### Accession
PXD022577

### Title
Proteomic Quantification of Lysine Acetylation in mouse hippocampus

### Description
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a leading cause of disability around the world and contributes greatly to the global burden of disease. Mounting evidence suggests that gut microbiota dysbiosis may be involved in the pathophysiology of MDD through the microbiota–gut–brain axis. Recent research suggests that epigenetic modifications might relate to depression. However, our knowledge of the role of epigenetics in host–microbe interactions remains limited. In the present study, we used a combination of affinity enrichment and high-resolution liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry analysis to identify hippocampal acetylated proteins in germ-free(GF) and specific pathogen-free(SPF) mice. In total, 986 lysine acetylation sites in 543 proteins were identified, of which 747 sites in 427 proteins were quantified. Motif analysis identified several conserved sequences surrounding the acetylation sites, including D*Kac, DKac, KacY, KacD, and D**Kac. Gene ontology annotations revealed that these differentially expressed acetylated proteins were involved in multiple biological functions and mainly located in mitochondria. In addition, pathway enrichment analysis showed that oxidative phosphorylation and the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle II (eukaryotic), both of which are exclusively localized to the mitochondria, were the primarily disturbed functions. Taken together, this study indicates that lysine acetylation changes may play a pivotal role in the mitochondrial dysfunction by which gut microbiota regulate brain function and behavioral phenotypes.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Collection and Preparation Mice were anesthetized with 10% chloral hydrate and immediately decapitated. The hippocampus was then dissected out on an ice-cold plate and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Brain tissue was stored at –80 °C until the assays were performed.  Each hippocampal sample (GF group [n = 8] and SPF group [n = 8]) was first ground with liquid nitrogen, and then transferred to a 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA, 3 μM Trichostatin A [TSA], 50 mM nicotinamide [NAM], 10 mM dithiothreitol [DTT], and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail III). The mixture was then centrifuged (20,000 × g, 4 °C for 10 min) to obtain the supernatant. Subsequently, the protein in the supernatant was precipitated with cold 15% tricarboxylic acid (TCA) for 2 h at –20 °C. After centrifuging at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed three times with cold acetone. The protein was then redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB; pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined using a 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin Digestion and High-Performance LC (HPLC) Fractionation For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea at a concentration < 2 M. Finally, trypsin (Promega) was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight, and a 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4-h digestion. The sample was then fractionated using high-pH reverse-phase HPLC on an Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, the peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 10, over 80 min into 80 fractions. The peptides were then combined into eight fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Affinity Enrichment of Acetylated Peptides To enrich Kac peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40; pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs) at 4 °C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with double-distilled H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% TFA. The eluted fractions were then combined and vacuum dried. The resulting peptides were cleaned with C18 Zip Tips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS The enriched peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA and directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim Pep Map 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim Pep Map RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 22% of solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for 24 min, from 22% to 35% for 8 min, climbing to 80% in 5 min, and then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The resulting peptides were analyzed using the Q ExactiveTM Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in triplicate. The peptides were subjected to the NSI source followed by MS/MS in the Q ExactiveTM Plus coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using an NCE setting of 30. Ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions (above a threshold ion count of 5e3 in the MS survey scan), with a 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. The applied electrospray voltage was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control was used to prevent overfilling of the orbitrap, and 5e4 ions were accumulated for the generation of MS/MS spectra. For the MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1,800. The fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant with the integrated Andromeda search engine(v.1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Uniprot/Swissprot_Mouse fasta（16,717 sequences, downloaded 8/2015）concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme, allowing up to four missing cleavages, five modifications per peptide, and five charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as the fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine, acetylation of lysine, and acetylation of protein N-terminals were specified as the variable modifications. The false discovery rate thresholds for proteins, peptides, and modification sites were set below 1%. The minimum peptide length was set at 7. For the quantification method, TMT-6-plex was selected. All other parameters in MaxQuant were set to their default values. The site localization probability was set as > 0.75. The quantitative P value uses the two-sample two-sided T test, and the enrichment statistical method is Fisher's exact test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gut microbiota, Germ-free, Specific pathogen-free, Lysine acetylation, Depression

### Affiliations
Chongqing Medical University
NHC Key Laboratory of Diagnosis and Treatment on Brain Functional Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, 1 Youyi Road, Yuzhong District, Chongqing 400016, China;

### Submitter
Yu Ying

### Lab Head
Dr xie peng
NHC Key Laboratory of Diagnosis and Treatment on Brain Functional Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, 1 Youyi Road, Yuzhong District, Chongqing 400016, China;


