### Accession
PXD012802

### Title
TMT and Label-Free Quantification of Yeast Mitochondrial and Cellular Proteome During Different Stages of Growth

### Description
Tandem mass tag (TMT)-based relative quantification was used in combination with the intensity-based absolute quantity estimation (IBAQ) to study of both yeast cells and isolated yeast mitochondria during fermentative growth, diauxic shift, respiratory growth.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were homogenized using a FastPrep®-24 instrument (Matrix-C (red) FAST tubes MP Biomedicals, OH, USA) for 5 repeated 40 seconds cycles at 6.5 m/s, with 30-60 seconds pause between. Samples were centrifuged at 400 x g for 2 min and the supernatants were transferred to new tubes. The supernatants were centrifuged at 21100 x g for 10 min to remove cell debris and the supernatants were transferred to new tubes. Protein concentration was determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific) and the Benchmark Plus microplate reader (BIO-RAD) with BSA solutions as standards. Reference pool of mitochondrial samples for quantification was prepared by combining equal amounts of all mitochondrial samples. The whole-cell-proteome reference pool was prepared from the aliquots of the lysates of S. cerevisiae CEN.PK 113-7D cells from the J. Nielsen Lab (Chalmers, Gothenburg, Sweden). Aliquots containing 25 ug of total protein from each sample and 25 ug from the reference pool were used for the TMT sample preparation; an aliquot of 50 ug of the pooled mitochondrial sample was spiked with 10.6 ug of the UPS2 Proteomics Dynamic Range Standard (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint-Louis, MO). Samples were reduced by addition of 2M DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 100 mM and incubated at 56C for 30 min. The samples were trypsin digested using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method modified from (Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May;6(5):359-62). In short, reduced samples diluted to 300 ul by addition of 8M urea were applied on Nanosep 30k Omega filters (Pall Life Sciences) and 200 ul 8M urea were used to repeatedly wash away the SDS. Alkylation was performed with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) diluted in digestion buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 50 mM TEAB) for 30 min at room temperature and the filters were then repeatedly washed with digestion buffer. Trypsin (Pierce Trypsin Protease, MS Grade, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in digestion buffer was added in a ratio of 1:100 relative to protein amount and the samples were incubated in 37°C overnight. Another portion of trypsin was added and incubated for 3 hours on the following morning. The peptides for the relative quantification were collected by centrifugation and subjected to isobaric mass tagging reagent TMT® according to the manufacturers instructions (Thermo Scientific). The labeled samples were combined into the pooled TMT sets, concentrated using vacuum centrifugation and SDC was removed by acidification with 10% TFA. The TMT-sets were fractionated into 44 primary fractions with basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptide separations were performed using a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation) and a linear gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B over 17 min followed by an increase to 100% B over 5 min. Solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.00 and solvent B was 90% acetonitrile, 10% 10 mM ammonium formate at pH 10.00. The primary fractions were concatenated into final 20 fractions (1+21+41, 2+22+42, … 20+40), dried and reconstituted in 15μl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for nLC MS analysis. The pooled sample for the label-free quantification was fractionated into 44 primary fractions as described above, but the primary fractions were concatenated into 10 final fractions. The combined fraction (16+17+36+37) was treated using the HiPPR Pierce detergent removal kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 20mM TEAB as an exchange buffer. The final fractions were dried and reconstituted in 15μl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for nLC MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Saccharomyces cerevisiae ATCC 204508 / S288c reference proteome database was downloaded from Uniprot (February 2018, 6049 sequences) and used for the database search on the TMT files; the concatenated database containing the above-mentioned sequences and the 48 UPS protein sequences was used for the processing of the UPS2-spiked reference files.  Precursor mass tolerance for all database searches was set to 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance to 0.6 Da; 1 missed cleavage was allowed; methionine oxidation was set as variable modification and methylthiolation on cysteine was set as fixed modification for all searches; TMT-6-plex on peptide N-terminus and on lysine was set as fixed modification for the searches on the TMT data. Percolator was used for PSM validation with the strict FDR threshold of 1%. The identified PSMs and proteins were subsequently filtered with the target FDR of 1%. Quantification was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.2. Minora feature detection node was used for precursor ion quantification, with the maximum intensity values used for quantification; abundance values for all unique and shared peptides were used for the IBAQ calculation. Abundances from the 3 technical replicates were averaged and divided by a number of theoretically observable peptides for a protein to yield the IBAQ intensity. The number of the observable peptides was calculated using an in-house Python script. The known absolute amount values of the UPS2 standard proteins were used to scale the Log-transformed IBAQ intensity values versus Log-transformed protein concentration. The TMT reporter ions were identified in the MS3 HCD spectra with the mass tolerance of 3 mmu, the S/N abundances of the reporter ions for the unique peptides were used for relative quantification. The resulting TMT reporter abundance values for each sample were normalized within Proteome Discoverer 2.2 on the total peptide amount.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> constitutes a popular eukaryal model for research on mitochondrial physiology. Being Crabtree-positive, this yeast has evolved the ability to ferment glucose to ethanol and respire ethanol once glucose is consumed. Its transition phase from fermentative to respiratory metabolism, known as the diauxic shift, is reflected by dramatic rearrangements of mitochondrial function and structure. To date, the metabolic adaptations that occur during the diauxic shift have not been fully characterized at the organelle level. In this study, the absolute proteome of mitochondria was quantified alongside precise parametrization of biophysical properties associated with the mitochondrial network using state-of-the-art optical-imaging techniques. This allowed the determination of absolute protein abundances at a subcellular level. By tracking the transformation of mitochondrial mass and volume, alongside changes in the absolute mitochondrial proteome allocation, we could quantify how mitochondria balance their dual role as a biosynthetic hub as well as a center for cellular respiration. Furthermore, our findings suggest that in the transition from a fermentative to a respiratory metabolism, the diauxic shift represents the stage where major structural and functional reorganizations in mitochondrial metabolism occur. This metabolic transition, initiated at the mitochondria level, is then extended to the rest of the yeast cell.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Diauxic shift, Intensity-based absolute quantification, Tandem mass tag, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Professor. Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Wallenberg Center for Protein Research, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Egor Vorontsov

### Lab Head
Dr Jens Nielsen
Professor. Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Wallenberg Center for Protein Research, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark


