### Accession
PXD042940

### Title
Proteomic analysis of extracellular vesicle released by MCF7 cells in the absence of the tetraspanins CD9, CD81 or CD63

### Description
The tetraspanins CD9, CD81, and CD63 are among the most widely used markers of Extracellular Vesicles (EVs) and are also used to isolate the vesicles they decorate. If their function in EVs is largely unknown, they have been suggested to play a role in the sorting of protein cargos into EVs or to regulate the uptake of EVs by acceptor cells. Using different tetraspanin-deficient MCF7 breast cancer cell lines, we have shown that the absence of any of these 3 tetraspanins had a minimal impact on their protein composition, as analyzed by label-free quantitative mass spectrometry. However, the EVs released by cells deficient in both CD9 and CD81 showed a decrease level of CD9P-1/EWI-F and EWI-2 (encoded by the genes PTGFRN and IGSF8 respectively), which are two well-characterized CD9 and CD81 molecular partners.

### Sample Protocol
Culture media of MCF7 cells were centrifugated at 4°C at 300g for 10 min to pellet floating or dead cells and then at 2,000g for 20 min to remove large particles. They were then filtered through a 0.22um filter and concentrated to a volume of 500 µl by ultrafiltration using vivaspin 20 Centrifugal Concentrators with a 30kDa membrane (Sartorius). The concentrated media were loaded on a 35nm SEC column (IZON). Following the manufacturer’s instructions, 500µl fractions were collected and fractions 7-10 highly enriched in vesicles were pooled and further concentrated using ultrafiltration. Protein extracts from vesicles were stacked inside 3-4 mm of a 10 % SDS-PAGE gels and stained with Imperial Stain Coomassie blue (Pierce). Each short protein lane was excised in one unique piece of gel and sliced into small pieces (about 1 mm3) for further reduction, alkylation and in-gel digestion with trypsin. Recovered Peptides were dried using a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (Sigma) and 2% acetonitrile. Automated peptide desalting was performed with the DigestPro MSi station (Intavis) using home-made StageTips (3 layers of 3M Empore C18 Disc stacked inside a 10 µl tip) as described in Hamada et al., 2021 (Hamada et al., 2021). Peptides were analyzed with a nanoElute UHPLC (Bruker) coupled to a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker). Peptides were directly loaded and separated on an Aurora2 RP-C18 analytical column (25 cm, 75 μm i.d., 120 Å, 1.6 µm from IonOpticks) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min with a 30 min elution gradient from 2% to 33 % acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Accumulation time was set to 100 msec in the TIMS tunnel. Mass range was set from 100 to 1700 m/z in MS and MS/MS and mobility range from 0.6 to 1.6 Vs/cm². Dynamic exclusion was activated for ions within 0.015 m/z and 0.015 V.s/cm² and released after 0,4 min. Exclusion was reconsidered if precursor ion intensity was 4 times superior. Low abundance precursors below the target value of 20000 a.u. and intensity of 2500 a.u. were selected several times for PASEF-MS/MS until the target value was reached. Parent ion selection was achieved by using a two-dimensional m/z and 1/K0 selection area filter allowing the exclusion of singly charged ions. Total cycle time was 1.1 sec with 10 PASEF cycles.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed by MaxQuant software version 1.6.17.0 for protein identification and quantification. The database used for protein identification was the UniProt human reference proteome (Date 06/2020, number of entries: 74823). MS1and MS2 mass error tolerances were set to 25 ppm. Normalization, Match Between Run and a “min ratio count” of 2 were applied for protein quantification. All others MaxQuant default parameters were left unchanged.

### Publication Abstract
The tetraspanins CD9, CD81 and CD63 are major components of extracellular vesicles (EVs). Yet, their impact on EV composition remains under-investigated. In the MCF7 breast cancer cell line CD63 was as expected predominantly intracellular. In contrast CD9 and CD81 strongly colocalized at the plasma membrane, albeit with different ratios at different sites, which may explain a higher enrichment of CD81 in EVs. Absence of these tetraspanins had little impact on the EV protein composition as analysed by quantitative mass spectrometry. We also analysed the effect of concomitant knock-out of CD9 and CD81 because these two tetraspanins play similar roles in several cellular processes and associate directly with two Ig domain proteins, CD9P-1/EWI-F/PTGFRN and EWI-2/IGSF8. These were the sole proteins significantly decreased in the EVs of double CD9- and CD81-deficient cells. In the case of EWI-2, this is primarily a consequence of a decreased cell expression level. In conclusion, this study shows that CD9, CD81 and CD63, commonly used as EV protein markers, play a marginal role in determining the protein composition of EVs released by MCF7 cells and highlights a regulation of the expression level and/or trafficking of CD9P-1 and EWI-2 by CD9 and CD81.

### Keywords
Cd63, Igsf8, Mcf7, Timstof pro, Cd81, Extracellular vesicles, Ptgfrn, Cd9, Proteome, Exosomes, Mass spectrometry, Tetraspanins

### Affiliations
Plateforme P3S UMS-37 PASS – Sorbonne Universite
Sorbonne Université, Inserm, CNRS, Centre d'Immunologie et des Maladies Infectieuses, CIMI-Paris, F-75013 Paris, France

### Submitter
Cédric Pionneau

### Lab Head
Dr Eric RUBINSTEIN
Sorbonne Université, Inserm, CNRS, Centre d'Immunologie et des Maladies Infectieuses, CIMI-Paris, F-75013 Paris, France


