### Accession
PXD010181

### Title
Multiomics reveal non-alcoholic fatty livere disease in rats following chronic exposure to an ultra-low dose of Roundup herbicide

### Description
The impairment of liver function by low environmentally relevant doses of glyphosate-based herbicides (GBH) is still a debatable and unresolved matter. Previously we have shown that rats administeres for 2 years with 0.1ppb of a Roundup GBH formulation showed signs of enhance liver injury as indicated by anatomorphological, blood/urine biochemical changes and transcriptome profiling. Here we present a multiomic study combining metabolome and proteome liver analyses to obtain further insight into the Roundup-induced pathology. Proteins significantly disutrbed (214 out of 1906 detected, q < 0.05) were involved in organonitrogen metabolism and fatty acid B-oxidation. Proteome disturbances reflected peroxisomal proliferation, steatosis and necrosis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome profiling using Tandem Mass Tag LC-MS/MS: Transverse cross sectional slices of liver were lysed in 8M lysis buffer (urea, NaCl, Tri-HCl, dH2O, phosphatase and protease inhibitor) and the protein concentration of the resulting homogenate calculated using a Nanodrop protein assay. Samples were reduced with 5mM dithiotreitol, alkylated by treatment with 14mM iodoacetamide and digested with 12ug bovine sequencing grade trypsin at 37 degrees Celsius for 18 hours. Subsequently, peptides were purified and extracted using Waters Sep-Pak Vac 3cc 200mg tC17 cartridges in accordance to the manufacturer's instructions before each sample was labelled by incubation with 60mM TMT10plex Isobaric Label Reagents. Labelled peptides were then purified and extracte again with the Waters Sep-Pak Vac 3cc 200mg tC18 cartridge, before being fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX) across an increasing salt concentration using elution buffers containing different concentrations of KCl: ranging from 0mM KCl in the first fraction to 350mM KCl in the 10th fraction. A 1/10th aliquot of the eluted peptide fracrtions were separated and lyophilised for direct analysis by LC-MS/MS. The remaining 9/10th of column eluate was enriched for phosphopeptides using a Pierce TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment and Clean-up Kit. Un-enriched samples were resuspended in 100ul of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and F1&6, F2&7, F3&8, F4&9 and F5&10 pooled to give 5 fractions. Phosphopeptide enriched samples were re-suspended in 30ul of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and pooled in the same way as the un-enriched samples to also give 5 fractions. Both enriched (8ul) and un-enriched (5ul) fractions were loaded onot a 50cm EASY-spray column and quantitative analysis was performed using the Orbitrap Velos-Pro mass spectrometer in positive ion mode. The peptides and phosphopeptides were separated by gradient elution, from 5-80% 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in acetonitrile (5-40% from 0-100 minutes, 50-80& from 100-110 minutes), at a flow rate of 300nl/min. Mass spectra (m/z) ranging from 400-1600 Daltons was acquired at a resolution of 60,000 and the 10 most intense ions were subjected to MS/MS by HCD fragmentation with 35% collision energy.  Proteome verification using Tande Mass Tag Selected Reaction Monitoring (SRM) experiment: Samples were prepared in the same way as the discovery experiment up to the TMT labelling stage. For SRM analysis the twenty individually TMT10plex Heavy labelled samples were not combined but analysed individually against a pool of the twenty liver samples labelled with TMTZero/Light Label Reagent included as a single point reference sample. All labelled peptides were purified and extracted before being lyophilised prior to mass spectrometry analysis. Peptides were resolubilised in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 2.5ug of protein loaded onto a 50cm EASY-Spray column using initial gradient conditions identical to those used in the discovery experiment. The LC system was coupled to a TSQ Vantage mass spectrometer set in positive ion mode with Q1 and Q3 peak width settings of 1 FWHM. Capillary temperature (degrees Celsius), collision gas pressure (mTorr) and spray voltage (V) were set at 270m 1.2 and 1800 respectively. In order to asses peptide transition specificity and abundance and define retention times, initial optimisation was performed using the reference samples alone. Following this a comfined 1:1 mix with a random Heavy TMT labelled sample was then measured. The final method contained all successful transitions for both TMT Heavy and TMT Light versions of the peptides. This final method was applied in three separate injections to each Heavy labelled experimental sample, which had been mized in a 1:1 ration with the Light labelled reference sample. Peptides were separated over 35 minutes, using gradient elution 5-80& 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in acetonitrile (0-5% from 0-3 minutes, 5-50% from 3-7 minutes, 50-65% from 7-30 minutes and 65-80% from 30-35 minutes) at a flow rate of 300nl/min.

### Data Protocol
Proteome profiling using Tandem Mass Tag LC-MS/MS: Protein identification was performed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4. Raw files were imported and searched against the UniprotKB/Swiss-Prot Database using Sequest for Proteome Discoverer. Faw files for both enriched and un-enriched fractions were merged together in a single file search for eac of the two TMT10plex sets. Precurose mass tolerance for the searches was set at 20ppm and fragment mass tolerance at 0.8ppm. The taxonomy selected was Rattus norvegicus and three enzymatic miscleavages were allowed. Dynamic modifications selected on the search were Oxidation (M), Phosphorylation (S, T, Y) and Deamidation (N, Q) and static modifcations were Carbamidomethyl (C), TMT10plex (K & Any N-terminus). Only peptides with TMT reporter ion signal intensities for all ten samples were used for further bioinfomatics analysis. The Proteome Discoverer files for both TMT1 & TMT2 were exported into an Excel sheet. In Excel any duplicate peptides were reomved before the data was SumScale Normalised. The two normalised data files were the merged together to give one 10vs10 Excel file comparison. Any peptides which did not have intensity values in all 20 TMT reporter ion channels were filtered out and median values were taken of the control and treated samples. Log2 rations were then calculated from these median values to determine regulation between treatment and control samples with a t-test being carried out to test for peptides significance (peptides classed as significant if they had a P-Value < 0.0 and a fold change of 1.2 either up or down regulated).  Proteome Verification using Tandem Mass Tag Selected Reaction Monitoring (SRM) Experiment: Peptides were selected for TMT-SRM verification based on finding from the discovery analysis. Peptides chosen were significantly regulated against parameters where peptides had to display a fold change of 1.2 either up or down-regulated, whilst being significant to a P-Value < 0.01. Data was analysed using Skyline software, with all peak matching also being visually verified. Peak are ratios between light and heavy transitions were generated for each sample and exported inot Excel. When importing raw SRM data files from the TSQ Vantage into Skyline software, a unique peak picking algorithm was used to confidently and accurately assign the best transition peaks for each peptide. Peptides were only taken forward for analysis if all assigned peaks were within a similar retention time period across all 60 samples. From the assigned peaks Skyline sofrware was then used to produce a 'total ratio' between the Light and Heavy transitions for all the 60 raw data files (3 x 10 control sample injection and 3 x 10 treated sample injections). This 'total ratio' value is a mean of the transition ratios, where the ratio is the comparison of the heavy transition peak areas to the light transition peak areas. The total ratio was averaged across all control and treated samples and a fold changed between the two calculated. Coefficient of variation (CV) values between technical sample repeats were calculated and also averaged across control and treatment samples. Any peptides which displayed an average technical CV value higher than 15% were excluded from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Roundup, Liver, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Kings College University London
Kings

### Submitter
George Renney

### Lab Head
Dr Proteomics Facility Kings
Kings College University London


