### Accession
PXD012969

### Title
Systematic Discovery of Deeply Conserved Plant Protein Complexes: hemp

### Description
The associated files are mass spec data from mixed-bed ion exchange chromatography fractions.  The starting material wasa clarified homogenate of Trader Joe's "Raw Shelled Hemp Seed".

### Sample Protocol
Glass dounce homogenate in buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 130 mM K-acetate, 5 mM Mg-acetate, 0.1 mM EDTA, 10 % glycerol, 1 mM DTT, and plant protease inhibitors)was filtered through cheesecloth, and clarified by centrifugation at 3,000, 14,000, and 40,000 x g.Following buffer exhcnge by ultrafiltration (3,000 kD Sartorius Vivaspin Turbo 4) 1.5 mg total protein was fractionated by HPLC using a NaCl gradient and a Mixed-Bed WAX-WCX column (PolyLC Inc.).  Fractions were prepared for Mass spec by buffer exchange (on an AcroPrep Addvance 96-filter plate with t 3kD MWCO, Pall # 8061)followed by reduction/alkylation with iodoacetamide and trykpsin digestions.  Peptides were desalted using a Lab-in-a-Plate 40 ul C18 resin 96-well plate (Glygen Corp # FNSC18).  Final peptides were resuspended in 30 ul 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and 5 ul was used for mass spec analysis.  Data was collected by LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Mass Spectrometer using a 75 minute top speed method and CID.

### Data Protocol
Data from .RAW files was processed using an in-house pipeline to be reported.  Briefly output from 3 search engines (Comeet, MS-GF+, and X!Tandem) was combined using the MSBlender software and peptide assignments to in-house assigned orthogroups to enable inter-species comparison of proteins identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hemp, Cannabis sativa, Mixed bed ion exchange, Seed, Cf-ms

### Affiliations
Molecular Biosciences, and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX USA
University of Texas at Austin

### Submitter
Ophelia Papoulas

### Lab Head
Dr Edward M. Marcotte
Molecular Biosciences, and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX USA


