### Accession
PXD017424

### Title
T cells and adipocyte IL-17RC control fat innervation and thermogenesis

### Description
The sympathetic nervous system innervates peripheral organs to regulate their function and maintain homeostasis, whereas target cells also produce neurotrophic factors to promote sympathetic innervation1,2. The molecular basis of this bi-directional communication is unknown. Here we use thermogenic adipose tissue from mice as a model system to show that T cells, specifically  T cells, have a crucial role in promoting sympathetic innervation, at least in part by driving the expression of TGF1 in parenchymal cells via the IL-17 receptor complex (IL-17RC). Ablation of IL-17RC specifically in adipose tissue reduces expression of TGF1 in adipocytes, impairs local sympathetic innervation and causes obesity and other metabolic phenotypes that are consistent with defective thermogenesis; innervation can be fully rescued by restoring TGF1 expression. Ablating   cells and the IL-17RC signalling pathway also impairs sympathetic innervation in salivary glands and the lungs. These findings demonstrate coordination between T cells and parenchymal cells to regulate sympathetic innervation.

### Sample Protocol
Basic pH reversed-phase separation Tandem mass tag (TMT)-labelled [Author: Correct definition?] peptides were solubilized in 500 l solution containing 5% can in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0 and separated by an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 mm particles, 4.6 mm inner diameter and 220 mm in length). An Agilent 1100 binary pump coupled with a photodiode array detector (Thermo Scientific) was used to separate the peptides. A 40-min linear gradient from 20% to 40% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8 (flow rate of 0.8 ml min1) separated the peptide mixtures into a total of 96 fractions (30 s). A total of 96 fractions was consolidated into 12 samples in a checkerboard fashion, acidified with 20 µl of 20% formic acid and vacuum dried to completion. Each sample was re-dissolved in 5% formic acid, 5% ACN, desalted via StageTips before liquid chromatograph–tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) analysis. LC–MS/MS Data were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 75 μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with 35 cm of Accucore C18 resin (2.6 μm, 100 Å, ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using a 3 hr gradient of 6–27% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid with a flow rate of 400 nL/min. Each analysis used an MS3-based TMT method as described previously. The data were acquired using a mass range of m/z 350 – 1350, resolution 120,000, AGC target 1 x 106, maximum injection time 100 ms, dynamic exclusion of 120 seconds for the peptide measurements in the Orbitrap. Data dependent MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap with a normalized collision energy (NCE) set at 35%, AGC target set to 2.0 x 104 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. MS3 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a HCD collision energy set to 55%, AGC target set to 1.5 x 105, maximum injection time of 150 ms, resolution at 50,000 and with a maximum synchronous precursor selection (SPS) precursors set to 10.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data processing and spectra assignment A compendium of in-house developed software was used to convert acquired mass spectrometric data from the .RAW file to the mzxml format. Erroneous assignments of peptide ion charge state and monoisotopic m/z were also corrected by the software. The Sequest algorithm was used to assign MS2 spectra by searching the data against a protein sequence database including Mouse Uniprot Database (downloaded June 2013) and known contaminants such as porcine trypsin and human keratins. A forward (target) database component was followed by a decoy component including all listed protein sequences. Searches were performed using a 30 ppm precursor ion tolerance and requiring both peptide termini to be consistent with trypsin specificity. Six-plex TMT labels on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.16293 Da) were set as static modifications and oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da) as a variable modification. An MS2 spectra assignment false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% was achieved by applying the target-decoy database search strategy36. Filtering was performed using a linear discrimination analysis method to create one combined filter parameter from the following peptide ion and MS2 spectra properties: XCorr and Cn, peptide ion mass accuracy, and peptide length. Linear discrimination scores were used to assign probabilities to each MS2 spectrum for being assigned correctly and these probabilities were further used to filter the data set with an MS2 spectra assignment FDR to obtain a protein identification FDR of less than 1%37. Determination of TMT reporter ion intensities For reporter ion quantification, a 0.003 m/z window centred on the theoretical m/z value of each reporter ion was monitored for ions, and the maximum intensity of the signal to the theoretical m/z value was recorded. Reporter ion intensities were de-normalized by multiplication with the ion accumulation time for each MS2 or MS3 spectrum and adjusted based on the overlap of isotopic envelopes of all reporter ions. Following extraction of the reporter ion signal, the isotopic impurities of the TMT reagent were corrected using the values specified by the manufacturer. Total signal-to-noise values for all peptides were summed for each TMT channel and all values were adjusted to account for variance. For each identified peptide, a total minimum signal-to-noise value of 100 was implemented.

### Publication Abstract
The sympathetic nervous system innervates peripheral organs to regulate their function and maintain homeostasis, whereas target cells also produce neurotrophic factors to promote sympathetic innervation<sup>1,2</sup>. The molecular basis of this bi-directional communication remains to be fully determined. Here we use thermogenic adipose tissue from mice as a model system to show that T cells, specifically &#x3b3;&#x3b4; T cells, have a crucial role in promoting sympathetic innervation, at least in part by driving the expression of TGF&#x3b2;1 in parenchymal cells via the IL-17 receptor C (IL-17RC). Ablation of IL-17RC specifically in adipose tissue reduces expression of TGF&#x3b2;1 in adipocytes, impairs local sympathetic innervation and causes obesity and other metabolic phenotypes that are consistent with defective thermogenesis; innervation can be fully rescued by restoring TGF&#x3b2;1 expression. Ablating &#x3b3;&#x3b4; &#x3a4; cells and the IL-17RC signalling pathway also impairs sympathetic innervation in other tissues&#xa0;such as&#xa0;salivary glands. These findings demonstrate coordination between T cells and parenchymal cells to regulate sympathetic innervation.

### Keywords
Tmt based quantitative proteomics, Murine brown adipose tissue

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Bruce M. Spiegelman, Ph D. Stanley J. Korsmeyer Professor of Cell Biology and Medicine Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School bruce_spiegelman@dfci.harvard.edu 617-632-3567

### Submitter
mark Jedrychowski

### Lab Head
Dr Bruce Spiegelman
Bruce M. Spiegelman, Ph D. Stanley J. Korsmeyer Professor of Cell Biology and Medicine Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School bruce_spiegelman@dfci.harvard.edu 617-632-3567


