### Accession
PXD000675

### Title
A Targeted in Vivo SILAC Approach for Quantification of Drug Metabolism Enzymes: Regulation by the Constitutive Androstane Receptor

### Description
The modulation of drug metabolism enzyme (DME) expression by therapeutic agents is a central mechanism of drug–drug interaction and should be assessed as early as possible in preclinical drug development. Direct measurement of DME levels is typically achieved by Western blotting, qPCR, or microarray, but these techniques have their limitations; antibody cross-reactivity among highly homologous subfamilies creates ambiguity, while discordance between mRNA and protein expression undermines observations. The aim of this study was to design a simple targeted workflow by combining in vivo SILAC and label-free proteomics approaches for quantification of DMEs in mouse liver, facilitating a rapid and comprehensive evaluation of metabolic potential at the protein level. A total of 197 peptides, representing 51 Phase I and Phase II DMEs, were quantified by LC-MS/MS using targeted high resolution single ion monitoring (tHR/SIM) with a defined mass-to-charge and retention time window for each peptide. In a constitutive androstane receptor (Car) activated mouse model, comparison of tHR/SIM-in vivo SILAC with Western blotting for analysis of the expression of cytochromes P450 was favorable, with agreement in fold-change values between methods. The tHR/SIM-in vivo SILAC approach therefore permits the robust analysis of multiple DME in a single protein sample, with clear utility for the assessment of the drug–drug interaction potential of candidate therapeutic compounds.

### Sample Protocol
Snap-frozen liver tissue was thawed by addition of 9 volumes of SDT lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH7.6) then homogenized by rotor-stator (2 × 5 s at 20k revolutions). Homogenate was heated to 95 °C for 5 min, sonicated (2 × 5 s), and then centrifuged at 16 000 g for 10 min. Supernatant (protein sample for analysis) was removed for in-gel trypsin digest and peptide extraction.  Peptide sample (0.2 mg/mL in water containing 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid) was separated by nanoflow liquid chromatography (Agilent 1200, Agilent, Santa Clara, CA). Approximately 0.4 μg total peptide was loaded onto a trap column at a flow rate of 10 μL/min for 3 min and the flow was then reversed to an Agilent Zorbex nano C18 column (0.0075 mm ID; 15 cm; 3 μm particle size). The peptides were resolved with a 3 h binary gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min as follows: 0% buffer B for 5 min followed by 2–30% buffer B for 140 min, 30–90% buffer B for 15 min, 90–0% buffer B for 10 min, and 0% buffer B for 10 min. Buffer A contained 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water, and buffer B contained 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The column was periodically cleaned with a 2 μL injection of buffer containing 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water.  A Proxeon nanospray source with a stainless steel emitter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to interface the nanoLC (Agilent) and LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Spray voltage was set at 1.8 kV. The Orbitrap was tuned using Glu-Fibrinogen B peptide. For the protein/peptide identification, a method that consisted of full scans between 330 and 1500 amu (in Orbitrap) and data dependent MS/MS with top six precursor ions (2+ to 4+ charged) in LTQ was employed. Orbitrap was operated in a profile mode at the resolution of 30 000 or 60 000 with a lock mass set at 445.1200 (polycyclodimethylsiloxane(28)), and LTQ was operated in a centroid mode with isolation width = 1 (m/z), normalized collision energy = 0.25, and activation time = 30 ms. The max fill times for Orbitrap and LTQ were set at 500 and 50 ms, respectively. A dynamic exclusion of 30 s was used to maximize the acquisition of MS2 on peptides with lower intensity. For tHR/SIM analysis, a method that consisted of full scans between 330 and 1500 a.m.u (in Orbitrap) and data dependent MS/MS scans with or without defined precursors was employed. A dynamic exclusion of 30 s and a threshold of 500 counts to trigger MS2 were also applied for MS/MS scans. Nontargeted data dependent MS/MS was performed when there was no targeted precursor found in the MS scan.

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide database search was carried out using PEAKS version 6 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada) with an IPI-mouse database (version 3.87, European Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, UK). The precursor mass tolerance was set at 7 ppm, and fragment ion mass tolerance set at 0.5 amu. The only permitted post-translational modifications were N-terminal acetylation and cysteine carbamidomethylation, while a maximum of two miscleavages were allowed. Quantification of the predefined targeted peptides was carried out using SIEVE version 2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using two seed files, one for each DME region of interest, containing retention time and m/z information. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm, and the minimal intensity for alignment was set at 100 000, with intensities derived from the first monoisotopic peak. Data from SIEVE were exported to Excel 2010 (Microsoft, Redmond, WA) for calculation of light to heavy peptide ratios. For protein quantification, light to heavy protein ratios were calculated within samples by summing average intensity values for all light peptides for each protein, then dividing by the corresponding heavy value. Light to heavy protein ratios for technical replicates were averaged then biological replicates normalized to the average of control, before calculation of fold changes.

### Publication Abstract
The modulation of drug metabolism enzyme (DME) expression by therapeutic agents is a central mechanism of drug-drug interaction and should be assessed as early as possible in preclinical drug development. Direct measurement of DME levels is typically achieved by Western blotting, qPCR, or microarray, but these techniques have their limitations; antibody cross-reactivity among highly homologous subfamilies creates ambiguity, while discordance between mRNA and protein expression undermines observations. The aim of this study was to design a simple targeted workflow by combining in vivo SILAC and label-free proteomics approaches for quantification of DMEs in mouse liver, facilitating a rapid and comprehensive evaluation of metabolic potential at the protein level. A total of 197 peptides, representing 51 Phase I and Phase II DMEs, were quantified by LC-MS/MS using targeted high resolution single ion monitoring (tHR/SIM) with a defined mass-to-charge and retention time window for each peptide. In a constitutive androstane receptor (Car) activated mouse model, comparison of tHR/SIM-in vivo SILAC with Western blotting for analysis of the expression of cytochromes P450 was favorable, with agreement in fold-change values between methods. The tHR/SIM-in vivo SILAC approach therefore permits the robust analysis of multiple DME in a single protein sample, with clear utility for the assessment of the drug-drug interaction potential of candidate therapeutic compounds.

### Keywords
Drug metabolism; drug−drug interaction; constitutive androstane receptor; protein quantification; targeted in vivo silac

### Affiliations
Department of Cancer Research
Jacqui Wood Cancer Centre, Medical Research Institute, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, University of Dundee, James Arrott Drive, Dundee DD1 9SY, Scotland

### Submitter
Kenneth MacLeod

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffrey Tze-Jen Huang
Jacqui Wood Cancer Centre, Medical Research Institute, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, University of Dundee, James Arrott Drive, Dundee DD1 9SY, Scotland


