### Accession
PXD001547

### Title
Metaproteome of the waste water treatment plant Gerwisch/Germany

### Description
In this study the impact of protein fractionation techniques prior to LC/MS analysis was investigated on activated sludge samples derived at winter and summer condition from a full-scale wastewater treatment plant (WWTP). For reduction of the sample complexity, different fractionation techniques including RP-LC (1D-approach), SDS-PAGE and RP-LC (2D-approach) as well as RP-LC, SDS-PAGE and liquid IEF (3D-approach) were carried out before subsequent ITMS analysis. The derived spectra were identified by MASCOT search using a combination of the public UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein database and metagenome data from a WWTP (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001547). The results showed a significant increase of identified spectra, enabled by applying IEF and SDS-PAGE to the proteomic workflow. Based on meta-proteins, a core metaproteome and the corresponding taxonomic profile of the wastewater activated sludge was revealed and functional aspects using the KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) pathway library were analyzed. Hereby, the KEGG Orthology identifiers (KO numbers) of protein hits were plotted into pathway maps of the central carbon (map01200) and nitrogen metabolism (map00910). Using the 3D-approach, most proteins involved in glycolysis and citrate cycle and nearly all proteins of the nitrogen removal were identified, qualifying this approach as the most promising for future studies.

### Sample Protocol
250 mL activated sludge samples were collected during winter and summer period from three different spots of an aerobic basin of the wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) in Gerwisch, Germany (winter “W”, summer “S”; see Supplementary Table S1 for process parameters). All samples were immediately cooled to 4°C, transported to the laboratory, and transferred into 50 mL tubes for subsequent analysis. Biomass was separated from the medium by centrifugation for 10 min at 10.000 x g at 20°C, and the pellets were stored at -20°C. Cell disruption and protein extraction were performed simultaneously in a ball mill with liquid phenol (10 g phenol plus 1 ml water) followed by precipitation with ammonium acetate in methanol (0.1 M). Afterwards the protein pellet was washed twice with ice-cold 80% acetone and twice with ice-cold 70% ethanol [1]. Protein pellets were then suspended in 7 M urea/2 M thiourea buffer containing 0.01 g mL-1 DTT and quantified by amido black assay [2, 3]. For the 1D- and 2D-approach 100 µg proteins were precipitated with acetone and separated by SDS-PAGE [4, 5]. For the 1D-approach electrophoresis was immediately stopped after proteins entered about 5 mm of the separation gel. For 2D-approach complete electrophoresis was performed. Afterwards, proteins were stained with colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue overnight and then cut out for subsequent tryptic digestion. In case of the 1D-approach the part of the lane containing proteins was cut as a single piece; for the 2D-approach the whole lane was horizontally chopped into 10 equal pieces. For the 3D-approach gel-free isoelectric focusing (IEF) was performed prior to the SDS-PAGE. Therefore 1.5 mg proteins were diluted with IPG rehydration solution (according to manufacturer’s manual for 3100 OFFGEL Fractionator, Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany) to a total volume of 1.8 mL and distributed to 12 cups of an OFFGEL Fractionator following the manufacturer’s instruction. Isoelectric focusing was performed along a pH range from pH 3–10 using 13 cm IPG strips (IPG strips, 13 cm, pH 3–10, SERVA Electrophoresis GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany). Collected proteins from every chamber were precipitated with acetone, separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie overnight. Each of the 12 PAGE lanes was chopped into ten equal pieces, resulting in 120 fractions per sample. For subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis all samples were reduced and alkylated with DTT and iodoacetamide. Afterwards samples were tryptically digested using an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:100 (Trypsin, Premium grade, SERVA Electrophoresis GmbH, Heidelberg Germany). Peptides were extracted, dried and suspended in 11 µL chromatographic liquid phase A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.05% TFA) containing only chemicals with LC-MS purity grade. 5 µL of this mixture were injected into an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano splitless LC system (Dionex, Bremen, Germany). Diluted peptides were isocratically loaded on a trap column (Dionex Acclaim PepMap100 C18 µ-precolumn, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 300 µm inner diameter, 5 mm length) with a flow rate of 7 µL min-1 (chromatographic liquid phase A). Chromatographic separation was performed using a reverse phase column (Dionex Acclaim PepMap C18 RSLCnano, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 150 mm length) at 40°C, a flow rate of 0.3 µL min-1, and a binary A/B-solvent gradient (120 min, A: 98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA; B: 80% ACN, 10% trifluorethanol, 10% H2O, 0.1% FA) as follows: 0–5 min, 4% B, 5–125 min, 4% B to 55% B, 125–130 min, 55% B, 130–131 min, 55% B to 90% B, 131–141 min, 90% B, 141–142 min, 90% B to 4% B, 142–163 min, 4% B.

### Data Protocol
Chromatography column for elution of peptides was on-line coupled to an ESI-amaZon™ ETD iontrap tandem MS (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) using positive mode and a Captive Spray nanoBooster™ module (Bruker) supporting electrospray ionisation. A scan range of 300–1500 m/z was used for precursor ions, of which the ten most intensive were taken for CID fragmentation. Fragment ions were scanned within a range of 100–2400 m/z. MS/MS spectra were exported as Mascot Generic Format (MGF) and imported to ProteinScape (version 3.1.3.461, Bruker). Using the search engine MASCOT (version 2.4, Matrix Science, London, England) and the UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (state 2014/10/23) in combination with a metagenome database, derived from a WWTP in Aalborg (Denmark , [6]), searches were performed batch wise with the following parameters: trypsin, one missed cleavage, monoisotopic mass, carbamidomethylation (cysteine) and oxidation (methionine) as variable modifications, ±0.03 Da precursor and ±0.4 Da MS/MS fragment tolerance, 1 13C and +2/+3 charged peptide ions. Peptide and protein information were collected in MASCOT DAT files and imported to the in-house software MetaProteomeAnalyzer 1.0.4 [7] for further analysis. Identified peptide sequences based on the metagenome data were assigned, using the protein basic local alignment search tool (BLAST, [8]) algorithm and an e-value cutoff of 0.0001.

### Publication Abstract
In this study, the impact of protein fractionation techniques prior to LC/MS analysis was investigated on activated sludge samples derived at winter and summer condition from a full-scale wastewater treatment plant (WWTP). For reduction of the sample complexity, different fractionation techniques including RP-LC (1D-approach), SDS-PAGE and RP-LC (2D-approach) as well as RP-LC, SDS-PAGE and liquid IEF (3D-approach) were carried out before subsequent ion trap MS analysis. The derived spectra were identified by MASCOT search using a combination of the public UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein database and metagenome data from a WWTP. The results showed a significant increase of identified spectra, enabled by applying IEF and SDS-PAGE to the proteomic workflow. Based on meta-proteins, a core metaproteome and a corresponding taxonomic profile of the wastewater activated sludge were described. Functional aspects were analyzed using the KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) pathway library by plotting KEGG Orthology identifiers (KO numbers) of protein hits into pathway maps of the central carbon (map01200) and nitrogen metabolism (map00910). Using the 3D-approach, most proteins involved in glycolysis and citrate cycle and nearly all proteins of the nitrogen removal were identified, qualifying this approach as most promising for future studies. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001547 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001547).

### Keywords
Activated sludge, Metaproteomics, Metaproteomeanalyzer, Wastewater treatment plant, Offgel isoelectric focusing

### Affiliations
Dr. rer. nat. Dirk Benndorf, Bioprocess Engineering, Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg, Universitätsplatz 2, D-39106 Magdeburg, Germany
Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg, Germany

### Submitter
Fabian Kohrs

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Dirk Benndorf
Dr. rer. nat. Dirk Benndorf, Bioprocess Engineering, Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg, Universitätsplatz 2, D-39106 Magdeburg, Germany


