### Accession
PXD010492

### Title
saliva of salivasaliva

### Description
Due to the uperior suppression ability to manipulate plant defense, the invasive spider mite T. evansi has become an ideal model to investigate the plant-herbivores interaction. In this study, we performed de novo transcriptome assembly of T. evansi, and characterize its secreted saliva by transcriptomic sequencing technology and Liquid Chromatography–Mass Spectrometry/Mass Spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) analysis, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
The T. evansi saliva was collected based on the methods that described previously (Zhu et al., 2018). Briefly, the adult mites were transferred from tomato to a plastic petri dish. Sterile diets with 2.5% sucrose was added between two layers of stretched Parafilm (Neenah, WI, USA) and the mites were allowed to feed for 24 h. Appropriately 50 dishes were used for one replicates, with each dish containing 200-300 mites. The liquid was collected from the space between the two layers of Paraﬁlm with a pipet and then ultraﬁltered with a 3-kDa molecular-weight cutoﬀ Amicon Ultra-4 Centrifugal Filter Device (Millipore) at 12,000 rpm at 4 °C for 15 min. The concentrated saliva solution was solubilized in 200 μl of SDT buffer (4 % SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM DTT) and incubated in hot water for 15 min.  Protein digestion was performed according to a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Briefly, the protein sample was added to 100 mM DTT and boiled for 5 min. After ultrafiltration, 100 μl iodoacetamide (IAA; Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) was added and incubated for 30 min in darkness. The ﬁlter was washed with 100 μl UA buﬀer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) at 14,000 g for 10 min and then 100 μl 25 mM NH4HCO3 (Sigma) twice. Finally, the protein suspension was digested with 4 μg of trypsin (Sigma) in 40 μl NH4HCO3 buﬀer by vortexing for 1 min and incubated at 37 °C overnight. The digested peptides were collected by concentrating at 14,000g for 10 min and were quantiﬁed at OD280.  Nano-LC-MS/MS analysis The shotgun analysis was conducted on an Easy nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) couple with a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, CA, USA). Peptides were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18, bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 mL, Sigma), concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Each fraction was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture was loaded onto a reverse phase trap column（Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm× 2 cm, nanoViper C18）connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3 μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. The linear gradient was run as follows: 0-55% buffer B for 110 min, 55-100% buffer B for 5 min, hold in 100% buffer B for 5 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300-1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the under fill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1 %. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) against N. lugens genomic (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/, BioProject PRJNA177647, 27 571 coding protein sequences) and transcriptomic databases (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra, accession number SRX023419, 21 908 coding protein sequences). Identified N. lugens sequences were validated using BLASTX to search for similar sequences in National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) protein database with a significance cutoff of E-value <10−5. For protein identification, the following options were used: (i) peptide mass tolerance, 20 ppm; (ii) MS/MS tolerance, 0.1 Da; (iii) enzyme, trypsin; (iv) missed cleavage, 2; (v) fixed modification, carbamidomethyl (C); (vi) variable modification, oxidation (M); (vii) ion score, > 20. An automatic decoy database search was performed with false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 0.01. The peptides with high peptide confidence (p < 0.05) were extracted

### Publication Abstract
The spider mite Tetranychus evansi has a remarkable ability to suppress and manipulate plant defenses, which makes it an ideal model to investigate plant-herbivores interactions. In this study, a de novo assembly of the transcriptome of T. evansi is performed and the proteins in its secreted saliva by LC-MS/MS are characterized. A total of 29&#xa0;365 unigenes are assembled and 136 saliva proteins are identified. Comparative analysis of the saliva proteins in T. evansi, T. truncatus, and T. urticae shows that 64 protein groups are shared by at least two Tetranychus species, and 52 protein groups are specifically identified in T. evansi. In addition, some saliva proteins are common in arthropod species, while others are species-specific. These results will help to elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which T. evansi modulates plant defenses.

### Keywords
Saliva saliva

### Affiliations
Department of Entomology, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210095, China
Nanjing Argriculture university

### Submitter
Haijian Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Haijian Huang
Department of Entomology, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210095, China


