### Accession
PXD043581

### Title
A proteomic-based approach identifies the NEDD4-adaptor NDFIP2 as an important regulator of IFITM3

### Description
IFITMs are a family of highly related interferon-induced transmembrane proteins that interfere with the processes of fusion between viral and cellular membranes and are thus endowed with broad antiviral properties. A number of studies have shown how the antiviral potency of IFITMs is highly dependent on their steady-state levels, their intracellular distribution as well as on a complex pattern of post-translational modifications, parameters that are overall tributary of a number of cellular partners. In an effort to identify additional protein partners involved in the biology of IFITMs, we have devised a proteomic-based approach based on the piggyback incorporation of IFITM3 partners into extracellular vesicles. MS analysis of the proteome of vesicles bearing or not IFITM3 identified the NDFIP2 protein adaptor protein as an important regulator of IFITM3 levels. NDFIP2 is a membrane-anchored adaptor protein of E3 ubiquitin ligases of the NEDD4 family that have been already involved in IFITM3 regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Human embryonic kidney HEK293T cells were cultured in complete DMEM media with 10% Fetal Calf Serum (Sigma). Forty 10-cm well plates were ectopically transfected by calcium phosphate with control or IFITM3 expressing DNAs (40 g/DNA per plate) overnight. Media was replaced the morning after and the exosomal fraction was harvested twenty-four hours later from the cell supernatant. The supernatant was first syringe-filtered (0.45 m), layered onto a two-step sucrose cushion (45/25% sucrose w/v, in 10 mM Tris/Cl pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl and 1 mM EDTA) and ultracentrifuged (25.000 rpm, 2 hours). The interface between the 45 and 25% sucrose was harvested, diluted three times in PBS and purified again by ultracentrifugation over a single layer of 25% sucrose (25.000 rpm, 2 hours).  Exosomes were then harvested at the bottom of the tube. The proteins present in purified exosomes were solubilized in Laemmli buffer and stacked in the top of a 4-12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen). After staining with R-250 Coomassie Blue (Biorad) or Silver staining (Pierce), proteins were digested in-gel using trypsin (modified, sequencing purity, Promega), as previously described (36). The resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 and LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 120 min gradient. For this purpose, the peptides were sampled on a precolumn (300 μm x 5 mm PepMap C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated in a 75 μm x 250 mm C18 column (PepMap C18, 3 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The MS and MS/MS data were acquired by Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30), the UniProt database (Homo sapiens taxonomy, 20161026 download) and the frequently observed contaminant database embedded in MaxQuant. Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethylation (C, fixed), acetyl (Protein N-ter, variable) and oxidation (M, variable). Minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Maximum false discovery rates - calculated by employing a reverse database strategy - were set to 0.01 at peptide and protein levels. The Match Between Run option was enabled with the default settings. Protein intensities were calculated from extracted MS intensities of unique and razor peptides and used to compute iBAQ values.

### Publication Abstract
IFITMs are a family of highly related interferon-induced transmembrane proteins that interfere with the processes of fusion between viral and cellular membranes and are thus endowed with broad antiviral properties. A number of studies have shown how the antiviral potency of IFITMs is highly dependent on their steady-state levels, their intracellular distribution and a complex pattern of post-translational modifications, parameters that are overall tributary of a number of cellular partners. In an effort to identify additional protein partners involved in the biology of IFITMs, we devised a proteomics-based approach based on the piggyback incorporation of IFITM3 partners into extracellular vesicles. MS analysis of the proteome of vesicles bearing or not bearing IFITM3 identified the NDFIP2 protein adaptor protein as an important regulator of IFITM3 levels. NDFIP2 is a membrane-anchored adaptor protein of the E3 ubiquitin ligases of the NEDD4 family that have already been found to be involved in IFITM3 regulation. We show here that NDFIP2 acts as a recruitment factor for both IFITM3 and NEDD4 and mediates their distribution in lysosomal vesicles. The genetic inactivation and overexpression of NDFIP2 drive, respectively, lower and higher levels of IFITM3 accumulation in the cell, overall suggesting that NDFIP2 locally competes with IFITM3 for NEDD4 binding. Given that NDFIP2 is itself tightly regulated and highly responsive to external cues, our study sheds light on a novel and likely dynamic layer of regulation of IFITM3.

### Keywords
Degradation, Virus infection, Vesicles, Nanolc-ms/ms, Ifitm3

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
EDyP


