### Accession
PXD021493

### Title
Integrated Redox Proteomic Analysis Highlights New Mechanisms of Sensitivity to Silver Nanoparticles

### Description
Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) are widely used nanomaterials in both commercial and clinical biomedical applications, but the molecular mechanisms underlying their activity remain elusive.  In this work we profiled proteomics and redox proteomics changes induced by AgNPs in two lung cancer cell lines: AgNPs sensitive Calu-1 and AgNPs resistant NCI-H358. We show that AgNPs induce changes in protein abundance and reversible oxidation in a time and cell line dependent manner impacting key cellular processes such as protein translation and modification, lipid metabolism, bioenergetics and mitochondrial dynamics. Supporting confocal microscopy and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) data further emphasize mitochondria as a target of AgNPs toxicity differentially impacting mitochondrial networks and morphology in Calu-1 and NCI-H358 lung cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and protein extraction. The cells were cultured to 90% confluence in 100 mm cell culture dishes and treated with 20 g/mL AgNPs for 4 and 24 hours as described above. After removal of media and 3x washes with cold PBS, the cells were lyzed with 500 μL of modified RIPA (mRIPA; 50 mM Tris HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM NaF) supplemented with 10 mM MSTP (Xoder Technologies, Winston-Salem, NC, USA) to selectively alkylate the reduced proteins and small molecule thiols. The lysate was incubated on ice for 30 min, and centrifuged at 18,000g for 10 min and at 4 °C. Protein concentration was measured with the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay and two aliquots were removed for proteomics (50 μg) and redox proteomics (100 μg) analysis. The samples for both proteomics and redox proteomics analysis were first precipitated with cold acetone (4x volume) overnight at -20 °C and processed as described below. In-solution digestion for proteomic analysis. After acetone precipitation, samples were centrifuged at 16,000g for 5 min.  The supernatant was discarded and the protein pellet was dried at room temperature for 5 min. The proteins were resuspended in solution by adding 200 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3, followed by proteolysis with 2.5 μg trypsin (trypsin:protein = 1:20; Pierce Trypsin Protease, MS Grade, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) at 37°C overnight.  The reaction was quenched with 1% formic acid (FA) and the peptides were dried using SpeedVac. Dried samples were stored at -80 °C prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  Redox proteomics - Reduction of reversible oxidized thiols and enrichment. The procedure followed published methods (Guo et al, 2014). The pellet collected by spinning the acetone precipitated samples at 16,000g for 5 min at 4 °C was resuspended in 150 μL resuspension buffer (50 mM HEPES, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS, pH 7.5). The samples were then reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37 °C and 850 rpm mixing for 1h. Excess DTT was removed using Bio-Gel P6 spin columns and the proteins were loaded on thiopropyl Sepharose resin (GE healthcare, Cat.No. 17042001), which was freshly made and pre-conditioned with the binding buffer (50 mM HEPES and 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.5). The tubes were then rotated at 4 °C overnight. Next day, the resin was washed with each of the following solutions:  8 M urea; 2 M NaCl; 0.1% SDS in PBS; 80% (vol/vol) acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% (vol/vol) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in H2O; and, 50 mM NH4HCO3. Redox proteomics - On-resin tryptic digestion and elution of enriched cysteine-containing peptides. The proteins covalently bound to the thiopropyl Sepharose resin were digested at 37 °C overnight by adding 200 μL 50 mM NH4HCO3 to each tube and trypsin for a trypsin-to-protein ratio of 1:20. After digestion, the resin was again washed with the 8 M urea, 2 M NaCl, 80% ACN and 0.1% TFA, and 50 mM NH4HCO3 solutions to remove unbound peptides. Covalently bound cysteine-containing peptides were then eluted twice with 100 μL elution buffer (25 mM NH4HCO3 with 20 mM DTT) after incubation for 30 min at room temperature and mixing at 850 rpm. The resin was finally washed with 100 μL of 80% ACN/0.1% TFA to elute the remaining peptides. The peptide fractions were then combined, dried using a SpeedVac and then stored at -80 °C for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched with the following parameters to identify proteins, compile, and MS1 quantitation: Sequest HT algorithm within the Proteome Discoverer v2.2 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) in combination with the UniProt protein FASTA database (Homo sapiens, 20,258 annotated entries, Feb 2018); FT-trap instrument, parent mass error tolerance of 10 ppm; fragment mass error tolerance of 0.6 Da (monoisotopic); maximum 2 missed cleavages were allowed; variable modifications of 15.995 Da (oxidation) on methionine, and 160.039 Da (MSTP) on cysteine. The identified peptides were validated using a reversed database search with target decoy PSM validator node under the parameters of 0.05 for maximum delta Cn, 0.01 and 0.05 for each strict and relaxed target FDR. For relative protein quantitation, the abundance was assessed by label free quantification (LFQ) workflow where total peak areas of identified peptides were measured which were normalized to the total ion current (TIC).

### Publication Abstract
Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) are widely used nanomaterials in both commercial and clinical biomedical applications, but the molecular mechanisms underlying their activity remain elusive. In this study we profiled proteomics and redox proteomics changes induced by AgNPs in two lung cancer cell lines: AgNPs-sensitive Calu-1 and AgNPs-resistant NCI-H358. We show that AgNPs induce changes in protein abundance and reversible oxidation in a time and cell-line-dependent manner impacting critical cellular processes such as protein translation and modification, lipid metabolism, bioenergetics, and mitochondrial dynamics. Supporting confocal microscopy and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) data further emphasize mitochondria as a target of AgNPs toxicity differentially impacting mitochondrial networks and morphology in Calu-1 and NCI-H358 lung cells. Proteomics data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD021493.

### Keywords
Reversible protein oxidation, Mitochondria, Lung, Proteomics, Silver nanoparticles

### Affiliations
Wake Forest Baptist Health
Section on Molecular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27157

### Submitter
Jingyun Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Cristina M. Furdui
Section on Molecular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27157


