### Accession
PXD013980

### Title
SILAC-Based Quantification of TGFBR2-Dependent Protein Expression in Extracellular Vesicles of Microsatellite Unstable Colorectal Cancers

### Description
Microsatellite unstable (MSI) colorectal cancers (CRCs) are characterized by Transforming Growth Factor Beta Receptor Type 2 (TGFBR2) deficiency. TGFBR2-deficient CRCs present altered target gene and protein expression. Such cellular alterations modulate the content of CRC-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs). EVs function as couriers of proteins, nucleic acids, and lipids in intercellular communication. At a qualitative level, we have previously shown that TGFBR2 deficiency can cause overall alterations in the EV protein content. To deepen the basic understanding of altered protein dynamics, this work aimed to quantify EV protein signatures in a TGFBR2-dependent manner. Using a SILAC approach for mass spectrometry-based quantification, 48 proteins that appeared to be regulated by cellular TGFBR2 expression were identified in MSI-derived EVs. TGFBR2-primed EVs were enriched in proteasome-associated proteins, whereas TGFBR2 deficiency led to upregulation of EV proteins related to the extracellular matrix and nucleosome. Altogether, the present study emphasizes the general overlap of proteins between EVs and their parental CRC cells and highlights the pathological role of the MSI tumor driver mutation affecting TGFBR2 by altering protein landscapes of EVs. From a clinical perspective, TGFBR2-regulated quantitative differences of protein expression in EVs might nominate novel biomarkers for liquid biopsy-based MSI typing in the future.

### Sample Protocol
HCT116-TGFBR2 cells allow dox-induced reconstituted expression of TGFBR2. Stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture was combined with high-resolution mass spectrometry to identify proteins of isolated EVs regulated in a TGFBR2-dependent manner.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS raw data was imported to MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.3). Peptides were identified using Andromeda search engine against the SwissProt database (download: 01/03/2019; Homo sapiens: 20,412 entries). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/p and two missed cleavage sites in case of incomplete trypsin hydrolysis were permitted. A minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids was required. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification, whereas methionine oxidation (M), asparagine and glutamine deamidation (NQ), and protein N-terminal acetylation were considered as variable modifications. Further parameters were set to a multiplicity of 2 and a maximum of 3 labeled amino acids per peptide. According to the SILAC labeling, Arg10 and Lys8 were selected for the heavy state. Mass tolerances were defined for precursor and fragmented ions as follows: MS first search – 20 ppm, MS main search – 6 ppm, and MS/MS – 0.5 Da.  Identification was performed under a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.001 (1 %) and a match probability of p < 0.01, where p is the probability that the observed match is a random event. SILAC-based quantification was based on unique and razor peptides with a minimum of two ratio counts. Peptide ratios were calculated and normalized for each arginine- and/or lysine-containing peptide as described. Data analysis was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.1.3)  and R software (version 3.5.0).

### Publication Abstract
Microsatellite unstable (MSI) colorectal cancers (CRCs) are characterized by mutational inactivation of <i>Transforming Growth Factor Beta Receptor Type 2</i> (<i>TGFBR2</i>). TGFBR2-deficient CRCs present altered target gene and protein expression. Such cellular alterations modulate the content of CRC-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs). EVs function as couriers of proteins, nucleic acids, and lipids in intercellular communication. At a qualitative level, we have previously shown that TGFBR2 deficiency causes overall alterations in the EV protein content. To deepen the basic understanding of altered protein dynamics, this work aimed to determine TGFBR2-dependent EV protein signatures in a quantitative manner. Using a stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) approach for mass spectrometry-based quantification, 48 TGFBR2-regulated proteins were identified in MSI CRC-derived EVs. Overall, TGFBR2 deficiency caused upregulation of several EV proteins related to the extracellular matrix and nucleosome as well as downregulation of proteasome-associated proteins. The present study emphasizes the general overlap of proteins between EVs and their parental CRC cells but also highlights the impact of TGFBR2 deficiency on EV protein composition. From a clinical perspective, TGFBR2-regulated quantitative differences of protein expression in EVs might nominate novel biomarkers for liquid biopsy-based MSI typing in the future.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Colorectal cancer, Extracellular vesicles, Silac, Microsatellite instability

### Affiliations
Dept. Applied Tumor Biology Institute of Pathology Im Neuenheimer Feld 224 69120 Heidelberg Germany
PhD Student

### Submitter
Fabia Fricke

### Lab Head
Dr Jürgen Kopitz
Dept. Applied Tumor Biology Institute of Pathology Im Neuenheimer Feld 224 69120 Heidelberg Germany


