### Accession
PXD033855

### Title
Proteome of NtrY defective mutant in Paracoccus denitrificans PD1222

### Description
Quantitative proteomic analysis of Paracoccus denitrificans PD1222 wild type and NtrY defective mutant in denitrifying conditions (anaerobiosis, nitrate as nitrogen source)

### Sample Protocol
Samples were collected at the same growth and consumption rates, then they were washed in phosphate buffer, sonicated and proteins were precipitated by using the 2D Clean-Up kit. Resuspended proteins in urea-based buffer were analyzed by LC-MS/MS in an tims-TOF Pro mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
RAW data were submitted to Andromeda search engine in the MaxQuant plantform. Paracoccus denitrificans PD1222 proteome from Uniprot (UP000000361) was used as database. In silico spectral library was generated from the same proteome database. Only those proteins identified from more than 1 peptide were considered for qualitative analysis. Only those proteins with a fold change higher than 2 and with a p value lower than 0.05 were considered as differential expressed. PD 1-3 correspond to wild-type (16, 17 and 20 in datasets with all data); NtrY 1-3 correspond to NtrY defective mutant (28, 29 and 30 in datasets with all data)

### Publication Abstract
Denitrification consists of the sequential reduction of nitrate to nitrite, nitric oxide, nitrous oxide, and dinitrogen. Nitrous oxide escapes to the atmosphere, depending on copper availability and other environmental factors. Iron is also a key element because many proteins involved in denitrification contain iron-sulfur or heme centers. The NtrYX two-component regulatory system mediates the responses in a variety of metabolic processes, including denitrification. A quantitative proteomic analysis of a <i>Paracoccus denitrificans</i> NtrY mutant grown under denitrifying conditions revealed the induction of different TonB-dependent siderophore transporters and proteins related to iron homeostasis. This mutant showed lower intracellular iron content than the wild-type strain, and a reduced growth under denitrifying conditions in iron-limited media. Under iron-rich conditions, it releases higher concentrations of siderophores and displayes lower nitrous oxide reductase (NosZ) activity than the wild-type, thus leading to nitrous oxide emission. Bioinformatic and qRT-PCR analyses revealed that NtrYX is a global transcriptional regulatory system that responds to iron starvation and, in turn, controls expression of the iron-responsive regulators <i>fur</i>, <i>rirA</i>, and <i>iscR</i>, the denitrification regulators <i>fnrP</i> and <i>narR</i>, the nitric oxide-responsive regulator <i>nnrS</i>, and a wide set of genes, including the <i>cd</i><sub>1</sub>-nitrite reductase NirS, nitrate/nitrite transporters and energy electron transport proteins.

### Keywords
Proteomic, Denitrification, Ntrxy system, Paracoccus denitrificans

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Córdoba
University of Cordoba

### Submitter
Alfonso Olaya Abril

### Lab Head
Dr María Dolores Roldán Ruiz
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Córdoba


