### Accession
PXD010590

### Title
Proteomics Analysis of Escherichia coli Persisters

### Description
Persisters, a dormant and multi-drug tolerant subpopulation that are able to resuscitate after antibiotic treatment, have recently received considerable attentions as the major risk of the relapse of various infectious diseases in clinics. However, due to their low abundance and inherent mutability, it is extremely difficult to study them by proteomics. Here, we developed a magnetic beads-based separation approach to enrich Escherichia coli persisters and then subject them to Filter-Aided Sample Perparation (FASP) followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. We applied spectral counting-based quantitative proteomics to study the proteomic changes of E. coli persisters under high concentration of ampicillin treatment.

### Sample Protocol
- Sample preparation:  For persisters formation, mid-exponential phase culture of E. coli K-12 was exposed with rifampin (100 µg/ml) pretreatment for 30 min and ampicillin (100 µg/ml) treatment for 3 h. The persisters were isolated and enriched using MicroBeads to remove the dead cells. Control sample used in this study is the mid-exponential phase culture of E. coli K-12 without any antibiotic treatment. Three biological replicates were performed for each persisters and control sample, and two technical replicates were performed for each biological replicate.   The cell pellet was suspended in 300 µL of lysis buffer (0.5% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, and 25 mM dithiothreitol), incubated at 95 ⁰C for 5 minutes, and sonicated for 3 min. The sample was centrifuged to remove cell debris and insoluble materials. Aliquot of the sample was taken for BCA protein assay (Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit). For shotgun proteomics, 200 µg of proteins were mixed with 250 µl of the exchange buffer (6M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 600 mM guadinine HCl), transferred to Amicon® filter device (Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany), and centrifuged. Then, 250 µl of the exchange buffer was added once again to the filter device, centrifuged, and the filtrate in the collection tube was discarded. The proteins in the filter device was alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA, 50 mM in exchange buffer) in dark for 20 min, and then centrifuged. 250 µl of the exchange buffer was added the filter device, centrifuged, and the filtrate in the collection tube was discarded. To dilute the urea concentration, 250 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to the filter device, centrifuged, and this step was repeated once again. Proteins were digested by sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1:100 w/w, Promega, Madison, WI) for 12 h at 37 ⁰C. Then, the sample was acidified with 10% formic acid to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) and desalted by C18 reverse-phase Spin Tip. Finally, samples were dried with SpeedVac (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and stored at -20 ⁰C before use.  - LC-MS/MS:  We adopt standard shotgun proteomics techniques to process the sample through the Thermo Scientific Accela HPLC system coupled to a dual cell linear ion trap MS, LTQ Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), which is interfaced to a nano-electrospray ion source. Approximately 10 µg of the protein digest was injected to the HPLC system and separated on a C18 column (Thermo Bio-Basic-18, 150 × 0.1 mm, 300 Å pore size, 5 µm particle size) at a flow rate of 220 µl/min. The mobile phase composition is 0.1% formic acid in water for solvent A, and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile for solvent B. The gradient was applied from 2 to 10% of solvent B for 4 min, from 10 to 32% of solvent B for 60 min, from 32 to 60% of solvent B for 6 min, and then from 60 to 80% of solvent B for 2 min. At the end, the mobile phase was kept at 80% of solvent B for 2 min, and then decreased to 2% of solvent B for 2 min. 14 minutes equilibration with 2% of solvent B was applied before the next injection. The m/z range acquired in the MS full scan was 400 to 2000 Da. The top 10 most intense precursor ions were selected to the MS2 by using collision-induced-dissociation (CID) with dynamic exclusion of 60s, and the singly charged precursor ions excluded from the MS2. The MS2 isolation width was 2.0 m/z, and the collision energy was set at 30.0 V.

### Data Protocol
The raw data acquired by the Thermo Scientific LTQ Velos were converted to mzML files by msconvert of the ProteoWizard (version 3.0.x). The mzML data sets were searched using Comet (version 2016.01 rev.2) against the E. coli K-12 proteome database obtained from the UniProt. The sequences of common contaminants, such as trypsin and human keratins, and decoy sequences generated by shuffling amino acid sequences between tryptic cleavage sites were added to the database. The decoy sequence in the database are used for the false discovery rate (FDR) estimation of the identified peptides. The searching criteria were set as follows: 3 amu peptide mass tolerance, monoisotopic mass type, fully digested enzyme termini, 1.005 amu fragment bin tolerance, 0.4 amu fragment bin offset, oxidated methionine and alkylated cysteine as the variable modifications. The results from Comet searching were processed by PeptideProphet of the Trans-Proteomics Pipeline (TPP) on the peptide level. Every data set was analyzed independently, and the peptide probabilities were assigned to matched peptides based on their respective searching scores and the distribution of decoy identifications.  The search results from the two technical replicates of each biological replicate were combined, and the proteins identified in at least two out of three biological replicates were used for label-free quantification by spectral counting. The quantification scores of proteins were given by the normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF), where the number of peptide spectrum matched for each protein divided by the length of the corresponding protein is normalized to the total number of PSMs divided by the length of protein for all identified proteins. Then, t test was employed to analyze the proteomics data based on MS/MS spectral counts. The differentially expressed proteins were defined as those with p value for t test below 0.05, and fold change higher or lower than ± 2-folds.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial persisters, a dormant and multidrug tolerant subpopulation that are able to resuscitate after antibiotic treatment, have recently received considerable attention as a major cause of relapse of various infectious diseases in the clinic. However, because of their low abundance and inherent transience, it is extremely difficult to study them by proteomics. Here we developed a magnetic-beads-based separation approach to enrich Escherichia coli persisters and then subjected them to shotgun proteomics. Rifampin pretreatment was employed to increase persister formation, and the resulting cells were exposed to a high concentration of ampicillin (10&#xd7; MIC) to remove nonpersisters. The survivors were analyzed by spectral counting-based quantitative proteomics. On average, 710 proteins were identified at a false discovery rate of 0.01 for enriched E. coli persisters. By spectral counting-based quantification, 105 proteins (70 down-regulated, 35 up-regulated) were shown to be differentially expressed compared with normal cells. A comparison of the differentially expressed proteins between the magnetic beads-enriched persisters and nonenriched persisters (a mixture of persisters and intact dead cells) shows only around half (&#x223c;58%) overlap and different protein-protein interaction networks. This suggest that persister enrichment is important to eliminate the cumulative effect of dead cells that will obscure the proteome of persisters. As expected, proteins involved in carbohydrate metabolism, fatty acid and amino acid biosynthesis, and bacterial chemotaxis were found to be down-regulated in the persisters. Interestingly, membrane proteins including some transport proteins were up-regulated, indicating that they might be important for the drug tolerance of persisters. Knockout of the pal gene expressing peptidoglycan-associated lipoprotein, one of the most up-regulated proteins detected in persisters, led to 10-fold reduced persister formation under ampicillin treatment.

### Keywords
Persistence, Dormancy, Antibiotic, Proteomics, Tolerant

### Affiliations
Chemical and Biological Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST), Hong Kong
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)

### Submitter
Jordy Evan Sulaiman

### Lab Head
Dr Henry Lam
Chemical and Biological Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST), Hong Kong


