### Accession
PXD029467

### Title
Identification of homophilic ATP1A1 interaction between tumor cells and fibroblasts

### Description
Tumor cells with diverse phenotype and biological behaviors are influenced by stromal cells through secretory factors or direct cell-cell contact. Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by extensive desmoplasia with fibroblasts as the major cell type. Here, we observed enrichment of myofibroblasts in juxta-tumoral position, where tumor cells gain epithelial-mesenchymal transition for invasion, that correlated with worsened prognosis in PDAC patients. Direct cell-cell contacts as forming heterocellular aggregates between fibroblasts and tumor cells were detected in primary pancreatic tumors and circulating tumor microemboli. Mechanistically, the overexpressed ATP1A1 of tumor cells binds to and reorganizes ATP1A1 of fibroblasts inducing calcium oscillations, NF-κB activation, and activin A secretion. Consequentially, either silencing ATP1A1 expression or neutralizing activin A secretion suppresses tumor invasion and colonization. Taken together, these results elucidate the mechanic interplay between tumor cells and the bound fibroblasts in PDAC progression, and provide opportunities for potential therapeutic strategy against tumor metastasis by blocking such interaction.

### Sample Protocol
Identifying ATP1A1 of tumor cells: Sulfo-SBED is a trifunctional crosslinker with an amine reactive group separated by a disulfide bond from a UV-activated aryl azide and a biotin. Sulfo-SBED crosslinkers bound to tumor membrane proteins through amine reactive groups with cleavable disulfide bond. After removal of unbound crosslinkers, tumor membrane proteins with Sulfo-SBED were added to fibroblasts for 5 hrs to enable sufficient protein binding. Unbound proteins were removed and cells were exposed to UV lamp to activate aryl azide group for crosslinking. In the end, crosslinked proteins were purified by monomeric-avidin beads. Western blotting analysis of no cross-linking control and cross-linked membrane protein complexes with streptavidin-HRP under reducing condition. Protein bands from five individual lanes were cutted for protein ID identification by mass spectrometry.  Identifying ATP1A1 of fibroblasts: Sulfo-NHS-Biotin crosslinkers bound to plasma membrane proteins of intracellular hydrogelated fibroblasts. Biotinylated proteins of fibroblasts which bound to ATP1A1 were immunoprecipitated by ATP1A1-Flag-bound M2 agarose beads, but not by Flag-bound M2 agarose beads or anti-HA agarose beads pre-mixed with ATP1A1-Flag. Finally, biotinylated proteins were released by detergent and purified by monomeric-avidin beads. Western blotting analysis of biotinylated fibroblast membrane proteins with streptavidin-HRP under reducing condition. Protein band from three individual lanes were cut for protein ID identification by mass spectrometry.  Samples were detected by LC-ESI-MS on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with with EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo, San Jose, CA, US) and EASY-spray source (Thermo, San Jose, CA, US). The disgestion solution was injected (5μl) at 1 μl/min flow rate on to easy column (C18, 0.075 mm X 150 mm, ID 3 μm; Thermo Scientific) Chromatographic separation was using 0.1% formic acid in water as mobile phase A and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile as mobile phase B operated at 300 nl/min flow rate. Briefly, the gradient employed was 2% buffer B at 2min to 40% buffer B at 40 min. Full-scan MS condition: mass range m/z 375-1800 (AGC target 5E5) with lock mass, resolution 60,000 at m/z 200, and maximum injection time of 50 ms. The MS/MS was run in top speed mode with 3s cycles with CID for protein id; while the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Electrospray voltage was maintained at 1.8 kV and capillary temperature was set at 275 oC.

### Data Protocol
Raw file processed by Maxquant (Version 1.6.14). MSMS spectra was search against the uniprot Human database and enzyme digest by trypsin with 2 miss cleavage. The parameter such as MS tolerance of 20ppm for first search and main search 6 ppm. Fragment tolerance was 0.5Da (IT). Variable modification of oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-terminal) and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C) as search parameters.

### Publication Abstract
Tumor cells with diverse phenotypes and biological behaviors are influenced by stromal cells through secretory factors or direct cell-cell contact. Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by extensive desmoplasia with fibroblasts as the major cell type. In the present study, we observe enrichment of myofibroblasts in a juxta-tumoral position with tumor cells undergoing epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) that facilitates invasion and correlates with a worse clinical prognosis in PDAC patients. Direct cell-cell contacts forming heterocellular aggregates between fibroblasts and tumor cells are detected in primary pancreatic tumors and circulating tumor microemboli (CTM). Mechanistically, ATP1A1 overexpressed in tumor cells binds to and reorganizes ATP1A1 of fibroblasts that induces calcium oscillations, NF-&#x3ba;B activation, and activin A secretion. Silencing ATP1A1 expression or neutralizing activin A secretion suppress tumor invasion and colonization. Taken together, these results elucidate the direct interplay between tumor cells and bound fibroblasts in PDAC progression, thereby providing potential therapeutic opportunities for inhibiting metastasis by interfering with these cell-cell interactions.

### Keywords
Human, Membrane protein, Atp1a1, Pancreatic cancer, Cell-cell contact, Fibroblast

### Affiliations
Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica
Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. Drug Development Center, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Irvine.

### Submitter
Yi-Ing  Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Wen-Hwa Lee
Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. Drug Development Center, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Irvine.


