### Accession
PXD014896

### Title
SCC1 interaction proteomics in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
FACT mediates cohesin function on chromatin Cohesin is a key regulator of genome architecture with roles in sister chromatid cohesion and the organisation of higher-order structures during interphase and mitosis. The recruitment and mobility of cohesin complexes on DNA are restricted by nucleosomes. Here we show that cohesin role in chromosome organization requires the histone chaperone FACT. Depletion of FACT in metaphase cells affects cohesin stability on chromatin reducing its accumulation at pericentric regions and binding on chromosome arms. Using Hi-C, we show that cohesin-dependent TAD (Topological Associated Domains)-like structures in G1 and metaphase chromosomes are disrupted in the absence of FACT. Surprisingly, sister chromatid cohesion is intact in FACT-depleted cells, although chromosome segregation failure is observed. Our results uncover a role for FACT in genome organisation by facilitating cohesin dependent compartmentalization of chromosomes into loop domains.

### Sample Protocol
HA-tagged SCC1 (Sister chromatid cohesion protein 1) protein was expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells and immunoprecipitated using anti-HA magnetic beads. Following wash steps proteins were eluted from anti-HA magnetic beads, and processed using a FASP sample preparation protocol (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). Briefly, samples were loaded onto 30 kDa centrifugal concentrators (Millipore, MRCF0R030) and buffer exchange was carried out by centrifugation on a bench top centrifuge (15min, 12,000g). Multiple buffer exchanges were performed sequentially with UA buffer (8M urea in 100mM Tris pH 8.5, 3x200l), reduction with 10mM DTT in UA buffer (30min, 40°C) and alkylation with 50mM iodoacetamide in UA buffer (20min, 25°C). This was followed by buffer exchange into UA buffer (3x100l) and 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (3x100l). Digestion was carried out with mass spectrometry grade trypsin (Promega, V5280) using 1g protease per digest (16h, 37°C). Tryptic peptides were collected by centrifugation into a fresh collection tube (10min, 12,000g) and washing of the concentrator with 0.5M sodium chloride (50l, 10min, 12,000g) for maximal recovery. Following acidification with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.2%, collected protein digests were desalted using Glygen C18 spin tips (Glygen Corp, TT2C18.96) and peptides eluted with 60% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (FA). Eluents were then dried using vacuum centrifugation.  Dried tryptic digests were redissolved in 0.1% TFA by shaking (1200rpm) for 30min and sonication on an ultrasonic water bath for 10min, followed by centrifugation (20,000g, 5°C) for 10min. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out in technical duplicates and separation was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via an EASY spray source (Thermo Scientific). For LC-MS/MS analysis protein digest solutions were injected and loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 100μm × 2cm) for desalting and concentration at 8μL/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. Peptides were then eluted on-line to an analytical column (Acclaim Pepmap RSLC C18, 75μm × 50cm) at a flow rate of 250nL/min. Peptides were separated using a 120 minute gradient, 4-25% of buffer B for 90 minutes followed by 25-45% buffer B for another 30 minutes (composition of buffer B – 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) and subsequent column conditioning and equilibration. Eluted peptides were analysed by the mass spectrometer operating in positive polarity using a data-dependent acquisition mode. Ions for fragmentation were determined from an initial MS1 survey scan at 70,000 resolution, followed by HCD (Higher Energy Collision Induced Dissociation) of the top 12 most abundant ions at 17,500 resolution. MS1 and MS2 scan AGC targets were set to 3e6 and 5e4 for maximum injection times of 50ms and 50ms respectively. A survey scan m/z range of 400 – 1800 was used, normalised collision energy set to 27%, charge exclusion enabled with unassigned and +1 charge states rejected and a minimal AGC target of 1e3.  References Wiśniewski, J.R., Zougman, A., Nagaraj, N., and Mann, M. (2009). Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nature Methods 6, 359-362.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using the MaxQuant software platform (v1.5.8.3), with database searches carried out by the in-built Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot S.cerevisiae database (version 20160815, number of entries: 6,729). A reverse decoy search approach was used at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) for both peptide spectrum matches and protein groups. Search parameters included: maximum missed cleavages set to 2, fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and serine, threonine, tyrosine phosphorylation. Label-free quantification was enabled with an LFQ minimum ratio count of 2. ‘Match between runs’ function was used with match and alignment time limits of 1 and 20 minutes respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Scc1 interactomics, Fact complex, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences
MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences Hammersmith Hospital Campus Du Cane Road,  London, W12 0NN United Kingdom

### Submitter
Holger Kramer

### Lab Head
Dr Jonay García-Luis
MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences Hammersmith Hospital Campus Du Cane Road,  London, W12 0NN United Kingdom


