### Accession
PXD011714

### Title
Scolopocryptops sexspinosus venom MS

### Description
MS analysis of tryptic digests of whole venoms from two individual of the centipede Scolopecryptops sexspinosus from Florida, USA.

### Sample Protocol
Quantification of venom protein samples was completed using a Qubit Protein Assay Kit and approximately 5 ug of whole venom was digested using the Calbiochem ProteoExtract All-in-One Trypsin Digestion Kit (Merch, Darmstadt, Germany) per manufacturer's instructions, resulting in approximately 4.3 ug of digested venom proteins. Digested proteinsamples were then frozen and dried using a SpeedVac.

### Data Protocol
Digested venom protein samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid to reach a final concentration of 250 ng/uL. Known concentrations of three highly-purified recombinant Escherichia coli proteins (Abcam) were mixed in specified proportions prior to digestion to yield final desired concentrations of 2,500 fmol of P31697 (Chaperone protein FimC), 250 fmol of P31658 (Protein deglycase 1), and 25 fmol of P00811 (Beta-lactamase ampC) per injection. The digested E. coli peptide mix was infused into venom samples prior to LC-MS/MS injection. A 2 uL aliquot of each sample was injected into an externally calibrated Thermo Q Exactive HF (high-resolution electrospray tandem mass spectrometer) in conjunction with Dionex UltiMate3000 RSLCnano System to perform LC-MS/MS analysis. Beginning with LC, samples were aspirated into a 50 uL loop and loaded onto the trap column (Thermo u-Precolumn 5 mm, with nanoViper tubing 30 um i.d.X10 cm), with a flow rate of 300 nL/min for separation on the analytical column (Acclaim pepmap RSLC 75 uMx 15 cm nanoviper). A 60 minute linear gradient from 3% to 45% B was performed using mobile phases A (99.9% H2O (EMD Omni Solvent) and 0.1% formic acid) and B (99.9% ACN and 0.1% formic acid). The LC eluent was directly nanosprayed into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The Q Exactive HF was operated in a data-dependent mode and under direct control of the Thermo Excalibur 3.1.66 (Thermo Scientific) throughout the chromatographic separation. A data-dependent top-20 method was used for MS data acquisition, selecting the most abundant, not-yet-sequenced precursor ions from the survey scans (350-1700 m/z). Sequencing was performed using higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation with a target value of 10^5 ions determined with predictive automatic gain control. Full scans (350-1700 m/z) were performed at 60,000 resolution in profile mode. MS2 were acquired in centroid mode at 15,000 resolution. A 15-second dynamic exclusion window was used and ions with a single charge, a charge more than seven, or an unassigned charge were excluded. All measurements were performed at room temperature, and each sample was run and measured in triplicate to facilitate lable-free quantification and account for any machine-related variability between samples.  The resulting raw files were searched with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 using SequestHT as the search engine, custom-generated FASTA databases, and percolator to validate peptides. The SequestHT search parameters used were: enzyme name = Trypsin, maximum missed cleavage = 2, minimum peptide length = 6, maximum peptide length = 144, maximum delta Cn = 0.05, precursor mass tolerance = 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance = 0.2 Da, dynamic modifications,  carbamidomethyl +57.021 Da(C) and oxidation +15.995 Da(M). Protein and peptide identities were validated using Scaffold (version 4.3.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) software. Peptide identities were accepted based on a 1.0% false discovery rate (FDR) using the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identities were also accepted with an FDR of 1.0% and a minimum of one recognized peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Many venom proteins have presumably been convergently recruited by taxa from diverse venomous lineages. These toxic proteins have characteristics that allow them to remain stable in solution and have a high propensity for toxic effects on prey and/or potential predators. Despite this well-established convergent toxin recruitment, some toxins seem to be lineage specific. To further investigate the toxic proteins found throughout venomous lineages, venom proteomics and venom-gland transcriptomics were performed on two individual red bark centipedes (Scolopocryptops sexspinosus). Combining the protein phenotype with the transcript genotype resulted in the first in-depth venom characterization of S. sexspinosus, including 72 venom components that were identified in both the transcriptome and proteome and 1468 nontoxin transcripts identified in the transcriptome. Ten different toxin families were represented in the venom and venom gland with the majority of the toxins belonging to metalloproteases, CAPS (cysteine-rich secretory protein, antigen 5, and pathogenesis-related 1 proteins), and &#x3b2;-pore-forming toxins. Nine of these toxin families shared a similar proteomic structure to venom proteins previously identified from other centipedes. However, the most highly expressed toxin family, the adamalysin-like metalloproteases, has until now only been observed in the venom of snakes. We confirmed adamalysin-like metalloprotease activity by means of in vivo functional assays. The recruitment of an adamalysin-like metalloprotease into centipede venom represents a striking case of convergent evolution.

### Keywords
Venom, Centipede

### Affiliations
Florida State University

### Submitter
Darin Rokyta

### Lab Head
Dr Darin R. Rokyta
Florida State University


