### Accession
PXD006927

### Title
Mtb BfrB interacted proteins -  Systematic Identification of Mycobacterium tuberculosis Effectors Reveals that BfrB Suppresses Innate Immunity

### Description
To identify the protein interacted with Mtb BfrB, we performed the GST Pulldown assay followed by MS.We identified that Mtb BfrB interact with human RPS3.

### Sample Protocol
Bands excised from protein gels were destained by incubation in intermixture of 7.5 mM potassium ferricyanide （III）and 25 mM sodium thiosulfate. After destained, the gel pieces were reduced by incubation in a solution of 10 mM DTT at 60°C for 20 min，followed by alkylating in a solution of 25 mM IAM at room temperature for 15 min. The pieces were digested in-gel with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) overnight at 37°C. The produced peptides were extracted with 60% acetonitrile containing 5% formic acid and 100% acetonitrile successively, dried by SpeedVac, and was re-dissolved in 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides was concentrated with peptide trap column (0.75 mm*2 cm, 3 µm, Dionex, Thermofisher), and released using a solvent system with solvent A consisting of 99.9% water and 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B consisting of 99.9% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were eluted with gradient 2~30% B in 80min, 30~80% B in 10 min, and 80% B hold for 10 min with a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min in a C18 capillary column (75 mm*15 cm, 3 µm, Dionex, Thermofisher).The eluted ions were analyzed by an ESI-Q-TOF mass spectrometer (maXis, Impact, Bruker Daltonik, Germany) in data dependent acquisition mode (m/z 350-1500). The Source Capillary was set at 2000~2400 v, the flow and temperature of dry gas was 2.0 L/min and 150 °C respectively. The mass spectrometer was set as one full MS scan followed by ten MS/MS scans on the ten most intense ions from the MS spectrum with the following dynamic exclusion settings: exclusion duration = 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped by Compass Data Analysis version 4.1 (Bruker Daltonics). The peak list was directly generated from raw data using centroid algorithm with peak width set as 0.1 m/z and intensity above 100. No peak smooth or filter process was applied. After the charge states were calculated, the de-isotoped. peak list was exported as mgf file for further mascot search. Mascot (version 2.4, Matrix Science) was set up to search database. The following parameters were considered for the searches: peptide mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da, and a maximum of two missed cleavage of trypsin was chosen. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification, and oxidation (M), were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> (Mtb) has evolved multiple strategies to counter the human immune system. The effectors of Mtb play important roles in the interactions with the host. However, because of the lack of highly efficient strategies, there are only a handful of known Mtb effectors, thus hampering our understanding of Mtb pathogenesis. In this study, we probed Mtb proteome microarray with biotinylated whole-cell lysates of human macrophages, identifying 26 Mtb membrane proteins and secreted proteins that bind to macrophage proteins. Combining GST pull-down with mass spectroscopy then enabled the specific identification of all binders. We refer to this proteome microarray-based strategy as SOPHIE (Systematic unlOcking of Pathogen and Host Interacting Effectors). Detailed investigation of a novel effector identified here, the iron storage protein BfrB (Rv3841), revealed that BfrB inhibits NF-&#x3ba;B-dependent transcription through binding and reducing the nuclear abundance of the ribosomal protein S3 (RPS3), which is a functional subunit of NF- &#x3ba;B. The importance of this interaction was evidenced by the promotion of survival in macrophages of the mycobacteria, <i>Mycobacterium smegmatis,</i> by overexpression of BfrB. Thus, beyond demonstrating the power of SOPHIE in the discovery of novel effectors of human pathogens, we expect that the set of Mtb effectors identified in this work will greatly facilitate the understanding of the pathogenesis of Mtb, possibly leading to additional potential molecular targets in the battle against tuberculosis.

### Keywords
Bfrb interact with rps3

### Affiliations
Shanghai Center for Systems Biomedicine, Key Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

### Submitter
He Xiang

### Lab Head
Dr He Xiang
Shanghai Center for Systems Biomedicine, Key Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China


