### Accession
PXD017923

### Title
The Mammalian Cytosolic Thioredoxin Reductase Pathway Acts via a Membrane Protein to Reduce ER-localised Proteins

### Description
Folding of proteins entering the mammalian secretory pathway requires the insertion of the correct disulfide bonds.  Disulfide formation involves both an oxidative pathway for their insertion and a reductive pathway to remove incorrectly formed disulfides.  Reduction of these disulfides is critical for correct folding and degradation of misfolded proteins.  Previously, we showed that the reductive pathway is driven by NADPH generated in the cytosol.  Here, by reconstituting the pathway using purified proteins and ER microsomal membranes, we demonstrate that the thioredoxin reductase system provides the minimal cytosolic components required for reducing proteins within the ER lumen.  In particular, saturation of the pathway and its protease sensitivity demonstrates the requirement for a membrane protein to shuttle electrons from the cytosol to the ER lumen.  These results provide compelling evidence for the critical role of the cytosol in regulating ER redox homeostasis to ensure correct protein folding and to facilitate the degradation of misfolded ER proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared for redox proteomics as previously described (van der Reest, Lilla et al., 2018) with some modifications.  Microsomes were incubated in the presence of the reductive system as described above either in the presence or absence of Trx1.  After 60 min incubation at 30 OC, microsomes were lysed in a buffer containing 4% SDS, 50?mM triethylammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5 and 55 mM unlabelled iodoacetamide (light IAA, 12C2H4INO – Sigma) to alkylate free cysteine thiols.  For each experimental replicate, 30?µg of protein were subsequently labelled with stable-isotope labelled iodoacetamide (heavy IAA, 13C2D2H2INO, Sigma) to alkylate reversibly oxidised cysteines.  Differentially alkylated proteins were precipitated using trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and digested first with Endoproteinase Lys-C (ratio 1:33 enzyme:lysate) for one h, followed by trypsin, overnight (ratio 1:33 enzyme:lysate).  The digested peptides from each experiment, and a pool sample, were differentially labelled using TMT10-plex reagent (Thermo Scientific).  Fully labelled samples were mixed in equal amount and desalted using a 100 mg Sep Pak C18 reverse phase solid-phase extraction cartridges (Waters). LC/MS/MS protocol TMT-labelled peptides were analysed as previously described (van der Reest et al., 2018) with minor modifications. First peptides were fractionated using high pH reverse phase chromatography on a C18 column (150 × 2.1 mm i.d. - Kinetex EVO (5 µm, 100 Å)) on a HPLC system (Agilent, LC 1260 Infinity II, Agilent).  A two-step gradient was applied, from 1–28% B in 42 min, then from 28–46% B in 13 min to obtain a total of 21 fractions for LC/MS/MS analysis.   Fractionated peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC II 1200 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  Elution was carried out using a binary gradient with buffer A (2% acetonitrile) and B (80% acetonitrile), both containing 0.1% formic acid.  Samples were loaded with 6?µl of buffer A into a 50?cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9?µm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH).  Packed emitter was kept at 50?°C by means of a column oven (Sonation) integrated into the nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific).  Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300? nl/min using different gradients optimised for three sets of fractions: 1–7, 8–15, and 16–21.  Initial percentage of buffer B (%B) was kept constant for 3 minutes, then a two-step gradient was used, all with 113 min for step one and 37?min for step two.  The %B were changed as follows.  For F1-7, %B was 2 at the start, 17 at step one, and 26 at step two.  For F8-14, %B was 4 at the start, 23 at step one, and 35 at step two.  For F15-21, %B was 6 at the start, 27 at step one, and 43 at step two.  All gradients were followed by a washing step (95% B) of 10?min followed by a 5?min re-equilibration step at the initial %B of each gradient, for a total gradient time of 168?min.  Eluting peptides were electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer using a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific).  An Active Background Ion Reduction Device (ESI Source Solutions) was used to decrease air contaminants signal level.  The Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific) was used for data acquisition.  A full scan over mass range of 350–1400 m/z was acquired at 60,000 resolution at 200 m/z, with a target value of 500,000 ions for a maximum injection time of 20?ms.  Higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation was performed on the 15 most intense ions, for a maximum injection time of 100?ms, or a target value of 100,000 ions. Peptide fragments were analysed in the Orbitrap at 50,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
The MS Raw data were processed with MaxQuant software (Cox & Mann, 2008) version 1.6.3.3 and searched with Andromeda search engine (Cox, Neuhauser et al., 2011), querying SwissProt (UniProt, 2010).  First and main searches were performed with precursor mass tolerances of 20?ppm and 4.5?ppm, respectively, and MS/MS tolerance of 20?ppm.  The minimum peptide length was set to six amino acids and specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites.  MaxQuant was set to quantify on “Reporter ion MS2”, and TMT10plex was chosen as Isobaric label.  Interference between TMT channels were corrected by MaxQuant using the correction factors provided by the manufacturer.  The “Filter by PIF” option was activated and a “Reporter ion tolerance” of 0.003 Da was used.  Modification by light (H(3)NOC(2)) and heavy (HNOCx(2)Hx(2)) iodoacetamide on cysteine residues (carbamidomethylation) were specified as variable, as well as methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation modifications, no fixed modifications were specified.  The peptide, protein, and site false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 %.  MaxQuant outputs were analysed with Perseus software version 1.6.2.3 (Cox & Mann, 2008).  The MaxQuant output ModSpecPeptide.txt file was used for quantification of cysteine-containing peptides oxidation, whereas ProteinGroup.txt file was used for protein quantification analysis.  Peptides with Cys count lower than one were excluded from the analysis, together with Reverse and Potential Contaminant flagged peptides.  From the ProteinGroups.txt file, Reverse and Potential Contaminant flagged proteins were removed, as well as protein groups identified with no unique peptides.  The TMT corrected intensities of proteins and peptides were normalised to the median of all intensities measured in each replicate.  Only cysteine-containing peptides uniquely assigned to one protein group within each replicate experiment, and robustly quantified in three out of three replicate experiments, were normalised to the total protein levels and included in the analysis.  To determine significantly oxidised cysteine-containing peptides, a Student t-test with a 5% FDR (permutation-based) was applied using normalised reporter ions intensities.

### Publication Abstract
Folding of proteins entering the mammalian secretory pathway requires the insertion of the correct disulfides. Disulfide formation involves both an oxidative pathway for their insertion and a reductive pathway to remove incorrectly formed disulfides. Reduction of these disulfides is crucial for correct folding and degradation of misfolded proteins. Previously, we showed that the reductive pathway is driven by NADPH generated in the cytosol. Here, by reconstituting the pathway using purified proteins and ER microsomal membranes, we demonstrate that the thioredoxin reductase system provides the minimal cytosolic components required for reducing proteins within the ER lumen. In particular, saturation of the pathway and its protease sensitivity demonstrates the requirement for a membrane protein to shuttle electrons from the cytosol to the ER. These results provide compelling evidence for the crucial role of the cytosol in regulating ER redox homeostasis, ensuring correct protein folding and facilitating the degradation of misfolded ER proteins.

### Keywords
Protein folding, Thioredoxin reductase system, Endoplasmic reticulum, Sicylia redox proteomics

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute, Switchback Road, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK.
Proteomics

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK Beatson Institute, Switchback Road, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK.


