### Accession
PXD044240

### Title
DNSN-1 recruits GINS for CMG helicase assembly during DNA replication initiation in C. elegans

### Description
Assembly of the DNA helicase known as CMG (CDC45-MCM-GINS) is the key regulated step during DNA replication initiation in eukaryotes.  Using the Caenorhabditis elegans embryo as a model system, we identify a new CMG assembly factor called DNSN-1, which associates with the BRCT-domain protein MUS-101.  We show that DNSN-1 is required to recruit the GINS complex to chromatin and find that DNSN-1 positions GINS on the MCM-2-7 helicase motor, by direct binding of DNSN-1 to GINS and MCM-3, on interfaces that are important for initiation and essential for viability.

### Sample Protocol
C. elegans strains were generated by CRISPR-Cas9, to introduce epitope tags (GFP or TAP).  Embryos were harvested and used to generate cell extracts, from which GFP or TAP-tagged proteins were isolated by immunoprecipitation.  Samples were resolved in 4-12% gradient gels.  Each lane was then cut into 40 slices, before mass spectrometry analysis by MS Bioworks (‘GeLC40’ analysis).

### Data Protocol
Data were searchd using Mascot and parsed into Scaffold 5.1.2 software.

### Publication Abstract
Assembly of the CMG (CDC-45-MCM-2-7-GINS) helicase is the key regulated step during eukaryotic DNA replication initiation. Until now, it was unclear whether metazoa require additional factors that are not present in yeast. In this work, we show that <i>Caenorhabditis elegans</i> DNSN-1, the ortholog of human DONSON, functions during helicase assembly in a complex with MUS-101/TOPBP1. DNSN-1 is required to recruit the GINS complex to chromatin, and a cryo-electron microscopy structure indicates that DNSN-1 positions GINS on the MCM-2-7 helicase motor (comprising the six MCM-2 to MCM-7 proteins), by direct binding of DNSN-1 to GINS and MCM-3, using interfaces that we show are important for initiation and essential for viability. These findings identify DNSN-1 as a missing link in our understanding of DNA replication initiation, suggesting that initiation defects underlie the human disease syndrome that results from DONSON mutations.

### Keywords
Mus-101, C. elegans, Dnsn-1, Cmg helicase, Donson, Dna replication, Meier gorlin syndrome

### Affiliations
MRC Protein Phosphorylation & Ubiquitylation Unit, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland - UK
University of Dundee

### Submitter
KARIM LABIB

### Lab Head
Dr Karim Labib
MRC Protein Phosphorylation & Ubiquitylation Unit, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland - UK


