### Accession
PXD032675

### Title
Profiling HeLa cell ubiquitylome with OtUBD and FK2

### Description
This project compares the novel ubiquitin affinity reagent OtUBD with a monoclonal ubiquitin antibody FK2 in their abilities to facilitae the profiling of the ubiquitylated proteome of HeLa cells. Enrichments were done side by side using a semi-denaturing condition.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were lysed with lysis buffer containing 0.5% Triton-X and supplemented with protease inhibitors and the DUB inhibitor NEM. The cleared lysate was denatured by incubating in 8M urea and diluted to 4M urea before applied to OtUBD resin or FK2 resin. The mixtures were incubated for 2.5 hours. The resins were then extensively washed and eluted with pH 2.5 glycine buffer. Eluted proteins were immediately neutralized with tris buffer (pH9) and lyophilized.  Protein pellets were redissolved, reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) followed by digestion with trypsin. Digested peptides were desalted. For more details, please refer to the preprint (DOI: 10.1101/2021.12.02.470885) or related article.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software v2.2 (Thermo Scientific). Data searching is performed using the Mascot algorithm (version 2.6.1) (Matrix Science) against a custom database containing protein sequences for OtUBD as well as the SwissProt database with taxonomy restricted to Homo sapiens (20387 sequences). The search parameters included tryptic digestion with up to 2 missed cleavages, 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance, and variable (dynamic) modifications of methionine oxidation; N-ethylmaleimide, N-ethylmaleimide+water, carbamidomethyl, or methylthio on cysteine; and GG adduct on lysine, protein N-terminus, serine, threonine or cysteine. Normal and decoy database searches were run, with the confidence level set to 95% (p<0.05).  Scaffold (version Scaffold_5.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Ubiquitin, Hela cells, Ubd

### Affiliations
Yale University

### Submitter
Mengwen Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Hochstrasser
Yale University


