### Accession
PXD030066

### Title
LncReader: identification of dual functional long non-coding RNAs using multi-head self-attention mechanism

### Description
The dual functional lncRNAs have been intensively studied and identified to be involved in various fundamental cellular processes recently. It is essential to understand in which context when a dual functional lncRNA serves as a non-coding RNA or a template for coding peptide, particularly in some pathological conditions. However, apart from time consuming and cell type specific experiments, there is virtually no in-silico method for predicting the identity of dual functional lncRNAs. Here, we developed a deep-learning model with multi-head self-attention mechanism, LncReader, to identify dual functional lncRNAs based on their sequence, physicochemical and secondary structural features. Our data demonstrated that LncReader showed multiple advantage compared to various classical machine learning methods. Moreover, to obtain independent in-house datasets for robust testing, mass spectrometry proteomics combined with RNA-seq were applied in four leukemia cell lines. Remarkably, LncReader achieved the best performance among all these datasets. Therefore, LncReader provides a sophisticated and practical tool that enables fast dual functional lncRNAs identification.

### Sample Protocol
The following cell lines were purchased from the ATCC and cultured in the corresponding medium with 10% FBS (Hyclone, Logan, Utah) at 37 ºC, 5% CO2 in a cell culture incubator. MOLM13 (DMEM), THP-1 (RPMI1640, 2-mercaptoethanol to a final concentration of 0.05 mM), HL60 (IMDM), K562 (IMDM). The cell sample was transferred to a 1.5 ml centrifuge tube and lysed with DB lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5), followed by 5 min of sonication on ice. The lysate was centrifuged at 12000 g for 15 min at 4℃ and the supernatant was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h at 56℃, subsequently alkylated with sufficient iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. The extracted protein volume was made up to 100 μL with DB lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5), and then digested with trypsin at 37 °C for 16 h. Digested sample was mixed with formic acid (pH under 3), and centrifuged at 12000 g for 5 min at room temperature. The supernatant was slowly loaded to the C18 desalting column, washed with washing buffer (0.1% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile) 3 times, then added elution buffer (0.1% formic acid, 70% acetonitrile). The eluents of each sample were collected and lyophilized. Tryptic peptides were separated by using high-pH HPLC to reduce sample complexity. The lyophilized powder was dissolved in solution A (2% acetonitrile, adjusted pH to 10.0 using ammonium hydroxide) and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 min at room temperature. The sample was fractionated using a C18 column (Waters BEH C18, 4.6×250 mm, 5 μm) on a Rigol L3000 HPLC system, and eluted with a stepwise gradient of increasing buffer B (98% acetonitrile, adjusted pH to 10.0 using ammonium hydroxide). The eluates were monitored at UV 214 nm, collected for a tube per minute and combined into 10 fractions finally. All fractions were dried under vacuum, and then, reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) in water. Samples were analyzed on Q ExactiveTM HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer interfaced with an Easy-nLC 1200 nanoflow liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a Nanospray Flex™ (ESI) in positive ion polarity. The lyophilized powder was dissolved in 10 μL of mobile phase A (100% water, 0.1% formic acid), centrifuged at 14,000 g for 20 min at 4℃, and 1 μg was loaded to a home-made C18 Nano-Trap column (2 cm×75 μm, 3 μm). Peptides were separated in a home-made analytical column (15 cm×150 μm, 1.9 μm) with a mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The eluted peptides were ionized under 2.1 kiloVolts and introduced into mass spectrometry. The MS analysis was performed in a data-dependent manner (DDA) with full scans (m/z 350-1,500) acquired using an Orbitrap mass analyzer at a mass resolution of 60,000(at m/z 200). The automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 3×106 and a maximum ion injection time was 20 ms. Up to 40 of the most intense precursor ions from a survey scan were selected and fragmented with higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 27%. Fragment ions were detected by orbitrap mass analyzer at a mass resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200, the AGC target value was 1×105, the maximum ion injection time was 45 ms, a normalized collision energy was set as 27%, an intensity threshold was 2.2×104, and the dynamic exclusion parameter was 20s.

### Data Protocol
Finally, we integrated 202195 validated human protein sequences from UniProt and 13013 novel peptides candidate sequences to construct a customized protein sequence databases. MaxQuant was used to search novel peptides according to the protein sequence databases with default parameters. If more than one detected peptide was assigned to a lncRNA-encoded candidate, the corresponding transcript was recognized as a potential dual functional lncRNA.

### Publication Abstract
Long noncoding ribonucleic acids (RNAs; LncRNAs) endowed with both protein-coding and noncoding functions are referred to as 'dual functional lncRNAs'. Recently, dual functional lncRNAs have been intensively studied and identified as involved in various fundamental cellular processes. However, apart from time-consuming and cell-type-specific experiments, there is virtually no in silico method for predicting the identity of dual functional lncRNAs. Here, we developed a deep-learning model with a multi-head self-attention mechanism, LncReader, to identify dual functional lncRNAs. Our data demonstrated that LncReader showed multiple advantages compared to various classical machine learning methods using benchmark datasets from our previously reported cncRNAdb project. Moreover, to obtain independent in-house datasets for robust testing, mass spectrometry proteomics combined with RNA-seq and Ribo-seq were applied in four leukaemia cell lines, which further confirmed that LncReader achieved the best performance compared to other tools. Therefore, LncReader provides an accurate and practical tool that enables fast dual functional lncRNA identification.

### Keywords
Molm13, K562, Leukemia cell lines, Hl60, Thp_1

### Affiliations
Department of Bioinformatics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China
Southern Medical University

### Submitter
Tianyuan Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Dong Wang
Department of Bioinformatics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China


