### Accession
PXD047140

### Title
Sustained hyperglycemia specifically targets translation of mRNAs for insulin secretion

### Description
Pancreatic beta-cells are specialized for coupling glucose metabolism to insulin peptide production and secretion. Acute glucose exposure robustly and coordinately increases translation of proinsulin and proteins required for secretion of mature insulin peptide. By contrast, chronically elevated glucose levels that occur during diabetes impair beta-cell insulin secretion and have been shown experimentally to suppress insulin translation. Whether translation of other genes critical for insulin secretion are similarly downregulated by chronic high glucose is unknown. Here, we used high-throughput ribosome profiling and nascent proteomics in MIN6 insulinoma cells to elucidate the genome-wide impact of sustained high glucose on -cell mRNA translation. Prior to induction of ER stress or suppression of global translation, sustained high glucose suppressed glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and downregulated translation of not only insulin, but also of mRNAs related to insulin secretory granule formation, exocytosis, and metabolism-coupled insulin secretion. Translation of these mRNAs was also downregulated in primary rat and human islets following ex-vivo incubation with sustained high glucose and in an in vivo model of chronic mild hyperglycemia. Furthermore, translational downregulation decreased cellular abundance of these proteins. Our study uncovered a translational regulatory circuit during beta-cell glucose toxicity that impairs expression of proteins with critical roles in beta-cell function.

### Sample Protocol
MIN6 cells were incubated in media with 5.5 mM or 25 mM glucose for 24 hours. During the last 2.5 hours, cells were changed to methionine-free media for 30 minutes, washed with PBS and then incubated in methionine-free media containing 250 µM AHA for 2 hours. Cells were collected, lysed in RIPA buffer containing cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail, and proteins were quantified by BCA. 2 mg protein per condition was reduced with 15 mM DTT (1 hour, RT), alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (20 minutes, dark, RT), quenched with 10 mM DTT (15 minutes, dark, RT), precipitated using methanol/chloroform, and resuspended in 50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 2% SDS pH 7.2. Copper-catalyzed cycloaddition of biotin was performed with 1 mg of protein by addition of 100 uM TBTA, 1 mM sodium ascorbate, 1 mM copper sulfate, 100 uM biotin-alkyne (2 hours, RT). Proteins were precipitated to remove excess biotin-alkyne, re-suspended in 2% SDS, 5 mM DTT, and diluted with RIPA buffer to final SDS to < 0.5%. Samples were mixed with 10 ul of high-capacity streptavidin beads (overnight, RT) and then washed twice sequentially with RIPA, 1 M KCl, 0.1 M Na2CO3, 2 M Urea in 50 mM Hepes, RIPA, and PBS pH 7.4. Tryptic digest, TMT labeling, separation into 6 fractions, and LC-MS3 analysis was performed as described (An et al. Nature. 2020;583(7815):303-9).

### Data Protocol
MS2 spectra were searched using the COMET algorithm against a Uniprot composite database derived from the mouse proteome, exogenous sequence, known contaminants, and reverse sequences. Peptide spectral matches were filtered to a 1% FDR using the target-decoy strategy combined with linear discriminant analysis. The proteins from the 6 runs were filtered to a <1% FDR. At least 2 unique peptides were required for identification, and proteins were quantified only from peptides with a summed SN threshold of >150. Protein intensity was log2 transformed, missing values imputed, and data was normalized such that all samples had the same median abundance. We used limma to perform linear modeling and moderated t-tests, with adjustment for surrogate variable analysis as previously described (Leek at al. PLoS Genet. 2007;3(9):1724-35).

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic &#x3b2; cells are specialized for coupling glucose metabolism to insulin peptide production and secretion. Acute glucose exposure robustly and coordinately increases translation of proinsulin and proteins required for secretion of mature insulin peptide. By contrast, chronically elevated glucose levels that occur during diabetes impair &#x3b2; cell insulin secretion and have been shown experimentally to suppress insulin translation. Whether translation of other genes critical for insulin secretion is similarly downregulated by chronic high glucose is unknown. Here, we used high-throughput ribosome profiling and nascent proteomics in MIN6 insulinoma cells to elucidate the genome-wide impact of sustained high glucose on &#x3b2; cell mRNA translation. Before induction of ER stress or suppression of global translation, sustained high glucose suppressed glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and downregulated translation of not only insulin, but also mRNAs related to insulin secretory granule formation, exocytosis, and metabolism-coupled insulin secretion. Translation of these mRNAs was also downregulated in primary rat and human islets following ex vivo incubation with sustained high glucose and in an in vivo model of chronic mild hyperglycemia. Furthermore, translational downregulation decreased cellular abundance of these proteins. Our study uncovered a translational regulatory circuit during &#x3b2; cell glucose toxicity that impairs expression of proteins with critical roles in &#x3b2; cell function.

### Keywords
Pancreatic -cells, Nascent proteomics, Glucose toxicity, Islets, Mrna translation, Ribosome profiling

### Affiliations
Joslin Diabetes Center/Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Abigael Cheruiyot

### Lab Head
Dr Jean E. Schaffer
Joslin Diabetes Center/Harvard Medical School


