### Accession
PXD038282

### Title
The cell wall lipoprotein CD1687 acts as a DNA binding protein during deoxycholate-induced biofilm formation in Clostridioides difficile

### Description
The ability of bacterial pathogens to establish recurrent and persistent infections is frequently associated with their ability to form biofilms. Clostridioides difficile infections have a high rate of recurrence and relapses and it is hypothesised that biofilms are involved in its pathogenicity and persistence. Biofilm formation by C. difficile is still poorly understood. It has been shown that specific molecules such as deoxycholate (DCA) or metronidazole induce biofilm formation, but the mechanisms involved remain elusive. In this study, we describe the role of the lipoprotein CD1687 in the DCA-induced biofilm formation of C. difficile. We showed that the expression of CD1687, which is part of an operon within the CD1685-CD1689 gene cluster, is controlled by multiple transcription starting sites induced for some of them in response to DCA. Only CD1687 is required for biofilm formation and the overexpression of CD1687 is sufficient to induce biofilm formation. Using RNAseq analysis, we showed that CD1687 affects the expression of transporters and metabolic pathways and we identified several potential binding partners by pull-down assay, including transport-associated extracellular proteins. We then demonstrated that CD1687 is surface exposed in C. difficile, and this localization is required for DCA-induced biofilm formation. Given this localization and that C. difficile forms eDNA-rich biofilms, we confirmed that CD1687 binds DNA in a non-specific manner. We thus hypothesize that CD1687 is a component of the downstream response to DCA leading to biofilm formation by promoting interaction between the cells and the biofilm matrix by binding eDNA.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli strain Bli5 containing a pET20-derived plasmid carrying the CD1687 gene (Table S1) was used to overexpress hexa-histidine-tagged CD1687 protein without its signal peptide. Cells were grown overnight at 37°C in LB supplemented with glucose (1% w/v) and antibiotics (ampicillin 100µg/mL and chloramphenicol 15µg/mL). The overnight culture was transferred (1/100) in 1 L of the same medium and incubated at 37°C. Once the culture reached an OD600nm of 0.5, IPTG was added (final concentration 0.1mM) and the culture was incubated for an additional 3h. Cells were then harvested by centrifugation (5000g, 10min, 4°C) and the pellet was washed with cold PBS. After centrifugation, the supernatant was discarded and resulting pellet was frozen at -20°C. The pellet was then resuspended in 15 mL of lysis buffer (50mM sodium phosphate pH=8.0; 300mM NaCl) and sonicated. After centrifugation (5000g, 10min, 4°C), the supernatant was collected and mixed with Ni-NTA beads and incubated one hour at 4°C. The beads were then transferred to an elution column and washed with washing buffer (50mM sodium phosphate pH=8.0; 300mM NaCl; 10mM imidazole). Proteins were eluted with 2 ml of sodium phosphate buffer (50mM, pH=8.0) supplemented with 300mM NaCl and a gradient of imidazole ranging from 50mM to 500mM.Eluted proteins were analysed by mass spectrometry. Proteins were reduced using 5mM TCEP for 30min at room temperature. Alkylation of the reduced disulfide bridges was performed using 10mM iodoacetamide for 30min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were then digested in two steps, first with 250 ng r-LysC Mass Spec Grade (Promega) for 4h at 30°C then samples were diluted below 2M urea with 100mM Tris HCl pH 8.5 and 500ng Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin was added for the second digestion overnight at 37°C. Proteolysis was stopped by adding formic acid (FA) at a final concentration of 5%. The resulting peptides were cleaned using AssayMAP C18 cartridges on the AssayMAP Bravo platform (Agilent) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Peptides were concentrated to dryness and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% FA just prior to LC-MS injection. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q ExactiveTM Plus Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 500ng of peptides were injected onto a home-made 37cm C18 column (1.9μm particles, 100Å pore size, ReproSil-Pur Basic C18, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Column equilibration and peptide loading were done at 900 bars in buffer A (0.1% FA). Peptides were separated with a multi-step gradient from 3 to 6% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA) in 5 min, 6 to 31 % buffer B in 80min, 31 to 62% buffer B in 20min at a flow rate of 250nL/min. Column temperature was set to 60°C. MS data were acquired using Xcalibur software using a data-dependent method. MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 and MS/MS scans (fixed first mass 100m/z) at a resolution of 17,500. The AGC target and maximum injection time for the survey scans and the MS/MS scans were set to 3E6, 20ms and 1E6, 60ms respectively. An automatic selection of the 10 most intense precursor ions was activated (Top 10) with a 30s dynamic exclusion. The isolation window was set to 1.6m/z and normalized collision energy fixed to 27 for HCD fragmentation. We used an underfill ratio of 1.0% corresponding to an intensity threshold of 1.7E5. Unassigned precursor ion charge states as well as 1, 7, 8 and >8 charged states were rejected and peptide match was disable.

### Data Protocol
Acquired Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 2.1.1.0 using the Andromeda search engine. The MS/MS spectra were searched against the Clostridium difficile 630 database (3,957 entries). All searches were performed with oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Trypsin was selected as protease allowing for up to two missed cleavages. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and the peptide mass was limited to a maximum of 4,600Da. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.01. The main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5ppm and to 20ppm for the MS/MS match tolerance. Second peptides was enabled to identify co-fragmentation events. A false discovery rate cut-off of 1% was applied at the peptide and protein levels. The statistical analysis of the proteomics data was performed as described previously. Briefly, four biological replicates were acquired per condition. To highlight significantly differentially abundant proteins between two conditions, differential analyses were conducted through the following data analysis pipeline: (1) deleting the reverse and potential contaminant proteins; (2) keeping only proteins with at least two quantified values in one of the two compared conditions to limit misidentifications and ensure a minimum of replicability; (3) log2-transformation of the remaining intensities of proteins; (4) normalizing the intensities by median centering within conditions thanks to the normalizeD function of the R package DAPAR, (5) putting aside proteins without any value in one of both compared conditions: as they are quantitatively present in a condition and absent in another, they are considered as differentially abundant proteins and (6) performing statistical differential analysis on them by requiring a minimum fold-change of 2 between conditions and by using a LIMMA t test combined with an adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg correction of the p values thanks to the adjust.p function of the R package cp4p. The robust method of Pounds and Cheng was used to estimate the proportion of true null hypotheses among the set of statistical tests. The proteins associated with an adjusted p value inferior to an FDR level of 1% have been considered as significantly differentially abundant proteins. Finally, the proteins of interest are therefore the proteins that emerge from this statistical analysis supplemented by those being quantitatively absent from one condition and present in another.

### Publication Abstract
The ability of bacterial pathogens to establish recurrent and persistent infections is frequently associated with their ability to form biofilms. Clostridioides difficile infections have a high rate of recurrence and relapses and it is hypothesized that biofilms are involved in its pathogenicity and persistence. Biofilm formation by C. difficile is still poorly understood. It has been shown that specific molecules such as deoxycholate (DCA) or metronidazole induce biofilm formation, but the mechanisms involved remain elusive. In this study, we describe the role of the C. difficile lipoprotein CD1687 during DCA-induced biofilm formation. We showed that the expression of CD1687, which is part of an operon within the CD1685-CD1689 gene cluster, is controlled by multiple transcription starting sites and some are induced in response to DCA. Only CD1687 is required for biofilm formation and the overexpression of CD1687 is sufficient to induce biofilm formation. Using RNAseq analysis, we showed that CD1687 affects the expression of transporters and metabolic pathways and we identified several potential binding partners by pull-down assay, including transport-associated extracellular proteins. We then demonstrated that CD1687 is surface exposed in C. difficile, and that this localization is required for DCA-induced biofilm formation. Given this localization and the fact that C. difficile forms eDNA-rich biofilms, we confirmed that CD1687 binds DNA in a non-specific manner. We thus hypothesize that CD1687 is a component of the downstream response to DCA leading to biofilm formation by promoting interaction between the cells and the biofilm matrix by binding eDNA.

### Keywords
Biofilm, Cd1687, Clostridioides difficile

### Affiliations
Laboratory Pathogenesis of Bacterial Anaerobes (LPBA) Institut Pasteur 25, rue du Docteur Roux 75015 PARIS
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Magalie Duchateau

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Dupuy
Laboratory Pathogenesis of Bacterial Anaerobes (LPBA) Institut Pasteur 25, rue du Docteur Roux 75015 PARIS


