### Accession
PXD003049

### Title
Identification of calredoxin (C. reinhardtii) interaction partners by affinity chromatography and LC-MS/MS

### Description
Calcium (Ca2+) and redox signaling play important roles in acclimation processes from archaea to eukaryotic organisms. Herein we characterized a unique protein from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii that has the competence to integrate Ca2+- and redox-related signaling. This protein, designated as calredoxin (CRX), combines four Ca2+-binding EF-hands and a thioredoxin (TRX) domain. A crystal structure of CRX, at 1.6 Å resolution, revealed an unusual calmodulin-fold of the Ca2+-binding EF-hands, which is functionally linked via an inter-domain communication path with the enzymatically active TRX domain. CRX is chloroplast-localized and interacted with a chloroplast 2-Cys-peroxiredoxin (PRX1). Ca2+-binding to CRX is critical for its TRX activity and for efficient binding and reduction of PRX1. Thereby, CRX represents a new class of Ca2+-dependent "sensor-responder" proteins. Genetically engineered Chlamydomonas strains with strongly diminished amounts of CRX revealed altered photosynthetic electron transfer and were affected in oxidative stress response underpinning a function of CRX in stress acclimation.

### Sample Protocol
Calredoxin affinity chromatography A thiol trapping approach was performed based on37,67. 5 mg of either WT CRX or two single point mutated versions (C238S and C241S) were covalently linked to HCl-washed CNBr-activated sepharose 4B overnight at 4°C to produce three separate columns. After successful coupling, remaining active groups were blocked with Tris/HCl, pH 8. Columns were equilibrated overnight in binding buffer (50 mM MOPS, 50 mM NaCl, pH 8) either with 2.5 µM free Ca2+ in 5 mM EGTA or with EGTA only. 5 mg total protein from C. reinhardtii were loaded onto each column and incubated for 1 h at 4°C. After washing with 3 x 5 ml 50 mM MOPS, 500 mM NaCl, pH 8.3, potential CRX targets were eluted with 10 mM DTT in 1 ml steps until absorbance at 280 nm dropped significantly, as determined by NanoDrop measurement. The eluates were concentrated in Vivaspin 4 Columns (MWCO 10 kDa, Sartorius) and subsequently submitted to tryptic digestion (Filter Aided Sample Preparation)45 for subsequent mass spectrometric analysis.  Peptide identification by mass spectrometry Tryptically digested peptides were chromatographically separated using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Scientific). The sample was loaded on a trap column (C18 PepMap 100, 300 µM x 5 mm, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Scientific) and desalted for 5 min using 0.05% (v/v) TFA/2% (v/v) acetontrile in ultrapure water at a flow rate of 5 µl/min. Then the trap column was switched in-line with the separation column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 75 µm x 15 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Scientific). The mobile phases for peptide elution consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in ultrapure water (A) and 80% acetonitrile/0.08% formic acid in ultrapure water (B). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and employing the following gradient profile: 2.5-35% B over 90 min, 35-60% B over 20 min, 60-99% B over 5 min, 99% B for 10 min. Afterwards the column was re-equilibrated with 97.5% A for 25 min. The LC system was coupled via a nanospray source to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operating in positive ion mode. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent manner, dynamically choosing the 12 most abundant precursor ions from the survey scans (scan range m/z 400–1600, resolution 70,000, AGC target value 1e6, maximum injection time 50 ms) for fragmentation (MS/MS) by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD, 27% normalized collision energy). Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion duration of 60 seconds. AGC target value for MS/MS was 5e4 at 50 ms maximum injection time. The precursor isolation window was 2.0 m/z and the resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500. The ‘underfill ratio’, specifying the minimum percentage of the target ion value to be reached at the maximum fill time, was 1%. Singly charged ions, ions with charge state 8 and above as well as ions with unassigned charge states were excluded from fragmentation. Internal lock mass calibration on m/z 445.12003 was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Label-free protein quantification for the analysis of potential calredoxin interaction partners Peptide identification and protein quantification was performed using MaxQuant 1.5.1.2 68 with default parameters for tryptic digestion and Orbitrap detection (maximum peptide mass: 8000 Da). Spectra were searched against a database containing protein sequences of the Chlamydomonas v5.5 gene models (Joint Genome Institute) merged with mitochondrial and chloroplast protein sequences from NCBI databases BK000554.2 and NC_001638.1. The database was further supplemented with commonly observed contaminants (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, the oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied to peptide and protein identifications. FDR calculation was performed by MaxQuant using a target-decoy approach. The ‘match between runs’ setting was activated.

### Publication Abstract
Calcium (Ca(2+)) and redox signalling play important roles in acclimation processes from archaea to eukaryotic organisms. Herein we characterized a unique protein from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii that has the competence to integrate Ca(2+)- and redox-related signalling. This protein, designated as calredoxin (CRX), combines four Ca(2+)-binding EF-hands and a thioredoxin (TRX) domain. A crystal structure of CRX, at 1.6&#x2009;&#xc5; resolution, revealed an unusual calmodulin-fold of the Ca(2+)-binding EF-hands, which is functionally linked via an inter-domain communication path with the enzymatically active TRX domain. CRX is chloroplast-localized and interacted with a chloroplast 2-Cys peroxiredoxin (PRX1). Ca(2+)-binding to CRX is critical for its TRX activity and for efficient binding and reduction of PRX1. Thereby, CRX represents a new class of Ca(2+)-dependent 'sensor-responder' proteins. Genetically engineered Chlamydomonas strains with strongly diminished amounts of CRX revealed altered photosynthetic electron transfer and were affected in oxidative stress response underpinning a function of CRX in stress acclimation.

### Keywords
Calredoxin, Chlamydomonas

### Affiliations
WWU Muenster, Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology
IBBP Muenster

### Submitter
Martin Scholz

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hippler
WWU Muenster, Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology


