### Accession
PXD031772

### Title
Enrichment of NICD4 interacting proteins by three different methods.

### Description
There are several methods to bring down the bait and interactors from the cell lysates, each with its own advantages and disadvantages. Recently, the most commonly used method is one step AP, TAP and proximity-labeling. In order to analyze the Strengths and weaknesses of the three methods, fusion proteins were constructed by NICD4 with FLAG, SFB (S tag-2x Flag tag-SBP tag) and TurboID respectively, NICD4 and its interactors were obtained by purification. By analyzing these proteins, we believe that SFB-TAP is the most reliable and effective method to identify interacting proteins.

### Sample Protocol
The excised gel bands described above were cut into approximately 1-mm3 pieces, which were then subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and dried. Samples were reconstituted in 5 μl of high-performance liquid chromatography solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). A nanoscale reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography capillary column was created by packing 5 μm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 μm inner diameter × ~20 cm length) using a flame-drawn tip. After the column was equilibrated, each sample was loaded onto the column using an autosampler. A gradient was formed, and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). As peptides eluted, they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
MS peptide sequences and, hence, protein identity were determined by matching fragmentation patterns in protein databases using the Mascot software program (Matrix Science, Boston, MA). Enzyme specificity was set to partially tryptic with two missed cleavages. Modifications of the peptides included carboxyamidomethyl (cysteines, variable), oxidation (methionine, variable), phosphorylation (S, T, Y, H, variable) and acetylation (N-term, K, variable). Mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions and fragment ions. The database searched was Swiss-Prot (Homo sapiens). Spectral matches were filtered to contain the false-discovery rate to less than 1% at the peptide level using the target-decoy method, and protein inference was considered following the general rules with manual annotation applied when necessary. This same principle was used for protein isoforms when they were present. Generally, the longest isoform was reported.

### Publication Abstract
Identification of protein interactors is fundamental to understanding their functions. Here, we describe a modified protocol for tandem affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry (TAP/MS), which includes two-step purification. We detail the S-, 2&#xd7;FLAG-, and Streptavidin-Binding Peptide (SBP)- tandem tags (SFB-tag) system for protein purification. This protocol can be used to identify protein interactors and establish a high-confidence protein-protein interaction network based on computational models. This is particularly useful for identifying <i>bona fide</i> interacting proteins for subsequent functional studies. For complete details on the use and execution of this protocol, please refer to Bian et&#xa0;al. (2021).

### Keywords
Flag tag ap, Nicd4, Turboid., Sfb-tap

### Affiliations
Westlake University
School of Life Sciences, Westlake University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China

### Submitter
bian weixiang

### Lab Head
Dr Xu Li
School of Life Sciences, Westlake University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China


