### Accession
PXD027289

### Title
Cyclophilin A is not acetylated at Lysine-82 and Lysine-125 in resting and stimulated platelets

### Description
Cyclophilin A (CyPA), a member of the family of cyclophilins, is widely expressed by all prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. Upon activation, CyPA can also be released from platelets, and  engages  in  extracellular  functions via  interaction  with  the  CD147 receptor that  contribute  to  cardiovascular  disease. CyPA was  recently  found  to  be acetylated  at  K82  and  K125,  two  lysines  conserved  in  most  species,  and  these modifications  were  required  for  secretion of  acetylated CyPA in  response  to  cell activation in vascular smooth muscle cells. We here addressed whether acetylation at these sitesis also required for release of acetylated CyPA from platelets. Western blot analyses  demonstrated  the  presence  of CyPA in  human  and  mouse platelets. Thrombin-stimulation resulted in CyPA release from platelets, however, no acetylation was observed –neither in cell lysates nor in supernatants of untreatedand thrombin-activated  platelets. Similar  results  were  obtained  after  immunoprecipitation  of CyPA from   platelets. In   vitro acetylation   of   recombinant   humanCyPA by   p300 acetyltransferase likewise did not induce CyPA acetylation. Using shotgun proteomics we  detected  two CyPA peptide  precursors  in  the  recombinant  protein,  acetylatedat K28,  but again no  acetylation  was found  in CyPA from  resting or stimulated  platelet samples.  Our  findings  suggest  that  acetylation  of CyPA is  not  a  major  protein modification in platelets, and that CyPA acetylation at K82 and K125 is not required for its secretion from platelets.

### Sample Protocol
To  overcome  the  limitation  of not  being  able  to  detect CyPA in  mouse  IP platelet lysates, we made capital out of the high expression of CyPA in murine platelets and separated  the  mouse  protein  on a 13%  polyacrylamide  gel,  followed  by  mass spectrometry-compatible  silver  staining and  Western  blotting to  detect  single  bands around 16 kDa.For completeness, a human lysate probe was loaded on the gel and processed simultaneously for Western blot and silver staining (Fig. 3). Using shotgun proteomics in conjunction with data-dependent acquisition, we detected two CyPA peptide precursors with lysine acetylation when analyzingin vitro acetylated recombinant  human CyPA.  The precursor  [VSFELFADK(ac)VPK+2H]2+, describing acetylation  of  K28, was  the  only  promising  candidate identified with two spectra,a mass deviation of +0.81and +0.41ppm and Mascot ion scoresof 59 and 41(Fig. 4A). The other precursor[Vk(ac)EGM(ox)NIVEAM(ox)ER+2H]2+,describing  acetylation of K133, was likely to be false positive as it was only identified in  oxidized form with a mass deviation of -0.07 ppm and -1.95 ppm (average mass deviation in the run was +1.2 ppm)(Fig. 4B), exhibited low Mascot ion scores of 35 and 22 and a non-matching precursor  isotope  pattern. In  contrast, neither  human  nor  mouse-derived stimulated platelet  samples  yielded  any lysine acetylated  peptide  identification. For  higher specificity  and  sensitivity  of  detection,  we  performed targeted  LC-MS in parallel reaction monitoring-modetargeting acetylation on K28, K82 and K125. We triggered the   doubly   and   triply   charged ion   of   the   peptidesVSFELFADK(ac)VPK), SIYGEK(ac)FEDENFILK, and TEWLDGK(ac)HVVFGK(Fig.4C, highlighted in green). We analyzed in vitro acetylated CyPA as well as stimulated platelet samples(mouse and human) after IP for enrichment of CyPA. Among all samples, K28 was exclusively detected in  the in vitro acetylated sample,  but  in  none  of the  stimulated  platelet samples. Moreover, in none of the samples, we detected any appreciable ion traces for K82 or K125 acetylation, which is in good accordance with the results from our data-dependent acquisition approach.

### Data Protocol
The pipeline tree: ------------------    |-(0) Spectrum Files     |-(1) Spectrum Selector       |-(2) Mascot         |-(3) Percolator  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Processing node 1: Spectrum Selector ------------------------------------------------------------------------------  1. General Settings: ----------------------------- Precursor Selection:  Use MS1 Precursor Use New Precursor Reevaluation:  True  2. Spectrum Properties Filter: ----------------------------- Lower RT Limit:  0 Upper RT Limit:  0 First Scan:  0 Last Scan:  0 Lowest Charge State:  0 Highest Charge State:  0 Min. Precursor Mass:  350 Da Max. Precursor Mass:  5000 Da Total Intensity Threshold:  0 Minimum Peak Count:  1  3. Scan Event Filters: ----------------------------- MS Order:  Is MS2 Min. Collision Energy:  0 Max. Collision Energy:  35 Scan Type:  Is Full  4. Peak Filters: ----------------------------- S/N Threshold (FT-only):  1.5  5. Replacements for Unrecognized Properties: ----------------------------- Unrecognized Charge Replacements:  Automatic Unrecognized Mass Analyzer Replacements:  ITMS Unrecognized MS Order Replacements:  MS2 Unrecognized Activation Type Replacements:  CID Unrecognized Polarity Replacements:  +  6. Just for Testing: ----------------------------- Precursor Clipping Range Before:  2.5 Da Precursor Clipping Range After:  5.5 Da  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Processing node 2: Mascot ------------------------------------------------------------------------------  1. Input Data: ----------------------------- Protein Database:  U710_human_fw Enzyme Name:  Trypsin Maximum Missed Cleavage Sites:  2 Instrument:  ESI-TRAP Taxonomy:  All entries  1.1 Peptide Scoring Options: ----------------------------- Peptide Cut Off Score:  10 Peptide Without Protein Cut Off Score:  5  1.2 Protein Scoring Options: ----------------------------- Use MudPIT Scoring:  Automatic Protein Relevance Threshold:  20 Protein Relevance Factor:  1  2. Tolerances: ----------------------------- Precursor Mass Tolerance:  10 ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance:  0.5 Da Use Average Precursor Mass:  False  3. Modification Groups: ----------------------------- From Quan Method:  None  4. Dynamic Modifications: ----------------------------- 2. Dynamic Modification:  Oxidation (M) 3. Dynamic Modification:  Acetyl (K) 4. Dynamic Modification:  Acetyl (N-term)  5. Static Modifications: ----------------------------- 1. Static Modification:  Carbamidomethyl (C)  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Processing node 3: Percolator ------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Publication Abstract
Cyclophilin A (CyPA) is widely expressed by all prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. Upon activation, CyPA can be released into the extracellular space to engage in a variety of functions, such as interaction with the CD147 receptor, that contribute to the pathogenesis of cardiovascular diseases. CyPA was recently found to undergo acetylation at K82 and K125, two lysine residues conserved in most species, and these modifications are required for secretion of CyPA in response to cell activation in vascular smooth muscle cells. Herein we addressed whether acetylation at these sites is also required for the release of CyPA from platelets based on the potential for local delivery of CyPA that may exacerbate cardiovascular disease events. Western blot analyses confirmed the presence of CyPA in human and mouse platelets. Thrombin stimulation resulted in CyPA release from platelets; however, no acetylation was observed-neither in cell lysates nor in supernatants of both untreated and activated platelets, nor after immunoprecipitation of CyPA from platelets. Shotgun proteomics detected two CyPA peptide precursors in the recombinant protein, acetylated at K28, but again, no acetylation was found in CyPA derived from resting or stimulated platelets. Our findings suggest that acetylation of CyPA is not a major protein modification in platelets and that CyPA acetylation is not required for its secretion from platelets.

### Keywords
Cyca, Ptm, Acetylation

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften (ISAS), Dortmund, Germany
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften, Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b, 44227 Dortmund

### Submitter
Stefan Loroch

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Sickmann
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften (ISAS), Dortmund, Germany


