### Accession
PXD012318

### Title
EZHIP / CXorf67 mimics K27M mutated oncohistones and functions as an intrinsic inhibitor of PRC2 function in aggressive posterior fossa ependymoma

### Description
Posterior fossa A (PFA) ependymomas comprise one out of nine molecular groups of ependymoma. PFA tumors are mainly diagnosed in infants and young children, show a poor prognosis and are characterized by a lack of the repressive histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) mark. Recently, we reported CXorf67 overexpression as hallmark of PFA ependymoma and showed that CXorf67 can interact with EZH2 thereby inhibiting polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2). Here, we report that the inhibitory mechanism of this interaction is similar as in diffuse midline gliomas harboring H3K27M mutations. A small, highly conserved peptide sequence located in the C-terminal region of CXorf67 mimics the H3K27M peptide and binds to the SET domain of EZH2. This interaction blocks EZH2 methyltransferase activity and causes H3K27 hypomethylation, an oncogenic mechanism that may be exploited for targeted therapy in PFA ependymoma. Based on its function, we have renamed CXorf67 into EZH2 Inhibitory Protein (EZHIP).

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% FCS. Medium was exchanged every second day and cells were split at least once per week. For co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) followed by mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, cells were  resuspended in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH8 , 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X100), vortexed and incubated on ice for 30 minutes. Subsequently, cellular debris was pelleted by centrifugation and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. The supernatant was then pre-cleared for 1 hour at 4°C using mouse IgG agarose beads. Afterwards, beads were pelleted by centrifugation and the supernatant was again transferred to a separate tube. The supernatant was then incubated with FLAG-M2 affinity gel overnight at 4°C. Mouse IgG agarose beads used for pre-clearing were washed twice with lysis buffer and then twice with PBS. Next, the beads were resuspended in 30μl of elution buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3, 15 mM DTT, 0.1% SDS) and boiled at 95°C for 5 minutes. Eluted proteins were saved for MS analysis to determine the protein background. The next day, proteins were eluted from the FLAG-M2 affinity gel using the same procedure as for the mouse IgG agarose beads followed by MS analysis. For Co-IP followed by western blot analysis, proteins were only eluted from the FLAG-M2 affinity gel using 40 μl of western blot elution buffer (10 μl of 4x NuPAGE™ LDS Sample Buffer, 4 μl of 10x NuPAGE™ Sample Reducing Agent and 26 μl of lysis buffer).  Samples obtained from Co-IP experiments were reduced with DTT (10mM) at 45°C for 30 minutes. Subsequently, proteins were alkylated using 40mM of Chloroacetamide (CAA) at room temperature for 30 minutes. Reduced and alkylated proteins were digested overnight at 37°C using 0.65 μg sequencing-grade modified trypsin in 100mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (ABC). Next, samples were further processed by the SP3 peptide clean-up procedure34, 35. In brief, 10 μl of pre-washed beads (20 μl of Sera-Mag Speed Beads A and 20μl of Sera-Mag Speed Beads B were combined and washed once with 160 μl ddH2O, 2x with 200 μl ddH2O, and re-suspended in 20μl ddH2O for a final working stock) as well as 100% Acetonitrile (CAN) were added to each sample in order to achieve a final concentration of 95% ACN. Peptides were allowed to bind to the beads at room temperature for 18 minutes in a thermocycler at 750 rpm, followed by 2 minutes incubation on a magnetic rack (Life technologies, DynaMag 2) to immobilize the beads. The supernatant was removed and beads were washed twice with 800 μl of 100% ACN. Beads were air-dried for 2 minutes at 37°C, resuspended in 17 μl of 0.1% Formic Acid (FA), and sonicated in a VWR Ultrasonic Cleaner USC-T waterbath for 5 minutes. Finally, samples were vortexed, quick-centrifuged, and placed into a magnetic rack to allow a clean transfer of the peptide-containing supernatant to a new reaction tube. MS injection-ready samples were stored at -20°C.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were separated using an Easy NanoLC 1200 fitted with a trapping (Acclaim PepMap C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, 100 μm x 2cm) and a self-packed analytical column (Reprosil-Pur Basic C18, 1.9μm, 100Å, 75μm x 40cm). The C18 material was packed into fused silica with an uncoated Pico-Tip Emitter with a 10μm tip (New Objective) using a Nanobaum pressure bomb. The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. Solvent A was ddH2O, 0.1% (v/v) FA and solvent B was 80% ACN in ddH2O, 0.1% (v/v) FA. The samples were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at a maximum pressure of 800 bar onto the trapping column. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column at a constant flow of 0.3μl/minute, at 55°C. During the elution, the percentage of solvent B was increased in a linear fashion from 3 to 8% in 4 minutes, then from 8% to 10% in 2 minutes, then from 10% to 32% in a further 68 minutes, and then to 50% B in 12 minutes. Finally, the gradient was finished with 8 minutes at 100% solvent B, followed by 11 minutes 97% solvent A. Peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer at a positive spray voltage of 2.5kV. The ion transfer tube temperature was set at 275°C. Full scan MS spectra with a mass range of m/z 375 to 1500 were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120.000 FWHM. The filling time was set to a maximum of 50 ms with an automatic gain control target of 1 x 106 ions. Intensities were filtered at a threshold of 5 x 103. The dynamic exclusion list was set with a maximum retention period of 40 seconds and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm, high and low, respectively. Isotopes, unassigned charges, and charges of 1, 5 to 8, and >8 were excluded. MS2 scan properties were set to use the quadrupole isolation mode with a window of m/z 1.6. HCD was selected as activation type at a percentage collision energy of 33%. MS2 scans were performed in the ion trap at a rapid scan rate with a first mass at m/z 120 and an automatic gain control target of 1 x 104 ions. The maximum injection time was set to 50ms with ion injection for all available parallelizable time. MS2 spectra were acquired as centroid data type. Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.2).  The search was performed against the human Uniprot database (201708_Uniprot_homo-sapiens_canonical_reviewed; 20214 entries) using the Andromeda search engine with the following search criteria: enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P with up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was selected as a fixed modification; oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) were set as variable modification36, 37. First and second search peptide tolerance was set to 20 and 4.5 ppm, respectively. The protein quantification was performed using the label-free quantification algorithm of MaxQuant. LFQ intensities were calculated using a minimum ratio count of one, and minimum and average number of neighbors of three and six, respectively. MS/MS were required for the LFQ comparison and stabilization of large LFQ ratios was enabled. Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) intensities were calculated with a log fit. Peptide and protein hits were filtered at a false discovery rate of 1%, with a minimal peptide length of seven amino acids. The reversed sequences of the target database were used as a decoy database. Remaining parameters of MaxQuant were left at the default settings. LFQ values were extracted from the protein Groups table and log2 transformed for further analysis. iBAQ values were extracted from the protein Groups table and log10 transformed for further analysis. All consecutive steps were performed in Microsoft Excel and Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Prc2, Cxorf67, Ependymoma, Ezhip

### Affiliations
DKFZ
Division of Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany & Hopp Children’s Cancer Center at the NCT Heidelberg (KiTZ), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Torsten Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Marcel Kool
Division of Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany & Hopp Children’s Cancer Center at the NCT Heidelberg (KiTZ), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany


