### Accession
PXD011046

### Title
Proteomic study on human breast cancer cells in response to different folate levels

### Description
The consequence of a supra-physiological folate tumour microenvironment in promoting metastasis potential of human breast cancers remains unexplored.  This study examined the molecular mechanism by which clinically aberrant folate levels may promote mitochondria and glycolytic stress-associated proteomic signatures to promote metastasis potential of human MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
The MCF-7 (human breast adenocarcinoma) cell line used in this study was obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA). Cells were cultured in RPMI 1640, with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 IU/ml streptomycin, 100 IU/ml penicillin, and 0.2% sodium bicarbonate. The cells were incubated in 37oC with 5% carbon dioxide (CO2).  The MCF-7 cells were cultivated in aberrant folate medium of low folate (LF: 10 nM) and high folate (HF: 50 uM). MCF-7 cells were initially cultured in the control medium (defined) and then passaged in medium containing LF or HF. Proteins were digested by trypsin and dimethyl labeled (LF vs. control, and HF vs. control, respectively). After SCX fractionation into six fractions, each fraction was analyzed in duplicate by nanoLC-MS/MS using LTQ-Orbitrap XL in DDA mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from LC-MS/MS were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.8) against the SWISS-PROT sequence database (version 2016_05 with 20,207 human sequence entries). The enzyme specificity was trypsin with up to two missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were N-acetylation of proteins, and oxidation of methionine. The minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Parent masses and fragment ions were searched with a mass tolerance of 4 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. FDRs at the peptide and protein levels were fixed at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Whether treatment with folic acid (FA) affects human breast cancer positively or negatively remains unclear. We subjected human Michigan Cancer Foundation-7 cells, a human breast cancer cell line, to suboptimal FA at low levels (10 nM; LF) and high levels (50 &#x3bc;M; HF) and investigated the molecular mechanisms underlying their effects through metabolic flux and systematic proteomics analyses. The data indicated that LF induced and HF aggravated 2-fold higher mitochondrial toxicity in terms of suppressed oxidative respiration, increased fermented glycolysis, and enhanced anchorage-independent oncospheroid formation. Quantitative proteomics and Gene Ontology enrichment analysis were used to profile LF- and HF-altered proteins involved in metabolism, apoptosis, and malignancy pathways. Through STRING analysis, we identified a connection network between LF- and HF-altered proteins with mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). Rapamycin-induced blockage of mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) signaling, which regulates metabolism, differentially inhibited LF- and HF-modulated protein signatures of mitochondrial NADH dehydrogenase ubiquinone flavoprotein 2, mitochondrial glutathione peroxidase 4, kynureninase, and alpha-crystallin B chain as well as programmed cell death 5 in transcript levels; it subsequently diminished apoptosis and oncospheroid formation in LF/HF-exposed cells. Taken together, our data indicate that suboptimal FA treatment rewired oncogenic metabolism and mTORC1-mediated proteomics signatures to promote breast cancer development.

### Keywords
Human, Breast cancer, Folate

### Affiliations
Department of Nutritional Science, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei, Taiwan
Fu Jen Catholic University

### Submitter
Wei-Chi Ku

### Lab Head
Dr Rwei-Fen Syu Huang
Department of Nutritional Science, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei, Taiwan


