### Accession
PXD033024

### Title
The mitochondrial Hsp70 controls the assembly of the F1FO-ATP synthase

### Description
The mitochondrial F1FO-ATP synthase produces the bulk of cellular ATP. The soluble F1 domain contains the catalytic head that is linked via the central stalk and the peripheral stalk to the membrane embedded rotor of the Fo domain. The assembly of the F1 domain and its linkage to the peripheral stalk is poorly understood. We uncovered a dual function of the mitochondrial Hsp70 (mtHsp70) in the formation of the ATP synthase. First, it cooperates with the assembly factors Atp11 and Atp12 to form the F1 domain of the ATP synthase. Second, the chaperone transfers Atp5 into the assembly line to link the catalytic head with the peripheral stalk. Inactivation of mtHsp70 leads to integration of an assembly-defective Atp5 variant into the mature complex, reflecting a quality control function of the chaperone. Thus, mtHsp70 acts as an assembly and quality control factor in the biogenesis of the F1FO-ATP synthase.

### Sample Protocol
Differentially SILAC-labeled samples were combined in a 1:1 ratio. For whole mitochondria samples, 50 µg were used, for the IP samples, the whole eluate fraction. Proteins were precipitated by addition of acetone at a sample to acetone ratio of 1:4 (v/v) and incubation at -20 °C overnight. On the following day, samples were centrifuged (15 min, 20,000g, 4°C) and the protein pellet was washed twice with ice-cold acetone. Protein pellets were air dried and resuspended in TEAB buffer (freshly prepared 8 M urea, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate), followed by incubation for 45 min at 37°C under constant agitation. Subsequently, disulfide bridges were reduced by incubation with 4 mM dithiothreitol 30 min at 56°C. Next, samples were alkylated with 8 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at room temperature (Müller and Winter, 2017). The reaction was quenched by addition of 4 mM DTT for 15 min at room temperature. Subsequently, samples were diluted with 100 mM TEAB to a final urea concentration of 1.6 M urea and trypsin (Promega) was added at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w). Proteolytic digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C. The resulting peptides were desalted using 50 mg Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters), dried using a vacuum centrifuge, resuspended in 5% acetonitrile, and the peptide concentration was determined using the fluorometric peptide assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Subsequently, peptides were dried using a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 5% ACN/5% FA and 1µg of sample measured on a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. The machine was operated in a DDA mode for the generation of a spectral library and DIA mode for quantification. Peptides were resuspended in 5 % acetonitrile, 5 % formic acid and analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano UHPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). One µg of peptides was loaded to a 30 cm analytical column at a flow rate of 600 nL/min using 100 % solvent A (0.1 % formic acid in water). Analytical columns were produced in house by generation of spray tips from fused silica capillaries (360 μm outer diameter, 100 μm inner diameter) with a P-2000 laser puller (Sutter Instruments) and packing of tips with 3 μm ReproSil-Pur AQ C18 particles (Dr. Maisch). Peptides were separated with 120 min (DIA measurements) and 240 min (DDA measurements) linear gradients from 5-35 % [v/v] solvent B (90 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % fatty acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. For DDA analyses, MS1 spectra were acquired from m/z 350-1,200 in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 60,000 and an AGC target setting of 4x105. The most intense precursor ions were selected for fragmentation (the top speed mode, cycle time of 3 sec), isolated using the quadrupole with an isolation width of m/z 1.6, and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27 %. MS2 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 30,000 and the dynamic exclusion was set to 120 sec. For DIA analysis, MS1 scans were acquired from m/z 350-1200 in the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 120,000, the maximum injection time was set to 20 msec and the AGC target setting set to 5 x10`5. MS2 scans were defined to cover the MS1 scan range with 36 scan windows of 24.1 m/z each, resulting in an overlap of 0.5 m/z and a cycle time of 3.44 sec. Peptide ions were fragmented by HCD with 27% NCE and MS2 spectra acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 30,000. The maximum injection time was set to 60 msec, and the AGC target setting to 1x10`6.

### Data Protocol
Thermo*.raw files were analyzed using Spectronaut 14.7.20 (Biognosys). Hybrid spectral libraries were generated from both DDA and DIA files with the Pulsar search engine integrated in Spectronaut, applying the following parameters: precursor ion mass tolerance: dynamic; Orbitrap fragment ion mass tolerance: dynamic; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation at cysteine; variable modifications: oxidation at methionine, acetylation at protein N-terminus, and deamidation at asparagine/glutamine; enzyme: trypsin; number of allowed missed cleavage sites: 2; minimum peptide length: 5 amino acids. For spectral library generation, the “Labeling Applied” option (SILAC label channels Arg0/Lys0, Arg6/Lys4, Arg10/Lys8) and the “In-Silico Generate Missing Channels” option were enabled. Data were searched against UniProt Homo sapiens (20,365 entries, version from May 2019) in combination with the cRAP database (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/index.htmL) containing common contaminants. For each peptide, the 3 - 6 most abundant b/y ions were selected for library generation, dependent on their signal intensity. Dynamic retention time alignment was performed based on the high-precision indexed retention time (iRT) concept (Bruderer et al., 2016). Mass tolerances (precursor and fragment ions) as well as peak extraction windows were defined automatically by Spectronaut. Normalization was disabled and data were filtered at 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) on the peptide and protein level (q-value < 0.01). High confidence identifications were exported for further analysis. Statistical analysis Master protein abundance values were analyzed by R Studio 4.1.0 (R Core Team, 2020) for data processing, differential expression analysis and visualization. First, protein abundance values for light (L), medium (M) and heavy (H) channels were log2 transformed and proteins with missing values in any channel removed. Additionally, proteins of the mitochondrial and IP dataset with average mean abundances of <3E+04 and <2.5E+04 as well as CVs>30 % and CV>50 %, respectively, were removed for further analysis. Also, Cox1 was removed due to false positive values for one Cox1 peptide in 0 mitochondria. Both datasets were median-normalized (equal median normalization function, DEqMS 1.12.1) and differentially abundant proteins were determined by a moderated t-test based on linear models (LIMMA 3.50.0 (Ritchie et al., 2015)). Finally, contrast values were extracted from the linear model for all possible comparisons (H/L, H/M, M/L) and exported to individual result tables. Proteins with a log(2)-fold change > 0.58 and a an corrected p-value (Benjamini Hochberg) < 0.05 were defined as significantly regulated.

### Publication Abstract
The mitochondrial F<sub>1</sub>F<sub>O</sub>-ATP synthase produces the bulk of cellular ATP. The soluble F<sub>1</sub> domain contains the catalytic head that is linked via the central stalk and the peripheral stalk to the membrane embedded rotor of the F<sub>O</sub> domain. The assembly of the F<sub>1</sub> domain and its linkage to the peripheral stalk is poorly understood. Here we show a dual function of the mitochondrial Hsp70 (mtHsp70) in the formation of the ATP synthase. First, it cooperates with the assembly factors Atp11 and Atp12 to form the F<sub>1</sub> domain of the ATP synthase. Second, the chaperone transfers Atp5 into the assembly line to link the catalytic head with the peripheral stalk. Inactivation of mtHsp70 leads to integration of assembly-defective Atp5 variants into the mature complex, reflecting a quality control function of the chaperone. Thus, mtHsp70 acts as an assembly and quality control factor in the biogenesis of the F<sub>1</sub>F<sub>O</sub>-ATP synthase.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Pulldown, Mthsp70, F1fo-atp synthase

### Affiliations
University of Bonn
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Bonn

### Submitter
Jasjot Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Dominic Winter
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Bonn


