### Accession
PXD020633

### Title
Polydisperse molecular architecture of connexin 26/30 heteromeric hemichannels revealed by AFM imaging

### Description
Gap junctions are arrays of intercellular channels formed by two hemichannels docked end-to-end. Each hemichannel is a hexamer containing the same or different connexin (Cx) isoform. While homomeric Cxs forms have been largely described functionally and structurally, lesser is known about heteromeric Cx channels. To unveil properties of heteromeric Cx channels is challenging considering the high number of potential subunit arrangements and stoichiometries, even for only combining two Cx isoforms. We engineered an HA tag onto Cx26 or Cx30 subunits and imaged hemichannels that were liganded by Fab-epitope antibody fragments. For Cx26-HA/Cx30 or Cx26/Cx30-HA heteromeric channels, the Fab-HA binding distribution followed a binomial distribution with a maximum of 3 Fab-HA bound. Furthermore, imaged Cx26/Cx30-HA triple liganded by Fab-HA showed multiple arrangements which can be derived from the law of total probabilities. Our results indicate a dominant subunit stoichiometry of 3Cx26:3Cx30 with the most abundant subunit arrangement of Cx26-Cx26-Cx30-Cx26-Cx30-Cx30.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, protein sample of heteromeric Cx30-HA/Cx26 hemichannels were precipitated with ethanol and the pellet was dissolved in 10 μl 1% (m/v) RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters). Disulfide bridges were reduced with 50 mM dithiotreitol and reduced cysteines were alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested with 0.5 μg Trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C overnight. RapiGest was removed by centrifugation after addition of 5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Tryptic peptides were separated by nano-flow reversed-phase liquid chromatography using a DionexUltiMate 3,000 RSLC nano System (Thermo Scientific) and directly eluted into an LTQ-Orbitrap XL hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). MS conditions were spray voltage of 1.8 kV, capillary temperature of 180 °C, normalised collision energy of 35% at an activation of q=0.25 with activation time of 30 ms. MS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap (m/z 300–2,000) at a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 400. The five most intense ions were selected for CID MS/MS fragmentation in the linear ion trap. Previously detected ions were excluded for 30 s. Singly charged ions and unrecognized charge states were excluded for fragmentation. Mass spectra were internally calibrated using the lock mass m/z 445.120025 (ref).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched against the NCBInr database (21 Nov 2011; 16245521 sequences) using the search engine Mascot v2.3.02. Mass accuracy filters were: 10 ppm (precursor ions) and 0.5 Da (fragment ions). Two missed cleavage sites per tryptic peptide were allowed. Variable modifications were carbamidomethylation (cysteines) and oxidation (methionine).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Connexin, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
, IWE ZIK HALOmem,  Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle,Germany
HALOmem, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg

### Submitter
Marie Alfes

### Lab Head
Dr Carla Schmidt
, IWE ZIK HALOmem,  Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle,Germany


