### Accession
PXD015360

### Title
Comparative glycoproteomic profiling of human body fluid between healthy controls and patients with papillary thyroid carcinoma

### Description
Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) is the most common type of thyroid cancer among women worldwide. It is confirmed mainly by fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB), an invasive diagnostic method. The key proteins responsible for thyroid hormone biosynthesis are glycosylated. Changes in site-specific glycosylation are associated with thyroid cancer. Integrated quantitative proteomic and glycoproteomic analyses of body fluids from patients with PTC may identify potential noninvasive biomarkers, improve diagnostic accuracy, and elucidate the basic mechanisms of tumor development. In the present study, we demonstrated a novel integrated method of body fluid proteome and glycoproteome analysis. We showed that it is highly reproducible and fast. It may also quantitatively profile protein glycosylation. Intact N-glycopeptides from the urine and plasma of healthy controls (HC), PTC, and PTC with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (PHT) were enriched by hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography. Sialic acid was removed from the N-glycopeptides with trifluoroacetic acid and heat. The desialo-N-glycopeptides were analyzed by HCD-MS/MS using stepped collision energies and several search engines for quantitative profiling. Ninety-two altered proteins and 134 intact N-glycopeptides were isolated from the plasma and urine samples of the three groups (90 samples from 15 subjects). To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to compare the plasma and urinary proteomes and glycoproteomes of HC, PTC, and PHT. Moreover, we revealed a novel indicator (ratio of fucosylated to non-fucosylated N-glycopeptide or F/NF) through desialo-N-glycopeptide analysis. These differently expressed glycoproteins and F/NF may serve as biomarkers contributing to clinical cancer diagnostics and could be used to improve diagnostic accuracy noninvasively.

### Sample Protocol
Standard IgG glycoprotein was dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH = 8.5) and the solution was denatured at 95 °C for 10 min. After being cooled to 20~25 °C, the solution was incubated with trypsin (trypsin:protein = 1:50 w/w) at 37 °C for 2 h. Human plasma protein digestion was performed by filter-aided sample preparation. Each 5-μL plasma aliquot was diluted to 195 μL with UA solution (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl; pH 8.5) and placed on a 30-kDa filter. Urinary proteins were extracted from 10 mL of urine supernatant by acetone precipitation and stored at –20 °C overnight. A 500-μL UA solution was then added to dissolve the urinary proteins. The solution was loaded onto a 30-kDa filter and centrifuged at 13,000 × g for 15 min. Then, 200 μL UA solution with 20 mM DTT was added and the reduction reaction was maintained for 4 h at 37 °C. The solution was removed by centrifugation at 13,000 × g for 15 min. and 200 μL UA solution with 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added. The mixture was incubated in the dark for 1 h at room temperature. The mixture was washed thrice with 200 μL UA and thrice with 200 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate by centrifugation at 13,000 × g for 15 min at room temperature. Then 200 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 8 μg trypsin was added to each filter tube. The filter tubes were washed twice with 100 μL water by centrifugation at 13,000 × g for 15 min. The flow-through fractions were collected and pooled and their peptide concentrations were measured by quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) at 480 nm. The peptide mixtures were freeze-dried and stored at −80 °C.Intact N-glycopeptides were enriched by the HILIC method. Briefly, 100 μg tryptic peptides were suspended in an 80% ACN/0.2% TFA solution. Then, 5 mg Venusil HILIC was washed thrice for 10 min each time with 0.1% TFA and 80% ACN/0.2% TFA. The samples were then loaded and rotated for 2 h at room temperature. The mixtures were transferred to a Pipet Tip (Axygen, Inc., Union City, CA, USA) packed with C8 membrane and washed twice with 80% ACN/0.2% TFA. Intact N-glycopeptides bound to the HILIC column were eluted thrice with 70 μL of 0.1% TFA. The eluted intact N-glycopeptides were equally partitioned into two tubes and dried by SpeedVac for further analysis. One of them was resuspended in 100 μL of 0.2% TFA and heated at 80 °C for 1 h to remove the sialic acid. The desialo-N-glycopeptides were dried by SpeedVac and resuspended in 20 μL of 0.1% FA for subsequent analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw peptide data files from the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) were searched against the human Swiss-Prot database (v. 2015_03; 20,410 entries) with MaxQuant (v. 1.5.3.8; Max Planck Gesellschaft, Munich, Germany)(30). For label-free proteome quantitation, the search parameters were set as follows. Two missed cleavages sites were allowed for trypsin digestion. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.02 Da) was set as the fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine (+15.99 Da), deamidation of asparagine (+0.98 Da), and acetylation of the protein N-terminal (+42.01 Da) were set as variable modifications. The first search mass tolerance was 20 ppm and the main search peptide tolerance was 4.5 ppm. The false discovery rates (FDR) of the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) and proteins were set to < 1%. The iBAQ intensities of the plasma and urinary proteins were extracted from the data files as quantitation information. For label-free quantitation of the N-glycoproteomes and the desialo-N-glycoproteomes, the search parameters were set as follows. Two missed cleavages sites were allowed for trypsin digestion. All other settings were the default values. Intact N-glycopeptides and desialo-N-glycopeptides form IgG were manually identified and quantified with Xcalibur v. 4.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). After manual MS1 spectrum collection, deconvoluted mass spectra were generated. These normalized all charge states to a single charge and removed all isotope peaks except for monoisotopic ones. The monoisotopic peaks and their intensities were selected for qualitative and quantitative analyses. The raw data files of intact N-glycopeptides and desialo-N-glycopeptides derived from Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS were searched against the human Swiss-Prot database (v. 2015_03; 20,410 entries) with pGlyco v. 2.2.0(31). The following parameters were used. Mass tolerances for the precursors and fragment ions were set as ± 5 ppm and ± 20 ppm, respectively. Two missed cleavages sites were allowed for trypsin digestion. The fixed modification was carbamidomethylation of all cysteine residues (+57.02 Da). Variable modifications included oxidation of methionine (+15.99 Da), deamidation of asparagine (+0.98 Da), and acetylation of the protein N-terminal (+42.01 Da). The N-glycosylation sequon (N-X-S/T/C; X ≠ P) was modified by changing 'N' to 'J'. Both of these had the same mass. Quality control methods for intact glycopeptide identification were set as the default. Quantification information of identified N-glycopeptides spectra was based on their MS/MS scan numbers and acquired from the "allpeptide.txt" file in MaxQuant (Max Planck Gesellschaft, Munich, Germany)(32, 33). Missing values were imputed using the minimum value across the proteome or glycoproteome data. The expression matrix was normalized based on total intensity. All normalized intensities were used in all quantitative analyses(20). ANOVA and partial least squares discriminant analysis were performed in SPSS v. 19.0 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA) and Simca-P v. 14.1 (Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Umeå, Sweden), respectively. Other analyses were run in R or a customized in-house platform (http://www.omicsolution.org/wu-kong-beta-linux/main/)(34).

### Publication Abstract
Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) is the most common type of thyroid cancer among women worldwide. It is confirmed mainly by fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB), an invasive diagnostic method. The key proteins responsible for thyroid hormone biosynthesis are glycosylated. Hence, changes in site-specific glycosylation are associated with thyroid cancer. Integrated quantitative proteomic and glycoproteomic analyses of body fluids from patients with PTC may identify potential noninvasive biomarkers, improve diagnostic accuracy, and elucidate the basic mechanisms of tumor development. In the present study, we demonstrate an integrated, highly reproducible, rapid method involving body fluid proteome and glycoproteome analysis. Moreover, this method may quantitatively profile protein glycosylation. Intact <i>N</i>-glycopeptides from the urine and plasma of healthy controls (HC), PTC, and PTC with Hashimoto's thyroiditis (PHT) were enriched by hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography. Sialic acid was removed from the <i>N</i>-glycopeptides with trifluoroacetic acid and heat. The desialo-<i>N</i>-glycopeptides were analyzed by HCD-MS/MS using stepped collision energies and several search engines for quantitative profiling. Ninety-two altered proteins and 134 intact <i>N</i>-glycopeptides were isolated from the plasma and urine samples of the three groups (90 samples from 15 subjects). To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to compare the plasma and urinary proteomes and glycoproteomes of HC, PTC, and PHT. Moreover, we reveal a novel indicator (ratio of fucosylated to nonfucosylated <i>N</i>-glycopeptide or F/NF) through desialo-<i>N</i>-glycopeptide analysis. These differently expressed glycoproteins and F/NF may serve as biomarkers contributing to clinical cancer diagnostics and could be used to improve diagnostic accuracy noninvasively.

### Keywords
Biomarker; mass spectrometry; site-specific n-glycopeptide; thyroid cancer

### Affiliations
Sichuan University, Westchina Hospital
Sichuan University

### Submitter
Yong Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Zhang
Sichuan University, Westchina Hospital


