### Accession
PXD017151

### Title
Glycine receptor complex analysis using immunoprecipitation-blue native gel electrophoresis-mass spectrometry

### Description
The pentameric glycine receptor (GlyR), comprising the α1 and β subunits, is a major inhibitory ionotropic receptor in brainstem and spinal cord. GlyRs interact with gephyrin (GPHN), a scaffold protein that anchors the GlyR in the plasma membrane and enables it to form clusters in glycinergic postsynapses. Using an interaction proteomics approach, we provides evidence of the ArfGEFs IQ motif and Sec7 domain 3 (IQSEC3) and IQ motif and Sec7 domain 2 (IQSEC2) as two novel synaptic proteins interacting with GlyR complexes. When the affinity-isolated GlyR complexes were fractionated by blue native gel electrophoresis and characterized by mass spectrometry, GlyR α1β-GPHN appeared as the most abundant complex with a molecular weight of approximately 1 MDa, and GlyR α1β-GPHN-IQSEC3 as a minor protein complex of approximately 1.2 MDa. A third GlyR α1β-GPHN-IQSEC2 complex existed at the lowest amount with a mass similar to the IQSEC3-containing complex. Using yeast two-hybrid we demonstrate that IQSEC3 interacts with the GlyR complex by binding to the GPHN G domain at the N-terminal of the IQSEC3 IQ-like domain. Our data provide direct evidence of the interaction of IQSEC3 with GlyR-GPHN complexes, underscoring a potential role of these ArfGEFs in the function of glycinergic synapses.

### Sample Protocol
For this study two types of experiments were performed: 1. Immunopurifications (IPs) on extracted proteins from brainstem using two antibodies targeted against the Glycine receptor a1, and antibodies against the Glycine receptor b, Gephyrin and the AMPA-receptor subunits GluA2/3 and GluA4. In addition IPs using anti-GluA2/3 and anti-GluA4 performed on proteins extraccted from hippocampus were included. All IPs were performed four times.After purification, proteins were eluted with SDS-loading buffer, separated by size using SDS-PAGE, and in-gel digested with trypsin. 2. IPs with the two antibodies against Glycine receptor a1 and Glycine receptor beta, followed by elution of native protein complexes using a peptide with the epitope sequence of the associated antibody. The purified native protein complexes were then concentrated on filter column, run on a BN-PAGE gel, cut into 48 gel slices and tryptic digested. Samples from both types of experiments were analysed with a TripleTOF 5600+ MS that was coupled to an Ultimate 3000 LC system.  All gel fractions were analysed by the mass spec individually.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were searched against the Mouse database (UP000000589_10090) using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4). For IP-BN data, unique high quality peptides were manually curated in Skyline for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The pentameric glycine receptor (GlyR), comprising the &#x3b1;1 and &#x3b2; subunits, is a major inhibitory ionotropic receptor in brainstem and spinal cord. GlyRs interact with gephyrin (GPHN), a scaffold protein that anchors the GlyR in the plasma membrane and enables it to form clusters in glycinergic postsynapses. Using an interaction proteomics approach, evidence of the ArfGEFs IQ motif and Sec7 domain 3 (IQSEC3) and IQ motif and Sec7 domain 2 (IQSEC2) as two novel synaptic proteins interacting with GlyR complexes is provided. When the affinity-isolated GlyR complexes are fractionated by blue native gel electrophoresis and characterized by mass spectrometry, GlyR &#x3b1;1&#x3b2;-GPHN appears as the most abundant complex with a molecular weight of &#x2248;1 MDa, and GlyR &#x3b1;1&#x3b2;-GPHN-IQSEC3 as a minor protein complex of &#x2248;1.2 MDa. A third GlyR &#x3b1;1&#x3b2;-GPHN-IQSEC2 complex exists at the lowest amount with a mass similar to the IQSEC3 containing complex. Using yeast two-hybrid it is demonstrated that IQSEC3 interacts with the GlyR complex by binding to the GPHN G domain at the N-terminal of the IQSEC3 IQ-like domain. The data provide direct evidence of the interaction of IQSEC3 with GlyR-GPHN complexes, underscoring a potential role of these ArfGEFs in the function of glycinergic synapses.

### Keywords
Protein complex, Iqsec3, Glycine receptor, Proteomics, Blue native gel electrophoresis

### Affiliations
CNCR, VU Amsterdam
MCN, Neuroproteomics, CNCR, VU, Amsterdam

### Submitter
Sophie van der Spek

### Lab Head
Dr Ka Wan Li
MCN, Neuroproteomics, CNCR, VU, Amsterdam


