### Accession
PXD042668

### Title
Protein Extraction from Ancient Teeth and Dental Calculus Compatible with Subsequent DNA Extraction

### Description
Dental calculus is becoming a crucial material in the study of past populations, with increasing interest in its proteomic and genomic content. Here we suggest further development of protocol for analysis of ancient proteins and a combined approach for subsequent ancient DNA extraction. We tested the protocol on recent teeth. We then applied the optimised protocol to ancient teeth to limit the destruction of calculus, as it is a precious and irreplaceable source of dietary, microbiological, and ecological information in the archaeological context. Finally, the applicability of the protocol was proven on samples of ancient calculus.

### Sample Protocol
Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) was done based on Wisniewski et al., 2009 using 10kDa cut-off filter columns and 0.5ug of trypsin (sequencing grade; Promega), incubated overnight in 37°C while shaking at 900 rpm. Protein input for FASP was in case of recent teeth ca 50ug/sample. In case of ancient teeth and dental calculus, we had to use whole extracts. Recent teeth LC-MS/MS analyses of all peptide mixtures were performed using the Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system connected to the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests (approx. 2 μg of peptides) were concentrated online and desalted using a trapping column (100 μm × 3 cm, 3.5μm X-Bridge BEH 130 C18 sorbent, Waters; temperature 40 ºC). After washing the trapping column with 0.1% formic acid (FA), the peptides were eluted (flow rate - 300 nl/min) from the trapping column onto an analytical column (Acclaim Pepmap100 C18, 3 µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; at temperature 40 ºC, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 140 min linear gradient program (1-80% of mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN). Equilibration of the trapping column and analytical column was performed prior to injection of the sample into the sample loop. The analytical column outlet was directly connected to the Digital PicoView 550 (New Objective) ion source with the sheath gas option and the use of the SilicaTip emitter (New Objective; FS360-20-15-N-20-C12). ABIRD (Active Background Ion Reduction Device, ESI Source Solutions) was installed. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent strategy with a survey scan (m/z range 350-2,000) selecting the top 20 most intense precursors. The resolution of the survey scan was 120,000 (at m/z 200) with a target value of 4×105 ions and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. HCD MS/MS (30% relative fragmentation energy, normal mass range) spectra were acquired with a target value of 5.0x104 and a resolution of 15,000 (at m/z 200). The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 22 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to m/z width of 1.2.  Ancient teeth and dental calculus LC-MS/MS analyses of all peptide mixtures of ancient samples were done using the nanoElute system connected to the timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker). One column (separation column: Bruker, FIFTEEN, 75μm ID, 150 mm long, 1.9 μm particles) mode was used on the nanoElute system with default equilibration conditions (4 column volumes at 800 bars). Sample loading was carried out using 2 pickup volumes + 2 μl at 800 bars. The peptides were eluted by a 90 min linear gradient program (flow rate 500 nl/min, 3-80% of mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in ACN). The column was placed inside the Column Toaster (40°C; Bruker) and its emitter side was installed into CaptiveSpray ion source (Bruker).  MS/MS data were acquired in the m/z range of 100-1700 and the 1/k0 range of 0.6-1.6 V×s×cm-2 using the DDA-PASEF method acquiring 10 PASEF scans with a scheduled target intensity of 20,000 and an intensity threshold of 2,500. Active exclusion was set for 0.4 min with precursor reconsideration for 4× more intense precursors.

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS/MS spectra were analysed in the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 1.4) with in-house Mascot (Matrixscience; version 2.5.1) search engine utilisation. Data obtained from recent and ancient teeth were searched against protein databases of Homo sapiens (20,600 protein sequences, version from 2021-06-16, downloaded from ftp://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/current_release/knowledgebase/reference_proteomes/Eukaryota/UP000005640/UP000005640_9606.fasta.gz), Human Oral Microbiome (3,907,188 protein sequences, version from 20-01-09, downloaded from http://www.homd.org/ftp/genomes/PROKKA/current) and cRAP contaminants (112 sequences, version from 2018-11-22, downloaded from http://www.thegpm.org/crap). Apart from these, a custom database has been added for the searches of data from ancient calculus. Database content is in the SI Appendix, Table S4. The mass tolerance for the peptides and MS/MS fragments was 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Modifications were set as follows for database search: oxidation (M, P) and deamidation (N, Q) as variable modifications, with carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification. For ancient calculus, oxidation on the P modification was not used. The enzyme specificity was tryptic with two permissible miscleavages.

### Publication Abstract
Dental calculus is becoming a crucial material in the study of past populations with increasing interest in its proteomic and genomic content. Here, we suggest further development of a protocol for analysis of ancient proteins and a combined approach for subsequent ancient DNA extraction. We tested the protocol on recent teeth, and the optimized protocol was applied to ancient tooth to limit the destruction of calculus as it is a precious and irreplaceable source of dietary, microbiological, and ecological information in the archeological context. Finally, the applicability of the protocol was demonstrated on samples of the ancient calculus.

### Keywords
Ancient dna, Ancient proteins, Dental calculus, Bioarchaeology, Protein extraction, Palaeoproteomics

### Affiliations
Masaryk University
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Pavel Roudnický

### Lab Head
Dr Zbyněk Zdráhal
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic


