### Accession
PXD012924

### Title
Accurate quantitative proteomic analyses using metabolic labeling and High Field Asymmetric Waveform Ion Mobility Spectrometry (FAIMS)

### Description
Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) is routinely used to profile changes in protein and peptide abundance across different experimental paradigms. As with other quantitative proteomic approaches, the detection of peptide isotopomers can be limited by the presence of interference ions that ultimately affect the quality of quantitative measurements. Here, we evaluate high field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) to improve the accuracy and dynamic range of quantitative proteomic analyses using SILAC. We compared quantitative measurements for tryptic digests of isotopically labeled protein extracts mixed in different ratios using LC-MS/MS with and without FAIMS. To further reduce sample complexity, we also examined the improvement in quantitative measurements when combining strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation prior to LC-MS/MS analyses. Using the same amount of sample consumed, analyses performed using FAIMS provided more than 30% and 200% increase in the number of quantifiable peptides compared LC-MS/MS performed with and without SCX fractionation, respectively. Furthermore, FAIMS reduced the occurrence of interfering isobaric ions and improved the accuracy of quantitative measurements. We leveraged the application of FAIMS in phosphoproteomic analyses to profile dynamic changes in protein phosphorylation in HEK293 cells subjected to heat shock for periods up to 20 min. In addition to the enhanced phosphoproteomic coverage, FAIMS also provided the ability to separate phosphopeptide isomers that often co-elute and can be misassigned in conventional LC-MS/MS experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and sample preparation For SILAC experiments human Embryonic Kidney 293 cells (HEK 293) were grown in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM, Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing 10% heat inactivated dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Wisent), 1% L-Glutamine (Gibco) and 1% Penicillin/Streptavidin (Gibco). Cells were grown in medium supplemented with either Arg0/Lys0 (light), Arg6/Lys4 (medium) or Arg10/Lys8 (heavy) lysine and arginine stable isotopes (Silantes, Germany) and were cultured at 37°C and 5% CO2. Light, medium and heavy labelled cells for different ratio experiments were collected simultaneously and washed twice with cold Phosphate Buffer Saline (PBS) and centrifuged at 215 g for 10 minutes. Cell pellets were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen before lysis in a buffer composed of 8M Urea, 50mM HEPES, 75mM NaCl at pH 8.5 followed by 3 x 5 sec sonication bursts. After centrifugation (13,000 rpm, 10 min), supernatants were transferred to a new tube and protein concentration determined by Bradford assay. SILAC channels were combined in at 13.5 : 5.4 : 1 (wt:wt:wt) ratio and diluted to 1 M Urea with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP-HCl, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and alkylated with 10 mM 2-Chloroacetamide (Aldrich). Digestion was performed overnight with Trypsin (1:50 enzyme:peptide ratio, Promega) Peptides were desalted on Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, dried down and reconstituted in 0.2% formic acid (FA) for MS analysis.  For heat shock experiments, the media was removed from labelled cells and replaced with preheated media at 43°C and incubation at 43°C, 5% CO2 for 10 or 20 min. Untreated and stressed cells were collected at the same time, washed twice with PBS, pelleted and frozen in liquid nitrogen until reduction, alkylation and trypsin digestion as indicated above. Phosphopeptide enrichment In-house TiO2 spin tips were packed with two C18 Empore membrane (3M) plugs and filled with 5 mg of TiO2 beads (Canadian Life Science). Before sample loading (1 mg of peptide per tip), spin tips were equilibrated with 150 μL of loading buffer (250 mM lactic acid, 70% acetonitrile, ACN and 3% trifluoroacetic acid, TFA). After sample loading, nonspecific binding peptides were removed by washing the tips with 100 μL of loading buffer, followed by 100 μL Q/N buffer (125 mM asparagine, 125 mM glutamine in 70% ACN and 3% TFA) and 100 μL of wash buffer (70% ACN and 3% TFA). Phosphopeptides were eluted with 200 μL of 1% ammonium hydroxide, pH 10.5 and 100 μL of washing buffer. After HLB desalting, phosphopeptides were frozen in liquid nitrogen, dried in a Speedvac and stored at −80°C prior to LC-MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analyses All samples were separated on a nano-LC-ultra 2D system (Eksigent) coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a 360 μm ID × 5 mm pre-column (Jupiter C18, 3 μm, 300 Å, Phenomenex) and separated on a 150 μm ID x 20 cm in house packed C18 column. Peptides were separated using a linear gradient of 5-30 % ACN (0.2% FA) in 60 min at a flow rate of 600 nL/min. For strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography, samples were loaded on a Optiguard SCX trap column, 5 μm, 300 Å, 0.5 ID × 23 mm (Optimize Technologies) and eluted online with salt plug fractions of ammonium acetate buffer, pH 3.5. Unless indicated, SCX fractionation was performed on 24 µg of tryptic digest and peptides were eluted in 12 salt-fractions ranging from 0 to 2000 mM (in 200 mM steps) followed by a final fraction with 2500 mM ammonium acetate. For phosphoproteomic experiments, tryptic digests from 1.6 mg of protein extract were fractionated by SCX into 5 SCX fractions (250, 500, 750, 1000 and 2000 mM) prior to LC-MS/MS analyses. For MS analyses, survey scans were acquired from 300 to 1200 m/z with 60,000 resolution at m/z 400. MS/MS spectra were acquired either in the ion trap or in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000 with a 2.0 Th isolation width. Normalized collision energy (NCE) for collision-induced dissociation (CID) was set at 35 whereas higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) spectra used a NCE of 28.  FAIMS For differential ion mobility separation, FAIMS was interfaced to a nanoelectrospray source coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Pure nitrogen was used at a flow rate of 2.3 L/min and the FAIMS device comprised two cylindrical electrodes spaced by a 1.5 mm gap30. The temperature of the inner and outer electrodes were set to 70°C and 90°C, respectively. For LC-FAIMS-MS/MS analyses, the dispersion voltage (DV) was set at -5000V and the compensation voltage was stepped in 3V increments from -30V to -63V unless otherwise indicated.

### Data Protocol
RAW files from the Xcalibur software (version 2.1) were searched with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) against the Human UniProt Database (February 17, 2016), including the reversed database (74508 entries). The RAW output files from FAIMS experiments acquired with CV stepping were first split into individual mzXML files (each CV step was converted to a different mzXML) with an in-house Python script prior to their analysis with MaxQuant. Trypsin/P was selected as a specific enzyme with a maximum of three missed cleavages and a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, deamidation (NQ) were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification. Arg10 and Lys8 were included in the search for the heavy labelled SILAC samples and Arg6 and Lys4 for medium labelled samples. The precursor ion tolerance was set at 20 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.3 Da (ion trap CID) or 0.01 Da (Orbitrap HCD).

### Publication Abstract
Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) is routinely used to profile changes in protein and peptide abundance across different experimental paradigms. As with other quantitative proteomic approaches, the detection of peptide isotopomers can be limited by the presence of interference ions that ultimately affect the quality of quantitative measurements. Here, we evaluate high field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) to improve the accuracy and dynamic range of quantitative proteomic analyses using SILAC. We compared quantitative measurements for tryptic digests of isotopically labeled protein extracts mixed in different ratios using LC-MS/MS with and without FAIMS. To further reduce sample complexity, we also examined the improvement in quantitative measurements when combining strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation prior to LC-MS/MS analyses. Using the same amount of sample consumed, analyses performed using FAIMS provided more than 30% and 200% increase in the number of quantifiable peptides compared to LC-MS/MS performed with and without SCX fractionation, respectively. Furthermore, FAIMS reduced the occurrence of interfering isobaric ions and improved the accuracy of quantitative measurements. We leveraged the application of FAIMS in phosphoproteomic analyses to profile dynamic changes in protein phosphorylation in HEK293 cells subjected to heat shock for periods up to 20 min. In addition to the enhanced phosphoproteomic coverage, FAIMS also provided the ability to separate phosphopeptide isomers that often coelute and can be misassigned in conventional LC-MS/MS experiments.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in culture (silac), Quantitative proteomics, High field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (faims)

### Affiliations
University of Montreal
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer,Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, P.O. Box 6128, Station. Centre-ville, Montréal, Québec, Canada H3C 3J7

### Submitter
Francis McManus

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Thibault
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer,Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, P.O. Box 6128, Station. Centre-ville, Montréal, Québec, Canada H3C 3J7


