### Accession
PXD002116

### Title
Trace-level concentrations of metconazole and isoproturon induce a metabolic stress in Pacific oyster

### Description
The Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas is a sessile animal that undergoes highly dynamic and stressful environmental constraints all along its life in the intertidal zone and estuaries. We analyzed the physiological effects induced by low environmental concentrations of two pesticides, metconazole (0.2 and 2 µg L-1) or isoproturon (0.1 and 1 µg L-1), or in mix (0.2 and 0.1 µg L-1 respectively) known to be encountered by oysters in the field. At such trace-level, metconazole and isoproturon induced a metabolic stress, reflected by an important over-activation of the sensing-kinase AMP-activated kinase  (AMPK). Such deregulation reflect alteration of energy management, since the sensing-molecule AMPK plays a key role in C. gigas energetic metabolism, as well as alteration in the adaptation to environmental stress, given its role in hypoxia. Neither pesticide had any effect on eco-physiological parameters during the 14 days-experiment: filtration rate, food consumption, growth, and available energy reserves remained unchanged. In contrast, using two-dimensional electrophoresis, we identified changes in proteins that belong to energetic metabolism and cytoskeletal induced by metconazole or isoproturon. Analyses of antioxidant enzymes revealed an increase in oxidative stress pathway in superoxide dismutase and catalase in some conditions. Taken together, our results proved that trace-level environmental concentrations of metconazole or isoproturon provoke important deleterious effects at the biochemical level in oyster, by inducing a metabolic stress and oxidative stress response. Such alterations were not directly reflected at the level of the whole organism when measuring eco-physiological parameters. Identifying the impacts of pesticides at environmental concentrations using biochemical approaches is thus a promising field of research to improve monitoring processes.

### Sample Protocol
Control oysters were compared with oysters exposed to Metconazole [10X] and Isoproturon [10X] using 2-DE. Oyster powder was homogenized in a urea/thiourea buffer containing urea 7 M, thiourea 2 M, DTT 0.1 M, 4% CHAPS, 0.5% IPG buffer (pH 4–7, GE Healthcare), 1% of Phosphatase inhibitor cocktail II (Sigma-Aldrich) and 2% of NaPPi, as previously described (Kingtong et al. 2013). After homogenization with a pestle, samples were sonicated and centrifuged at 15000 g, 4°C for 30 min. Protein concentrations were determined using a modified Bradford assay (Ramagli 1999), all samples were adjusted to 400 μg of proteins in 250 μL of rehydration solution (urea 7M, DTT 0.1M, 4% CHAPS, and 0.2% IPG buffer, and loaded onto the immobilized pH gradient (IPG) strip (ImmobilineDryStrip pH 4–7NL, 11 cm, GE healthcare). Three technical replicates were done for each protein sample, to ensure 2-DE reproducibility. IPG strips were passively rehydrated overnight with 250 µL of protein sample. Isoelectric focusing was conducted in a Protean IEF electrophoresis system (Biorad), and the focusing protocol was as follows : 100 V for 2h30, 300 V for 1h30, gradient voltage increase to 1000 V for 1h, gradient voltage increase to 8000 V for 6h, 8000 V for 10h, and reduced to 500 V. Focused strips were equilibrated in an equilibration buffer (Tris–HCl 50 mM pH 8.8, urea 6 M, 30% glycerol, 2% SDS and 0.002% Bromophenol Blue) for two 15 min-periods, with 1 g/L dithiothreitol then 48.2 g/L iodoacetamide. For second dimension electrophoresis, each strip was applied to 8-16% Tris-HCl Criterion precast gel (Biorad) and separated at 100 V for 35 min and 180 V for 65 min. Gels were stained with Coomassie Blue (PhastGel, GE Healthcare), unspecific coloration was destained with a solution containing 30% methanol and 7% acetic acid, then scanned with imaging system G:box (Syngene). Spot detection and amount was measured based on spot volume normalized using built-in algorithms was done with the Progenesis SameSpots software (version 3.3, Nonlinear Dynamics, Durham, NC, USA). Automatic detection was performed by the software, but artifact spots were manually checked and removed. To screen for proteins that were differentially expressed for oysters exposed or not to pesticides, only protein spots with normalized volumes greater than 1.5 with statistical differences (P<0.05) were selected for subsequent identification mass spectrometry analysis. These spots were washed with milliQ water, destained in NH4HCO3 100 mM/acetonitrile (ACN) (1:1), and dehydrated in 100% ACN. After rehydration in NH4HCO3 100 mM and dehydration in 100% ACN, excised spots were air-dried and incubated overnight at 37 °C in a solution of modified trypsin (Promega, Charbonnières-les-Bains, France) at 12.5 ng/μL in 50 mM NH4HCO3. The resulting tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel spots by several washes in formic acid/ACN/water as previously described (Corporeau et al. 2014). The tryptic digests were then concentrated by vacuum centrifugation to reach a final volume of 30 μL. Mobile A (H2O/formic acid, 100:0.1) and B (ACN/formic acid, 100:0.1) phases for HPLC were delivered by the Ultimate 3000 nanoflow LC system (Dionex, LC Packings). 10 µL of peptide mixture was loaded on a trapping precolumn (5 mm × 300 μm i.d., 300 Å pore size, Pepmap C18, 5 μm) for 3 min in 2% buffer B at a flow rate of 25 µL/min. This step was followed by reverse-phase separations at a flow rate of 0.250 µL/min using an analytical column (15 cm × 300 μm i.d., 300 Å pore size, Pepmap C18, 5 μm, Dionex, LC Packings). We ran a gradient ranging from 2% to 35% of B for the first 60 min, 35% to 60% of B from min 60-85, and 60% to 90% of B from min 85-105. Finally, the column was washed with 90% of B for 16 min, and with 2% of B for 19 min prior to loading of the next sample. The peptides were detected by directly eluting them from the HPLC column into the nanoelectrospray ion source of the LTQ-Orbitrap XL (ThermoScientific) mass spectrometer. An ESI voltage of 1.4 kV was applied to the HPLC buffer using the liquid junction provided by the nanoelectrospray ion source and the ion transfer tube temperature was set to 200°C. The LTQ-Orbitrap XL instrument was operated in its data-dependent mode by automatically switching between full survey scan MS and consecutive MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 400–2000) were acquired in the OrbiTrap with a resolution of r = 60000 at m/z 400; ion injection times are calculated for each spectrum to allow for accumulation of 106 ions in the OrbiTrap. The 10 most intense peptide ions in each survey scan with an intensity above 2000 counts and a charge state≥2 were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the ion trap by collision induced dissociation. Normalized collision energy was set to 35% with an activation time of 30 ms. Peaks selected for fragmentation were automatically put on a dynamic exclusion list for 60 s with a mass tolerance of ± 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
MS data were saved in RAW file format (ThermoScientific) using XCalibur 2.0.7 with tune 2.4. The data analysis was performed with the Proteome Discoverer 1.2 software supported by Mascot (Mascot server v2.2.07; http://www.matrixscience.com) database search engines for peptide and protein identification. MS/MS spectra were compared to the Crassostrea Gigas Uniprot Reference Proteome database (UP000005408, July 2014, 25978 sequences, 11649621 residues). Mass tolerance for MS and MS/MS was set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Trypsine was selected as enzyme with one miscleavage allowed. Protein modifications were fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable oxidation of methionine. Identified peptides were filtered based on the Mascot score to obtain a false discovery rate of 1%. Only rank 1 peptides were considered. In the case of peptides shared by different proteins, proteins were automatically grouped. The proteins within a group are ranked according to their protein score. The protein reported in the protein table corresponds to the top score protein.

### Publication Abstract
Here, we assess the physiological effects induced by environmental concentrations of pesticides in Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas. Oysters were exposed for 14 d to trace levels of metconazole (0.2 and 2 &#x3bc;g/L), isoproturon (0.1 and 1 &#x3bc;g/L), or both in a mixture (0.2 and 0.1 &#x3bc;g/L, respectively). Exposure to trace levels of pesticides had no effect on the filtration rate, growth, and energy reserves of oysters. However, oysters exposed to metconazole and isoproturon showed an overactivation of the sensing-kinase AMP-activated protein kinase &#x3b1; (AMPK&#x3b1;), a key enzyme involved in energy metabolism and more particularly glycolysis. In the meantime, these exposed oysters showed a decrease in hexokinase and pyruvate kinase activities, whereas 2-DE proteomic revealed that fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (F-1,6-BP), a key enzyme of gluconeogenesis, was up-regulated. Activities of antioxidant enzymes were higher in oysters exposed to the highest pesticide concentrations. Both pesticides enhanced the superoxide dismutase activity of oysters. Isoproturon enhanced catalase activity, and metconazole enhanced peroxiredoxin activity. Overall, our results show that environmental concentrations of metconazole or isoproturon induced subtle changes in the energy and antioxidant metabolisms of oysters.

### Keywords
Pesticides, Marine bivalves, Metabolism, Crassostrea gigas, Trace-level

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
Protim - Irset Inserm U1085

### Submitter
Melanie Lagarrigue

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Pineau
Protim - Irset Inserm U1085


