### Accession
PXD027992

### Title
Nanodiscs-based proteomics to identify lipid-interacting proteins in yeast

### Description
Many soluble proteins interact with membranes to perform important biological functions, including signal transduction, regulation, transport, trafficking and biogenesis. Despite their importance, these protein-membrane interactions are difficult to characterize due to their often-transient nature as well as phospholipids’ poor solubility in aqueous solution. Here, we employ nanodiscs – small, water-soluble patches of lipid bilayer encircled with amphipathic scaffold proteins – along with quantitative proteomics to identify lipid-binding proteins in S. cerevisiae. Using nanodiscs reconstituted with yeast total lipid extracts or only phosphatidylethanolamine (PE-nanodiscs), we capture several known membrane-interacting proteins, including the Rab GTPases Sec4 and Ypt1, which play key roles in vesicle trafficking. Utilizing PE-nanodiscs enriched with phosphatidic acid (PEPA-nanodiscs), we specifically capture a member of the Hsp40/J-protein family, Caj1, whose function has recently been linked to membrane protein quality control. We show that Caj1 interaction with liposomes containing PA is modulated by pH and PE lipids, and depends on two patches of positively charged residues near the C-terminus of the protein. The protein Caj1 is the first example of an Hsp40/J-domain protein with affinity for membranes and phosphatidic acid lipid specificity. These findings highlight the utility of the nanodisc system to identify and characterize protein-lipid interactions that may not be evident using other methods.

### Sample Protocol
The lysine and arginine auxotrophic strain, BY4742 Δarg4, was grown for 7 h in YPD media at 25°C, washed three times with sterile water and diluted to a final O.D.600 of 0.007 in yeast nitrogen base minimal medium. For the “light” labeled culture, media contained 0.69 mg/ml complete supplement mixture minus arginine and lysine, 36 μg/ml of arginine, and 30 μg/ml of lysine. For the “heavy” SILAC labeled culture, Arg6 and Lys4 were added in place of arginine and lysine. The cultures were grown side-by-side for 14 h at 25 °C prior to harvesting. Cell pellets were re-suspended in TSG buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9, 50 mM sodium chloride, 10% w/v glycerol) and lysed in the presence of 10 mM protease inhibitor by glass beads (1.5 ml of beads per 1 ml of culture). Lysates were centrifuged at 7000 × g to remove cellular debris, then at 200,000 × g where the soluble protein fraction was obtained.  For affinity pull-down of the nanodiscs with SILAC extract, 10 μg nanodisc or MSP were bound onto 20 μL Nickel NTA agarose resin for 5 min at 25 °C in TSG buffer with gentle shaking. After a brief wash to remove unbound material, the resin bound with nanodisc was incubated for 30 min with 1 mg “heavy” SILAC labeled yeast cytosolic extract. As a control, 1 mg “light” cytosolic extract was incubated with the resin bound with MSP. Beads from both samples were then combined and washed 3 times with 1 mL TSG buffer supplemented with 50 mM Imidazole. Proteins were eluted in 100 μL TSG buffer supplemented with 600 mM Imidazole. Proteins were digested with Trypsin, STAGE-tipped and analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The yeast ORF database was used to identify peptides/proteins in Mascot. Protein ratios were quantified using Proteome Discoverer v1.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteins identified with only a single unique peptide were not included in our analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Many soluble proteins interact with membranes to perform important biological functions, including signal transduction, regulation, transport, trafficking, and biogenesis. Despite their importance, these protein-membrane interactions are difficult to characterize due to their often-transient nature as well as phospholipids' poor solubility in aqueous solution. Here, we employ nanodiscs-small, water-soluble patches of a lipid bilayer encircled with amphipathic scaffold proteins-along with quantitative proteomics to identify lipid-binding proteins in <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae.</i> Using nanodiscs reconstituted with yeast total lipid extracts or only phosphatidylethanolamine (PE-nanodiscs), we capture several known membrane-interacting proteins, including the Rab GTPases Sec4 and Ypt1, which play key roles in vesicle trafficking. Utilizing PE-nanodiscs enriched with phosphatidic acid (PEPA-nanodiscs), we specifically capture a member of the Hsp40/J-protein family, Caj1, whose function has recently been linked to membrane protein quality control. We show that the Caj1 interaction with liposomes containing PA is modulated by pH and PE lipids and depends on two patches of positively charged residues near the C-terminus of the protein. The protein Caj1 is the first example of an Hsp40/J-domain protein with affinity for membranes and phosphatidic acid lipid specificity. These findings highlight the utility of combining proteomics with lipid nanodiscs to identify and characterize protein-lipid interactions that may not be evident using other methods. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD027992.

### Keywords
Rab gtpase, Caj1, Silac labeling, Hsp40, Nanodiscs

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver BC, Canada
University of Oxford

### Submitter
John Young

### Lab Head
Dr Franck Duong
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver BC, Canada


