### Accession
PXD016604

### Title
Optimized high-order drug mixtures improve colorectal carcinoma treatment via inactivationof MAP kinase signaling pathway and cell cycle alteration

### Description
Colorectal carcinoma is currently treated with a combination of chemotherapeutic drugs supplemented with targeted drugs. Since there is an eminent need to improved therapeutic success we employed the phenotypically-driven therapeutically guided multidrug optimization (TGMO) technology to identify personalized optimal drug combinations (ODCs). Using this technology we obtained low dose synergistic and selective ODCs for a panel of human colorectal carcinoma cells that remained active in 3-dimensional heterotypic co-culture models. From RNA sequencing and phosphoproteomics analysis we noticed considerable overlap in the top 20 most active kinases in all cell lines and that the mechanism converges around MAP kinase signaling and cell cycle inhibition despite differential cell mutation status, transcript expression levels and protein kinase activity.  RNA sequencing revealed differentially expressed genes that confirmed these observations.  These combinations were subsequently translated to in vivo models. Interestingly, the optimized drug mixtures reduced tumor volume with 80% and significantly outperformed the standard chemotherapy (FOLFOX) in these models, while preventing toxicity, observed after FOLFOX treatment. Pharmacokinetics studies demonstrated that the combinations supported significantly enhanced drug bioavailability.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultured to near-confluence and left untreated (0.1% DMSO) or were exposed  to drugs for 2 hours. Cells were washed once in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) prior to lysis in lysisbuffer (9M urea buffer containing 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and phosphatase inhibitors). Cells were lysed in the presence of phosphatase inhibitors and were scraped and sonicated on ice using a Soniprep 150 tip sonicator. Subsequent centrifugation of the lysate was performed for 15 min at maximum speed. The cleared lysate was aliquotted and stored at -80°C until further use. Lysates were reduced in 4 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) for 20 min at 60°C, cooled to room temperature and subsequently alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min in the dark. After dilution to 2M urea using 20 mM HEPES buffer pH 8.0, the lysate was digested with 20 µg Sequencing Grade Modified trypsin/mg protein by overnight incubation at 22°C. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. Samples were then incubated for 15 min on ice, centrifuged for 5 min at 1800 x g and transferred to a new tube. Tryptic digests were desalted using 6 cc HLB Oasis cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) placed on a vacuum system. Bound peptides were washed using 0.1% TFA before elution to glass vials in 40% ACN/0.1% TFA. Eluates were lyophilized to dryness for 48 hours and stored at -80°C until further use. Enrichment for tyrosine phosphorylated phosphopeptides was performed using the anti-phosphotyrosine antibody P-Tyr-1000 coupled to agarose beads (PTMScan, Cell Signaling Technology). Briefly, 5 mg lyophilized phosphopeptides were dissolved in IAP buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate and 50 mM NaCl) and incubated with 2 µl P-Tyr-1000 beads per mg protein at 4°C for 2 hours. After sequential washes in cold IAP buffer and MQ, peptides were eluted from the beads in two steps in 0.15% TFA, desalted in 20 ul StageTips (1mm 3M SDB-XC membrane) using 0.1% TFA  and eluted with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA into glass-lined autosampler vials. Eluates were dried in a speedvac at 45°C and redissolved in 20µl loading solvent (4% acetonitrile in 0.5% TFA)  and stored at 4°C until LC-MS/MS measurement on the same day. For all pTyr samples corresponding lysate (1 µg on column) were also analysed for global protein expression.  LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 40 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 1.9 μm Pepmap Acclaim C18 (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 3 μl/min on a 10 mm × 75 μm ID trap column packed with 3 μm Pepmap Acclaim C18 at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 90 min (120 min inject-to-inject) at 35°C in a column oven. Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 15 for peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.4 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 15000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against Swissprot human proteome (cannonical_and_isoforms, downloaded February 2019,  42417 entries) using MaxQuant 1.6.4.0. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 6 (default MaxQuant settings). Peptide identifications were propagated across samples with the match between runs option checked.  Phosphopeptides were quantified by counting MS/MS spectra (spectral counts) or by their extracted ion intensities (‘Intensity’ in MaxQuant). For pTyr IP data for each sample the phosphosite intensities were normalized on the corresponding lysate summed spectral counts.

### Publication Abstract
The current standard of care for colorectal cancer (CRC) is a combination of chemotherapeutics, often supplemented with targeted biological drugs. An urgent need exists for improved drug efficacy and minimized side effects, especially at late-stage disease. We employed the phenotypically driven therapeutically guided multidrug optimization (TGMO) technology to identify optimized drug combinations (ODCs) in CRC. We identified low-dose synergistic and selective ODCs for a panel of six human CRC cell lines also active in heterotypic 3D co-culture models. Transcriptome sequencing and phosphoproteome analyses showed that the mechanisms of action of these ODCs converged toward MAP kinase signaling and cell cycle inhibition. Two cell-specific ODCs were translated to in vivo mouse models. The ODCs reduced tumor growth by ~80%, outperforming standard chemotherapy (FOLFOX). No toxicity was observed for the ODCs, while significant side effects were induced in the group treated with FOLFOX therapy. Identified ODCs demonstrated significantly enhanced bioavailability of the individual components. Finally, ODCs were also active in primary cells from CRC patient tumor tissues. Taken together, we show that the TGMO technology efficiently identifies selective and potent low-dose drug combinations, optimized regardless of tumor mutation status, outperforming conventional chemotherapy.

### Keywords
Human, Drug selection, Phosphoproteomics, Colorectal carcinoma, Ptyr ip, Combination therapy, Phosphokinase ranking, Label-free, Single-shot

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


