### Accession
PXD036704

### Title
LC-MS/MS Isomeric Profiling of N-Glycans derived from Low-Abundant Serum Glycoproteins in Mild Cognitive Im-pairment Patients

### Description
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is an early stage of memory loss that affects cognitive abilities, such as language or virtual/spatial comprehension. This cognitive decline is mostly ob-served with the aging of individuals. Recently, MCI has been considered as a prodromal phase of Alzheimer’s disease (AD), with a 10-15% conversion rate. However, the existing diagnostic methods fail to provide precise and well-timed diagnoses, and the pathophysiology of MCI is not fully understood. Alterations of serum N-glycan expression could represent essential con-tributors to the overall pathophysiology of neurodegenerative diseases and be used as a poten-tial marker to assess MCI diagnosis using non-invasive procedures. Herein, we undertook an LC-MS/MS glycomics approach to determine and characterize potential N-glycan markers in de-pleted blood serum samples from MCI patients. For the first time, we profiled the isomeric gly-come of the low abundant serum glycoproteins extracted from serum samples of control and MCI patients using an LC-MS/MS analytical strategy. Additionally, the MRM validation of the identified data showed five isomeric N-glycans with the ability to discriminate between healthy and MCI patients: the sialylated N-glycans HexNAc5,Hex6,Neu5Ac3 and HexNAc6,Hex7,Neu5Ac4 with single AUCs of 0.92 and 0.87 respectively, and combined AUC of 0.96; and the sialylat-ed-fucosylated N-glycans HexNAc4,Hex5,Fuc,Neu5Ac, HexNAc5,Hex6,Fuc,Neu5Ac2 and HexNAc6,Hex7,Fuc,Neu5Ac3 with single AUCs of 0.94, 0.67, and 0.88 respectively, and combined AUC of 0.98. According to ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) and in line with recent publications the identified N-glycans may play an important role in neuroinflammation. Process that plays a fundamental role in the progression of neurodegenerative diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Depletion of high-abundance proteins in serum samples. Sera samples from control and MCI patients were depleted of high abundance pro-teins using a Human 14 Multiple Affinity Removal Column from Agilent Technologies Inc. A 30 uL aliquot of serum was depleted according to the protocol provided by the column manufacturer. N-glycans release, purification, reduction and permethylation.  The N-glycans were released, 25 ug of protein was diluted to a total volume of 100 uL with 50 mM ABC buffer (pH ~7.5) and denatured at 90°C for 15 min. After the samples had cooled to room temperature, 1 uL of PNGase F (1000 U) was added, and the samples were incubated at 37°C for 20 h. The N-glycan reduction was accomplished by the addition of 10 uL of 10ug/uL ammonium-borane solution. After incubation, the residual borane was removed by the addition of methanol, generating methyl borate that was evaporated while drying in the vacuum concentrator. The reduced and dried N-glycans were then permethylated with a solid-phase permethylation protocol, as previously described. The dried N-glycans were resuspended in 30 uL of DMSO, 1.2 uL of water, and 20 uL of iodomethane. The solution was then applied into a microspin column packed with sodium hydroxide beads that were subsequently incubated in darkness at room temperature for 25 min N-glycan profiling. Two previously developed in-house strategies capable of separating an important number of isomeric N-glycans were used to complete the isomeric N-glycan profile of low-abundant serum glycoproteins in MCI samples. The MGC-LC-MS that uses a home-made 10mm mesoporous graphitized carbon (MGC) column, and the C18(50cm)-LC-MS that takes advantage of the path length to increase the interactions in the analyte-stationary phase, both resulted in isomeric separation. The samples were separated on a 10 mm MGC column or a 50 cm C18 column using an UltiMate 3000 Nano UHPLC system (Thermo Sc., San Jose, CA). An Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap column was used in both systems (75 um x 2 cm, 3 um particle size, Thermo Sc., Pittsburg, PA) for loading and online purification. For the MGC-LC-MS system, the oven was set to an opti-mum temperature of 75°C, which has been demonstrated to yield efficient isomeric sepa-ration. An LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Sc., San Jose, CA) was used for sample analysis. It was operated in positive ion mode with an ESI voltage of 1.6kV. Data was acquired with a scan range of 400 – 2000 m/z and 100K resolution. The top eight most intense precursor ions were selected for collision induced dissociation (CID) with a normalized collision energy of 35% and activation time of 10 ms. Multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) validation. The MGC-LC-MS system was used to perform a multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) verification on the previously identified N-glycans with statistical differences in abun-dance between control and MCI samples (t-test; p value < 0.05). For the MRM data acquisi-tion, the TSQ Vantage (Thermo Sc., San Jose, CA) triple quadrupole mass spectrometer was utilized. Data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA) with two scan events was per-formed in positive ion mode. The first event was a full MS scan at the range of 300 – 1500 m/z in Q3 with a scan time of 0.7 s and peak width of 0.7 FWHM. Data-dependent scan occurred for the second scan event where the five most intense ions from scan event one were subsequently selected and subjected to MS2. Protein analysis of the depleted serum samples. The equivalent to 50 ug of protein from the depleted serum was resuspended to 50 uL with 50 mM NH4HCO3 buffer and denatured at 90°C in a water bath for 10 min. The denatured protein was reduced by the addition of 1.25 uL of dithiothreitol (DTT) 200 mM and incubation at 60°C for 45 min. Then, the denatured and reduced protein was alkylated by the addition of 5 uL of iodoacetamide (IAA) 200 mM and incubation at 37°C for 45 min. A second addition of 1.25 uL of DTT 200 mM and incubation at 37°C for 30 min was performed to quench the IAA excess. Trypsin enzyme was added to the treated sample at a concentration ratio of 1:25 and incubated at 37°C overnight. Finally, the samples were dried down in a SpeedVac concentrator.

### Data Protocol
For the N-glycan profiling using the MGC and C18 columns. The analysis of the raw data was performed using Xcalibur 4.2 (Thermo Scientific) soft-ware; extracted ion chromatograms of each glycan structure, including all possible sodium and ammonium adducts, were generated. The m/z values of the identified glycan structures and their corresponding adducts were applied to generate the extracted ion chromatograms (EICs). The areas under the curve of the EICs were integrated, and the generated data were used to perform relative glycan quantitation. For the MRM mode, three transition ions were summed for each precursor ion to generate the extracted ion chromatogram in Xcalibur Qual Browser. The corresponding transition were selected according to our previous publications. The peak areas were computed and used to calculate the relative abundance of the investigated targets and subjected to statistical analyses. Statistical t-test was applied to the sample groups, after which the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was utilized to control the false discovery rate (FDR). To investigate the ability of the N-glycans to differentiate between sample cohorts, we used receiving operating characteristic (ROC) curves, dot plots, heat maps, principal component analysis (PCA), partial least squares-discriminant analysis (PLS-DA), and orthogonal partial least-squares-discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA), using SIMCA® software. Proteomics data was then searched against the UniProt database homo sapiens in MaxQuant® (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany). The protein rela-tion with MCI and AD was investigated using ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) and Ge-neOntology (GO).

### Publication Abstract
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is an early stage of memory loss that affects cognitive abilities, such as language or virtual/spatial comprehension. This cognitive decline is mostly observed with the aging of individuals. Recently, MCI has been considered as a prodromal phase of Alzheimer's disease (AD), with a 10-15% conversion rate. However, the existing diagnostic methods fail to provide precise and well-timed diagnoses, and the pathophysiology of MCI is not fully understood. Alterations of serum <i>N</i>-glycan expression could represent essential contributors to the overall pathophysiology of neurodegenerative diseases and be used as a potential marker to assess MCI diagnosis using non-invasive procedures. Herein, we undertook an LC-MS/MS glycomics approach to determine and characterize potential <i>N</i>-glycan markers in depleted blood serum samples from MCI patients. For the first time, we profiled the isomeric glycome of the low abundant serum glycoproteins extracted from serum samples of control and MCI patients using an LC-MS/MS analytical strategy. Additionally, the MRM validation of the identified data showed five isomeric <i>N</i>-glycans with the ability to discriminate between healthy and MCI patients: the sialylated <i>N</i>-glycans GlcNAc<sub>5</sub>,Hex<sub>6</sub>,Neu5Ac<sub>3</sub> and GlcNAc<sub>6</sub>,Hex<sub>7</sub>,Neu5Ac<sub>4</sub> with single AUCs of 0.92 and 0.87, respectively, and a combined AUC of 0.96; and the sialylated-fucosylated <i>N</i>-glycans GlcNAc<sub>4</sub>,Hex<sub>5</sub>,Fuc,Neu5Ac, GlcNAc<sub>5</sub>,Hex<sub>6</sub>,Fuc,Neu5Ac<sub>2</sub>, and GlcNAc<sub>6</sub>,Hex<sub>7</sub>,Fuc,Neu5Ac<sub>3</sub> with single AUCs of 0.94, 0.67, and 0.88, respectively, and a combined AUC of 0.98. According to the ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) and in line with recent publications, the identified <i>N</i>-glycans may play an important role in neuroinflammation. It is a process that plays a fundamental role in neuroinflammation, an important process in the progression of neurodegenerative diseases.

### Keywords
Mci, Biomarker glycan, Neurological disorder, Isomeric n-glycans

### Affiliations
Texas Tech University
Graduate student

### Submitter
Cristian Gutierrez Reyes

### Lab Head
Dr Yehia Mechref
Texas Tech University


