### Accession
PXD021533

### Title
tRNA 3' shortening by LCCR4 as a response to stress in Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
Sensing of environmental cues is crucial for cell survival. To adapt to changes in their surroundings cells need to tightly control the repertoire of genes expressed at any time. Regulation of translation is key, especially in organisms in which transcription is hardly controlled, like Trypanosoma brucei. In this study we describe the shortening of the bulk of the cellular tRNAs during stress at the expense of the conserved 3’ CCA-tail. This tRNA shortening is specific for nutritional stress and renders tRNAs unsuitable substrates for translation. We uncovered the nuclease LCCR4 (Tb927.4.2430), a homologue of the conserved deadenylase Ccr4, as being responsible for tRNA trimming. Once optimal growth conditions are restored tRNAs are rapidly repaired by the trypanosome tRNA nucleotidyltransferase thus rendering the recycled tRNAs amenable for translation. This mechanism represents a fast and efficient way to repress translation during stress, allowing quick reactivation with a low energy input.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown exponentially and then stressed on PBS for 2h and then harvested and frozen in liquid nitrogen. After thawing on ice cell pellets were resuspended in 1ml of ribosome buffer A (20mM Tris pH 7.6, 120mM KCl, 2mM MgCl2) per 3-4x109 cells and frozen and thawed as before. Cells were passed 10 times through a G25 needle, 10 times through a G27 needle and finally cell debris removed by centrifugation at maximal speed for 15 minutes. Lysates (0.5ml) were run in a 25ml Superose6I column using ribosome buffer A at 0.5ml/min flow. For analysis of the fractions 25l of 4 fractions were pooled and in vitro tRNA cleavage activity tested as described in Material and Methods. Positive fractions were pooled, concentrated and loaded in a Superdex200 column. Elution was performed using the same buffer and fractions tested for activity as before. A positive fraction and 2 negative fractions (eluting immediately before and after the positive ones) were run in a 10% SDS-PAGE and gel slices cut. The gel pieces were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. The digests were analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS (PROXEON coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer, ThermoFisher Scientific) with one injection of 5 μl digests. Peptides were trapped on a µPrecolumn C18 PepMap100 (5μm, 100 Å, 300 μm×5mm, ThermoFisher Scientific, Reinach, Switzerland) and separated by backflush on a C18 column (5 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm×15 cm, C18) by applying a 40-minute gradient of 5% acetonitrile to 40% in water, 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The Full Scan method was set with resolution at 70,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1E06 and maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. The data-dependent method for precursor ion fragmentation was applied with the following settings: resolution 17,500, AGC of 1E05, maximum ion time of 110 milliseconds, mass window 2 m/z, collision energy 27, under fill ratio 1%, charge exclusion of unassigned and 1+ ions, and peptide match preferred, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Spectra interpretation was performed with Easyprot on a local, server run under Ubuntu against a forward + reverse Trypanosoma Brucei database, using fixed modifications of carboamidomethylated on Cys, and variable modification of oxidation on Met, and acetylation on protein N-Term. Parent and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10ppm and 0.4Da, respectively. Matches on the reversed sequence database were used to set a z-score threshold, where 1% false discoveries on the peptide spectrum match level had to be expected. Protein identifications were only accepted, when two unique peptides fulfilling the 1% FDR criterium were identified.

### Publication Abstract
Sensing of environmental cues is crucial for cell survival. To adapt to changes in their surroundings cells need to tightly control the repertoire of genes expressed at any time. Regulation of translation is key, especially in organisms in which transcription is hardly controlled, like Trypanosoma brucei. In this study, we describe the shortening of the bulk of the cellular tRNAs during stress at the expense of the conserved 3' CCA-tail. This tRNA shortening is specific for nutritional stress and renders tRNAs unsuitable substrates for translation. We uncovered the nuclease LCCR4 (Tb927.4.2430), a homologue of the conserved deadenylase Ccr4, as being responsible for tRNA trimming. Once optimal growth conditions are restored tRNAs are rapidly repaired by the trypanosome tRNA nucleotidyltransferase thus rendering the recycled tRNAs amenable for translation. This mechanism represents a fast and efficient way to repress translation during stress, allowing quick reactivation with a low energy input.

### Keywords
Translation, Trna, Ccr4, Stress, Brucei

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
University of Bern
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry University of Bern Switzerland

### Submitter
Marina Cristodero

### Lab Head
Dr Norbert Polacek
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry University of Bern Switzerland


