### Accession
PXD039195

### Title
Proteomic Analysis Reveals the Association between the Path-ways of Glutathione and α-Linolenic Acid Metabolism and Lanthanum Accumulation in Tea Plants

### Description
Tieguanyin (TGY) and Shuixian (SX) cultivars of Camellia sinensis were selected to explore the mechanism underlying the accumulation of the rare earth element lanthanum through proteomics. Roots and fresh leaves of TGY and SX with low- and high-accumulation potential for lanthanum, respectively, were studied; 845 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified. Gene ontology analysis showed that the DEPs are involved in redox processes and related to molecular functions, such as defense and oxidative stress reactions, catalytic activity, and metal ion binding. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes metabolic pathway analysis showed that DEPs were associated with glutathione (GSH) and α-linolenic acid metabolism, plant pathogen interaction, and oxidative phosphorylation. Thirty-seven proteins in the GSH metabolism pathway showed significant differences, of which 18 GSH S-transferases show differential expression patterns in the root system.The expression multiples of GST (TEA004130.1) and GST (TEA032216.1) in T1L and T0L were 6.84 and 4.06, respectively, which were significantly higher than those in S1L and S0L. The lanthanum-induced activation of the GSH-related antioxidant defense system may cause the difference in TGY and SX. The LOX2.1 (TEA011765.1) and LOX2.1 (TEA011776.1 expression ratios) in the α-linolenic acid metabolic pathway were 2.44 and 6.43 in T1R and T0R, respectively, which were significantly higher than those in S1R snd S0R. The other differential proteins were also sig-nificantly upregulated in TGY leaves.The synthesis of specific substances induces lantha-num-associated defense responses in TGY, which is of great significance for the stability of its yield.

### Sample Protocol
One-year-old root cuttings of low- and high-REE-absorbing experimental cultivars of Camellia sinensis TGY and SX, respectively, were selected as plant materials. Cuttings were obtained from a local commercial tea seedling farm (Anxi Qianhe). Each plant, regarded as a seedling, was 20–30-cm long with a main stem diameter of 2–3 mm. Plants of both cultivars showed similar growth rates. 4.1. Hydroponic Culture of Tea Seedlings The experimental tea seedlings were washed under tap water, and their roots were rinsed with deionized water. Cuttings of TGY and SX were cultured in a growth chamber in containers with a capacity of 35 L and a height of 15 cm (Turnover Box Co., Nanjing, China) with four to six holes on top. Individual plants were separated using a foam board, and a sponge was tightly inserted into each hole for the stems to protrude through. Roots were shielded from light, and a half of the nutrient solution was re-placed at weekly intervals (Figure 8). The compositions of nutrient solutions are listed in Table 2. The pH of the solution was maintained between 5.0 and 5.5. Tea seedlings were cultured in this system for 2–3 weeks prior to the initiation of treatment. The ex-periment was conducted in an artificial climate chamber under a day/night tempera-ture regime of 28/20 °C and relative humidity of 75 %. Seedlings of both varieties grew uniformly before the initiation of treatment. To observe the growth of a large number of new white roots compared to the original roots, we added La3+ at different concen-trations to the culture solution. 4.2. La Treatment Analytical grade La chloride (LaCl3·6H2O) was used to prepare different concen-trations of La3+ solutions. In this study, the concentration of La3+ was set at 1.20 mmol/L and distilled water was set as the control. Solutions were prepared by adding an ap-propriate amount of LaCl3·6H2O to distilled water. After heating, the solutions were cooled to 25 °C and quantified to a final volume of 1 L. Each treatment was experi-mentally performed in triplicate, with 48 plants per replicate, to ensure an adequate number of robust plants to measure results.

### Data Protocol
4.4. Identification and Analysis of Protein Using Mass Spectrometry 4.4.1. Protein extraction, quantification, and analysis of electrophoresis Roots of TGY and SX (T0R/T1R/S0R/S1R) and the third leaf of the shoots (T0L/T1L/S0L/S1L) were frozen in liquid nitrogen at concentrations of 0 and 1.2 mmol/L, respectively. Protein samples were extracted using the Total Plant Protein Extraction Kit (PP0601-10, Beijing Bonfei Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Beijing, China), and protein quality inspection was conducted using the Bradford Protein Quantitative Kit (PA121221, TIANGEN BIOTECH (BEIJING) CO., LTD, Beijing, China). Protein samples (35 µg) were taken from each sample, and 5× sample loading buffer was added at a ratio of 5:1 (v/v) and bathed in boiling water for 5 min; then, at 14,000 ×g, the super-natant was centrifuged for 10 min and subjected to 10% sodium dodecyl sul-fate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) (constant flow: 14 mA; electro-phoresis time: 90 min). After electrophoresis, sample cleavage was evaluated using Coomassie brilliant-blue staining. 4.4.2. Methods for protein profiling Label-free protein quantification was performed using data-dependent acquisition. In this method, the mass spectrometer first collects mass spectrometry (MS) data MS1 and MS2 several times and performs quantitative analysis based on a label-free quan-titative method, which is based on MS1 data integration. Owing to the very high data density of MS1, intelligent identification of peptide profiles was performed on raw data prior to data integration calculations.

### Publication Abstract
Lanthanum can affect the growth and development of the tea plant. Tieguanyin (TGY) and Shuixian (SX) cultivars of Camellia sinensis were selected to explore the mechanism underlying the accumulation of lanthanum (tea plants' most accumulated rare earth element) through proteomics. Roots and fresh leaves of TGY and SX with low- and high-accumulation potential for lanthanum, respectively, were studied; 845 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified. Gene ontology analysis showed that DEPs were involved in redox processes and related to molecular functions. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes metabolic pathway analysis showed that DEPs were associated with glutathione (GSH) and &#x3b1;-linolenic acid metabolism, plant pathogen interaction, and oxidative phosphorylation. Thirty-seven proteins in the GSH metabolism pathway showed significant differences, wherein 18 GSH S-transferases showed differential expression patterns in the root system. Compared with the control, expression ratios of GST (TEA004130.1) and GST (TEA032216.1) in TGY leaves were 6.84 and 4.06, respectively, after lanthanum treatment; these were significantly higher than those in SX leaves. The LOX2.1 (TEA011765.1) and LOX2.1 (TEA011776.1) expression ratios in the &#x3b1;-linolenic acid metabolic pathway were 2.44 and 6.43, respectively, in TGY roots, which were significantly higher than those in SX roots. The synthesis of specific substances induces lanthanum-associated defense responses in TGY, which is of great significance for plant yield stability.

### Keywords
Rare earth elements; lanthanum; tea; genotypes; ultrastructure; transcriptome.

### Affiliations
Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University

### Submitter
zhihui Xue

### Lab Head
Dr zhihui Xue
Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University


