### Accession
PXD026288

### Title
Tumor temporal proteome profiling reveals the immunological triple offensive induced by synthetic anti-cancer Salmonella

### Description
The engineered “obligate” anaerobic Salmonella typhimurium strain YB1 shows a prominent ability to repress tumor growth and metastasis, which has great potential as a novel cancer immunotherapy. However, the antitumor mechanism of YB1 remains unelucidated. To resolve the proteome dynamics induced by the engineered bacteria, we applied tumor temporal proteome profiling on murine bladder tumors after intravenous injection of either YB1 or PBS as a negative control. Our data suggests that during the two weeks treatment of YB1 injections, the cured tumors experienced three distinct phases of the immune response. Two days after injection, the innate immune response was activated, particularly the complement and blood coagulation pathways. In the meantime, the phagocytosis was initiated. The professional phagocytes such as macrophages and neutrophils were recruited, especially the infiltration of M1 macrophages was enhanced. Seven days after injection, substantial amount of T cells was observed at the invasion margin of the tumor. As a result, the tumor shrunk significantly. Overall, the temporal proteome profiling can systematically reveal the YB1 induced immune responses in tumor, showing great promise for elucidating the mechanism of bacteria-mediated cancer immunotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
1 Salmonella YB1 and tumor cells culture S. typhimurium strain YB1 was cultivated in LB broth containing 25μg/mL chloramphenicol at 37°C, with shaking at 220 rpm overnight. The YB1 cultures were then transferred twice and grown until the logarithmic phase. OD600 was measured to determine the bacterial count. The MB49 mouse bladder cancer cell line was maintained in DMEM-HG supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% streptomycin and 1% penicillin. The medium was renewed every other day. Cells were cultivated at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2. 2 Animals and tumor tissues collection All animal experiments were approved by the animal care regulations of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Four-to six-week-old female C57BL/6 mice (Vital River Laboratory Animal Technology Co. Ltd, CHN) were subcutaneously injected with MB49 cells (1×10 6 ) in the flank region. Tumor volume was calculated according to the following formula: tumor volume = length × (width) 2 /2.  When the volumes of the MB49 tumors reached about 200 mm3, the C57BL/6 mice were randomly divided into two groups. One group was inoculated via the tail vein of the mice with YB1 (1×10 7) dissolved in 125μL PBS, whereas the control group was treated with 125μL PBS only. The mice were killed at different time points after injection. The whole tumor tissues were washed twice with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) to remove blood and other contaminants, quick-frozen in liquid N2 and stored at –80°C for protein extractions.  3 Protein Preparation and Peptide Extraction At least 1 mg samples of tumor tissues were cut off and lysed in a buffer that consisted of 5mM EDTA, 150mM NaCl, 20mM HEPES (pH8.5), 1% SDS, and a Roche complete protease inhibitor cocktail tablet for 10 min on ice. Following lysis, tissues debris was further lysed using sonication under suitable conditions. The lysates were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C, and the supernatants were harvested. The protein concentration was measured by BCA Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, P/N 23225). Approximately 100μg protein solution was reduced and alkylated for 30 min at 37 °C using 1μl 0.5 M TCEP, and 2μl 1 M CAA. After alkylation, quantitative precipitation of soluble and hydrophobic proteins from dilute solutions was based on a defined methanol-chloroform-water mixture method as described in Wessel D et al. (1984)[21]. Finally, the protein pellets were re-disolved by the addition of 20μl of Urea buffer (8 M Urea, 100mM HEPES) and vortexed fully. The protein pellets were reconstituted by the addition of 180μl of 20mM HEPES and vortexed fully. For digestion, 2μg mass spectrometry grade trypsin (Promega, P /N V5280) were added for digestion overnight at 37 ºC. The peptide digestions were quenched by 10μl of 10% formic acid (FA).  4 Peptides Desalting The acidifying peptide samples were desalted using a 100 mg desalting column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, P/N 60108-302). In short, the desalting column was activated with 1 ml acetonitrile (ACN)) twice,  and 1 ml buffer B (80% ACN，0.5% FA in water) twice. The buffer A was loaded twice to equilibrate the desalting column. Subsequently, the peptide solution was loaded onto the column, washed with 1 ml buffer A three times and eluted with buffer B to a clean tube. The eluent was dried completely in a SpeedVac centrifuge at 45°C and store at -80°C. 5 LC-MS/MS Analysis All peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA (vol/vol) and separated on on reversed-phase columns (trapping column: particle size = 3 μm, C18, length = 20 mm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, P/N 164946); analytical column: particle size = 2 μm, C18, length =250 mm(Thermo Fisher Scientific, P/N 164941)) on an Easy-nLC™ 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was achieved using a 120 min gradient (buffer A: 0.1% FA in water, buffer B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, then analyzed by Orbitrap Fusion Lumos in a data-dependent mode. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with the ion transfer tube temperature set at 300 °C. The positive ion spray voltage was 2.1 kV. Full-scan MS spectra (m/z 350–1800) was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000. HCD fragmentation was performed at normalized collision energy of 30%. The MS2 automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 5e4 with a maximum injection time (MIT) of 35 ms.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics Data Processing and Bioinformatic Analysis The MS/MS data were searched against a Swiss-Prot database（Musculus release-20190412 and Salmonella release-20190426 downloaded from UniProt）with MaxQuant 1.5.3.30. Data were searched with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. Searches were performed with enzyme specificity and only tryptic peptides were allowed to remain in the final data sets, and up to two mis-cleavages allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation was specified as a static modification; oxidation of methionine residue and acetylation, (protein-N) were allowed as variable modifications. Reverse decoy databases were included for all searches to estimate false discovery rates. Peptide and protein identifications were also quantified and filtered for less than 1% false-discovery rate (FDR). The intensity values from MaxQuant were normalized and further processed using the VSN method. We removed proteins with fewer than two samples in each group of samples at each time point. Then, the missing values were imputed by using the QRILC method. The Limma package was used for determining differentially expressed proteins between tumor mice and tumor mice injected with Salmonella. Proteins with an average fold change >1 and P-value <0.05 were considered different. For proteins of significant difference, their molecular functions and associated biological processes were analyzed using the DAVID (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/home.jsp) analysis tool, the FDR threshold was set at 5%. In order to observe the protein change panels at seven time points, we used the CLUSTER package to create a k-means cluster analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Engineered salmonella, Blood coagulation, Quantitative proteomics, M1 macrophage, Tumor specific t cell, Cancer immunotherapy

### Affiliations
Dept. Chemical Proteomics, Institute of Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology (SIAT), Chinese Academy of Sciences
Institute of Synthetic Biology,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology (SIAT),
Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
zhao wenjuan

### Lab Head
Dr Li Nan
Dept. Chemical Proteomics, Institute of Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology (SIAT), Chinese Academy of Sciences


