### Accession
PXD008011

### Title
Venom proteomics of Naja naja of western India origin

### Description
Bites by the Indian spectacled cobra (Naja naja) are widely reported across the Indian subcontinent, with an associated high rate of mortality and morbidity. In western India (WI), the numbers of reported incidents of cobra envenomation are significantly higher than the other snake bites. In this study the venom proteome of WINn was deciphered for the first time using tandem mass spectroscopy analysis.

### Sample Protocol
WINnV (dry weight 75 mg) was dissolved in 1.2 mL of 20 mM Tris–HCl containing 150 mM NaCl buffer, pH 7.4 (buffer A), centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 10 min, and the clear supernatant was then filtered through a 0.2 micron nylon membrane syringe filter (Genetix Biotech Asia Pvt. Ltd., India). The protein content of the filtrate was determined (see below) before it was subjected to fractionation through a HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 30 pg gel filtration column (pre-equilibrated with buffer A) coupled to an ÄKTA purifier FPLC system (Wipro GE Healthcare, Sweden). The elution of protein at a flow rate of 20 mL/hr was monitored at 280 nm, and 2 mL fractions were collected in each tube. The protein content of crude venom and the fractions were determined by the method of Lowry et al. (1951). From a standard curve of BSA, the concentration of unknown protein was determined at 660 nm. Eighty µg of protein from each gel filtration peak was subjected to 12.5% SDS-PAGE in reducing conditions. The protein bands were visualized by staining the gel with PhastGel Blue R stain (GE Healthcare, Sweden) and destaining was done with methanol: acetic acid:water (40:10:50). The protein bands were excised with sterile scalpels and subjected to in-gel digestion with sequencing grade trypsin (13 ng/μL in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 10% acetonitrile) at an enzyme: substrate ratio of 1:30 at 37 °C for 16 h following manufacturer’s (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) protocol.

### Data Protocol
The tryptic peptides were desalted, concentrated using ZipTip C18 (Merck, USA) and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid. They were then separated on an Agilent 1200 HPLC system integrated to an LTQ Orbitrap Discovery hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) via a Nanomate Triversa (Advion BioSciences, Ithaca, NY). FT-ICR/Orbitrap was used as the MS scan mode and the MS/MS scan in the range from m/z 500 to 2000 was acquired in the linear ion trap mode. For collision-induced dissociation (CID)-MS/MS analysis, doubly or triply-charged ions were selected. The signal: noise ratio was kept >2 when selecting the precursors for MS/MS data acquisition. All the raw MS/MS data were searched and analysed using PEAKS 8.5 software where carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, oxidation of methionine residues, pyro-glu from glutamine, and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were selected for variable modifications. The percent mass error tolerance and the fragment mass error tolerance were set to 12 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively and up to two missed cleavages and three maximum variable modifications per peptide were allowed. The LC-MS/MS data were searched in the NCBI (non-redundant database with reviewed proteins) database against venom protein entries of Elapidae (taxid: 8602), Naja (taxid: 8638) and Naja naja (taxid: 35670). To exclude contaminating proteins from identification, a contaminant database with 115 protein entries (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/crap.fasta) was included in the database search process. To improve the sequence coverage of identified venom proteins and identify additional proteins, semi-tryptic peptide sequences were also considered for identification. The redundant peptides (peptides that are present in more than one protein entry) were manually removed from the dataset and the following protein/peptide identification criteria were considered to unambiguously identify proteins: (i) only matching proteins and peptides showing a −10logP value that was ≥30 and ≥20, respectively; (ii) the false discovery rate (FDR) was kept very stringent (0.1%); and (iii) presence of at least one overlapping homologous distinct peptide in identified protein.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background</b>: Snakebite is a severe problem in the tropical countries including Indian subcontinent. Premier cases of cobra bites are being reported from western India (WI). <b>Research design and methods</b>: The proteome of WI <i>N. naja</i> venom (NnV) was deciphered by high resolution mass spectrometry analysis of venom, further fractionated by gel filtration (GF) or RP-HPLC followed by SDS-PAGE and then tandem mass spectrometric analysis of protein bands. The efficacy of commercial polyantivenom (PAV) towards WINnV was assessed by ELISA, immuno-blot, neutralization, and venom-PAV immunoaffinity chromatography studies. <b>Results</b>: Proteomic analysis of WINnV, GF fractions, and SDS-PAGE protein bands of RP-HPLC and GF peaks identified 14, 34, 40, and 54, distinct proteins, respectively, when searched against Elapidae database. The biochemical properties of WINnV correlated well with its proteome composition and pathophysiology of cobra envenomation, including neuroparalysis. This study also highlighted the differences in proteome composition between WINnV and previously reported Eastern India NnV. The tested antivenoms exhibited poor immuno-recognition and neutralization of low molecular mass proteins (&lt;20&#xa0;kDa), such as three-finger toxins, the major class of protein in WINnV. <b>Conclusion</b>: Improvements in production protocols of antivenoms is the necessity of the hour, supplemented with antibodies raised against the poorly recognized toxins.

### Keywords
Snake venom, Lc-ms/ms, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Professor, Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Tezpur University, Assam, India
Research Scholar, Tezpur University, Assam, India.

### Submitter
Abhishek Chanda

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. A. K. Mukherjee
Professor, Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Tezpur University, Assam, India


