### Accession
PXD041620

### Title
Lable-free LC-MSMS in HeLa on DYRK3 and Sec16A, Human cervical cancer cells

### Description
In order to identify sites of the SEC16A specifically phosphorylated by the Dual Specificity Kinase DYRK3, mCherry-SEC16A was transiently over expressed in HeLa cells together with GFP-DYRK3 or EGFP-C1 only

### Sample Protocol
A total of 8 samples (4 samples for category “GFP” and 4 samples for category “DYRK3”) were processed. HeLa cells were grown in 10-cm dishes to 70% confluence, transfected with 4 μg of mCherry-Sec16A plasmid in combination with 4 μg of GFP-DYRK3 (WT) or EGFP-C1 plasmids using Lipofectamine 2000 and 18h post-transfections cells were processed for immunoprecipitation using RFP-trap magnetic beads (Chromotek). For each sample, an aliquot was taken after on-bead trypsin digestion (carried out at 37°C overnight) for the Pull down analysis. The rest of the sample was used for phospho enrichment with Ti-IMAC magnetic beads. Both, the Pull down and the enriched samples were measured on a Orbitrap HF-X mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The default workflow for data analysis consists of a 2-group analysis between 2 categories of interest. The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against a Uniprot human reference proteome (taxonomy 9606, canonical version from 2016-12-09), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation, methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. MaxQuant Orbitrap default search settings were used. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label free quantification was enabled and a 2 minutes window for match between runs was applied. In the MaxQuant experimental design, each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values. Precursor and fragment tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively for the initial search. The re-quantify option was selected. For the phospho-site analysis a similar data analysis strategy as described in (Sharma et al., 2014) was implemented. In brief, the MaxQuant phospho_STY_site.txt file was used as the input file. The phospho-site table is expanded with respect to their multiplicity and filtered for a minimum localization site probability of 0.75. For each two-group comparison all peptides with a maximum of four missing values were retained. The data was normalized with a modified robust z-score transformation and p-values were computed with a moderated t-test with pooled variance (as implemented in the limma package (Ritchie et al., 2015). If all measurements of a peptide are missing in one of the conditions, a pseudo fold change was computed replacing the missing group average by the mean of 10% smallest protein intensities in that condition. Calculated p-values are adjusted for multiple testing using BH-method. Total protein levels were monitored to make sure there were no changes in SEC16A total protein amount between the two experimental conditions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hela, Dyrk3, Sec16a, Lable-free lc-msms

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Katrina Meyer

### Lab Head
Dr Lucas Pelkmans
Department of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


