### Accession
PXD015293

### Title
Quantitative proteome analyses of two types of Parkinson’s disease mouse model revealed potential pathways of the pathogenesis

### Description
Parkinson’s disease is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder that results in motor dysfunction and eventually cognitive impairment. -Synuclein protein has been known to be the most culprit protein but the clear pathological mechanism remains to be elucidated. As an effort to clarify the pathogenesis mechanism by -synuclein, various Parkinson’s disease mouse models with -synuclein overexpression have been developed. However, the systemic analysis of protein abundance change by the overexpressed -synuclein in whole proteome level still has been lacking. To address this issue, we established two different types of Parkinson’s disease model mice by injecting preformed -synuclein fibrils or inducing the expression of A53T mutant -synuclein to discover overlapping pathway, which is altered in the two different types of Parkinson’s disease mouse models. For more accurate quantification of mouse brain proteome, stable isotope labeling with amino acid in mammal-based quantification was implemented. As a result, we have successfully identified a total of 8,355 proteins from both of the mouse models; ~6,800 and ~7,200 proteins from preformed -synuclein fibrils injected model and A53T mutant -synuclein over-expressing model, respectively. From the pathway analysis of the differentially expressed proteins in common, complement and coagulation cascade pathway was recognized as the most enriched one. This is the first study that sheds light on the significance of the complement and coagulation pathway in the pathogenesis of PD through proteome analyses with two different types of Parkinson’s disease mouse models.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteome analysis of PD model mouse samples The mouse brain samples were extracted by Filter Aided Sample Prep (FASP) approach. Briefly, the mouse ventral midbrain samples were sonicated in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB)/4% SDS/10 mM dithiothreitol with Halt protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific) for 5 min followed by heating at 95oC for 5 min. After cooling down, the proteins were alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min followed by centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 10 min. SDS in the sample was removed by diluting the samples with 50 mM TEAB/8 M urea and concentrated with a centricon with 30 KDa MWCO for 40 min at RT. This buffer exchange step was repeated five times. Sweat gland proteins were digested with Lys-C at room temperature for 3 h followed by further digestion with trypsin overnight. Following enzyme digestion by either approach, the peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridge and fractionated into 24 fractions by basic pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography. Briefly, lyophilized samples were reconstituted in solvent A (10 mM TEAB, pH 8.5) and loaded onto XBridge C18, 5 μm 250 × 4.6 mm column (Waters, Milford, MA). Peptides were resolved using a gradient of 3 to 50% solvent B (10 mM TEAB in acetonitrile, pH 8.5) over 50 min collecting 96 fractions. The fractions were subsequently concatenated into 24 fractions followed by vacuum drying using SpeedVac. The dried peptides were reconstituted in 15 µl 10% FA and the entire amount was injected.  Mass spectrometric analysis of PD model mouse samples The fractionated peptides were analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to EASY-nanoLC II system. The peptides from each fraction were reconstituted in 10% formic acid and loaded onto a trap column (100 µm x 2 cm) at a flow rate of 5 µl per minute. The loaded peptides were resolved at 250 nl/min flow rate using a linear gradient of 10 to 35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile) over 95 minutes on an analytical column (50 cm x 75 µm ID) packed in house and was fitted on EASY-Spray ion source that was operated at 2.0 kV voltage. Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out in a data dependent manner with a full scan in the range of m/z 350 to 1550 in top speed mode setting 3 sec per cycle. Both MS and MS/MS were acquired and measured using Orbitrap mass analyzer. Full MS scans were measured at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400. Precursor ions were fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) method and detected at a mass resolution of 30,000 at m/z 400. The HCD energy was set to 32 for mouse samples and 35 for human samples. The Automatic gain control for full MS was set to 1 million ions and for MS/MS was set to 0.05 million ions with a maximum ion injection time of 50 and 100 ms, respectively. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 sec and singly charged ions were rejected. Internal calibration was carried out using lock mass option (m/z 445.1200025) from ambient air.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v 2.1; Thermo Scientific) suite was used for identification and quantitation. The tandem mass spectrometry data were searched using SEQUEST search algorithms against a mouse RefSeq database (version 73) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants. The search parameters used were as follows: a) trypsin or LysC as a proteolytic enzyme (with up to two missed cleavages) b) peptide mass error tolerance of 10 ppm; c) fragment mass error tolerance of 0.02 Da; d) carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146 Da) as fixed modification; e) oxidation of methionine (+15.99492 Da), heavy lysine (+6.02013 Da) as variable modifications. The minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. Peptides and proteins were filtered at a 1 % false-discovery rate (FDR) at the PSM level using percolator node and at the protein level using protein FDR validator node, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder that results in motor dysfunction and, eventually, cognitive impairment. &#x3b1;-Synuclein protein is known as a central protein to the pathophysiology of PD, but the underlying pathological mechanism still remains to be elucidated. In an effort to understand how &#x3b1;-synuclein underlies the pathology of PD, various PD mouse models with &#x3b1;-synuclein overexpression have been developed. However, systemic analysis of the brain proteome of those mouse models is lacking. In this study, we established two mouse models of PD by injecting &#x3b1;-synuclein preformed fibrils (PFF) or by inducing overexpression of human A53T &#x3b1;-synuclein to investigate common pathways in the two different types of the PD mouse models. For more accurate quantification of mouse brain proteome, the proteins were quantified using the method of stable isotope labeling with amino acids in mammals . We identified a total of 8355 proteins from the two mouse models; &#x223c;6800 and &#x223c;7200 proteins from &#x3b1;-synuclein PFF-injected mice and human A53T &#x3b1;-synuclein transgenic mice, respectively. Through pathway analysis of the differentially expressed proteins common to both PD mouse models, it was discovered that the complement and coagulation cascade pathways were enriched in the PD mice compared to control animals. Notably, a validation study demonstrated that complement component 3 (C3)-positive astrocytes were increased in the ventral midbrain of the intrastriatal &#x3b1;-synuclein PFF-injected mice and C3 secreted from astrocytes could induce the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons. This is the first study that highlights the significance of the complement and coagulation pathways in the pathogenesis of PD through proteome analyses with two sophisticated mouse models of PD.

### Keywords
Silam, Parkinson's disease, Alpha-synuclein

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Department of Neurology Institute for Cell Engineering Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine

### Submitter
chanhyun na

### Lab Head
Dr Hanseok Ko
Department of Neurology Institute for Cell Engineering Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine


