### Accession
PXD044448

### Title
Adherence to Lifestyle Recommendations Linked to Innate Immunity and Lipoprotein Metabolism: A Cross-Sectional Comparison Using Untargeted Proteomics

### Description
This study used untargeted proteomics to compare blood proteomic profiles in two groups of adults that differed widely in lifestyle habits. The goal was to identify a core list of proteins that were either upregulated or downregulated based on adherence to recommended lifestyle habits in adults. A total of 52 subjects in the lifestyle group (LIFE) (28 males, 24 females) and 52 in the control group (CON) (27 males, 25 females) participated in this cross-sectional study. Age, education level, marital status, and height did not differ significantly between LIFE and CON groups. The LIFE and CON groups differed markedly in body composition and fat mass-related anthropometric measurements including waist circumference, body mass index (BMI), sagittal abdominal diameter (SAD), and body composition (body fat percentage and fat mass index or FMI) (p<0.001). LIFE and CON groups were also widely disparate in physical activity patterns and maximal aerobic fitness, dietary intake patterns, disease risk factor prevalence, blood measures of inflammation, triglycerides, HDL-cholesterol, glucose, and insulin, weight-adjusted leg/back and handgrip strength, and mood states. The proteomics analysis showed strong group differences for 39 of 725 proteins identified in the dried blood spot samples. Of these, 18 were downregulated in the LIFE group and collectively indicated a lower innate immune activation signature. A total of 21 proteins were upregulated in the LIFE group and supported greater lipoprotein metabolism and HDL remodeling. Lifestyle-related habits and biomarkers were probed and the variance (>50%) in downregulated and upregulated proteins was best explained by group contrasts in indicators of body composition and visceral fat including FMI and SAD. This cross-sectional study established that a relatively small number of upregulated and downregulated proteins are associated with good lifestyle habits. A targeted “lifestyle” proteomic panel based on these data could be used in future studies to determine the efficacy of various prevention and treatment strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Dried blood spot (DBS) specimens were collected via fingerprick onto standard blood spot cards (Whatman® protein saver cards, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). One fingerprick provided 3 to 4 drops of blood and were dried at room temperature and stored at low humidity with desiccants. The DBS samples were used for the proteomics analysis. DBS cards were center punched (4 mm) and added to two 96 wells plates in randomized order. Proteins were resolubilized from the punches in 8M urea, 50mM AmBic and 0.1mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 minutes at 37°C while shaking.  Proteins were subsequently alkylated using 0.1mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 minutes in the dark. Protein concentrations were measured. Samples were diluted 5x with 50mM AmBic to reduce the urea concentration to less than 2M and proteins were digested at 37°C using trypsin in a 1:50 trypsin to protein ratio. Data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) was performed on an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a nanoLC (Dionex) with a flowrate of 300 nl/min for 60 minutes using a linear gradient. Data were acquired in a DIA mode in combination with BoxCar. For DIA MS2, 31 windows were created and optimized for DBS samples. MS1 resolution was set to 60000 and MS2 resolution was set to 30000. The MS1 fill time was 100ms with automatic gain control (AGC) equal to 500%, and the MS2 fill time was 55ms with AGC equal to 3000%. For BoxCar, MS1 windows were optimized for DBS samples for 3x10 boxes, with MS1 resolution set to 120000 at a fill time set to 23 ms and AGC target equal to 100%. Identifications were performed against a customized library with 1,012 proteins (pre-fractionated) and 11,791 peptides using an internal pipeline InfineQ 1.5 (ProteiQ Biosciences, Berlin, Germany) to increase protein coverage. Identifications were conducted while controlling for a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) with cross-run selection enabled and deep post-translational modification (PTM) analysis not enabled. Loess normalization was performed on peptide levels across all measurements. Spectra were analyzed for quality using Skyline (51) with manual validation. Real time quality control of MS measurements was consistent showing stable LC-MS data acquisition and reproducible sample preparation. A total of 970 proteins were identified in at least one DBS sample, and 725 proteins were identified in every sample. Protein identification was based on LC-MS DIA BoxCar analysis with 5.8% missing values and a median technical coefficient of variation (CV) measured in technical replicates of 15.8%.

### Data Protocol
The untargeted proteomics analysis identified 970 proteins in at least one DBS sample, and 725 proteins in every sample. Principal component analysis (PCA) revealed outlier data from one study participant, and these data were removed from the proteomics analysis. The non-proteomics data are expressed as mean±SD and were analyzed using SPSS (IBM SPSS Statistics, Version 28.0, IBM Corp, Armonk, NY, USA). Between group study participant characteristics were contrasted using independent t-tests for continuous data and Pearson’s chi-square for categorical data (Tables 1 and 2). The Perseus computational platform was used for statistical analysis of the proteomics data.  Principal component analysis (PCA) was used to examine the potential for outlier samples in the proteomics dataset. Two-sample t-tests (LIFE vs. CON) with permutation-based FDR correction (Q<0.05 alpha level) were used to probe for group contrasts in proteins. The proteins that were statistically different were mapped onto STRING v11.5 to build protein–protein interaction (PPI) networks (http://string-db.org/). A reactome pathway enrichment analysis was used to examine the primary pathways affected by group status.

### Publication Abstract
This study used untargeted proteomics to compare blood proteomic profiles in two groups of adults that differed widely in lifestyle habits. A total of 52 subjects in the lifestyle group (LIFE) (28 males, 24 females) and 52 in the control group (CON) (27 males, 25 females) participated in this cross-sectional study. Age, education level, marital status, and height did not differ significantly between LIFE and CON groups. The LIFE and CON groups differed markedly in body composition, physical activity patterns, dietary intake patterns, disease risk factor prevalence, blood measures of inflammation, triglycerides, HDL-cholesterol, glucose, and insulin, weight-adjusted leg/back and handgrip strength, and mood states. The proteomics analysis showed strong group differences for 39 of 725 proteins identified in dried blood spot samples. Of these, 18 were downregulated in the LIFE group and collectively indicated a lower innate immune activation signature. A total of 21 proteins were upregulated in the LIFE group and supported greater lipoprotein metabolism and HDL remodeling. Lifestyle-related habits and biomarkers were probed and the variance (&gt;&#x2009;50%) in proteomic profiles was best explained by group contrasts in indicators of adiposity. This cross-sectional study established that a relatively small number of proteins are associated with good lifestyle habits.

### Keywords
Lipoproteins, Exercise, Proteomics, Lifestyle, Immunity

### Affiliations
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
FACSM Professor, Department of Biology, Appalachian State University

### Submitter
Amanda Ooi

### Lab Head
Dr David C. Nieman
FACSM Professor, Department of Biology, Appalachian State University


