### Accession
PXD007777

### Title
iTRAQ-based Quantitative Phosphoproteomics Revealed Differences in Phosphorylation Modification Between Different Toxoplasma gondii Genotypes

### Description
iTRAQ technology combine with titanium dioxide (TiO2) affinity chromatography was applied to investigate the phosphoproteomic difference between type I (RH) strain, type II Prugniuad (PRU) strain and Chinese 1 (PYS) strain genotypic tachyzoites of T. gondii

### Sample Protocol
Firstly, total proteins were extracted from tachyzoites of Type I RH strain T. gondii, Type II PRU strain T. gondii and Chinese 1 PYS strain T. gondii, respectively. Then, samples were labeled with 8-plexed iTRAQ reagent and phosphorylated peptides were enriched by titanium dioxide (TiO2) beads.

### Data Protocol
Q Exactive Mass Spectrometer (Thermal Scientific) coupled with HPLC system was used to perform LC-MS/MS analysis. Database search was performed using the Mascot search engine (version 2.3, Matrix Science) embedded in the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
To gain insights into differences in the virulence among <i>T. gondii</i> strains at the post-translational level, we conducted a quantitative analysis of the phosphoproteome profile of <i>T. gondii</i> strains belonging to three different genotypes. Phosphopeptides from three strains, type I (RH strain), type II (PRU strain) and ToxoDB#9 (PYS strain), were enriched by titanium dioxide (TiO2) affinity chromatography and quantified using iTRAQ technology. A total of 1,441 phosphopeptides, 1,250 phosphorylation sites and 759 phosphoproteins were detected. In addition, 392, 298, and 436 differentially expressed phosphoproteins (DEPs) were identified in RH strain when comparing RH/PRU strains, in PRU strain when comparing PRU/PYS strains, and in PYS strain when comparing PYS/RH strains, respectively. Functional characterization of the DEPs using GO, KEGG, and STRING analyses revealed marked differences between the three strains. <i>In silico</i> kinase substrate motif analysis of the DEPs revealed three (RxxS, SxxE, and SxxxE), three (RxxS, SxxE, and SP), and five (SxxE, SP, SxE, LxRxxS, and RxxS) motifs in RH strain when comparing RH/PRU strains, in PRU strain when comparing PRU/PYS, and in PYS strain when comparing PYS/RH strains, respectively. This suggests that multiple overrepresented protein kinases including PKA, PKG, CKII, IKK, and MAPK could be involved in such a difference between <i>T. gondii</i> strains. Kinase associated network analysis showed that ROP5, ROP16, and cell-cycle-associated protein kinase CDK were the most connected kinase peptides. Our data reveal significant changes in the abundance of phosphoproteins between <i>T. gondii</i> genotypes, which explain some of the mechanisms that contribute to the virulence heterogeneity of this parasite.

### Keywords
Differentially expressed phosphoprotein (dpp), Toxoplasma gondii, Phosphoproteomics, Tachyzoite, Genotype, Itraq

### Affiliations
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (LVRI, CAAS)

### Submitter
Ze-Xiang Wang

### Lab Head
Dr XingQuan Zhu
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (LVRI, CAAS)


