### Accession
PXD003913

### Title
Identification of human PKD2 interaction partners from Golgi-enriched protein fractions of HeLa cells by affinity enrichment cross-linking/MS

### Description
We investigated the interaction network of human PKD2 in the cytosol as well as in Golgi-enriched subcellular protein fractions, using an affinity enrichment strategy combined with chemical cross-linking/mass spectrometry (MS). Analysis of the subproteomes revealed the presence of distinct proteins in the cytosolic and Golgi fractions. The covalent fixation of transient or weak interactors by chemical cross-linking allowed capturing interaction partners that might otherwise vanish during conventional pull-down experiments. In total, 31 interaction partners were identified for PKD2.

### Sample Protocol
All affinity enrichment and cross-linking experiments were carried out between 0 to 4 °C, either in batch mode or using spin columns (Pierce Screw Cap, Thermo Scientific). First, 20 µg of glutathione sepharose beads (4B, GE Healthcare) were prepared by washing three times with binding buffer (50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 mM TCEP, 10% (v/v) glycerol, pH 7.5). Subsequently, 20 µg (cytosolic fractions) or 10 µg (Golgi-enriched fractions) of GST-PKD2 in 200 µl of binding buffer were bound to the affinity matrix by incubation for 1 h. For the GST and matrix control samples, equimolar amounts of GST (Pierce, Thermo Scientific) or binding buffer were applied. Beads with affinity-captured GST-PKD2 and control samples were incubated with 800 µl of cytosolic fractions or 100 µl of Golgi-enriched fractions for 2 h. Chemical cross-linking was carried out with 5 mM bis(sulfosuccinimidyl) glutarate (BS2G-D0/D4) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 2 h on ice. Control samples without chemical cross-linker were treated with an equal volume of DMSO. The cross-linking reactions were quenched by addition of ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 20 mM. After the cross-linking reactions, the sepharose beads were washed three times with 400 µl of binding buffer containing 500 mM NaCl. The beads were resuspended in 40 µl of denaturation solution (8 M urea, 400 mM ammonium bicarbonate), incubated at 400 rpm, 37 °C for 15 min and subjected to in-solution digestion with Glu-C and trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Peptide solutions were analyzed by LC/MS/MS on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a Nanospray Flex nano-ESI ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a RP C8 precolumn (Acclaim PepMap, 300 μm × 5 mm, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 30 µl/min. After washing on the precolumn with 0.1% (v/v) TFA for 15 min at 30 µl/min, peptides were eluted and separated on a C18 separation column (Acclaim PepMap, 75 μM × 250 mm, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) that had been equilibrated with solvent A (0.1% (v/v) FA). Elution of peptides from the separation column was performed with a linear gradient from 0-35% solvent B (ACN, 0.08% (v/v) FA) within 300 min at 300 nl/min. Peptides were directly transferred to the nano-ESI ion source and analyzed in data-dependent MS/MS acquisition mode: High-resolution precursor ion scans (m/z 300-1500, R = 120,000 at m/z 200, AGC target value = 4.0e5, max. injection time = 50 ms) in the Orbitrap analyzer were acquired every 5 s. Within these 5 s the most abundant signals were selected for MS/MS experiments using CID (35% normalized collision energy) (isolation window 2 Th). Fragment ion spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap (precursor ions charge states 2-7, signal threshold = 5000 counts, AGC target value = 1.0e4, max. injection time = 50 ms). Fragmented precursor ions were dynamically excluded from CID for 60 s (mass tolerance window 10 ppm). Data acquisition and inspection of raw data were conducted via the Xcalibur software (version 3.0.63, Thermo Fisher Scientific). All experiments were conducted as biological replicates, i.e., independent cell culture and fractionation experiments, performing analyses as triplicate for all PKD2 and matrix control samples. Cross-linked matrix and GST control samples were performed as biological triplicates (Golgi-enriched fractions) or duplicates (cytosolic fractions). Also, two technical replicates, i.e., affinity enrichment, chemical cross-linking, and MS analysis were carried out. Raw files from LC/MS/MS measurements were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) (27) by combining every file for each condition, i.e., cytosolic fractions or Golgi-enriched fractions. Protein identification was carried out with the Andromeda search engine (32) by matching MS and MS/MS data to the human reference proteome downloaded from the UniProt database (http://www.uniprot.org, FASTA file; download date: 2015-01-20; 89,734 entries) and an integrated database of common contaminants (245 entries). Database searches were conducted with standard settings for Orbitrap precursor ion MS analysis and measurement of fragment ions in the linear ion trap, allowing maximum mass differences of 20 ppm (first search) / 4.5 ppm (main search) and 0.5 Da. Trypsin and Glu-C were set as specific proteolytic enzymes, allowing up to three missed cleavage sites for comparison with in-silico digestion products. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. Protein identifications were filtered against a target decoy database (reversed sequence order) allowing a maximum false discovery rate of 1%. Additionally, the “match between runs” feature was enabled and label-free quantification of proteins (LFQ) was conducted using the MaxLFQ option (28) with minimum ratio count set to value 1. The “proteinGroups” output file from MaxQuant was used for downstream data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
We investigated the interaction network of human PKD2 in the cytosol and in Golgi-enriched subcellular protein fractions by an affinity enrichment strategy combined with chemical cross-linking/mass spectrometry (MS). Analysis of the subproteomes revealed the presence of distinct proteins in the cytosolic and Golgi fractions. The covalent fixation of transient or weak interactors by chemical cross-linking allowed capturing interaction partners that might otherwise disappear during conventional pull-down experiments. In total, 31 interaction partners were identified for PKD2, including glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta (GSK3B), 14-3-3 protein gamma (YWHAG), and the alpha isoform of 55 kDa regulatory subunit B of protein phosphatase 2A (PPP2R2A). Remarkably, the entire seven-subunit Arp2/3 complex (ARPC1B, ARPC2, ARPC3, ARPC4, ARPC5, ACTR3, ACTR2) as well as ARPC1A and ARPC5L, which are putative substitutes of ARPC1B and ARPC5, were identified. We provide evidence of a direct protein-protein interaction between PKD2 and Arp2/3. Our findings will pave the way for further structural and functional studies of PKD2 complexes, especially the PKD2/Arp2/3 interaction, to elucidate the role of PKD2 for transport processes at the trans-Golgi network. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD003909 (enrichment from cytosolic fractions), PXD003913 (enrichment from Golgi fractions), and PXD003917 (subcellular fractionation).

### Keywords
Human, Hela cells, Cross-linking/ms, Affinity enrichment, Pkd2, Golgi apparatus, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Bioanalytics Institute of Pharmacy Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg Halle (Saale), Germany

### Submitter
Björn Häupl

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Sinz
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Bioanalytics Institute of Pharmacy Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg Halle (Saale), Germany


