### Accession
PXD032195

### Title
UNASSAMBLED CELL WALL PROTEINS FORM AGGREGATES IN THE EXTRACELLULAR SPACE OF CHLAMYDOMONAS REINHARDTII STRAIN UVM4

### Description
The green microalga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii is emerging as a promising cell biofactory for secreted recombinant protein (RP) production. In recent years, the generation of the broadly-used cell wall-deficient mutant strain UVM4 has allowed for a drastic increase in secreted RP yields. However, purification of secreted RPs from the extracellular space of C. reinhardtii strain UVM4 is challenging. Previous studies suggest that secreted RPs are trapped in a matrix of cell wall protein aggregates populating the secretome of strain UVM4, making it difficult to isolate and purify the RPs. To better understand the nature and behaviour of these extracellular protein aggregates, we analysed and compared the extracellular proteome of the strain UVM4 to its cell-walled ancestor, C. reinhardtii strain 137c. When grown under the same conditions, strain UVM4 produced a unique extracellular proteomic profile, including a higher abundance of secreted cell wall glycoproteins. Further characterization of high molecular weight extracellular protein aggregates in strain UVM4 revealed that they are largely comprised of pherophorins, a specific class of cell wall glycoproteins. Our results offer important new insights into the extracellular space of strain UVM4, including strain-specific secreted cell wall proteins and the composition of the aggregates possibly related to impaired RP purification. The discovery of pherophorins as a major component of extracellular protein aggregates will inform future strategies to remove or prevent aggregate formation, enhance purification of secreted RPs, and improve yields of recombinant biopharmaceuticals in this emerging cell biofactory.

### Sample Protocol
C. reinhardtii 137c and UVM4 strains were up-scaled from a single colony and grown under mixotrophic conditions at 25°C and 100 rpm in 4 mL Tris Acetate Phosphate (TAP) medium (Gorman and Levine, 1965) with ~50 µmol photons/m2/s1 of continuous light until mid-exponential phase (OD750 nm ≈ 1.5). proteins in the 250-fold concentrated extracellular fractions were precipitated using a chloroform/methanol precipitation protocol adapted from Wessel and Flugge (Wessel and Flugge, 1984) and subsequently resuspended in 100 mM of triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) with 1 M of urea. The protein preparation step (reduction and alkylation) was performed using 5 mM of tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 20 mM of acrylamide monomers (AM), whilst 20 mM of dithiothreitol (DTT) were used to quench the alkylation reaction. To remove impurities, 40 µg of total protein were subjected to a single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) as described in Hughes et al. (2019). After SP3 preparation, samples were resuspended in 100 µL of 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC), obtaining a final concentration of protein of 0.4 µg/µL in all samples. Finally, protein digestion was performed overnight with proteomic grade trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega) in a 1:50 w/w ratio at 37°C. Using an Acquity M-class nanoLC system (Waters, USA), 5 µL of the sample were loaded at 15 µL/min for 2 minutes onto a nanoEase Symmetry C18 trapping column (180 µm x 20 mm) before being washed onto a PicoFrit column (75 µm ID x 300 mm; New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed with Magic C18AQ resin (3 µm, Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA). Peptides were eluted from the column and into the source of a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using the following program: 5 – 30% MS buffer B (98% Acetonitrile + 0.2% Formic Acid) over 90 minutes, 30 – 80% MS buffer B over 3 minutes, 80% MS buffer B for 2 minutes, and 80 – 5% MS buffer B for 3 min. The eluting peptides were ionised at 2400 V. A Data Dependant MS/MS (dd-MS2) experiment was performed, with a survey scan of 350 – 1,500 Da performed at 70,000 resolution for peptides of charge state 2+ or higher with an AGC target of 3e6 and maximum Injection Time of 50 ms. The Top 12 peptides were selected fragmented in the HCD cell using an isolation window of 1.4 m/z, an AGC target of 1e5 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. Fragments were scanned in the Orbitrap analyser at 17,500 resolution and the product ion fragment masses measured over a mass range of 50 – 2,000 Da. The mass of the precursor peptide was then excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data files were searched using Peaks Studio X against the UniProt Chlamydomonas reinhardtii proteome (UP000006906, protein count: 18,829) and a database of common contaminants with the following parameter settings: Fixed modifications: none; Variable modifications: oxidised methionine, deamidated asparagine; Enzyme: semi-trypsin; Number of allowed missed cleavages: 3; Peptide mass tolerance: 10 ppm; MS/MS mass tolerance: 0.05 Da. The results of the search were then filtered to include peptides with a –log10(Pvalue) score that was determined by the False Discovery Rate (FDR) of <1%, the score being that where decoy database search matches were <1% of the total matches.

### Publication Abstract
The green microalga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii is emerging as a promising cell biofactory for secreted recombinant protein (RP) production. In recent years, the generation of the broadly used cell wall-deficient mutant strain UVM4 has allowed for a drastic increase in secreted RP yields. However, purification of secreted RPs from the extracellular space of C. reinhardtii strain UVM4 is challenging. Previous studies suggest that secreted RPs are trapped in a matrix of cell wall protein aggregates populating the secretome of strain UVM4, making it difficult to isolate and purify the RPs. To better understand the nature and behaviour of these extracellular protein aggregates, we analysed and compared the extracellular proteome of the strain UVM4 to its cell-walled ancestor, C. reinhardtii strain 137c. When grown under the same conditions, strain UVM4 produced a unique extracellular proteomic profile, including a higher abundance of secreted cell wall glycoproteins. Further characterization of high molecular weight extracellular protein aggregates in strain UVM4 revealed that they are largely comprised of pherophorins, a specific class of cell wall glycoproteins. Our results offer important new insights into the extracellular space of strain UVM4, including strain-specific secreted cell wall proteins and the composition of the aggregates possibly related to impaired RP purification. The discovery of pherophorins as a major component of extracellular protein aggregates will inform future strategies to remove or prevent aggregate formation, enhance purification of secreted RPs, and improve yields of recombinant biopharmaceuticals in this emerging cell biofactory. KEY POINTS: &#x2022; Extracellular protein aggregates hinder purification of recombinant proteins in C. reinhardtii &#x2022; Unassembled cell wall pherophorins are major components of extracellular protein aggregates &#x2022; Known aggregate composition informs future strategies for recombinant protein purification.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Glycoproteins, Microalgae, Secretome, Recombinant protein, Pherophorins, Chlamydomonas

### Affiliations
Climate Change Cluster, University of Technology Sydney, 15 Broadway, Ultimo 2007, Sydney, NSW, Australia
University of technology Sydney

### Submitter
Matthew Padula

### Lab Head
Dr Peter J. Ralph
Climate Change Cluster, University of Technology Sydney, 15 Broadway, Ultimo 2007, Sydney, NSW, Australia


