### Accession
PXD003709

### Title
Preferential phosphorylation on old histones during early mitosis in human cells

### Description
How histone posttranslational modifications (PTMs) are inherited through cell cycle remains poorly understood. Canonical histones are made in the S phase of cell cycle. Combining mass spectrometry-based technologies and stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), we interrogate the distributions of multiple major histone PTMs on old versus new histones in synchronized human cells. We show that histone PTMs can be grouped to three categories accordingly to their distributions. Most lysine mono-methylation and acetylation PTMs are either symmetrically distributed on old and new histones, or asymmetric on new histones. In contrast, most di- and tri-methylation PTMs are asymmetric on old histones, suggesting the inheritance of different PTMs is regulated distinctly. Intriguingly, old and new histones are distinguished in their phosphorylation status during early mitosis, in three different human cell types: Hela, 293T and human foreskin fibroblast (HFF) cells. The mitotic hallmark H3S10ph is predominantly associated with old H3 at early mitosis and become symmetric with the progression of mitosis. The same distribution pattern is found on other mitotic histone phosphorylation marks, including H3T3/T6ph, H3.1/2S28ph and H1.4S26ph, excluding S28/S31ph on the H3 variant H3.3. Although H3S10ph often associates with the neighboring K9 di- or tri-methylation, they are not required for the asymmetric distribution of S10ph on the same H3 tail. Inhibition of the kinase Aurora B does not change the distribution pattern despite significant reduction of H3S10ph levels. K9me2 abundance on the new H3 is significantly reduced after Aurora B inhibition, suggesting a crosstalk between H3S10ph and H3K9me2.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue culture and synchronization Hela S3 cells were cultured and maintained in suspension as previously described (1). In brief, Hela cells were cultured in Minimum Essential Medium Eagle Joklik Modification with L-glutamine (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 10% Hyclone® New Calf Serum (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) and 100 U/mL Penicillin-Streptomycin (Life technologies). Hela cells were maintained in a density between 1x105 to 1x106 cells/mL. For double thymidine synchronization, 2.5 mM thymidine (Acros Organics) was added to the medium. The first block was 18-19 hours. Cells were subsequently released for 8.5 to 10 hours in normal medium and subjected to a second block with 2.5 mM thymidine for 15-17 hours. For experiments with nocodazole, 0.1 µg/mL nocodazole (EMD Millipore) was added in normal medium after the double thymidine block. For experiments with Aurora B inhibitor hesperadin, 100nM hesperadin (EMD Millipore) or equivalent DMSO solvent was added to the media at 2 hours after the double thymidine block. For different time points collected from the same experiment, a small portion was removed from the suspension culture at each time point. Human foreskin fibroblast (HFF) cells and 293T cells were cultured and maintained as previously described (2, 3). Briefly, HFF and 293T cells were cultured in DMEM with high glucose (Life technologies), supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) (Sigma-Aldrich). HFF Cells were cultured below ~80% confluency to avoid contact inhibition-induced quiescence state. Cells below 13 passages were used. 293T cells were supplemented with 3 µg/mL of puromycin (Santa Cruz) to maintain the FA- and Flag-tagged H3.3 (WT or K9M) transgene. For synchronization of HFF and 293T cells, cells were plated at 20-25% confluency and subjected to serum starvation with 0.1% FBS for 24 hours. Subsequently media with 10% FBS and 2 mM hydroxyurea were added for 18 hours. Normal growth media with 0.1 µg/mL nocodazole was subsequently introduced for releasing. G/2M cells were collected 6-7 hours after releasing. For different time points collected from the same experiment, cells were plated separately in different tissue culture wells/plates but at identical densities and treated the same.  SILAC medium preparation DMEM lacking L-Arginine and L-Methionine was purchased (AthenaES or Thermo Fisher scientific Inc.). Joklik medium lacking L-Arginine and L-Methionine was made from powder Joklik mixture (Sigma-Aldrich) and supplemented with all the necessary vitamins and amino acids based on the standard recipe. The SILAC medium was supplemented with 10% dialyzed Fetal Bovine Serum (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.), as well as L-Arginine-13C6, 15N4:HCl (Cambridge Isotope Labs.) and L-Methionine-methyl-13C, D3 (Sigma-Aldrich) or regular light L-Methionine (Sigma-Aldrich) according to the standard recipe. Light L-Proline (Sigma-Aldrich) was also added to the medium at 200 mg/L to prevent conversion from the heavy arginine(4).   1. Zee BM, Levin RS, Xu B, LeRoy G, Wingreen NS, Garcia BA. 2010. In vivo residue-specific histone methylation dynamics. J Biol Chem 285:3341–3350. 2. Evertts AG, Zee BM, Dimaggio PA, Gonzales-Cope M, Coller HA, Garcia BA. 2013. Quantitative Dynamics of the Link Between Cellular Metabolism and Histone Acetylation. J Biol Chem. 3. Lewis PW, Müller MM, Koletsky MS, Cordero F, Lin S, Banaszynski LA, Garcia BA, Muir TW, Becher OJ, Allis CD. 2013. Inhibition of PRC2 activity by a gain-of-function H3 mutation found in pediatric glioblastoma. Science 340:857–861. 4. Bendall SC, Hughes C, Stewart MH, Doble B, Bhatia M, Lajoie GA. 2008. Prevention of amino acid conversion in SILAC experiments with embryonic stem cells. Mol Cell Proteomics MCP 7:1587–1597.

### Data Protocol
We determine the relative abundance at the MS1 level based on the ratios we obtained, either manually or by a Matlab-based program, EpiProfile(1). Data was corrected for differences in detection efficiencies based on the correction factors generated by a synthetic peptide library as previously described(2). For phosphorylated peptides that were not included in the synthetic peptide library, an average correction factor generated from all the peptides with the same histone backbone was used. For histone H3.3 27-40 peptide, H1.4 25-32 peptide and the K9M 9-17 peptide, no correction factors were available and thus no correction was performed.  1. Yuan Z-F, Lin S, Molden RC, Cao X-J, Bhanu NV, Wang X, Sidoli S, Liu S, Garcia BA. 2015. EpiProfile Quantifies Histone Peptides With Modifications by Extracting Retention Time and Intensity in High-resolution Mass Spectra. Mol Cell Proteomics MCP 14:1696–1707. 2. Lin S, Wein S, Gonzales-Cope M, Otte GL, Yuan Z-F, Afjehi-Sadat L, Maile T, Berger SL, Rush J, Lill JR, Arnott D, Garcia BA. 2014. Stable Isotope labeled histone peptide library for histone post-translational modification and variant quantification by mass spectrometry. Mol Cell Proteomics MCP.

### Publication Abstract
How histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) are inherited through the cell cycle remains poorly understood. Canonical histones are made in the S phase of the cell cycle. Combining mass spectrometry-based technologies and stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture, we question the distribution of multiple histone PTMs on old versus new histones in synchronized human cells. We show that histone PTMs can be grouped into three categories according to their distributions. Most lysine mono-methylation and acetylation PTMs are either symmetrically distributed on old and new histones or are enriched on new histones. In contrast, most di- and tri-methylation PTMs are enriched on old histones, suggesting that the inheritance of different PTMs is regulated distinctly. Intriguingly, old and new histones are distinct in their phosphorylation status during early mitosis in the following three human cell types: HeLa, 293T, and human foreskin fibroblast cells. The mitotic hallmark H3S10ph is predominantly associated with old H3 at early mitosis and becomes symmetric with the progression of mitosis. This same distribution was observed with other mitotic phosphorylation marks, including H3T3/T6ph, H3.1/2S28ph, and H1.4S26ph but not S28/S31ph on the H3 variant H3.3. Although H3S10ph often associates with the neighboring Lys-9 di- or tri-methylations, they are not required for the asymmetric distribution of Ser-10 phosphorylation on the same H3 tail. Inhibition of the kinase Aurora B does not change the distribution despite significant reduction of H3S10ph levels. However, K9me2 abundance on the new H3 is significantly reduced after Aurora B inhibition, suggesting a cross-talk between H3S10ph and H3K9me2.

### Keywords
Histone phosphorylation, Mitosis, Cell cycle, Histone modifications, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
UPenn
Epigenetics Program, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania

### Submitter
Zuo-Fei Yuan

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin A. Garcia
Epigenetics Program, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania


