### Accession
PXD035758

### Title
Characterization of RAS/RAF/ERK signal cascade as a novel regulating factor in alpha-amanitin-induced liver injury

### Description
The well-known hepatotoxicity mechanism resulting from alpha-amanitin (-AMA) exposure arises from RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) inhibition. RNAP Ⅱ inhibition occurs through the dysregulation of mRNA synthesis. However, the signaling pathways in hepatocytes that arise from -AMA have not yet been fully elucidated. Here, we identified that the RAS/RAF/ERK signaling pathway was activated through quantitative phosphoproteomic and molecular biological analyses. Bioinformatics analysis showed that AMA exposure increased protein phosphorylation in a time-dependent AMA AMA exposure. In addition, phosphorylation increased not only the components of the ERK signaling pathway but also U2AF65 and SPF45, known splicing factors. Therefore, we propose a novel mechanism of -AMA as follows. The RAS/RAF/ERK signaling pathway involved in aberrant splicing events is activated by -AMA exposure followed by aberrant splicing events leading to cell death.

### Sample Protocol
2.3. Preparation of proteins from hepatocytes and trypsin digestion -AMA-treated Huh-7 cells were harvested and directly added to 500 L of 8 M urea (Sigma-Aldrich) in 100 mM Tris (VWR International, Radnor, PA, USA) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). The collected cells for one minute (output 30%, 5-second on and off intervals) and then centrifuged at RT at 16,000 × g for 10 min to separate the soluble proteins from the cell debris. The supernatant was removed from the top fraction and placed in new sample tubes, and the protein concentration was determined using a BCA kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Duplicate samples were harvested from each treatment group, and proteins were extracted. Protein samples (100 g) were placed in new sample tubes, and 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich) was added for cysteine residue reduction at 56 °C for 30 min. The samples were then treated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) in the dark for 30 min to alkylate cysteine groups. Next, samples were diluted two-fold for trypsin digestion. Following a pH check, trypsin (2 g) was directly added to the samples and allowed to digest for 18 h at 37 °C. Then, 1% trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to complete the digestion step. The peptides were dried in a speed-vac dryer at a low temperature. 2.4. Sample preparation for comparative phosphoproteomics analysis The phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The TiO2 tip was activated in 20 L buffer A (40% ACN with 4% TFA) and equilibrated in 20 L buffer B (buffer A with 25% lactic acid). The peptides were dissolved in 150 L of buffer B using a sonicator and loaded onto the TiO2 tip. Phosphopeptides were washed twice with buffer B and three times with buffer A and eluted using 50 L of 1.5% ammonium hydroxide solution and 50 L of 5% pyrrolidine. The sample was desalted following the manufacturer’s instructions using GL-Tip™SDB and GL-Tip™GC (GL Science Inc., Tokyo, Japan).  Dried peptide samples were dissolved in 50 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 6-plex TMT reagent labeling (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After checking the peptide concentration using a Pierce™ quantitative colorimetric peptide assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equal amounts of peptides from each group were labeled and placed in a sample tube. Pooled peptide samples were fractionated using a Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  We harvested 10 M -AMA-treated Huh-7 cells with and without 5 M ERK1/2 inhibitor and added to 500 L of 8 M urea (Sigma-Aldrich) in 100 mM Tris (VWR International) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to investigate the effect of the ERK1/2 inhibitor. The trypsin-digested peptides were collected as described above. The-AMA and ERK1/2 inhibitor treatment groups were labeled with 18O water for quantitative analysis based on the 18O/16O ratio. Peptide concentrations were determined using a Pierce™ quantitative colorimetric peptide assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equal amounts of peptides from each group were blended 1:1 with the control group. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed as previously described.  2.5. Instruments  All samples were dissolved in 10 L of solution A (2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid), and 2 g of each fraction was loaded onto an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system connected to a PepMap™ RSLC C18 analytical column and Acclaim PepMap™ 100 trap column. Samples were eluted using the gradient liquid chromatography method (5–30% acetonitrile for 150 min) and analyzed using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer in positive ion mode at the Mass Spectrometry Convergence Research Center. Quantitative mass spectrometry analyses were performed in duplicate for each pooled peptide sample. The electrospray voltage was set to 2.0 kV for the TMT-labeled sample analysis. The precursor ion scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000. The automatic gain control (AGC) target value for the MS scan of 1.0 × 106 higher-energy collisional dissociation collision (HCD) mode was used to obtain MS2 (R = 7,500). The data-dependent mode producing 10 of the most abundant ions from the full scans was fragmented in the HCD mode with 40% normalized collision energy (NCE). For 18O-labeled sample analysis, the MS2 parameter changed from the HCD mode to the collision-induced dissociation (CID) mode with 30% NCE. The other parameters were the same as those used in the TMT-labeled sample analysis.

### Data Protocol
2.6. Phosphoproteome data analysis and Bioinformatics Analysis All mass spectra data were input into MaxQuant 1.5.1.0 [25], and the human proteome database (updated 12/13/2018) was downloaded from Uniprot to obtain bioinformatics information. Protein and peptides were obtained using the following parameters: trypsin/P for cleavage enzyme permitting up to 2 missed cleavages; 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions of mass error; carbamidomethylation on Cys for fixed modification and oxidation on Met, crotonylation on lysine, and acetylation on the protein N-terminus for variable modifications. The false discovery rate for proteins, peptides, and phosphosites was set to 1%. The minimum length of the peptide was set to 7. The site localization probability was set to > 0.75 for selected specific phosphorylation sites. All other MaxQuant parameters were set to their default values.  The DAVID Functional Annotation Bioinformatics Microarray Analysis web-based software was used for Gene ontology (GO), InterPro, and KEGG pathway analyses [26]. Perseus 1.6.0.7, depending on the phosphoprotein regulation patterns, was used for unsupervised hierarchical clustering [27]. All reported ion intensities from the treatment groups were divided by the reporter ion intensity from the control group, and these data were normalized using Z-score normalization to categorize proteins based on abundance-changing tendencies. Hierarchical clustering based on Euclidean distance was applied to cluster the normalized scores, and average linkage clustering was used to process the k-means clustering. Heat map clustering was used to visualize the data.  The STRING analytical tool was used to profile the protein-protein networks. iGPS 1.0 was used to identify kinase-specific p-sites and systematically elucidate site-specific kinase-substrate relationships [28]. The STRING analytical tool (https://string-db. org/) was used to search for specific protein networks [29].

### Publication Abstract
The well-known hepatotoxicity mechanism resulting from alpha-amanitin (&#x3b1;-AMA) exposure arises from RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) inhibition. RNAP &#x2161; inhibition occurs through the dysregulation of mRNA synthesis. However, the signaling pathways in hepatocytes that arise from &#x3b1;-AMA have not yet been fully elucidated. Here, we identified that the RAS/RAF/ERK signaling pathway was activated through quantitative phosphoproteomic and molecular biological analyses in Huh-7 cells. Bioinformatics analysis showed that &#x3b1;-AMA exposure increased protein phosphorylation in a time-dependent &#x3b1;-AMA exposure. In addition, phosphorylation increased not only the components of the ERK signaling pathway but also U2AF65 and SPF45, known splicing factors. Therefore, we propose a novel mechanism of &#x3b1;-AMA as follows. The RAS/RAF/ERK signaling pathway involved in aberrant splicing events is activated by &#x3b1;-AMA exposure followed by aberrant splicing events leading to cell death in Huh-7 cells.

### Keywords
Alpha-amanitin; toxic mushroom; acute liver failure; global phosphoproteome; ras/raf/erk signaling pathway

### Affiliations
BK21 FOUR Community-Based Intelligent Novel Drug Discovery Education Unit, College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 41566, Republic of Korea
College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 41566, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Doeun Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sangkyu Lee
BK21 FOUR Community-Based Intelligent Novel Drug Discovery Education Unit, College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 41566, Republic of Korea


