### Accession
PXD007628

### Title
MHC II immunopeptidome during Plasmodium berghei blood stage infection

### Description
In malaria, T cells play a dual role by both restricting parasite growth and mediating immunopathology such as the deadly neuroinflammation called cerebral malaria.  During experimental cerebral malaria (ECM), IFN produced by CD4 T cells promotes CD8 T cell sequestration in brain capillaries, resulting in endothelial damage, oedema and death.  However the antigen-presenting cells controlling the development of CD4 T cell responses, as well as the antigens recognized by these CD4 T cells, are unknown. Here we used mass spectrometry to characterize the MHC II immunopeptidome presented by dendritic cells during blood stage malaria in C57BL/6 mice.  We identified 14 MHC II ligands derived from 13 conserved Plasmodium berghei proteins that we validated in vivo.  This work profiles the first MHC II immunopeptidome in a mouse model of blood stage malaria.

### Sample Protocol
MHC II molecules were immunoprecipitated from the cleared lysate using 50 µg of Y-3P antibody (BioXCell) bound to protein-G beads overnight at 4°C.  Beads were washed 3 times, peptides were eluted with 10% acetic acid at 70°C for 10 min. Prior to analysis to nanoLC-MSMS, peptides were separated from protein using a Vivaspin concentrator with 10 kDa MW cutoff.  Peptides were subjected to solid-phase extraction using a C18 Sep-Pak cartridge and finally concentrated using a rotating evaporator.  Nano-LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Peptides were automatically fractionated onto a C18 reverse-phase column (75 µm×150 mm, 2 µm particle, PepMap100 RSLC column, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a temperature of 35°C.  Trapping was performed during 4 min at 5 μL/min, with solvent A (98 % H2O, 2% ACN and 0.1 % FA).  Elution was performed using two solvents A (0,1 % FA in water) and B (0,1 % FA in ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  Gradient separation was 36 min from 2 % B to 40% B, 2 min to 90% B, and maintained for 5 min.  The column was equilibrated for 13 min with 5% buffer B prior to the next sample analysis.  The electrospray voltage was 1.9 kV, and the capillary temperature was 275 °C.  Full MS scans were acquired over m/z 400–2000 range with resolution 70,000 (m/z 200).  The target value was 1.00E+06.  Ten most intense peaks with charge state between 2 and 7 were fragmented in the HCD collision cell with normalized collision energy of 35%, and tandem mass spectrum was acquired with resolution 35,000 at m/z 200.  The target value was 2.00E+05.  The ion selection threshold was 6.7E+04 counts and the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 250 ms for full MS scans and 150 ms for tandem mass spectrum.  Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data collected during nano-LC-MS/MS analyses were processed and converted into *.mgf peak list format with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  MS/MS data was interpreted using search engine Mascot (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) installed on a local server.  Searches were performed with a tolerance on mass measurement of 0.02 Da for precursor and 10 ppm for fragment ions, against a composite target decoy database (189576 total entries) built with Plasmodium Berghei UniProt database (TaxID=5823, 03 December 2015, 13853 entries), Mus Musculus UniProt database (TaxID=10090, 03 December 2015, 78986 entries) fused with the sequences of recombinant trypsin and a list of classical contaminants (117 entries).  Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation were searched as variable modifications and no enzyme was indicated.  For each sample, peptides were filtered out according to the cut-off set for proteins hits with 1 or more peptides taller than 9 residues and ion score > 19, allowing a false positive identification rate of 2.5% for protein and 0.4% for peptides.

### Publication Abstract
In malaria, CD4 Th1 and T follicular helper (T<sub>FH</sub>) cells are important for controlling parasite growth, but Th1 cells also contribute to immunopathology. Moreover, various regulatory CD4 T-cell subsets are critical to hamper pathology. Yet the antigen-presenting cells controlling Th functionality, as well as the antigens recognized by CD4 T cells, are largely unknown. Here, we characterize the MHC II immunopeptidome presented by DC during blood-stage malaria in mice. We establish the immunodominance hierarchy of 14 MHC II ligands derived from conserved parasite proteins. Immunodominance is shaped differently whether blood stage is preceded or not by liver stage, but the same ETRAMP-specific dominant response develops in both contexts. In na&#xef;ve mice and at the onset of cerebral malaria, CD8&#x3b1;<sup>+</sup> dendritic cells (cDC1) are superior to other DC subsets for MHC II presentation of the ETRAMP epitope. Using <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i> depletion of cDC1, we show that cDC1 promote parasite-specific Th1 cells and inhibit the development of IL-10<sup>+</sup> CD4 T cells. This work profiles the <i>P.&#xa0;berghei</i> blood-stage MHC II immunopeptidome, highlights the potency of cDC1 to present malaria antigens on MHC II, and reveals a major role for cDC1 in regulating malaria-specific CD4 T-cell responses.

### Keywords
Plasmodium berghei, Lc-msms, Malaria, Mouse, Mhc ii

### Affiliations
Centre d'Infection et d'Immunité de Lille Univ. Lille (CIIL), Univ. Lille, CNRS UMR 8204, Inserm U1019, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, F-59000 Lille, France.
Institut Pasteur de Lille

### Submitter
SALIOU Jean-Michel

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Michel Saliou
Centre d'Infection et d'Immunité de Lille Univ. Lille (CIIL), Univ. Lille, CNRS UMR 8204, Inserm U1019, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, F-59000 Lille, France.


