### Accession
PXD014473

### Title
Interactome of overexpressed BAG3 in HEK293T cells

### Description
HEK293T cells stably expressing N-terminally HA-tagged BAG3 were employed to screen for novel BAG3 interacting proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Cells (4x 15 cm dishes) were harvested and lysed with 3 ml lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% Nonidet P40 (NP40) and EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail tablets). Centrifugation-cleared lysates (13,000 rpm) were filtered through 0.45 µm spin filters (Millipore Ultrafree-CL) and immunoprecipitated with 60 µl anti-HA resin. Resin containing immune complexes were washed five times with lysis buffer followed by five PBS washes, and elution with 150 µl of 250 mg/ml HA peptide in PBS. Eluted immune complexes were precipitated with 20% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and pellets were washed once with 10% TCA and four times with cold acetone. Precipitated proteins were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) with 20% acetonitrile and incubated with sequencing grade trypsin at a concentration of 12.5 ng/ml at 37ºC for 4 h. Trypsin reactions were quenched by addition of 5% formic acid and peptides were desalted using C18 Stage Tips. For each liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry run using an LTQ Velos linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) 4 µl were loaded onto a 18 cm x 125 µm (ID) C18 column and peptides eluted using a 50min 8–26% acetonitrile gradient. Spectra were acquired using a data-dependent Top-10 method. Each sample was shot twice in succession, followed by a wash with 70% acetonitrile and 30% isopropanol.

### Data Protocol
Tandem MS/MS data were searched using Sequest and a concatenated target-decoy uniprot human database with a 2 Da mass window. All data were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (peptide level) before analysis using CompPASS (Sowa et al., 2009).  Sowa ME, Bennett EJ, Gygi SP, Harper JW. Defining the Human Deubiquitinating Enzyme Interaction Landscape. Cell 2009;138:389–403. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2009.04.042.

### Publication Abstract
Chaperone-assisted selective autophagy (CASA) initiated by the cochaperone Bcl2-associated athanogene 3 (BAG3) represents an important mechanism for the disposal of misfolded and damaged proteins in mammalian cells. Under mechanical stress, the cochaperone cooperates with the small heat shock protein HSPB8 and the cytoskeleton-associated protein SYNPO2 to degrade force-unfolded forms of the actin-crosslinking protein filamin. This is essential for muscle maintenance in flies, fish, mice and men. Here, we identify the serine/threonine protein kinase 38 (STK38), which is part of the Hippo signaling network, as a novel interactor of BAG3. STK38 was previously shown to facilitate cytoskeleton assembly and to promote mitophagy as well as starvation and detachment induced autophagy. Significantly, our study reveals that STK38 exerts an inhibitory activity on BAG3-mediated autophagy. Inhibition relies on a disruption of the functional interplay of BAG3 with HSPB8 and SYNPO2 upon binding of STK38 to the cochaperone. Of note, STK38 attenuates CASA independently of its kinase activity, whereas previously established regulatory functions of STK38 involve target phosphorylation. The ability to exert different modes of regulation on central protein homeostasis (proteostasis) machineries apparently allows STK38 to coordinate the execution of diverse macroautophagy pathways and to balance cytoskeleton assembly and degradation.

### Keywords
Bag3, Ha-ip, Ltq velos

### Affiliations
Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy) Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München
SyNergy, LMU München

### Submitter
Christian Behrends

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Behrends
Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy) Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München


