### Accession
PXD019398

### Title
The Caveolin3 complex stabilizes functional surface expression of the Lactate-Proton Shuttle McT1 but not the sodium channel Nav1.5 in cardiomyocytes - Part 2: Ratiometric Proximity Proteomics

### Description
Caveolin3 variants were associated with action potential prolongation. As Caveolin1 was recently identified in cardiomyocytes, we hypothesize that conserved isoform-specific protein interactions underlie human loss-of-function variants. To analyze the Caveolin1 and Caveolin3 interactome, we developed unbiased live-cell proteomic and isoform-specific mass spectrometry techniques. We demonstrate the functional relevance and pathogenic mechanism of a novel Caveolin3 interactor in gene-edited human iPSC-cardiomyocyte models.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were separated by SDS-PAGE (4-12% Gradient Bis-Tris; Invitrogen), stained with Coomassie Blue for visualization purposes, and sliced into 12 equidistant slices regardless of staining. After washing, gel slices were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with 2-iodoacetamide and digested with Endopeptidase Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) overnight. The resulting peptide mixtures were then extracted, dried in a SpeedVac, reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid/ (v:v) and prepared for nanoLC-MS/MS as described previously (Atanassov and Urlaub, 2013). For mass spectrometric analysis samples were enriched on a self-packed reversed phase-C18 precolumn (0.15 mm ID x 20 mm, Reprosil-Pur120 C18-AQ 5 µm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and separated on an analytical reversed phase-C18 column (0.075 mm ID x 200 mm, Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 µm, Dr. Maisch) using a 30 min linear gradient of 5-35 % acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v:v) at 300 nl min-1). The eluent was analyzed on a Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole/orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) equipped with a FlexIon nanoSpray source and operated under Excalibur 2.5 software using a data-dependent acquisition method. Each experimental cycle was of the following form: one full MS scan across the 350-1600 m/z range was acquired at a resolution setting of 70,000 FWHM, and AGC target of 1*10e6 and a maximum fill time of 60 ms. Up to the 12 most abundant peptide precursors of charge states 2 to 5 above a 2*10e4 intensity threshold were then sequentially isolated at 2.0 FWHM isolation width, fragmented with nitrogen at a normalized collision energy setting of 25%, and the resulting product ion spectra recorded at a resolution setting of 17,500 FWHM, and AGC target of 2*10e5 and a maximum fill time of 60 ms. Selected precursor m/z values were then excluded for the following 15 s. Two technical replicates per sample were acquired.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant Software version 1.5.2.8 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). Proteins were identified against the UniProt Rat Reference Proteome (v2017.02) along with a set of common lab contaminants. The search was performed with trypsine as enzyme and iodoacetamide as cysteine blocking agent. Up to two missed tryptic cleavages and methionine oxidation as a variable modification were allowed for. Instrument type ‘Orbitrap’ was selected to adjust for MS acquisition specifics. FDR was adjusted to 1% on both peptide and protein levels. The Arginine R6 and R10, and Lysine K4 and K8 labels including the ‘Re-quantify’ option were specified for relative protein quantitation. Perseus Software version 1.5.6.0 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) was used to obtain relative protein quantitation values from the MaxQuant Software results and perform statistical evaluation.

### Publication Abstract
[Figure: see text].

### Keywords
Cardiomyopathy; cell biology; metabolism; proteomics; stem cells

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen


