### Accession
PXD024630

### Title
ZNF524 directly binds telomeres and supports their integrity via TRF2/RAP1

### Description
Telomeres are nucleoprotein structures at the ends of linear chromosomes. In humans, they consist of TTAGGG repeats, which are bound by dedicated proteins such as the shelterin complex. This complex consists of six proteins (TRF1, TRF2, RAP1, POT1, TPP1 and TIN2) and blocks unwanted DNA damage repair at telomeres, e.g. by suppressing non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) through its subunit TRF2. While shelterin does not work autonomously, additional direct telomere binding proteins have been described to function in a supplementary role. We here describe ZNF524, a zinc finger protein that directly binds to telomeric repeats with nanomolar affinity and reveal the base-specific sequence recognition by co-crystallization with telomeric DNA. ZNF524 localizes to telomeres and specifically maintains the presence of the TRF2/RAP1 subcomplex at telomeres without affecting the other shelterin members. Loss of ZNF524 concomitantly results in an increase in DNA damage signaling and recombination events. Overall, we identified ZNF524 as a direct telomere binding protein and propose that ZNF524 is involved in the maintenance of telomere integrity by promoting TRF2/RAP1 subcomplex binding.

### Sample Protocol
Denatured proteins were separated on a 4-12% Bis-/Tris gel (NuPAGE, Thermo Scientific) for 10 min at 180 V in 1x MOPS buffer (NuPAGE, Thermo Scientific). Proteins were stained with the Colloidal Blue Kit (Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions and each sample was cut individually with a clean scalpel into 1 mm x 1 mm pieces. The gel pieces were destained (50% 50 mM NH4HCO3 (ABC), 50% ethanol) in several rounds, then dehydrated twice in 100% acetonitrile and its remnants removed using a Concentrator Plus (Eppendorf). The gel pieces were incubated with reduction buffer (50 mM ABC pH 8.0, 10 mM DTT) for 60 min at 56 °C followed by incubation with alkylation buffer (50 mM ABC pH 8.0, 50 mM iodoacetamide) for 45 min at RT in the dark. The gel pieces were washed with 50 mM ABC once. Subsequently, two dehydration steps were performed and the acetonitrile was completely removed. The gel pieces were rehydrated in trypsin solution (50 mM ABC pH 8.0, 2 µg trypsin per sample, Promega) overnight at 37 °C, the supernatant was collected and the digested peptides were extracted by one round of incubation with extraction buffer (30% acetonitrile, 10% trifluoracetic acid), one round of 100% acetonitrile, another round of extraction buffer and finally two rounds of 100% acetonitrile for 15 min at RT with agitation. In each round, supernatants were recovered and combined. The acetonitrile was evaporated in the Concentrator Plus to reduce the volume to <200 µL. Peptides were desalted on StageTips and analysed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on an in-house packed C18 column (New Objective, 25 cm long, 75 µm inner diameter) for reverse-phase chromatography. Peptides were eluted from the column in an optimized 2 h gradient from 2-40% MS grade acetonitrile/0.5% formic acid solution at a flow rate of 225 nL min-1. The mass spectrometer was used in a data-dependent acquisition mode with one MS full scan and up to 20 MS/MS scans using HCD fragmentation. MS scans were conducted with 60,000 resolution at a maximum injection time of 20 ms and MS/MS scans with 15,000 resolution at a maximum injection time of 75 ms.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) and searched against the human Uniprot database (95,934 entries). Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, while oxidation (Met) and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. For enzyme specificity, trypsin was selected with a maximum of two miscleavages. Search results were filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01 and for known contaminants, proteins groups only identified by site, and reverse hits of the MaxQuant results. LFQ quantification (without fast LFQ) using at least 2 LFQ ratio counts and the match between run option were activated in the MaxQuant software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid, Telomeres, Znf524, Genome stability

### Affiliations
Cancer Science Institute, National University of Singapore, Singapore
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore

### Submitter
Dennis Kappei

### Lab Head
Dr Dennis Kappei
Cancer Science Institute, National University of Singapore, Singapore


