### Accession
PXD009396

### Title
Quantitative analysis of the erythrocyte kinome

### Description
The erythrocytes, the most numerous cells of the human body (Sender 2016), have the fundamental function of providing oxygen to the other cells throughout the organism. Protein phosphorylations are involved in the regulation of several important mechanisms in erythrocytes, such as cytoskeleton remodeling and membrane deformability allowing them to transit into the smallest capillaries. We performed a label free quantitative analysis aimed at specifically identify the set of kinases expressed in erythrocytes (the erythrocyte kinome).

### Sample Protocol
Erythrocytes were purified from the peripheral blood of healthy donors by centrifugation through 62 and 72.5% Percoll layers.  ATP-binding proteins including active kinases were purified from one mg of erythrocyte proteins using the kinase enrichment kit from Pierce with both ActivX desthiobiotin ATP and ADP probes. After kinase purification, peptides were prepared with the filter-aided sample preparation method (FASP) using trypsin for protein digestion. Peptides were analyzed by nLC-MS-MS using an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation liquid chromatographic system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a C18 reverse phase analytical column (2 µm particle size, 100 A˚ pore size, 75 µm internal diameter, 25 cm length) with a 3h gradient from 99% solution A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) to 40% solution B (80% ACN, 0.085% formic acid). The Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process.

### Data Protocol
Label free quantitative proteomic analysis was performed using Maxquant version 1.6.1.0 (Cox et al, 2014). The database used was a concatenation of Human sequences from the Uniprot-Swissprot database (Uniprot, release 2017-05) and the list of contaminant sequences from Maxquant. Cystein carbamidomethylation was set as constant modification and acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. A maximum of two missed tryptic digestion was allowed. The minimum peptide length allowed was 7 amino acids and the maximum was 6000 Da. Second peptide search and the “match between runs” options were allowed. False discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% on both peptides and proteins. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was done using both unique and razor peptides with at least 2 peptide ratio required for LFQ.

### Publication Abstract
Reticulocytes produced in the bone marrow undergo maturation in the bloodstream to give rise to erythrocytes. Although the proteome of circulating red cells has been the subject of several reports, the cellular populations used for these studies were never completely devoid of reticulocytes. In our current study, we used highly purified erythrocyte and reticulocyte populations to quantify the absolute expression levels of the proteins in each cell population. Erythrocytes and reticulocytes were purified in a multistep process involving cellulose chromatography, Percoll gradient centrifugation, and fluorescence cell sorting after thiazole orange labeling. Proteins were analyzed by mass spectrometry from whole cells and erythrocyte plasma membrane (ghosts), leading to the identification and quantification of 2077 proteins, including 654 that were reticulocyte-specific. Absolute quantifications of these proteins were made using the mean corpuscular hemoglobin content of the cells as a standard. For each protein, we calculated the percentage loss during the terminal stages of reticulocyte maturation and the percentage of association with the plasma membrane. In addition, we used modified adenosine triphosphate and adenosine diphosphate molecules that enable the transfer of a biotin molecule to the catalytic sites of kinases to isolate active kinases in the erythrocytes and determined the absolute expression of 75 protein kinases and the modification of their expression during reticulocyte maturation. Our findings represent the first absolute quantification of proteins that are specifically expressed in normal erythrocytes with no detectable contamination by reticulocytes. Our findings thus represent a reference database for the future proteomic analysis of pathological erythrocytes.

### Keywords
Kinome, Red blood cells, Label free quantification, Human primary cells, Erythrocytes, Kinases

### Affiliations
Institut Cochin, INSERM U1016, CNRS UMR8104, Plateforme de proteomique 3P5, Paris Descartes University
Plateforme Proteomique 3P5, Université Paris Descartes, Inserm U1016, Institut Cochin, Cnrs UMR8104,  France

### Submitter
Emilie-Fleur GAUTIER

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick MAYEUX
Institut Cochin, INSERM U1016, CNRS UMR8104, Plateforme de proteomique 3P5, Paris Descartes University


