### Accession
PXD017530

### Title
Intronic CRISPR repair in LZTR1-deficient iPSC-cardiomyocytes from Noonan syndrome patients reveals new treatment options

### Description
Noonan syndrome (NS) is a multisystemic developmental disorder characterized by its clinical variability with common symptoms such as typical facial dysmorphism, short stature, developmental delay and intellectual disability as well as congenital heart disease. The disease is causally linked to gain-of-function mutations in a number of genes leading to an increased signal transduction along the RAS-MAP kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway. However, our understanding of the pathophysiological alterations and mechanisms, especially of the associated cardiomyopathy, remains limited and effective therapeutic options are lacking. In this study, we present a family with two siblings displaying an autosomal recessive form of NS with severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy caused by biallelic mutations within leucine zipper like transcription regulator 1 (LZTR1). Induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (iPSC-CMs) of the affected siblings recapitulated the hypertrophic phenotype and uncovered a causal link between LZTR1 dysfunction, RAS accumulation, RAS-MAPK signaling hyperactivity, hypertrophic gene response and cellular hypertrophy. Intronic CRISPR repair in the patients’ iPSCs normalized RAS-MAPK signaling activity and cellular hypertrophy paving the way for personalized medical treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were labeled with stable isotopes of arginine and lysine by long-term culture in SILAC cardio culture medium composed of SILAC RPMI 1640 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 2% B27 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 25 mM HEPES (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 10 μl/ml Glutamax (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 1.74 mM L-proline (Sigma-Aldrich), and 0.219 mM 13C6,15N2-L-lysine (Cambridge Isotopes) and 0.575 mM 13C6,15N4-L-arginine (Cambridge Isotopes) for heavy-isotope labeling for 45 days, as previously described (Cyganek et al., 2018). For generation of the spike-in super-SILAC standard, the individual heavy-labeled iPSC-CM cultures of the 4 patient-derived and the 3 WT iPSC lines were pelleted at day 68-71 and pooled with equal amounts of protein. Non-labeled samples were maintened in the respective culture medium containing 1.74 mM L-proline, 0.219 mM L-lysine and 0.575 mM L-arginine (all: Sigma-Aldrich) as light-isotopes. Two individual differentiations of each iPSC line were used for analysis and individual samples were pelleted at day 60-75 and mixed 1:1 with the spike-in super-SILAC standard with the appropriate amount of LDS buffer and redox substance (Invitrogen). For cell lysis, cell pellets were incubated on ice for 30 min in 0.5% Nonidet P-40 buffer containing 50 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.8), 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4, complete protease inhibitors (Roche), and 0.2% n-dodecyl β-D-maltoside. Protein concentrations were measured with the Infinite® 200 PRO (Tecan).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant Software 1.5.2.8 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry). Proteins were identified against the UniProtKB Homo sapiens reference proteome (v2016.07; 71,544 entries) augmented with common lab contaminants. The search was performed with trypsin as enzyme and iodoacetamide as cysteine-blocking agent. Up to 2 missed tryptic cleavages and methionine oxidation as a variable modification were allowed. Instrument type ‘Orbitrap’ was selected to adjust for MS acquisition specifics. The arginine R10 and lysine K8 labels including the ‘Re-quantify’ option were specified for relative protein quantification. Resulting data from MaxQuant analysis were further analyzed by Perseus (v1.6.6, Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry) to obtain relative protein quantification values and to perform statistical evaluation. The data set was filtered based on a minimum of 3 valid values. Ratios of intensity of heavy- and light-labeled proteins were log2 transformed and the mean of each group was calculated. Intensity values were log10 transformed. To identify relevant protein signatures, two groups were compared against each other: NS versus WT and NS-corr versus NS. For statistical analysis, the t-test with false discovery rate of 0.05 or the outlier significance score for log protein ratios depending on intensity values (significance B) with Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate of 0.05 was applied. The disease-specific proteome signature was created based on literature research and STRING protein-protein association networks (v11.0, https://string-db.org/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ipsc, Stem cell, Proteomics, Silac

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
University Medical Center Goettingen, Institute of Clinical Chemistry, Core Facility Proteomics

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
University Medical Center Goettingen, Institute of Clinical Chemistry, Core Facility Proteomics


