### Accession
PXD015789

### Title
The mitochondrial HSP90 paralog TRAP1 forms an OXPHOS-regulated tetramer and is involved in maintaining mitochondrial metabolic homeostasis

### Description
The molecular chaperone TRAP1, the mitochondrial isoform of cytosolic HSP90, remains poorly understood with respect to its pivotal role in the regulation of mitochondrial metabolism. Most studies have found it to be an inhibitor of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) and an inducer of the Warburg phenotype of cancer cells. However, others have reported the opposite and there is no consensus on the relevant TRAP1 interactors. This calls for a more comprehensive analysis of the TRAP1 interactome and of how TRAP1 and mitochondrial metabolism mutually affect each other.

### Sample Protocol
The TRAP1 mutant IP-MS analysis was performed by Poochon Scientific (https://www.poochonscientific.com/services/protein-identification/) with three biological replicates per sample and two replicates for controls. Briefly, 2 x 106 HEK293T cells were seeded in 15 cm dishes, grown and transfected with various constructs using the Jetprime transfection reagent at 70% confluency. 24hrs after transfection, mitochondrial lysate preparation and IPs were performed as described above. 30 µl of the total IP sample for each IP (two controls and triplicates for the mutants) were run on a 4-12% gradient SDS-PAGE followed by in-gel trypsin digestion of two fractions and LC/MS/MS analysis. The LC/MS/MS analyses of samples were carried out using a Q-Exactive hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each LC/MS/MS run, the tryptic peptide mixture was loaded onto a peptide trap cartridge set to a flow rate of 5μl/min. The trapped peptides were eluted onto a reversed-phase PicoFrit column (New Objective, Woburn, MA) using a linear gradient of acetonitrile (3-36%) in 0.1% formic acid. Eluted peptides from the PicoFrit column were then ionized and sprayed into the mass spectrometer, using a Nanospray Flex Ion Source ES071 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, two raw MS files from two LC/MS/MS runs for each sample were analyzed using the Thermo Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1 platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for peptide identification and protein assembly. Database searches against the public human protein database obtained from the NCBI website were performed based on the SEQUEST and percolator algorithms through the Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1 platform. The minimum peptide length was specified to be five amino acids. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 15 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. The maximum false peptide discovery rate was specified as 0.01. Finally, the estimation of relative protein abundance was based on PSMs [69, 70]. For further comparison of relative abundance of interacting proteins for a particular mutant or for WT TRAP1, all data were normalized to 100 PSMs for the immunoprecipitated TRAP1 protein in a given replicate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hsp90, Trap1, Mitochondria, Oxidative phosphorylation, Atp synthase, Proteomics, Molecular chaperone, Glutamine

### Affiliations
Poochon Scientific
Département de Biologie Cellulaire Université de Genève Sciences III 30, quai Ernest-Ansermet CH - 1211 Genève 4, Switzerland

### Submitter
Jon (Jian-Jiang)  Hao

### Lab Head
Dr Didier Picard
Département de Biologie Cellulaire Université de Genève Sciences III 30, quai Ernest-Ansermet CH - 1211 Genève 4, Switzerland


