### Accession
PXD005351

### Title
Proteomics of Cycloclasticus endosymbiont of deep-sea mussel Bathymodiolus heckerae from Campeche Knolls, southern Gulf of Mexico

### Description
Bathymodiolin mussels are a group of bivalves associated with deep-sea reducing habitats, such as hydrothermal vents and cold seeps. These mussels usually engage in an obligatory symbiosis with sulfur and/or methane oxidizing Gammaproteobacteria. In addition to these bacteria, Bathymodiolus heckerae that inhabit gas and oil seeps in Campeche Bay, the southern Gulf of Mexico, host bacteria phylogenetically  with the Cycloclasticus genus. We recently discovered the capability for short-chain alkane degradation in draft genomes of symbiotic Cycloclasticus. With proteomics, we investigated whether the genes required for this process are expressed by the symbionts.

### Sample Protocol
We prepared tryptic digests from three biological replicates (whole gills) following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol described by Wisniewski et al.  (2009, Nat. Meth. 6(5)). In brief, SDT-lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT) was added in a 1:10 sample/buffer ratio to the sample pellets. Samples were heated for lysis to 95° C for 10 minutes followed by pelleting of debris for 5 min at 21,000 x g. 30 µl of the cleared lysate were mixed with 200 µl of UA solution (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) in a 10 kDa MWCO 500 µl centrifugal filter unit (VWR International) and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 200 µl of UA solution were added again and centrifugal filter spun at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 100 µl of IAA solution (0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA solution) were added to the filter and incubated at 22° C for 20 min. The IAA solution was removed by centrifugation and the filter was washed three times by adding 100 µl of UA solution and then centrifuging. The buffer on the filter was then changed to ABC (50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate), by washing the filter three times with 100 µl of ABC. 2 µg of MS grade trypsin (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) in 40 µl of ABC were added to the filter and filters incubated over night in a wet chamber at 37° C. The next day, peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 20 min, followed by addition of 50 µl of 0.5 M NaCl and again centrifugation. Peptides were not desalted. Approximate peptide concentrations were determined using the Pierce Micro BCA assay (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were analyzed by 1D-LC-MS/MS. For each sample two technical replicates were run. Two wash runs and one blank run were done between samples to reduce carry over. For each run, 2 to 7 µg of peptide were loaded onto a 5 mm, 300 µm ID C18 Acclaim® PepMap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and desalted on the pre-column. After desalting the peptides the pre-column was switched in line with a 50 cm x 75 µm analytical EASY-Spray column packed with PepMap RSLC C18, 2µm material (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was heated to 45° C. The analytical column was connected via an Easy-Spray source to a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on the analytical column and mass spectra acquired in the Orbitrap as described by Petersen et al. (2016, Nat. Microb. 2(16195)). Roughly 650,000 MS/MS spectra were acquired per sample (3 technical replicates combined).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification a database was created using all protein sequences predicted from the Cycloclasticus genome of B. heckerae, protein sequences predicted from preliminary genomes of the other B. heckerae symbionts, and protein sequences predicted from an EST library of the related host species B. azoricus (http://transcriptomics.biocant.pt/deepSeaVent/). CD-HIT was used to remove redundant sequences from the database (http://weizhongli-lab.org/cd-hit/). The cRAP protein sequence database (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) containing protein sequences of common laboratory contaminants was appended to the database. The final database contained 52,997 protein sequences. For protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the database using the Sequest HT node in Proteome Discoverer version 2.0.0.802 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously (Petersen et al. 2016, Nat. Microb. 2(16195)). Only proteins identified with medium or high confidence were retained resulting in an overall false discovery rate of <5%. Between 4960 and 7742 proteins were identified per sample.

### Publication Abstract
Cycloclasticus bacteria are ubiquitous in oil-rich regions of the ocean and are known for their ability to degrade polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). In this study, we describe Cycloclasticus that have established a symbiosis with Bathymodiolus heckerae mussels and poecilosclerid sponges from asphalt-rich, deep-sea oil seeps at Campeche Knolls in the southern Gulf of Mexico. Genomic and transcriptomic analyses revealed that, in contrast to all previously known Cycloclasticus, the symbiotic Cycloclasticus appears to lack the genes needed for PAH degradation. Instead, these symbionts use propane and other short-chain alkanes such as ethane and butane as carbon and energy sources, thus expanding the limited range of substrates known to power chemosynthetic symbioses. Analyses of short-chain alkanes in the environment of the Campeche Knolls symbioses revealed that these are present at high concentrations (in the &#x3bc;M to mM range). Comparative genomic analyses revealed high similarities between the genes used by the symbiotic Cycloclasticus to degrade short-chain alkanes and those of free-living Cycloclasticus that bloomed during the Deepwater Horizon oil spill. Our results indicate that the metabolic versatility of bacteria within the Cycloclasticus clade is higher than previously assumed, and highlight the expanded role of these keystone species in the degradation of marine hydrocarbons.

### Keywords
1d-lc, Cycloclasticus, Metaproteomics, Chemosynthetic symbiosis, Metaproteome

### Affiliations
North Carolina State University
Symbiosis Department, Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen, Germany

### Submitter
Manuel Kleiner

### Lab Head
Dr Nicole Dubilier
Symbiosis Department, Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen, Germany


