### Accession
PXD016382

### Title
Comparative proteomics of meat-spoiling bacteria predicts drivers for their coexistence on modified atmosphere packaged meat

### Description
Oxygen and carbon dioxide are common protective gases used in modified atmosphere packaging (MAP) of meat. Within the package, they selectively suppress members of the spoilage microbiome, reshaping it to adapted species concomitantly growing upon MAP. Thus, this species must exhibit adaptation mechanisms to withstand the inhibitory effect of carbon dioxide and oxygen, and cope with selective nutrition on MAP meat. In order to uncover these mechanisms, the typical representative meat-spoiling bacteria Brochothrix (B.) thermosphacta TMW2.2101 and four lactic acid bacteria (LAB) Carnobacterium (C.) divergens TMW2.1577, C. maltaromaticum TMW2.1581, Leuconostoc (L.) gelidum subsp. gelidum TMW2.1618 and L. gelidum subsp. gasicomitatum TMW2.1619 were grown in a meat simulation medium under a controlled, sterile environment, aerated constantly with either air, 100%_N2, 30%_CO2/70%_O2 or 30%_CO2/70%_N2. Growth dynamics were monitored and a label-free quantitative mass spectrometric approach was employed to determine changes within the bacterial proteomes in response to the different gas atmospheres. Revealed bacterial tolerance to modified atmospheres (MA) comprise two possible scenarios: Either bacteria were intrinsically adapted to MA, exhibiting no proteomic regulation of enzymes (L. gelidum subsp. gelidum and gasicomitatum) or, tolerance was provided by varying specific metabolic adaptation (B. thermosphacta, C. divergens, C. maltaromaticum). In detail, metabolic adaptation mechanisms to oxygen comprised an enhanced oxidative stress reduction response, adjustment of the pyruvate metabolism and catabolic oxygen consuming reactions. Adaptation to carbon dioxide was characterized by an upregulation of proteins involved in intracellular pH homeostasis, maintenance of osmotic balance and alteration of the fatty acid composition of the cell membrane. We furthermore predict species-specific strategies for different and preferential carbon source utilization enabling a non-competitive coexistence on meat and resulting in a synergistic spoilage. We conclude that a gas atmosphere containing 30%_CO2/70%_O2 has no inhibitory effect on the analyzed prominent meat-spoiling bacteria whereas 30%_CO2/70%_N2 predictively inhibits C. divergens TMW21577 and B. thermosphacta TMW2.2101 but not the other three species. This gives a mechanistically explanation of their acknowledged status as typical spoilage organisms on packaged meats.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strains and cultivation.  Representative strains for five species isolated from MA packed meat were selected among isolates of previous studies along their abundancy. B. thermosphacta TMW 2.2101 was isolated from minced beef (Hilgarth et al., 2019), C. divergens TMW 2.1577 and C. maltaromaticum TMW 2.1581 were isolated from skinless chicken breast (Höll et al., 2016) and L. gelidum subsp. gelidum TMW 2.1618 and L. gelidum subsp. gasicomitatum TMW 2.1619 were isolated from beef steaks (Hilgarth et al., 2018).  In order to ensure reproducibility, media of all experiments were inoculated from the same respective preculture from glycerol stock cultures prepared in brain heart infusion (BHI) media (Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany). Therefore, bacteria were grown at 25°C aerobically in Erlenmeyer flasks or anaerobically in gas tight Schott bottles. Cultures were harvested, aliquoted, supplemented with 90% glycerol (Gerbu Biotechnik GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany) and frozen at -80°C. Aerobic precultures were used for inoculation of experiments with air and 30%_CO2/70%_O2 and anaerobic precultures were used for experiments with 100%_N2 and 30%_CO2/70%_N2. Cultivation media for proteomic experiments was specifically adapted to components of real meat as previously described by Kolbeck et al. (2019b).  Experimental setup.  Bacteria were cultivated in 0.4 liter MSM in gas tight locked glass bottles. Inoculation of the media was done with the previous prepared precultures OD590=0.1. Fermentation was performed over 48 hours at 120 rpm and 25°C ±2°C. Media were constantly aerated through a gassing cannula for a constant atmosphere. All bacteria were cultivated in triplicates under four different gas mixtures (air, N2, 30%_CO2/70%_O2, 30%_CO2/70%_N2). Cell growth was monitored over 48 hours by optical density measurement. Samples for proteomic analysis were taken in exponential growth phase with log CFU ml-1 > 8 to comparable to cell counts with those occurring in the relevant time frame during meat spoilage. Proteomic sample preparation.  Sample preparation was performed as described in detail previously (Kolbeck et al., 2019a). Briefly, bacterial cells were resuspended in 8M urea lysis buffer and lysed by beads beating. Total protein concentrations were determined using the BCA method. 100 µg of protein extract were reduced with 10 mM DTT and carbamidomethylated with 55 mM chloroacetamide. Subsequently, proteins were digested with 1 µg trypsin overnight at 37°C. Digested peptide samples were desalted and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 98% H2O, 0.1% formic acid to a final concentration of 0.1 µg/µl. LC-MS/MS data acquisition.  LC-MS/MS measurements were performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For full proteome analyses 0.5 µg of peptides were delivered to a trap column (ReproSil-pur C18-AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch, 20 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min in HPLC grade water with 0.1% formic acid. After 10 minutes of loading, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil Gold C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, 450 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) and separated using a 50 min gradient from 4% to 32% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile and 5% (v/v) DMSO) at 300 nL/min flow rate. Both nanoLC solvents (solvent A = 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water and 5% (v/v) DMSO) contained 5% DMSO to boost MS intensity. The Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) and positive ionization mode. MS1 spectra (360–1300 m/z) were recorded at a resolution of 60,000 using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 45 msec. Up to 18 peptide precursors were selected for fragmentation in case of the full proteome analyses. Only precursors with charge state 2 to 6 were selected and dynamic exclusion of 25 sec was enabled. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 26%. The precursor isolation window width was set to 1.3 m/z. MS2 Resolution was 15.000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1e5 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 25 msec (full proteome).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification by MaxQuant.  Peptide identification and quantification was performed using the software MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) with its built-in search engine Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011; Tyanova et al., 2016a). MS2 spectra were searched against the NCBI proteome databased of L. gelidum subsp. gelidum TMW2.1618 (CP017196), L. gelidum subsp. gasicomitatum TMW2.1619 (CP017197), C. divergens TMW2.1577 (RSDV000000001), C. maltaromaticum TMW2.1581 (CP016844) and B. thermosphacta TMW2.2101 (RSDU000000001), supplemented with common contaminants (built-in option in MaxQuant). Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. Results were adjusted to 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level and protein level employing a target-decoy approach using reversed protein sequences. The minimal peptide length was defined as 7 amino acids, the “match-between-run” function was disabled. For full proteome analyses carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.  Statistical data analysis by Perseus.  Either labelled free quantification (LFQ) values were used from MaxQuant for identifying significantly different regulated proteins between two sampling conditions or intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values to compare general expression of proteins within each sample. LFQ and iBAQ values were identically possessed using the open source software Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016b). Statistical data analysation was done applying the following pipeline: I) Data clean-up by removing proteins from potential contaminants, only identified by site or reverse, II) log2 data transformation and normalization, III) removing proteins only identified in one of three replicates, IV) calculating the mean of three replicates, V) performing a Welch t-test of two sampling conditions (only with LFQ values), VI) exporting data to excel. Afterwards, proteins were filtered based on the following parameters: q-value<0.05 and log2 fold change>= 2.

### Publication Abstract
Besides intrinsic and extrinsic factors such as antagonism for organic substrates or temperature, the storage atmosphere of meat has a high influence on the development of its initial microbiota. Specific modified atmospheres (MAs) selectively suppress growth of aerobic and anaerobic bacteria, thus reshaping the initial microbiota. As some microorganisms are more tolerant to MA, they overgrow competitors and produce metabolites that cause rejection of the product. In order to elucidate responses to different MA by means of metabolic adaptation and competition for organic substrates on meat, the typical representative meat spoilage bacteria <i>Brochothrix</i> (<i>B.</i>) <i>thermosphacta</i> TMW2.2101 and four lactic acid bacteria <i>Carnobacterium</i> (<i>C.</i>) <i>divergens</i> TMW2.1577, <i>C. maltaromaticum</i> TMW2.1581, <i>Leuconostoc</i> (<i>L.</i>) <i>gelidum</i> subsp. <i>gelidum</i> TMW2.1618 and <i>L. gelidum</i> subsp. <i>gasicomitatum</i> TMW2.1619 were chosen. Bacteria were grown in sterile glass bottles filled with a meat simulation medium, which was aerated constantly with either air, 100%_N<sub>2</sub>, 30%_CO<sub>2</sub>/70%_O<sub>2</sub> or 30%_CO<sub>2</sub>/70%_N<sub>2</sub>. Growth of bacteria during incubation at 25&#xb0;C and stirring at 120 rpm was monitored over 48 h and a label-free quantitative mass spectrometric approach was employed to determine changes within the bacterial proteomes in response to oxygen and carbon dioxide. Both <i>Leuconostoc</i> subsp. were intrinsically tolerant to MA, exhibiting no proteomic regulation of enzymes, whereas the other species provide a set of metabolic adaptation mechanism, enabling higher resistance to the detrimental effects of MA. Those mechanisms comprise: enhanced oxidative stress reduction, adjustment of the pyruvate metabolism and catabolic oxygen consumption in response to oxygen and intracellular pH homeostasis, maintenance of osmotic balance and alteration of the fatty acid composition in response to carbon dioxide. We further evaluated the potential of industrial used MA to inhibit specific bacterial spoilage. No bacterial inhibition is predicted for 30%_CO<sub>2</sub>/70%_O<sub>2</sub> for the analyzed species, whereas 30%_CO<sub>2</sub>/70%_N<sub>2</sub> predictively inhibits <i>C. divergens</i> TMW21577 and <i>B. thermosphacta</i> TMW2.2101. Furthermore, species-specific metabolic pathways enabling different and preferential carbon source utilization were identified, which enable non-competitive coexistence of respective bacteria on meat, resulting in synergistic spoilage. In conclusion, this study gives mechanistically explanations of their acknowledged status as typical spoilage organisms on MAP meats.

### Keywords
Carnobacterium maltaromaticum, Carnobacterium divergens, Leuconostoc   gelidum subsp. gasicomitatum, Brochothrix thermosphacta, Meat-spoiling bacteria, Leuconostoc gelidum subsp. gelidum, Differential proteomics

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technische Universität München Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising GERMANY
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technische Universität München Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising GERMANY


