### Accession
PXD033334

### Title
Human RNase 4 Improves mRNA Sequence Characterization by LC-MS/MS.

### Description
With the rapid growth of synthetic messenger RNA (mRNA)-based therapeutics and vaccines, the development of analytical tools for characterization of long, complex RNAs has become essential. Tandem liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) permits direct assessment of the mRNA primary sequence and modifications thereof without conversion to cDNA or amplification. It relies upon digestion of mRNA with site-specific endoribonucleases to generate pools of short oligonucleotides that are then amenable to MS-based sequence analysis. Here, we showed that the uridine-specific human endoribonuclease hRNase 4 improves mRNA sequence coverage, in comparison with the benchmark enzyme RNase T1, by producing a large population of uniquely mappable cleavage products. Furthermore, we deployed hRNase 4 to characterize mRNAs fully substituted with 1-methylpseudouridine (m1Ψ) or 5-methoxyuridine (mo5U), as well as mRNAs selectively depleted of uridine–two key strategies to reduce synthetic mRNA immunogenicity. Lastly, we demonstrated that hRNase 4 enables direct assessment of the 5′ cap incorporation in in vitro synthesized mRNA. Collectively, this study highlights the power of hRNase 4 to interrogate mRNA sequence, identity, and modifications by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Each mRNA (3–10 μg) was mixed in a denaturing solution of 3 M urea in NEBuffer 1. To denature mRNA structure, the sample was incubated at 90°C for 10 min and quickly cooled to room temperature. The resultant cooled mRNA solution was diluted threefold in NEBuffer 1. For hRNase 4 digestion, between 1–3 μL of hRNase 4 and 160 units of T4 PNK (New England Biolabs) were added to the diluted mRNA mixture and incubated at 37°C for 2 h with shaking at 300 rpm. For RNaseT1 digestion, 1 μL of RNase T1 (New England Biolabs) and incubated at 37°C for 1 h with shaking at 300 rpm. The resultant digests were filtered utilizing a Ultrafree MC-GV 0.22 µm spin column (Millipore) at 13,400 rpm for 5 min.  LC-MS/MS was performed according to a protocol modified from Grünberg et al., 2021. Ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) separation of RNA oligonucleotides was performed on a Thermo Scientific Vanquish Horizon UHPLC system equipped with a DNAPacTM RP Column (2.1 x 50 mm, 4 mm) at 70 °C utilizing a 25-min 5-35% gradient of solvent A (1% hexafluoroisopropanol (HFIP), 0.1% N,N-diisopropylethylamine (DIEA), 1 μM EDTA) and increasing solvent B (80% Methanol, 0.075% HFIP, 0.0375% DIEA, 1 μM EDTA) at a 300 μL/min flow rate. High-resolution mass spectrometry was performed on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Plus orbitrap mass spectrometer operating under negative electrospray ionization mode (–ESI). Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis was performed in data-dependent acquisition mode (ddMS2). ss data was collected at a resolution of 70,000 (FWHM) at m/z 200. The top-5 masses in each intact mass spectrum (with dynamic exclusion) were subjected to HCD-fragmentation at a resolution of 35,000 (FWHM) and a normalized collision energy of 20%.

### Data Protocol
Tandem MS/MS data analysis was performed utilizing the Nucleic Acids Search Engine (NASE) (Wein et al., 2020) in Open-MS (version: 2.6.0) (Rost et al., 2016). Precursor and fragment ion mass cutoffs of 3 ppm were utilized. Na+/K+ adduct precursor masses, and 0 to +4 precursor isotopes between the charge states –1 to –20 were considered for analysis. Fragment ions as defined by (Mcluckey et al., 1992) (a-B, a, b, c, d, w, x, y, and z) were considered for analysis of tandem mass spectra. MS/MS data were searched against theoretical digests of the appropriate mRNA sequence with either RNaseT1 or hRNase 4 with up to two missed cleavages. Only 3′-phosphorylated or 2′,3′-hydroxylated cleavage products were considered in RNaseT1 or hRNase 4/T4 PNK digests, respectively. A target/decoy false discovery rate (FDR) utilizing shuffled oligonucleotides of 5% was applied. Exact duplicate oligonucleotides were removed for downstream sequence coverage calculations.

### Publication Abstract
With the rapid growth of synthetic messenger RNA (mRNA)-based therapeutics and vaccines, the development of analytical tools for characterization of long, complex RNAs has become essential. Tandem liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) permits direct assessment of the mRNA primary sequence and modifications thereof without conversion to cDNA or amplification. It relies upon digestion of mRNA with site-specific endoribonucleases to generate pools of short oligonucleotides that are then amenable to MS-based sequence analysis. Here, we showed that the uridine-specific human endoribonuclease hRNase 4 improves mRNA sequence coverage, in comparison with the benchmark enzyme RNase T1, by producing a larger population of uniquely mappable cleavage products. We deployed hRNase 4 to characterize mRNAs fully substituted with 1-methylpseudouridine (m1&#x3a8;) or 5-methoxyuridine (mo5U), as well as mRNAs selectively depleted of uridine-two key strategies to reduce synthetic mRNA immunogenicity. Lastly, we demonstrated that hRNase 4 enables direct assessment of the 5' cap incorporation into in vitro transcribed mRNA. Collectively, this study highlights the power of hRNase 4 to interrogate mRNA sequence, identity, and modifications by LC-MS/MS.

### Keywords
Mrna; human rnase4;

### Affiliations
New England Biolabs, Inc, 240 County Rd, Ipswich, MA, 01938, USA.
New England Biolabs

### Submitter
Eric Wolf

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan R. Correa Jr.
New England Biolabs, Inc, 240 County Rd, Ipswich, MA, 01938, USA.


