### Accession
PXD035666

### Title
Dynamic phosphoproteomics of BRS3 activation reveals Hippo signaling pathway for cell migration

### Description
Bombesin receptor subtype-3 (BRS3) is an orphan G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) that involved in a range of pathological and physiological processes, while its biological functions and underlying regulatory mechanisms remain largely unknown. Quantitative phosphoproteomics approach was employed in this study to comprehensively decipher the signal transductions that occurred upon intracellular BRS3 activation. Lung cancer cell line H1299-BRS3 was treated with MK-5046, an agonist of BRS3, for different durations. Harvested cellular proteins were digested and phosphopeptides were enriched by immobilized titanium (IV) ion affinity chromatography (Ti4+-IMAC) for label-free quantification analysis. In total, 12,052 phosphopeptides were identified, corresponding to 4,015 phosphoproteins and 10,820 phosphosites. Data analysis revealed that 27 phosphopeptides corresponding to 6 proteins were involved in Hippo signaling pathway, which was significantly regulated by the activation of BRS3. Verification experiments demonstrated down-regulation of Hippo signaling pathway could induce the dephosphorylation and nucleus localization of Yes-associated protein (YAP), which further confirmed its association with cell migration through kinase inhibition. Our data collectively demonstrate that BRS3 activation contributes to cell migration through down-regulating Hippo signaling pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Harvested cells were washed with PBS and lysed in 8 M Urea which containing PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor and complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor at the ratio of 1:100 (v/v) and 1:50 (v/v). Cellular proteins were digested by trypsin overnight at 37°C through using Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) approach as previous described. Three biological replicates were prepared in parallel for each sample, which were subjected for label-free quantification (LFQ). For proteome analysis, 30 μg proteins were digested to prepare enough samples for three technical repeats. For phosphoproteome analysis, 300 μg proteins were digested and aliquoted. Phosphorylated peptides were enriched from the 3 aliquots through Ti4+-IMAC method  in parallel. Briefly, the digested peptides were mixed with prepared Ti4+-IMAC material in a ratio of 1:25 (w/w) and vortexed for 30 min. After centrifuged at 15,000 g for 5 min, the supernatant was removed and the sediment was washed in turn by washing buffer 1 (50% ACN with 6% TFA and 200 mM NaCl) and washing buffer 2 (30% ACN with 0.1% TFA). The captured phosphorylated peptides on Ti4+-IMAC materials were eluted by 10% NH4OH with ultrasound and vortex.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were analyzed with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.7.0) by searching against the UniProtKB human database (release 2017_11_28, 20244 entries). Maximal two missed cleavage sites were allowed. The fixed modification was cysteine carbamidomethylation while the variable modifications were methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation (pS/pT/pY) of proteins. The mass tolerances for precursors and fragment ions were 6 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. The criterial of at least two unique peptides and false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1% at the protein level were applied for protein identification. Label-free quantification (LFQ) analysis of the proteomics and phosphoproteomics data was based on intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ). The coefficients of our mass spectrometry data were calculated by the Perseus software (version 1.6.5.0) (21). The localization probabilities of phosphosites > 0.75, with the fold change (FC) ≥ 2 or ≤ 0.5 and p-value < 0.05 were the criteria for dysregulated candidates screening.

### Publication Abstract
Bombesin receptor subtype-3 (BRS3) is an orphan G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) that is involved in a variety of pathological and physiological processes, while its biological functions and underlying regulatory mechanisms remain largely unknown. In this study, a quantitative phosphoproteomics approach was employed to comprehensively decipher the signal transductions that occurred upon intracellular BRS3 activation. The lung cancer cell line H1299-BRS3 was treated with MK-5046, an agonist of BRS3, for different durations. Harvested cellular proteins were digested and phosphopeptides were enriched by immobilized titanium (IV) ion affinity chromatography (Ti<sup>4+</sup>-IMAC) for label-free quantification (LFQ) analysis. A total of 11,938 phosphopeptides were identified, corresponding to 3,430 phosphoproteins and 10,820 phosphosites. Data analysis revealed that 27 phosphopeptides corresponding to six proteins were involved in the Hippo signaling pathway, which was significantly regulated by BRS3 activation. Verification experiments demonstrated that downregulation of the Hippo signaling pathway caused by BRS3 activation could induce the dephosphorylation and nucleus localization of the Yes-associated protein (YAP), and its association with cell migration was further confirmed by kinase inhibition. Our data collectively demonstrate that BRS3 activation contributes to cell migration through downregulation of the Hippo signaling pathway.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Signaling transductions, Gpcr, Hippo signaling pathway, Cell migration

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology

### Submitter
miao guo

### Lab Head
Dr Hua xiao
School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology


