### Accession
PXD018989

### Title
Phosphate and phosphite differentially impact the proteome and phosphoproteome of Arabidopsis suspension cell cultures

### Description
Phosphorus is an essential limited nutrient for plant growth and modern agricultural productivity. A comprehensive understanding of how plants respond to phosphate starvation is essential to develop more phosphate-use efficient crops. Here we quantified protein-level responses to phosphate (PO4-) and phosphite (PO3-) in Arabidopsis thaliana suspension cells, relative to a phosphate-starved state using label-free proteomics and phosphoproteomics. Phosphite is similarly sensed and taken up by plants as phosphate but cannot be used as a source of phosphorus. Phosphite is hence a useful tool to delineate between non-specific processes related to sensing and transport, and specific responses to phosphorus nutrition. We find that responses to phosphate and phosphite occur mainly at the level of protein phosphorylation, complemented by limited changes in protein abundance, primarily in protein translation, and phosphate transport and scavenging proteins. Phosphorylation changes in proteins involved in core processes such as translation, RNA splicing and kinase signalling are especially important in phosphate starvation. We also find differential phosphorylation in response to phosphate and phosphite in 69 proteins, including splicing factors, translation factors, the PHT1;4 phosphate transporter and the HAT1 histone acetyltransferase—potential phospho-switches sensing changes in phosphorus nutrition. Our study hence illuminates several new aspects of the phosphate-starvation response and identifies important targets for further investigation and crop improvement.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis cell culture was lyophilized, then ground to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen and extracted using filter-assisted sample preparation with a 30K MWCO amicon filter as described by . Digested peptides (500ug) were desalted using C18 Sep-Pak columns (Waters), followed by immediate enrichment of phosphorylated peptides using NP‐Ti02 (Sachtopore; SNX 030S 005 #9205/1639) as previously described (Wiśniewski et al., 2009) (Uhrig et al., 2019). Unbound peptides and NP‐Ti02 enriched Ti02 peptides were dried, dissolved in 3% ACN/0.1% TFA, desalted using ZipTip C18 pipette tips (ZTC18S960; Millipore), then dried and dissolved in 3.0% ACN/0.1% FA prior to mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.14 (http://www.maxquant.org/; (Cox & Mann, 2008; Tyanova et al., 2016)). MS/MS spectra were searched with the Andromeda search engine against a decoyed (reversed) version of the Arabidopsis protein database from TAIR (release TAIR10) concatenated with a collection of 261 known mass spectrometry contaminants. Trypsin specificity was set to one missed cleavage and a protein and PSM false discovery rate of 1% was deployed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven and Match between runs along with requantify options enabled. Fixed modifications included: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, while variable modifications included: methionine oxidation (both proteome and phosphoproteome analyses) and phosphorylated serine, threonine and tyrosine (pSTY) for analysis of the phosphoproteome.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphorus absorbed in the form of phosphate (H<sub>2</sub> PO<sub>4</sub><sup>-</sup> ) is an essential but limiting macronutrient for plant growth and agricultural productivity. A comprehensive understanding of how plants respond to phosphate starvation is essential for the development of more phosphate-efficient crops. Here we employed label-free proteomics and phosphoproteomics to quantify protein-level responses to 48&#xa0;h of phosphate versus phosphite (H<sub>2</sub> PO<sub>3</sub><sup>-</sup> ) resupply to phosphate-deprived Arabidopsis thaliana suspension cells. Phosphite is similarly sensed, taken up and transported by plant cells as phosphate, but cannot be metabolized or used as a nutrient. Phosphite is thus a useful tool for differentiating between non-specific processes related to phosphate sensing and transport and specific responses to phosphorus nutrition. We found that responses to phosphate versus phosphite resupply occurred mainly at the level of protein phosphorylation, complemented by limited changes in protein abundance, primarily in protein translation, phosphate transport and scavenging, and central metabolism proteins. Altered phosphorylation of proteins involved in core processes such as translation, RNA splicing and kinase signaling was especially important. We also found differential phosphorylation in response to phosphate and phosphite in 69 proteins, including splicing factors, translation factors, the PHT1;4 phosphate transporter and the HAT1 histone acetyltransferase - potential phospho-switches signaling changes in phosphorus nutrition. Our study illuminates several new aspects of the phosphate starvation response and identifies important targets for further investigation and potential crop improvement.

### Keywords
Phosphate-nutrition, Quantitative proteomics, Arabidopsis, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
University of Alberta

### Submitter
Richard Uhrig

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Uhrig
University of Alberta


