### Accession
PXD023957

### Title
The phosphorylation of the Smad2/3 linker region by Nemo-like kinase regulates TGF-β signaling

### Description
Smad2 and Smad3 (Smad2/3) primarily mediates the transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) signaling that drives cell proliferation, differentiation, and migration. The dynamics of the Smad2/3 phosphorylation provides the key mechanism for regulating the TGF-β signaling pathway. Here we identified NLK as a novel regulator of TGF-β signaling pathway via modulating the phosphorylation of Smad2/3 in the linker region.

### Sample Protocol
Flag-NLK and NLK (K155M) were expressed in HEK293T cells and immunoprecipitated with anti-FLAG M2-agarose. Immunoprecipitates were washed five times with NETN buffer containing a high concentration of salt (0.5 M NaCl). The proteins were eluted by using Flag peptides (Sigma-Aldrich). Recombinant GST-tagged Smad2, GST-tagged Smad3 and GST-tagged point-mutated Smad3 were produced in Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3) cells and puriﬁed with glutathione sepharose 4B (GE Healthcare) followed by gel filtration chromatography. The purified GST-tagged Smad proteins were incubated with aliquots of immunoprecipitated NLK in 20 µl of kinase buffer containing 5 µCi [γ-32P] ATP at 30°C for 30 minutes. The samples were resolved by SDS-PAGE. The gel bands of interest were excised from the gel, reduced with 5 mM of DTT and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide which was followed by in-gel digestion with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) at 37℃ overnight and chymotrypsin (Promega) at 25℃ overnight. The peptides were extracted twice with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 50% acetonitrile aqueous solution for 30 min and then dried in a speedvac. Peptides were redissolved in 20μl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 6 μl of extracted peptides were analyzed by Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the peptides were separated by a 65 min gradient elution at a flow rate 0.30 µl/min with a Thermo-Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system, which was directly interfaced with a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer. The analytical column was a home-made fused silica capillary column (75 µm ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA) packed with C-18 resin (300 Å, 5 µm, Varian, Lexington, MA). Mobile phase consisted of 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The Q Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode using Xcalibur 2.0.2.1462 software and there was a single full-scan mass spectrum in the orbitrap (350-1800 m/z, 70,000 resolution) followed by 10 data-dependent MS/MS scans at 29% normalized collision energy (HCD).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra from each LC-MS/MS run were searched against the Smad2.fasta or Smad3.fasta from UniProt using an in-house Proteome Discoverer (Version PD1.4, Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA). The search criteria were as follows: no enzyme was choosed; two missed cleavage was allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) were set as the fixed modifications; the oxidation (M) and phosphoylation were set as the variable modification; precursor ion mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm for all MS acquired in an orbitrap mass analyzer; and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.02Da for all MS2 spectra acquired. Proteome Discoverer node ptmRS was used for analysis and mapping of peptide/protein phosphorylation sites. ptmRS Best Site Probabilities displays the most likely positions of the modifications and their site score for each PSM. For each modification site, this value is an estimate of the probability (0–100%) that the site is truly modified. Any ptmRS site probabilities above 75% indicate that a site is truly modified.

### Publication Abstract
Smad2 and Smad3 (Smad2/3) are structurally similar proteins that primarily mediate the transforming growth factor-&#x3b2; (TGF-&#x3b2;) signaling responsible for driving cell proliferation, differentiation, and migration. The dynamics of the Smad2/3 phosphorylation provide the key mechanism for regulating the TGF-&#x3b2; signaling pathway, but the details surrounding this phosphorylation remain unclear. Here, using in&#xa0;vitro kinase assay coupled with mass spectrometry, we identified for the first time that nemo-like kinase (NLK) regulates TGF-&#x3b2; signaling via modulation of Smad2/3 phosphorylation in the linker region. TGF-&#x3b2;-mediated transcriptional and cellular responses are suppressed by NLK overexpression, whereas NLK depletion exerts opposite effects. Specifically, we discovered that NLK associates with Smad3 and phosphorylates the designated serine residues located in the linker region of Smad2 and Smad3, which inhibits phosphorylation at the C terminus, thereby decreasing the duration of TGF-&#x3b2; signaling. Overall, this work demonstrates that phosphorylation on the linker region of Smad2/3 by NLK counteracts the canonical phosphorylation in response to TGF-&#x3b2; signals, thus providing new insight into the mechanisms governing TGF-&#x3b2; signaling transduction.

### Keywords
Smad2, Smad3, Phosphorylation, Nlk

### Affiliations
Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, National Cancer Center/National Clinical Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021, China
State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100005, China

### Submitter
Yanchi Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Song
State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100005, China


