### Accession
PXD019790

### Title
Hippocampal synaptoproteomic changes of susceptibility and resilience of rats to chronic social isolation

### Description
The susceptibility to chronic social isolation (CSIS) is associated with development of major depression (MD). Recent studies relate MD with altered expression of synaptic proteins in specific brain regions, whereby some individuals exposed to the stressors are resistant to the stress. To explore the neurobiological underpinnings and identify candidate biomarkers for MD, a comparative proteomic approach was used to map hippocampal synaptic protein alterations of rats exposed to 6 weeks of CSIS, an animal model of depression. This model generates two stress-response phenotypes, reflecting CSIS-sensitive (depressive-like behaviour) and CSIS-resilience, assessed by sucrose preference test. Our aim was to characterize the synaptoproteome changes representative of potential long-term changes in protein expression underlying susceptibility or resilience to stress.

### Sample Protocol
The synaptosomal fractions of CSIS-sensitive, CSIS-resilient and control rats were pooled so that each sample contained the same amount of total protein, which was then heated to 95°C for 5min and cooled on ice prior to loading onto NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris Gels (life technologies). SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) was performed according to the manufacturer's specification. Proteins were fixed within the polyacrylamide matrix by incubating the entire gel in 5% acetic acid in 1:1 (v/v) water:methanol for 30min. After Coomassie staining (60min), the gel slab was rinsed with water (60min) and each lane was excised, divided into 3 gel fragments (samples) and cut into small pieces. The proteins were then in-gel destained (100mM ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile 1:1 (v/v)), reduced (10mM DTT), alkylated (50mM Iodoacetamide) and finally Trypsin-digested by overnight incubation at 37°C. The generated peptides were collected from the gel pieces, which were further subjected to a peptide extraction step with an acidic (1.5% formic acid) acetonitrile (66%) solution. Both peptide containing samples were combined and dried down in a vacuum centrifuge. Dried peptides were re-dissolved in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and loaded onto a C18 precolumn (Acclaim; Dionex) using a RSLC nano HPLC system (Dionex). Peptides were then eluted with an aqueous-organic gradient, resolved on a C18 column (Acclaim; Dionex) with a flow rate of 300nl/min and electrosprayed into a LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). A Triversa Automate (Advion Biosciences) was used as an ion source. Each scan cycle consisted of one FTMS full scan and up to seven ITMS dependent MS/MS scans of the seven most intense ions. Dynamic exclusion (30s), mass width (10ppm) and monoisotopic precursor selection were enabled. All analyses were performed in positive ion mode.

### Data Protocol
Extracted MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot database using the Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3) search engine (Thermo Fisher Scientific) accepting common variable modifications and one missed tryptic cleavage. Peptide tolerance was 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance was 0.5 Da. All protein identification experiments were carried out using the corresponding decoy database and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. The relative quantification of the proteins in the three subgroups was performed with the label free quantification (LFQ) tool of the Sieve 2.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a mass error tolerance of 10ppm und a retention time shift of 1min. Proteins identified by only one (unique) peptide match were excluded from bioinformatic analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The susceptibility of an individual to chronic social isolation (CSIS) stress may cause major depression (MD) whereby some individuals are resistant to the stress. Recent studies relate MD with altered expression of synaptic proteins in specific brain regions. To explore the neurobiological underpinnings and identify candidate biomarkers of susceptibility or resilience to CSIS, a comparative proteomic approach was used to map hippocampal synaptic protein alterations of rats exposed to 6 weeks of CSIS, an animal model of depression. This model generates two stress-response phenotypes: CSIS-sensitive (depressive-like behaviour) and CSIS-resilience assessed by means of sucrose preference and forced swim tests. Our aim was to characterize the synaptoproteome changes representative of potential long-term changes in protein expression underlying susceptibility or resilience to stress. Proteomic data showed increased expression of glycolytic enzymes, the energy-related mitochondrial proteins, actin cytoskeleton, signalling transduction and synaptic transmission proteins in CSIS-sensitive rats. Protein levels of glutamate-related enzymes such as glutamate dehydrogenase and glutamine synthetase were also increased. CSIS-resilient rats showed similar proteome changes, however with a weaker increase compared to CSIS-sensitive rats. The main difference was observed in the level of protein expression of vesicle-mediated transport proteins. Nonetheless, only few proteins were uniquely up-regulated in the CSIS-resilient rats, whereby Cytochrome b-c1 complex subunit 2, mitochondrial (Uqcrc2) and Voltage-dependent anion-selective channel protein 1 (Vdac1) were uniquely down-regulated. Identified altered activated pathways and potential protein biomarkers may help us better understand the molecular mechanisms underlying synaptic neurotransmission in MD or resilience, crucial for development of new therapeutics.

### Keywords
Rat, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Synaptosomal fraction, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Institute for Clinical Chemistry, Medical Faculty Mannheim of the University of Heidelberg
Institute for Clinical Chemistry, Medical Faculty Mannheimof the University of Heidelberg (lab head)

### Submitter
Victor Costina

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Findeisen
Institute for Clinical Chemistry, Medical Faculty Mannheimof the University of Heidelberg (lab head)


