### Accession
PXD040224

### Title
Proteomics of 2 postmortem Human Brain Regions for Identification of Cognitive Resilience Factors

### Description
We implemented an integrative systems-level analysis of multi-region postmortem human brain proteomics derived from the Religious Order and Rush Memory and Aging Project (ROSMAP) to identify proteins and pathways significantly altered in resilient cases. ROSMAP is an information-rich longitudinal cohort-based study in which participants enroll without dementia, undergo annual cognitive and clinical assessments and donate their brains at death (12). Multiplex tandem mass tag mass spectrometry (TMT-MS)-based proteomic data was implemented for a correlation network analysis. Data from an independent brain proteome wide association study (PWAS) of cognitive trajectory was integrated with the brain network to robustly prioritize protein communities associated with cognitive resilience. This revealed proteins linked to synaptic biology and cellular energetics. Neuritin (NRN1) was prioritized as a hub that co-expressed with a community of proteins with high correlation to cognitive stability in life and is known for important roles in synaptic maturation and stability.

### Sample Protocol
Human brain case classification Paired brain tissue from frontal cortex (BA6) and temporal cortex (BA37) from Rush OSMAP 256 samples. Postmortem neuritic plaque extent by CERAD criteria & neurofibrillary tangle pathology as Braak staging was assessed. Case traits: https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn22695346. Cases with CERAD of 0-1 and Braak 0-3 without dementia at last eval. were defined control (if Braak=3, then CERAD must =0); cases CERAD 1-3 & Braak 3-6 without dementia at last eval. were defined AsymAD; cases CERAD 2-3 and Braak 3-6 with dementia at last eval. were AD. Dementia was defined at MMSE score<24.  Brain tissue homogenization ~100 mg wet tissue weight of brain tissue homogenized in lysis buffer (8M urea, 10 mM Tris, 100 mM NaH2PO4, pH 8.5) with HALT inhibitor cocktail (Thermo) using a Bullet Blender (Next Advance) in a RINO tube (Next Advance) with ~100 ul of steel beads (0.9–2.0 mm, Next Advance) and 500 ul of lysis buffer and homogenized in a Bullet Blender at 4°C (2 x5 min). Lysates in Eppendorf LoBind tubes sonicated for 3x 5s active sonication at 30% amplitude then 15s on ice were centrifuged for 5 min @15000g & supernatant transferred to a new tube. Protein concentration was determined by BCA (Pierce) and 1-dimensional SDS-PAGE was run for Coomassie stain as QC for protein integrity & equal loading.  Protein digestion 100 ug of each sample was normalized to equal volume with additional lysis buffer, reduced with 1 mM DTT at RT for 30 min, followed by 5 mM IAA in the dark for 30 min. LysC (Wako) at 1:100 (wt/wt) was added; digestion proceeded overnight. Samples were seven-fold diluted with 50 mM NH4CO3. Trypsin (Promega) was added at 1:50 (wt/wt), and digestion occured for 16 h. The peptide solutions were acidified to a final concentration of 1% (vol/vol) FA and 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA and desalted with a 30 mg HLB column (Oasis). Each HLB column was first rinsed with 1 ml of methanol, washed with 1 ml of 50% (vol/vol) ACN and equilibrated with 2× 1 ml of 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA. Samples were loaded onto the column and washed with 2× 1 ml of 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA. Elution was performed with 2 volumes of 0.5 ml of 50% (vol/vol) ACN. Equal peptide sample amounts were pooled as GIS, split and labeled for each TMT batch. Eluates were dried in a SpeedVac.  TMT peptide labeling Cases were randomized by age, sex, PMI, diagnosis, into 26 total batches. Peptides from each case and the GIS pool(1-2/batch) were labeled with a TMT 11-plex kit (Thermo 90406). Each sample (100 ug peptides) resuspended in 100 uL 100 mM TEAB buffer +5mg TMT labeling reagent @ RT in anhydrous ACN (256 ul) was added and vortexed for 5 min; 41 ul of each TMT channel mix was transferred to the peptide solutions and allowed to incubate for 1h at RT. Reactions quenched with 8 ul 5% (vol/vol) hydroxylamine (Pierce) & channels were combined, dried by SpeedVac (Labconco) to ~150 ul & diluted with 1 ml of 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA and acidified to a final concentration of 1% (vol/vol) FA and 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA. Labeled peptides were desalted with a 200 mg C18 Sep-Pak column (Waters). Each Sep-Pak column was activated with 3 ml of methanol, washed with 3 ml of 50% (vol/vol) ACN and equilibrated with 2× 3 ml of 0.1% TFA. The samples were then column-loaded and washed with 2× 3 ml of 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA, followed by 2 ml of 1% (vol/vol) FA. Elution with 2 volumes of 1.5 ml 50% (vol/vol) ACN preceded drying to completeness using a SpeedVac.

### Data Protocol
Brain database searching and protein quantification All raw MS data files (624 total files generated across 26 batches) were analyzed in the Proteome Discover software suite (version 2.3, ThermoFisher) and MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProtKB human proteome database (downloaded April 2015 with 90,411 total sequences). The Sequest HT search engine was used with the following parameters: fully tryptic specificity; maximum of two missed cleavages; minimum peptide length of 6; fixed modifications for TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.02146 Da); variable modification for oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (+0.984 Da); precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm; and fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered to a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% using the Percolator node. Following spectral alignment, peptides were assembled into proteins and further filtered based on the combined probabilities of their constituent peptides to a final FDR of 1%. Multiconsensus was performed to achieve parsimony across individual batches. In cases of redundancy, shared peptides were assigned to the protein sequence in adherence with the principles of parsimony. Reporter ions were quantified from MS2 scans using integration tolerance of 20 ppm with the most confident centroid setting. Only unique and razor (i.e., parsimonious) peptides were considered for quantification.  Brain data preprocessing A total of 10,426 high confidence, master proteins were identified across all 26 TMTM batches, but only proteins quantified in >50% of samples were included in subsequent analyses (n=7,787 proteins). Log2 abundances were normalized as a ratio dividing by the central tendency of pooled global internal standards (GIS). As previously applied, batch correction was performed using a Tunable Approach for Median Polish of Ratio (TAMPOR; https://github.com/edammer/TAMPOR), an iterative median polish algorithm for removing technical variance across batch. Multidemensional scaling (MDS) plots were used to visualize batch contributions to variation before and after batch correction. Network connectivity was used to remove outliers, that is samples that were greater than 3 standard deviations below the mean. Finally, non-parametric bootstrap regression was performed to remove the potentially confounding covariates of age, sex and post-mortem interval (PMI). Each trait was subtracted times the median coefficient from 1000 iterations of fitting for each protein, while protecting for diagnosis (Control, AsymAD, AD) in the regression model.

### Publication Abstract
The molecular mechanisms and pathways enabling certain individuals to remain cognitively normal despite high levels of Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology remain incompletely understood. These cognitively normal people with AD pathology are described as preclinical or asymptomatic AD (AsymAD) and appear to exhibit cognitive resilience to the clinical manifestations of AD dementia. Here we present a comprehensive network-based approach from cases clinically and pathologically defined as asymptomatic AD to map resilience-associated pathways and extend mechanistic validation. Multiplex tandem mass tag MS (TMT-MS) proteomic data (n&#xa0;= 7787 proteins) was generated on brain tissue from Brodmann area 6 and Brodmann area 37 (n&#xa0;= 109 cases, n&#xa0;= 218 total samples) and evaluated by consensus weighted gene correlation network analysis. Notably, neuritin (NRN1), a neurotrophic factor previously linked to cognitive resilience, was identified as a hub protein in a module associated with synaptic biology. To validate the function of NRN1 with regard to the neurobiology of AD, we conducted microscopy and physiology experiments in a cellular model of AD. NRN1 provided dendritic spine resilience against amyloid-&#x3b2; (A&#x3b2;) and blocked A&#x3b2;-induced neuronal hyperexcitability in cultured neurons. To better understand the molecular mechanisms of resilience to A&#x3b2; provided by NRN1, we assessed how exogenous NRN1 alters the proteome by TMT-MS (n&#xa0;= 8238 proteins) of cultured neurons and integrated the results with the AD brain network. This revealed overlapping synapse-related biology that linked NRN1-induced changes in cultured neurons with human pathways associated with cognitive resilience. Collectively, this highlights the utility of integrating the proteome from the human brain and model systems to advance our understanding of resilience-promoting mechanisms and prioritize therapeutic targets that mediate resilience to AD.

### Keywords
Dlpfc, Human brain, Itc, Proteome discoverer

### Affiliations
Emory University
Professor, Emory University School of Medicine Departments of Biochemistry and Neurology

### Submitter
Eric Dammer

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas T. Seyfried, DPhil
Professor, Emory University School of Medicine Departments of Biochemistry and Neurology


