### Accession
PXD013594

### Title
Investigating the dynamics of the SecA–SecYEG complex dynamic by HDX-MS

### Description
We employ hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) to investigate the conformational dynamics required to facilitate based Brownian ratchet mechanism for protein secretion (by the SecA-SecYEG complex).

### Sample Protocol
1. Preparation: To form the SecA-SecYEG complex, SecYEG and SecA were mixed and incubated for 10 min on ice.  2. Sample labeling: 5 µl of SecA or the SecA-SecYEG complex was diluted into 95 ml of deuteration buffer (20 mM Tris pH 8, 2 mM MgCl2, 50 mM KCl, and 0.02 % (w/v) dodecyl-maltoside DDM in D2O). Deuteration was carried out at 25C. The proteins were labelled by incubation in deuteration buffer for 0.25, 1, 5, and 30 minutes. For experiments analysing the Sec complex in the presence of the nucleotides, 1 mM of either the non-hydrolysable AMPPNP or ADP was added to the protein mixture and to equilibrium or deuteration buffer.  3. Quenching and Online digestion: Deuteration was quenched with 100 L of quench buffer (0.7 % (v/v) formic acid and 0.1 % (w/v) DDM) at 1 C and a pH 2.4. Protein digestion to peptides was performed at 25C using an Enzymate online digestion column (Waters) in 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid at a flow rate of 200 mL/min.  4. Liquid chromatography and Mass spectrometry: The peptides are eluted from the trapping column to the analytical column for rapid UPLC separation. Peptides were then ionized by positive electrospray into a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters). A 20-30 V trap collision energy ramp was utilised to capture the MSE data.

### Data Protocol
 LC/MS data for undeuterated samples are processed in ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS). PLGS is used for quantitative and qualitative proteomics research. Deuterated samples are then processed in DynamX Software. Both PLGS and DynamX are available from Waters. DynamX is dedicated HDX software which automatically calculates the deuterium uptakes of each peptide from undeuterated to deuterated time-points. The calculated uptakes are then displayed is several formats such as: uptake charts, difference plots, and heat maps.

### Publication Abstract
The bacterial Sec translocon is a multi-protein complex responsible for translocating diverse proteins across the plasma membrane. For post-translational protein translocation, the Sec-channel - SecYEG - associates with the motor protein SecA to mediate the ATP-dependent transport of pre-proteins across the membrane. Previously, a diffusional-based Brownian ratchet mechanism for protein secretion has been proposed; the structural dynamics required to facilitate this mechanism remain unknown. Here, we employ hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) to reveal striking nucleotide-dependent conformational changes in the Sec protein-channel from <i>Escherichia coli</i>. In addition to the ATP-dependent opening of SecY, reported previously, we observe a counteracting, and ATP-dependent, constriction of SecA around the pre-protein. ATP binding causes SecY to open and SecA to close; while, ADP produced by hydrolysis, has the opposite effect. This alternating behaviour could help impose the directionality of the Brownian ratchet for protein transport through the Sec machinery.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Seca–secyeg

### Affiliations
Lecturer in Chemical Systems Biology Department of Chemistry King's College London
King's College London

### Submitter
Zainab Ahdash

### Lab Head
Dr Argyris Politis
Lecturer in Chemical Systems Biology Department of Chemistry King's College London


