### Accession
PXD023550

### Title
The Pentose Phosphate Pathway in pathogenic Francisella

### Description
Metabolic pathways are now considered as intrinsic virulence attributes of pathogenic bacteria and hence represent potential targets for anti-bacterial strategies. Here, we addressed the role of the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) and its connections with other metabolic pathways in the pathophysiology of Francisella novicida. We have previously shown that this intracellular bacterial pathogen used gluconeogenesis to metabolize host-derived nutrients in the cytosolic compartment of infected macrophages. Francisella species, which lacks the oxidative branch of the PPP, are equipped with all the genes of the non-oxidative branch (i.e.  tktA, tal, rpiA and rpe, encoding transketolase, transaldolase, ribose-phosphate isomerase and ribulose phosphate epimerase, respectively).  The involvement of the PPP in the early stage of intracellular life cycle of F. novicida was first demonstrated with the study of PPP inactivation mutants. Indeed, inactivation of tktA, rpiA or rpe genes, severely impaired intramacrophagic multiplication during the first 24–hours. However, time-lapse video microscopy demonstrated that rpiA and rpe mutants were able to resume late intracellular bacterial multiplication. To get further insight into the links between the PPP and other metabolic networks of the bacterium, we next performed a thorough proteo-metabolomic analysis of these mutants. We show that the PPP constitutes a major bacterial metabolic hub with multiple connections with glycolysis, tricarboxylic acid cycle and other metabolic pathways, such as fatty acid degradation and sulfur metabolism. Hence, our study highlights how, by its multiple connections with other metabolic pathways, PPP is instrumental to Francisella pathogenesis and growth in its intracellular niche.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion: FASP (Filter-aided sample preparation) procedure for protein digestion was performed as previously described, using 30 kDa MWCO centrifugal filter units (Microcon, Millipore, Cat No MRCF0R030). Briefly, sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS, 2% final) was added to 30 μg of each lysate to increase solubility of the proteins, in a final volume of 120 μL. Proteins were reduced with 0.1M dithiotreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 60 °C, then applied to the filters, mixed with 200 μL of 8M urea, 100mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8 (UA buffer), and finally centrifuged for 15 min at 15,000 x g. In order to remove detergents and DTT, the filters were washed twice with 200 μl of UA buffer. Alkylation was carried out by incubation for 20 min in the dark with 50mM iodoacetamide. Filters were then washed twice with 100 μl of UA buffer (15,000 x g for 15 min), followed by two washes with 100 μl of ABC buffer (15,000 x g for 10 min), to remove urea. All centrifugation steps were performed at room temperature. Finally, trypsin was added in 1:30 ratio and digestion were achieved by overnight incubation at 37 °C. NanoLC-MS/MS protein identification and quantification: Samples were vacuum dried, and resuspended in 30 μL of 10% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for LC-MS/MS. For each run, 1 μL was injected in a nanoRSLC-QExactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000, ThermoScientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (Pepmap C18, Thermo Scienfitic). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient of 120 min. Two blanks were run between triplicates to prevent sample carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top-10 acquisition method. Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3Å~106 counts, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1Å~105. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000m/z. MS and MS/MS scans were recorded in profile mode. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s duration. Three replicates of each sample were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data processing following nanoLC-MS/MS acquisition: The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.8.30 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot F. novicida database (release 2016, 1 722 entries). To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set a mass deviation of 3 and 20 ppm respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates at the protein and peptide levels were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously. The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Proteins were quantified according to the MaxQuant label-free algorithm using LFQ intensities 71, 72; protein quantification was obtained using at least 1 peptide per protein. Statistical and bioinformatic analysis, including heatmaps, profile plots, and clustering, were performed with Perseus software (version 1.5.5.31) freely available at www.perseus-framework.org73. For statistical comparison, we set two groups, WT and ΔtktA, each containing four biological replicates. Each sample was run in technical triplicates as well. We then filtered the data to keep only proteins with at least 3 valid values out 4 in at least one group. Next, the data were imputed to fill missing data points by creating a Gaussian distribution of random numbers with a SD of 33% relative to the SD of the measured values and 2.5 SD downshift of the mean to simulate the distribution of low signal values. We performed an T test, FDR<0.001, S0 = 1. Hierarchical clustering of proteins that survived the test was performed in Perseus on logarithmic scaled LFQ intensities after z-score normalization of the data, using Euclidean distances.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Intracellular parasitism, Francisella tularensis., Metabolic adaptation, Pentose phosphate pathway

### Affiliations
Plateforme Protéome Institut Necker, PPN, Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker INSERM US24-CNRS UMS 3633
Proteomics Platform Necker, PPN-3P5, Structure Fédérative de Recherche SFR Necker, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France

### Submitter
Cerina Chhuon

### Lab Head
Dr Guerrera Ida Chiara
Plateforme Protéome Institut Necker, PPN, Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker INSERM US24-CNRS UMS 3633


### SDRF

