### Accession
PXD027886

### Title
Identifying Layilin Interaction Partners

### Description
This project aimed to identify the ligand for the cell surface receptor and C-type lectin laylin, a surface receptor with unknown function.

### Sample Protocol
Layilin-interacting proteins were identified using affinity purification/mass spectrometry. Briefly, A375 cells were SILAC labeled and lysed before incubation with a bead-bound layilin multimer (COMP) in the presence of calcium or EDTA. Both forward and reverse SILAC modes were used. Protein pulldowns were digested with trypsin, desalted, separated using C18 reverse phase chromatography, and analyzed using a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched using PEAKS Online (version 1.5). PEAKS Q was used for SILAC analysis. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used a fixed modification, with deamidation (NQ), acetylation (N-term), and the SILAC labels used as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Layilin is a small type I transmembrane receptor thought to bridge extracellular ligands with the cytoskeleton through its intracellular interactions with the scaffolding protein talin. Recent bulk- and single-cell RNA sequencing experiments have repeatedly found layilin to be highly upregulated in key T&#xa0;cell sub-populations in multiple disease states, suggesting its importance to the adaptive immune response. Despite this prevalence, little is known about layilin's precise role in mediating extracellular interactions or how these interactions can be modulated in disease states. Here we take advantage of layilin's dependence on calcium ions to discover its interactions with highly glycosylated type II, IV, V, and VI collagens. Toward exploring layilin's role in disease, we exploited the Ca<sup>2+</sup> dependence in a differential phage display strategy to engineer species cross-reactive antibodies that block this interaction.

### Keywords
T cell, Collagen, Layilin, C-type lectin

### Affiliations
University of California, San Francisco

### Submitter
James Byrnes

### Lab Head
Dr James Wells
University of California, San Francisco


