### Accession
PXD022974

### Title
Lamin B1 acetylation slows the G1 to S cell cycle transition through inhibition of DNA repair

### Description
Emerging evidence points to post translational modification (PTM) of nuclear lamins as a key regulator of their diverse roles in nuclear organization, chromatin stability, DNA repair, and cell cycle progression. However, the functions of many of these PTMs remain uncharacterized. Here, we demonstrate a role for acetylation at lysine 134 on lamin B1 in slowing the G1 to S cell cycle transition by inhibiting resolution of DNA damage by canonical nonhomologous end joining.

### Sample Protocol
For miniTurbo experiments, cells were treated with 500 uM biotin for 10 min to activate the biotin ligase prior to collection and storage at -80 °C. Cell lysates were lysed and biotinylated proteins were captured by streptavidin-IP. On bead followed by in solution trypsin digestions was performed. Samples were StageTip desalted and were analyzed by a label-free method on an LTQ Orbitrap. All other samples were lysed, trypsinized overnight, StageTip desalted, and analyzed by a label-free method on an LTQ Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed via Proteome Discover 2.4. Subsequent filtering was performed in Microsoft Excel. MS1 quantification of acetyl K134 was performed in Skyline v20.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lamin, Lamin b1, Nonhomologous end joining, Dna repair, Acetylation, Turboid

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University

### Submitter
Laura Murray

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana M. Cristea
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University


