### Accession
PXD035045

### Title
Ubiquitinome profiling reveals in vivo UBE2D3 targets and implicates UBE2D3 in protein quality control.

### Description
Ubiquitination has crucial roles in many cellular processes and dysregulation of ubiquitin machinery enzymes can result in various forms of pathogenesis. Cells only have a limited set of ubiquitin-conjugating (E2) enzymes to support the ubiquitination of many cellular targets. As individual E2 enzymes have many different substrates and interactions between E2 enzymes and their substrates can be transient, it is challenging to define all in vivo substrates of an individual E2 and the cellular processes it affects. Particularly challenging in this respect is UBE2D3, an E2 enzyme with promiscuous activity in vitro but less defined roles in vivo. Here, we set out to identify in vivo targets of UBE2D3 by using SILAC-based and label-free quantitative ubiquitin diGly proteomics to study global proteome and ubiquitinome changes associated with UBE2D3 depletion. UBE2D3 depletion changed the global proteome, with proteins from metabolic pathways, in particular retinol metabolism, being the most affected. The impact of UBE2D3 depletion on the ubiquitinome was much more prominent. Interestingly, molecular pathways related to mRNA translation were the most affected. Indeed, we find that ubiquitination of the ribosomal proteins RPS10 and RPS20, critical for ribosome-associated protein quality control (RQC), is dependent on UBE2D3. Moreover, we show by TULIP2 methodology that RPS10 and RPS20 are direct targets of UBE2D3 and demonstrate that UBE2D3’s catalytic activity is required to ubiquitinate RPS10 in vivo. Collectively, our findings show that depletion of an E2 enzyme in combination with quantitative diGly-based ubiquitinome profiling is a powerful tool to identify new in vivo E2 substrates, as we have done here for UBE2D3. Together with our identification of RQC factors as novel in vivo targets of UBE2D3, our work provides an important resource for further studies on the in vivo functions of UBE2D3.

### Sample Protocol
Nanoflow LC-MS/MS was performed on an EASY-nLC system (Thermo) coupled to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo), operating in positive mode and equipped with a nanospray source. Peptide mixtures were trapped on a ReproSil C18 reversed phase column (Dr Maisch GmbH; column dimensions 1.5 cm × 100 µm, packed in-house) at a flow rate of 8 µl/min. Peptide separation was performed on ReproSil C18 reversed phase column (Dr Maisch GmbH; column dimensions 15 cm × 50 µm, packed in-house) using a linear gradient from 0 to 80% B (A = 0.1% FA; B = 80% (v/v) AcN, 0.1 % FA) in 70 or 120 min and at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column eluent was directly sprayed into the ESI source of the mass spectrometer. All mass spectra were acquired in profile mode. The resolution in MS1 mode was set to 70,000 (AGC: 3E6), the m/z range 350-1700. Fragmentation of precursors was performed in data-dependent mode by HCD (Top15) with a precursor window of 3.0 m/z and a normalized collision energy between 26.0-28.0; MS2 spectra were recorded in the ion trap. Singly charged precursors were excluded from fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 seconds and the intensity threshold was set to 8.0E3. For the ubiquitinome analysis, a single LC-MS/MS run was performed for all immunoprecipitated peptide material from one sample.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.6.0.16)26 for identification and relative quantification of proteins. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins and peptides, and a minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids were required. The Andromeda search engine was used to search the MS/MS spectra against the Mus musculus Uniprot database (version: up_mouse_2017_09.fasta) concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences and a contaminant database listing typical background proteins. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. MS/MS spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant’s default settings for Orbitrap and ion trap spectra. The maximum precursor ion charge state used for searching was 7 and the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin. Further modifications were Cysteine carbamidomethylation (fixed) as well as Methionine oxidation and Lysine ubiquitination (variable). The minimum number of peptides for positive protein identification was set to 2. Heavy-to-light (H:L) ratios were calculated using MaxQuant’s default settings, including a minimum ratio count of 2 for label based protein quantification and of 1 for diGly peptide quantification. The minimum number of razor and unique peptides was set to 1. Only unique and razor non-modified, methionine oxidized and protein N-terminal acetylated peptides were used for protein quantitation. The minimal score for modified peptides was set to 40 (default value). The ‘requantify’ option was selected in all cases. Only proteins that were identified and quantified in both duplicates and with consistent ratios, were considered for further analysis. The proteingroups.txt, modificationspecificpeptides.txt and GlyGly_(K)sites.txt output tables were all processed in R (version 4.1.0). Reverse hits (decoys) and potential contaminants were filtered excluded from analysis. Normalized ratios of all replicate experiments were Log2 transformed and these values were used in a one sample two-sided t-test (mu = 0) to calculate p-values. The modificationspecificpeptides.txt table was further adjusted by adding the diGly sites probability column from the GlyGly_(K)sites.txt table. Protein sets were further analyzed with Perseus (version 1.6.0.7)27, through the use of Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA; QIAGEN Inc., https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/products/ingenuity-pathway-analysis)28, STRING analysis (https://string-db.org/)29 and in-house developed software30. For statistical testing of quantitative data, we used a one-sample t-test in Perseus using 250 randomizations and further settings FDR=0.05 and S0=0.5.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitination has crucial roles in many cellular processes, and dysregulation of ubiquitin machinery enzymes can result in various forms of pathogenesis. Cells only have a limited set of ubiquitin-conjugating (E2) enzymes to support the ubiquitination of many cellular targets. As individual E2 enzymes have many different substrates and interactions between E2 enzymes and their substrates can be transient, it is challenging to define all in&#xa0;vivo substrates of an individual E2 and the cellular processes it affects. Particularly challenging in this respect is UBE2D3, an E2 enzyme with promiscuous activity in&#xa0;vitro but less defined roles in&#xa0;vivo. Here, we set out to identify in&#xa0;vivo targets of UBE2D3 by using stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture-based and label-free quantitative ubiquitin diGly proteomics to study global proteome and ubiquitinome changes associated with UBE2D3 depletion. UBE2D3 depletion changed the global proteome, with the levels of proteins from metabolic pathways, in particular retinol metabolism, being the most affected. However, the impact of UBE2D3 depletion on the ubiquitinome was much more prominent. Interestingly, molecular pathways related to mRNA translation were the most affected. Indeed, we find that ubiquitination of the ribosomal proteins RPS10 and RPS20, critical for ribosome-associated protein quality control, is dependent on UBE2D3. We show by Targets of Ubiquitin Ligases Identified by Proteomics 2 methodology that RPS10 and RPS20 are direct targets of UBE2D3 and demonstrate that the catalytic activity of UBE2D3 is required to ubiquitinate RPS10 in&#xa0;vivo. In addition, our data suggest that UBE2D3 acts at multiple levels in autophagic protein quality control. Collectively, our findings show that depletion of an E2 enzyme in combination with quantitative diGly-based ubiquitinome profiling is a powerful tool to identify new in&#xa0;vivo E2 substrates, as we have done here for UBE2D3. Our work provides an important resource for further studies on the in&#xa0;vivo functions of UBE2D3.

### Keywords
Ubiquitinome, Ube2d3, Silac

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Erasmus MC


