### Accession
PXD000603

### Title
Lung cancer and Normal Lung Tissue LC-MS/MS

### Description
The Chromosome-centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) was recently initiated as an international collaborative effort. Our team adopted chromosome 9 (Chr 9) and performed a bioinformatics and proteogenomic analysis to catalog Chr 9-encoded proteins from normal tissues, lung cancer cell lines and lung cancer tissues.        TQ orbitrap, Orbitrap full MS scans were acquired from m/z 350 to 1500 at a resolution of 15 000 (at m/z 400). Parent ions were fragmented using the LTQ (isolation width of 2 m/z units) , with a maximum injection time of 100 ms combined with an AGC value of 1 x104 using three fragmentation modes such as collision-induced dissociation (CID) alone, the reagent ion source emission current, reagent ion electron energy, and reagent ion source chemical ionization pressure were set to 35 mA, 70 V, and 26 psi, respectively.        Database : UniProt database (rel. 2012-06, 86,875 entries). Search software : MASCOT software (version 2.2.04). Database search criteria were as follows: taxonomy Homo sapiens, carboxyamidomethylated (+57 Da) at cysteine residues for fixed modifications, oxidized at methionine (+16 Da) residues for variable modi?cations, two maximum allowed missed cleavage, 10 ppm MS tolerance. Only peptides resulting from trypsin digestion were considered. PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet were used to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR). We identified proteins using two or more unique peptides with an FDR < 1% at the protein level.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The Chromosome-centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) was recently initiated as an international collaborative effort. Our team adopted chromosome 9 (Chr 9) and performed a bioinformatics and proteogenomic analysis to catalog Chr 9-encoded proteins from normal tissues, lung cancer cell lines, and lung cancer tissues. Approximately 74.7% of the Chr 9 genes of the human genome were identified, which included approximately 28% of missing proteins (46 of 162) on Chr 9 compared with the list of missing proteins from the neXtProt Master Table (2013-09). In addition, we performed a comparative proteomics analysis between normal lung and lung cancer tissues. On the basis of the data analysis, 15 proteins from Chr 9 were detected only in lung cancer tissues. Finally, we conducted a proteogenomic analysis to discover Chr 9-residing single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) and mutations described in the COSMIC cancer mutation database. We identified 21 SNPs and four mutations containing peptides on Chr 9 from normal human cells/tissues and lung cancer cell lines, respectively. In summary, this study provides valuable information of the human proteome for the scientific community as part of C-HPP. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium with the data set identifier PXD000603.

### Keywords
Lung cancer, Lc-ms/ms, Normal lung tissue

### Affiliations
Seoul National University

### Submitter
Je-Yoel Cho

### Lab Head


