### Accession
PXD031345

### Title
Normal respiratory chain capacity and physiology in mice with severely reduced levels of mitochondrial respirasomes; Cross-linking of intact mitochondria

### Description
The mammalian oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) system in the inner mitochondrial membrane comprises respiratory chain complexes I-IV (CI-CIV) and ATP synthase. Together, these protein complexes harvest metabolic energy to generate ATP, the cellular energy currency. The inner mitochondrial membrane is abundant in OXPHOS complexes and CI, CIII and CIV exhibit specific protein-protein interactions to form stable supercomplex assemblies, exemplified by the respirasome (CI-CIII2-CIV). Respirasomes are conserved in evolution, and as well documented by biochemical and structural methods. However, their physiological roles are much debated, despite a substantial literature suggesting their importance in facilitating catalysis and regulating turnover in response to metabolic demand. To investigate the in vivo role of respirasomes, we deleted a short conserved, charged loop in the UQCRC1 subunit of CIII that contacts CI. The resulting homozygous knock-in mice show profoundly decreased levels of respirasomes on blue native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (BN-PAGE) and complexome profiling proteomics analyses of different tissues, although the individual complexes appear unaffected. In vivo The spatial organization of respirasomes in vivo was altered in knock-in mice as shown by cross-linking experiments on intact mitochondria. Surprisingly, the mutant mice are healthy, with normal respiratory chain capacity and normal exercise tolerance. Therefore, respirasomes are dispensable for OXPHOS function in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
For each genotype mitochondria purified from three biological replicates were diluted in MIB buffer to a protein concentration of 1 mg/mL and subsequently cross-linked with DSSO (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using optimized conditions (0.5 mM DSSO, 30 min at 25 °C). The cross-link reaction was quenched for 30 min at 25 °C by the addition of 50 mM Tris (1 M Tris buffer, pH 8.5). Cross-linked mitochondria were pelleted at 11,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min and and re-suspended in mitochondrial lysis buffer (100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 7 M Urea, 1 % Triton-X-100, 5 mM TCEP, 30 mM CAA, 2.5 mM Mg2+, proteinase inhibitor cocktail). Mitochondria were solubilized for 30 min on ice. Next, proteins in the soluble fraction were precipitated using Methanol/Chloroform precipitation as previously described (Wessel and Flugge, 1984). The dried protein pellet was then re-suspended in digestion buffer (100 mM Tris·HCl pH 8.5, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 5 mM TCEP, and 30 mM CAA). Protein digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C using Trypsin (1:25 ratio weight/weight) and Lys-C (1:100 ratio weight/weight), respectively. Finally, peptides were de-salted solid-phase extraction C18 columns (Sep-Pak, Waters) and fractionated into 22 fractions using an Agilent 1200 HPLC pump system (Agilent) coupled to a strong cation exchange (SCX) separation column (Luna SCX 5 µm to 100 Å particles, 50 × 2 mm, Phenomenex).

### Data Protocol
The 22 SCX fractions of DSSO were analysed using an Ultimate3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 50-cm analytical column packed with C18 beads (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 µm) heated at 45°C, connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos as previously described (Hevler et al., 2021). Briefly., Ppeptides were eluted at 300 nL/min with a 95 minutes gradient from 9% to 40% of buffer B (80% Acetonitrile and 20% water with 0.1% formic acid). To identify cross-linked peptides, MS1 scans with the Orbitrap resolution set to 120,000 from 350 to 1400 m/z were performed (normalized AGC target set to 250 % and maximum injection time set to auto). Ions with a charge from +3 to +8 were fragmented with stepped HCD (21 %, 27 %, 33 %) and further analyzed (MS2) in the Orbitrap (30,000 resolution, normalized AGC target set to 200 % and maximum injection time set to auto) for detection of DSSO signature peaks (difference in mass of 37.972 Da). The four ions with this specific difference were further sequenced following MS3 CID - Ion Trap scans (collision energy 35 %, normalized AGC target set to 200 % and maximum injection time set to auto). The raw files corresponding to the 22 DSSO fractions were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer software suite version 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the incorporated XlinkX node for analysis of cross-linked peptides as reported by Klykov et al.60. Data were searched against a FASTA file containing proteins, which were previously identified following a classical bottom-up workflow. Were applicable, mitochondrial target peptides were removed from respective protein sequences. For the XlinkX search, fully tryptic digestion with three maximum missed cleavages, 10 ppm error for MS1, 20 ppm for MS2 and 0.5 Da for MS3 in Ion Trap was set as search parameters. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as static modification while Oxidation (Met) was set as dynamic modification. Cross-linked peptides were accepted with a minimum XlinkX score of 40 and maximum FDR (controlled at PSM level for cross-linked spectrum matches) rate set to 5%.

### Publication Abstract
The tricarboxylic acid cycle is the central pathway of energy production in eukaryotic cells and plays a key part in aerobic respiration throughout all kingdoms of life. One of the pivotal enzymes in this cycle is 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex (OGDHC), which generates NADH by oxidative decarboxylation of 2-oxoglutarate to succinyl-CoA. OGDHC is a megadalton protein complex originally thought to be assembled from three catalytically active subunits (E1o, E2o, E3). In fungi and animals, however, the protein MRPS36 has more recently been proposed as a putative additional component. Based on extensive cross-linking mass spectrometry data supported by phylogenetic analyses, we provide evidence that MRPS36 is an important member of the eukaryotic OGDHC, with no prokaryotic orthologues. Comparative sequence analysis and computational structure predictions reveal that, in contrast with bacteria and archaea, eukaryotic E2o does not contain the peripheral subunit-binding domain (PSBD), for which we propose that MRPS36 evolved as an E3 adaptor protein, functionally replacing the PSBD. We further provide a refined structural model of the complete eukaryotic OGDHC of approximately 3.45 MDa with novel mechanistic insights.

### Keywords
Cross-linking mass spectrometry (cx-ms)

### Affiliations
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Johannes Hevler

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Heck
Utrecht University


