### Accession
PXD026875

### Title
Applying log-normal peak fitting to parallel reaction monitoring data analysis.

### Description
To support quantitative data analysis, we have developed a software, peakfit, that fits acquired chromatographic data to the log-normal peak equation and reports the calculated peak parameters. To demonstrate the capabilities of this approach, we provide hereby four example datasets: (1) 15 QCs of a PRM assay targeting the three most common isoforms of Apolipoprotein E (E2, E3, and E4); (2) PRM data of samples with 6 different ApoE phenotypes (E2/2, E2/3, E2/4, E3/3, E3/4, and E4/4); (3) shotgun run of a commercial HeLa digest to demonstrate processing of MS1 data, and (4) a quality control peptide mix to demonstrate assessment of chromatographic performance on basis of the base peak chromatogram.

### Sample Protocol
Samples of PRM demonstrator data set: 2 uL serum sample were reduced with 5 mM 1,4-Dithiothreito, alkylated with 10 mM Methyl-methanethiosulfonate, and overnight digested by the addition of 4  µg trypsin; after digest samples were acidified and diluted and an amount corresponding to about 10 nL of initial serum volume; Sample of MS1 demonstrator dataset: 50 ng injection of commercial HeLa digest (Pierce HeLa Protein Digest Standard, Cat# 88329, Thermo Fisher); Sample of ‘BasePeakQC’ example (generic quality check sample): mixture of stable isotopically labelled peptides (from following protein precursors: AKAP9, ALBU, APOB, CO3, CPN2, HPT, IBP7, IGF2, IGG1, LG3BP, LSAMP, LUM, NCAM2, OSTP, SAA4, SAMP, SHBG, TIMP1, and VTDB); per run 100 fmol of each peptide was injected.

### Data Protocol
To prepare demonstrator datasets for our Peakfit tool, we conducted data processing of PRM (‘ApoE’ datasets) and shotgun data (‘Hela’ dataset) using the software package Skyline. For extraction of base peak chromatogram, we used msaccess.exe of the software package Proteowizard (e.g.msaccess.exe file.raw -x "spectrum_table") and the generated output file was converted into a tab separated file.

### Publication Abstract
Chromatographic separation is often an important part of mass-spectrometry-based proteomic analysis. It reduces the complexity of the initial samples before they are introduced to mass-spectrometric detection and chromatographic characteristics (such as retention time) add analytical features to the analyte. The acquisition and analysis of chromatographic data are thus of great importance, and specialized software is used for the extraction of quantitative information in an efficient and optimized manner. However, occasionally, automatic peak picking and correct peak boundary setting is challenged by, for instance, aberration of peak shape, peak truncation, and peak tailing, and a manual review of a large number of peaks is frequently required. To support this part of the analysis, we present here a software tool, <i>Peakfit</i>, that fits acquired chromatographic data to the log-normal peak equation and reports the calculated peak parameters. The program is written in R and can easily be integrated into <i>Skyline</i>, a popular software packages that is frequently used for proteomic parallel reaction monitoring applications. The program is capable of processing large data sets (&gt;10&#x202f;000 peaks) and detecting sporadic outliers in peak boundary selection performed, for instance, in <i>Skyline</i>. In an example data set, available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD026875, we demonstrated the capability of the program to characterize chromatographic peaks and showed an example of its ability to objectively and reproducibly detect and solve problematic peak-picking situations.

### Keywords
Software tool, Peak modelling, Data processing, Parallel reaction monitoring, Peak fitting

### Affiliations
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Neurology, Clinical & Cancer Proteomics
Erasmus MC Rotterdam
Department of Neurology

### Submitter
Christoph Stingl

### Lab Head
Dr Theo M. Luider
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Neurology, Clinical & Cancer Proteomics


