### Accession
PXD001111

### Title
Combining solid phase extraction with ultra-short gradients in LC-MS/MS substantially improves protein identification per unit of time

### Description
Here, we describe a novel LC system enabling rapid protein/proteome analysis which requires <10 min analysis time. The setup consists of an autosampler harbouring two sets of 96 STAGE-tips which function as pre-columns, and a short RP analytical column, which can run a 5 min gradient. We show that the system allows the efficient combination with several popular off-line pre-fractionation methods, such as gel-electrophoresis, strong-cation exchange chromatography, but also in the analysis of interactomes obtained by affinity purification. A typical shotgun proteomics experiment, involving 36 SCX fractions of an AspN digested cell lysate, lead to the detection of over 3600 protein groups in only 3h cumulative gradient time when using a QExactive mass analyser. Application to typical various proteomics experiments such as samples from pull-downs allowed the detection of hundreds of proteins whereby a given protein’s interactome could be determined in less than 1h of accumulated gradient time. This new LC system diminishes proteome analysis time considerably, whole providing sufficient proteomic detail, and may thus also aid in bringing proteomics into the clinic where fast turn-over times are essential.

### Sample Protocol
Human t-lymphoma (Jurkat) and cervix carcinoma (Hela) cells were lysed in lysis buffer (8 M urea (Sigma-Aldrich), protease inhibitor tablets (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) in 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC; Sigma-Aldrich), pH 8). Lysates were cleared by centrifugation for 10’ at 20,000 g and 4°C. Supernatant was transferred into a new tube and the protein amount was determined by Bradford protein assay (Biorad, Hercules, USA). Next, proteins were digested utilizing the filter assisted sample preparation (FASP) protocol 19. The reduced and alkylated sample was first treated with Lys-C (Sigma-Aldrich) in an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1∶50 (w/w) for 4 h, then trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) was used o/n  at 37°C in an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:100 (w/w). AspN digests were obtained by incubating the sample first with AspN (Roche) at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1∶100 for 4 h at RT then 100 μl of digestion buffer (1 M urea in 50 mM AMBIC) containing AspN in an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:200 were added and incubated o/n at RT.  Resulting peptide mixtures were desalted using Seppak 1cc columns (Waters Corporation, Milford, USA).  Immune precipitation (IP) and in-gel digestion: Cells were lysed in IP lysis buffer consisting of 150 mM NaCl (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 0.1% TritonX-100, 10% glycerol (all Sigma-Aldrich), phosStop phosphatase inhibitor tablet, protease inhibitor tablet (both Roche) in 20 mM Tris, pH 7.5. To homogenize the samples a douncer with pestle B was used for 3 times 30 sec on ice. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation for 10 min at 20,000 g and 4°C. Supernatant was transferred into a new tube and the protein amount was determined by Bradford protein assay (Biorad). For each immune precipitation 600 μg of lysate was mixed with 30 μl phospho-p44/42 MAPK XP® rabbit mAB sepharose bead conjugate (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, USA) and incubated o/n at 4°C on a rotator. After five washing steps with lysis buffer, proteins were denatured by boiling for 5 min in XT loading buffer (Biorad). The denatured sample was then separated on a criterion precast 4-12% bis-tris gel (Biorad). Each gel lane was cut into 11 pieces and a standard in-gel digestion was performed. We applied an improved SCX system to fractionate the samples. Briefly, an Agilent 1100 HPLC system (Aglilent, Santa Clara, USA) was equipped with a Opti-Lynx (Optimized Technologies, Oregon, USA) trapping cartridge and a Zorbax Bio- SCX II column (0.8 mm i.d. × 50 mm length, 3.5 μm; Agilent). Solvent A consisted of 0.05% formic acid in 20% acetonitrile, while solvent B contained 0.05% formic acid and 0.5 M NaCl in 20% acetonitrile. 600 µg of labeled peptide mixture was loaded and a total of 50 fractions (1 min each, 50 µL elution volume) were collected and dried down in a vacuum concentrator. The salt gradient used for elution of the peptides was as follows: 0-0.01 min (0-2% B); 0.01-8.01 min (2-3% B); 8.01-14.01 min (3-8% B); 14.01-28 min (8-20% B); 28-38 min (20-40% B); 38-48 min (40-90% B); 48-54 min (90% B); 54-60 min (0% B).

### Data Protocol
The raw data obtained, were initially processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo). The created peak lists were searched with Mascot (Matrix Science, Version 2.4) using the human Uniprot database and the following parameters: 50 p.p.m. precursor mass tolerance and 0.05 Da fragment ion tolerance. Trypsin was specified as enzyme while the fragment ion type as ESI-QUAD-TOF Up to two missed cleavages were accepted, oxidation of methionine was set up as variable modification and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Percolator calculated the target FDR with a strict cut-off of 0.01 22. After identification and quantification, all results were combined and filtered with the following criteria: Mascot ion score of at least 20 on peptides and proteins, maximum peptide rank 1, high peptide confidence, maximum search engine rank 1.

### Publication Abstract
Here, we explore applications of a LC system using disposable solid-phase extraction (SPE) cartridges and very short LC-MS/MS gradients that allows for rapid analyses in less than 10 min analysis time. The setup consists of an autosampler harboring two sets of 96 STAGE tips that function as precolumns and a short RP analytical column running 6.5 min gradients. This system combines efficiently with several proteomics workflows such as offline prefractionation methods, including 1D gel electrophoresis and strong-cation exchange chromatography. It also enables the analysis of interactomes obtained by affinity purification with an analysis time of approximately 1 h. In a typical shotgun proteomics experiment involving 36 SCX fractions of an AspN digested cell lysate, we detected over 3600 protein groups with an analysis time of less than 5.5 h. This innovative fast LC system reduces proteome analysis time while maintaining sufficient proteomic detail. This has particular relevance for the use of proteomics within a clinical environment, where large sample numbers and fast turnover times are essential.

### Keywords
Hela, 2d, Ap-ms, Spe-lc, E.coli, Jurkat

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences Utrecht University
Faculty of Science

### Submitter
N. Binai

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences Utrecht University


