### Accession
PXD030990

### Title
Comparison of Different Mass-Spectrometry Workflows for the Proteomic Analysis of Tear Fluid

### Description
Proteomic analysis of tear fluid is challenging mainly due to a wide dynamic range of proteins and small sample volume. However, recent advancements in mass spectrometry have revolutionized the field of proteomics through its unprecedented depth, speed, and accuracy even with small sample volumes. In this study using the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer, we compared four different mass-spectrometry workflows for proteomic analysis of human tear fluid.

### Sample Protocol
Tear samples were collected using Schirmer strips. The strips were cut in half lengthwise into two equal pieces and each half was used separately for two protein digestion methods (post-extraction protein digestion and In-strip digestion). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using collision-induced dissociation (CID) and higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation techniques for both methods.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed via the Proteome Discoverer software (ver 2.2) and submitted for SequestHT search against the SwissProt human database. SequestHT search parameters were set as 10 ppm precursor and 0.6 Da product ion tolerance, with static carbidomethylation (+57.021 Da) for cysteine, dynamic oxidation for methionine (+15.995 Da). The percolator peptide spectrum matching (PSM) validator algorithm was used for PSM validation. Proteins unable to be distinguished based on the database search results were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. A protein report was generated containing the identities and number of PSM for each protein group, which were further utilized for spectral counting based semi-quantitative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The tear film is a multi-layer fluid that covers the corneal and conjunctival epithelia of the eye and provides lubrication, nutrients, and protection from the outside environment. Tear fluid contains a high concentration of proteins and has thus been recognized as a potential source of biomarkers for ocular disorders due to its proximity to disease sites on the ocular surface and the non-invasive nature of its collection. This is particularly true in the case of dry eye disease, which directly impacts the tear film and its components. Proteomic analysis of tear fluid is challenging mainly due to the wide dynamic range of proteins and the small sample volumes. However, recent advancements in mass spectrometry have revolutionized the field of proteomics enabling unprecedented depth, speed, and accuracy, even with small sample volumes. In this study using the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer, we compared four different mass spectrometry workflows for the proteomic analysis of tear fluid collected via Schirmer strips. We were able to establish a method of in-strip protein digestion that identified &gt;3000 proteins in human tear samples from 11 healthy subjects. Our method offers a significant improvement in the number of proteins identified compared to previously reported methods without pooling samples.

### Keywords
Tear film; proteomics; biomarkers; dry eye disease; ocular surface; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Center for Biotechnology & Genomic Medicine, Dept. of Population Health Sciences Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University
Augusta University

### Submitter
Ashok Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Ashok Sharma
Center for Biotechnology & Genomic Medicine, Dept. of Population Health Sciences Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University


