### Accession
PXD030334

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Human Conjunctival Cells and Tears Collected with Schirmer Strips Using TimsTOF Pro

### Description
This study aimed to investigate the human tear proteins extracted from whole (W) Schirmer strips (ScS) and their two parts, the bulb (B) and the rest of the strip (R) with a comprehensive proteomic approach using a trapped ion mobility mass spectrometer, the timsTOF Pro. Eight ScS were collected from two healthy subjects at 4 different visits to be separated into three batches: 4W, 4B and 4R. In total, 1582 proteins were identified in the W, B and R batches. Among all iden-tified proteins, binding proteins (43.4%) and those with catalytic activity (42.2%) constituted more than 80% of the molecular functions. The most represented biological processes were cel-lular processes (31.2%), metabolic processes (20.8%) and biological regulation (13.1%). Enzymes were the most represented protein class (41 %), consisting mainly of hydrolases (47.5%), oxi-doreductases (22.1%) and transferases (16.7%). The bulb (B), which is in contact with the conjunc-tiva, might collect both tear and cell proteins and therefore promote identification of more pro-teins. Processing B and R separately before MS analysis, combined with the high data acquisition speed and the addition of ion-mobility-based separation in timsTOF Pro, can bring a new dimension to biomarker investigations of a limited sample such as tear fluid.

### Sample Protocol
Tear samples were collected with Schirmer trips (ScS) from two health subjects. For each subject, ScS samples were collected from both eyes in the morning (a.m.) and af-ternoon (p.m.) for two consecutive days. The samples were separated into two batches. In the first batch, the 4 whole strips were pooled (W). In the second batch, the whole ScS was cut into two parts to provide the upper part containing the bulb (B) and the remaining part (R). Each pooled batch was eluted in 1 ml of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing protease inhibitors and placed on an IKA® VXR basic Vibrax® orbital shaker at 1500 motions/minute at 4°C for 4 hours. The samples were centrifuged for 5 minutes at 14,000 rpm at 4°C, and the supernatants were collected. Protein quantification assay was carried out using a BCA Protein Assay.  Sample preparation was performed on 10 µg of proteins for each pooled sample, adjusted to the same volume and same protein concentration. Then, dithiothreitol (Sigma, #3483-12-3) was added to the samples up to 5 mM as a final concentration to reduce the proteins in a 37 °C water bath for 30 min. Subsequently, alkylation was performed by adding Scientific, #23225) using a Spark® Multimode Microplate Reader (Tekan, Männedorf, Switzerland). Samples were stored at -80 °C until MS analysis. Subsequently, alkylation was performed by adding iodoacetamide (Sigma, #144-48-9) up to 15 mM for 30 min in the dark and at room temperature. The samples were then subjected to two-step in-solution digestion, first by adding 200 ng of Lys-C protease (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #90307) (protease/protein mass ratio equal to 1:50) and incubating for 120 min at 37°C, then by adding 200 ng of Trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #90058) (protease/protein mass ratio equal to 1:50) for overnight incubation at 37 °C. Following the digestion, automated StageTips desalting of the peptides was performed using DigestProMSi (Intavis, Cologne, Germany). Eluted peptides were dried using a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, #F0507) and 2% acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich, #271004). For each sample, 500 ng of peptides were injected in triplicate into a nanoElute UHPLC (Ultra High Performance Liquid Chromatography) (Bruker, Champs-sur-Marne, France) coupled to a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker, Champs-sur-Marne, France). Peptides were directly loaded and separated on an Aurora2 RP-C18 analytical column (25 cm, 75 μm i.d., 120 Å, 1.6 µm from IonOpticks) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min at 40°C. Mobile phase A consisted of 2 % acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. A 90 min elution gradient was performed by increasing mobile phase B from 0% B to 3% over 1 min, 3% B to 15% over 56 min, then 15% B to 23% over 21 min and 23% B to 32% over 13 min. MS acquisition was run in DDA (data-dependent acquisition) mode with PASEF. Accumulation time was set to 100 msec in the TIMS tunnel. The capillary voltage was set to 1.6 kV, mass range from 100 to 1700 m/z in MS and MS/MS and mobility range from 0.6 to 1.6 Vs/cm². Dynamic exclusion was activated for ions within 0.015 m/z and 0.015 V.s /cm² and released after 0.4 min. Exclusion was defined as precursor ion intensity 4 times higher. Low abundance precursors below the target value of 20,000 arbitrary units (a.u.) and intensity of 2500 a.u. were selected several times for PASEF-MS/MS until the target value was reached. Parent ion selection was achieved by using a two-dimensional m/z and 1/K0 selection area filter allowing the exclusion of singly charged ions. The total cycle time was 1.1 sec with 10 PASEF cycles.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were analyzed with Bruker Compass Data Analysis (version 5.1) and further processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.8.0) for protein identification [89]. The search parameters were set as follows: mass tolerance of 25 ppm for MS1 and 40 ppm for MS2, carbamidomethyl as fixed modification, Acetyl (Protein N-term) and oxidation (on M residue) as variable modifications; up to 2 missed cleavages allowed. Protein identifications were performed against the Uniprot Homo sapiens database UP000005640_9606 (https://www.uniprot.org/, 20672 entries, 02/08/2019) while the p-value of peptides and proteins were adjusted to obtain corresponding FDR <1%, with a minimum of 1 peptide per protein. Semi-quantitative estimations of the protein content of the samples were performed taking into account the numbers of matched spectra per protein. The spectral counting method was used for the comparison.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Timstof pro, Proteomics, Schirmer strips, Conjunctival cells, Tears

### Affiliations
Sorbonne Universite
UMS PASS - P3S
Sorbonne Université, UMS PASS, Plateforme P3S

### Submitter
Solenne Chardonnet

### Lab Head
Dr Solenne Chardonnet
Sorbonne Université, UMS PASS, Plateforme P3S


