### Accession
PXD041960

### Title
Human plasma LC-MS/MS from children with bacterial and viral infections

### Description
LC-MS/MS proteomic profiling was performed on children with bacterial and viral infections using plasma samples. Protein biomarkers indiciative of bacterial or viral infection were identified.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to proteomic quantification using LC-MS/MS, a top 12 abundant protein depletion spin column (Catalog no. 85165, ThermoFisher Scientific) was used to remove 12 high abundance proteins: α1-acid glycoprotein, α1-antitrypsin, α2-macroglobulin, albumin, apolipoprotein A-I, apolipoprotein A-II, fibrinogen, haptoglobin, IgA, IgG, IgM and transferrin. Ten microliters of plasma were added into each depletion column. Immunodepletion cartridges were rotated at 20 rpm for 1 hr to maximise immunoaffinity binding. The flow-through was collected by spinning the samples at 1000 g for 1 min. To concentrate proteins in flow-through, trichloroacetic acid (TCA) protein precipitation was followed by adding 60 µl of 100% TCA into the T12-abundant depleted samples. Six microliters of 2% sodium deoxycholate (DOC) were added into TCA samples and kept at -80 °C for 1 hr. Samples were centrifuged at 13000 g for 30 min at 4 °C and the supernatants were discarded. Eight hundred microliters of cold acetone (100%) were added to each sample, incubated at -20 °C for 1 hr and centrifuged at 13000 g for 30 min. The protein pellet samples were resuspended in 60 µl of 4M urea (pH 7.4 mM Tris). For total protein quantification of the depleted samples, bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assays were used (ThermoFisher Scientific). Following protein quantification, the proteins were digested at 70° (denaturing condition) by thermostable trypsin using the SMART digestion kit (ThermoFisher Scientific).   The purified peptides were analyzed by nano-UPLC–MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-UPLC with EASY-Spray column (75 μm × 500 mm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific). A 60 min linear gradient of 2-35% acetonitrile in 5% DMSO/0.1% Formic Acid was used running at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap (Fusion Lumos, Thermo Scientific) between 400 and 1500 m/z at a resolution of 120 000, an AGC target of 4.0E5, maximal injection time of 50ms. MS/MS were acquired with a fixed duty cycle of 3 seconds (“Top Speed”) and data dependent acquisition (DDA). Precursors between charge state 2+ and 7+ and the intensity threshold of 5.0E3 were selected for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation, with collision energy of 35% and an AGC target of 5.0E3. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the ion trap using the rapid scan mode.   Proteomic profiling was performed at the Discovery Proteomics Facility, Oxford.

### Data Protocol
The raw dataset files were processed by MaxQuant (1.6.10.43) based on default settings with matching between runs activated and contaminants included. The FDR cut-off for proteins and peptides was 1% with razor protein FDR enabled and the variable modifications were methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation. Maximum peptide mass was 4600 Da. Second peptide search was enabled. Relative quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bacterial, Plasma, Humans, Viral, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Section of Paediatric Infectious Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, UK
Imperial College London

### Submitter
Heather Jackson

### Lab Head
Dr Myrsini Kaforou
Section of Paediatric Infectious Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, UK


