### Accession
PXD012862

### Title
CD44 regulates epigenetic plasticity by mediating iron endocytosis - part 2

### Description
The biological process termed Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) plays a central role in cancer cell invasion, metastasis, self-renewal and resistance to therapy(1,2). Here, using western blot technique, we show that H3K9me2 decreases when MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cells undergo EMT upon EGF.  We validate this decrease by performing high-resolution MS/MS spectrum. Interestingly, we find that H3K9me2 is associated with mesenchymal genes regulation.   1. Nieto, M. A., Huang, R. Y., Jackson, R. A. & Thiery, J. P. EMT: 2016. Cell 166, 21–45 (2016). 2. Puisieux, A. & Brabletz, T. & Caramel, J. Oncogenic roles of EMT-inducing transcription factors. Nat. Cell Biol. 16, 488–494 (2014).

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in 145 cm2 dishes, in five independent biological replicates, and were treated with EGF for 72h. The whole cell extracts were collected by scrapping. After centrifugation at 500 x g, 4°C for 5 min, cells were lysed in hypotonic lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES, 10 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM DTT, cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, #000000011697498001)) and were incubated for 45 min at 4 ºC on a rotary wheel. After centrifugation at 20000 × g, 4 ºC for 20 min, supernatants were discarded and nuclei were resuspended in 0.2 M H2SO4 overnight at 4 ºC on a rotary wheel. Subsequently, lysates were centrifuged at 20000 × g, 4 ºC for 20 min and histones were precipitated using 33% trichloroacetic acid for 1 h at 4 ºC. The resulting solutions were then centrifuged at 20000×g, 4 ºC for 20 min to precipitate histones, washed twice with ice-cold acetone and centrifuged at 20000×g, 4 ºC for 10 min. Histones were dried for 20 min at RT and solubilised in deionised water. Histones were resolved on a 18% SDS-PAGE, followed by colloidal blue staining and mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Histones were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with colloidal blue (LabSafe Gel Blue GBiosciences). One gel slice was excised for each purification and in-gel digested by using trypsin/LysC (Promega). Peptide extracted from each band were then analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS (RSLCnano system coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X). Peptides were first trapped onto a C18 column (75 μm inner diameter × 2 cm; nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM 100, Thermo Scientific) with buffer A at a flow rate of 2.5 µL/min over 4 min. Separation was performed on a 50 cm x 75 µm C18 column (nanoViper C18, 3 μm, 100Å, Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC, Thermo Scientific) regulated to 50°C and with a linear gradient from 2% to 35% buffet B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 91 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in PRM mode. The acquisition list was generated from the peptides obtained from the mix samples (5 replicates) of each condition based on the DDA results.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Histones, Breast cancer, Ms/ms spectrum, Emt

### Affiliations
Institut Curie
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique Institut Curie PSL Research University

### Submitter
Guillaume Arras

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique Institut Curie PSL Research University


