### Accession
PXD017817

### Title
Proteomic characterization of the culture supernatant of Mycobacterium bovis in different growth stages

### Description
The goal of this study is to identify the different proteins secreted by Mycobacterium bovis in the culture media at different stages of bacterial growth. A field strain of M. bovis was allowed to grow in a culture media and culture supernatant was collected at three-time points representing approximately three different phases of growth. The supernatant was digested by trypsin and analyzed by LC-MS/MS analysis

### Sample Protocol
M. bovis cultures were sterile filtered twice, sterility was confirmed by culture. Bovine albumin was depleted from the culture supernatant using albumin depletion kit(ThermoScientific). Protein ws precipitated using TCA followed by washing the pellet.The pellet was then solubilised using ammonium bicarbonate and ProteaseMax surfactant. Reduction was done using DTT and alkylation using IAA. Proteins were digested using Trypsin Gold (Promega. Peptides were then purified using Pierce C18 column then lyophilised. Petides were then anlaysed by LC-MS/MS analysis by Thermo OrbitrapTM FusionTM Tribrid mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Scientific). Searches were performed using Sequest, Mascot and MS Amanda search algorithms against a custom Mycobaterium bovis database and a protein contaminants database.Protein localization prediction was obtained using UniProt (https://www.uniprot.org/) and using PSORTb  https://www.psort.org/psortb/, locus tags were obtained using PROTEIN BLAST https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi?PAGE=Proteins and using mycobrowser https://mycobrowser.epfl.ch/

### Publication Abstract
This study aimed to identify proteins secreted by <i>Mycobacterium bovis</i> into culture medium at different stages of bacterial growth. A field strain of <i>M. bovis</i> was grown in Middlebrook 7H9 media and culture supernatant was collected at three-time points representing three different phases of growth (early exponential, late exponential, and stationary phases). Supernatants were double filtered, digested by trypsin and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The study found 15, 21, and 16 proteins in early, mid and late growth phases, respectively. In total, 22 proteins were identified, 18 of which were reported or predicted to have a cell wall or extracellular localization. To our knowledge, this is the first study to identify proteins secreted into the culture medium by a field strain of <i>M. bovis</i> in three different stages of growth. The dataset generated here provides candidate proteins with the potential for the development of serological diagnostic reagents or vaccine for bovine tuberculosis. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD017817.

### Keywords
M. bovis, Culture supernatant, Secreted proteins, Growth stage

### Affiliations
Canadian Food Inspection Agency
Canadian Food Inspection Agency, Ottawa laboratory Fallowfield, Canada University of Ottawa, Canada

### Submitter
Nadia Assal

### Lab Head
Dr Min Lin
Canadian Food Inspection Agency, Ottawa laboratory Fallowfield, Canada University of Ottawa, Canada


