### Accession
PXD027739

### Title
Release of a nuclear ubiquitin-like protein activates proteasomal degradation of mislocalized hydrophobic mitochondrial proteins in trypanosomes

### Description
Mitochondrial protein import in the parasitic protozoan Trypanosoma brucei is mediated by the atypical outer membrane translocase, ATOM. It consists of seven subunits including ATOM69, the import receptor for hydrophobic proteins. Ablation of ATOM69, but not of any other subunit, triggers a unique quality control pathway resulting in the proteasomal degradation of non-imported mitochondrial proteins. The process requires a protein of unknown function, an E3 ubiquitin ligase and the ubiquitin-like protein (TbUbL1), which all are recruited to the mitochondrion upon ATOM69 depletion. TbUbL1 is a nuclear protein, a fraction of which is released to the cytosol upon triggering of the pathway. Nuclear release is essential since cytosolic TbUbL1 can bind mislocalized mitochondrial proteins and likely transfers them to the proteasome. Mitochondrial quality control has previously been studied in yeast and metazoans. Finding such a pathway in the highly diverged trypanosomes suggests such pathways are an obligate feature of all mitochondria.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeling and LC-MS sample preparation: Transgenic cells enabling the RNAi-mediated knockdown of individual ATOM components (i.e., ATOM11, ATOM12, ATOM14, ATOM19, and ATOM69) were grown in SDM-80 medium containing 5.55 mM glucose, 10% dialyzed FCS and either the unlabeled "light" or stable isotope-labeled "heavy" versions of arginine (Arg0 or Arg10) and lysine (Lys0 or Lys8). To guarantee complete labeling of all proteins with heavy amino acids, the cells were cultured in SILAC medium for 6–10 cell doublings. Differentially labeled induced and uninduced RNAi cells were mixed in equal amounts. Cells were collected by centrifugation and washed with PBS. Crude mitochondria-enriched pellets (referred to as 'mito' fractions) were obtained by incubating 2 × 10E8 cells on ice for 10 min in 0.6 M sorbitol, 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 2 mM EDTA pH 8 containing 0.015% (w/v) digitonin, and centrifugation (5 min and 6,800 g and 4°C). Mixed whole cells (ATOM69-RNAi cells) and mito fractions obtained from ATOM11-, ATOM12-, ATOM14- or ATOM19-RNAi cells were then analyzed by LC-MS. Mito fractions were analyzed following either a gel-based (ATOM11, ATOM12, and ATOM14 RNAi experiments; see Peikert et al., 2017, Nat. Commun. 8) or a gel-free approach (ATOM19 RNAi experiments; see Rout et al., 2021, PNAS 118). Proteins of whole cell extracts from mixed uninduced and induced ATOM69 RNAi cells were digested using trypsin, followed by fractionation of the resulting peptide mixtures by high-pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography prior to LC-MS analysis as reported (Peikert et al., 2017, Nat. Commun. 8).  Experiments were performed in three independent replicates including a label-switch. LC-MS analysis: Samples of all ATOM RNAi experiments were analyzed on an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) using the set up and LC-MS parameters described before for the gel-based (Peikert et al., 2017, Nat. Commun. 8) or gel-free (Rout et al., 2021, PNAS 118) approach.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantification, MS raw data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43) and its integrated search engine Andromeda.MS/MS data were searched against all entries for T. brucei TREU927 listed in the respective fasta file downloaded from the TriTryp database (version 8.1; http://tritrypdb.org/tritrypdb/). MS/MS data acquired in this work for mito fractions from ATOM11, ATOM12, ATOM14 and ATOM19 RNAi as well as whole cell extracts from ATOM69 RNAi experiments were processed together with datasets previously published for mito fractions of ATOM40 (Peikert et al., 2017, Nat. Commun. 8), ATOM46 and ATOM69 (Rout et al., 2021, PNAS 118) RNAi experiments. Protein identification and quantification were based on ≥ 1 unique peptide and ≥ 1 ratio count, respectively. For all other parameters, MaxQuant default settings were used, including carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications, and Lys8 and Arg10 as heavy labels. To identify proteins with significantly altered abundance upon RNAi-induced ablation of the different ATOM components, the 'linear models for microarray data' (limma) approach was used, a moderated t-test that adjusts a protein's variance in ratios between replicates towards the average ratio variance of the entire dataset (Smyth, 2004, Stat. Appl. Genet. Mol. Biol. 3; Schwaemmle et al., 2013, J Proteome Res. 12). P-values were determined for proteins quantified in ≥ 2 replicates and adjusted for multiple testing according to Benjamini-Hochberg (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Rnai-mediated protein knockdown, Silac, Trypanosoma brucei, Mitochondrial quality control

### Affiliations
University of Freiburg, Institute of Biology II, Biochemistry/Functional Proteomics
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany


### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
University of Freiburg, Institute of Biology II, Biochemistry/Functional Proteomics


