### Accession
PXD019120

### Title
Reliable identification of protein-protein interactions by crosslinking mass spectrometry_CLMS_BS3&DSSO_datasets

### Description
Crosslink mass spectrometry dataset on soluble, SEC-fractionated high-molecular weight proteome of E. coli, crosslinked with BS3 or DSSO.  This data was used to identify protein-protein interactions and to obtain information on protein (complex) topologies. In the end, the data was used for finding and evaluating a reliable approach for error control in crosslink mass spectrometry, particularly for PPI-studies.  Cleared E. coli lysate was fractionated in the range of 3 MDa to 150 kDa (44 fractions). After taking aliquots for quantitative proteomics (JPST000843 ), the aliquots were split and the proteins in each fraction crosslinked (with BS3 or DSSO) and pooled again for each crosslinker set. Then, the pool was precipitated, derivatized and proteolysed in-solution. Digests were fractionated by SCX and hSAX (9x10 offline-fractionation matrix). Afterward, each peptide fraction was acquired via LC-MS on Q Exactive HF. Raw data was pre-processed (denoising, peak-list generation, error correction) and this data searched with xiSEARCH 1.6.746 using differing databases. FDR was calculated using xiFDR (version 2.0dev) under various settings to probe several FDR approaches.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets of Escherichia coli K12 strain were lysed by sonication and cleared of debris by centrifugation. The cleared lysate was then subjected to ultracentrifugation and concentrated using ultrafiltration. The high molecular weight proteome was fractionated using a BioSep SEC-S4000 column and crosslinked peptide pools were fractionated using an Äkta pure system. The fractions were then pooled and desalted using Stage-tips. We incubated protein pellets with cold acetone, then solubilized them using Urea, Thiourea, and ABC. After incubating with DTT and IAA, we added LysC proteases and trypsin proteases. To stop the reactions, we added TFA, followed by sample clean-up using the Stage-tip protocol. The samples were stored at -20°C until LC-MS acquisition. We used a mass spectrometer and nano system to analyze crosslinked peptides. Mobile phases A and B were used with a C18 Easy-Spray column. We eluted the analytes using a gradient and washed the column. We isolated the ten most intense precursor ions for fragmentation using HCD. Fragment ion scans were acquired with dynamic exclusion and in-source-CID. Each LC-MS run took 120 minutes.

### Data Protocol
xiSEARCH & xiFDR software was used to analyzed the data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein-protein interaction, Fdr, Ppi, Crosslinking, Mass spectrometry, E. coli, Clms

### Affiliations
Technische Universität Berlin, Bioanalytics, Prof. Juri Rappsilber

### Submitter
Ludwig Sinn 

### Lab Head
 Prof. Dr. Juri Rappsilber 
Technische Universität Berlin, Bioanalytics, Prof. Juri Rappsilber


