### Accession
PXD034891

### Title
Label-free quantitative SWATH-MS proteomic analysis of adult myocardial slices in vitro after biomimetic electromechanical stimulation

### Description
Conventional in vitro cell cultures are relatively available and have been widely used in explaining many mechanisms, but their simple construction is not directly applied to the in vivo environment. A possible solution to overcome this problem is special in vitro model maintained with cardiac slices. Slices show a preserved architecture, multi-cellularity and physiology of the heart tissue. This approach creates a bridge between the gap in cellular and in vivo studies. This study demonstrated that it is possible to find protein biomarkers between rat myocardial slices which were stretched to sarcomere lengths (SL) within the physiological range of 1.8–2.4μm and slices cultured without electromechanical stimulation and with fresh myocardial slices.

### Sample Protocol
Rat myocardial slices were electromechanically stimulated and stretched within the physiological range to SL of 1.8 and 2.4μm. Stimulated heart slices were compared with slices cultured on a liquid-air interface without electromechanical stimulation (unloaded, non-stimulated-TW) and with fresh myocardial slices (C). Fresh-frozen Heart heart slices were prepared for MS analysis using pressure cycling technology (PCT) in PBI NEP2320 Barocycler (Pressure BioSciences Inc., South Easton, Easton, MA, USA). Briefly, proteins were extracted using a solution containing 8M urea and 100 mM NH4HCO3 in 60 cycles (30000 psi for 50 s followed by 14.7 psi for 10 s per cycle) in 33°C. Disulfide bridges were reduced by incubation with 100 mM dithiotreitol in 35°C for 30 min, and cysteine residues were alkylated by 200 mM iodoacetamide in 30-min incubation at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were digested at 35°C, first by LysC in 1:50 enzyme-substrate ratio and next, by trypsin in 1:20 enzyme-substrate ratio in 45 and 90 pressure cycles, respectively (20000 psi for 50 s followed by 14.7 psi for 10 s per cycle). Proteolytic peptides resulting from digestion were desalted on the C18 resin in the STAGE Tips procedure. CO BY TU NAPISIAĆ O UŻYCIU TEGO APARTU DO EKSTRAKCJI BIAŁEK. NIE WIEM TEZ JAK NAPISAC O UZYCIU LYS-C. The desalted vacuum-evaporated samples were dissolved in 33 μL of 50% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. From each particular sample, 3 μL of the solution was taken to create four pool samples: C, TW, 1.8 and 2.2. The samples were transferred to HPLC vials with inserts and subjected to LC-MS/MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS spectra from DDA LC-MS/MS analyses of the rat heart samples were searched against the UniProt Rattus norvegicus database (version from 15.05.2018) using the Paragon algorithm incorporated in ProteinPilot 4.5 (SCIEX) software. The following database search parameters were applied: instrument TripleTOF 5600, iodoacetamide cysteine alkylation; enzyme: trypsin; special factors: urea denaturation; ID focus: biological modifications; search effort꞉ thorough ID, detected protein threshold [Conf]> 10%; automatic false discovery rate (FDR) analysis. Protein identification analysis was performed for all the types of pool rat heart protein extracts: C, TW, 1.8 and 2.2, by combined search of the MS/MS spectra from .wiff files of three technical replicates. Resulting .group file constituted the spectral ion library used in SWATH-MS quantification. Protein identifications were filtered at the level of 1% FDR. Data from SWATH-MS experiments were processed against MS/MS spectral ion library obtained by database search. Briefly, the .group file from ProteinPilot was loaded into SWATH 2.0 in PeakView 2.2 software (SCIEX), for automatic spectral ion library creation with modified peptides allowed and shared peptides excluded. Retention time calibration was performed basing on 9-11 peptides evenly distributed along chromatographic retention time. Manual selection of peptides and transitions for quantification depending on their quality was performed for each spectral library. Next, after automatic data processing, peptides and transitions which did not meet the applied criteria were removed. SWATH intensities for all quantified proteins were then exported to Excel and absolute protein concentrations were calculated using Total Protein Approach (TPA) in a DIA-TPA methodology applied before.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Rat, Myocardial slices, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Justus Liebig University Giessen
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry, Core Facility Laboratories, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG-MUG, University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland

### Submitter
Aleksandra Bogucka

### Lab Head
Dr Paulina Czaplewska
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry, Core Facility Laboratories, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG-MUG, University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland


