### Accession
PXD004680

### Title
A quantitative map of beta-lactone induced virulence regulation

### Description
Beta-lactones have recently been introduced as the first selective ClpP inhibitors that attenuate virulence of both sensitive Staphylococcus aureus and multiresistant strains (MRSA). Although previous knockout studies showed that ClpP is essential for S. aureus alpha-toxin production a link between beta-lactone inhibition and molecular virulence mechanisms has been lacking so far. We here perform a chemical-proteomic approach to elucidate anti-virulence pathways. First, we demonstrate by gel-free activity-based protein profiling that ClpP is the predominant target of beta-lactones. Only a few off-targets were discovered, which, unlike ClpP, were not involved in the reduction of alpha-toxin expression. Second, in-depth mechanistic insight was provided by a full proteomic comparison between lactone treated and untreated S. aureus cells. Quantitative mass spectrometric analysis revealed a strong up-regulation of Rot and a corresponding down-regulation of alpha-toxin, providing the first direct connection between the lactone-dependent phenotype and a corresponding cellular mechanism. By building up a quantitative virulence regulation network, we visualize the impact of ClpP inhibition in a systems biology context. Interestingly, a lack of in vitro Rot degradation by either ClpXP or ClpCP calls for an indirect mode of action that may involve ClpX-mediated RNA signaling and feed-back circuits.

### Sample Protocol
Staphylococcus aureus strains were grown under defined growth conditions. For ABPP experiments, cells were incubated with probe or DMSO for 1 h in PBS at an OD600 of 40. The labeled proteome was extracted by mechanical lysis and clicked to rhodamine-biotin-azide. Biotinylated proteins were precipitated and subsequently enriched via avidin beads. Proteins were denatured, reduced and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Samples were then diluted with TEAB and digested over-night by trypsin. Peptides in the supernatant were desalted by C18 columns, lyophilized, dimethyl-labeled, again lyophilized and subjected to tandem mass spectrometry. For whole-proteome analyses, bacteria were directly incubated with probe or DMSO, harvested and lysed. The soluble proteome was denatured, reduced and alkylated and then pre-digested with LysC for 4 h. After dilution with TEAB, the proteome was digested over-night with trypsin. Samples were desalted by C18 chromatography and dimethyl labeled on-column. After lyophilization, the peptides were fractionated using HILIC in case of compound D3 and U1, again lyophilized and subjected to tandem mass spectrometry. Samples were either measured on a Thermo Orbitrap XL or a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex 3000 nano HPLC system with a 15 cm C18 column. MS1 spectra were recorded in the orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000/120,000. Charge states greater 1 were accepted for CID/HCD fragmentation. MS2 spectra were recorded in the ion trap. The Orbitrap XL instrument was run in a TOP5 mode, the Orbitrap Fusion in the top-speed mode.

### Data Protocol
MS data were searched with MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.8 with most default settings (trypsin/P set as the digest enzyme, max. 2 missed cleavages, oxidation (M) and protein N-term acetylation as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification, min. peptide length 7, 4.5 ppm for precursor mass tolerance (FTMS MS/MS match tolerance) and 0.5 Da for fragment mass tolerance (ITMS MS/MS match tolerance)). For protein identification the following settings were used: PSM FDR 0.01, Protein FDR 0.01, min. razor + unique peptides: 1, razor protein FDR enabled, second peptides enabled. Searches were done against the Uniprot database for S. aureus NCTC8325 (taxon identifier: 93061, reference reviewed and unrevieved proteome (2889 entries) downloaded on 12.07.2015) and USA300 (taxon identifier: 367830, reviewed and unrevieved proteome (2607 entries) downloaded on 12.07.2015). Quantification was performed using dimethyl labeling with the following settings: light: DimethLys0, DimethNter0; medium: DimethLys4, DimethNter4 and heavy: DimethLys8, DimethNter8, min. ratio count: 2, unique + razor peptides used for quantification, variable modifications included for quantification, advanced ratio estimation enabled, requantify option enabled. Resulting data were further analyzed using Perseus software version 1.5.2.6. The rows were filtered (identified by site, reverse, contaminants), normalized ratios (compound vs. DMSO) transformed 1/x (due to label switch, if not set up in MaxQuant) and log2(x). One-sample Student’s t-test was performed and volcano plots were generated plotting log2(fold change (FC) compound/DMSO) vs. –log10 (p-value).

### Publication Abstract
&#x3b2;-Lactones have recently been introduced as the first selective ClpP inhibitors that attenuate virulence of both sensitive Staphylococcus aureus and multiresistant strains (MRSA). Although previous knockout studies showed that ClpP is essential for S. aureus alpha-toxin production, a link between &#x3b2;-lactone inhibition and molecular virulence mechanisms has been lacking so far. We here perform a chemical-proteomic approach to elucidate antivirulence pathways. First, we demonstrate by gel-free activity-based protein profiling that ClpP is the predominant target of &#x3b2;-lactones. Only a few off-targets were discovered, which, unlike ClpP, were not involved in the reduction of alpha-toxin expression. Second, in-depth mechanistic insight was provided by a full proteomic comparison between lactone treated and untreated S. aureus cells. Quantitative mass-spectrometric analysis revealed increased repressor of toxin (Rot) levels and a corresponding down-regulation of &#x3b1;-toxin, providing the first direct connection between the lactone-dependent phenotype and a corresponding cellular mechanism. By building up a quantitative virulence regulation network, we visualize the impact of ClpP inhibition in a systems biology context. Interestingly, a lack of in vitro Rot degradation by either ClpXP or ClpCP calls either for a proteolysis mechanism with yet unknown adaptor proteins or for an indirect mode of action that may involve ClpX-mediated RNA signaling and feedback circuits.

### Keywords
Antivirulence, Proteomics, S. aureus clpp, Activity-based protein profiling, Chemical knockout

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet
Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich (CIPSM) at the Department of Chemistry, Technische Universität München, Lichtenbergstraße 4, 85747 Garching b. München

### Submitter
Matthias Stahl

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan A. Sieber
Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich (CIPSM) at the Department of Chemistry, Technische Universität München, Lichtenbergstraße 4, 85747 Garching b. München


