### Accession
PXD028503

### Title
Identification of the Polycomb repressive complex 2 and its interacting proteins in Paramecium tetraurelia

### Description
Please provide an overall description of your study, think something similar in scope to the manuscript abstractn Paramecium tetraurelia, Ezl1 (Homolog of EZH2) and PtCAF1 (homolog of RbAp46/48) play important roles in genome rearrangement by disrupting the transposon and transposon-derived DNA elimination. Their influences on are very similar, which make us speculate they belong to the same complex. After verifying their interaction, we speculate the complex is polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and want to find the other components of this complex. We first tagged PtCAF1 with FlagHA and used anti-HA antibody to enrich for the interacting proteins, coupled with mass spectrometry analyses (previous submission). In this way, we identified the core components of PRC2, as well as some interacted proteins with this complex.  In a follow up dataset, we tagged two other subunits of the PRC2 complex we identified, Ezl1 and Eed, with FlagHA,used an anti-HA antibody to enrich for the interacting proteins, coupled with mass spectrometry analyses, and verified the complex.

### Sample Protocol
Around 1.2 million cells were collected, washed twice with 10mM Tris (pH 7.4), followed by two washes with 1x PBS and the supernatant removed. The pellet was resuspended in 2ml lysis buffer (50mM Tris (pH 8.0), 150mM NaCl, 5mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 1x complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche), 1% Triton X-100, 10% glycerol) and sonicated at 55% amplitude for 15 seconds using a Branson digital sonifier. The soluble fraction was separated by centrifugation and 1ml was incubated overnight at 4℃ with 50μl Anti-HA Affinity Matrix (Roche) which had been washed thrice with IP buffer (10mM Tris (pH 8.0), 150mM NaCl, 1mM MgCl2, 0.01% NP40, 5% glycerol). After overnight incubation, the beads were washed six times with IP buffer and the supernatant removed. The beads fraction were separated by SDS-PAGE electrophoresis and stained with Instant blue, before the entire sample was cut into cubes and stored in 20% Ethanol until processing.   The mass spectrometry analysis was performed at the Proteomics Mass Spectrometry Core Facility (PMSCF) of the University of Bern, Switzerland. The gel pieces were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. The digests were analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS (PROXEON coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with one injection of 5 μl digests. Peptides were trapped on a µPrecolumn C18 PepMap100 (5μm, 100 Å, 300 μm×5mm, ThermoFisher Scientific, Reinach, Switzerland) and separated by backflush on a C18 column (5 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm×15 cm, C18) by applying a 40-minute gradient of 5% acetonitrile to 40% in water, 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 350 nl/min. The Full Scan method was set with resolution at 60,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1E06 and maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. The data-dependent method for precursor ion fragmentation was applied with the following settings: resolution 15,000, AGC of 1E05, maximum ion time of 110 milliseconds, mass window 1.6 m/z, collision energy 27, under fill ratio 1%, charge exclusion of unassigned and 1+ ions, and peptide match preferred, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry of the first dataset and follow-up dataset was interpreted with MaxQuant version 1.5.4.1, respectively version 1.6.14.0, using a concatenated target and reverted decoy protein sequence database of Paramecium tetraurelia, v1.99.27 from the Centre National de Séquençage (https://www.cea.fr/), respectively v2.0 from ParameciumDB (https://paramecium.i2bc.paris-saclay.fr/download/Paramecium/tetraurelia/51/annotations/ptetraurelia_mac_51/). Full trypsin specificity was applied, allowing for up to 3 missed cleavages, variable modification on protein N-termini with acetylation, oxidation on methionine, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, and static modification with carbamidomethylation on cysteine, with a mass accuracy of 10 ppm for precursor and 20 ppm for fragment ions. Only proteins with at least 2 peptides identified with a 1% FDR level were accepted. The match between run option was activated but interpretation between different sample sets hindered by non-consecutive fraction numbering in the first dataset.

### Publication Abstract
In animal germlines, transposons are silenced at the transcriptional or post-transcriptional level to prevent deleterious expression. Ciliates employ a more direct approach by physically eliminating transposons from their soma, utilizing piRNAs to recognize transposons and imprecisely excise them. Ancient, mutated transposons often do not require piRNAs and are precisely eliminated. Here, we characterize the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) in Paramecium and demonstrate its involvement in the removal of transposons and transposon-derived DNA. Our results reveal a striking difference between the elimination of new and ancient transposons at the chromatin level and show that the complex may be guided by Piwi-bound small RNAs (sRNAs). We propose that imprecise elimination in ciliates originates from an ancient transposon silencing mechanism, much like in plants and metazoans, through sRNAs, repressive methylation marks, and heterochromatin formation. However, it is taken a step further by eliminating DNA as an extreme form of transposon silencing.

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Polycomb repressive complex 2, Paramecium tetraurelia

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Mariusz Nowacki
Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern


