### Accession
PXD021444

### Title
A trimeric Rab7 GEF controls NPC1-dependent lysosomal cholesterol export

### Description
Cholesterol import in mammalian cells is mediated by the LDL receptor pathway. Here, we perform a genome-wide CRISPR screen using an endogenous cholesterol reporter and identify >100 genes involved in LDL-cholesterol import. We characterise C18orf8 as a core subunit of the mammalian Mon1-Ccz1 guanidine exchange factor (GEF) for Rab7, required for complex stability and function. C18orf8-deficient cells lack Rab7 activation and show severe defects in late endosome morphology and endosomal LDL trafficking, resulting in cellular cholesterol deficiency. Unexpectedly, free cholesterol accumulates within swollen lysosomes, suggesting a critical defect in lysosomal cholesterol export. We find that active Rab7 interacts with the NPC1 cholesterol transporter and licenses lysosomal cholesterol export. This process is abolished in C18orf8-, Ccz1- and Mon1A/B-deficient cells and restored by a constitutively active Rab7. The trimeric Mon1-Ccz1-C18orf8 (MCC) GEF therefore plays a central role in cellular cholesterol homeostasis coordinating Rab7 activation, endosomal LDL trafficking and NPC1-dependent lysosomal cholesterol export.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells, or HeLa cells expressing 3xHA-C18orf8, C18orf8-3xHA, GFP-3xHA or NPC1-3xHA were lysed in 1% Digitonin, HA-tagged proteins were immune precipitated for 2.5 hours at 4°C using Ezview anti-HA agarose (Sigma-Aldrich) as described above, eluted for 1h at 37°C using 0.5 g/ml HA peptide (Sigma-Aldrich) and denatured using 2% SDS, 50mM Tris pH7.4. Eluted samples were reduced with 10mM TCEP for 10mins RT and alkylated with 40mM Iodoacetamide for 20mins RT in the dark. Reduced and alkylated samples were then submitted to digestion using the SP3 method (PMID: 25358341). Briefly, carboxylate coated paramagnetic beads are added to the sample and protein is bound to the beads by acidification with formic acid and addition of acetonitrile (ACN, final 50%). The beads are then washed sequentially with 100% ACN, 70% Ethanol (twice) and 100% ACN. 10uL of a buffer of TEAB (Triethylammonium bicarbonate) pH8 and 0.1% Sodium deoxycholate (SDC) is then added to the washed beads along with 100ng trypsin. Samples were then incubated overnight at 37 degrees with periodic shaking at 2000rpm. After digestion, peptides are immobilised on beads by addition of 200uL ACN and washed twice with 100uL ACN before eluting in 19uL 2% DMSO and removing the eluted peptide from the beads.

### Data Protocol
Samples were acidified by addition of 1uL 10% TFA and the whole, 20uL sample injected. Data were acquired on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) running Xcalibur v4.3 (Thermo-Fisher) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UHPLC (Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded at 10 μl/min for 5 min on to an Acclaim PepMap C18 cartridge trap column (300 um × 5 mm, 5 um particle size) in 0.1% TFA. After loading a linear gradient of 3–32% solvent B over 60 or 90min was used for sample separation with a column of the same stationary phase (75 µm × 75 cm, 2 µm particle size) before washing at 90% B and re-equilibration. Solvents were A: 0.1% FA and B:ACN/0.1% FA. MS settings were as follows. MS1: Quadrupole isolation, 120’000 resolution, 5e5 AGC target, 50 ms maximum injection time, ions injected for all parallelisable time. MS2: Quadrupole isolation at an isolation width of m/z 0.7, HCD fragmentation (NCE 34) with the ion trap scanning out in rapid mode from, 8e3 AGC target, 250 ms maximum injection time, ions accumulated for all parallelisable time. Target cycle time was 2s. Spectra were searched by Mascot v2.3 (Matrix Science) within Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo-Fisher) in two rounds of searching. First search was against the UniProt Human reference proteome (26/09/17) and compendium of common contaminants (GPM). The second search took all unmatched spectra from the first search and searched against the human trEMBL database (UniProt, 26/0917). The following search parameters were used. MS1 Tol: 10 ppm, MS2 Tol: 0.6 Da, Fixed mods: Carbamindomethyl (C) Var mods: Oxidation (M), Enzyme: Trypsin (/P). PSM FDR was calculated using Mascot percolator and was controlled at 0.01% for ‘high’ confidence PSMs and 0.05% for ‘medium’ confidence PSMs. Proteins were quantified using the Minora feature detector within Proteome Discoverer and values normalised against the median protein abundance of the whole sample.

### Publication Abstract
Cholesterol import in mammalian cells is mediated by the LDL receptor pathway. Here, we perform a genome-wide CRISPR screen using an endogenous cholesterol reporter and identify &gt;100 genes involved in LDL-cholesterol import. We characterise C18orf8 as a core subunit of the mammalian Mon1-Ccz1 guanidine exchange factor (GEF) for Rab7, required for complex stability and function. C18orf8-deficient cells lack Rab7 activation and show severe defects in late endosome morphology and endosomal LDL trafficking, resulting in cellular cholesterol deficiency. Unexpectedly, free cholesterol accumulates within swollen lysosomes, suggesting a critical defect in lysosomal cholesterol export. We find that active Rab7 interacts with the NPC1 cholesterol transporter and licenses lysosomal cholesterol export. This process is abolished in C18orf8-, Ccz1- and Mon1A/B-deficient cells and restored by a constitutively active Rab7. The trimeric Mon1-Ccz1-C18orf8 (MCC) GEF therefore plays a central role in cellular cholesterol homeostasis coordinating Rab7 activation, endosomal LDL trafficking and NPC1-dependent lysosomal cholesterol export.

### Keywords
Mon1, Rab7, Npc1, Ldl, Lysosome, C18orf8, Ccz1, Gef, Cholesterol

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease, University of Cambridge, UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
James Williamson

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Lehner
Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease, University of Cambridge, UK


