### Accession
PXD011141

### Title
N-terminome Method Development (Discovery)

### Description
Developed a method to enrich N-terminome. Several parameters were change to optimization. This project focused on the discovery of N-terminome.

### Sample Protocol
Reduction, Alkylation, Amine Labeling, Digestion, and enrich N-terminome with amine capturing agent.

### Data Protocol
MS-GF+ database search and FDR surveyed by percolator

### Publication Abstract
The field of terminal proteomics is limited in that it is optimized for large-scale analysis via multistep processes involving liquid chromatography. Here, we present an integrated N-terminal peptide enrichment method (iNrich) that can handle as little as 25 &#x3bc;g of cell lysate via a single-stage encapsulated solid-phase extraction column. iNrich enables simple, rapid, and reproducible sample processing, treatment of a wide range of protein amounts (25 &#x3bc;g &#x223c; 1 mg), multiplexed parallel sample preparation, and in-stage sample prefractionation using a mixed-anion-exchange filter. We identified &#x223c;5000 N-terminal peptides (Nt-peptides) from only 100 &#x3bc;g of human cell lysate including Nt-formyl peptides. Multiplexed sample preparation facilitated quantitative and robust enrichment of N-terminome with dozens of samples simultaneously. We further developed the method to incorporate isobaric tags such as a tandem mass tag (TMT) and used it to discover novel peptides during ER stress analysis. The iNrich facilitated high-throughput N-terminomics and degradomics at a low cost using commercially available reagents and apparatus, without requiring arduous procedures.

### Keywords
Human, Yeast, N-terminome

### Affiliations
Center for Theragnosis, KIST, Seoul, Korea
KIST

### Submitter
Shinyeong Ju

### Lab Head
Dr Cheolju Lee
Center for Theragnosis, KIST, Seoul, Korea


