### Accession
PXD017532

### Title
Sex estimation of a Mesolithic infant through enamel peptides by LC-MS/MS

### Description
Sex estimation of a Mesolithic infant by amelogenin peptides

### Sample Protocol
A small fragment of the tooth (~10 mg; including both dentine and enamel), was sonicated with MilliQ water and quickly pre-cleaned with 5% HCl. Then, the specimen was digested through 250 μl of 5% HCl (suprapur grade). This solution was desalted and purified using a C18 silica SpinTip (Thermo Scientific) and dried down overnight under a class 100 laminar-flow hood in the clean room facility of the Department of Chemical and Geological Sciences (University of Modena and Reggio Emilia). Dry peptides were re-suspended using 35 μl of a water:acetonitrile:formic acid mixture (95:3:2) and analysed by LC-MS/MS (Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC coupled to a high-resolution Q Exactive mass spectrometer; Thermo Scientific). A run time of 90 minutes was employed for the specimen and the blanks. The analysis of the AV1’s tooth was duplicated.

### Data Protocol
To check the presence of amelogenin proteins we searched the ion chromatograms, focusing on specific peptides as SM(ox)IRPPY (AMELY; [M+2H]+2 440.2233 m/z) and SIRPPYPSY  (AMELX; [M+2H]+2  540.2796 m/z). Additionally, raw data were converted in Mascot generic format and searched against UniProt (constrained to Homo sapiens) and cRAP (contaminant database, 116 sequences). No proteolytic enzyme was selected in search parameters and one missed cleavage allowed. Deamidated asparagines/glutamine (NQ) and oxidated methionine (M) were set as variable modifications. Error tolerance was set at 10 ppm for the precursor ions and 0.05 Da for the product ions. False discovery rate was estimated through an automatic decoy database, with a probability threshold trimmed to a FDR <1%. A specific protein was considered as identified if at least two significant peptides were observed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Amelogenin; sex estimation; enamel; fossil

### Affiliations
Department of Cultural Heritage - University of Bologna
Department of Cultural Heritage, University of Bologna

### Submitter
Federico Lugli

### Lab Head
Dr Federico Lugli
Department of Cultural Heritage, University of Bologna


