### Accession
PXD002188

### Title
Nucleolar proteome of the developing brain

### Description
To study nucleolar involvement in brain development, the nuclear and nucleolar proteomes from the rat cerebral cortex at postnatal day 7 were analyzed using LC-MS/iTRAQ methodology.

### Sample Protocol
All the samples were brought to the following reagent concentrations: 2% of  SDS and 100 mM DTT. Protein concentration was estimated with dot-blot and 100 g of protein  from each sample was taken for further preparation. Proteins were denatured and reduced at 95oC  for 5 minutes, and subsequently digested with trypsin (Promega) in filter devices (10 MWCO,  Sartorius Stedim) using the Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method. The digestion  was performed for 16h at enzyme/protein ratio of 1/100. For better compatibility with iTRAQ, we used triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB, Sigma) instead of ammonium  bicarbonate. Further on, all samples were lyophillized and incubated with iTRAQ mass tags as  recommended in the manufacturer's protocol (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA). After 1 hour the labeling reaction was stopped by diluting each sample with an appropriate amount of sample  buffer (8 M urea, 0.2% IPG buffer pH 3–11 NL (GE Healthcare), 0.002% bromophenol blue in  50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0). Labeled samples were then pooled, concentrated in a Speedvac and  fractionated on the IEF strip. The strip was then cut into 18 fractions and from each fraction  peptides were extracted. Peptide mixtures were analyzed with an LC-MS system, composed of a  UPLC chromatograph (nanoAcquity, Waters) directly coupled to a Q Exactive mass  spectrometer (Thermo), working in the data-dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS data were pre-processed with Mascot Distiller  software (v.2.4.3, MatrixScience, Boston, MA) and a search was performed with the Mascot  Search Engine (MatrixScience, Mascot Server 2.4.1) against the Uniprot-derived, complete  mouse proteome database (43236 sequences). To reduce mass errors, the peptide and fragment  mass tolerance settings were established separately for individual LC-MS/MS runs after a  measured mass recalibration, as described previously (28). Subsequently, data from individual  MS runs were merged into a single Mascot search. The parameters were as follows: enzyme -  Trypsin, missed cleaveages - 1, fixed modifications - Carbamidomethyl(C), variable  modifications - Oxidation (M), quantitation - iTRAQ 8plex, taxonomy - unrestricted, instrument - HCD, parent MMD - 5 ppm, fragment MMD - 0.08 Da, Decoy option - active. A statistical  assessment of the confidence of peptide assignments was based on the target/decoy database search strategy. This procedure provided q-value estimates for each peptide spectrum match  in the dataset. All queries with q-values >0.01 were removed from further analysis. A protein  was regarded as identified confidently when at least two peptides of this protein were found.  Proteins identified by a subset of peptides from another protein were excluded from the analysis.  Proteins that exactly matched the same set of peptides were combined into a single group  (family). The mass calibration and data filtering described above were carried out with MScan  software, developed in-house (http://proteom.ibb.waw.pl/mscan/).

### Publication Abstract
To study nucleolar involvement in brain development, the nuclear and nucleolar proteomes from the rat cerebral cortex at postnatal day 7 were analyzed using LC-MS/iTRAQ methodology. Data of the analysis are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002188. Among 504 candidate nucleolar proteins, the overrepresented gene ontology terms included such cellular compartmentcategories as "nucleolus", "ribosome" and "chromatin". Consistent with such classification, the most overrepresented functional gene ontology terms were related to RNA metabolism/ribosomal biogenesis, translation, and chromatin organization. Sixteen putative nucleolar proteins were associated with neurodevelopmental phenotypes in humans. Microcephaly and/or cognitive impairment were the most common phenotypic manifestations. Although several such proteins have links to ribosomal biogenesis and/or genomic stability/chromatin structure (e.g. EMG1, RPL10, DKC1, EIF4A3, FLNA, SMC1, ATRX, MCM4, NSD1, LMNA, or CUL4B), others including ADAR, LARP7, GTF2I, or TCF4 have no such connections known. Although neither the Alazami syndrome-associated LARP7nor the Pitt-Hopkins syndrome-associated TCF4 were reported in nucleoli of non-neural cells, in neurons, their nucleolar localization was confirmed by immunostaining. In cultured rat hippocampal neurons, knockdown of LARP7 reduced both perikaryal ribosome content and general protein synthesis. Similar anti-ribosomal/anti-translation effects were observed after knockdown of the ribosomal biogenesis factor EMG1 whose deficiency underlies Bowen-Conradi syndrome. Finally, moderate reduction of ribosome content and general protein synthesis followed overexpression of two Pitt-Hopkins syndrome mutant variants of TCF4. Therefore, dysregulation of ribosomal biogenesis and/or other functions of the nucleolus may disrupt neurodevelopment resulting in such phenotypes as microcephaly and/or cognitive impairment.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Rat, Nucleolus, Itraq

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland
IBB PAS

### Submitter
Agata Malinowska

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Dadlez
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland


