### Accession
PXD004923

### Title
Proteomic and genomic characterization of a yeast model for Ogden Syndrome

### Description
Naa10 is a N-terminal acetyltransferase that, in a complex with its auxiliary subunit Naa15, co-translationally acetylates the -amino group of newly synthetized proteins as they emerge from the ribosome. Roughly 40-50% of the human proteome is acetylated by Naa10, rendering this an enzyme with one of the most broad substrate ranges known. Recently, we reported an X-linked disorder of infancy, Ogden syndrome, in two families harboring a c.109T>C (p.Ser37Pro) variant in NAA10. In the present study we performed in-depth characterization of a yeast model of Ogden syndrome. Stress tests and proteomic analyses suggest that the S37P mutation disrupts Naa10 function and reduces cellular fitness during heat shock, possibly due to dysregulation of chaperone expression and accumulation. Microarray and RNA-seq revealed a pseudo-diploid gene expression profile in Naa10 cells, likely responsible for a mating defect. In conclusion, the data presented here further support the disruptive nature of the S37P/Ogden mutation and identify affected cellular processes potentially contributing to the severe phenotype seen in Ogden syndrome.

### Sample Protocol
yeast were harvested during the exponential phase of growth at an OD600 of 0.6, separated by filtration (see below) and cryogenically grinded in a SPEX Freezer Mill. The samples were resuspended in Y-PER yeast protein extraction reagent (Thermo Fisher) and cellular debris removed by centrifugation. Each sample was chemically labeled separately with 1 of up to 8 distinct isobaric iTRAQ reagents. Peptides were fractionated using a high-low pH reverse phase separation strategy adapted from Gillar et al. (2005). For the first (high pH) dimension, peptides were fractionated on a 10cm x 1.0mm column packed with Gemini 3u C18 resin (Phenomenex, Ventura, CA) at a flow rate of 100ul/min.  Mobile phase A consisted of 20mM ammonium formate pH 10 and mobile phase B consisted of 90% acetonitrile/20mM ammonium formate pH 10.  100 ug of total peptide was reconstituted with 50uL of mobile phase A and the entire sample injected onto the column.  Peptides were separated using a 35 minute linear gradient from 5% B to 70% B and then increasing mobile phase  to 95% B for 10 minutes.  Fractions were collected every minute for 80 minutes and were then combined into 22 fractions using the concatenation strategy described by Wang et al. (2011).  An estimated 1ug of peptide from each of the 22 fractions was then separately injected into the mass spectrometer.An Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), equipped with a nano-ion spray source was coupled to an EASY-nLC system (Thermo Scientific). The nano-flow LC system was configured with a 180-μm id fused silica capillary trap column containing 3 cm of Aqua 5-μm C18 material (Phenomenex), and a self-pack PicoFrit™ 100-μm analytical column with an 8-μm emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed to 15cm with Aqua 3-μm C18 material (Phenomenex).  Mobile phase A consisted of 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B consisted of 90% acetonitrile/ 0.1% formic Acid.  3uL of each sample dissolved in mobile phase A, was injected through the autosampler onto the trap column.  Peptides were then separated using the following linear gradient steps at a flow rate of 400 nL/min: 5% B for 1 min, 5% B to 35% B over 70 min, 35% B to 75% B over 15 min, held at 75% B for 8 min, 75% B to 8% B over 1 min and the final 5 min held at 8% B.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were extracted using the MASCOT Distiller software (MatrixScience). False discovery rates (FDR) were estimated by searching equivalent reversed or randomized sequence databases, using a cutoff value of 1% FDR. Protein-level expression ratios were calculated using intensity-weighted averages from matching peptides after outlier removal. This experiment was performed in duplicate. Comparing the two sample replicates, we fitted a Cauchy distribution using the EasyFit statistical package (MathWave, Inc.). Peptide p values were calculated using a two-tailed t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Naa10 is an N<sup>&#x3b1;</sup> -terminal acetyltransferase that, in a complex with its auxiliary subunit Naa15, co-translationally acetylates the &#x3b1;-amino group of newly synthetized proteins as they emerge from the ribosome. Roughly 40-50% of the human proteome is acetylated by Naa10, rendering this an enzyme one of the most broad substrate ranges known. Recently, we reported an X-linked disorder of infancy, Ogden syndrome, in two families harbouring a c.109&#x2009;T&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;C (p.Ser37Pro) variant in NAA10. In the present study we performed in-depth characterization of a yeast model of Ogden syndrome. Stress tests and proteomic analyses suggest that the S37P mutation disrupts Naa10 function and reduces cellular fitness during heat shock, possibly owing to dysregulation of chaperone expression and accumulation. Microarray and RNA-seq revealed a pseudo-diploid gene expression profile in &#x394;Naa10 cells, probably responsible for a mating defect. In conclusion, the data presented here further support the disruptive nature of the S37P/Ogden mutation and identify affected cellular processes potentially contributing to the severe phenotype seen in Ogden syndrome. Data are available via GEO under identifier GSE86482 or with ProteomeXchange under identifier PXD004923. &#xa9; 2016 The Authors. Yeast published by John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd.

### Keywords
Ogden syndrome

### Affiliations
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Stanley Institute for Cognitive Genomics, One Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, USA

### Submitter
Keith Rivera

### Lab Head
Dr Gholson J. Lyon
Stanley Institute for Cognitive Genomics, One Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, USA


