### Accession
PXD000308

### Title
Shotgun label-free quantitative proteomics of water-deficit stressed mid-mature peanut (Arachis hypogaea L.) seed

### Description
Legume seeds and peanuts, in particular, are an inexpensive source of plant proteins and edible oil. Owing to their importance in global food security, it is necessary to understand the genetic, biochemical, and physiological mechanisms involved in controlling seed quality and nutritive attributes. A comprehensive understanding of seed development and the effects of water-deficit stress on the incorporation of the main storage reserves in seeds, such as proteins, fatty acids, starch, and secondary metabolites will enhance our ability to improve seed quality and yield through molecular breeding programs. In the present study we employed a label-free quantitative proteomics approach to study the functional proteins altered in the mid mature peanut seed during water-deficit stress.  The RAW files of LC-MS/MS runs were converted to mzXML format and searched using GPM (Global Proteome Machine, version 2.1.1) software. Each mzXML spectra file was also searched against a reversed sequence database to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR). The 16 output files for each replicate were combined to create a single merged result file and only proteins with FDR less than 1% were used for the analysis. The following parameters were used for the search: Enzyme: trypain, [RK]|{P}; allowed missed cleavage: 2; variable modification: methionine oxidation; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation of cysteine; MS and MS/MS mass tolerance: ±2 Da and ±0.2 Da respectively. For the comparative analysis, the normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAFs) was used to study protein abundance as described earlier. For each identified protein, k, in sample i, the number of spectral counts was divided by length of the identified protein. NSAFi values for each sample i were obtained by normalizing SpCk/Lengthk values to the total by dividing by the sum (SpCk/Lengthk) over all proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Legume seeds and peanuts, in particular, are an inexpensive source of plant proteins and edible oil. A comprehensive understanding of seed metabolism and the effects of water-deficit stress on the incorporation of the main storage reserves in seeds, such as proteins, fatty acids, starch, and secondary metabolites, will enhance our ability to improve seed quality and yield through molecular breeding programs. In the present study, we employed a label-free quantitative proteomics approach to study the functional proteins altered in the midmature (65-70 days postanthesis) peanut seed grown under water-deficit stress conditions. We created a pod-specific proteome database and identified 93 nonredundant, statistically significant, and differentially expressed proteins between well-watered and drought-stressed seeds. Mapping of these differential proteins revealed three candidate biological pathways (glycolysis, sucrose and starch metabolism, and fatty acid metabolism) that were significantly altered due to water-deficit stress. Differential accumulation of proteins from these pathways provides insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying the observed physiological changes, which include reductions in pod yield and biomass, reduced germination, reduced vigor, decreased seed membrane integrity, increase in storage proteins, and decreased total fatty acid content. Some of the proteins encoding rate limiting enzymes of biosynthetic pathways could be utilized by breeders to improve peanut seed production during water-deficit conditions in the field. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000308.

### Keywords
Peanut

### Affiliations
Center for Biotechnology and Genomics

### Submitter
Masoud zabet-moghaddam

### Lab Head


