### Accession
PXD043220

### Title
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic reprogramming in epithelial ovarian cancer metastasis

### Description
Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is a high-risk cancer presenting with heterogeneous tumors. The high incidence of EOC metastasis from primary tumors to nearby tissues and organs is a major driver of EOC lethality. We used cellular models of spheroid formation and re-adherence to investigate cellular signaling dynamics in each step toward EOC metastasis. In our system, adherent cells model primary tumors, spheroids formation represents the initiation of metastatic spread, while re-adherent spheroid cells represent secondary tumors. Proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses show that spheroid cells are hypoxic and show markers for cell cycle arrest. Aurora kinase B (AURKB) abundance and downstream substrate phosphorylation are significantly reduced in spheroids and re-adherent cells, explaining their cell cycle arrest phenotype. The proteome of re-adherent cells is most similar to spheroids, yet greater changes in the phosphoproteome show that spheroid cells stimulate Rho-associated kinase 1 (ROCK1) mediated signaling, which controls cytoskeletal organization. In spheroids, we found significant phosphorylation of ROCK1 substrates that were reduced in both adherent and re-adherent cells. Application of the ROCK1-specific inhibitor Y-27632 to spheroids increased the rate of re-adherence and spheroid density. The data suggest ROCK1 inhibition increases EOC metastatic potential. We identified novel pathways controlled by AURKB and ROCK1 as major drivers of metastatic behavior in EOC cells. Our data show that phosphoproteomic reprogramming precedes proteomic changes that characterize spheroid re-adherence in EOC metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion. Cells were lysed by three rounds of sonication at 35% amplitude (5s on/15s off) on ice in 6 M guanidine, 200 mM EPPS (pH 8.6), 100 mM NaF, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (2 mM NaF, 2 mM imidazole, 1.15 mM Na2MoO4, 2 mM Na3VO4, 4 mM Na2C4H4O6, 1 mM Na4P2O7, 1 mM b-glycerophosphate). Lysates were methanol-chloroform precipitated and protein pellets dried before resuspension in 200 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazinepropanesulphonic acid (EPPS). Samples were treated with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 30 minutes and 15 mM Indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) for 45 minutes. LysC (Wako, Osaka, Japan) digestion was performed at a ratio of 1 mAu per 100µg of protein for 2 hours at 37˚C, then trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added at a ratio of 1:40 for overnight digestion. Finally, samples were corrected to pH<2 by addition of trifluoroacetic acid, desalted by C18 column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA), dried in a SpeedVac, and stored in -80˚C until labelling.  TMT labelling. Samples were resuspended in 200 mM EPPS and labelled with TMT 10-plex labelling reagents as described previously (17). Reactions were quenched by addition of 2.7 µl of 5% hydroxylamine. Finally, samples were combined at equal ratios, desalted by 100 mg C18 column, and dried.  Phosphopeptide enrichment. Phosphopeptides were isolated from whole peptide sample by consecutive TiO2 and Fe-IMAC enrichment, as described (18). Briefly, TiO2 enrichment was performed using High-Select TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) according to manufacturer protocols. The flow-through and washes from TiO2 were saved and combined, dried to approximately 30 uL by SpeedVac, and used for Fe-IMAC as previously described (19). Finally, the flow-through and washes from Fe-IMAC were saved and combined, dried by SpeedVac, and used for proteome sample analysis. Both proteome and phosphoproteome samples were fractionated by Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA), with additional elutions in 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (phosphoproteome) or 0.1% formic acid in water (proteome). Elutions were dried by SpeedVac and pellets resuspended in 0.1% formic acid in water for mass spectrometry injection.  Mass spectrometry analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed as described (20). Peptides were analyzed by data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method on an EASY-nLC 1000 system coupled with Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (20 mm with 75 µm in diameter, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and separated on an EASY-Spray ES803A analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient consisted of a linear gradient from 5% to 25% B, then 40% B for the last 15% of the gradient. Gradient length was 3 hours for the phosphoproteome or 4 hours for proteome fractions.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. FragPipe version 17.2-build23 was used for data processing (21-24). The TMT10 workflow was used for proteome samples and the TMT10-phospho workflow was used for phosphoproteomics samples. The median centering output was used for further analysis in Perseus version 1.6.14.0 (25). RStudio version 4.2.2 (26) was used for creation of heatmaps and PCA plots. DEqMS (27) and Limma (28) were used for quality control analysis, creation of volcano plots, and boxplots. Data was analyzed by GSEA (29), KSEA (30), Coral (31), and Cytoscape (32) with EnrichmentMap (33), Omics Visualizer (34), and STRING (35) add-ons according to respective guidelines. Kaplan-meier plots were generated using KM-plotter, with the ovarian cancer database using the default settings (36).

### Publication Abstract
Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is a high-risk cancer presenting with heterogeneous tumors. The high incidence of EOC metastasis from primary tumors to nearby tissues and organs is a major driver of EOC lethality. We used cellular models of spheroid formation and readherence to investigate cellular signaling dynamics in each step toward EOC metastasis. In our system, adherent cells model primary tumors, spheroid formation represents the initiation of metastatic spread, and readherent spheroid cells represent secondary tumors. Proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses show that spheroid cells are hypoxic and show markers for cell cycle arrest. Aurora kinase B abundance and downstream substrate phosphorylation are significantly reduced in spheroids and readherent cells, explaining their cell cycle arrest phenotype. The proteome of readherent cells is most similar to spheroids, yet greater changes in the phosphoproteome show that spheroid cells stimulate Rho-associated kinase 1 (ROCK1)-mediated signaling, which controls cytoskeletal organization. In spheroids, we found significant phosphorylation of ROCK1 substrates that were reduced in both adherent and readherent cells. Application of the ROCK1-specific inhibitor Y-27632 to spheroids increased the rate of readherence and altered spheroid density. The data suggest ROCK1 inhibition increases EOC metastatic potential. We identified novel pathways controlled by Aurora kinase B and ROCK1 as major drivers of metastatic behavior in EOC cells. Our data show that phosphoproteomic reprogramming precedes proteomic changes that characterize spheroid readherence in EOC metastasis.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Epithelial ovarian cancer, Aurora kinase, Rock1, Metastasis

### Affiliations
University of Western Ontario
Department of Biochemistry, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, Western University, London, ON, N6A 5C1, Canada

### Submitter
Owen Hovey

### Lab Head
Dr Ilka Heinemann
Department of Biochemistry, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, Western University, London, ON, N6A 5C1, Canada


