### Accession
PXD008983

### Title
CIP2A interactome in human Th17 Cells

### Description
CIP2A immunoprecipitation (IP) was carried out with two specific anti CIP2A antibodies that recognize distinct regions of CIP2A protein and respective Immunoglobulin G (IgG) were used in control IPs as a negative control. The digested samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS to identify CIP2A protein network.

### Sample Protocol
Human CD4+ T cell isolation, activation, and differentiation. Umbilical cord blood was layered on ficol (GE health Care # 17-1440-03) for isolation of white blood cells. CD4+ T cells were then isolated using Dynal bead CD4+ isolation kit from Invitrogen (Cat #11331D). For activation of T cells, a combination of plate-bound anti-CD3 (Beckman Coulter REF # IM-1304) and soluble anti-CD28 (Beckman coulter REF # IM1376) antibodies was used. The Th17 cultured cells were stimulated in presence of IL-6 (20ng/ml, Roche, Cat# 11138600 001); IL-1β (10ng/ml, R&D Systems Cat# 201 LB); TGF-β1 (10ng/ml, R&D Systems Cat# 240); anti-IL-4 (1 ug/ml) R&D Systems Cat# MAB204); anti-IFN-γ (1 ug/ml R&D Systems Cat#MAB-285).  Digestion and Mass Spectrometry The immuno-precipitates (both IgG and CIP2A pulldown) were denatured with 8 M urea followed by reduction of cysteine disulphide bridges using dithiothreitol (10 mM) at 37 0C for 1 h. The cysteine residues were subsequently alkylated using iodoacetamide (13.6 mM, in darkness) at room temperature for 30 min. The samples were diluted to reduce the urea concentration to <1 molar, followed by digestion with sequencing grade modified trypsin (0.29 µg per immuno-precipitate) at 37 0C overnight (~16 hours). The samples were acidified then desalted using C18 Stage Tips, prepared in house using Empore C18 disks (3M, Cat No 2215). The desalted samples were dried and stored at -800C until further analysis.  After reconstituting in formic acid/acetonitrile (both 2% in water), aliquots of the digested peptides (200 ng) were analysed with Easy-nLC 1200 coupled to Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were loaded onto a 20 x 0.1 mm i.d.  pre-column packed with 5 µm Reprosil C18-bonded silica (Dr Maisch GmbH)  and separated with a 75 µm x 150 mm analytical column packed with 5 µm Reprosil C18 (Dr Maisch GmbH). A separation gradient from 5 to 35% B in 78 min was used at a flow rate of 300 nl/min.  MS/MS data were acquired in positive ion mode with a data dependent acquisition setting for higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most intense ions (m/z 300-2000, charge states > 1+). MS1 spectra were acquired with the resolution set to 120,000 (at m/z 400), with a target value (AGC) of 3,000,000 ions and a maximal injection time of 100 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 15,000 (at m/z 400), a target value of 50,000 ions, a maximum injection time of 250 ms, and the lowest mass fixed at m/z 120. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. Triplicate analysis were performed for all samples in randomized batches.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis and statistics:  The mass spectrometry raw files were searched against a Uniprot FASTA sequence database of the human proteome (version June 2016) using the Andromeda search engine (1), incorporated with the MaxQuant software (2). Trypsin digestion, with a maximum of two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, and variable modification of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were specified in the searches. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 at the peptide and protein level was applied. MaxQuant’s label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm (3) was used to calculate the relative protein intensity profiles across the samples. The “match between run” option with a time window of 0.7 min was enabled to perform matching across the mass spectrometric measurements.   The MaxQuant output was further processed using Perseus (4). Notably the output was filtered to remove contaminants, reverse hits and proteins only identified by site. Protein LFQ values were log2 transformed. Categorical annotation was made to define grouping, followed by filtering to retain proteins with three valid values in at least one group (IgG and CIP2A pulldown). To identify potential interactors, t-test statistics was applied. To filter non-specific interactions the Significance Analysis of INTeractome (SAINT)  analysis was made (Mellacheruvu et al. 2013) using the CrapOme interface (https://reprint-apms.org/).

### Publication Abstract
Cancerous inhibitor of protein phosphatase 2A (CIP2A) is involved in immune response, cancer progression, and Alzheimer's disease. However, an understanding of the mechanistic basis of its function in this wide spectrum of physiological and pathological processes is limited due to its poorly characterized interaction networks. Here we present the first systematic characterization of the CIP2A interactome by affinity-purification mass spectrometry combined with validation by selected reaction monitoring targeted mass spectrometry (SRM-MS) analysis in T helper (Th) 17 (Th17) cells. In addition to the known regulatory subunits of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), the catalytic subunits of protein PP2A were found to be interacting with CIP2A. Furthermore, the regulatory (PPP1R18, and PPP1R12A) and catalytic (PPP1CA) subunits of phosphatase PP1 were identified among the top novel CIP2A interactors. Evaluation of the ontologies associated with the proteins in this interactome revealed that they were linked with RNA metabolic processing and splicing, protein traffic, cytoskeleton regulation and ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation processes. Taken together, this network of protein-protein interactions will be important for understanding and further exploring the biological processes and mechanisms regulated by CIP2A both in physiological and pathological conditions.

### Keywords
Cord blood, Interactome, Cip2a, Lc-ms/ms, Th17 cells

### Affiliations
Turku Biosciences
Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University

### Submitter
Robert Moulder

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Riitta Lahesmaa
Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University


