### Accession
PXD013064

### Title
IDENTIFICATION OF AN UNCONVENTIONAL SUBPEPTIDOME BOUND TO THE BEHÇET’S DISEASE - ASSOCIATED HLA–B*51:01 THAT IS REGULATED BY ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM AMINOPEPTIDASE 1 (ERAP1)

### Description
Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) - B*51:01 and endoplasmic reticulum aminopeptidase 1 (ERAP1) are two strong predisposing genetic factors to Behçet's disease (BD). Previous studies have focused on two subgroups of HLA-B*51 peptidome containing Proline (Pro) or Alanine (Ala) at position 2 (P2). Little is known about the unconventional non-Pro/Ala2 HLA-B*51-bound peptides. We aimed to study the features of this novel sub-peptidome, and investigate its regulation by ERAP1. CRISPR-Cas9 was used to generate an HLA-ABC-knockout HeLa cell line (HeLa.ABC-KO), which was subsequently transduced to express HLA-B*51:01 (HeLa.ABC-KO.B51). ERAP1 was silenced using lentiviral shRNA. Peptides bound to HLA-B*51:01 were eluted and analyzed by Mass Spectrometry. The characteristics of non-Pro/Ala2, Pro2 and Ala2 peptides, and their alteration by ERAP1 silencing were investigated. Effects of ERAP1 silencing on cell surface expression of HLA-B*51:01 were studied using flow cytometry. More than 20% of peptides eluted from HLA-B*51:01 lacked Proline or Alanine at P2. This unconventional group of HLA-B*51:01-bound peptides was enriched for 8-mers (with fewer 9-mers) compared to Pro2 and Ala2 sub-peptidomes, and had similar N-terminal and C-terminal residue usages to Ala2 peptides with the exception of the less abundant Leucine at position Ω. Knockdown of ERAP1 increased the percentage of non-Pro/Ala2 to approximately 40%, increased the percentage of longer (10-mer and 11-mer) peptides eluted from HLA-B*51:01 complexes, and abrogated the predominance of Leucine at P1. Interestingly knockdown of ERAP1 altered the length and N-terminal residue usage of non-Ala2&Pro2 and Ala2 but not the Pro2 peptides. Finally, ERAP1 silencing regulated the expression levels of cell surface HLA-B*51 in a cell type - dependent manner. The HLA-B*51:01 peptidome includes a surprisingly high proportion of unconventional non-Pro/Ala2 peptides which are increased by ERAP1 silencing, mimicking the loss-of-function BD risk variant.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of HLA-B*51 bound peptides 1.5x108 Cells were lysed in 5 ml lysis buffer (0.5% Igepal, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, supplemented with cOmplete™ protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)). HLA complexes were immunoprecipitated using 1 mg W6/32 antibody (pan-specific for HLA class I molecules) cross-linked to Protein G Sepharose beads (GE healthcare) for purification of intact HLA-B*51 complexes. The beads were washed three times using 2x150 mM NaCL and 1x450 mM NaCl in 50 mM Tris buffer, and salt was removed  in a final wash with 50 mM Tris. HLA peptides were eluted by addition of 2.5 ml 10% acetic acid. The enriched HLA-B*51 peptides were further purified from larger complex components by HPLC (Ultimate 3000) on a ProSwift RP-1S 4,6 x 50 mm column (Thermo Scientific) applying a linear gradient of 2-35% CAN over 10 min. Alternating fractions that did not contain beta-2-microglobulin or alpha chain were pooled into two final fractions, and further concentrated and kept at -80°C prior to MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS data was analyzed with Peaks 7 (Bioinformatics Solutions) for identification of peptide sequences. Spectra were matched to all reviewed 20210 SwissProt entries from 03/03/2016. The results were filtered using a score cut-off of –lg10P=15, resulting in a false discovery rate of an average of 2.4%. The searches were performed with the following parameters: no enzyme specificity, no static and variable modifications, peptide tolerance: ± 5ppm and fragment tolerance: ± 0.03 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) B*51:01 and endoplasmic reticulum aminopeptidase 1 (ERAP1) are strongly genetically associated with Beh&#xe7;et's disease (BD). Previous studies have defined two subgroups of HLA-B*51 peptidome containing proline (Pro) or alanine (Ala) at position 2 (P2). Little is known about the unconventional non-Pro/Ala2 HLA-B*51-bound peptides. We aimed to study the features of this novel subpeptidome, and investigate its regulation by ERAP1. CRISPR-Cas9 was used to generate an HLA-ABC-triple knockout HeLa cell line (HeLa.ABC-KO), which was subsequently transduced to express HLA-B*51:01 (HeLa.ABC-KO.B51). ERAP1 was silenced using lentiviral shRNA. Peptides bound to HLA-B*51:01 were eluted and analyzed by mass spectrometry. The characteristics of non-Pro/Ala2, Pro2, and Ala2 peptides and their alteration by ERAP1 silencing were investigated. Effects of ERAP1 silencing on cell surface expression of HLA-B*51:01 were studied using flow cytometry. More than 20% of peptides eluted from HLA-B*51:01 lacked Pro or Ala at P2. This unconventional group of HLA-B*51:01-bound peptides was relatively enriched for 8-mers (with relatively fewer 9-mers) compared with the Pro2 and Ala2 subpeptidomes and had similar N-terminal and C-terminal residue usages to Ala2 peptides (with the exception of the less abundant leucine at position &#x3a9;). Knockdown of ERAP1 increased the percentage of non-Pro/Ala2 from 20% to &#x223c;40%, increased the percentage of longer (10-mer and 11-mer) peptides eluted from HLA-B*51:01 complexes, and abrogated the predominance of leucine at P1. Interestingly knockdown of ERAP1 altered the length and N-terminal residue usage of non-Ala2&amp;Pro2 and Ala2 but not the Pro2 peptides. Finally, ERAP1 silencing regulated the expression levels of cell surface HLA-B*51 in a cell-type-dependent manner. In conclusion, we have used a novel methodology to identify an unconventional but surprisingly abundant non-Pro/Ala2 HLA-B*51:01 subpeptidome. It is increased by knockdown of ERAP1, a gene affecting the risk of developing BD. This has implications for theories of disease pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Erap1; hla–b*51:01; behçet’s disease

### Affiliations
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Nicola Ternette

### Lab Head
Dr Nicola Ternette
University of Oxford


