### Accession
PXD033985

### Title
In vivo and in vitro Genome Editing to explore GNE functions

### Description
GNE myopathy is an adult onset neuromuscular disorder characterized by slowly progressive distal and proximal muscle weakness, caused by missense recessive mutations in the GNE gene. Although the  encoded bifunctional enzyme is well known as the limiting factor in the biosynthesis of sialic acid, no clear mechanisms have been recognized to account for the muscle atrophic pathology, and novel functions for GNE have been hypothesized.  Two major issues impair studies on this protein. First, the expression of the GNE protein is minimal in humans and mice muscles and there is no reliable antibody to follow up endogenous expression. Second, no reliable animal model is available for the disease and cellular models from GNE myopathy patients' muscle cells (expressing the mutated protein) are less informative than expected.  In order to broaden our knowledge on GNE functions in muscle, we have taken advantage of the CRISPR/Cas9 method for genome editing to first, add a tag to the endogenous Gne gene in mouse, allowing the determination of the spatiotemporal expression of the protein in the organism using well established and reliable antibodies against the specific tag. In addition we have generated a Gne knock out murine muscle cell lineage to identify the events resulting from the total lack of the protein. A thorough multi-omics analysis of both systems including transcriptomics, proteomics, phosphoproteomics and ubiquitination,  unraveled novel pathways for Gne, in particular its involvement  in cell cycle control and in the DNA damage/repair pathway. The elucidation of fundamental mechanisms of Gne in normal muscle may contribute to the identification of the disrupted functions in GNE myopathy, thus, to the definition of novel  biomarkers and possible therapeutic targets for this disease.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse muscle cells were extracted and trypsinized. The peptides were either enriched for phosphopeptides on TiOX beads or enriched for ubiquitinated peptides using  KGG antibody or analyze without enrichments. All the samples were analyzed by LC-MSMS using the Q Exactive HFX

### Data Protocol
THe MS data was analyzed by the MaxQunt software with 1% FDR and label free quantitation..

### Publication Abstract
GNE myopathy is an adult onset neuromuscular disorder characterized by slowly progressive distal and proximal muscle weakness, caused by missense recessive mutations in the <i>GNE</i> gene. Although the encoded bifunctional enzyme is well known as the limiting factor in the biosynthesis of sialic acid, no clear mechanisms have been recognized to account for the muscle atrophic pathology, and novel functions for GNE have been hypothesized. Two major issues impair studies on this protein. First, the expression of the GNE protein is minimal in human and mice muscles and there is no reliable antibody to follow up endogenous expression. Second, no reliable animal model is available for the disease and cellular models from GNE myopathy patients' muscle cells (expressing the mutated protein) are less informative than expected. In order to broaden our knowledge on GNE functions in muscle, we have taken advantage of the CRISPR/Cas9 method for genome editing to first, add a tag to the endogenous Gne gene in mouse, allowing the determination of the spatiotemporal expression of the protein in the organism, using well established and reliable antibodies against the specific tag. In addition we have generated a Gne knock out murine muscle cell lineage to identify the events resulting from the total lack of the protein. A thorough multi-omics analysis of both cellular systems including transcriptomics, proteomics, phosphoproteomics and ubiquitination, unraveled novel pathways for Gne, in particular its involvement in cell cycle control and in the DNA damage/repair pathways. The elucidation of fundamental mechanisms of Gne in normal muscle may contribute to the identification of the disrupted functions in GNE myopathy, thus, to the definition of novel biomarkers and possible therapeutic targets for this disease.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Crispr/cas9, Gne, Myopathy

### Affiliations
Technion
Goldyne Savad Institute of Gene Therapy Hadassah -The Hebrew University Medical Center Jerusalem 91120, Israel

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Stella Mitrani-Rosenbaum
Goldyne Savad Institute of Gene Therapy Hadassah -The Hebrew University Medical Center Jerusalem 91120, Israel


