### Accession
PXD035289

### Title
Temporal proteomics of human cerebrospinal fluid reveals novel differentially-regulated proteins after severe traumatic brain injury

### Description
The pathophysiology of traumatic brain injury (TBI) requires further characterization to fully elucidate changes in molecular pathways. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) provides a rich repository of brain-associated proteins that may be affected by TBI. Here, we implemented high-resolution mass spectrometry to evaluate changes to the CSF proteome after severe TBI. 91 CSF samples were analyzed with mass spectrometry, collected from 16 patients with severe TBI (mean 32 yrs; 81% male) on day 0, 1, 2, 4, 7 and/or 10 post-injury (8-16 samples/timepoint) and compared to CSF obtained from 11 non-injured controls. We quantified 1152 proteins with mass spectrometry, of which approximately 80% were associated with CSF. 1083 proteins were differentially regulated after TBI compared to control samples. The most highly-upregulated proteins at each timepoint included neutrophil elastase, myeloperoxidase, cathepsin G, matrix metalloproteinase-8, and S100 calcium-binding proteins A8, A9 and A12—all proteins involved in neutrophil activation, recruitment, and degranulation. Pathway enrichment analysis confirmed the robust upregulation of proteins associated with innate immune responses. Conversely, downregulated pathways included those involved in nervous system development, and several proteins not previously identified after TBI such as testican-1 and latrophilin-1. We also identified 7 proteins (GM2A, Calsyntenin 1, FAT2, GANAB, Lumican, NPTX1, SFRP2) positively associated with an unfavorable outcome at 6 months post-injury. These findings highlight the robust innate immune response that occurs after severe TBI, supporting future studies to target neutrophil-related processes. In addition, the novel proteins we identified to be differentially regulated by severe TBI warrant further investigation as potential biomarkers or therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
CSF samples collected from TBI patients and controls were analyzed by quantitative proteomics using tandem mass tag (TMT) labelling. The CSF samples were lysed in 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris, pH8.1, boiled at 95°C for 10 min and sonicated using a probe sonicator. The samples were prepared for the acquisition by LC MS/MS using the method described previously 26. The proteins were trapped on S-Trap mini columns (Profiti) and digested to peptides using sequencing grade trypsin with an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 and incubated overnight at 37°C. Using a Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific), equal tryptic peptide amounts of each sample were labelled with the TMT-11plex reagent set (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Individual samples were then pooled into multiple plexes and which have been acquired individually by LC-MS/MS to maximum the number of peptide and protein identifications.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant v1.6.5.0 27 and its implemented Andromeda search engine 27 against the reference human proteome (Human Swissprot, March 2019) to identify CSF proteins and to obtain quantitative ms3 reporter ion intensities. Carbamidomethylation, N-terminal acetylation, and oxidation of methionine were used as a fixed and variable modifications respectively. TMT reporter ion masses were also used as variable modifications. Approximately 900 proteins were identified per sample. As human albumin was very abundant, it was excluded from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The pathophysiology of traumatic brain injury (TBI) requires further characterization to fully elucidate changes in molecular pathways. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) provides a rich repository of brain-associated proteins. In this retrospective observational study, we implemented high-resolution mass spectrometry to evaluate changes to the CSF proteome after severe TBI. 91 CSF samples were analyzed with mass spectrometry, collected from 16 patients with severe TBI (mean 32 yrs; 81% male) on day 0, 1, 2, 4, 7 and/or 10 post-injury (8-16 samples/timepoint) and compared to CSF obtained from 11 non-injured controls. We quantified 1152 proteins with mass spectrometry, of which approximately 80% were associated with CSF. 1083 proteins were differentially regulated after TBI compared to control samples. The most highly-upregulated proteins at each timepoint included neutrophil elastase, myeloperoxidase, cathepsin G, matrix metalloproteinase-8, and S100 calcium-binding proteins A8, A9 and A12-all proteins involved in neutrophil activation, recruitment, and degranulation. Pathway enrichment analysis confirmed the robust upregulation of proteins associated with innate immune responses. Conversely, downregulated pathways included those involved in nervous system development, and several proteins not previously identified after TBI such as testican-1 and latrophilin-1. We also identified 7 proteins (GM2A, Calsyntenin 1, FAT2, GANAB, Lumican, NPTX1, SFRP2) positively associated with an unfavorable outcome at 6&#xa0;months post-injury. Together, these findings highlight the robust innate immune response that occurs after severe TBI, supporting future studies to target neutrophil-related processes. In addition, the novel proteins we identified to be differentially regulated by severe TBI warrant further investigation as potential biomarkers of brain damage or therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Proteins, Biomarker, Secondary injury, Inflammation, Tbi, Cerebrospinal fluid

### Affiliations
Monash University

### Submitter
Ralf Schittenhelm

### Lab Head
Dr Bridgette Semple
Monash University


