### Accession
PXD024975

### Title
Protoemics on HIPPOCAMPi FROM PARTIAL-BODY IRRADIATED MICE

### Description
Background: The brain undergoes ionizing radiation exposure in many clinical situations, particularly during radiotherapy for brain tumors. The critical role of hippocampus in the pathogenesis of radiation-induced neurocognitive dysfunction is well recognized.  Aim: The goal of this study is to test the potential contribution of non-targeted effects in the detrimental response of hippocampus to irradiation and to elucidate the mechanisms involved.  Material and Methods: C57Bl/6 mice were whole body (WBI) or partial body (PBI) irradiated with 0.1 or 2.0 Gy of X-rays or sham irradiated. PBI consisted in the exposure of the lower third of the mouse body, whilst the upper two thirds were shielded. Hippocampi were collected 15 days or 6 months post-irradiation and a multi-omics approach was adopted to assess the molecular changes in non-coding RNAs, proteins and metabolic levels, as well as histological changes in the rate of hippocampal neurogenesis.  Results: Notably, at 2.0 Gy the pattern of early molecular and histopathological changes induced in the hippocampus at 15 days following PBI was similar in quality and quantity to the effects induced by WBI, thus providing a proof of principle of the existence of out-of-target radiation response in the hippocampus of conventional mice. We detected major alterations in DAG/IP3 and TGF- signaling pathways as well as in the expression of proteins involved in the regulation of long-term neuronal synaptic plasticity and synapse organization, coupled with defects in NSCs self-renewal in the hippocampal dentate gyrus. However, compared to the persistence of the WBI effects, most of the PBI effects were only transient and tended to decrease at 6 months post-irradiation, indicating important mechanistic difference. On the contrary, at low dose we identified a progressive accumulation of molecular defects that tended to manifest at later post-irradiation times. These data, indicating that both targeted and non-targeted radiation effects might contribute to the pathogenesis of hippocampal radiation-damage, have general implications for human health

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomics Each 10 µg protein sample in 0.1x RIPA buffer was subjected to tryptic digest applying a modified  filter aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure (26, 27)(Grosche et al. 2016; Wiśniewski et al. 2009). After protein reduction and alkylation using DTT and iodoacetamide, samples were denatured in UA buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris /HCl pH 8.5), centrifuged on a 30 kDa cut-off filter device (Sartorius), and washed three times with UA buffer and twice with 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC). Proteins were lysed for 2 h at room temperature using 0.5 µg Lys-C (Wako Chemicals, Neuss, Germany) and subsequently for 16 h at 37°C using 1 µg trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany). Peptides were collected by centrifugation (10 min at 14 000 g) and acidified with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and stored at -20°C. 2.8.2 Mass spectrometric measurements LC-MSMS analysis was performed in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. MS data were acquired on a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) each online coupled to a nano-RSLC (Ultimate 3000 RSLC; Dionex). Tryptic peptides were automatically loaded on a C18 trap column (300 µm inner diameter (ID) × 5 mm, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, LC Packings) at 30µl/min flow rate. For chromatography, a C18 reversed phase analytical column (nanoEase MZ HSS T3 Column, 100 Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters) at 250 nl/min flow rate in a 95 minute non-linear acetonitrile gradient from 3 to 40% in 0.1% formic acid was used. The high-resolution (60 000 full width at half-maximum) MS spectrum was acquired with a mass range from 300 to 1500 m/z with automatic gain control target set to 3 x 106 and a maximum of 30 ms injection time. From the MS pre-scan, the 15 most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation (MSMS) if at least doubly charged, with a dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds. MSMS spectra were recorded at 15 000 resolution with automatic gain control target set to 5 x 102 and a maximum of 50 ms injection time. The normalized collision energy was 28 and the spectra were recorded in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis QI analysis for label-free quantification for 6 month data Spectra were analyzed using Progenesis QI software for proteomics (Version 4, Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters, Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.) for label-free quantification as previously described (Grosche et al., MCP, 2016) with the following changes: Spectra were searched against the Swissprot mouse database (Release 2017_02, 16872 sequences). Search parameters used were 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 20 mmu fragment mass tolerance. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine was allowed as variable modifications, allowing only one missed cleavage site. Mascot integrated decoy database search was set to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % with a percolator ion score cut-off of 13 and an appropriate significance threshold. Peptide assignments were imported into Progenesis QI. Normalized abundances of peptides were summed up and allocated to the respective protein. Statistical analysis of differences between experimental groups was performed in QI using ANOVA generating p-values as well as q-values based on an optimized FDR approach. Proteome Discoverer analysis for two week analysis Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 2.4.1.15) was used for peptide and protein identification via a database search (Sequest HT search engine) against SwissProt mouse data base (Release 2020_02, 17061 sequences), considering full tryptic specificity, allowing for up to two missed tryptic cleavage sites, precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a static modification. Dynamic modifications included deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met; and a combination of Met loss with acetylation on protein N-terminus. Percolator was used for validating peptide spectrum matches and peptides, accepting only the top-scoring hit for each spectrum, and satisfying the cutoff values for FDR <1%, and posterior error probability <0.01. The final list of proteins complied with the strict parsimony principle. The quantification of proteins was based on abundance values based on the area for unique plus razor peptides. Abundance values were normalized in a retention time dependent manner to account for sample loading errors. The protein abundances were calculated summing up the abundance values for admissible peptides. The final protein ratio was calculated using median abundance values of four to five replicate analyses each and defined to be up to 100. The statistical significance of the ratio change was ascertained employing the T-test approach described in (28)(Navarro et al. 2014) which is based on the presumption that we look for expression changes for proteins that are just a few in comparison to the number of total proteins being quantified. The quantification variability of the non-changing "background" proteins can be used to infer which proteins change their expression in a statistically significant manner. P-values are adjusted according the method of Benjamini-Hochberg.  The analyses of protein-protein interaction and signaling networks were performed by the software tools INGENUITY Pathway Analysis (IPA) (Qiagen, Inc., Hilden, Germany, https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/products/ingenuity-pathway-analysis)(20)( Krämer, 2013)

### Publication Abstract
The brain undergoes ionizing radiation exposure in many clinical situations, particularly during radiotherapy for brain tumors. The critical role of the hippocampus in the pathogenesis of radiation-induced neurocognitive dysfunction is well recognized. The goal of this study is to test the potential contribution of non-targeted effects in the detrimental response of the hippocampus to irradiation and to elucidate the mechanisms involved. C57Bl/6 mice were whole body (WBI) or partial body (PBI) irradiated with 0.1 or 2.0 Gy of X-rays or sham irradiated. PBI consisted of the exposure of the lower third of the mouse body, whilst the upper two thirds were shielded. Hippocampi were collected 15 days or 6 months post-irradiation and a multi-omics approach was adopted to assess the molecular changes in non-coding RNAs, proteins and metabolic levels, as well as histological changes in the rate of hippocampal neurogenesis. Notably, at 2.0 Gy the pattern of early molecular and histopathological changes induced in the hippocampus at 15 days following PBI were similar in quality and quantity to the effects induced by WBI, thus providing a proof of principle of the existence of out-of-target radiation response in the hippocampus of conventional mice. We detected major alterations in DAG/IP3 and TGF-&#x3b2; signaling pathways as well as in the expression of proteins involved in the regulation of long-term neuronal synaptic plasticity and synapse organization, coupled with defects in neural stem cells self-renewal in the hippocampal dentate gyrus. However, compared to the persistence of the WBI effects, most of the PBI effects were only transient and tended to decrease at 6 months post-irradiation, indicating important mechanistic difference. On the contrary, at low dose we identified a progressive accumulation of molecular defects that tended to manifest at later post-irradiation times. These data, indicating that both targeted and non-targeted radiation effects might contribute to the pathogenesis of hippocampal radiation-damage, have general implications for human health.

### Keywords
6 month, Shotgun proteomics, Low radiation, 2 weeks, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Biomedical Technologies, Agenzia Nazionale per le Nuove Tecnologie, l'Energia e lo Sviluppo Economico Sostenibile (ENEA), Rome, Italy
Helmholtz Zentrum München

### Submitter
Christine von Toerne

### Lab Head
Dr Mariateresa Mancuso
Laboratory of Biomedical Technologies, Agenzia Nazionale per le Nuove Tecnologie, l'Energia e lo Sviluppo Economico Sostenibile (ENEA), Rome, Italy


