### Accession
PXD011283

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of microvescicoles and exosomes isolated from urine of medullary sponge kidney disease (MSK) versus Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) patients.

### Description
Microvescicles (MV) and exosomes (EX) seem to be involved in the pathogenetic machinery of the autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD), but, at the moment, no studies have assessed their role in medullary sponge kidney disease (MSK), a sporadic kidney malformation featuring cysts, nephrocalcinosis and recurrent renal stones. To discover their role in this disease we employed a proteomic-based research strategy.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were processed by in-StageTip (iST) processing method, containing 2 SDB-RPS disks. 25 µL of 2% SDC, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5 were added to the pellets and the cells were lysated, reduced and alkylated in a sigle step and then loaded into StageTip. The lysates were diluted with 25 mM Tris pH 8.5 containing 1 µg of tryspin. The samples were acidified with 100 µl of 1% (v/v) TFA and washed three times with 0.2 % (v/v) TFA. Elutions were performed with 60 µl of 5% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide, 80% (v/v) ACN.

### Data Protocol
After normalization, data obtained from mass spectrometry, were analyzed using unsupervised hierarchical clustering analyses. Multidimensional Scaling (MDS) with k-mean and Spearman's Correlation, to identify outlier and samples dissimilarity. Then, the normalized expression profile of proteins was used to construct the co-expression network by mean of Weight Gene Co-expression Network Analysis (WGCNA) package in R. Weighted adjacency matrix was constructed using the power function. The adjacency matrix was transformed into topological overlap matrix (TOM), which measure the network connectivity of all proteins. To classify proteins with co-expression profile into protein modules a hierarchical clustering analysis was conducted according to the TOM-based dissimilarity with a minimum size of 30 proteins for module. To identify the relationship between each module and clinical trait a Module Eigengenes (MEs) were considered. In addition, we calculated the correlation between MEs and each clinical trait and their statistical significance corrected for multiple interaction. A heatmap was used to visualize the degree and significance of each relationship. To identify the hub proteins of each modules that maximize the discrimination between the selected clinical traits a non-parametric U-Mann Whitney test, machine learning such as non-linear Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Partial Least Squares Discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) were used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Huma, Msk, Adpkd, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Istituto Gaslini
Gaslini Children's Hospital

### Submitter
Andrea Petretto

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
Istituto Gaslini


