### Accession
PXD012192

### Title
Peptidomics analysis of milk protein-derived peptides released over time in the preterm infant stomach

### Description
Over the course of milk digestion, native milk proteases and infant digestive proteases fragment intact proteins into peptides with potential bioactivity. This study investigated the release of peptides over three hours of gastric digestion in 14 preterm infant sample sets. The peptide content was extracted and analyzed from milk and gastric samples via Orbitrap tandem mass spectrometry. The relative ion intensity (abundance) and count of peptides in each sample were compared over time and between infants fed milk fortified with bovine milk fortifier and infants fed unfortified milk. Bioactivity of the identified peptides was predicted by sequence homology to known bioactive milk peptides. Both total and bioactive peptide abundance and count continuously increased over three hours of gastric digestion. After accounting for infant weight, length, and post-conceptual age, fortification of milk limited the release of peptides from human milk proteins. Peptides that survived further gastric digestion after their initial release were structurally more similar to bioactive peptides than non-surviving peptides. This work is the first to provide a comprehensive profile of milk peptides released during gastric digestion over time, which is an essential step in determining which peptides are most likely to be biologically relevant in the infant.

### Sample Protocol
Fifteen microliter aliquots of the skimmed milk and gastric samples were collected and dissolved in 85 μL of 0.1% FA solution to reduce the viscosity of the gastric samples. Milk proteins were precipitated from the samples by addition of 100 µL of 24% trichloroacetic acid. After mixing for 10 s with a vortex mixer, the samples were centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 20 min at 4 °C, and the supernatant containing the peptides was collected. Peptides were loaded onto C18 reverse-phase preparative chromatography 96-well plates (Glygen, Columbia, MD). Trichloroacetic acid, salts, oligosaccharides, and lactose were washed out with 1% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, and peptides were eluted in 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. The peptide solutions were frozen at –80 °C and lyophilized using a freeze dry system (Labconco FreeZone 4.5 L, Kansas City, MO). After drying, the samples were rehydrated in 15 µL of 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were analyzed with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer connected to a Waters Nano Acquity UHPLC (Water Corporation, Milford, MA). One μL of peptides were loaded onto a C18 180 μm × 20 mm, 5-μm bead nanoAcquity UPLC Trap Column (Waters) for enrichment and desalting, and separated with a 100 μm × 100 mm, 1.7-μm bead Acquity UPLC Peptide BEH C18 column (Waters) over 120 min. The mobile phase consisted of 0.1% formic acid in H2O (Solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (Solvent B). The separation gradient consisted of 3−10% solvent B over 3 min, 10−30% solvent B over 99 min, 30−90% solvent B over 3 min, 90% solvent B for 4 min, 90−3% solvent B over 1 min then finally held at 3% solvent B for 10 min. A 30-min column wash was performed after each sample run. Mass spectra were collected in positive ionization mode and with data dependent acquisition. Peptides were ionized with an electrospray voltage of 2,400V and ion transfer tube temperature of 300 °C. The mass spectrometer scanned masses between 400 and 1,500 m/z. Full scan MS data were acquired in the orbitrap at 120 K resolution at 200 m/z. The automatic gain control target was 4.0 × 105 over a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Precursor ions were selected for most intense peaks with an ion intensity threshold of 5.0 × 103 and charge state 2-7. Precursor ions were fragmented using collision-induced dissociation with a collision energy of 35%. Following fragmentation, precursors were excluded (10 ppm mass error) for 1 min.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed in Thermo Proteome Discoverer (v2.1.0.81), and a SequestHT search engine identified peptides using an in-house human and bovine milk protein sequence database. Potential modifications allowed included phosphorylation of serine and threonine, and oxidation of methionine. Only peptides identified with high confidence were included (P < 0.01), and peptide sequences with multiple modifications were grouped into a single peptide for counts. Counts measured the number of unique peptide sequences identified in a sample. Abundance measured the area under the curve of the eluted peak (ion intensity), as determined by Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
Over the course of milk digestion, native milk proteases and infant digestive proteases fragment intact proteins into peptides with potential bioactivity. This study investigated the release of peptides over 3 h of gastric digestion in 14 preterm infant sample sets. The peptide content was extracted and analyzed from milk and gastric samples via Orbitrap tandem mass spectrometry. The relative ion intensity (abundance) and count of peptides in each sample were compared over time and between infants fed milk fortified with bovine milk fortifier and infants fed unfortified milk. Bioactivity of the identified peptides was predicted by sequence homology to known bioactive milk peptides. Both total and bioactive peptide abundance and count continuously increased over 3 h of gastric digestion. After accounting for infant weight, length, and postconceptual age, fortification of milk limited the release of peptides from human milk proteins. Peptides that survived further gastric digestion after their initial release were structurally more similar to bioactive peptides than nonsurviving peptides. This work is the first to provide a comprehensive profile of milk peptides released during gastric digestion over time, which is an essential step in determining which peptides are most likely to be biologically relevant in the infant. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD012192.

### Keywords
Human milk, Gastric, Digestion, Peptide, Bioactive, Preterm

### Affiliations
Oregon State University
Nutrition Program, School of Biological and Population Health Sciences, College of Public Health and Human Sciences, Oregon State University

### Submitter
Robert Beverly

### Lab Head
Dr David Dallas
Nutrition Program, School of Biological and Population Health Sciences, College of Public Health and Human Sciences, Oregon State University


