### Accession
PXD042770

### Title
A comprehensive spectral assay library to quantify the Halobacterium salinarum NRC-1 proteome by DIA/SWATH-MS

### Description
Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA) is a mass spectrometry-based method to reliably identify and reproducibly quantify large fractions of a target proteome. The peptide-centric data analysis strategy employed in DIA requires a priori generated spectral assay libraries. Such assay libraries allow to extract quantitative data in a targeted approach and have been generated for human, mouse, zebrafish, E. coli and few other organisms. However, a spectral assay library for the extreme halophilic archaeon Halobacterium salinarum NRC-1, a model organism that contributed to several notable discoveries, is not publicly available yet. Here, we report a comprehensive spectral assay library to measure 2,563 of 2,646 annotated H. salinarum NRC-1 proteins. We demonstrate the utility of this library by measuring global protein abundances over time under standard growth conditions. The H. salinarum NRC-1 library includes 21,074 distinct peptides representing 97% of the predicted proteome and provides a new, valuable resource to confidently measure and quantify any protein of this archaeon.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture H. salinarum sp. NRC-1 (ATCC700922) was cultured in nutrient-rich complex medium: 250 g/L NaCl, 20 g/L MgSO4•7H2O, 3 g/L sodium citrate, 2 g/L KCl and 10 g/L peptone. Cultures were grown in unbaffled flasks with 40% of the flask volume occupied by the culture and illuminated at ~20 μmol/m2/s in Innova9400 incubators (New Brunswick). Cultures to generate the library were grown to mid-exponential growth (OD600 0.55) and stationary phase (OD600 1.27) at 37 °C under shaking at 220 rpm. Cells from 5 mL cultures were harvested by centrifugation at 8,000 x g for 2 min at 4 °C. The culture supernatant was discarded, pellets were snap-frozen on dry-ice/ethanol and stored at -80 °C. Sample preparation Cell pellets were resuspended in 750 µL Milli-Q water and disrupted at 4 °C using three 2.8 mm ceramic beads (Mo Bio Laboratories) and a Precellys 24 homogenizer (Bertin Corp) at 6500 rpm for 3 x 30 s followed by 6,800 rpm for 2 x 30 s, resting for 1 min between cycles. The protein content was determined by bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) (Thermo-Fisher). Proteins were reduced with 5mM Dithiothreitol (DDT, 45 min, 37 °C), alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide (IAM, 30 min, room temperature, darkness), followed by quenching of unreacted IAM with 5 mM DTT (15 min, room temperature, darkness). Samples were diluted 1:1 with 125 mM NH4HCO3 and digested with trypsin (Promega) at 1:50 enzyme:substrate ratio at 37 °C for 16 h. The digest was dried under centrifugal evaporation (Savant, Thermo-Fisher). In addition, two mid-log phase samples were prepared with alternative methods: 1) 750 µL water with cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche) were added to the cell pellet, the sample was vortexed and undissolved material removed by centrifugation at (16,000 x g, 10 min, 4 °C) followed by BCA, reduction, alkylation and digestion as described above, and 2) Cells were lysed with 750 µL water with cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor using the Precellys 24 homogenizer as described above. The sample was centrifuged (16,000 x g, 10 min, 4 °C), the remaining pellet dissolved in 3 µL 10% SDS and combined with the soluble fraction. Proteins were reduced, alkylated and quenched as described above, and precipitated with 6 volumes of cold acetone (-35 °C, 16 h). The sample was centrifuged (3,000 x g, 10 min, 4 °C), the pellet resuspended in 125 mM NH4HCO3, the protein content determined by BCA and proteins digested with trypsin. Peptides were desalted with tC18 SepPak cartridges (Waters). Off-Gel electrophoresis Two cultures of H. salinarum NRC-1 grown to mid-log and stationary phase were subjected to pI-based peptide separation using the 3100 OFFGEL fractionator (Agilent Technologies). 400 µg of each sample was mixed and dissolved in OFFGEL stock solution (glycerol, ampholytes, water) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Peptides were separated using immobilized pH gradient gel strips pH 3-10, 24 cm. Peptides were focused at 50 kVh with maximum current of 50 µA and a maximum voltage set to 8,000 V. Twenty-four in-solution fractions were collected, acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (pH <2) and individually desalted using a tC18 96-well µ-elution plate (Waters). Samples were dried under centrifugal vacuum evaporation (Savant) and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid/water. Each fraction was spiked with a set of synthetic peptides for retention time (RT) standardization 31 prior to DDA analysis. Synthetic peptides  1,383 peptides were individually chemically synthesized as free amine at the N-terminus and carboxylic acid at the C-terminus, cysteine residues were incorporated as carboxyamidomethylated cysteine building blocks (PEPotec SRM library Grade 1, Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Peptides were pooled in sets of 95, diluted to 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water (v/v), and 100 fmol of crude peptide were subjected LC-MS/MS. Data dependent acquisition (DDA)  Samples were analyzed with a TripleTOF® 5600+ equipped with a Nanospray-III® Source (Sciex) and an Ekspert™ nanoLC 425 with cHiPLC® system operated in trap-elute mode (Eksigent). Samples were loaded on a cHiPLC trap (200 µm x 500 µm ChromXP C18-CL, 3 µm, 120 Å) and washed for 10 minutes at 2 µL/min. Peptides were eluted on a nano cHiPLC column (75 µm x 15 cm ChromXP C18-CL, 3 µm, 120 Å) with 0.1% formic acid in water (A), 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B) (v/v) using a gradient from 3% to 33% B in 120 min, 33%-63% B from 120-128 min and 63%-83% B from 128-132 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Data were acquired in DDA mode. A survey scan (TOF-MS) was acquired in the m/z range of 300-1,250 Da with 250 msec accumulation time. The 20 most intense precursor ions with charge state 2-4 above 300 counts per second were selected for fragmentation with rolling collision energy and a collision energy spread of +/- 15V. MS/MS fragment spectra were collected in the range of 100-2,000 Da with 150 msec accumulation and a 3.3 s cycle time.

### Data Protocol
Instrument-native .wiff files acquired in DDA mode were converted to mzML using ProteoWizard msconvert. MS/MS spectra were associated with peptide sequences using Comet (version 2014.01 rev. 0), X!Tandem (version Jackhammer) and OMSSA (version 2.1.8). The database comprised 2,646 H. salinarum NRC-1 protein entries (2,437 distinct protein sequences and 209 entries resulting from multiple genome mapping), a sequence-shuffled decoy counterpart, common contaminants and a set of peptides for retention time standardization. Searched peptides were allowed to be semi-tryptic with up to two missed cleavages. The search parameters included a fixed modification of +57.021464 for carbamidomethylated cysteine and a variable modification of +15.9949 for oxidized methionine. Variable N-terminal acetylation of +42.010565 was allowed in the Comet search. A monoisotopic mass error tolerance of 20 ppm was used in X!Tandem and Comet with the isotope error setting activated while 0.8 Da was used in OMSSA. The search results were processed and statistically validated with the open-source proteomics data analysis package Trans-Proteomics Pipeline (TPP, version 4.6.2) including PeptideProphet and iProphet. Whole cell lysate and OGE data were processed together. Peptide spectrum matches (PSM) generated by each search engine were analyzed with PeptideProphet to assign each PSM a probability of being correct. The accurate mass binning and non-parametric model were enabled in the PeptideProphet analysis. Decoy hits were reported with a probability based on the model learned. PeptideProphet results were further processed with iProphet to refine the PSM-level probabilities and compute peptide-level probabilities based on corroborating information from the ensemble of identifications, and to combine the results from all three search engines.  Next, a raw spectral library was built from iProphet results using SpectraST, followed by the generation of a consensus spectral library. A SWATH assay library was generated from the consensus spectral library using the script spectrast2tsv.py available within the msproteomicstools software (https://pypi.python.org/pypi/msproteomicstools) with 300 to 1,250 m/z precursor mass range, 350 m/z as lower and 2,000 m/z as upper mass limits of fragment ions, theoretical masses, y- and b-ions, Peakview format and default settings for other parameters. The same approach was taken to process the synthetic peptides using Comet as search engine. The set of spiked-in synthetic peptides of human origin were used by RTCatalog, a software tool part of the TPP, to align retention times (RT) across all runs to build a retention time catalogue for the spectral assay library. The same scheme of 100 variable acquisition windows that was used to acquire the DIA/SWATH data was applied to the full DIA/SWATH ion library using the spectrast2tsv.py script. For further details see Methods in the publication

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Data-dependent acquisition, Spectral assay library, Swath, Halobacterium salinarum nrc-1, Dia, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA, USA

### Submitter
Ulrike Kusebauch

### Lab Head
Dr Robert L.
Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA, USA


