### Accession
PXD045881

### Title
Alterations in the extracellular proteome of human pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa in response to natural and modified N-acyl-L-homoserine lactones

### Description
The common opportunistic human pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa employs quorum sensing QS to regulate a large set of genes involved in virulence and host-pathogen interactions. The Las circuit positioned on the top of the QS hierarchy in P. aeruginosa, makes use of N-acyl-L-homoserine lactones (AHL) as signal molecules, like N-3-oxo-dodecanoyl-L-homoserine lactone (3O-C12-HSL). Here, a quantitative proteomic approach was used to study the effect of natural 3O-C12-HSL and four AHL analogues on the expression and excretion of QS-regulated extracellular proteins. Treatment with AHL compounds resulted in significant difference in appearance of the 3O-C12-HSL-responsive reference proteins related to QS communication and virulence, i.e., a distinct activity as QS modulators. In summary, 3O-C12-HSL has a profound effect on extracellular proteome involved in the pathogenicity of P. aeruginosa, and the four AHL analogues have achieved a distinct inhibitory effect on the extracellular proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of extracellular proteins  P. aeruginosa PA14 was grown in MINS for 18 h at 37°C with shaking and good aeration, reaching A600 of approximately 1.0 (late exponential phase - early stationary phase). Then, Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) was added to bacterial cultures. Cells were removed by centrifugation at 5000 x g for 15 min at 4°C, and supernatants were filtered using 0.45 μm syringe filters (Pall Corporation) to remove bacteria debris. Cell-free supernatants were concentrated using 3K MWCO 20 ml devices (Pall Corporation) and centrifugation at 5000 g for 30 min at 17°C. Concentrated samples were washed and desalted in the same devises by adding 10 ml 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and centrifugation at 5000 g for 20 min at 17°C; this step was repeated three times. Lastly, the samples were concentrated at 5000 g for 1 h at 17°C, resulting in a final volume of approximately 1 ml extracellular protein fraction.  In-solution digestion  The extracellular protein fractions were reduced in 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 60°C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 30 min at RT in dark. DTT was then added again to the samples to a final concentration of 17.5 mM. MS-grade trypsin (Thermo Scientific) was used for the following enzymatic digestion according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Pierce C18 tips (Thermo Scientific) were used to desalt the obtained peptides. Peptides were then reconstituted in 0.1 % formic acid in milliQ water and peptides concentrations were estimated at A280 (NanoDrop ND-1000 Spectrophotometer, Thermo) prior to liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analyses.Proteomic analysis with LC-MS/MS  Peptides were separated by reverse phase chromatography on a 20 mm × 100 µm C18 pre-column followed by a 100 mm × 75 µm C18 column with particle size 5 µm (NanoSeparations, Nieuwkoop, Netherlands) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min on EASY-nLC II (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by a gradient of 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B) as follows: from 2% B to 30% B in 60 min; from 30% B to 100% B in 60 min. Automated online analyses were performed in positive mode by LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray source with Xcalibur software (v.2.6, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full MS scans were collected with a range of 350–1800 m/z at resolution of 30,000 (m/z 200), the top 20 most intense multiple charged ions were selected with an isolation window of 2.0 and fragmented in the linear ion trap by collision-induced dissociation with normalized collision energy of 30%. Dynamic exclusion was enabled ensuring that peaks selected for fragmentation were excluded for 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Database Search  Generated raw files were analyzed with Sequest HT in Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, CS version 1.4.0.288) using P. aeruginosa PA14 protein sequence database available at NCBI (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein). Proteins were identified with the following search parameters: trypsin as a digestion enzyme; maximum number of missed cleavages 2; fragment ion mass tolerance 0.50 Da; parent ion mass tolerance 10.0 ppm; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modifications.  Proteomic Data Evaluation and Label-Free Quantification  Identified proteins were validated using SCAFFOLD software (Version 4.4.8; Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR). Identifications were based on a minimum of 2 peptides, minimum 95% peptide identification probability (using the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm), and minimum 99% protein identification probability using the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Proteins containing similar peptides, and which could not be differentiated based on LC-MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. The label-free quantitative analysis was performed using total number of spectral counts; normalization was performed to account for variations between samples. Quantitative differences were statistically analyzed by Fisher exact test using SCAFFOLD software. Differences with P-values ≤ 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
Quorum sensing (QS) is a mode of cell-cell communication that bacteria use to sense population density and orchestrate collective behaviors. The common opportunistic human pathogen <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> employs QS to regulate a large set of genes involved in virulence and host-pathogen interactions. The Las circuit positioned on the top of the QS hierarchy in <i>P. aeruginosa</i> makes use of <i>N</i>-acyl-L-homoserine lactones (AHLs) as signal molecules, like <i>N</i>-3-oxo-dodecanoyl-L-homoserine lactone (3O-C<sub>12</sub>-HSL). Disabling QS circuits by certain small-molecule compounds, known as quorum-sensing inhibitors (QSIs), has been proposed as a strategy to attenuate bacterial pathogenicity. In this study, four new AHL analogs were designed by incorporating a tert-butoxycarbonyl Boc group in amide and &#x3b2;-keto (3-oxo) moiety. Compounds were evaluated on a molecular and phenotypic basis as a QSI using the screening strategy linked to the assignment of the Las QS system in <i>P. aeruginosa</i>. Using a LasR-based bioreporter, we found that the compounds decreased LasR-controlled light activity and competed efficiently with natural 3O-C<sub>12</sub>-HSL. The compounds reduced the production of the cognate 3O-C<sub>12</sub>-HSL and certain virulence traits, like total protease activity, elastase activity, pyocyanin production, and extracellular DNA release. Furthermore, a quantitative proteomic approach was used to study the effect of the compounds on QS-regulated extracellular proteins. Among the four compounds tested, one of them showed the most significant difference in the appearance of the 3O-C<sub>12</sub>-HSL-responsive reference proteins related to QS communication and virulence, i.e., a distinct activity as a QSI. Moreover, by combining experimental data with computational chemistry, we addressed the effect of LasR protein flexibility on docking precision and assessed the advantage of using a multi-conformational docking procedure for binding mode prediction of LasR modulators. Thus, the four new AHL compounds were tested for their interaction with the AHL-binding site in LasR to identify the key interferences with the activity of LasR. Our study provides further insight into molecular features that are required for small-molecule modulation of LasR-dependent QS communication in <i>P. aeruginosa</i>. This should facilitate rational design of the next generation of antivirulence tools to study and manipulate QS-controlled fitness in bacteria and, thereby, handle bacterial infections in a new way.

### Keywords
Pseudomons aeruginosa; extracellular proteome; lactone

### Affiliations
Linköping University
Linkoping University

### Submitter
Elena Vikström

### Lab Head
Dr Elena Vikström
Linkoping University


