### Accession
PXD009311

### Title
Phosphoproteomics analysis of normal and mutated granulocyte colony stimulating factor receptors

### Description
Granulocyte colony stimulating factor receptor (G-CSFR) plays important role in the production of neutrophils from hematopoietic stem cells. Mutated form of the receptor has been directly associated with two distinct malignant phenotype in patients, e.g. acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and chronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL). However, the signaling mechanism of the mutated G-CSFRs is not well understood. Here, we describe a comprehensive SILAC based quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of the mutated G-CSFRs compared to the normal receptor using BaF3 cell line based in vitro model system. High pH reversed phase concatenation and Titanium Dioxide Spin Tip column were utilized to increase the dynamic range and detection of the phosphoproteome of G-CSFRs.  The dataset was further analyzed using several computational and bioinformatics tools. Overall, this dataset is a first of any phosphoproteomics analysis of granulocyte colony stimulating factor receptors in the normal and disease associated mutations. We anticipate that our dataset will have a strong potential to decipher the phospho-signaling differences between the normal and malignant G-CSFR biology with therapeutic implications.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and SILAC labeling BaF3 cell lines stably expressing normal and mutated G-CSFRs, were grown in RPMI medium (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) with 5% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2mM L-glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 ug/mL streptomycin in a humidified incubator at 37 ᵒC  with 5.0% CO2. For heavy amino acid labeling, the cells were cultured in RPMI with 5% FBS, 2mM L-glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 ug/mL streptomycin, 50 mg/L arginine-12C6 monohydrochloride and 100 mg/L lysine-12C6 monohydrochloride (light) or 50 mg/L arginine-13C6 monohydrochloride and 100 mg/L lysine-13C6 monohydrochloride (heavy) (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). The heavy amino acid labeling efficiency was determined at the day 5 by running the lysate of continuing culture. Once the determination of heavy amino acid incorporation was more than 95%, the growing cells spin down at 1200 rpm for 5 min before harvesting. Furthermore, cells were washed 3 times with PBS before 6 hours of serum starvation prior to G-CSF stimulation at various time points. Cells grown in heavy SILAC medium were stimulated with G-CSF (40 ng/mL) for 12.5 mins and 90 mins at 37 ᵒC and cells grown in light medium were left unstimulated.  Cell lysis and protein digestion Post G-CSF stimulated BaF3 cells were washed with cold phosphate buffered saline and lysed in the Urea lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM beta-glycerophosphate). The lysed cells were further sonicated and centrifuged at 16,000 x g at 15 C for 20 min. 660 nM protein assay (Thermo, #22660) was used  to measure the total protein amount. 10 mg of light and heavy labeled protein were mixed together before reduction and alkylation steps. 5 mM of DTT was used to reduce the proteins at 60 C for 20 min. Iodoacetamide based alkylation was performed using 10 mM for 10 min at RT in the dark. The sample dilution was performed so that the final urea concentration was <2M.  TPCK treated trypsin (Worthington Biochemical Corp) overnight at room temperature while rotating, was used for proteolytic digestion. Prior to dealting step, the peptide mixture was acidified using 1% Triflouroacetic acid (TFA). Desalted was done using C-18 Sep-apk cartridge (Waters, cat# WAT051910). The extracted peptides were lyophilized and stored at -80C until further analysis.  Basic high-pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography (Brplc) and TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment Peptides were fractionated by high pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography. Briefly, 10 mg of lyophilized peptide mixture was suspended in 1 mL of bRPLC solvent (10 % Ammonium Formate in water pH 10) and fractionated by bRPLC chromatography on a XBridge C18, 5 um, 250 x 4.6 mm column (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) by employing an increasing gradient of solvent B (10 % Ammonium Formate in 90 % Acetonitrile pH 10) on an Ultimate Plus by LC Packings with a flow rate of 250 ul/min. For each experiment, a total of 60 fractions were initially collected with 375 ul in each tube. The fractions were then concatenated to 12 fractions and dried using speedvac. Each concatenated fraction was subjected to TiO2 based phosphopeptide enrichment.  For phospho-peptides enrichment, TiO2 spin columns were used (Thermo Scientific). Spin columns were first washed with buffer A (80% acetonitrile in water). The dried peptide from each concatenated tube was suspended in 20 uL of buffer B (40% lactic acid in buffer A). Suspended peptide solution was applied to the spin columns and centrifuges at 1000Xg for 2 min. The previous was repeated twice before washing the column with 20 uL each of buffer B and A respectively. The elution was performed with 30% ammonium hydroxide solution twice. The eluted enriched phosphopeptides were dried using speed vac before Mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Nano-LC-MS/MS Analysis Mass spectrometry analyses were performed using a TripleTOF 5600+ MS (Sciex, Toronto, ON, Canada) coupled to an Eksigent (Dublin, CA) nanoLC Ultra nanoflow system. First of all, dried phosphopeptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid before loading onto IntegraFrit trap column (outer diameter of 360 um, inner diameter of 100 um, and 25 um packed bed) from New Objective (Woburn, MA). For desalting and concentrating the sample, samples were run at 2 uL/min in formic acid /water 0.4/99.2 (v/v) for 10 min. To accomplish the chromatographic separation of the enriched phosphopeptides, the sample was ran through the analytical column, Acclaim PepMap100 (inner diameter of 75 um, length 15 cm, C18 particle size of 3 um, and pore size of 100 A) from Dionex-Thermo Fisher Scientific (Sunnyvale, CA). The peptide elution step was achieved using a varying mobile phase (MP) gradient from 95% phase A (0.1% FA in water) to 40% phase B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) for 70 min, from 40% phase B to 85% phase B for 5 min, and then keeping the same MP composition for 5 more minutes at 300 nL/min. A positive ion mode was used to operate the mass spectrometer using 4303 cycles for 90 min. 0.25 s accumulation time and 350-1600 m/z window were used in each TOF-MS cycle. We collected 20 information dependent acquisition (IDA) MS/MS-scans on the most intense candidate ions which has a minimum of 150 counts. An accumulation time of 0.05 s and a mass tolerance of 100 ppm were used for the product ion scan.   Mass spectrometric data analysis  The data generated by nano-LC-MS/MS (.wiff files) from the enriched phosphopeptides were further analyzed for protein identification and quantification using Protein Pilot software (version 5.0, revision 4769). Protein Pilot utilized the Paragon algorithm and searched against a UniProt database of Mus musculus protein sequences. Each phospho-enriched raw MS data was processed using the SILAC specific settings in Protein Pilot: sample type (SILAC (Lys+8, Arg+10)), Cys Alkylation (Iodoacetamide), Digestion (Trypsin), instrument (Triple TOF 5600), and Special Factors (Phospho-emphasis). False Discovery Rate (FDR) was set as 0.05 with through ID as search effort. A combined search run was performed for 12 raw MS runs (phospho-enriched samples from 12 high pH concatenated fractions) for phospho-serine/threonine peptides. The searched results were generated as .group files in a spreadsheet as peptide summary report. A minimum of 95% confidence in identity (calculated by probability algorithm of Protein Pilot software) was used a cut-off for phosphopeptides identification. Furthermore, sequence, modification, mass-to-charge ration (m/z value), and charge (z) were as selection parameters for phosphopeptide data filtration as previously done by Wijeyratne et al. (8).  A heavy/light ratio were calculated based on MS1 quantification values generated by Protein Pilot.  Phosphoproteomic data filtration using perl A custom written perl script was used to pre-process as well as normalize the phospho-proteomic data set. This script utilized the raw data (one file per replicate of an experimental condition) and normalized the peptide based on the median-normalized ratios of peptide intensities for receptor-activated vs. non-activated states (G-CSF treated vs. non-G-CSF treated). Further, peptide identifications were set to use 95% confidence. In case of the intensities of multiple identifications of the same peptide, the data was averaged. Specific situations where a peptide was detected in only one of the two channels (activated or non-activated receptors), to circumvent this, log ratios of heavy to light peptide intensities were artificially set to plus or minus infinity. Furthermore, peptide ratios were normalized within replicates, so that they have a median of 0. We calculated Pearson correlation coefficient (r) between replicates to access the technical reproducibility and it was found to be high. Given the high value of r between replicates, the missing values were imputed to the median value of 0 (no change between activated and non-activated states) before final analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Granulocyte colony stimulating factor receptor (G-CSFR) plays an important role in the production of neutrophil granulocytes. Mutated G-CSFRs have been directly associated with two distinct malignant phenotypes in patients, e.g. acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and chronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL). However, the signaling mechanism of the mutated G-CSFRs is not well understood. Here, we present a comprehensive SILAC-based quantitative phosphoserine and phosphothreonine dataset of the normal and mutated G-CSFRs signaling using the BaF3 cell-line-based in vitro model system. High pH reversed phase concatenation and Titanium Dioxide Spin Tip column were utilized to increase the dynamic range and detection of the phosphoproteome of G-CSFRs. The dataset was further analyzed using several computational tools to validate the quality of the dataset. Overall, this dataset is the first global phosphoproteomics analysis of both normal and disease-associated-mutant G-CSFRs. We anticipate that this dataset will have a strong potential to decipher the phospho-signaling differences between the normal and malignant G-CSFR biology with therapeutic implications. The phosphoproteomic dataset is available via the PRIDE partner repository.

### Keywords
G-csfr signaling, Phosphoproteomics, Silac

### Affiliations
Department of Cancer Biology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267, USA
University of Cincinnati

### Submitter
Pankaj Dwivedi

### Lab Head
Dr Kenneth D. Greis
Department of Cancer Biology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267, USA


