### Accession
PXD020167

### Title
Mass spectrometry of P. tricornutum proteome, Bohlin clone Pt1 8.6 (CCMP632) culture, cpsrp54-8, cpsrp54-11.

### Description
The chloroplast signal recognition particle 54 kDa (CpSRP54) is a member of the CpSRP pathway targeting proteins to thylakoid membranes. In plants, CpSRP54 has a dual function and is involved in both co-translational and post-translational insertion of thylakoid membrane proteins like subunits of photosynthetic complexes and light harvesting antenna proteins, respectively. In green microalgae, CpSRP54 seems to function only in the post-translational part of the CpSRP pathway. The effects of loss of CpSRP54 in the diatom model species Phaeodactylum tricornutum support a role in co-translational targeting of proteins to thylakoid membranes, but not in the post-translational CpSRP pathway. Lack of CpSRP54 does not have a negative effect on the content of light harvesting antenna proteins and pigments, but causes lower levels of a selection of PSII, PSI, Cytb6f and ATP synthase subunits. Cpsrp54 lines also display decreased photophysiological fitness, stronger induction of photoprotective mechanisms and lower growth rates compared to wild type when exposed to increased light intensities. Mechanisms alleviating the loss of CpSRP54, involving upregulation of chaperones, might explain the still relatively mild phenotype of the cpsrp54 mutants.

### Sample Protocol
The axenic P. tricornutum Bohlin clone Pt1 8.6 (CCMP632) culture was obtained from the culture collection of the Provasoli-Guillard National Center for Culture of Marine Phytoplankton, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences, USA. The cpsrp54-8, cpsrp54-11, cpsrp54-20 mutant lines used for this study were isolated from single cells from the M2, M4 and M8 lines, respectively. The cpsrp54 KO mutants had been created with the aid of the CRISPR/Cas9 technology using a P. tricornutum culture derived from the sequenced clone Pt1 8.6 as a starting point. Bi-allelic knock out mutations were confirmed in the three lines by TOPO cloning and subsequent Sanger sequencing of PCR products spanning the region of the CpSRP54 gene targeted by the Cas9-gRNA complex. P. tricornutum wild type (WT) cells and cpsrp54 lines (cpsrp54-8, cpsrp54-11, cpsrp54-20) cell cultures were grown at 15°C under continuous cool white fluorescent light at scalar irradiance (EPAR) of ~35 µmol photons m-2 s-1 (low light (LL)) or ~200 µmol photons m-2 s-1 (medium light (ML)), unless otherwise stated. The cultures were kept in the exponential growth phase for at least two weeks under LL or ML conditions before conducting experiments.  After cell harvesting and total protein isolation, 100 µl of SDC buffer was added to each sample. After mixing by pipetting, contents were transferred to LoBind tubes (Eppendorf), they were kept at 95 °C for 5 minutes, then they were sonicated at 4 °C in a Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode) for 10 cycles each with 1 minute sonication followed by half a minute without sonication. Protein concentration was measured in a Direct Detect (Millipore) and a volume containing 50 µg total protein was separated for further sample preparation, volume was adjusted to 50 µl by addition of water. Here, SDC buffer is 1% SDC, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM 2-Chloroacetamide, Roche Protease Inhibitor cocktail, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5. Unless otherwise-stated, chemicals are from Sigma. Next, a KingFisher Flex (Thermo Scientific) magnetic-bead handling robot performed clean-up of the proteins using HILIC magnetic microparticles (ReSyn Bioscience) followed by tryptic digestion into peptides. In more details, deep well plates were prepared and placed into the KingFisher as: 25 µl of HILIC microparticles (20 mg/ml) and 175 µl Equilibration buffer at position 1, 500 µl Equilibration buffer at position 2, 50 µl sample and 50 µl Bind buffer at position 3, 200 µl 95% Acetonitrile at positions 4 and 5, 50 µl Trypsin (0.1 µg/µl in 45 mM Acetic Acid) and 150 µl Digestion buffer at position 6, comb Tip at position 7. Then the robot executed the following protocol: pick up the comb tip, collect HILIC magnetic particles, equilibrate HILIC magnetic particles in Equilibration buffer, bind protein to HILIC magnetic particles, wash in high organic content twice, elute from HILIC and digest protein with Trypsin at 37 ° for 4 hours, remove HILIC magnetic particles. BindIt Software 3.3.1 (Thermo Scientific) was used to prepare the robot protocol and to run it. Here, Equilibration buffer is 15% Acetonitrile, 100 mM Ammonium acetate pH 4.5; Bind buffer is 0.5% SDS, 30% Acetonitrile, 200 mM Ammonium acetate pH 4.5; Digestion buffer is 20 mM Ammonium formate pH 8.2. Unless otherwise-stated, chemicals are from Sigma. Subsequently the digested peptides were transferred to new tubes, they were acidified by addition of 2 µl Formic acid, then the tubes were spun-down (16,000g for 5 minutes) and 100 µl of supernatants were transferred to LC-MS vials. Analysis was performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific) interfaced with an Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 trap column (75 μm i.d., 2 cm long, 3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) and further separated on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 analytical column (75 μm i.d., 50 cm long, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) at 250 nl/min using a 180-minute gradient (145 min 5%-35% B, 15 min 35%-100% B, 20 min 100% B; where A is 0.1 % formic acid  and B is 0.1 % formic acid, 80% Acetonitrile). Unless otherwise-stated, chemicals are from Fisher Scientific. Peptide ions were analysed in positive ion mode under data dependent acquisition using the following parameters: Electrospray voltage 1.9 kV, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy 27. Each MS scan (200 to 2000 m/z, 3e6 AGC target, profile) was acquired at a resolution of 60,000 FWHM, followed by 15,000 FWHM MS/MS scans (200 to 2000 m/z, 1.2 m/z isolation width, 1e5 AGC target, 48 ms maximum IT, centroid) triggered for the 15 most intense ions, with a 25 s dynamic exclusion. Charge exclusion was set to unassigned, 1 and greater than 5.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were quantified by processing MS data using Thermo Scientific™ Proteome Discoverer™ (http://www.thermoscientific.com/content/tfs/en/product/proteome-discoverer-software.html) version 2.3 (PD). Preview version 2.3.5 from Protein Metrics Incorporated (https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/ac200609a) was used to inspect the raw files to determine optimal search criteria. Namely, following search parameters were used: enzyme specified as Trypsin with maximum two missed cleavages allowed; Acetylation of Protein N-terminal with or without Met-loss (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3536895/), Oxidation of Methionine and Deamidation of Asparagine/Glutamine as dynamic post-translational modification while Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine as static; Precursor mass-tolerance of 20 PPM while Fragment mass-tolerance of 0.02 Dalton. Spectrum file RC, PD’s node, was set up to query the raw files against the Phaeodactylum tricornutum (strain CCAP 1055/1, https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000759) and internal contaminants database to recalibrate and detect features with the Minora node and Sequest (https://link.springer.com/article/10.1016%2F1044-0305%2894%2980016-2) search engines available PD. For downstream analysis of these peptide-spectra-matches (PSM), both protein and peptide identifications/PSM false-discovery-rate (FDR) was set to 1% as high and 5% as medium confidence thus only unique peptides with these confidences thresholds were used for final protein group identification and label the level of confidence respectively. Each protein group abundance was normalized by the total abundance of all identified peptides at the FDR and scaled on all average with Precursor Ion Quantifier node (http://tools.thermofisher.com/content/sfs/posters/PN-64857-LC-MS-LFQ-Proteome-Discoverer-IMSC2016-PN64857-EN.pdf) of PD.

### Publication Abstract
The chloroplast signal recognition particle 54&#xa0;kDa (CpSRP54) protein is a member of the CpSRP pathway known to target proteins to thylakoid membranes in plants and green algae. Loss of CpSRP54 in the marine diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum lowers the accumulation of a selection of chloroplast-encoded subunits of photosynthetic complexes, indicating a role in the co-translational part of the CpSRP pathway. In contrast to plants and green algae, absence of CpSRP54 does not have a negative effect on the content of light-harvesting antenna complex proteins and pigments in P. tricornutum, indicating that the diatom CpSRP54 protein has not evolved to function in the post-translational part of the CpSRP pathway. Cpsrp54 KO mutants display altered photophysiological responses, with a stronger induction of photoprotective mechanisms and lower growth rates compared to wild type when exposed to increased light intensities. Nonetheless, their phenotype is relatively mild, thanks to the activation of mechanisms alleviating the loss of CpSRP54, involving upregulation of chaperones. We conclude that plants, green algae, and diatoms have evolved differences in the pathways for co-translational and post-translational insertion of proteins into the thylakoid membranes.

### Keywords
Crispr, Cas9

### Affiliations
Professor, Department of Biology, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, N-7491, Trondheim, Norway
Engineer at NTNU, Norway

### Submitter
Animesh Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Atle Bones
Professor, Department of Biology, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, N-7491, Trondheim, Norway


