### Accession
PXD013239

### Title
MSCs on soft/stiff substrates treated with ROCK or myosin II inhibitors

### Description
Tissues are maintained by homeostatic feedback mechanisms in which cells can respond to, but also modify, the chemical and mechanical properties of the surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM). Mechano-sensitive mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) resident in the marrow niche experience a diverse mechanical environment, but ageing can affect the composition and quality of bone and marrow tissues. Here we quantified the compounded effects of substrate stiffness and replication-induced senescence on MSC morphology and their ability to modify their environments through secretion of ECM proteins. The ECM proteome was found to be sensitive to substrate stiffness, but pharmacological inhibition of cellular contractility perturbed this response, decreasing levels of tenascin-C, fibulins and fibronectin. A corresponding change in the ECM of senescent cells, concomitant with a loss of mechano-responsive morphological features, suggested a decoupling of mechanotransduction pathways. Intracellular proteomic and transcriptomic analyses confirmed a decrease in all components of the cytoskeletal protein homeostasis machinery in senescent MSCs. These results demonstrate a senescence-mediated perturbation to cytoskeletal homeostasis, pathways of mechanotransduction and the secretion of ECM proteins considered necessary for tissue maintenance.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and replicative senescence Human mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) were sourced from knee and hip bone marrow (male and female donors, aged 58 – 80 years) using established methodology (Strassburg et al, 2010). Informed written consent was obtained from donors. Experiments followed relevant guidelines and regulations, and were performed with approval from the National Research Ethics Service and the University of Manchester. MSCs were cultured on tissue culture treated polystyrene (TCTP) in low-glucose DMEM with pyruvate (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Labtech.com) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin cocktail (PS, Sigma-Aldrich). Experiments were conducted at early passage (‘EP’; passage number 2 through 5).  Cell treatments MSCs were cultured on commercially sourced PA gels with defined stiffness (2 and 25 kPa) and bovine collagen-I functionalization (Matrigen Life Technologies). Blebbistatin (Sigma-Aldrich) was used at 5 µM; ROCK inhibitor Y-27632 (Sigma-Aldrich) was used at 10 µM. Media and chemical treatments were replaced after every four days in culture.  Secreted ECM protein harvest 12000 MSCs were seeded per well of six-well plates (tissue culture plastic or collagen-I coated PA of defined stiffness) and cultured for 8 days. Cells were washed with PBS at RT, before ECM extraction in 500 µL 2 M NaCl, 25 mM DTT in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (all Fisher Scientific) for 20 minutes at 37 °C. Extraction with the same buffer was performed serially in two wells. Control samples, in which ECM extraction was performed on cell-free substrates incubated with media under matched conditions for 8 days were used to create background lists of ‘false positive’, contaminant and bovine-sourced peptides in subsequent mass spectrometry (MS) analysis.  Label-free mass spectrometry (MS) sample preparation, analysis and data processing Immobilized-trypsin beads (Perfinity Biosciences) were suspended in 150 µL of digest buffer (1.33 mM CaCl2, Sigma, in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and 50 µL of ECM extract or 25 µL of whole cell extract and shaken overnight at 37 °C. The resulting digest was then reduced (addition of 4 µL x 500 mM DTT in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate; 10 min. shaking at 60 °C) and alkylated (addition of 12 µL x 500 mM iodoacetamide, Sigma, in AB; 30 min. shaking at RT). Peptides were acidified by addition of 5 µL x 10% trifluoroacetic acid (Riedel-de Haën) in water, and cleaned by two-phase extraction (2 x addition of 200 µL ethyl acetate, Sigma, followed by vortexing and aspiration of the organic layer). Peptides were desalted, in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol, using POROS R3 beads (Thermo Fisher) and lyophilized. Peptide concentrations (measured by Direct Detect spectrophotometer, Millipore) in injection buffer (5% HPLC grade acetonitrile, Fisher Scientific, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in deionized water) were adjusted to 300 ng/µL (Orbitrap Elite) or 200 ng/µL (Q Exactive HF) prior to MS analysis.  Digested samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer or a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer, where indicated. Alternative use of Q-Exactive spectrometer. Briefly, for the Orbitrap Elite, peptides were separated using a 75 mm x 250 μm inner diameter 1.7 μM CSH C18, analytical column (Waters) with a gradient from 92% A (0.1% formic acid, FA, Sigma, in deionized water) and 8% B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) to 33% B, in 104 min at 300 nL/min. For the Q Exactive HF, peptides were separated in a gradient of 95% A and 5% B to 7% B at 1 min, 18% B at 58 min, 27% B in 72 min and 60% B at 74 min at 300 nL/min using a 75 mm x 250 μm inner diameter 1.7 μM CSH C18, analytical column (Waters). Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependent analysis. Peptide mixtures were separated using a gradient from 92% A (0.1% formic acid, FA, Sigma, in deionized water) and 8% B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) to 33% B, in 104 min at 300 nL min-1, using a 75 mm x 250 μm inner diameter 1.7 μM CSH C18, analytical column (Waters). Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependent analysis.

### Data Protocol
Spectra from multiple samples were aligned using Progenesis QI (version 3.0; Nonlinear Dynamics) and searched using Mascot (server version 2.5.1; parser version 2.5.2.0; Matrix Science UK), against the UniProt human database (release-2018_06). The peptide database was modified to search for alkylated cysteine residues (monoisotopic mass change, 57.021 Da), oxidized methionine (15.995 Da), hydroxylation of asparagine, aspartic acid, proline or lysine (15.995 Da) and phosphorylation of serine, tyrosine and threonine (79.966 Da). Peptide intensities were exported from Progenesis QI as Excel spreadsheets (Microsoft) for further processing. Peptides detected in cell-free control experiments were not used for quantification. Following database searching, peptide lists and their respective raw abundances were exported from Progenesis QI as a .csv file for further analysis using BayesENproteomics (Mallikarjun et al, 2018) as described previously (Gilbert et al, 2018). BayesENproteomics fits regularized regression models to simultaneously calculate fold changes and impute missing values, taking into account donor variability and post-translationally modified peptides. BayesENproteomics also incorporates weights when calculating fold changes based on BH-FDR-adjusted (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995) Mascot scores for each protein’s peptide (i.e. lower confidence in a peptide’s identity decreases that peptide’s influence on the final model fit). We used a peptide FDR cutoff of 0.2. P-values for proteomics were calculated by Empirical Bayes-modified t-tests and BH-FDR-adjusted.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Contractility, Mechanotransduction, Msc

### Affiliations
Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine (L5) / Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine, University of Manchester
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Venkatesh Mallikarjun

### Lab Head
Dr Joe Swift
Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine (L5) / Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine, University of Manchester


