### Accession
PXD013569

### Title
Proteomic response of Staphylococcus sp. NIOSBK35 to varying arsenic (III) concentrations

### Description
Protein expression in Staphylococcus sp. NIOSBK35 isolated from marine environment (mangrove sediments) to different concentrations of arsenic (III)

### Sample Protocol
The whole cell protein extraction was performed using standardised inhouse protocols, followed by methanol precipitation and in-solution tryptic digestion. Digested samples were subjected to peptide mass fingerprinting. The MS analysis was carried using Agilent nanoChip LC-MS QToF using ProtID chip using a non-linear gradient of water and acetonitrile solvents. The spectra were acquired using Mass Hunter Data Acquisition software.

### Data Protocol
The spectra generated were analysed using Spectrum Mill Software. The search was performed against a species specific database with precursor and product mass tolerance of 50 and 100 ppm respectively and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Peptides were filtered by a score of more than one and %SPI of more than 10. Proteins were filtered by a score of more than one.

### Publication Abstract
Peptide mass fingerprinting of Gram-positive marine-derived <i>Staphylococcus cohnii</i> #NIOSBK35 gave us an insight into the proteins involved in conferring arsenic resistance as well as the probable metabolic pathways affected under metal stress. Analysis of the protein profiles obtained from LC/MS QToF (Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry-Quadrupole Time of Flight) resulted in the identification of 689 proteins. Further grouping of these proteins based on the arsenic concentration (0, 250, 500 and 850&#xa0;ppm) and the time points (6, 9, 12, 18, 24 and 36&#xa0;h) in growth phase showed that a total of 13 proteins were up-regulated, while 178 proteins were down-regulated across all the concentrations and time points. Arsenic specific proteins like arsenical pump-driving ATPase, ArsR family transcriptional regulator and arsenic operon resistance repressor were found to be highly up-regulated throughout all the conditions indicating their possible involvement in the tolerance to arsenic. MBL fold metallo-hydrolase, a known stress protein, was the only protein that was up-regulated at all time points across all arsenic concentrations. Metabolic pathways like translation, carbohydrate metabolism, amino acid metabolism, membrane transport, metabolism of cofactors and vitamins, replication and repair, nucleotide metabolism along with stress proteins and hypothetical proteins were found to be significantly expressed. Our results also suggest that arsenic stress at higher levels is negatively affecting the expression of many normal functional proteins required for cell survival.

### Keywords
Peptide mass fingerprinting, Marine-derived, Lc-ms qtof, Arsenic (iii)

### Affiliations
CSIR-National Institute of Oceanography

### Submitter
Samir Damare

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Samir R. Damare
CSIR-National Institute of Oceanography


