### Accession
PXD039123

### Title
Verticillium dahliae Vta3 promotes ELV1 virulence factor gene expression in xylem sap, but tames Mtf1-mediated late stages of fungus-plant interactions and microsclerotia formation

### Description
Verticillium transcription activator of adhesion 3 (Vta3) is required for plant root colonization and pathogenicity of the soil-borne vascular fungus Verticillium dahliae [Bui et al., 2018]. In this study, we discovered that Vta3 contributes to the virulence of V. dahliae on tomato plants by promoting ELV1 gene expression, which is not necessary for vegetative growth or production of conidiospores. Gene expression of the transcription factor Mtf1 is reduced in the presence of an intact VTA3 gene. The presence of an intact MTF1 gene triggers the expression of fungal effector genes and plant immune responses (transcription of tomato pathogenesis-related protein genes, and levels of pipecolic and salicylic acids functioning in tomato defense signaling against (hemi-) biotrophic pathogens), and is required for disease symptoms similar to those seen in tomato plants infected by the V. dahliae wild-type. Mtf1 promotes the formation of resting structures at the end of the infection cycle, which allows the fungus to survive in the soil and later to re-infect host plants. Protein pull-downs were performed with GFP-fused Vta3 to investigate whether there is evidence for a direct interaction of the regulators Vta3 and Mtf1. In this study, ribosomal proteins predominantly co-enriched with Vta3, and our data set did not give evidence that Mtf1 directly interacts with Vta3. Bui T-T, Harting R, Braus-Stromeyer SA, Tran V-T, Leonard M, Höfer A, et al. Verticillium dahliae transcription factors Som1 and Vta3 control microsclerotia formation and sequential steps of plant root penetration and colonisation to induce disease. New Phytologist. 2019;221: 2138–2159. doi:10.1111/nph.15514

### Sample Protocol
Potato dextrose medium (500 ml; Carl Roth) was inoculated with 5 × 108 freshly harvested conidiospores of V. dahliae and cultured for five days at 25 °C with shaking. Proteins were extracted from the V. dahliae JR2 wild-type, the wild-type strain overexpressing ectopically integrated GFP and the VTA3-GFP expressing strain. The experiment, including protein extraction, in vitro protein pull-down, chloroform-methanol extraction, trypsin digest in presence of RapiGest SF (Waters) and precipitation, was performed as previously described [Höfer et al., 2021] with the following modifications: 15 µl of GFP-Trap Agarose beads were used. The three eluates were collected in one tube. Peptides were dissolved in 40 µl of sample buffer by shaking for 5 min and incubation in an ultrasonic bath for 3 min. The peptides were purified using StageTips [Rappsilber et al., 2003; 2007]. Briefly, StageTips were equilibrated in four steps with (I) 100 µl methanol/0.1% formic acid, (II) 100 µl 70% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid, (III) 100 µl water/0.1% formic acid and (IV) 100 µl water/0.1% formic acid. Samples were divided onto two StageTips and incubated on the columns for 5 min. This step was repeated after centrifugation at 4,000 rpm for 5 min. The columns were washed twice with 200 µl of water/0.1% formic acid. Elution was performed by adding 60 µl of 70% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid, and the two parts of each sample were combined. Peptide samples were dried and resolved in 20 µl liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS) sample buffer. LC/MS analysis of the peptides was performed as described [Höfer et al., 2021]. Höfer AM, Harting R, Aßmann NF, Gerke J, Schmitt K, Starke J, et al. The velvet protein Vel1 controls initial plant root colonization and conidia formation for xylem distribution in Verticillium wilt. PLoS Genet. 2021;17: e1009434. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1009434 Rappsilber J, Mann M, Ishihama Y. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc. 2007;2: 1896–1906. doi:10.1038/nprot.2007.261 Rappsilber J, Ishihama Y, Mann M. Stop and go extraction tips for matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, nanoelectrospray, and LC/MS sample pretreatment in proteomics. Anal Chem. 2003;75: 663–670. doi:10.1021/ac026117i

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.6.10.43 [Cox & Mann, 2008] and Perseus 1.6.0.7 [Tyanova et al., 2016] were used to analyze MS raw data. Data were processed as described [Höfer et al., 2021]. Missing values were replaced four times from the normal distribution. The VTA3-GFP expressing strain was used as the first group and the wild-type as the second group. Höfer AM, Harting R, Aßmann NF, Gerke J, Schmitt K, Starke J, et al. The velvet protein Vel1 controls initial plant root colonization and conidia formation for xylem distribution in Verticillium wilt. PLoS Genet. 2021;17: e1009434. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1009434 Cox J, Mann M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 2008;26: 1367–1372. doi:10.1038/nbt.1511 Tyanova S, Temu T, Sinitcyn P, Carlson A, Hein MY, Geiger T, et al. The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Methods. 2016;13: 731–740. doi:10.1038/nmeth.3901

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Verticillium dahliae, Mtf1, Vta3, Verticillium transcription activator of adhesion 3, Jr2, Transcription factor, Master transcription factor 1

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Microbiology and Genetics, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics and Goettingen Center for Molecular Biosciences (GZMB), University of Goettingen, Germany
Georg-August-Universität Göttingen

### Submitter
Oliver Valerius

### Lab Head
Dr Gerhard H. Braus
Department of Molecular Microbiology and Genetics, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics and Goettingen Center for Molecular Biosciences (GZMB), University of Goettingen, Germany


