### Accession
PXD011216

### Title
Proteomics identifies potential biomarkers and implicates the granin family in Parkinson’s disease

### Description
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder.   Treatments are available to address PD motor symptoms, but not disease progression or cognitive decline.  Demonstrating disease modification in clinical trials is still a substantial challenge because of the high disease heterogeneity and variability in progression as well as subjectivity in clinical scoring. To develop novel therapeutics for PD, there is an urgent need to identify biomarkers for patient stratification in clinical trials. In this study, we used cutting edge data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry to identify PD-specific biomarkers in patient cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). To identify novel biomarkers with minimal false discovery, two independent cohorts were analyzed by DIA mass spectrometry.  An initial discovery cohort of 53 PD and 72 control (CTRL) patient samples was analyzed, identifying 53 proteins with significant changes (nominal p-value ≤ 0.05) in PD relative to CTRL out of the 342 detectable proteins.  A second cohort of 28 PD and 43 CTRL samples were analyzed as above and identified 41 proteins with significant changes in PD. Thirteen proteins showed significant changes in both cohorts, some of which are previously reported to be altered in PD (i.e., EPHA4 and SERPINC1). Three members of a specific protein family, which are cleaved into bioactive peptides, were amongst these 13 proteins . Further, peptide-level quantification of the detectable members of this protein family (7 total) revealed that specific regions of all 7 proteins are decreased in Parkinson’s disease samples. Together, these data may implicate altered processing, localization, and/or function of this entire protein family for the first time in PD.

### Sample Protocol
20 ug of CSF was acetone precipitated and subjected to digestion with LysC and Trypsin in Rapigest. The sample was resuspended in 0.1 Formic acid, 3% Acetonitrile and 2 ul was injected for analysis. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) was performed on a Q Exactive HF hybrid Quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometry (ThermoFisher) interfaced with NanoAcquity (Waters). The sample was separated using a C18 trapping (2GVM Trap Symmetry C18 column, 180 µm x 20mm, Waters) and reverse phase column (1.8 µm HSS T3 nanoACQUITY column, 100 µm x 100mm, Waters) for DIA acquisition over a 60 min  gradient. An inclusion list containing 17 precursors ranging from m/z 400 to 1000 with varying isolation windows was used for DIA with a resolution of 60,000 (AGC = 3e6).

### Data Protocol
Samples were processed in Spectronaut Pulsar v11 utilizing a library generated from fractionated CSF. Peptide precursor identification was set with q-value cutoff of 0.01, corresponding to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Endogenous peptides were used for retention time calibration across samples. Intensities of the top 3 peptide precursors identified for each protein were averaged, when available, to generate the protein level quantification. A local normalization approach was employed that incorporates local regression with locally weighted smoothing as previously described13. A <a href="https://www.biognosys.com/technology/spectronaut-viewer">free version</a> of the Spectronaut Viewer is available to view the .sne SEARCH files.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Parkinson's, Csf, Proteomics, Biomarkers, Cerebrospinal fluid

### Affiliations
CNS Genetic Diseases Research, Neuroscience Therapeutic Area, Sanofi, Inc., Framingham, MA 01701
Sanofi

### Submitter
Pablo Sardi

### Lab Head
Dr Sergio Pablo Sardi
CNS Genetic Diseases Research, Neuroscience Therapeutic Area, Sanofi, Inc., Framingham, MA 01701


