### Accession
PXD024305

### Title
Characterization of peptide-protein relationships in protein ambiguity groups via bipartite graphs - data set D2

### Description
Motivation: In bottom-up mass spectrometry proteins are enzymatically digested before measurement. The relationship between proteins and peptides can be represented by bipartite graphs that can be split into connected components. This representation is useful to aid protein inference and quantification, which is complex due to the occurrence of shared peptides. We conducted a comprehensive analysis of these bipartite graphs using peptides from an in silico digestion of protein databases as well as quantified peptides. Results: The graphs based on quantified peptides are smaller and have less complex structures compared to the database level. However, the proportion of protein nodes without unique peptides and the proportion of graphs that contain these proteins increase. Large differences between the two underlying organisms (mouse and yeast) on database as well as quantitative level could be observed. Insights of this analysis may be useful for the development of protein inference and  quantification algorithms. Link to preprint: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.07.28.454128v1?ct=

### Sample Protocol
For details see the original publication from Ramus et al. (PMID: 26862574). A yeast cell lysate was prepared in 8M urea / 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate buffer and this lysate was used to resuspend and perform a serial dilution of the UPS1 standard mixture (Sigma). Twenty uL of each of the resulting samples, corresponding to 9 different spiked levels of UPS1 (respectively 0,05 - 0,125 - 0,250 - 0,5 - 2.5 - 5 - 12,5 - 25 - 50 fmol of UPS1 /ug of yeast lysate), were reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide. The urea concentration was lowered to 1M by dilution, and proteins were digested in solution by addition of 2% of trypsin overnight. Enzymatic digestion was stopped by addition of TFA (0.5% final concentration). Samples (2ug of yeast cell lysate + different spiked level of UPS1) were analyzed in triplicate by nanoLC-MS/MS using a nanoRS UHPLC system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using a 105 min gradient on a 15 cm C18 column, and a top20 data-dependent acquisition method.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were taken from the ProteomXchange repository, identifier PXD001819, and re-analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.3.4 and Andromeda. The settings were taken from Workflow 7 of the corresponding publication by Ramus et al. (PMID: 26862574) except that Trypsin (no cuts after proline) was used instead of Trypsin/P, to match the corresponding in silico digestion of the database. In summary, precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for first search and to 6 ppm for main search and the fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to six amino acids and maximum peptide mass to 4600 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were used as variable modifications. The peptide.txt result file was used for further processing of the quantitative peptide-level data. The corresponding database (in total 6,371 entries) consists of the Uniprot yeast proteome with isoforms (2020-01-31, 6,078 entries), the UPS1 fasta containing the 48 sequences, as well as the contaminants database used by Andromeda (245 sequences).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ups1, Label-free, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-University Bochum
Ruhr-University Bochum, Medical Faculty, Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Medical Bioinformatics.   Ruhr-University Bochum, Medical Proteome Analysis, Center for Proteindiagnostics (PRODI).

### Submitter
Karin Schork

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Eisenacher
Ruhr-University Bochum, Medical Faculty, Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Medical Bioinformatics.   Ruhr-University Bochum, Medical Proteome Analysis, Center for Proteindiagnostics (PRODI).


### SDRF
- Organism: Saccharomyces cerevisiae
- organism part: not available
- disease: not available
- cell type: not applicable
- label: AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample
- instrument: AC=MS:1001742;NT=LTQ Orbitrap Velos
- modification parameters: NT=Carbamidomethyl;TA=C;MT=fixed;AC=UNIMOD:4
- modification parameters.1: NT=Oxidation;MT=variable;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35
- modification parameters.2: NT=Acetyl;AC=UNIMOD:67;PP=Protein N-term;MT=variable

