### Accession
PXD012096

### Title
RUNX2 stimulates neoangiogenesis through the RUNT domain in melanoma

### Description
Transcription factors, by acting on gene expression can affect molecular pathways and can thereby induce malignant transformation. Among the transcription factors involved in cellular transformation, we recently highlighted the role of RUNX2 in melanoma cell migration and proliferation. In the present study, we extended the analysis of the molecular effects of RUNT domain of RUNX2 in melanoma cells to deepen understanding of the underlying mechanisms. By the CRISPR/Cas9 system we generated the RUNT KO melanoma cells 3G8. Therefore, using a proteomic approach, we compared  3G8 with the original wild-type melanoma cell line (A375). The results showed a specific protein signature of 3G8 cells related to apoptosis and migration. In addition, proteomic analysis allowed us to point out the involvement of the RUNT domain in the neoangiogenesis process. Among the deregulated proteins implicated in angiogenesis we found fatty acid synthase, chloride intracellular channel protein-4, heat shock protein beta-1, Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor 1, D-3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase, myosin-1c and caveolin-1. Accordingly, the VEGF gene expression was higher in A375 compared to 3G8 cells; HUVEC cells expressed increased levels of the neoangiogenetic markers CD105 and CD31 when co-cultured with A375 cells. In conclusion, our study provided new insight into RUNX2 molecular details which can be crucial to possibly propose it as an oncotarget of melanoma.

### Sample Protocol
Lysated cells were subjected to trypsin digestion and then desalted. After the desalting, the sample was vacuum evaporated and reconstituted with 20 μL of 0.05% formic acid in water. The cell proteins were analyzed with a micro-LC Eksigent Technologies (Eksigent Technologies) system that included a micro LC200 Eksigent pump with flow module 5-50 µL, interfaced with a 5600+ TripleTOF system (Sciex) equipped with DuoSpray Ion Source and CDS (Calibrant Delivery System). The stationary phase was a Halo C18 column (0.5 x 100 mm, 2.7 µm; Eksigent Technologies). The mobile phase was a mixture of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (B), eluting at a flow-rate of 15.0 µL min−1 at an increasing concentration of solvent B from 2% to 40% in 30 min. The injection volume was 4.0 μL and the oven temperature was set at 40 °C. For identification purposes the samples were subjected to a data dependent acquisition (DDA): the mass spectrometer analysis was performed using a mass range of 100–1500 Da (TOF scan with an accumulation time of 0.25 s), followed by a MS/MS product ion scan from 200 to 1250 Da (accumulation time of 5.0 ms) with the abundance threshold set at 30 cps (35 candidate ions can be monitored during every cycle). For the label-free quantification the samples were subjected to cyclic data independent analysis (DIA) of the mass spectra, using a 25-Da window: the mass spectrometer was operated such that a 50-ms survey scan (TOF-MS) was performed and subsequent MS/MS experiments were performed on all precursors.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were acquired with Analyst TF 1.7 (Sciex). The DDA files were searched using Protein Pilot software v. 4.2 (Sciex) and Mascot v. 2.4 (Matrix Science). Trypsin as digestion enzyme was specified for both the software. For Mascot we used 2 missed cleavages, the instrument was set to ESI-QUAD-TOF and the following modifications were specified for the search: carbamidomethyl cysteins as fixed modification and oxidized methionine as variable modification. A search tolerance of 50 ppm was specified for the peptide mass tolerance, and 0.1 Da for the MS/MS tolerance. The charges of the peptides to search for were set to 2 +, 3 + and 4 +, and the search was set on monoisotopic mass. The UniProt Swiss-Prot reviewed database containing human proteins was used and a target-decoy database search was performed. False Discovery Rate was fixed at 1%. The quantification was performed by integrating the extracted ion chromatogram of all the unique ions for a given peptide. SwathXtend was employed to build an integrated assay library, built with the DDA acquisitions, using a protein FDR threshold of 1%. The quantification was carried out with PeakView 2.0 and MarkerView 1.2. (Sciex). Six peptides per protein and six transitions per peptide were extracted from the SWATH files. Shared peptides were excluded as well as peptides with modifications. Peptides with FDR lower than 1.0% were exported in MarkerView for the t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Runx2 is a transcription factor involved in melanoma cell migration and proliferation. Here, we extended the analysis of Runt domain of Runx2 in melanoma cells to deepen understanding of the underlying mechanisms. By the CRISPR/Cas9 system we generated the Runt KO melanoma cells 3G8. Interestingly, the proteome analysis showed a specific protein signature of 3G8 cells related to apoptosis and migration, and pointed out the involvement of Runt domain in the neoangiogenesis process. Among the proteins implicated in angiogenesis we identified fatty acid synthase, chloride intracellular channel protein-4, heat shock protein beta-1, Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor 1, D-3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase, myosin-1c and caveolin-1. Upon querying the TCGA provisional database for melanoma, the genes related to these proteins were found altered in 51.36% of total patients. In addition, VEGF gene expression was reduced in 3G8 as compared to A375 cells; and HUVEC co-cultured with 3G8 cells expressed lower levels of CD105 and CD31 neoangiogenetic markers. Furthermore, the tube formation assay revealed down-regulation of capillary-like structures in HUVEC co-cultured with 3G8 in comparison to those with A375 cells. These findings provide new insight into Runx2 molecular details which can be crucial to possibly propose it as an oncotarget of melanoma.

### Keywords
Melanoma, Proteomics, Neoangiogenesis, Runx2

### Affiliations
University of Eastern Piedmont  Department of Sciences and Technological Innovation, University of Piemonte Orientale, Italy
University of Eastern Piedmont 

### Submitter
Marcello Manfredi

### Lab Head
Dr Marcello Manfredi
University of Eastern Piedmont  Department of Sciences and Technological Innovation, University of Piemonte Orientale, Italy


