### Accession
PXD017390

### Title
Human gut microbiome cultured over time responsed differently to drug stimulation

### Description
In vitro gut microbiota models are often used to study drug-microbiome interaction. Similar to culturing individual microbial strains, the biomass accumulation of in vitro gut microbiota follows a logistic growth curve. Current studies on in vitro gut microbiome responses introduce drug stimulation during different growth stages, e.g. lag phase or stationary phase. However, in vitro gut microbiota in different growth phases may respond differently to a same stimuli. Therefore, in this study, we used a 96-deep well plate-based culturing model (MiPro) to culture the human gut microbiota. Metformin, as the stimulus, was added at the lag, log and stationary phases of growth. Microbiome samples were collected at different time points for optical density and metaproteomic functional analysis. Results show that in vitro gut microbiota responded differently to metformin added during different growth phases, in terms of the growth curve, alterations of taxonomic and functional compositions. The addition of drugs at log phase leads to the greatest decline of bacterial growth. Metaproteomic analysis suggested that the strength of the metformin effect on the gut microbiome functional profile was ranked as lag phase > log phase > stationary phase. Our results showed that metformin added at lag phase resulted in a significantly reduced abundance of the Clostridiales order as well as an increased abundance of the Bacteroides genus, which was different from stimulation during the rest of the growth phase. Metformin also resulted in alterations of several pathways, including energy production and conversion, lipid transport and metabolism, translation, ribosomal structure and biogenesis. Our results indicate that the timing for drug stimulation should be considered when studying drug-microbiome interactions in vitro.

### Sample Protocol
Microbial cell pellets were lysed for protein extraction.50 μg of protein in each sample was reduced and alkylated with 10 mM dithiothreitol and 20 mM iodoacetamide,and was digested using trypsin at 37°C overnight. The tryptic peptides were desalted with a 10-μm C18 column and desalted tryptic peptides corresponding to 0.2 μg of protein were loaded for LC-MS/MS analysis with an Eskigent 425 nanoLC and run on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific Inc.).

### Data Protocol
The MS data was processed with MetaPro-IQ bioinformatics workflow with the MetaLab software (version 1.0)

### Publication Abstract
Metaproteomics has been used in combination with <i>in vitro</i> gut microbiota models to study drug-microbiome interactions. However, it remains unexplored whether the metaproteomics profile of <i>in vitro</i> gut microbiota responds differently to a same stimulus added at different growth phases. In this study, we cultured a human gut microbiota in 96-deep well plates using a previously validated model. Metformin was added during the lag, log, and stationary phases. Microbiome samples, collected at different time points, were analyzed by optical density and function by metaproteomic. The <i>in vitro</i> gut microbiota growth curves, taxonomy, and functional responses were different depending whether metformin was added during the lag, log, or stationary phases. The addition of drugs at the log phase may lead to the greatest decline of bacterial growth. Metaproteomic analysis suggests that the strength of the metformin effect on the gut microbiome functional profile may be ranked as lag phase &gt; log phase &gt; stationary phase. Metformin added at the lag phase may result in a significantly reduced level of the Clostridiales order and an increased level of the <i>Bacteroides</i> genus, which is different from stimulations during the rest of the growth phases. Metformin may also result in alterations of several pathways, including energy production and conversion, lipid transport and metabolism, translation, ribosomal structure, and biogenesis. Our results indicate that the timing for drug stimulation should be considered when studying drug-microbiome interactions <i>in vitro</i>.

### Keywords
Drug, Metaproteomics, Microbiome

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
Universtiy of Ottawa

### Submitter
Leyuan Li

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada


