### Accession
PXD018608

### Title
Crosslinking/mass spectrometry (CLMS) analysis of Cohesin complex

### Description
The ring-shaped cohesin complex is thought to fulfil its roles in sister chromatid cohesion, genome stability and gene regulation by topologically encircling DNAs. The ring is formed by two Structural Maintenance of Chromosome (SMC) subunits, whose ATPase heads are linked by a kleisin subunit. Additional components, including the Mis4Scc2/NIPL cohesin loader, engage the kleisin. We applied crosslinking mass spectrometry to characterize cohesion complex in two conditions: initial binding and gripping state.

### Sample Protocol
Protein cross-linking of cohesin complex was performed in two different conditions. Initial binding reaction was performed in the absence of nucleotide. Gripping state reaction was promoted by ADP and BeSO4-NaF. All materials (cohesin, loader and DNA) were dialyzed in SDA cross-linking buffer (35 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.5, 0.5 mM TCEP, 25 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 15% (w/v) glycerol and 0.003% (w/v) Tween 20) at 4 ºC for 3 hours. Cohesin (200 nM), Mis4-Ssl3 (200 nM) and 125bp dsDNA (200 nM) were mixed on ice in SDA cross-linking buffer. The reaction in each condition was started in the absence of nucleotide or in the presence of 0.5 mM ADP and 0.5 mM BeSO4-10 mM NaF at 32 ºC. After 20 minute-incubation, SDA was added to 50 μg of the cohesin complex with three different cross-linker weight ratios. (Protein: SDA=1:1.3, 1:1.9 and 1: 3.8). The diazirine group in SDA was photo-activated using UV irradiation, at 365 nm, from an Ultraviolet Cross-linker (Spectrum). Samples were applied onto the 96-well plate, placed on ice at a distance of 5 cm from the UV-A lamp and irradiated for 20 minutes. After UV irradiation, the sample was further incubated on ice for 2 hours to react an NHS group in SDA. The reaction mixtures from three cross-linker ratios were combined together and quenched with ammonium bicarbonate (final concentration 50 mM). The sample was added with 4 times volume of cold acetone and incubated at -20 ºC for 1 hour. Proteins were precipitated by centrifuge, dried in a vacuum concentrator. For each sample, the dried protein pellet (estimated 100 µg proteins) was resolubilized in 100 µL digestion buffer (8M urea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC)) to an estimated protein concentration of 1 mg/mL. Dissolved protein sample was reduced by addition of 0.5 µL 1M Dithiothreitol (DTT), the reduction reaction was incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes. The free -SH groups in the sample were then alkylated by adding 3 µL 500 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and incubating at room temperature for 20 minutes. After alkylation, 0.5 µL 1M DTT was added to quench excess of IAA. Subsequently, protein sample was digested with LysC (with 1:50 (m/m) protease to protein ratio) at room temperature for four hours. The sample was then diluted with 100 mM ABC to reach urea concentration of 1.5 M. Trypsin was added with 1:50 (m/m) protease to protein ratio to further digest proteins for overnight (~15 hours) at room temperature. Resulting peptides were de-salted using C18 StageTips (PMID:17703201).  For each sample, resulting peptides were fractionated using size exclusion chromatography in order to enrich for crosslinked peptides (PMID:24356771). Peptides were separated using a Superdex Peptide 3.2/300 column (GE Healthcare) at a flow rate of 10 μl/min. The mobile phase consisted of 30% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. The earliest six peptide-containing fractions (50 μl each) were collected. Solvent was removed using a vacuum concentrator. The fractions were then analysed by LC-MS/MS.  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), connected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each SEC fraction was resuspended in 1.6% v/v acetonitrile 0.1% v/v formic acid and analysed with replicated LC-MS/MS acquisitions (except for SEC fraction 5 of the “initial binding” sample). Peptides were injected onto a 50-centimetre EASY-Spray C18 LC column (Thermo Scientific) that is operated at 50°C column temperature. Mobile phase A consists of water, 0.1% v/v formic acid and mobile phase B consists of 80% v/v acetonitrile and 0.1% v/v formic acid. Peptides were loaded and separated at a flowrate of 0.3 μL/min. Peptides were separated by applying a gradient ranging from 2% to 45% B over 90 min. Gradient was optimized for each corresponding SEC fraction. Following the separating gradient, the content of B was ramped to 55% and 95% within 2.5 minutes each. Eluted peptides were ionized by an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific) and introduced directly into the mass spectrometer. The MS data is acquired in the data-dependent mode with the top-speed option. For each three-second acquisition cycle, the full scan mass spectrum was recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000. The ions with a charge state from 3+ to 7+ were isolated and fragmented using Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). For each isolated precursor, one of three collision energy settings (26%, 28% or 30%) was selected for fragmentation using data dependent decision tree based on the m/z and charge of the precursor. The fragmentation spectra were then recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50000. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with single repeat count and 60-second exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
The MS2 peak lists were generated from the raw mass spectrometric data files using the MSConvert module in ProteoWizard (version 3.0.11729). The default parameters were applied, except that Top MS/MS Peaks per 100 Da was set to 20 and the de-noising function was enabled. Precursor and fragment m/z values were recalibrated. Identification of crosslinked peptides was carried out using xiSEARCH software (https://www.rappsilberlab.org/software/xisearch) (PMID:31556486) (version 1.7.0). The “initial binding” and the “gripping state” samples were processed separately. For each sample, peak lists from all LC-MS/MS acquisitions were searched against the sequence and the reversed sequence of cohesion plus loader subunits (including Psm1, Psm3, Rad21, Psc3, Mis4 and Ssl3). The following parameters were applied for the search: MS accuracy = 4 ppm; MS2 accuracy = 10 ppm; enzyme = trypsin (with full tryptic specificity); allowed number of missed cleavages = two; missing monoisotopic peak=2; cross-linker = SDA (the reaction specificity for SDA was assumed to be for lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine and protein N termini on the NHS ester end and any amino acids for the diazirine end ); fixed modifications = carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications = oxidation on methionine and SDA loop link. Identified crosslinked peptide candidates were filtered using xiFDR (PMID: 28267312). A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% on residue-pair-level was applied with “boost between” option selected.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Crosslinking/mass spectrometry, Cohesin complex

### Affiliations
Technischen Universität Berlin
Technische Universität Berlin The University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Zhuo Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Technische Universität Berlin The University of Edinburgh


