### Accession
PXD020346

### Title
TENT5A mediated cytoplasmic polyadenylation in osteoblast supports proper bone formation.

### Description
The bone formation, osteogenesis,  is a very complex process in which osteoblasts play a crucial role. The primary function of theses terminally differentiated mesenchymal stem cells is the secretion of fibrillary, dense, highly crosslinked type 1 collagen. Herein we show that the TENT5A gene, which mutations lead to osteogenesis imperfecta, is an active cytoplasmic poly(A) polymerase, which in osteoblast positively regulates the expression of collagen subunits and also other secreted proteins essential for proper bone formation. TENT5A substrates have shorter poly(A) tails in TENT5 KO, as revealed by direct RNA sequencing. In the case of Col1α1 and Col1α2 transcripts, the lack of cytoplasmic polyadenylation by TENT5 leads to drastic decree in the protein production but also aberrant structure. The increase in TENT5A expressing during osteoblasts differentiation positively correlates with the cytoplasmic extension of the poly(A) trials of mRNA targets.   The first physiologically relevant regulation of collagen expression at the posttranscriptional level.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to the analysis, gel slices were subjected to a standard “in-gel digestion” procedure, during which proteins were reduced with 100 mM DTT (for 30 min at 56°C), alkylated with 0.5M iodoacetamide (45 min in a darkroom at room temperature) and digested overnight with 10 ng/μl trypsin solution (sequencing grade modified trypsin, Promega V5111). The resultant peptides were eluted from the gel with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 2%acetonitrile (ACN). Finally, to stop digestion trifluoroacetic acid was added at a final concentration of 0.1%. The digest was centrifuged at 4 °C, 14 000 g for 30 min, to pellet solids. The particle-free supernatant was analyzed by LC-MS/MS in the Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry (IBB PAS, Warsaw) using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled to an Orbitrap QExative mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent MS2 mode, and data were acquired in the m/z range of 300–2000. Peptides were separated by a 180 min linear gradient of 95% solution A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 35% solution B (acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The measurement of each sample was preceded by three washing runs to avoid cross-contamination. The final MS washing run was searched for the presence of cross-contamination between samples.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched with the Max-Quant (Version 1.6.3.4) platform search parameters: match between runs (match time window 0.7 min, alignment time 20 min), enzyme: trypsin/p; specific; max missed 2, minimal peptide length 7aa, variable modification: methionine and proline oxidation, fixed: cysteine alkylation, main search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm, protein FDR 0.01. Data were searched against protein database containing all mice collagen sequences.    The list of peptides containing oxidized proline was statistically analyzed. At level of a single peptide and at genral level of sum of a intensities of all oxidated peptides identified in wt and ko samples.

### Publication Abstract
Osteoblasts orchestrate bone formation through the secretion of type I collagen and other constituents of the matrix on which hydroxyapatite crystals mineralize. Here, we show that TENT5A, whose mutations were found in congenital bone disease osteogenesis imperfecta patients, is a cytoplasmic poly(A) polymerase playing a crucial role in regulating bone mineralization. Direct RNA sequencing revealed that TENT5A is induced during osteoblast differentiation and polyadenylates mRNAs encoding Col1&#x3b1;1, Col1&#x3b1;2, and other secreted proteins involved in osteogenesis, increasing their expression. We postulate that TENT5A, possibly together with its paralog TENT5C, is responsible for the wave of cytoplasmic polyadenylation of mRNAs encoding secreted proteins occurring during bone mineralization. Importantly, the Tent5a knockout (KO) mouse line displays bone fragility and skeletal hypomineralization phenotype resulting from quantitative and qualitative collagen defects. Thus, we report a biologically relevant posttranscriptional regulator of collagen production and, more generally, bone formation.

### Keywords
Collagen, Lc-ms/ms, Mice

### Affiliations
Medical University of Bialystok
international institute of molecular and cell biology in warsaw

### Submitter
Dominik Cysewski

### Lab Head
Dr Andrzej Dziembowski
international institute of molecular and cell biology in warsaw


