### Accession
PXD045639

### Title
Multi-omics data integration reveals sex-dependent hippocampal programming by maternal high-fat diet during lactation in adult mouse offspring

### Description
Early-life exposure to high-fat diet (HF) can program metabolic and cognitive alterations in adult offspring. Although the hippocampus plays a crucial role in memory and metabolic homeostasis, few studies reported the impact of maternal HF on this structure. We assessed the effects of maternal HF during lactation on physiological, metabolic and cognitive parameters in young adult offspring mice. To identify early-programming mechanisms in hippocampus, we developed a multi-omics strategy in male and female offspring. Maternal HF induced a transient increased body weight at weaning, a mild glucose intolerance only in 3-month-old male mice with no change in plasma metabolic parameters in adult male and female offspring.  Behavioral alterations revealed by Barnes maze test were observed both in 6-month-old male and female mice. Multi-omics strategy unveiled sex-specific transcriptomic and proteomic modifications in the hippocampus of adult offspring. These studies, that were confirmed by regulon analysis, showing that, although genes whose expression was modified by maternal HF were different between sexes, the main pathways affected were similar with mitochondria and synapses as main hippocampal targets of maternal HF. The effects of maternal HF reported here may help to better characterize sex-dependent molecular pathways involved in cognitive disorders and neurodegenerative diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction Hippocampal proteins were extracted from freeze tissue. Hippocampal tissue was sonicated on ice in 200 µL of Tris buffer containing 10% sucrose (pH 7.4) and homogenized at 4°C for 1h. Homogenates were kept at -80°C until use. Protein concentrations were quantified using BCA assay (Pierce) following the manufacturer’s instructions.  Proteomic preparation A shotgun bottom-up proteomic approach was carried out. All samples were resuspended in 100 µL of ammonium bicarbonate buffer (NH4HCO3, 50 mM) and 50 µL of denaturation buffer (urea 6 M) were added, and the mixture was incubated and sonicated for 5 min. After denaturation, 50 µL of reduction buffer (Dithiothreitol- DTT 40 mM) were added to the sample, and incubated at 56°C for 40 min. Next, 50 µL of alkylation buffer (Iodoacetamide IAA 100 mM) were added to the sample, and the mixture was incubated in darkness for 40 min to allow for alkylation. To neutralize the free IAA, 50 µL of 600 mM Thio-urea buffer were added to the samples. A subsequent addition of 200 µL of ammonium bicarbonate buffer was made to reduce the urea concentration to below 1 M. For enzymatic digestion, a final concentration of 3% trypsin was added to the diluted samples, and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37 °C. To stop the digestion process, 10 µL of 5% TFA were  added to the digested sample. Finally, the samples were dried using a SpeedVac. Prior to nLC-MS/MS analysis, the samples were desalted using ZipTip C-18 (Millipore). NanoLC-MS/MS analysis The digested proteins were analyzed utilizing a Nano Acquity UPLC system (Waters) connected to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) through a Nanospray Flex source. The samples were separated by means of online reversed phase, using a pre-concentration column (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm). The peptides were separated by applying a linear gradient of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (5%-30%) for 2 hours, at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The Q-Exactive was operated in DDA (data-dependent acquisition) mode defined to analyze the ten most intense ions of MS analysis (Top 10). The MS analysis was performed with a m/z mass range between 300 to 1600, resolution of 70,000 FWHM, AGC of 3e6 ions and maximum injection time of 120 ms. The MS/MS analysis was performed with a m/z mass range between 200 to 2000, AGC of 5e4 ions, maximum injection time of 60 ms and resolution set at 17,500 FWHM. Higher Energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) was set to 30%. Precursors ions with charges states > +1 and < +8 were kept for the fragmentation, with a dynamic exclusion time of 20s.

### Data Protocol
Data processing The proteins were identified by comparing all MS/MS data with the proteome database of Mus Musculus (Uniprot, release December 2021, 86492 entries), using the MaxQuant software version 2.0.3.0. The oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were defined as variable modifications. The carbamidomethylation of cysteine was chosen as fixed modifications. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was done keeping the default parameters of the MaxLFQ algorithm [2]. The digestion parameters were defined using trypsin with 2 maximum missed cleavages. The protein and peptide identification parameters were carried out with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%, and a minimum of 2 peptides per protein including 1 unique. Next, the analysis was done by Perseus software (https://maxquant.net/perseus/) version 1.6.10.43 [3]. The LFQ intensity of each sample was downloaded in Perseus and the data matrix was filtered by removing the potential contaminants, reverse and only identified by site. The data were then transformed using the log2(x).

### Publication Abstract
Early-life exposure to high-fat diets (HF) can program metabolic and cognitive alterations in adult offspring. Although the hippocampus plays a crucial role in memory and metabolic homeostasis, few studies have reported the impact of maternal HF on this structure. We assessed the effects of maternal HF during lactation on physiological, metabolic, and cognitive parameters in young adult offspring mice. To identify early-programming mechanisms in the hippocampus, we developed a multi-omics strategy in male and female offspring. Maternal HF induced a transient increased body weight at weaning, and a mild glucose intolerance only in 3-month-old male mice with no change in plasma metabolic parameters in adult male and female offspring. Behavioral alterations revealed by a Barnes maze test were observed both in 6-month-old male and female mice. The multi-omics strategy unveiled sex-specific transcriptomic and proteomic modifications in the hippocampus of adult offspring. These studies that were confirmed by regulon analysis show that, although genes whose expression was modified by maternal HF were different between sexes, the main pathways affected were similar with mitochondria and synapses as main hippocampal targets of maternal HF. The effects of maternal HF reported here may help to better characterize sex-dependent molecular pathways involved in cognitive disorders and neurodegenerative diseases.

### Keywords
Maternal high-fat diet, Lc-ms/ms, Multiomics, Sexual dimorphism, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
PRISM U1192 Universite de Lille FRANCE
PRISM

### Submitter
Soulaimane Aboulouard

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
PRISM U1192 Universite de Lille FRANCE


