### Accession
PXD023525

### Title
OGDH/DHTKD1-DLST (E1o/E1a- E2o) CL-MS

### Description
human OGDH (E1o) and DHTKD1 (E1a) were cross-linked with DLST (E2o). The samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS in order to elucidate the interaction sites between these two E1-E2 subcomplexes.

### Sample Protocol
The human E1a or E1o (1 nmol, 33 µM subunits) and E2o (1 nmol, 33 µM subunits) in buffer containing 20 mM K2HPO4 (pH 7.5) containing 0.5 mM ThDP, 1 mM MgCl2, 0.15 M NaCl and 10% glycerol. After 30 min of incubation at 20 °C, 1 µl of CDI (1 M) or DSBU (150 mM) dissolved in DMSO was added and the cross-linking reaction was conducted at 15 °C for 45 min. To quench the reaction, the reaction mixture was diluted to 50 µl with reaction buffer above, and 1 M Tris.HCl (pH 8.0) was added to a final concentration of 20 mM. Cross-linked samples were subjected to tryptic and Glu-C in-solution double digestion. Digested samples were desalted on a SepPak SPE C-18 column and were dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge (Savant), then dissolved in 100 µl of 20% acetonitrile (0.05% formic acid).  Peptide enrichment was carried out by using a SCX trap cartridge. The enriched peptides were desalted by a SepPak SPE C-18 column and were dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge. Cross-linked peptides were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS peak lists were generated using the ProteoWizard 3.0.18156 and searched against the Swissprot database (proteome ID: UP000000558, search was done by using searchGUI-3.3.117 incorporated with peptideshaker 1.16.42).Cross-links were evaluated using software tool Merox 1.6.6 with the following parameters: precursor 5 ppm; fragment 15 ppm mass accuracy; CDI or BuUrBu set as cross-linker. The cross-linked peptides were manually validated, the results with FDR < 0.01 limit were exported.

### Publication Abstract
The 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex (OGDHc) is a key enzyme in the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and represents one of the major regulators of mitochondrial metabolism through NADH and reactive oxygen species levels. The OGDHc impacts cell metabolic and cell signaling pathways through the coupling of 2-oxoglutarate metabolism to gene transcription related to tumor cell proliferation and aging. <i>DHTKD1</i> is a gene encoding 2-oxoadipate dehydrogenase (E1a), which functions in the L-lysine degradation pathway. The potentially damaging variants in <i>DHTKD1</i> have been associated to the (neuro) pathogenesis of several diseases. Evidence was obtained for the formation of a hybrid complex between the OGDHc and E1a, suggesting a potential cross talk between the two metabolic pathways and raising fundamental questions about their assembly. Here we reviewed the recent findings and advances in understanding of protein-protein interactions in OGDHc and 2-oxoadipate dehydrogenase complex (OADHc), an understanding that will create a scaffold to help design approaches to mitigate the effects of diseases associated with dysfunction of the TCA cycle or lysine degradation. A combination of biochemical, biophysical and structural approaches such as chemical cross-linking MS and cryo-EM appears particularly promising to provide vital information for the assembly of 2-oxoacid dehydrogenase complexes, their function and regulation.

### Keywords
Dhtkd1, Ogdh

### Affiliations
Rutgers University-Newark, Chemistry Department
Rutgers University

### Submitter
XU ZHANG

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Jordan
Rutgers University-Newark, Chemistry Department


