### Accession
PXD017452

### Title
Analysis of Global Protein Expression in PIWIL1 knockdown PDAC cell line

### Description
In contrast to the great advances in understanding of the functions of Piwi in germlines, their actions in cancer cells remain less clear. In particular, Piwi proteins have been asserted as oncoproteins, but little is known about how their oncogenic function is achieved in cancer cells. We conducted mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic analyses to monitor the proteome changes upon PIWIL1 downregulation in PDAC cell line.

### Sample Protocol
For cell lysis, cell pellets were suspended on ice in 200 μL lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) and boiling for 5 min. The samples were further ultrasonicated and boiling again for another 5 min. Undissolved cellular debris were removed by centrifugation at 14 000 rpm for 15 min. For protein digestion, DTT and other low-molecular-weight components were removed using 200 μl UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) by repeated ultrafiltration (Microcon units, 30 kD) facilitated by centrifugation. Then 100 μL 0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA buffer was added to block reduced cysteine residues and the samples were incubated for 20 min in darkness. The filter was washed with 100 μl UA buffer three times and then 100 μl 25 mM NH4HCO3 twice. Finally, the protein suspension was digested with 3 μg trypsin (Promega) in 40 μl 25 mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 37 °C, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. The peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm using an extinctions coefficient of 1.1 of 0.1% (g/l) solution that was calculated on the basis of the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins.

### Data Protocol
Raw data analysis was performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5). MS data were searched against the Human uniport database. Protein aboundance was calculated on the basis of the normalized spectral protein intensity (LFQ intensity). An initial search was set at a precursor mass window of 6 ppm. The search followed an enzymatic cleavage rule of Trypsin/P and allowed maximal two missed cleavage sites and a mass tolerance of 20ppm for fragment ions. The cutoff of global false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Piwil1, Pdac

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology，Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Li Feng

### Lab Head
Dr Mofang Liu
Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences


