### Accession
PXD026200

### Title
The proteome of developing barley anthers during meiotic prophase I

### Description
In the current project, we aimed to discover how the barley anther proteome changes, both quantitatively and qualitatively, during meiotic prophase I when the important process of homologous recombination is taking place. Taking advantage of a recently published barley anther transcriptomic dataset (BAnTr) and a newly developed sensitive mass spectrometry-based approach to analyse barley anther proteome, we have conducted high-resolution mass spectrometry analysis of barley anthers, collected at 6 time points and representing their development from pre-meiosis to metaphase. Each time point was carefully staged using immunocytology. We identified >6400 proteins, including 82 known and putative meiotic proteins, and were able to quantify dynamic variation in the proteome during different stages of barley anther development.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection We used barley (H. vulgare) cv. Golden Promise throughout. Plants were grown in 70% humidity under 16 h of light at 18–20°C and 8 h of dark at 16°C until they reached meiosis (6–7 weeks) in a controlled environment growth room. For anther collection, 0.8–1.4 cm spikes (i.e. developing barley inflorescences) were collected and anthers within a size range of 0.6–1.1 mm dissected manually from individual developing spikelets with insulin syringes on a plastic Petri dish under a stereoscopic microscope (with graticule). As meiosis is not perfectly synchronized along the length of the spike, we only collected anthers from the middle spikelets. Each barley spikelet contains three developmentally synchronized anthers and so meiosis was monitored in one anther from each spikelet by immunostaining using meiosis specific antibodies. The remaining two anthers were placed on a cavity glass slide in a drop of 1 × PBS including protease inhibitor cocktail prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions and squashed with an insulin needle. Samples were placed immediately in an Eppendorf tube containing LDS NuPage buffer including one tenth volume of NuPAGE sample reducing agent. Six sizes of anthers were collected: 0.6 mm, 0.7 mm, 0.8 mm. 0.9 mm, 1.0 mm and 1.1 mm, each in five biological replicates. Individual paired squashed anthers were treated according to Lewandowska et al. (2019). Briefly,  paired anthers from the same spikelet were put into an Eppendorf tube and extracted with the LDS NuPage buffer. Size fractionation of protein extracts was then achieved by quick SDS-PAGE analysis on 4–12% (w/v) Bis-Tris NuPage gels. Each gel track was cut into 3 fractions corresponding to 3–17, 17–62, and 62–250 kDa. Gel pieces were de-stained by immersion in 50% acetonitrile and proteins reduced by incubation with 10 mM DTT in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate by incubating for 30 min in the dark. The gel slices were then digested with trypsin 12.5 μg/mL in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at 30°C, shaking at 300 rpm on an Eppendorf Thermomixer shaker and peptides were extracted the next day by incubating the gel pieces in 50% acetonitrile. Samples were dried to approximately 10 μL by vacuum centrifugation in an Eppendorf speedvac at room temperature. LC-MS/MS and MaxQuant Analysis and Label-free Protein quantification An Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific) was used with 15 µl of peptides (in 1% Formic Acid) injected onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 (C18, 100 µM x 2 cm) nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 2% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) in formic acid  peptides were resolved on a 50 cm × 75 µM Easy-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (Thermo Scientific) over a 200 min organic gradient with a flow rate of 300 nl min-−1. The chromatography performed for these samples was as follows. The gradient commenced with 6 minutes of 95% buffer A (0.1% formic acid)/5% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid), followed by a linear gradient to 35% buffer B over 130 minutes, then an increase to 98% buffer B for 22 minutes duration, and completed with a return to 2% buffer B at minute 153 for 17 minutes. Ions accepted for MS/MS were 2+ and greater. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 seconds, and the inclusion mass width for precursor ions was 10 ppm. Peptides were transferred to the mass spectrometer via an Easy-Spray source with temperature set at 50˚C and a source voltage of 2.0 kV. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on a Q Exactive Plus Mass Spectrometer (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw files were processed and searched using MaxQuant version 1.6.6.0 and the Andromeda peptide search engine (Cox et al., 2011; Cox and Mann, 2008), against a custom-made Hordeum vulgare Barley Anther Proteome Database (BaAPD), containing 25,776 protein sequences.  Enzyme specificity was set as trypsin and the number of missed cleavages permitted was 2. The variable modifications were set as oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus. Fixed modifications were set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines only. The MS tolerance was set to 7 ppm with the MS/MS tolerance set to 0.5 Da. The ‘match between runs’ function was enabled between corresponding fractions. The peptide and protein False Discovery Rate (FDR) were both set to 1% (Cox and Mann, 2008), and the proteins used for further analysis had 2 or more peptides assigned to them. Relative protein quantification was performed with MaxQuant’s LFQ algorithm, which combines and adjusts peptide intensities into a protein intensity value; ‘stabilize large LFQ ratios’ function was enabled. For the methylation analysis a new MaxQuant search was done with the same parameters as above but with methylation of arginine and lysine defined as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Flowering plants reproduce sexually by combining a haploid male and female gametophyte during fertilization. Male gametophytes are localized in the anthers, each containing reproductive (meiocyte) and non-reproductive tissue necessary for anther development and maturation. Meiosis, where chromosomes pair and exchange their genetic material during a process called recombination, is one of the most important and sensitive stages in breeding, ensuring genetic diversity. Most anther development studies have focused on transcript variation, but very few have been correlated with protein abundance. Taking advantage of a recently published barley anther transcriptomic (BAnTr) dataset and a newly developed sensitive mass spectrometry-based approach to analyse the barley anther proteome, we conducted high-resolution mass spectrometry analysis of barley anthers, collected at six time points and representing their development from pre-meiosis to metaphase. Each time point was carefully staged using immunocytology, providing a robust and accurate staging mirroring our previous BAnTr dataset. We identified &gt;6100 non-redundant proteins including 82 known and putative meiotic proteins. Although the protein abundance was relatively stable throughout prophase I, we were able to quantify the dynamic variation of 336 proteins. We present the first quantitative comparative proteomics study of barley anther development during meiotic prophase I when the important process of homologous recombination is taking place.

### Keywords
Barley, Anther, Meiosis

### Affiliations
The James Hutton Institute
The James Hutton Institute, Dundee, UK

### Submitter
Runxuan Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Robbie Waugh
The James Hutton Institute, Dundee, UK


