### Accession
PXD017232

### Title
Agonists of orally expressed TRP channels stimulate salivary secretion and modify the salivary proteome

### Description
Natural compounds that can stimulate salivary secretion are of interest in developing treatments for xerostomia, the perception of a dry mouth, that affects between 10 and 30% of the adult and elderly population.  Chemesthetic transient receptor potential (TRP) channels are expressed in the surface of the oral mucosa. The TRPV1 agonists capsaicin and piperine have been shown to increase salivary flow when introduced into the oral cavity but the sialogogic properties of other TRP channel agonists have not been investigated. In this study we have determined the influence of different TRP channel agonists on the flow and protein composition of saliva.    Mouth rinsing with the TRPV1 agonist nonivamide or menthol, a TRPM8 agonist, increased whole mouth saliva (WMS) flow and total protein secretion compared to unstimulated saliva, the vehicle control mouth rinse or cinnamaldehyde, a TRPA1 agonist. Nonivamide also increased the flow of labial minor gland saliva but parotid saliva flow rate was not increased. The influence of TRP channel agonists on the composition and function of the salivary proteome was investigated using a multi-batch quantitative mass spectrometry method novel to salivary proteomics. Inter-personal and inter-mouth rinse variation was observed in the secreted proteomes and, using a novel bioinformatics method, inter-day variation was identified with some of the mouth rinses. Significant changes in specific salivary proteins were identified after all mouth rinses. In the case of nonivamide, these changes were attributed to functional shifts in the WMS secreted, primarily the over representation of salivary and non-salivary cystatins which was confirmed by immunoassay.  This study provides new evidence of the impact of TRP channel agonists on the salivary proteome and the stimulation of salivary secretion by a TRPM8 channel agonist, which suggests that TRP channel agonists are potential candidates for developing treatments for sufferers of xerostomia

### Sample Protocol
The first minute and second minute post-TRP channel mouth rinse saliva samples from each collection were pooled. The 24 unstimulated samples from each of the two participants (48 in total) were pooled into two unstimulated pools, one for each participant. Five µL of each pooled sample was added to 95 µL phosphate buffered saline (137mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 1.8 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.4) for protein quantification using a Bradford assay (Thermo Scientific, USA). Absorbance of each sample was read by spectrophotometer at 595 nm and compared to a standard curve of bovine serum albumin of known protein concentration. Fifty µg of protein was extracted from each sample and frozen at -80°C. Frozen samples were freeze dried and reconstituted in 70 µL 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS). 10 µL 8mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) in 100 mM TEAB, 0.1% SDS was added to each sample and incubated at 55°C for one hour. 10 µL 375 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 100 mM TEAB, 0.1% SDS was added to each sample and incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes. 4 µL of 0.25 µg/µL trypsin (Roche, sequencing grade) was added to each sample and left overnight at 37 °C. Forty one µL of TMT reagent was added to each of the 48 post mouth rinse samples and the twelve unstimulated pool samples (see Table 3 for details) and incubated at room temperature for one hour. Eight µL of 5% hydroxylamine was added to each sample and left at room temperature for 15 minutes. Samples from each 10plex batch were pooled into six 10plex sample pools and stored at -80 °C prior to freeze drying until completion. IEF fractionation was carried out using the Agilent 3100 OFFGEL system (Agilent Technologies Inc, Germany) and was carried out according to the manufacturers protocol. 1.8 mL OFFGEL buffer stock added to each sample for reconstitution. Six OFFGEL strips with a linear pH gradient ranging from 3 to 10, one for each 10plex sample pool, were hydrated in 50 µL OFFEGL rehydration solution for 15 minutes. 12-fraction frames were fitted to each of the strips and 150 µL of reconstituted sample loaded into each fraction well. IEF was carried out under the following conditions: 20 kVh (100 hours, V: 500-5400 V, max. I: 50 µA. Upon completion, each fraction was removed and frozen at -80 °C. Fractions were thawed on ice and pooled into six fraction pools (Fraction 1 with 7, 2 with 8, 3 with 9, 4 with 10, 5 with 11 and 6 with 12). Ten µL of elution buffer (50% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid) was added to each sample. Zip-Tips were hydrated twice in 10 µL hydration solution (50% ACN, trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)) and then washed in 1 µL of wash solution (0.1% TFA). S10 µL samples was washed through the Zip-Tip 10 times before eluting with elution solution (0.1% TFA). The elute was frozen at -80 °C prior to freeze drying until completion. Fractions were reconstituted in 10 µL 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. The peptides from each fraction were resolved using reverse-phase chromatography on a 75 µM C18 EASY column using a 3-step gradient of 5-40% ACN and a 95% ACN wash in 0.1% formic acid at a rate of 300 µL/min over 220 minutes (EASY-NanoLC, ThermoScientific, USA). Nano-ESI was performed directly from the column and ions were analysed by using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro (ThermoScientific, USA). Ions were analysed using a Top-10 data-dependent switching mode with the 10 most intense ions selected for HCD for peptide identification and reporter ion fragmentation in the Orbitrap. Automatic gain control targets were 30,000 for the iontrap and 1,000,000 for the orbitrap

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted from the Xcalibur data system (version 2.2, ThermoScientific, USA) and searched through Mascot using Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.0.288, ThermoScientific, USA) to determine specific peptides and proteins. The parameters included: 20 ppm peptide precursor mass tolerance; 0.5 Da for the fragment mass tolerance; 2 missed cleavages, trypsin enzyme; TMT-6plex (N-terminus and K), carbamidomethyl (C) and oxidation (M) dynamic modifications; database: UniProt_HUMAN (release-2018_02). False discover rate was set at 0.05 and 0.01 for relaxed and strict parameters respectively, with validation based on q-Value. The data was analysed using KNIME and embedded R scripts (KNIME analytics platform, Germany). Peptides were excluded from analysis if they were unassigned or had missing TMT channel intensity data; the primary accession number was taken for each peptide and proteins were grouped by this accession number with the geomean of individual peptide intensities given as the protein intensity value; TMT intensities were normalised using a sum scaling method and to the geomean of the two standard values for each peptide. Batches were then concatenated, batch corrected using ComBat (43) and PCA, clustering (XMeans and k-Means), gene ontology (GO) and specific protein analyses (fold changes and TTests) were carried out. Venn diagrams were produced using Venny 2.1 (http://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/). As the ComBat algorithm is only applicable to proteins present in all batches, a novel method of comparing samples across batches was developed. PCA plots of each non-ComBat corrected batch were carried out separately and Euclidean distances between each post-mouth rinse sample and the relevant unstimulated pool calculated. These Euclidean distances were then expressed relative to the distance between the two unstimulated pools which are present in each batch and, in theory, will vary to the same degree in each batch (Supplementary Figure a).

### Publication Abstract
Natural compounds that can stimulate salivary secretion are of interest in developing treatments for xerostomia, the perception of a dry mouth, that affects between 10 and 30% of the adult and elderly population. Chemesthetic transient receptor potential (TRP) channels are expressed in the surface of the oral mucosa. The TRPV1 agonists capsaicin and piperine have been shown to increase salivary flow when introduced into the oral cavity but the sialogogic properties of other TRP channel agonists have not been investigated. In this study we have determined the influence of different TRP channel agonists on the flow and protein composition of saliva. Mouth rinsing with the TRPV1 agonist nonivamide or menthol, a TRPM8 agonist, increased whole mouth saliva (WMS) flow and total protein secretion compared with unstimulated saliva, the vehicle control mouth rinse or cinnamaldehyde, a TRPA1 agonist. Nonivamide also increased the flow of labial minor gland saliva but parotid saliva flow rate was not increased. The influence of TRP channel agonists on the composition and function of the salivary proteome was investigated using a multi-batch quantitative MS method novel to salivary proteomics. Inter-personal and inter-mouth rinse variation was observed in the secreted proteomes and, using a novel bioinformatics method, inter-day variation was identified with some of the mouth rinses. Significant changes in specific salivary proteins were identified after all mouth rinses. In the case of nonivamide, these changes were attributed to functional shifts in the WMS secreted, primarily the over representation of salivary and nonsalivary cystatins which was confirmed by immunoassay. This study provides new evidence of the impact of TRP channel agonists on the salivary proteome and the stimulation of salivary secretion by a TRPM8 channel agonist, which suggests that TRP channel agonists are potential candidates for developing treatments for sufferers of xerostomia.

### Keywords
Cinnamaldehyde, Nonivamide, Proteome, Menthol, Saliva, Transient receptor potential channel agonists

### Affiliations
King's College London
Faculty of Dentistry, Oral & Craniofacial Sciences, King’s College London (London, UK)

### Submitter
Jack Houghton

### Lab Head
Dr Gordon Proctor
Faculty of Dentistry, Oral & Craniofacial Sciences, King’s College London (London, UK)


