### Accession
PXD031329

### Title
Identification of factors secreted by testicular germ cell tumor cell lines and microenvironmental cells.

### Description
Type II germ cell tumors (GCTs) are the most common neoplasia in young men of age 14-45 years. It is generally accepted that GCTs arise from a common precursor lesion, called germ cell neoplasia in situ (GCNIS), eventually developing into seminomas or non-seminomas, such as (embryonal carcinomas, ECs). The latter stem-cell like EC can further differentiate into teratomas (TE), yolk-sac tumors (YST), or choriocarcinomas (CC). Even though cisplatin-based chemotherapy is an efficacious standard of care during the management of GCT patients, the development of cisplatin resistance remains a major obstacle. As such, the surrounding tumor microenvironment and its secreted factors could endorse the development of drug resistance. These stromal cells, including immune cells (e.g. macrophages, T-lymphocytes), endothelial cells, and fibroblasts, can influence tumor cells by promoting proliferative and anti-apoptotic signaling pathways. Vice versa, microenvironmental cells can be influenced by tumor cells as well. For the identification of secreted proteins, cell lysates and supernatants from seven human germ cell tumor cell lines (seminoma: TCam-2; embryonal carcinoma (EC): 2102EP, NCCIT; choriocarcinoma (CC): JAR, JEG-3), yolk-sac tumor (YST): GCT72; 1411H) and five human cell types from the microenvironment (fibroblasts: MPAF, HVHF2; M2 macrophages: THP-1-M2; T-lymphocytes: JURKAT; endothelial cells: HUVEC) have been evaluated using liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry (LC-MS).

### Sample Protocol
Secretome samples were prepared by TCA precipitation of conditioned medium and cell lysates after beadmilling of harvested cells essentially as decribed (PMID 29322779). Samples were further processed by in-gel digestion with trypsin und prepared for MS analysis as described in PMID 29322779.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed by MaxQuant 1.6.12.0 enabling peptide and protein identification and quantification. Homo sapiens sequences form UP000005640 (UniProt KB, 27.03.2020) were use, “match between runs” and label-free quantification enabled. All 36 harvested secretome samples were analysed in one search, separate searches were carried out for each individual cell line including three secretome and three lysate samples.

### Publication Abstract
The tumor microenvironment (TM), consisting of the extracellular matrix (ECM), fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and immune cells, might affect tumor invasiveness and the outcome of standard chemotherapy. This study investigated the cross talk between germ cell tumors (GCT) and surrounding TM cells (macrophages, T-lymphocytes, endothelial cells, and fibroblasts) at the transcriptome and secretome level. Using high-throughput approaches of three-dimensional (3D) co-cultured cellular aggregates, this study offers newly identified pathways to be studied with regard to sensitivity toward cisplatin-based chemotherapy or tumor invasiveness as a consequence of the cross talk between tumor cells and TM components. Mass-spectrometry-based secretome analyses revealed that TM cells secreted factors involved in ECM organization, cell adhesion, angiogenesis, and regulation of insulin-like growth factor (IGF) transport. To evaluate direct cell-cell contacts, green fluorescent protein (GFP)-expressing GCT cells and mCherry-expressing TM cells were co-cultured in 3D. Afterward, cell populations were separated by flow cytometry and analyzed by RNA sequencing. Correlating the secretome with transcriptome data indicated molecular processes such as cell adhesion and components of the ECM being enriched in most cell populations. Re-analyses of secretome data with regard to lysine- and proline-hydroxylated peptides revealed a gain in proteins, such as collagens and fibronectin. Cultivation of GCT cells on collagen I/IV- or fibronectin-coated plates significantly elevated adhesive and migratory capacity, while decreasing cisplatin sensitivity of GCT cells. Correspondingly, cisplatin sensitivity was significantly reduced in GCT cells under the influence of conditioned medium from fibroblasts and endothelial cells. This study sheds light on the cross talk between GCT cells and their circumjacent TM, which results in deposition of the ECM and eventually promotes a pro-tumorigenic environment through enhanced migratory and adhesive capacity, as well as decreased cisplatin sensitivity. Hence, our observations indicate that targeting the ECM and its cellular components might be a novel therapeutic option in combination with cisplatin-based chemotherapy for GCT patients.

### Keywords
Tumor microenvironment, Germ cell tumors, Secretome, Liquid chromatography coupled mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Proteome Research (AG Stühler) Institute of Molecular Medicine Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf 40225 Düsseldorf Germany
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Proteome Research (AG Stühler) Institute of Molecular Medicine Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf 40225 Düsseldorf Germany


