### Accession
PXD016148

### Title
Fast and robust proteome screening platform identifies neutrophil extracellular trap formation in the lung in response to cobalt ferrite nanoparticles

### Description
The goal of this study was to investigate the effects of magnetic iron cobalt oxide nanoparticles (cobalt doped Fe3O4 nanoparticles with increasing amounts of cobalt) after pulmonary exposure while in parallel presenting a proteomics platform that is easily transferable to large-scale nanotoxicology screening as part of an integrated assessment and testing approach for regulation of nanoparticles. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) is a proximal biofluid that can be used to monitor airway inflammation and toxic responses in the lung. It is routinely sampled for differential lung diagnostics and has been discussed as a source for early detection of lung cancer. In order to assess effects of metal oxide nanoparticles upon inhalation, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from mice dosed by single intratracheal instillation was collected and subjected to classical biocompatibility assays as well as proteome analysis. Magnetic oxide nanoparticles with iron and cobalt oxide (Fe3-xCoxO4) at different ratios (1:0, 3:1, 1:1, 1:3, 0:1) were tested at two concentrations (54 µg, 162 µg per animal) and two time points after instillation (day 1, day 3). As a positive control carbon black nanomaterial known to induce lung inflammation was included for both time points, but only at the high dosage (162 µg per animal).  Proteomics experiments were divided into three parts – test of reproducibility, discovery and screening phase. The reproducibility of the newly introduced Evosep One LC system was evaluated by re-measuring of technical replicates (n=16). During the discovery phase, selected representative samples with 3 biological replicates per group (total n=9) including pure iron oxide nanoparticles, pure cobalt oxide nanoparticles and vehicle controls were subjected to in-depth proteome profiling by extensive pre-fractionation and including isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling following a classical LC-MS/MS setup. This step allowed us to identify affected pathways and generate hypotheses regarding mechanisms of the effects of nanoparticles. During screening, all samples of the study were measured label-free as single-shot injections separated on short gradients of 21 min using the robust, high-throughput Evosep One LC system. This step allowed a fast screening of the 5 different types of magnetic metal oxide nanoparticles on BALF, at two concentrations and two time points together with their representative controls (total n=166). All screening measurements were completed in only 2.7 days.

### Sample Protocol
BALF protein concentration was determined by Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. All samples were brought to the same protein concentration (0.1 µg/µl) by dilution with saline. Protein extraction was performed using 4 M urea/thiourea. After reduction with dithiothreitol and alkylation with iodoacetamide, proteins were digested at room temperature with Lys-C for 4 h and trypsin overnight at a 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio. For in-depth BALF profiling (discovery phase) samples from three experimental groups (day 1 high dose; CTRL, Fe3O4, and Co3O4 nanoparticles) were selected.  A total of 9 samples with 3 biological replicates per group were TMT-labeled (TMT-10plex minus 131N, Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer`s protocol and were run as 9plex. Combined TMT-labeled peptides with 5 µg per channel were desalted on R2/R3 resin in StageTip format. Unlabeled peptides for reproducibility evaluation and screening were loaded on Evosep tips in 0.5 % formic acid in water after C18 activation with 100 % acetonitrile and equilibration. For in-depth BALF profiling (discovery) 45 µg of 9-plex TMT labeled peptides were separated into 16 fractions by high pH reversed phase pre-fractionation using an UltiMate 3000 LC system (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an Acquity UPLC CSH C18 column with 300 µm × 100 mm, 1.7 µm (Waters). Peptides were eluted over a gradient from 4 % to 48 % solvent B over 60 min (solvent A: 20 mM ammonium formate, adjusted to pH 9.6 by NH4OH; solvent B: 80 % acetonitrile 20 % 20 mM ammonium formate, adjusted to pH 9.6 by NH4OH). A reference BALF library composed of representative samples of the study (pooled mix of 40 µg) was fractionated label-free into 33 fractions and run together with the BALF screening samples to increase protein identification from the match between run functionality in MaxQuant analysis.   LC-MS/MS analysis for TMT-labeled BALF samples (discovery, in-depth profiling) were carried out using an EASY-nLC 1000 system connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were fractionated (high pH RP, 16 fractions) and then separated using a 136 min gradient on a 15 cm column with 3 µm Reprosil-Pur C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). LC-MS/MS analysis for label-free BALF samples (reproducibility evaluation, screening including a reference library) was carried out using an Evosep One LC system connected to a Tribrid Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Unfractionated peptides were separated using a 21 min gradient on a 7 cm column.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.7 for screening, reproducibility and reference library in combined search, version 1.6.1 for discovery) and generated peak lists were searched against the murine UniProt FASTA reference proteome database downloaded in May 2018 (52528 entries). The FDR was set to 1 % for both protein and peptide identification. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed with a minimal peptide length of seven amino acids. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Label-free BALF samples for reproducibility evaluation and screening were analyzed allowing for match between runs with matching time window of 0.7 min and alignment time window of 3 min. For TMT-labeled BALF samples (discovery) the TMT10plex was selected as isobaric label, excluding Nter131C and Lys131C. For protein quantification a minimal ratio count of one was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
Despite broad application of magnetic nanoparticles in biomedicine and electronics, only a few <i>in vivo</i> studies on biocompatibility are available. In this study, toxicity of magnetic metal oxide nanoparticles on the respiratory system was examined <i>in vivo</i> by single intratracheal instillation in mice. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) samples were collected for proteome analyses by LC-MS/MS, testing Fe<sub>3</sub>O<sub>4</sub> nanoparticles doped with increasing amounts of cobalt (Fe<sub>3</sub>O<sub>4</sub>, CoFe<sub>2</sub>O<sub>4</sub> with an iron to cobalt ratio 5:1, 3:1, 1:3, Co<sub>3</sub>O<sub>4</sub>) at two doses (54 &#x3bc;g, 162 &#x3bc;g per animal) and two time points (day 1 and 3 days postinstillation). In discovery phase, in-depth proteome profiling of a few representative samples allowed for comprehensive pathway analyses. Clustering of the 681 differentially expressed proteins (FDR &lt; 0.05) revealed general as well as metal oxide specific responses with an overall strong induction of innate immunity and activation of the complement system. The highest expression increase could be found for a cluster of 39 proteins, which displayed strong dose-dependency to iron oxide and can be attributed to neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) formation. In-depth proteome analysis expanded the knowledge of <i>in vivo</i> NET formation. During screening, all BALF samples of the study (<i>n</i> = 166) were measured label-free as single-injections after a short gradient (21 min) LC separation using the Evosep One system, validating the findings from the discovery and defining protein signatures which enable discrimination of lung inflammation. We demonstrate a proteomics-based toxicity screening with high sample throughput easily transferrable to other nanoparticle types. Data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD016148.

### Keywords
Nanoparticles, Mouse, Balf, Lung, Metal oxide nanoparticles, Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, Tmt, Iron cobalt oxide nanoparticles, Clinical proteomics, Label-free, Murine

### Affiliations
Professor  Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology  University of Southern Denmark
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Anja Billing

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Kjeldsen
Professor  Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology  University of Southern Denmark


