### Accession
PXD029899

### Title
Polypyrimidine Tract Binding Proteins PTBP1 and PTBP2 Interact with Distinct Proteins Under Splicing Conditions

### Description
RNA binding proteins play an important role in regulating alternative pre-mRNA splicing and in turn cellular gene expression. Polypyrimidine tract binding proteins, PTBP1 and PTBP2, are paralogous RNA binding proteins that play a critical role in the process of neuronal differentiation and maturation; changes in the concentration of PTBP proteins during neuronal development direct splicing changes in many transcripts that code for proteins critical for neuronal differentiation. How the two related proteins regulate different sets of neuronal exons is unclear. The distinct splicing activities of PTBP1 and PTBP2 can be recapitulated in an in vitro splicing system with the differentially regulated N1 exon of the c-src pre-mRNA. Here, we conducted experiments under these in vitro splicing conditions to identify PTBP1 and PTBP2 interacting partner proteins.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa nuclear extracts were prepared as previously described (Pina et. al 2018). Splicing reactions contained 2.2 mM MgCl2, 0.4 mM ATP, 20 mM creatine phosphate, 48 ug of histidine tagged PTBP, and were brought to a total volume of 200 µl with HeLa nuclear extracts (PTBP1 HeLa, PTBP2 HeLa) or with Buffer Dialysis Glutamate (DG) (20 mM HEPES KOH pH 7.9, 20% glycerol, 80 mM KCl, 0.2 mM PMSF, 1 mM DTT) for controls (PTBP1 DG, PTBP2 DG). A splicing reaction that contained all components including HeLa extract but not PTBP protein was also used as a control to identify non-specific proteins inherent to HeLa nuclear extract (HeLa only). Reaction tubes were incubated at 30C for 90 minutes.  All steps described here in were carried out at 4C. After incubation,100 µl HisPur Ni-NTA magnetic resin (Thermo Fisher), equilibrated in Buffer DG with 1X Phosstop (Sigma Aldrich) and 1X Sigmafast EDTA free (Sigma Aldrich), was added to each reaction mixture.  An additional 200 µl of Buffer DG with 1X Phosstop and 1X Sigmafast was added to each sample and set to incubate overnight. A magnetic separation rack (New England Biolabs) was utilized to remove the buffer.  Resin was washed once with 1 ml of Wash Buffer (50 mM sodium phosphate pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 30 mM imidazole, 1X Phosstop, 1X Sigmafast EDTA free) followed by three 1 ml washes with Wash Buffer without 1X Phosstop and 1X Sigmafast EDTA free.  60 µl of Elution Buffer (50 mM sodium phosphate pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 300 mM imidazole) was utilized to resuspend the resin and the samples were set to elute overnight. Supernatant was retrieved via magnetic separation and was dialyzed utilizing Slide-a-lyzer mini units (2000 MWCO) (Fisher Scientific)  for 2 hours in 1 L of dialysis buffer (20 mM HEPES KOH pH 7.9, 80 mM KCl, 1mM DTT, 0.1 mM PMSF), changing to fresh buffer at the 1 hour mark. To determine PTBP specific protein-protein interactions that occur under splicing conditions, eluates equivalent to 5 µg of protein were aliquoted and sent for mass spectrometry analysis to the University of California San Diego, Biomolecular and Proteomics Mass Spectrometry facility.   Protein samples were diluted in TNE (50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA) buffer. RapiGest SF reagent (Waters Corp.) was added to the mix to a final concentration of 0.1% and samples were boiled for 5 min. TCEP (Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine) was added to 1 mM (final concentration) and the samples were incubated at 37C for 30 min. Subsequently, the samples were carboxymethylated with 0.5 mg/ml of iodoacetamide for 30 min at 37C followed by neutralization with 2 mM TCEP (final concentration). Proteins samples prepared as above were digested with trypsin (trypsin:protein ratio - 1:50) overnight at 37C. RapiGest was degraded and removed by treating the samples with 250 mM HCl at 37C for 1 h followed by centrifugation at 14000 rpm for 30 min at 4C. The soluble fraction was then added to a new tube and the peptides were extracted and desalted using C18 desalting columns (Thermo Scientific, PI-87782). Peptides were quantified using BCA assay and a total of 1 ug of peptides were injected for LC-MS analysis. Trypsin-digested peptides were analyzed by ultra high pressure liquid chromatography (UPLC) coupled with tandem mass spectroscopy (LC-MS/MS) using nano-spray ionization. The nanospray ionization experiments were performed using a Orbitrap fusion Lumos hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) interfaced with nano-scale reversed-phase UPLC (Thermo Dionex UltiMate™ 3000 RSLC nano System) using a 25 cm, 75-micron ID glass capillary packed with 1.7-µm C18 (130) BEHTM beads (Waters corporation).  Peptides were eluted from the C18 column into the mass spectrometer using a linear gradient (5–80%) of ACN (Acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 375 μl/min for 1.5 h. The buffers used to create the ACN gradient were: Buffer A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and Buffer B (100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid). Mass spectrometer parameters are as follows;  an MS1 survey scan using the orbitrap detector (mass range (m/z): 400-1500  (using quadrupole isolation), 120000 resolution setting, spray voltage of 2200 V, Ion transfer tube temperature of 275 C, AGC target of 400000, and maximum injection time of 50 ms) was followed by data dependent scans (top speed for most intense ions, with charge state set to only include +2-5 ions, and 5 second exclusion time, while selecting ions with minimal intensities of 50000 at in which the collision event was carried out in the high energy collision cell (HCD Collision Energy of 30%), and the fragment masses where analyzed in the ion trap mass analyzer (With ion trap scan rate of turbo, first mass m/z was 100, AGC Target 5000 and maximum injection time of 35ms).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was carried out using Peaks Studio 8.5 (Bioinformatics solutions Inc.)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ptbp1, Splicing, Ptbp, Nptb, Lc-ms/ms, Ptbp2, Ptb

### Affiliations
California State University Fullerton
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, California State University Fullerton

### Submitter
Jeffrey Pina

### Lab Head
Dr Niroshika Monerawila Keppetipola
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, California State University Fullerton


