### Accession
PXD006165

### Title
Mice liver tissue LC-MSMS EPAC

### Description
We employed mouse models with targeted deletion of the genes encoding Epac1 (Rapgef3) and Epac2 (Rapgef4) in combination with 2/3 partial hepatectomy to investigate the functional roles of Epac1 and Epac2 in liver. Proteomic analysis of liver tissue before and 36h after hepatectomy revealed changes in the proteome in Epac depleted mice, most significantly of proteins involved in lipid metabolism. The current study is the first to identify functional roles for Epac1 and Epac2 in livers of an animal model. The results support the notion that Epac proteins are not required for normal liver development and function, but that these factors become important in the regulation of cellular responses in stressful situations.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen liver samples (10-12 µg) harvested pre- and 36 h post-PH were lysed in SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.6) and processed for LC-MS analysis according to the FASP procedure. The samples were analyzed on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (240 min LC gradient).

### Data Protocol
The raw MS files were analyzed with the MaxQuant module (v. 1.5.1.2), and searched against the reviewed SwissProt Mus musculus database (downloaded 06.01.2016, containing 24 808 canonical and isoform sequences). Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as fixed modification and acetylation of prot N-term and oxidation of Met were set as variable modifications. The label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used for quantification with LFQ min. ratio count set to 1, and the match-between-runs option was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
The exchange proteins directly activated by cAMP 1 and 2 (Epac1 and Epac2) are expressed in a cell specific manner in the liver, but their biological functions in this tissue are poorly understood. The current study was undertaken to begin to determine the potential roles of Epac1 and Epac2 in liver physiology and disease. Male C57BL/6J mice in which expression of Epac1 and/or Epac2 are deleted, were subjected to partial hepatectomy and the regenerating liver was analyzed with regard to lipid accumulation, cell replication and protein expression. In response to partial hepatectomy, deletion of Epac1 and/or Epac2 led to increased hepatocyte proliferation 36&#x2009;h post surgery, and the transient steatosis observed in wild type mice was virtually absent in mice lacking both Epac1 and Epac2. The expression of the protein cytochrome P4504a14, which is implicated in hepatic steatosis and fibrosis, was substantially reduced upon deletion of Epac1/2, while a number of factors involved in lipid metabolism were significantly decreased. Moreover, the number of K&#xfc;pffer cells was affected, and Epac2 expression was increased in the liver of wild type mice in response to partial hepatectomy, further supporting a role for these proteins in liver function. This study establishes hepatic phenotypic abnormalities in mice deleted for Epac1/2 for the first time, and introduces Epac1/2 as regulators of hepatocyte proliferation and lipid accumulation in the regenerative process.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mice, Epac, Liver tissue, Hepatectomy

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedicine, The University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
PROBE

### Submitter
Elise Aasebo

### Lab Head
Dr Marit Bakke
Department of Biomedicine, The University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway


