### Accession
PXD031584

### Title
PPP2R1A is a component of WAVE complex and it is important for cancer cell migration

### Description
WAVE protein complex is involved in cancer cell motility and migration. We performed a proteomic analysis of WAVE complex components after different migration stimulation and inhibitions.

### Sample Protocol
WAVE complex was imunoprecipited using the protein ABI1 as bait. Proteins were digested on resin and the resulting peptide mixtures analyzed by LC-MSMS

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed by MaxQuant in Label-Free mode.

### Publication Abstract
The RAC1-WAVE-Arp2/3 signaling pathway generates branched actin networks that power lamellipodium protrusion of migrating cells. Feedback is thought to control protrusion lifetime and migration persistence, but its molecular circuitry remains elusive. Here, we identify PPP2R1A by proteomics as a protein differentially associated with the WAVE complex subunit ABI1 when RAC1 is activated and downstream generation of branched actin is blocked. PPP2R1A is found to associate at the lamellipodial edge with an alternative form of WAVE complex, the WAVE Shell Complex, that contains NHSL1 instead of the Arp2/3 activating subunit WAVE, as in the canonical WAVE Regulatory Complex. PPP2R1A is required for persistence in random and directed migration assays and for RAC1-dependent actin polymerization in cell extracts. PPP2R1A requirement is abolished by NHSL1 depletion. PPP2R1A mutations found in tumors impair WAVE Shell Complex binding and migration regulation, suggesting that the coupling of PPP2R1A to the WAVE Shell Complex is essential to its function.

### Keywords
Human cell line, Proteomics

### Affiliations
SMBP, ESPCI Paris PSL/CNRS
ESPCI-CNRS

### Submitter
Giovanni Chiappetta

### Lab Head
Dr Joelle Vinh
SMBP, ESPCI Paris PSL/CNRS


