### Accession
PXD045719

### Title
Microglial Rac1 is essential for experience-dependent brain plasticity and cognitive performance

### Description
Here, we used conditional cell-specific gene targeting in mice with multi-omics approaches, and demonstrated that the RhoGTPase Rac1 was an essential requirement for the microglia to sense and interpret the brain microenvironment, and for crucial microglia-synapse crosstalk driving experience-dependent plasticity. Phosphoproteomics profiling detected a large modulation of RhoGTPase signaling, predominantly of Rac1, in microglia of mice exposed to an environmental enrichment protocol. Ablation of microglial Rac1 affected pathways involved in microglia-synapse communication, disrupted experience-dependent synaptic remodeling, and blocked the gains in learning, memory and sociability induced by environmental enrichment.

### Sample Protocol
Protein identification and quantitation were performed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system coupled to a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides of each sample were loaded onto a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap C18 100 Å, 5 mm × 300 µm i.d., 160454, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in a mobile phase of 2% ACN, 0.1% FA at 10 µL/min. After 3 min loading, the trap column was switched in-line to a 50 cm × 75 μm inner diameter EASY-Spray column (ES803, PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) at 300 nL/min. Separation was achieved by mixing A: 0.1% FA and B: 80% ACN, 0.1% FA with the following gradient: 5 min (2.5% B to 10% B), 120 min (10% B to 30% B), 20 min (30% B to 50% B), 5 min (50% B to 99% B), and 10 min (hold 99% B). Subsequently, the column was equilibrated with 2.5% B for 17 min. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 4.0 and Tune 2.9 software (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.5.0.4 software (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Protein identification analysis was performed with the data available in the UniProt protein sequence database for the Mus Musculus Proteome (2020_02 version, 55,398 entries) and a common contaminant database from MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.6, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany). Sequest HT tandem mass spectrometry peptide database search program was used as the protein search algorithm. The search node considered an ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. The maximum allowed missing cleavage sites was set as 2. For the phosphoproteomics, the IMP-ptmRS node, with the PhosphoRS mode (set to false), was used to localize phosphorylation sites. The Inferys rescoring node was considered, and the processing node Percolator was enabled with the following settings: maximum delta Cn 0.05; decoy database search target False Discovery Rate—FDR 1%; validation based on q-value. Protein-label-free quantitation was performed with the Minora feature detector node at the processing step. Precursor ion quantification used the processing step with the following parameters: Peptides: unique plus razor; precursor abundance was based on intensity; normalization mode was based on the total peptide amount; the pairwise protein ratio calculation and hypothesis test were based on a t-test (background based). The Feature Mapper node from the Proteome Discoverer software was used to create features from unique peptide-specific peaks within a short retention time and mass range. This was achieved by applying a chromatographic retention time alignment with a maximum shift of 10 min and 10 ppm of mass tolerance allowed for mapping features from different sample files. For feature linking and mapping, the minimum signal to noise (S/N) threshold was set at 5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microglia; synaptosomes; glia-neuron interaction; highthroughput phosphoproteomics; synaptic plasticity

### Affiliations
Glial Cell Biology Lab, i3s - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Porto, Portugal
i3s - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde da Universidade do Porto/Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar (ICBAS), Universidade do Porto

### Submitter
Tiago Almeida

### Lab Head
Dr João Bettencourt Relvas
Glial Cell Biology Lab, i3s - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Porto, Portugal


