### Accession
PXD014136

### Title
Changes to SUMO2 conjugation during Influenza virus infection of cultured cells

### Description
Dynamic SUMO modifications of diverse cellular protein groups are critical to orchestrate resolution of stresses such as genome damage, hypoxia or proteotoxicity. Defense against pathogen insult (usually reliant upon host recognition of ‘non-self’ nucleic acids), is also modulated by SUMO, but the underlying mechanisms are incompletely understood. Here, we used quantitative SILAC-based proteomics to survey pan-viral host SUMOylation responses, creating a resource of almost 600 common and unique SUMO remodeling events that are mounted during influenza A and B virus infections, as well as during viral immune stimulation. By integrating knock-out/reconstitution models and transcriptomics, we provide evidence that influenza virus triggered loss of SUMO-modified TRIM28 leads to derepression of endogenous retroviral elements, unmasking this cellular pool of ‘self’ double-stranded (ds) RNA. Consequently, loss of SUMO-modified TRIM28 potentiates canonical cytosolic dsRNA-activated interferon-mediated defenses. Our data suggest that a key nuclear mechanism that prevents expression of endogenous retroviruses has been functionally co-opted via a stress-induced SUMO switch to augment antiviral immunity.

### Sample Protocol
A549 (adenocarcinomic human alveolar basal epithelial) cells overexpressing either TAP only or TAP-SUMO2 were infected with influenza virus for 16-22h.  Twenty 15-cm Petri dishes were grown per each condition (3 SILAC conditions), so in total 60 dishes.  35 μl of 1.2x LDS sample was added to the TAP-purified pellet and heated for 8 min at 80°C and the whole sample was resolved by PAGE (10% NuPage BisTris gel, 10 wells, MOPS buffer).  20 μg of each crude protein sample was resolved according to the same conditions. Lanes containing purified and crude lysates were cut into 13 slices according to the same pattern. In-gel tryptic digestion was performed and the final peptides were dissolved in 35 μl of 1% formic acid.  10-14 μl of each TAP-purified sample (numbered 1-13), or 5-10 μl of each crude extract sample (numbered 21-33) was loaded per run on a 150-240 minute HPLC fractionation. MS setup details can be found in RAW files but generally: Peptide samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system via an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Scientific) running a 75 μm x 500 mm EASY-Spray column at 45ºC. Data were acquired in the data-dependent mode. Full scan spectra (m/z 300–1800) were acquired first and the n most intense ions were fragmented by HCD and measured within the orbitrap. n varied from 4 to 12 depending on the samples (see RAW files).

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using MaxQuant v1.5.2.8 using default settings and the following specifications: K0&R0, K4&R6, and K8&R10 SILAC conditions (three in total) 1% FDR at all levels.  Fixed modifications; Carbamidomethyl (C). Variable modifications; Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Oxidation (M) Human proteome and influenza virus proteome databases as search space

### Publication Abstract
Dynamic small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) linkages to diverse cellular protein groups are critical to orchestrate resolution of stresses such as genome damage, hypoxia, or proteotoxicity. Defense against pathogen insult (often reliant upon host recognition of "non-self" nucleic acids) is also modulated by SUMO, but the underlying mechanisms are incompletely understood. Here, we used quantitative SILAC-based proteomics to survey pan-viral host SUMOylation responses, creating a resource of almost 600 common and unique SUMO remodeling events that are mounted during influenza A and B virus infections, as well as during viral innate immune stimulation. Subsequent mechanistic profiling focused on a common infection-induced loss of the SUMO-modified form of TRIM28/KAP1, a host transcriptional repressor. By integrating knockout and reconstitution models with system-wide transcriptomics, we provide evidence that influenza virus-triggered loss of SUMO-modified TRIM28 leads to derepression of endogenous retroviral (ERV) elements, unmasking this cellular source of "self" double-stranded (ds)RNA. Consequently, loss of SUMO-modified TRIM28 potentiates canonical cytosolic dsRNA-activated IFN-mediated defenses that rely on RIG-I, MAVS, TBK1, and JAK1. Intriguingly, although wild-type influenza A virus robustly triggers this SUMO switch in TRIM28, the induction of IFN-stimulated genes is limited unless expression of the viral dsRNA-binding protein NS1 is abrogated. This may imply a viral strategy to antagonize such a host response by sequestration of induced immunostimulatory ERV dsRNAs. Overall, our data reveal that a key nuclear mechanism that normally prevents aberrant expression of ERV elements (ERVs) has been functionally co-opted via a stress-induced SUMO switch to augment antiviral immunity.

### Keywords
Sumo, Influenza, Ns1

### Affiliations
Professor of Molecular Biology Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Mike Tatham

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald Thomas Hay
Professor of Molecular Biology Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee


