### Accession
PXD023022

### Title
Molecular architecture of the endocytic TPLATE complex – part1 TAP/BS3 cross-linking dataset

### Description
Eukaryotic cells rely on endocytosis to regulate their plasma membrane proteome and lipidome. Most eukaryotic groups, except fungi and animals, have retained the evolutionary ancient TSET complex as endocytic regulator. Unlike other coatomer complexes, structural insight into TSET is lacking. Here, we reveal the molecular architecture of plant TSET (TPLATE complex/TPC) using an integrative structural approach. We identify crucial roles for specific TSET subunits in complex assembly and membrane interaction. Our data therefore generates novel evolutionary insight into the difference between the hexameric TSET in Dictyostelium and the octameric TPC in plants. Structural elucidation of this ancient adaptor complex represents the missing piece in the coatomer-puzzle and vastly advances our functional as well as evolutionary insight into the process of endocytosis.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to cross-linking, TML and AtEH1/Pan1 subunits were expressed in PSB-D cultures with a C-terminal GS tag and subsequently purified based on an established protocol (36). After the purification, the beads were washed with PBS and spun down for 3min at 500rpm. Fresh BS3 cross-linker (A39266, Thermo Fisher) dissolved in PBS was added and incubated on a rotating wheel for 30min at room temperature. Excess cross-linker was quenched at room temperature for 30min with 50mM NH4HCO3. For further MS analysis, proteins were subsequently reduced with 5mM DTT and acetylated in the dark with 15mM iodoacetamide. Next, the beads were washed with 50mM NH4HCO3 and incubated overnight at 37 °C with Trypsin/LysC (V5071, Promega). The supernatant was removed from the beads and desalted with Monospin C18 columns (Agilent Technologies, A57003100). The peptides were re-dissolved in 20 µl loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) of which 10 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany). The peptides were separated on an in-house produced column (75 µm x 400 mm), equipped with a laser pulled electrospray tip using a P-2000 Laser Based Micropipette Puller (Sutter Instruments), packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur basic 1.9 µm silica particles (Dr. Maisch). The column was kept at a constant temperature of 40°C. Peptides eluted using a non-linear gradient reaching 30% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) in 105 min, 56% MS solvent B in 145 min and 97% MS solvent B  after 150 min at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. This was followed by a 10-minutes wash at 97% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 were isolated (isolation window of 1.5 m/z) for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (145-4,085 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer. The S-lens RF level was set at 50 and precursor ions with unassigned, single and double charge states were excluded from fragmentation selection. 

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.10.43), and searched with the built-in Andromeda search engine against the Araport11plus database. This is a merged database of the Araport11 protein sequences (http://www.Arabidopsis.org) and sequences of all types of non-Arabidopsis contaminants possibly present in AP-MS experiments. These contaminants include the cRAP protein sequences, a list of proteins commonly found in proteomics experiments, which are present either by accident or by unavoidable contamination of protein samples (The Global Proteome Machine, http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). In addition, commonly used tag sequences and typical contaminants, such as sequences derived from the resins or the proteases used, were added. The MaxQuant proteingroups file was filtered for 2 peptide identifications, and only identified by site, reverse and contaminants were removed. Proteins were ranked by descending iBAQ values, showing that the 8 TPC subunits have the highest iBAQ values, and are thus the most abundant proteins in the samples. Therefore a custom database consisting of the 8 TPC protein sequences was made to use in the pLink2.0 program. The fragmentation spectra of the obtained crosslinks were manually checked and intra-cross-links within 20 amino acids were removed.

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic cells rely on endocytosis to regulate their plasma membrane proteome and lipidome. Most eukaryotic groups, except fungi and animals, have retained the evolutionary ancient TSET complex as an endocytic regulator. Unlike other coatomer complexes, structural insight into TSET is lacking. Here, we reveal the molecular architecture of plant TSET [TPLATE complex (TPC)] using an integrative structural approach. We identify crucial roles for specific TSET subunits in complex assembly and membrane interaction. Our data therefore generate fresh insight into the differences between the hexameric TSET in <i>Dictyostelium</i> and the octameric TPC in plants. Structural elucidation of this ancient adaptor complex represents the missing piece in the coatomer puzzle and vastly advances our functional as well as evolutionary insight into the process of endocytosis.

### Keywords
Tplate complex, Arabidopsis, Tset, Structure, Bs3 cross-linking

### Affiliations
Ghent University, Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Ghent, B-9052, Belgium
VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Ghent, B-9052, Belgium


### Submitter
Dominique Eeckhout

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Van Damme
Ghent University, Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium


