### Accession
PXD004730

### Title
Proteomics identification of CsrA-regulated proteins in Legionella pneumophila

### Description
The carbon storage regulator protein CsrA regulates cellular processes post-transcriptionally by binding to target-RNAs altering translation efficiency and/or their stability. In this dataset we identified proteins regulated by CsrA in the human bacterial pathogen Legionella pneumophila by labelfree shotgun proteomics. WT and ∆csrA bacteria were grown to exponential phase in three biological replicates. Bacteria were lysed by sonication and extracted proteins were reducted, alkylated and digested with trypsin. The resulting peptide mixtures were analyzed by LC-MS/MS and proteins were identified by the MaxQuant software. In total of 1,448 proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm in a labelfree approach. Cluster analysis showed that expression of almost all proteins was affected by the mutation of CsrA as about half of the identified proteins were up and half were down regulated. About 15% of the proteome (238 proteins) was strongly affected with 132 proteins significantly up and 109 significantly down regulated dependent on CsrA.

### Sample Protocol
Legionella was grown in triplicates to E phase (OD2.5) and cells were lysed in 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 8 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate and 1 mM -glycerophosphate by sonication. The protein concentration in the supernatants of each replicate was measured using a Bradford assay (Biorad) and equal protein amounts, each containing 1 mg total protein, were used for further analysis. Proteins in each sample were reduced with 5 mM DTT and incubation for 30 minutes at 55˚C and then alkylated by addition of 100 mM iodoacetamide for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Both samples were further diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 2 M and proteins were digested with 10 µg trypsin (Promega) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37 ˚C. Peptides were then purified on a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters) and 50 µg peptides of each sample was re-dissolved in 50 µl solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile (98:2, v/v)) of which 2 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Proxeon, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) on a reverse-phase column (made in-house, 75 µm I.D. x 250 mm, 1.9 µm beads C18 Reprosil-Pur, Dr. Maisch) and eluted by an increase in solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) in linear gradients from 5% to 23% in 100 minutes, then from 23% to 40% in 40 minutes and finally from 40% to 55% in 20 minutes, all at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 15 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (300-1700 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000 with a maximum fill time of 20 ms. The 15 most intense ions above a threshold value of 400,000 were isolated (window of 1.4 Th) for fragmentation by HCD at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 25 ms with an underfill ratio of 10%. The S-lens RF level was set at 60 and we excluded precursor ions with single, unassigned and charge states above six from fragmentation selection.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against two databases with L. pneumophila Paris proteins encoded by the chromosome (database containing 3142 protein sequences) (http://genolist.pasteur.fr/LegioList/) with a mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions of 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine residues was set as variable modification and carbamidomethyl formation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained leading to the identification of 1662 L. pneumophila proteins. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.3.0) after loading the protein group file from MaxQuant. Proteins only identified by site, reverse database hits and contaminants were removed and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit. This way, 1448 proteins were quantified in total. After log2 transformation of the LFQ intensity values, a t-test was performed (FDR=0.05 and S0=1) to compare both strains and reveal significantly up- and downregulated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The carbon storage regulator protein CsrA regulates cellular processes post-transcriptionally by binding to target-RNAs altering translation efficiency and/or their stability. Here we identified and analyzed the direct targets of CsrA in the human pathogen Legionella pneumophila. Genome wide transcriptome, proteome and RNA co-immunoprecipitation followed by deep sequencing of a wild type and a csrA mutant strain identified 479 RNAs with potential CsrA interaction sites located in the untranslated and/or coding regions of mRNAs or of known non-coding sRNAs. Further analyses revealed that CsrA exhibits a dual regulatory role in virulence as it affects the expression of the regulators FleQ, LqsR, LetE and RpoS but it also directly regulates the timely expression of over 40 Dot/Icm substrates. CsrA controls its own expression and the stringent response through a regulatory feedback loop as evidenced by its binding to RelA-mRNA and links it to quorum sensing and motility. CsrA is a central player in the carbon, amino acid, fatty acid metabolism and energy transfer and directly affects the biosynthesis of cofactors, vitamins and secondary metabolites. We describe the first L. pneumophila riboswitch, a thiamine pyrophosphate riboswitch whose regulatory impact is fine-tuned by CsrA, and identified a unique regulatory mode of CsrA, the active stabilization of RNA anti-terminator conformations inside a coding sequence preventing Rho-dependent termination of the gap operon through transcriptional polarity effects. This allows L. pneumophila to regulate the pentose phosphate pathway and the glycolysis combined or individually although they share genes in a single operon. Thus the L. pneumophila genome has evolved to acclimate at least five different modes of regulation by CsrA giving it a truly unique position in its life cycle.

### Keywords
Labelfree shotgun proteomics, Legionella pneumophila, Csra

### Affiliations
VIB Proteomics Core
Ghent University
Biology Of Intracellular Bacteria Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France

### Submitter
Impens Francis

### Lab Head
Dr Carmen Buchrieser
Biology Of Intracellular Bacteria Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France


