### Accession
PXD012320

### Title
Interactome of the Escherichia coli nitrate reductase respiratory complex, NarGHI, under various metabolic conditions

### Description
Cellular respiration is a fundamental process undergone within energy-transducing membranes through the redox activity of multimeric protein assemblies, so-called respiratory complexes. In most cases, electron transport is ensured by lipophilic molecules, quinones, serving as electron shuttles. This redox activity is coupled to the net translocation of protons across the membrane thereby establishing an electrochemical gradient, the protonmotive force (pmf). Such a gradient powers the transport of molecules (such as proteins, ions or antibiotics) and ATP synthesis but was also shown to participate in protein localization in prokaryotes.  Importantly, energy-transducing membranes show a high level of organization with heterogeneous distribution of respiratory complexes as observed across several bacterial lineages. Although electron transport in energy-transducing membranes is considered to be a kinetic process coupled to the diffusion of all reactants and in particular quinones, it is not clear to which extent subcellular distribution of respiratory complexes can have an influence on the overall kinetics. We previously evidenced polar clustering of nitrate reductase, NarGHI, an anaerobic respiratory complex in the gut bacterium Escherichia coli. Such spatial organization was shown to directly impact the electron flux of the associated respiratory chain. While dynamic localization of such complex plays an important role in controlling respiration, the mechanism by which it impacts the electron flux is not understood. Yet, under such conditions where nitrate is the sole terminal electron acceptor, functioning of the electron transport chain in enteric bacteria such as E. coli and Salmonella typhimurium is associated with the production of nitric oxide (NO) mainly resulting from the reduction of nitrite by nitrate reductase. As a consequence, both E. coli and S. typhimurium produce a multitude of enzymes controlling NO homeostasis, the primary source of nitrosative stress. Protein S-nitrosylation is a ubiquitous NO-dependent post-translational modification of cysteine that regulates protein structure and function. Recently, Seth et al demonstrated that, in absence of oxygen, NO oxidation is mainly catalyzed by the hybrid cluster protein Hcp allowing its further reaction with thiols of a broad spectrum of proteins. Among Hcp-dependent S-nitrosylated targets are the nitrate reductase complex, multiple metabolic enzymes and the transcription factor OxyR whose S-nitrosylation entails a distinct nitrosative stress regulon. Optimizing electron transport through clustering of nitrate reductase will lead to nitrite accumulation which may in turn be responsible for NO production.  Here, the electron-donating respiratory complex, the formate dehydrogenase, FdnGHI was shown to cluster at the poles under nitrate respiring conditions. Its proximity with the nitrate reductase complex was confirmed by evaluating the interactome of the later under distinct metabolic conditions reported to impact its subcellular organization. All the identified partners were exclusively found when cells were grown under nitrate respiration. The proximity of two respiratory complexes provides mechanistic explanation on the importance of subcellular organization onto quinone pool turnover. Noteworthy is the identification of several components playing key roles in the protection against endogenous nitrosative stress.

### Sample Protocol
The immunoprecipitation was done with ChromoTek GFP-Trap® on membrane extracts issued from the nitrate reductase deficient strain JCB4023 harbouring the pVA70GFP plasmid encoding the narGegfpHJI operon under the control of its native promoter. The plasmid pVA70 containing the untagged version of the operon was used as negative control. Each strain was grown overnight in 5 ml of defined media containing either glycerol and nitrate (aerobic and nitrate-respiring conditions) or glucose (fermentative conditions) and subcultured the next day into 30 ml of identical media in  500 ml conical flasks at 37°C under 180 rpm. At mid-exponential phase (OD600nm of 0.9), the cultures corresponding to nitrate-respiring and fermentative conditions were transferred in gas tight bottles, gassed with argon, and incubated during an additional hour at 37°C. This procedure ensures optimal polar localisation of the nitrate reductase under nitrate-respiring conditions while resulting in an even distribution of the complex under anoxic fermentative ones. To preserve potential transient interactions, polar clustering being oxygen sensitive, experiments were performed in presence of 1% formaldehyde added to the cell culture when stated. After 30 minutes of incubation at room temperature, the cross-linking reaction was stopped by adding 125 mM of glycine and incubated for further 15 minutes at room temperature before proceeding to three washing steps in a buffer containing 150 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7) and 1 mM MgCl2. The cultures corresponding to aerobic conditions have been stopped at OD600nm 1.2 and subjected to the same treatment. Membrane fractions were prepared from each culture and solubilized overnight at 4°C with a combination of 1% Triton X-100 and 1% n-Dodecyl β-D-maltoside (DDM). The immunoprecipitation was done by following the supplier recommendations (ChromoTek). The immunoprecipitate samples were controlled on silver nitrate stained 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel prior analysis by mass spectrometry. The defined medium is composed of potassium phosphate buffer (100 mM) adjusted to pH 7.4, ammonium sulfate (6 mM), NaCl (9 mM), magnesium sulfate (2 mM), sodium molybdate (5 μM), sodium selenite (1 μM), Mohr’s salt (10 μM), calcium chloride (100 μM), casaminoacids (0.5 %), and thiamine (0.01 %). Antibiotic was added when required.   Each condition was injected in 3 biological replicates and 2 technical replicates in liquid chromatography coupled with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). First peptides were concentrated and purified on a pre-column from Dionex (C18 PepMap100, 2 cm × 100 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 5 µm particle size) in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile). In the second step, peptides were separated on a reverse phase LC EASY-Spray C18 column from Dionex (PepMap RSLC C18, 50 cm × 75 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 2 µm particle size) at 300 nL/min flow rate and 40°C. After column equilibration using 4% of solvent B (20% water - 80% acetonitrile - 0.1% formic acid), peptides were eluted from the analytical column by a two steps linear gradient (4-20% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid for 220 min and 20-45% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid for 20 min). For peptide ionization in the EASY-Spray nanosource, spray voltage was set at 2.2 kV and the capillary temperature at 275 °C. The mass spectrometer was used in data dependent mode to switch consistently between MS and MS/MS. Time between Masters Scans was set to 3 seconds. MS spectra were acquired with the Orbitrap in the range of m/z 375-1500 at a FWHM resolution of 60 000 measured at 200 m/z. AGC target was set at 4.0.105 with a 50 ms Maximum Injection Time. The more abundant precursor ions were selected and collision induced dissociation fragmentation at 35% was performed and analyzed in the ion trap using the “Inject Ions for All Available Parallelizable time” option with a maximum injection time of 105 ms and an AGC target of 1.0.105. Charge state screening was enabled to include precursors with 2 and 7 charge states. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and a duration of 60s. These chromatographic conditions were previously optimized with a protein pool from all the samples.

### Data Protocol
The relative intensities based on label-free quantification (LFQ) were calculated using the MaxLFQ algorithm from MaxQuant 1.6.1.0. The LC-MS raw acquisitions were processed by the Andromeda search engine integrated into MaxQuant. The identification of the precursor ions present in the mass spectra was performed by comparison with the protein database of E. coli (Oranism ID 83333) extracted from UniProt on the 20th of November 2017 and containing 4,306 entries. This database was supplemented with a set of 245 proteins that are commonly found as contaminants. The following parameters were used for this search: (i) trypsin cleavage authorization before prolines; (ii) authorization of two failed cleavages; (iii) fixed modification of cysteines by carbamidomethylation (+57.02146 Da) and variable modification of methionines by oxidation (+15.99491) and N-terminal proteins by acetylation (+42.0116); (iv) authorization of 5 modifications per peptide; and (v) minimum peptides length of 7 amino acids and a maximum mass of 4600 Da. Spectra alignment was performed in two dimensions; the elution time of the precursor ions (min) and the mass over charge (m/z; amu). The "Match between runs" option has been enabled to allow the transfer of identifications between LC-MS/MS based on the mass and the retention time using the default settings. The false positive rate on identification was set at 1%. The statistical analysis was carried out with the Perseus program (version 1.6.1.2) of the MaxQuant environment. The normalized intensity LFQ was transformed by a base logarithm 2 to obtain a normal distribution. Differential protein expressions were evidenced by the application of a student t-test performed associated to a permutation-based false discovery rate (pFDR) at 1% using 250 permutations. The differential proteomics analysis was carried out on identified proteins after removal of proteins only identified with modified peptides, peptides shared with other proteins, proteins from contaminant database and proteins which are only represented in 70% in at least one condition.

### Publication Abstract
Respiration is a fundamental process that has to optimally respond to metabolic demand and environmental changes. We previously showed that nitrate respiration, crucial for gut colonization by enterobacteria, is controlled by polar clustering of the nitrate reductase increasing the electron flux through the complex. Here, we show that the formate dehydrogenase electron-donating complex, FdnGHI, also clusters at the cell poles under nitrate-respiring conditions. Its proximity to the nitrate reductase complex was confirmed by its identification in the interactome of the latter, which appears to be specific to the nitrate-respiring condition. Interestingly, we have identified a multiprotein complex dedicated to handle nitric oxide resulting from the enhanced activity of the electron transport chain terminated by nitrate reductase. We demonstrated that the cytoplasmic NADH-dependent nitrite reductase NirBD and the hybrid cluster protein Hcp are key contributors to regulation of the nitric oxide level during nitrate respiration. Thus, gathering of actors involved in respiration and NO homeostasis seems to be critical to balancing maximization of electron flux and the resulting toxicity.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Most bacteria rely on the redox activity of respiratory complexes embedded in the cytoplasmic membrane to gain energy in the form of ATP and of an electrochemical gradient established across the membrane. Nevertheless, production of harmful and toxic nitric oxide by actively growing bacteria as either an intermediate or side-product of nitrate respiration challenges how homeostasis control is exerted. Here, we show that components of the nitrate electron transport chain are clustered, likely influencing the kinetics of the process. Nitric oxide production from this respiratory chain is controlled and handled through a multiprotein complex, including detoxifying systems. These findings point to an essential role of compartmentalization of respiratory components in bacterial cell growth.

### Keywords
Interactome, Escherichia coli, Nitrate respiration, Label-free, Narghi

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
Marseille Proteomics, CRCM, Inserm, CNRS

### Submitter
Luc Camoin

### Lab Head
Dr Camoin Luc
Marseille Proteomics, CRCM, Inserm, CNRS


