### Accession
PXD021516

### Title
Strucuture-function relationships of an atypical secretory kinase essential for Toxoplasma gondii invasion

### Description
An essential step in active host cell invasion by the obligate intracellular apicomplexan parasites is the formation of a moving junction (MJ), which joins both plasma membranes and connects the underlying host cortical cytoskeleton with the parasite actomyosin system. Invading Toxoplasma gondii secrete RON complex proteins from rhoptry organelles into the host cell which provide the MJ components on the cytoplasmic side of the host cell membrane. We investigated the role of an essential organelle-resident RON13 kinase and implicated in phosphorylation of rhoptry content. Structural biology and biochemistry demonstrated that RON13 is an atypical kinase inserted N-terminally in the organelle membrane and processed by the aspartyl protease 3. In the absence of RON13 function rhoptry discharge is unaffected but parasites fail to invade cells in vitro and become avirulent in a mouse model. Comparative phosphoproteomics revealed RON13-dependent phosphorylation of secreted RONs involved in anchoring the MJ in the host cell cytoskeleton.

### Sample Protocol
Bands of interest were digested as follow: gel pieces were destained by incubation in 100 μl of 50% acetonitrile (AcN) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB) for 15 min at room temperature. Proteins were reduced by incubation of gel pieces for 30 min. at 50°C in 100 μl of 10 mM DTT in 50 mM AB. DTT solution was then replaced by 100 μl of 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50mM AB and protein were alkylated by incubation of the gel pieces for 30 min at 37°C in the dark. Gel pieces were then washed for 15 min with 100 μl of 50mM AB and for 15 min with 100 μl of 100% AcN. Gel pieces were then air dried for 15 min at room temperature. Dried pieces of gel were rehydrated for 45 min at 4°C in 35 μl of a solution of 50 mM AB containing trypsin at 10 ng/μl and 0.01% of Protease Max (PM) Surfactant trypsin enhancer (Promega). Subsequently, 10 μl of 0.01% of PM in 50mM AB was added before incubating the samples for 1 hour at 50°C. Supernatant was transferred to a new polypropylene tube and an additional peptide extraction was performed with 70 μl of 20% FA for 15 min at room temperature with occasional shaking. Extractions were pooled, completely dried under speed vacuum and stored at -20°C.

### Data Protocol
Samples were diluted in 15 μl of loading buffer (5% CH3CN, 0.1% FA) and 2 μl were injected on column. LC-ESI-MS/MS was performed on a Q-Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a Acclaim pepmap100, C18, 3μm, 75μm x 20mm nano trap-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 75 μm x 250 mm, C18, 2μm, 100 Å Easy-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analytical separation was run for 90 min using a gradient of H2O/0.1 % Formic acid (solvent A) and CH3CN/0.1 % Formic acid (solvent B). The gradient was run as follows: 0-5 min 95 % A and 5 % B, then to 65 % A and 35 % B for 60 min, then to 10 % A and 90 % B for 10 min and finally stay 15 min at 10 % A and 90 % B. Flow rate was of 250 nL/min for a total run time of 90 min. For MS survey scans, the resolution was set to 70’000 and the ion population was set to 3 × 106 with an m/z window from 400 to 2000. For data dependant analysis, up to fifteen precursor ions were isolated and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation HCD at 27% NCE. For MS/MS detection, the resolution was set to 17’500, the ion population was set to 1 × 105 with an isolation width of 1.6 m/z units.Peak lists (MGF file format) were generated from raw data using the MSConvert conversion tool from ProteoWizard. The peaklist files were searched against the ToxoDB_Tgondii_GT1 database (ToxoplasmaDB.org, release 42, 8460 entries) combined with an in-house database of common contaminant using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with one potential missed cleavage. Precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as fixed modification. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. The Mascot search was validated using Scaffold 4.9.0 (Proteome Software). Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 5.0 % probability to achieve an FDR less than 0.1 % by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 26.0 % probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0 % and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Active host cell invasion by the obligate intracellular apicomplexan parasites relies on the formation of a moving junction, which connects parasite and host cell plasma membranes during entry. Invading Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites secrete their rhoptry content and insert a complex of RON proteins on the cytoplasmic side of the host cell membrane providing an anchor to which the parasite tethers. Here we show that a rhoptry-resident kinase RON13 is a key virulence factor that plays a crucial role in host cell entry. Cryo-EM, kinase assays, phosphoproteomics and cellular analyses reveal that RON13 is a secretory pathway kinase of atypical structure that phosphorylates rhoptry proteins including the components of the RON complex. Ultimately, RON13 kinase activity controls host cell invasion by anchoring the moving junction at the parasite-host cell interface.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii kinase ron complex invasion

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. 
Dpt. of Microbiology and molecular medicine, Universtity of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland

### Submitter
Gaelle Lentini

### Lab Head
Dr Dominique Soldati
Dpt. of Microbiology and molecular medicine, Universtity of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland


