### Accession
PXD012676

### Title
Fingolimod and remyelination -  Fingolimod downregulates brain sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 1 levels but does not promote remyelination or neuroprotection in the cuprizone model

### Description
Remyelinating substances could be an essential supplement to immunomodulatory medications, optimizing the treatment of multiple sclerosis (MS) patients. Fingolimod is a sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor (S1PR) modulator and crosses the blood-brain barrier. Central nervous system (CNS) cells express S1PRs, and Fingolimod could theoretically improve CNS remyelination and be neuroprotective per se, but data are inconsistent. We used the cuprizone model for investigating the effect of fingolimod on remyelination and axonal damage by Immunohistochemistry and quantitative mass spectrometry. After three weeks of remyelination, fingolimod-treated mice had more mature oligodendrocytes in the secondary motor cortex than the placebo group. However, fingolimod did not at any time point affect remyelination or axonal damage. We conclude that fingolimod does not promote remyelination or protect against axonal injury or loss after cuprizone exposure.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, the individual frontal right hemisphere of mice receiving fingolimod or placebo were lysed in 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCcl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT, and the protein concentration estimated. Before digestion, the samples were pooled, and 50 µg of each pool was digested by Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). The samples were tagged by a tandem mass tag (TMT  )10-plex set that was split in two, enabling simultaneous tagging of 20 samples; 18 sample pools and two identical reference samples enabling combining and comparing the two 10 plexes. Each TMT 10 plex experiment was fractionated by mixed mode reverse phase chromatography. This resulted in 58 fractions each 10 plex that was lyophilized and dissolved in 1% formic acid (FA) / 2% acetonitrile (ACN) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Following LC-MS/MS, peptides were identified, quantified and normalized in Proteome discoverer 2.0 (Thermo Scientific), only unique peptides were used for protein quantification. The samples were analyzed by the statistical software limma [29] in R. Specifically, the samples were grouped into condition (Placebo 6DM, Placebo 1RM, Placebo 3RM, Fingolimod 6DM, Fingolimod 1RM, Fingolimod 3RM) and batch (batch = 1 or 0 corresponding to the two TMT experiments) before empirical Bayes statistics [30] on the resulting values for condition, comparing fingolimod to placebo at each timepoint. Proteins with a p-value<0.01 and a log2 FC >0.2 or <-0.2 was considered significant (Log2 FC >20%). Benjamini Hochberg correction was used to adjust the p-values for multiple comparisons (q-value <0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Fingolimod is used to treat patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis; it crosses the blood-brain barrier and modulates sphingosine-1-phosphate receptors (S1PRs). Oligodendrocytes, astrocytes, microglia, and neuronal cells express S1PRs, and fingolimod could potentially improve remyelination and be neuroprotective. We used the cuprizone animal model, histo-, immunohistochemistry, and quantitative proteomics to study the effect of fingolimod on remyelination and axonal damage. Fingolimod was functionally active during remyelination by downregulating S1PR1 brain levels, and fingolimod-treated mice had more oligodendrocytes in the secondary motor cortex after three weeks of remyelination. However, there were no differences in remyelination or axonal damage compared to placebo. Thus, fingolimod does not seem to directly promote remyelination or protect against axonal injury or loss when given after cuprizone-induced demyelination.

### Keywords
Multiplexing, Brain, Tissue, Qe-hf, Fingolimod, Mouse, Proteomics, Tmt, Cpz, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Institute of Marine Research
Proteomics unit at the university of Bergen (PROBE), Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen

### Submitter
Eystein Oveland

### Lab Head
Dr Frode S. Berven
Proteomics unit at the university of Bergen (PROBE), Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen


