### Accession
PXD010156

### Title
Tomato another proteome -  Response mechanisms induced by exposure to high temperature in anthers from thermo-tolerant and thermo-sensitive tomato plants: A proteomic perspective

### Description
The study was aimed to investigate by differential proteomics heat stress response mechanisms in tomato anthers collected from flowers of Solanum lycopersicum cv Saladette (SAL), already annotated as a thermo-tolerant tomato genotype and flowers from Solanum lycopersicum cv M82, reported as a thermo-sensitive genotype. Proteins constitutively present at higher or lower level in the tolerant genotype and/or proteins whose abundance was modulated by growth under high temperature in both genotypes were identified, thus leading to define processes involved in the heat stress response and responsible for efficient reduction of the adverse effects of HS. Results showed differences in the abundance of ninety-six proteins and their functional classification highlighted that heat stress mainly affected metabolic pathways, such as energy metabolism (glycolysis and sucrose degradation), nitrogen assimilation and amino acid biosynthesis and modulated the expression of proteins involved in the folding and degradation machinery and ROS detoxification systems

### Sample Protocol
Plants of thermo-tolerant SAL and thermo-sensitive M82 genotypes were grown in greenhouse under controlled temperature conditions (CC) (26°C/20°C day/night) and natural illumination. After a month, plants designated for the HS treatment were moved in a different greenhouse and subjected to high temperature conditions (HT) (36°C\25°C (day\night) under natural illumination). These growth conditions were kept for a total period of three months. Anthers collected from 7-8 mm flower buds of the two genotypes were grinded to powder with liquid nitrogen and 0.8 g of anther powder were treated with 2 mL Tris-HCl pH 8.0 buffered phenol and 2 mL of extraction media (0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 10 mM EDTA, 0.4% 2-mercaptoethanol, 0.9 M sucrose). Phenol extracted proteins were precipitated by adding 10 volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol (pre-chilled to -80°C) to the phenol phase at -80°C overnight. Protein pellets, collected by centrifugation, were dissolved in 200 µL buffer solution (8 M Urea, 4% Chaps, 40 mM Tris-HCl, 40 mM DTT) and 300 μg protein samples were analyzed by 2-DE (IEF first dimension, SDS-PAGE second dimension). Protein spots were visualized by staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 and 2-DE protein patterns were recorded as digitalized images. Spot detection, quantization, and analysis were performed using the PDQuest™ 2-D Analysis Software, Version 6.2 (Bio-Rad). Spots were excised from 2-DE gels and in-gel tryptic digestion was carried out. Protein identification was achieved by peptide mass fingerprint (PMF) strategy and nanoESI-LC-MS/MS experiments

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using the MassLynx 2.1 and ProteinLynx Global Server software. Protein identification was achieved by using peak lists for searches against the NCBInr database using the Mascot algorithm and selecting the Mascot algorithm options Peptide Mass Fingerprint and MS/MS Ion Search. Identified proteins were classified by means of the bioinformatic resource SolCyc Biochemical Pathways (http://solcyc.solgenomics.net/) using as organism database Solanum lycopersicum to define biological functions and metabolic pathways involved in HS response. Hierarchical cluster analysis of differentially represented proteins in the four Image Analyses was performed using Genesis 1.7.7 software (http://genome.tugraz.at/genesisclient/genesisclient_description.shtml). Protein interaction networks were obtained with STRING (http://string-db.org). Active prediction methods used in our analysis were neighbourhood, coexpression, experiments, co-occurrence, databases and text mining, using custom confidence value of 0.600.

### Publication Abstract
Constant global warming is one of the most detrimental environmental factors for agriculture causing significant losses in productivity as heat stress (HS) conditions damage plant growth and reproduction. In flowering plants such as tomato, HS has drastic repercussions on development and functionality of male reproductive organs and pollen. Response mechanisms to HS in tomato anthers and pollen have been widely investigated by transcriptomics; on the contrary, exhaustive proteomic evidences are still lacking. In this context, a differential proteomic study was performed on tomato anthers collected from two genotypes (thermo-tolerant and thermo-sensitive) to explore stress response mechanisms and identify proteins possibly associated to thermo-tolerance. Results showed that HS mainly affected energy and amino acid metabolism and nitrogen assimilation and modulated the expression of proteins involved in assuring protein quality and ROS detoxification. Moreover, proteins potentially associated to thermo-tolerant features, such as glutamine synthetase, S-adenosylmethionine synthase and polyphenol oxidase, were identified.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Anthers, Thermotolerance, Heat stress, Tomato

### Affiliations
Institute of Food Science-National Research Council
INstitute of Food Sciences- National Research Council of Italy

### Submitter
Maria Fiorella Mazzeo

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Fiorella Mazzeo
INstitute of Food Sciences- National Research Council of Italy


