### Accession
PXD019646

### Title
Endosulfines Igo1 and Igo2 promote hyperosmotic stress signaling via inhibition of protein phosphatase 2A

### Description
The hyperosmotic stress response in budding yeast is a paradigm for cellular responses to physicochemical stimuli that is often used for modeling signal transduction pathways. Here, we describe the phosphatase PP2A-Cdc55 as a novel master regulator of hyperosmotic stress signaling. We show that its inhibition by the Greatwall kinase-Endosulfine signaling module at the onset of hyperosmotic stress is crucial for cellular survival with far-reaching consequences for the stress-regulated phospho-proteome. Indeed, this mechanism is required and sufficient to induce stress-specific phosphorylation patterns. This system operates in parallel and independently of the well-established Hog1 MAP kinase pathway, affecting up to 50% of the stress-induced S/T-P motifs. Many of these motifs appear to be direct substrates of PP2A-Cdc55. We exemplify the functional impact of stress-induced inhibition of PP2A-Cdc55 on the transcriptional regulation of stress-associated genes via the transcriptional regulators Rph1 and Gis1.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted using TRIzol (Invitrogen) (Reiter et al., 2012), or (for setup SR igo1Δigo2Δ) using a TCA based protocol. TCA extraction was performed as follows: cells were resuspended in 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris pH 8.0 and disrupted by beat beating using a Fast Prep (3 cycles: 45 s, power level 5.5). Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation. Proteins were extracted by addition of ice-cold TCA (15% final concentration), followed by an incubation for 60 minutes on ice. Proteins were centrifuged (12,000 x g, 5min, 4 °C), washed in 15% TCA and acetone and shortly dried. Protein pellets were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer containing 8 M urea. Protein concentration (2-3 mg/ml) was determined by Bradford protein assay (Bio Rad), using bovine serum albumin to create a standard curve. Protein samples were diluted to 50 mM ABC, 6 M Urea by using 50 mM ABC. Disulfide bridges were reduced by adding dithiothreitol (DTT), using a DTT to protein ratio of 1:50, and samples were incubated for 30 minutes at 56 °C. Cysteines were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide (IAA), using an IAA to protein ratio of 1:10, and samples were incubated for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature. Remaining IAA was quenched by adding DTT, using a DTT to protein ratio of 1:100. Proteins were digested with LysC (Roche) for 2 hours at 30 °C, using a LysC to protein ratio of 1:100. Protein samples were diluted to 50 mM ABC 0.6 M Urea by using 50 mM ABC. Proteins were digested with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega) overnight at 37 °C, using a trypsin to protein ratio of 1:60. The overnight digest was stopped by adding 100% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. Resulting peptide samples were desalted using Strata-X reversed phase polymeric solid phase extraction cartridges Phenomenex, 200 mg), and eluted by addition of 70% acetonitrile (ACN) 0.1% formic acid (FA). An aliquot of ~ 1µg protein extract was taken, diluted with 0.1% TFA to an ACN concentration below 2% and subjected to MS analysis. Peptide samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, lyophilized and stored at -80 °C. Phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 (Titansphere bulk media, 5 micron, GL Science). The amount of TiO2 resin was adjusted to the peptide concentration (1.25 mg of TiO2 / 3.5 mg yeast protein extract). TiO2 resin was washed with 50% Methanol, H2O and equilibrated with TiO2 loading buffer (0.8 M phtalic acid, 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA). Dried peptide samples were dissolved in 100 µl TiO2 loading buffer and incubated for 1 hour with 1 mg TiO2 resin per 2.8 mg protein extract. The TiO2 resin were transferred to a Mobicol spin column and washed with 2 x 250 µl TiO2 loading buffer, 2 x 250 µl 80% ACN 0.1% TFA, 2 x 250 µl 1% ACN 0.1% TFA. Bound phosphopeptides were eluted by addition of 2 x 150 μl 0.3 M ammonium hydroxide and acidified to pH 2.5 by addition of 10% TFA. Phosphopeptide samples were desalted using C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters), vacuum dried and stored at -80 °C. Phosphopeptides were fractionated offline by strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX), using 1 ml Resource S column (GE healthcare) installed in a nano-HPLC machine (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, samples were injected using SCX Buffer A (5 mM NaH2PO4, 30% acetonitrile (ACN), pH 2.7). Peptides bound to the column were separated by a linear gradient of sodium chloride in SCX buffer A. Based upon UV measurements, some fraction containing low amounts of peptide were pooled which resulted in a total of 12 fractions (fractions were collected every minute and then pooled together). Each elution sample was adjusted by TFA to pH 2-3 for subsequent desalting (Rappsilber et al., 2007) and mass spectrometry measurement.  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an UltiMate 3000 Dual LC nano-HPLC System (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific), containing both a trapping column for peptide concentration (PepMap C18, 5 x 0.3 mm, 5 µm particle size) and an analytical column (PepMap C18, 500 x 0.075 µm , 2 µm particle size, Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled to a Linear Trap Quadrupole Orbitrap Velos (with CID, collision-induced dissociation mode; or ETD, electron-transfer dissociation) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap (with HCD, higher-energy collisional dissociation mode) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) or a Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid (with HCD) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) via a Proxeon nanospray flex ion source (Thermo Fisher). For peptide separation on the HPLC the concentration of organic solvent (acetonitrile) was increased from 2.5% to 40% in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 275 nl/min, using different gradient times. For acquisition of MS2 spectra the instruments were operated in a data-dependent mode with dynamic exclusion enabled. A detailed description of the acquisition settings for individual raw files as well as the experimental setup can be found in the publication associated with this repository.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data was analyzed using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) software version 1.5.2.8 (global proteome experiments) or with version 1.6.0.16 (Gis1 and Rph1 HB purification experiments), using default parameters with the following modifications. MS2 spectra were searched against a protein database from the SGD (Saccharomyces Genome Database, www.yeastgenome.org, version 3rd February, 2011) containing 6,717 entries, concatenated with a database of common laboratory contaminants (provided with MaxQuant). Hence, the option to include contaminants was deactivated. Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P” (allowing cleavage after proline), the minimal peptide length was set to 6 and the maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 2. The option “I = L” was activated to treat the amino acids leucine and isoleucine as indistinguishable. The minimum peptide length was set to 6. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as fixed modification. “Acetyl (Protein N-term)”, “Deamidation (NQ)”, “Oxidation (M)” and “Phospho (STY)” were set as variable modifications. A maximum of 6 variable modifications per peptide was allowed. For MS measurements of samples prior to phosphopeptide enrichment “Phospho (STY)” was not used as a variable modification. For SILAC quantification “multiplicity” was set to 2, “Arg6” and “Lys6” were specified as heavy labels, ”Requantify” and “Match between runs” were enabled. For calculation and normalization of phosphorylation site SILAC ratios in-house Python scripts were used. All data was extracted from MaxQuant evidence tables. SILAC ratios (heavy to light) were extracted from the column “Ratio H/L”, log2 transformed and, if necessary, inverted. SILAC ratios were corrected for differences in the amount of heavy-labeled and light-labeled cells. In addition, proline containing peptides were corrected for signal loss caused by the conversion of heavy-labeled arginine to heavy-labeled proline (Ong et al., 2003). Normalization factors were calculated independently for each replicate and experiment. For calculation of normalization factors only unphosphorylated peptides were considered. First, the average log2 ratio of peptides, not containing proline, was calculated and subtracted from the log2 ratios of individual phosphorylated and unphosphorylated peptides. Second, a proline-conversion factor was calculated as the average log2 ratio of unphosphorylated peptides containing exactly one proline and the log2 ratio (divided by two) of peptides containing two prolines. For each phosphorylated and unphosphorylated peptide the proline-conversion factor was multiplied by the number of prolines present in the peptide sequence and subtracted from the log2 ratio. To correct for differences in protein abundances of Gis1 and Rph1 in the HB purification experiments all peptides of the respective protein were normalized by subtracting the median log2 ratio of the unphosphorylated peptides. An isoform phosphorylation site probability was calculated by multiplying the highest individual phosphorylation site probabilities. Peptides with an isoform probability below 70% were discarded. To facilitate interpretation of protein phosphorylation sites, phosphopeptides were grouped into “phosphorylation sites” containing the same set of phosphorylated protein residues, regardless of potential missed cleavages or additional modifications such as oxidation. The SILAC log2 ratio of individual “phosphorylation sites” was calculated independently for each replicate and experiment as the average log2 ratio of all corresponding evidence table entries.

### Publication Abstract
Changing environmental cues lead to the adjustment of cellular physiology by phosphorylation signaling networks that typically center around kinases as active effectors and phosphatases as antagonistic elements. Here, we report a signaling mechanism that reverses this principle. Using the hyperosmotic stress response in Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a model system, we find that a phosphatase-driven mechanism causes induction of phosphorylation. The key activating step that triggers this phospho-proteomic response is the Endosulfine-mediated inhibition of protein phosphatase 2A-Cdc55 (PP2A<sup>Cdc55</sup> ), while we do not observe concurrent kinase activation. In fact, many of the stress-induced phosphorylation sites appear to be direct substrates of the phosphatase, rendering PP2A<sup>Cdc55</sup> the main downstream effector of a signaling response that operates in parallel and independent of the well-established kinase-centric stress signaling pathways. This response affects multiple cellular processes and is required for stress survival. Our results demonstrate how a phosphatase can assume the role of active downstream effectors during signaling and allow re-evaluating the impact of phosphatases on shaping the phosphorylome.

### Keywords
Gis1, Rph1, Phosphorylation, Igo1, Igo2, Quantitative proteomics, Pp2a, Phosphatase, Stress signaling, Hyperosmotic stress, Stress response, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Cdc55, Endosulfines

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Labs, University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 9, 1030 Vienna, Austria
Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Max Perutz Labs, University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 9, 1030 Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
David Hollenstein

### Lab Head
Dr Reiter Wolfgang
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Labs, University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 9, 1030 Vienna, Austria


