### Accession
PXD031771

### Title
Breast Cancer Cell Secretome Analysis to Decipher miRNA Tumor Biology and Discover Potential Biomarkers

### Description
MicroRNA (miRNA/miR) miR526b and miR655 overexpressed tumor cell-free secretions promote breast cancer phenotypes in the tumor microenvironment (TME). However, the mechanisms of miRNA regulating TME have never been investigated. With mass spectrometry analysis of MCF7-miRNA-overexpressed versus miRNA-low MCF7-Mock tumor cell secretomes, we identified 34 novel secretory proteins coded by eight genes YWHAB, TXNDC12, MYL6B, SFN, FN1, PSMB6, PRDX4, and PEA15 those are differentially regulated. We used bioinformatic tools and systems biology approaches to identify these markers’ role in breast cancer. Gene ontology analysis showed that the top functions are related to apoptosis, oxidative stress, membrane transport, and motility, supporting miRNA-induced phenotypes. These secretory markers expression is high in breast tumors, and a strong positive correlation exists between upregulated markers’ mRNA expressions with miRNA cluster expression in luminal A breast tumors. Gene expression of secretome markers is higher in tumor tissues compared to normal samples, and immunohistochemistry data supported gene expression data. Moreover, both up and downregulated marker expressions are associated with breast cancer patient survival. miRNA regulates these marker protein expressions by targeting transcription factors of these genes. Premature miRNA (pri-miR526b and pri-miR655) are established breast cancer blood biomarkers. Here we report novel secretory markers upregulated by miR526b and miR655 (YWHAB, MYL6B, PSMB6, and PEA15) are significantly upregulated in breast cancer patients’ plasma, and are potential breast cancer biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
Collection of conditioned media MCF7-Mock, MCF7-miR526b, and MCF7-miR655 cell lines were grown in complete RPMI 1640 media (Gibco, ON, Canada) with 10% fetal bovine serum (VWR, ON, Canada) and 1% Pen-Strep. Stable miRNA-overexpressed cells and mock (empty vector-transfected) cells received Geneticin (G418) at a concentration of 200μg/ml (Biobasic, ON, Canada), and all cell lines were maintained in cell culture at 37°C, 5% CO2. Once cell confluency reached 90%, all cells were washed with 1x phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (Gibco, ON, Canada) to remove any trace of complete media. All cells were followed by being serum-starved with basal media for 16 hours before collection of the cell secretion in the media. The conditioned media, which contains all the secretory proteins and cell metabolites, was collected from all cell lines.

### Data Protocol
Preparation of proteins to be analyzed by nanoHPLC-MS  Conditioned media proteins were precipitated overnight with 35% ethanol, followed by acidification with sodium acetate and the addition of a digestion buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate and 50mM NH4HCO3). Precipitated proteins were quantified by BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL) with at least 100μg protein used per cell line. The protein underwent reduction and alkylation (dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide) before digestion with trypsin. Peptides were isolated by stage tip purification before analysis by nanoHPLC-MS (Agilent 6530 Accurate-Mass Q-TOF LC/MS, Santa Clara, CA). In a single run, we had two experimental replicates of each sample. S, with four biological replicates, we generated n=8 sets of data for each cell line.

### Publication Abstract
MicroRNA (miRNA/miR) 526&#xa0;b- and miR655-overexpressed tumor cell-free secretions regulate the breast cancer tumor microenvironment (TME) by promoting tumor-associated angiogenesis, oxidative stress, and hypoxic responses. Additionally, premature miRNA (pri-miR526b and pri-miR655) are established breast cancer blood biomarkers. However, the mechanisms of how these miRNAs regulate the TME has yet to be investigated. Mass spectrometry analysis of miRNA-overexpressed cell lines MCF7-miR526b, MCF7-miR655, and miRNA-low MCF7-Mock cell-free secretomes identified 34 differentially expressed proteins coded by eight genes. In both miRNA-high cell secretomes, four markers are upregulated: <i>YWHAB</i>, <i>SFN</i>, <i>TXNDC12</i>, and <i>MYL6B,</i> and four are downregulated: <i>PEA15</i>, <i>PRDX4</i>, <i>PSMB6</i>, and <i>FN1</i>. All upregulated marker transcripts are significantly high in both total cellular RNA pool and cell-free secretions of miRNA-high cell lines, validated with quantitative RT-PCR. Bioinformatics tools were used to investigate these markers' roles in breast cancer. These markers' top gene ontology functions are related to apoptosis, oxidative stress, membrane transport, and motility supporting oncogenic miR526b- and miR655-induced functions. Gene transcription factor analysis tools were used to show how these miRNAs regulate the expression of each secretory marker. Data extracted from the Human Protein Atlas showed that YWHAB, SFN, and TXNDC12 expression could distinguish early and late-stage breast cancer in various breast cancer subtypes and are associated with poor patient survival. Additionally, immunohistochemistry analysis showed the expression of each marker in breast tumors. A stronger correlation between miRNA clusters and upregulated secretory markers gene expression was found in the luminal A tumor subtype. YWHAB, SFN, and MYL6B are upregulated in breast cancer patient's blood, showing biomarker potential. Of these identified novel miRNA secretory markers, SFN and YWHAB successfully passed all validations and are the best candidates to further investigate their roles in miRNA associated TME regulation. Also, these markers show the potential to serve as blood-based breast cancer biomarkers, especially for luminal-A subtypes.

### Keywords
Mir655, Estrogen receptor-positive (er+), Tumor microenvironment (tme), Microrna, Biomarker, Mir526b, Systems biology, Secretome, Breast cancer, Bioinformatics, Luminal a

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Brandon University, 3rd Floor, John R. Brodie Science Centre, 270 18th Street, Brandon, MB, Canada, R7A 6A9
Brandon University

### Submitter
Riley Feser

### Lab Head
Dr Mousumi Majumder
Department of Biology, Brandon University, 3rd Floor, John R. Brodie Science Centre, 270 18th Street, Brandon, MB, Canada, R7A 6A9


