### Accession
PXD009729

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Plasmodium yoelii oocyst sporozoites

### Description
Proteomic analysis of Plasmodium yoelii oocyst sporozoites

### Sample Protocol
Six-to-eight week old female Swiss Webster (SW) mice were infected by intraperitoneal (IP) injection of cryopreserved infected blood and were monitored until the peak day of male gametocyte exflagellation. Mice were then anesthetized with an IP injection of ketamine/xylazine and exposed to 150-200 Anopheles stephensi mosquitoes for 15 minutes with periodic movements on the cage to promote consistency in the transmission of parasites to the mosquito population. Oocyst sporozoites were collected by microdissection and grinding of mosquito midguts on day 10 post-blood meal. Oocyst sporozoites were purified over an Accudenz cushion and lysed by addition of 2xSample Buffer and heating at 70°C for 5 minutes. Lysate was electrophoresed through a 4-20% SDS-polyacrylamide gel, post-stained with Imperial Stain and destained in H2O. The gel was cut into 26 fractions and gel pieces were then de-stained with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) in 50 % acetonitrile (ACN) and dehydrated with ACN. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM DTT in 100 mM ABC and cysteines were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ABC. Gel pieces were washed with 50 mM ABC in 50 % ACN, dehydrated with ACN, and rehydrated with 6.25 ng/µL sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ABC. After incubating overnight at 37 °C, the supernatant was recovered and peptides were extracted by incubating the gel pieces with 2 % ACN/1 % formic acid (FA), then ACN. The extractions were combined with the digest supernatant, evaporated to dryness in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator, and reconstituted in liquid chromatography (LC) loading buffer consisting of 2 ACN/0.2 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). LC was performed using an Eksigent nanoLC at 500 nL/min. Peptides were separated on a column with an integrated fritted tip (360 µm outer diameter (O.D.), 75 µm inner diameter (I.D.), 15 µm I.D. tip; New Objective) packed in-house with a 20 cm bed of C18 (Dr. Maisch ReproSil Pur C18 AQ, 120 Å, 3 µm). Prior to each run, sample was loaded onto a trap column consisting of a fritted capillary (360 µm O.D., 150 µm I.D.) packed with a 1 cm bed of the same stationary phase and washed with loading buffer. The trap was then placed in-line with the separation column for the separation gradient. The LC mobile phases consisted of buffer A (0.1 FA in water) and buffer B (0.1 % FA in ACN). The separation gradient was 5 % B to 35 % B over 90 min. Tandem MS (MS/MS) was performed with a Thermo Fisher Scientific LTQ Velos-Orbitrap. Data-dependent acquisition was employed to select the top 20 precursors for collision-induced dissociation (CID) and analysis in the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion and precursor charge state selection were employed. The 26 fractions were pooled into 13 fractions and anlyzed in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometer output files were converted to mzML format using msConvert version 3.0.6002 (PMID:18606607) and searched with Comet version 2015.02 rev.0 (PMID:23148064). The precursor mass tolerance was ±20 ppm, and fragment ions bins were set to a tolerance of 1.0005 m/z and a monoisotopic mass offset of 0.4 m/z. Semi-tryptic peptides and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The search parameters included a static modification of +57.021464 Da at Cys for formation of S-carboxamidomethyl Cys by iodoacetamide and potential modifications of +15.994915 Da at Met for oxidation, -17.026549 Da at peptide N terminal Gln for deamidation from formation of pyroGlu, -18.010565 Da at peptide N terminal Glu for loss of water from formation of pyroGlu, -17.026549 Da at peptide N-terminal Cys for deamidation from formation of cyclized N-terminal S-carboxamidomethyl Cys, and +42.010565 for acetylation at the N-terminus of the protein, either at N-terminal Met or the N-terminal residue after cleavage of N-terminal Met. The spectra were searched against a database comprising P. yoelii yoelii 17X (PMID:25359557) (PlasmoDB v.30, www.plasmodb.org (PMID:18957442)) appended with Anopheles stephensi Indian AsteI2.3 (PMID:25244985) (VectorBase, www.vectorbase.org (PMID:25510499)), and a modified version of the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (v.2012.01.01, The Global Proteome Machine, www.thegpm.org/cRAP) with the Sigma Universal Standard Proteins removed and the LC calibration standard peptide [Glu-1] fibrinopeptide B appended. Decoy proteins with the residues between tryptic residues randomly shuffled were generated using a tool included in the TPP and interleaved among the real entries. The MS/MS data were analyzed using the Trans Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) (PMID:25631240) version 5.0.0 Typhoon. Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were assigned scores in PeptideProphet (PMID:124035970), peptide-level scores were assigned in iProphet (PMID:23720762), and Protein identifications were inferred with ProteinProphet (PMID:14632076). In the case that multiple proteins were inferred at equal confidence by a set of peptides, the inference was counted as a single identification and all relevant protein IDs were listed. Only proteins with ProteinProphet probabilities corresponding to a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1.0 % (as determined from the ProteinProphet mixture models) were reported.

### Publication Abstract
Plasmodium sporozoites are transmitted from infected mosquitoes to mammals, and must navigate the host skin and vasculature to infect the liver. This journey requires distinct proteomes. Here, we report the dynamic transcriptomes and proteomes of both oocyst sporozoites and salivary gland sporozoites in both rodent-infectious Plasmodium yoelii parasites and human-infectious Plasmodium falciparum parasites. The data robustly define mRNAs and proteins that are upregulated in oocyst sporozoites (UOS) or upregulated in infectious sporozoites (UIS) within the salivary glands, including many that are essential for sporozoite functions in the vector and host. Moreover, we find that malaria parasites use two overlapping, extensive, and independent programs of translational repression across sporozoite maturation to temporally regulate protein expression. Together with gene-specific validation experiments, these data indicate that two waves of translational repression are implemented and relieved at different times during sporozoite maturation, migration and infection, thus promoting their successful development and vector-to-host transition.

### Keywords
Oocyst sporozoites, Plasmodium yoelii

### Affiliations
Institute for Systems Biology

### Submitter
Kristian Swearingen

### Lab Head
Dr Robert L. Moritz
Institute for Systems Biology


