### Accession
PXD035761

### Title
Identification of putative reader proteins of RNA 5-methylcytosine and its derivatives in Caenorhabditis elegans

### Description
Methylation of carbon-5 of cytosines (m5C) is a conserved post-transcriptional nucleotide modification of RNA with widespread distribution across organisms. m5C has been shown to participate in mRNA transport and maintain mRNA stability through its recognition by the reader proteins ALYREF and YBX1, respectively. We recently showed that m5C is required for Caenorhabditis elegans development and fertility under heat stress. To contribute to the understanding of how m5C and its oxidative derivatives mediate their functions, we developed RNA baits bearing modified cytosines in diverse structural contexts to pulldown potential readers in C. elegans. Our mass spectrometry analyses reveal unique binding proteins for each of the modifications. We validate our dataset by demonstrating that the nematode ALYREF homologues ALY-1 and ALY-2 preferentially bind m5C in vitro. The dataset presented here serves as an important scientific resource that will support the discovery of new functions of m5C and its derivatives.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for protein mass spectrometry Samples were processed and analysed as described in Bensaddek et al, 2016. Samples were reduced using 25 mM tris-carboxyethylphosphine TCEP for 30 min at room temperature, then alkylated in the dark for 30 min using 50 mM iodoacetamide. Protein concentration was quantified using the EZQ assay (Life Technologies). The lysates were diluted with 100 mM TEAB 4-fold for the first digestion with endoprotease Lys-C, then further diluted 2.5-fold before a second digestion with trypsin. Lys-C and trypsin were used at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w). The digestions were carried out overnight at 37°C, then terminated by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1% (v:v). Peptides were desalted using C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters) following manufacturer’s instructions, dried and dissolved in 5% formic acid (FA).  Reverse-phase liquid chromatography-MS RP-LC was performed using a Dionex RSLC nano HPLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were injected onto a 75 μm x 2 cm PepMap-C18 pre-column and resolved on a 75 μm x 50 cm RP- C18 EASY-Spray temperature controlled integrated column-emitter (Thermo). The mobile phases were: 2% ACN incorporating 0.1% FA (Solvent A) and 80% ACN incorporating 0.1% FA (Solvent B). A gradient from 5% to 35% solvent B was used over 4 h with a constant flow of 200 nL/min. The spray was initiated by applying 2.5 kV to the EASY-Spray emitter and the data were acquired on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) under the control of Xcalibur software in a data dependent mode selecting the 15 most intense ions for HCD-MS/MS. Raw MS data was processed using MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data was processed using MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Caenorhabditis elegans, Label free, C elegans

### Affiliations
Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Alejandro Brenes

### Lab Head
Dr Angus I. Lamond
Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression


