### Accession
PXD003766

### Title
Proteolytic-independent role of mycosins in stabilization of the ESX-1 and ESX-5 type VII secretion membrane complexes.

### Description
Pathogenic mycobacteria contain up to five type VII secretion (T7S) systems, ESX-1 to ESX-5, which have central roles in virulence and viability. One of the conserved components of these systems, the serine protease mycosin (MycP), has been shown to be essential for secretion by ESX-1 and ESX-5. However, here we show that protease activity of MycP1 and MycP5 of M. marinum is not essential for ESX-1 and ESX-5 dependent secretion, respectively. This indicates that MycP has a second, so far unknown, function that is essential for T7S. To investigate whether this second role is  related to proper functioning of the T7S membrane core complex, we first verified  that the ESX-1 membrane complex is of similar composition and size as the previously analyzed ESX-5 complex and that MycP1 and MycP5 are not an integral part of the respective core complex. In contrast, we could not detect  ESX-1 and ESX-5 complexes under mycP1 and mycP5 knockout conditions, respectively. Interestingly, the ESX-5 complex could be detected at wild-type levels in the absence of MycP5, when membranes were subjected to crosslinking before detergent solubilization, suggesting that MycP is involved in complex stabilization. Based on our findings we hypothesize that mycosins loosely associate with their respective membrane complex, which is crucial for the full integrity and functioning of the secretion machinery.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of ESX-1 and ESX-5 membrane complexes M. marinum bacteria were grown until an OD600 of 1 to 1.5 and harvested by centrifugation. Cells were resuspended in PBS with 250 mM sucrose and lysed with a One Shot Cell disruptor (Constant systems Ltd). Unlysed cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 3000xg for 10 minutes. The cell envelope (CE) fraction was isolated by centrifugation at 100.000xg for 30 minutes and resuspended in PBS with 250 mM sucrose. Proteins were solubilized from isolated CE fractions as described above, with the addition of 0.3 mg/ml avidin (Sigma) after the DDM incubation. Solubilized proteins were incubated with Strep-tactin beads for 30 minutes head-over-head, washed with 50 mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.8, 150 mM KOAc, 125 mM sucrose, 0.04% DDM and eluted with 10 mM desthiobiotin, dissolved in the same buffer as for the washing. SDS solubilisation buffer was added to the elution fractions, samples were heated at 94°C, separated on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel and visualized by Coomassie staining.  LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 20 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 3 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 60 min (9 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (4 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 2 E5 charges and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot M.marinum completeproteome (ATCC BAA-535M) FASTA file (5418 entries) using using MaxQuant 1.4.1.2. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 6 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 17. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match between runs option checked. Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected.  Protein quantitation Proteins were (label-free) quantified by spectral counting i.e. the sum of all MS/MS spectra for each identified protein. For quantitative analysis across samples, spectral counts for identified proteins in a sample were normalized to the sum of spectral counts for that sample. This gives the relative spectral count contribution of a protein to all spectral counts in the sample. When comparing different biological samples, these normalized spectral counts were used to calculate ratios. Differential analysis of samples was performed using the beta-binominal test, which takes into account within- and between-sample variations, giving fold-change values and associated p-values for all identified proteins. Protein cluster analysis of the differentially expressed proteins was performed using hierarchical clustering in R. The protein abundances were normalized to zero mean and unit variance for each individual protein. Subsequently, the Euclidean distance measure was used for protein clustering.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
T7s, Tuberculosis, Mycobacterium marinum, Esx1, Esx5, Label-free, Single-shot

### Affiliations
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


