### Accession
PXD039238

### Title
The γ-secretase substrate proteome and its role in cell signaling regulation

### Description
γ-Secretase is involved in the regulated intramembrane proteolysis (RIP) of a variety of integral membrane proteins and generates the amyloid peptide (Aβ) in Alzheimer’s Disease (AD). Microglia are centrally involved in AD, but the substrates and function of γ-secretase in these cells remain largely unstudied. Using a novel γ-Secretase Substrate Identification (G-SECSI) method, we identified 85 substrates, of which 59 were previously unknown, in stem cell derived microglia-like cells. More than 60% of those are signalling receptors possibly involved in cell state regulation. Inhibition of γ-secretase using Semagacestat or selective genetic knockout alters the expression of homeostatic (HM) and disease-associated (DAM) genes, in particular when microglia are exposed to amyloid plaques in vivo. Thus, γ-secretase regulates tonic signaling via a spectrum of substrates in microglia in steady state, and its blockage results in the defective transition to the DAM response in AD. 

### Sample Protocol
H9MG fractionated membrane samples were prepared for mass spectrometry using s-trap mini columns (Protifi). Membrane pellets were solubilized in 5% SDS, 10mM TCEP (tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine) and 50mM TEAB (triethylammonium bicarbonate). Samples were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour. Samples were loaded onto s-trap columns following the manufacturer’s instructions and columns were washed 5 times with 100mM TEAB pH 7.1 in 90% methanol. Proteins were digested with trypsin (1:20 enzyme to protein) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 47 C for 2 hours. Peptides were eluted from the mini column by sequential washes with 80ul 100mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by 80ul 0.2% formic acid and lastly with 80ul 0.2% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile. Peptides were dried and suspended in 1% formic acid for analysis by mass spectrometry.  H9MG membrane derived peptides were analyzed using an Exploris 480 (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS (Thermo Scientific). LC buffers were the following: buffer A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v). For all samples 15 μL of the suspended peptides was loaded at 10 μL/min onto a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in 2% buffer B. The trap column was washed for 5 min at the same flow rate and then the trap column was switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific, resolving C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 5% buffer B to 35% buffer B in 125 min and then to 98% buffer B by 127 min. The column was then washed with 98% buffer B for 20 min. The data was acquired using an easy spray source operated in positive mode with spray voltage at 2.6 kV, and the ion transfer tube temperature at 250C. The MS was operated in DDA mode. A scan cycle comprised a full MS scan (m/z range from 335-1800), orbitrap resolution set to 60000, AGC target set to custom, normalised AGC target at 300%, maximum injection time mode set to custom, maximum injection time at 25 ms, microscan set to 1 and source fragmentation disabled. Data of full MS scan were acquired in profile mode. MS survey scan was followed by 20 MS/MS scan events using the following parameters: multiplex ions set to false, isolation window set to 1.4, collision energy mode set to fixed, collision energy type set to normalized, HCD collision energies set to 30%, orbitrap resolution 15000, first mass 110, AGC target set to standard, maximum injection time mode set to custom, maximum injection time set to 40, microscan set to 1. Data for MS/MS DDA scan event were acquired in profile mode. Two blanks were run between each sample to reduce peptide carry-over.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data files were searched and quantified with the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.10.43). Proteins and peptides were identified using Uniprot canonical databases. The following search parameters were set: oxidation of methionine and N terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, protein and peptide false discovery rate of 0.01. Raw files labelled 'S' are from samples treated with Semagacestat, while raw files labelled 'D' were control (DMSO).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alzheimer’s disease, Gamma secretase, Microglia

### Affiliations
Laboratory for the Research of Neurodegenerative Diseases, VIB Center for Brain & Disease Research, VIB, Leuven, Belgium
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Andrew Howden

### Lab Head
Professor Bart De
Laboratory for the Research of Neurodegenerative Diseases, VIB Center for Brain & Disease Research, VIB, Leuven, Belgium


