### Accession
PXD006452

### Title
CDK5 and GSK3 mediate neuroinflammation-induced neurodegeneration

### Description
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating neurodegenerative disease characterized by progressive paralysis resulting from specific degeneration of upper and lower motor neurons (MNs). Chronic neuroinflammation, mediated by activated microglia, is a hallmark of patients diagnosed with ALS, and correlates with disease pathogenesis. Protecting MNs, particularly from toxic insults caused by neuroinflammation, could lead to effective treatments of ALS patient. Here, we report a screening campaign identifying a series of pyrazolotriazines that cell-autonomously protect MNs against neuroinflammation. We demonstrate that these compounds inhibit Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5) and Glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3), and we use phospho-proteomics to show that neuroprotection is linked to alterations in microtubule dynamics.

### Sample Protocol
First, SDS was removed from each replicate lysate by acetone precipitation. Protein pellets were then dissolved in 8M urea, 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.5 and first digested with endopeptidase LysC at 37°C for 3-4 hours. After diluting to 2M urea, trypsin was added and the digest continued at 37°C over night.  The digest was stopped by adding TFA to a final concentration of 0.1%. Following incubation at RT for 10 min any particulate material that had formed was removed by centrifugation.  The samples were then desalted using Sep-Pak Classic C18 cartridges, elution of bound peptides was performed using 5ml of buffer W (80% Acetonitrile, 6% TFA). Phosphopeptides were enriched from each eluate using 5 sequential extractions with TiO2 beads for 10 min each ( in a 1:1 ratio beads /protein; Sachtopore NP 5µm). Beads were spun down after each extraction step, resuspended in buffer W and transfered to a pipette tip containing an Empore C8 filter plug (Supelco). Each tip was briefly centrifuged in a table top centrifuge to pack the column and to drain off the liquid. Bound phosphopeptides were eluted with 2 x 100 µl 40% NH4OH (aq. 25% NH3)/ 60% Acetonitrile into tubes containing 40 µL 10% TFA for neutralization. Eluted phosphopeptides were concentrated in a SpeedVac and desalted following acification with TFA (final concentration 1%) using Stage tips. Peptides were analyzed by LC MS/MS on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), equipped with an Easy nano-LC system and a nano electrospray source (both from Proxeon; Odense, Denmark). Briefly, peptides were online-separated by reversed-phase chromatography on fused silica capillary chromatography columns (15 cm length, ID 75 µm; New Objectives) that were packed in-house with Reprosil pur C18 material (3 µm; Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany), using a multistep gradient from 3 to 7% of buffer B (80% acetonitril, 0.1% formic acid) in 3 min, from 7 – 37% B in 90 min, from 37 – 60% B in 10 min and from 60 to 90% in 3 min at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. After additional 12 min at 90% B the column was re-equilibrated at starting conditions. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with multistage activation (MSA) enabled (positive ion mode, source voltage 2.1kV) automatically switching between a survey scan (mass range m/z = 300-1800, resolution R = 30 K) and MS/MS acquisition of the 15 most intense peaks by collisional induced dissociation in the ion trap (isolation width m/z = 2.0; normalized collision energy 35%; dynamic exclusion enabled with repeat count 1, repeat duration 30.0, exclusion list size 50 and exclusion duration set to 120 s; double charge and higher charges were allowed).

### Data Protocol
). Raw data were processed by MaxQuant software (1.5.3.8) involving the built-in Andromeda search engine. The search was performed against the human uniprotKB database UP000005640_9606.fasta (version from 12/2015) supplemented with common contaminants. Parameters defined for the search were: Trypsin as digesting enzyme, allowing two missed cleavages; a minimum length of 7 amino acids; carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues as fixed modification, oxidation at methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation at serines, theronines and tyrosines as variable modifications. The maximum allowed mass deviation was 20 ppm for the MS and 0.5 Da for the MS/MS scans.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pyrazolotriazines, Lc-msms, Phosphoproteomics, Neuroinflammation, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Motoneuron

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Roentgenstr. 20, 48149 Muenster, Germany

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Roentgenstr. 20, 48149 Muenster, Germany


