### Accession
PXD037257

### Title
PRM-based quantitative proteomic analysis of ribosomes in GC-1 cell line

### Description
Relative protein quantification of RPL4 and RPL39L in non-ribosome, 40S, 60S and ribosome fractions by PRM;Absolute quantification of RPL39 and RPL39L levels in ribosomes of GC-1 wild type cell, and RPL39L-IRES-eGFP-overexpressed RibosomeCore-/Y GC-1 cells with or without dox-induced expression of RPL39 by PRM. Bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a negative control.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were treated with ultrafiltration tubes to remove high concentration of sucrose and then lysed by lysis buffer consisting of 8M urea, protease/phosphatase Inhibitor in Tris-HCL (PH 8.0) , which then sonicated for complete lysis. The extracted proteins from samples were reduced and alkylated by DTT and IAA, respectively. Protein digestion was performed using trypsin (5ng/μl) for 16 h at 37 °C. Finally, the peptides were desalted through the C18 columns and then dried before use.

### Data Protocol
PRM data were processed with Skyline Daily software. At least three transitions per precursor were used to quantify the targeted peptides in the samples. For relative quantification, the protein expression was calculated as the ratio of the endogenous to the heavy peptide, which was then added to the transition peak areas.

### Publication Abstract
Ribosomes are highly sophisticated translation machines that have been demonstrated to be heterogeneous in the regulation of protein synthesis<sup>1,2</sup>. Male germ cell development involves complex translational regulation during sperm formation<sup>3</sup>. However, it remains unclear whether translation during sperm formation is performed by a specific ribosome. Here we report a ribosome with a specialized nascent polypeptide exit tunnel, Ribosome<sup>ST</sup>, that is assembled with the male germ-cell-specific protein RPL39L, the paralogue of core ribosome (Ribosome<sup>Core</sup>) protein RPL39. Deletion of Ribosome<sup>ST</sup> in mice causes defective sperm formation, resulting in substantially reduced fertility. Our comparison of single-particle cryo-electron microscopy structures of ribosomes from mouse kidneys and testes indicates that Ribosome<sup>ST</sup> features a ribosomal polypeptide exit tunnel of distinct size and charge states compared with Ribosome<sup>Core</sup>. Ribosome<sup>ST</sup> predominantly cotranslationally regulates the folding of a subset of male germ-cell-specific proteins that are essential for the formation of sperm. Moreover, we found that specialized functions of Ribosome<sup>ST</sup> were not replaceable by Ribosome<sup>Core</sup>. Taken together, identification of this sperm-specific ribosome should greatly expand our understanding of ribosome function and tissue-specific regulation of protein expression pattern in mammals.

### Keywords
Gc-1, Ribosome, Prm, Protein quantification

### Affiliations
Nanjing Medical University
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine. Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

### Submitter
yue wang

### Lab Head
Dr Xuejiang Guo
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine. Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.


