### Accession
PXD043878

### Title
Utilization of Stability-based Proteomics for the Investigation of Structured RNA-protein Interactions

### Description
The stability of proteins from rates of oxidation (SPROX), thermal protein profiling (TPP) methods as well as triple helix pulldowns with LC-MS/MS readouts are used to identify the protein targets of three RNA ligands, the MALAT1 triple helix (TH), a viral stem loop (SL), and an unstructured RNA (PolyU) in LNCaP nuclear lysate. This work establishes a novel platform for the global discovery and interrogation of RNA-protein interactions that is generalizable to numerous biological contexts and RNA targets.

### Sample Protocol
SPROX, TPP, and triple helix pulldown analyses were performed on nuclear lysates of LNCaP cells treated with three RNA ligands, the MALAT1 triple helix, a viral stem loop, and an unstructured RNA (PolyU). The samples from the different conditions were combined to generate one sample per each experimental replicate (16 in total). The samples were prepared for bottom-up LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis following and iFASP digestion and TMT 16-plex labeling procedure, as well as an offline C18 cleaning. A Thermo orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer was used to acquire the the raw data.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS output files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.3 and the 2017-10-25 release of the UniProt Knowledgebase. MMTS modifcation of cysteine; TMT 16-plex labeling of lysine side chains and peptide N-termini were set as static modifications. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine; and acetylation of the N-terminus were set as variable modifications. Trypsin was used as the enzyme, with an allowance of 2 missed cleavages. Only the proteins and peptides with an FDR confidence of "high" and "medium" were used for further analysis. The log2 transformed ratio for each RNA lignad treatment samples were generated. A two tailed Student's T-test was performed to compare the results of each RNA ligand to the untreated lysate control. Hit proteins were identified using a p-value and Z-score cutoff. The pulldown high confident protein hits were identified using only proteins that were identified in all LC-MS/MS runs, had 15 peptides or greater identified, and were not identified in the beads only control sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Thermodynamics, Rna, Proteomics, Thermal denaturation, Rna-protein interactions, Chemical denaturation

### Affiliations
Duke University Department of Chemistry
PI of the Fitzgerald lab at Duke University Department of Chemistry

### Submitter
Morgan Bailey

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Michael C. Fitzgerald
PI of the Fitzgerald lab at Duke University Department of Chemistry


