### Accession
PXD008919

### Title
Semen of gibel carp -  Distinct sperm nucleus behaviors between genotypic and temperature-dependent sex determination males are associated with replication and expression-related pathways in a gynogenetic fish

### Description
In our study, differential male nucleus events and development behaviors were revealed from the fertilized eggs in response to the sperm from males of genotypic sex determination (GSD) and temperature-dependent sex determination (TSD) in gibel carp. When the eggs of maternal fish were fertilized by the sperm from males of GSD, the fertilized egg encountered similar sexual reproduction events and behaviors. However, when the eggs of maternal fish were fertilized by the sperm from males of TSD, a typical process of gynogenesis was observed.      To reveal the underlying molecular mechanism of differential sperm nucleus development behaviors in the fertilized eggs, iTRAQ-based quantitative semen proteomics were performed on three semen samples from three males of GSD and three semen samples from three males of TSD respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Semen samples (each sample 200 μl) from three males of GSD and three males of TSD were collected in propagation season. Total proteins of each sample were extracted and quantified by Bradford Assay and SDS-PAGE analysis. Then, the proteins were digested using Trypsin Gold (Promega) after being diluted by 100mM triethylamine borane. Then peptides were labeled using iTRAQ Reagent8-plex Kit (AB SCIEX) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The labeled peptides with different reagents were combined and desalted with a Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Subsequently, the peptides were separated on a Shimadzu LC-20AB HPLC Pump system and reconstituted with buffer A (5%ACN, 95% H2O, pH 9.8) to 2 ml. After that, they were loaded onto a column and separated at a flow rate of 1 ml/min with a gradient of 5% buffer B (5% H2O, 95% ACN, pH 9.8) 10 min, 5-35% buffer B for 40min, 35-95% buffer B for 1 min, 95% buffer B for 3 min, and decreased to 5% within 1 min before equilibrating with buffer B for 10 min. 20 fractions were collected by measuring absorbance at 214 nm.     Peptides of each fraction were resolved in buffer A (2% CAN, 0.1% FA) and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min. Then, a LC-20AD nano-HPLC instrument (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) was used to separate the supernatant. A linear gradient from 8% to 35% of buffer B (2% H2O and 0.1% FA in ACN) was run at 300 nL/min to elute the peptides in 35 min, followed by ramping up to 60% in 5 min, up to 80% for 5 min, and finally returned to 5% in 0.1 min and equilibrated for 10 min. TripleTOF analysis was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA). Data was acquired with the following MS conditions: ion spray voltage 2.3kV, curtain gas of 30, nebulizer gas of 15, and interface heater temperature of 150°C. The whole data acquisition used high sensitivity model and the accumulation time for MS1 is 250ms, and the mass ranges was from 350 to 1500 Da. 30 production scans were collected if they exceeded a threshold of 120 counts per second and with charge-state 2+ to 5+. Dynamic exclusion was set for 1/2 of peak width (12s), the collision energy was adjusted to all precursor ions for collision-induced dissociation and the Q2 transmission window for 100Da was 100%.      The raw MS/MS data was converted into MGF format by ProteoWizard tool msConvert, the exported MGF files were searching using MASCOT version 2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom) and at least one unique peptide was necessary for the identified protein. The Mascot search parameters included: trypsin as enzyme, fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.1Da, mass values were set to monoisotopic, oxidation (M) and iTRAQ8plex (Y) as variable modification, peptide mass tolerance was set to 0.05Da, fixed modifications were set to iTRAQ8plex (N-term), iTRAQ8plex (K) and Carbamidomethyl (C). Three biological replicates were indispensable for iTRAQ data analysis. For protein quantification, automated software named IQuant had been used. The PSMs (peptide-spectral match) were pre-filtered at a PSM-level FDR (false discovery rate) of 1% for assessing the confidence of peptides. In order to control the rate of false-positive at protein level, FDR of assembled proteins will be estimated (protein-level FDR <= 0.01). Proteins with 1.2 fold change and Q-value less than 0.05 were determined as differentially expressed proteins (DEPs).

### Data Protocol
Gene Ontology (GO) database (http://www.geneontology.org/), Clusters of Orthologous Groups of proteins (COG) database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG/), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/pathway.html) were used for basic bioinformatics analysis. Overrepresentation analyses were performed in the Reactome database (https://reactome.org/) using up-regulated DEPs and down-regulated DEPs. The P-value indicated the statistical significance of each hit pathway, the false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated for estimating the false positives via Benjamini-Hochberg approach in Reactome, All DEPs were used to perform KEGG pathway enrichment analysis using cluster profiler in R via Fisher's exact test, P < 0.05 were considered as statistical significance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gibel carp, Tsd, Semen proteomics, Gsd, Itraq

### Affiliations
IHB,CAS
Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Yaojun Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Jian-Fang Gui
Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences


