### Accession
PXD002051

### Title
Secretome identification of immune cell factors mediating metastatic cell homing

### Description
Metastatic cell homing is a complex process mediated in part by diffusible factors secreted from immune cells found at a pre-metastatic niche. We report on connecting together secretomics and a TRanscriptional Activity CEll aRray (TRACER) to identify functional paracrine interactions between immune cells and metastatic cells as novel mediators of metastatic cell homing. Splenocytes from orthotopic mouse models of breast cancer were isolated to generate a diseased splenocyte conditioned media (D-SCM) containing immune cell secreted factors. MDA-MB-231 metastatic cell activity including cell invasion, migration, transendothelial migration, and proliferation were increased when cultured with D-SCM compared to healthy SCM (H-SCM) and unconditioned media controls. Our secretome analysis of D-SCM yielded secreted factor candidates that contribute to increased metastatic cell activity. In parallel, we identified active TFs within metastatic cells in response to the secreted factors using TRACER. We connected both data sets using MetaCore software to determine interactions between immune cell secreted factors and active metastatic cell TFs to narrow down functional secreted factor candidates that mediate metastatic cell homing. Haptoglobin was among the list of secreted factors and was validated in vitro as a key mediator of metastatic cell recruitment. Furthermore, we designed an implantable poly(lactide-co-glycolide) biomaterial scaffold as a mimic of the pre-metastatic niche to slowly release haptoglobin and demonstrate increased homing of metastatic cells to the scaffold in vivo. Taken together, our studies demonstrate a novel systems biology technique to identify functional paracrine signaling factors, which were validated to reveal mediators of metastatic cell homing.

### Sample Protocol
Immunodeficient NOD-scid IL2Rgammanull (NSG) female mice (Jackson Labs) were injected with 2.0 x 106 MDA-MB-231BR cells (37) labeled with tdTomato and F-luciferase reporters at the right mammary fat pad. Spleens were harvested 28 days later from tumor-bearing and tumor-free mice processed into single cell suspensions, and plated in serum-free RPMI media for 48 hours.

### Data Protocol
Proteins in SCM samples were concentrated for proteomics analysis using a 3 kDa Amicon cellulose centrifugal filter unit (Millipore). Samples were enzymatically digested and directly eluted into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific) and searched using embedded SEQUEST HT search engine. Proteins were quantified using spectral counting (38) and normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAF) (39, 40).  Proteins were significantly changed with a P-value < 0.05 and a log2 fold change greater than or equal to 2

### Publication Abstract
Metastatic cell homing is a complex process mediated in part by diffusible factors secreted from immune cells found at a pre-metastatic niche. We report on connecting secretomics and TRanscriptional Activity CEll aRray (TRACER) data to identify functional paracrine interactions between immune cells and metastatic cells as novel mediators of homing. Metastatic breast cancer mouse models were used to generate a diseased splenocyte conditioned media (D-SCM) containing immune cell secreted factors. MDA-MB-231 metastatic cell activity including cell invasion, migration, transendothelial migration, and proliferation were increased in D-SCM relative to control media. Our D-SCM secretome analysis yielded 144 secreted factor candidates that contribute to increased metastatic cell activity. The functional mediators of homing were identified using MetaCore software to determine interactions between the immune cell secretome and the TRACER-identified active transcription factors within metastatic cells. Among the 5 candidate homing factors identified, haptoglobin was selected and validated in vitro and in vivo as a key mediator of homing. Our studies demonstrate a novel systems biology approach to identify functional signaling factors associated with a cellular phenotype, which provides an enabling tool that complements large-scale protein identification provided by proteomics.

### Keywords
Lc ms/ms, Mouse, Secretome

### Affiliations
Northwestern University Proteomics core
Department of Biomedical Engineering University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 1119 Carl A. Gerstacker Building 2200 Bonisteel Boulevard Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2099

### Submitter
Dhaval  Nanavati

### Lab Head
Dr Lonnie D. Shea, Ph.D
Department of Biomedical Engineering University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 1119 Carl A. Gerstacker Building 2200 Bonisteel Boulevard Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2099


