### Accession
PXD038133

### Title
Temporal phosphoproteomic analysis of VEGF-A signaling in HUVECs: An insight into early signaling events associated with angiogenesis

### Description
Aim of the study was to elucidate the phosphoproteomics alterations caused by the treatment of VEGF-A in HUVEC cells at early timepoints of 1, 5 and 10 minutes. Label-free quantitative temporal phosphoproteomics experiments were carried out using LC-MS/MS methods. LTQ orbitrap XL ETD (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA, USA) connected to UltiMate 3000 nanoLC Pump (Dionex Co., Sunnyvale, CA, USA) was used for data acquisition.

### Sample Protocol
A HUVEC cell lines were stimulated with VEGF-A (50 ng/mL) for three different intervals (1, 5 and 10 min) and untreated HUVEC cells were used as control. All the treatments were performed in triplicates. The treated cellswere scraped using 1 mL of the lysis buffer A [6 M guanidinium chloride, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide, 100 mM tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane-hydrochloric acid (pH 8.5)] and stored at -80°C until use. The cellular protein pellets were diluted with the lysis buffer B [12 mM sodium deoxycholate, 12 mM sodium N-dodecanoylsarcosinate, 100 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) (pH 8.5), 1% protease inhibitor cocktail and phosphatase inhibitor 2/3 cocktails (P2714, P5726 and P0044, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA)], heated at 95°C for 5 min, cooled on ice for 15 min, sonicated (Branson probe sonifier output 3-4, 50% duty cycle, 3X 30 sec), and heated again (95°C for 5 min).  The protein concentration of each sample was quantified using a Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). HUVEC cell lysate (50 µg total protein in 250 µL of the lysis buffer B) was reacted in 9.9 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 37°C, followed by 47.2 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 37°C in the dark. After 5-fold dilution with 100 mM TEAB buffer (pH 8.5), the proteins were digested with 2.8 µg of Lys-C (Wako, Osaka, Japan) for 3 h at 37°C followed by 2.5 µg of trypsin (Promega, Medison, WI, USA) for 16 h at 37°C. The reaction was quenched by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and the protein digests were subjected to clean-up using C18 stage tips. can Phosphopeptides in the elution were enriched using TiO2-based hydroxy acid-modified metal oxide chromatography (HAMMOC). The samples were concentrated using C18 stage tips, dried and stored at -80℃ until analysis. Each protein digest was dissolved with 12 µL of 0.1% TFA 5% acetonitrile (ACN), and 5 µL of the sample was loaded on a self-packed capillary column (Reprosil-Pur C18 materials, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany, 100 µm x 130 mm. 5 µm tip i.d.) using a HTC-PAL autosampler (CTC Analytics, Zwingen, Switzerland). The peptides in the samples were separated using an UltiMate 3000 nanoLC Pump (Dionex Co., Sunnyvale, CA, USA). As mobile phase, mixture of (A) acetic acid/water (0.5:100, v/v), (B) acetic acid/acetonitrile (0.5:100, v/v) and (C) acetic acid/dimethyl sulfoxide (0.5:100, v/v) were used at the flow rate of 500 nL/min [(A) + (B) = 96%, (C) = 4%, (B) 0–4% (0–5 min), 4–24% (5–65 min), 24–76% (65–70 min), 76% (70–80 min), and 0% (80.1–120 min)]. The separated peptides were ionized at 2400 V, injected into LTQ orbitrap XL ETD (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA, USA) and detected as peptide ions (mass scan range: m/z 400–1500, mass resolution: 60000 at m/z 400). Top 10 peaks of multiple charged peptide ions were subjected to collision-induced dissociation (isolation width: 2 Th, normalized collision energy: 35 V, activation Q: 0.25, activation time: 30 ms). All samples were analyzed in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MSraw data were searched against the human RefSeq database (release 109) appended with frequently observed contaminants (116 entries) using Mascot and SEQUEST HT search algorithms through the Proteome Discoverer platform (version 2.2, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Oxidation of methionine, carbamidomethylation of cysteine were set as fixed modifications while phosphorylation at serine, threonine, and tyrosine were set as variable modifications by considering a maximum missed cleavage of two.  The precursor mass error tolerance and fragment mass error tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. The data were also searched against a decoy database and 1% false discovery rate was considered at peptide spectrum match, peptides and protein levels for sequence identification. The localization probability of phosphorylated site was calculated using the PTM-RS node (Version 3.0) in the Proteome Discoverer, and the identified phosphopeptides with more than 75% probability were used for bioinformatics analysis. The raw abundance values of each phosphopeptides were normalized using smooth quantile normalization method using R programming (version 3.6.1). More than 1.3-fold change of the normalized value from control (p-value of student’s t-test ≤ 0.05) were considered as up- or down-regulated phosphorylation at different time-points.

### Publication Abstract
Vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A) is one of the primary factors promoting angiogenesis in endothelial cells. Although defects in VEGF-A signaling are linked to diverse pathophysiological conditions, the early phosphorylation-dependent signaling events pertinent to VEGF-A signaling remain poorly defined. Hence, a temporal quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis was performed in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) treated with VEGF-A-165 for 1, 5 and 10&#xa0;min. This led to the identification and quantification of 1971 unique phosphopeptides corresponding to 961 phosphoproteins and 2771 phosphorylation sites in total. Specifically, 69, 153, and 133 phosphopeptides corresponding to 62, 125, and 110 phosphoproteins respectively, were temporally phosphorylated at 1, 5, and 10&#xa0;min upon addition of VEGF-A. These phosphopeptides included 14 kinases, among others. This study also captured the phosphosignaling events directed through RAC, FAK, PI3K-AKT-MTOR, ERK, and P38 MAPK modules with reference to our previously assembled VEGF-A/VEGFR2 signaling pathway map in HUVECs. Apart from a significant enrichment of biological processes such as cytoskeleton organization and actin filament binding, our results also suggest a role of AAK1-AP2M1 in the regulation of VEGFR endocytosis. Taken together, the temporal quantitative phosphoproteomics analysis of VEGF signaling in HUVECs revealed early signaling events and we believe that this analysis will serve as a starting point for the analysis of differential signaling across VEGF members toward the full elucidation of their role in the angiogenesis processes. Workflow for the identification of early phosphorylation events induced by VEGF-A-165 in HUVEC cells.

### Keywords
Angiogenesis, Vegf-a, Cytoskeleton organization, Quantitative phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
Project Researcher (Postdoctoral fellow) 
Institute for Advanced Biosciences, Keio University, Tsuruoka, Yamagata, 997-0017, Japan
Institute for Advanced Biosciences, Keio University, Tsuruoka, Yamagata, 997-0017, Japan

### Submitter
Abhinand C S

### Lab Head
Dr Abhinand S. Chandran
Institute for Advanced Biosciences, Keio University, Tsuruoka, Yamagata, 997-0017, Japan


