### Accession
PXD013454

### Title
Mass spectrometry analysis of peptides from sourdoughs and baked goods

### Description
Sourdough fermentation, owing to a mixture of yeast and Lactic Acid Bacteria (LAB), is an old biotechnology process that deeply influences the sensory, chemical features and shelf life properties of leavened baked goods. Besides a plethora of functional active metabolites, LABs are able to produce peptides from enzymatic digestion of cereals proteins; which are defined bioactive peptides having important roles in nutrition and healthcare perspective.  Starting from the observation that production of peptides is a strain specific feature and that some LAB strains are more efficient in producing Low Molecular Weight peptides, L. farciminis H3 and A11 strains and L. sanfranciscensis I4 strain have been selected for their high ability to produce peptides equipped with biological activity. The peptides isolated from the respective sourdough show antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activity detected as the ability either to reduce intracellular ROS production and to decrease the expression of inflammatory markers like NF-kB and IL-1β in cultured murine macrophages.  Herein solid proofs of keeping of the biological activity of the peptides in baked bread are provided to increase the literature data on biological activity in the finished products that is, till now, still scanty. Low Molecular Weight peptides from breads obtained with the LAB strains above mentioned, show the same antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activity as that observed in doughs. Mass spectrometry performed both on doughs and breads highlights a lot of peptides derived from native proteins: among these only three peptides are present in all the analyzed extracts, while a large number of peptides are strain-specific. Moreover, comparing doughs vs breads peptides, major differences can be noticed either in amino acidic composition and in proteins from which they derive. However, irrespective of the sequences, all the tested strains produce bioactive peptides equipped with antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activity

### Sample Protocol
Samples H3, A11, O1, I4 both from liquid sourdough and coked breads, were applied at a qTOF mass spectrometer Impact II coupled to an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLC nano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA)  was used to analyze the peptide content from H3, A11, I4 and O1 samples,. The Acidic Control was also analyzed.  1µg of each LMW sample was injected 2 times. Peptides were separated by reverse phase chromatography using an Acclaim™ PepMap™  column (100 C-18, 3µm particle size, 500mm) equipped with a 20mm  trap-column (C-18, 5µm particle size). Flow rate was 250nL/min and peptides were eluted by a water/ CH3CN gradient, containing 0.1% formic acid (FA). Solvent A: H2O+ 0.1% FA; Solvent B: CH3CN+0.1% FA. Gradient: 0-5min, 5%B; 5-120min, 35%B; 120-135min, 45%B; 135-137min, 90%B; 137-147min, 90%B; 147-150min, 5%B and 150-170 min, 5%B. The eluted peptides were analyzed by nanoESI coupled with a TOF analyzer working in the m/z range 200-2200. The 18 multiple charged precursors with higher intensities were analyzed by MS/MS.The selected precursors have been excluded from MS/MS analysis for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Identification was performed with Search GUI and Peptideshaker software [Vaudel et al., 2011] using the following parameters: digestion unspecific, fragment ion types by, precursor m/z tolerance 20ppm, fragment m/z tolerance 0.1Da and precursor charge 1-4. Peak lists obtained from MS/MS spectra were identified using Comet v. 2016.01 rev. 3 [23148064] and the search was conducted using SearchGUI v. 3.2.20 [PMID  21337703]. Protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy [20013364] version of a fasta formatted file containing [(UniProt Triticum aestivum (Wheat) [4565]) as well as several available Lactobacillus proteomes (UniProt Lactobacillus farciminis [1612], Lactobacillus rossiae [231049], Lactobacillus sanfranciscensis (Lactobacillus sanfrancisco) [1625]) and known bioactive peptides from BIOPEP database (Minkiewicz P., Dziuba J., Iwaniak A., Dziuba M., Darewicz M., BIOPEP database and other programs for processing bioactive peptide sequences.Journal of AOAC International, 91, 2008, 965-980.)] comprising 155996 target sequences. The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI. The identification settings were as follows: 20.0 ppm as MS1 and 0.5 Da as MS2 tolerances; no fixed modifications, variable modifications: Oxidation of M (+15.994915 Da).Peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using PeptideShaker version 1.16.15 [25574629]. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a confidence of 1.0% False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution. Proteins were considered as identified if [at least 1 confident peptide were identified by at least 1 confident spectrum].   Peptides identified at high quality (number and quality of PSM, peptide spectra matches) in each sample (H3, A11,  O1, I4 and CA) were collected for both cooked and crude extracts.  FASTA  files were created and indexed with appropriate annotations, representing unique sequences per condition (for a total of 10 conditions). Such sequence files were pooled and formatted for BLASTp search. A web-server was then designed to interrogate  such database using candidate sequences as queries. The default values of search were fixed to word size = 2 and scoring matrix PAM30, similarly to the configuration of the online NCBI  BLAST optimized for short matches. The  search  engine  is  freely  available  at:  http://bioserver2.sbsc.unifi.it/bioinfo/pazzagli/luigia.html  Data were analyzed using  a two in house developed perl script. The first script implements a modified method from (Secher et al., 2016). The method is inspired by the concept of Longest Peptide Variants (LPV), aimed at reducing the complexity of the peptide data set. Briefly, our algorithm retains the longest peptides, irrespective of the source protein, over the whole peptide set and maintains an accurate spectral abundance. To achieve this, all confidently identified peptides (T) and the count of their PSM are loaded, then peptides are sorted by length and, starting from the longest peptide L, peptides T ≠ L are recursively mapped onto L. During iterations, if a peptide C was found to be perfectly and entirely contained on L it is removed from the list of available peptides and its number of PSMc is accumulated onto PSML. PSML is the peptide spectra match of the longest peptide and PSMc is the PSM of peptides contained in the longest peptide. The second script is inspired by the coverage plots frequently used in NGS to detect copy number variations. Briefly, given a set of protein sequences of interest, the list of confidently identified peptides are mapped onto protein sequence and stacked to compose a position specifc coverage by summing up the number of PSM of stacking peptides. COVP is the coverge profile of the protein of interest P of length N, and PSMc,i is the number of PSM if the peptide C covering the position i.  Such procedures are implemented as perl scripts (PS_pept_collapse.pl and PS_prot_covplot.pl) that are freely available at https://github.com/matteoramazzotti/MSutils.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Peptides, Lc-msms, Sourdough, Wheat

### Affiliations
Prof. Luigia Pazzagli, PhD.  Professore Associato di Biochimica (BIO/10)  Specialista in Biochimica e Biochimica Clinica,  Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche Sperimentali e Cliniche,  Viale Morgagni 50, 50134 Firenze  Tel. 0552751258  Mail.  luigia.pazzagli@unifi.it
università di firenze

### Submitter
Lorenzo Mazzoli

### Lab Head
Dr Luigia Pazzagli
Prof. Luigia Pazzagli, PhD.  Professore Associato di Biochimica (BIO/10)  Specialista in Biochimica e Biochimica Clinica,  Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche Sperimentali e Cliniche,  Viale Morgagni 50, 50134 Firenze  Tel. 0552751258  Mail.  luigia.pazzagli@unifi.it


