### Accession
PXD015996

### Title
Aberrant astrocyte protein secretion contributes to altered neuronal development in diverse disorders

### Description
Astrocytes negatively impact neuronal development in a range of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDs), however how they do this, and if mechanisms are shared across multiple disorders, is not known. We developed an in vitro system to ask how astrocyte protein secretion and gene expression change in 3 genetic NDs. This identified disorder specific changes, as well as core proteins that are increased in release in all 3 NDs. ND astrocytes increase release of Igfbp2, and blocking Igfbp2 partially rescues the neurite outgrowth inhibitory effects of Rett Syndrome astrocytes. We identified that ND astrocytes upregulate release of Bmp6, which acts on astrocytes themselves and is upstream of astrocyte secretion changes in NDs. Blocking Bmp signaling in Fragile X Syndrome astrocytes reverses the inhibitory effects of FXS astrocytes on neuronal development. We provide a resource of astrocyte secreted proteins in health and NDs, as well as novel targets for intervention in diverse NDs.

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentration of ACM was determined by Bradford Assay and ACM was distributed into aliquots of 15 ug before being flash-frozen with liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until analysis. Samples were precipitated by methanol/chloroform. Dried pellets were dissolved in 8 M urea/100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP, Sigma-Aldrich) and alkylated with 10 mM chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich). Proteins were digested overnight at 37C in 2 M urea/100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5, with trypsin (Promega). Digestion was quenched with formic acid, 5% final concentration. The digested samples were analyzed on a Fusion Lumos Orbitrap tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo). The digest was injected directly onto a 30 cm, 75 um ID column packed with BEH 1.7um C18 resin (Waters). Samples were separated at a flow rate of 300 nl/min on a nLC 1000 (Thermo). Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile, respectively. A gradient of 1-25% B over 160 min, an increase to 35% B over 60 min, an increase to 90% B over 10 min and held at 100%B for a final 10 min was used for 240 min total run time. Column was re-equilibrated with 20 ul of buffer A prior to the injection of sample. Peptides were eluted directly from the tip of the column and nanosprayed directly into the mass spectrometer by application of 2.5 kV voltage at the back of the column. The Orbitrap Fusion was operated in a data dependent mode.  Full MS scans were collected in the Orbitrap at 120K resolution with a mass range of 400 to 1500 m/z and an AGC target of 4e5. The cycle time was set to 3 sec, and within this 3 sec the most abundant ions per scan were selected for CID MS/MS in the iontrap with an AGC target of 1e4 and minimum intensity of 5000. Maximum fill times were set to 50 ms and 200 ms for MS and MS/MS scans respectively. Quadrupole isolation at 1.6 m/z was used, monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled and dynamic exclusion was used with exclusion duration of 5 sec.

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identification were done with Integrated Proteomics Pipeline – IP2 (Integrated Proteomics Applications). Tandem mass spectra were extracted from raw files using RawConverter (Xu et al., 2015) and searched with ProLuCID (Xu et al., 2015) against Uniprot mouse database. The search space included all fully-tryptic and half-tryptic peptide candidates, carbamidomethylation on cysteine was considered as a static modification.   The validity of the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) generated by ProLuCID was assessed using Search Engine Processor (SEPro) module from PatternLab for Proteomics platform (Carvalho et al., 2016). XCorr, DeltaCN, DeltaMass, ZScore, number of peaks matched, and secondary rank values were used to generate a Bayesian discriminating function. A cutoff score was established to accept a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% based on the number of decoys. A minimum sequence length of six residues per peptide was required and results were post-processed to only accept PSMs with < 10ppm precursor mass error. Volcano plots were generated by a pairwise comparison of each individual ND versus WT using PatternLab’s TFold module. The following parameters were used to select differentially expressed proteins: spectral count data were normalized using NSAF values (Zybailov et al., 2006), and two nonzero replicate values were required for each condition. A BH q-value was set at 0.05 (5 % FDR). A variable fold-change cutoff for each individual protein was calculated according to the t-test p-value using an F-Stringency value automatically optimized using the TFold software

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Synapse, Bmp, Neurodevelopment, Axon, Igf, Astrocyte, Secreted proteins, Dendrite

### Affiliations
Salk
Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA, USA

### Submitter
Jolene Diedrich

### Lab Head
Dr Nicola Allen
Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA, USA


