### Accession
PXD007898

### Title
Fibroblast activation -  CTGF/VEGFA-activated fibroblasts promote tumor migration through micro-environmental modulation

### Description
The tumour secretome contains proteinaceous factors that could potentially cause activation of neighbouring fibroblasts via contact-independent processes. In this project, we aim to identify such paracrine activators of tumour origin and elucidate the functional impact of activation on fibroblasts and the tumour metastatic process.

### Sample Protocol
Secretomes were pulse-labeled by azidohomoalanine in place of methionine, captured by alkyne-azide click chemistry and digested off beads. Total proteome analyses were performed with high pH fractionation. Phospho-enrichment was performed by Ti-IMAC STAGE tips. All samples were reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and sequentially digested with LysC and Trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30, with cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine to AHA substitution (UniMod Accession #896).

### Publication Abstract
Fibroblast activation is associated with tumor progression and implicated in metastasis, but the initial triggering signals required to kick-start this process remain largely unknown. Because small cancerous lesions share limited physical contact with neighboring fibroblasts, we reasoned the first tumor-derived signal for fibroblast activation should be secreted and diffusible. By pulsed metabolic labeling and click-chemistry based affinity enrichment, we sieved through the ductal carcinoma secretome for potential fibroblast activators. Using immuno-depletion/supplementation assays on various secreted factors, we pinpointed that tumor-secreted CTGF/VEGFA alone is sufficient to activate paired mammary fibroblasts from the same patient via ROCK1 and JunB signaling. Fibroblasts activated in this manner are distinct in morphology, growth, and adopt a highly tumor-like secretion profile, which in turn promotes tumor migration by counteracting oxidative and lactate stress. These findings reveal a profound division-of-labor between normal and cancer cells under the directive of the latter, and allude to potential metastatic prevention through inhibiting local fibroblast activation.

### Keywords
Tumor microenvironment; fibroblast activation; reciprocal signaling; secretome; mass spectrometry.

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands.  Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands.
Utrecht University

### Submitter
wei wu

### Lab Head
Dr Albert JR Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands.  Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands.


