### Accession
PXD036792

### Title
Interactome dynamics of RAF1-BRAF kinase monomers and dimers

### Description
RAF kinases play major roles in cancer. BRAFV600E mutants drive ~6% of human cancers. Potent kinase inhibitors exist but show variable effects in different cancer types, sometimes even inducing paradoxical RAF kinase activation. Both paradoxical activation and drug resistance are frequently due to enhanced dimerization between RAF1 and BRAF, which maintains or restores the activity of the downstream MEK-ERK pathway. Here, using quantitative proteomics we mapped the interactomes of RAF1 monomers, RAF1-BRAF and RAF1-BRAFV600E dimers identifying and quantifying >1,000 proteins. In addition, we examined the effects of vemurafenib and sorafenib, two different types of clinically used RAF inhibitors. Using regression analysis to compare different conditions we found a large overlapping core interactome but also distinct condition specific differences. Given that RAF proteins have kinase independent functions such dynamic interactome changes could contribute to their functional diversification. Analysing this dataset may provide a deeper understanding of RAF signalling and mechanisms of resistance to RAF inhibitors.

### Sample Protocol
Construction of iDimerize plasmids. Plasmids for the induced dimerization of RAF1 and BRAF were generated in two steps. Using the iDimerize plasmids pC4-RHE and pC4EN-F1 (former ARIAD Pharmaceuticals, now Takara Bio)18 as template, the ORFs encoding FRB and FKBP respectively were amplified by PCR and cloned into pcDNA3.1(+) (Invitrogen), giving the pFRB and pFKBP vectors. For detection and immunoprecipitation of the fusion proteins, N-terminal tags were added to FRB (V5) and FKBP (FLAG). Subsequently, the ORFs of RAF1 and BRAF (wildtype/V600E) were cloned into pFRB and pFKBP, respectively, C-terminally of the dimerization domain. Cells and transfection. HEK293 cells were grown in Dulbecco’s modified eagle medium (DMEM, Gibco) supplemented with 10% (v/v) foetal bovine serum and 2mM L-glutamine at 37C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2. Cells were transfected one day after seeding at 50-70% confluence using Lipofectamine 2000 reagent (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. They were treated with dimerizer and drugs as indicated in Fig. 1 of the manuscript.  Cell lysis, immunoprecipitation and Western blotting. Cells were lysed in ice cold 10mM Tris pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 0.5% NP40 supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche Diagnostics, 1 tablet/10 ml). The lysates were cleared of debris by centrifugation at 15,000 X g for 10 min at 4 C. The protein concentrations in supernatants were measured using the Pierce® BCA Protein Assay Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Lysates were adjusted to contain equal amounts of protein and used for immunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis.  Affinity Purification – Mass Spectrometry (AP-MS). All samples were prepared as 3 biological replicates, each with 2 technical replicates. Cleared lysates were immunoprecipitated with 5l V5 agarose beads for 30 minutes at 4C. Beads were washed 3 times with 500 l ice-cold IP wash (10 mM Tris pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl). Then, tryptic peptides were obtained by on bead digestion19. Briefly, the immunoprecipitates were incubated in 60 l of Buffer 1 (2 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 5 g/ml Trypsin [modified sequencing-grade trypsin; Promega]) for 30 minutes at 37C. Beads were washed twice in 25 μl of buffer 2 (2 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM DTT). The supernatants were pooled and left to digest overnight at room temperature. Then, samples were alkylated by addition of 20 l iodoacetamide (5 mg/ml) and incubation for 30 minutes in the dark. The reaction was stopped by adding 1 l 100% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and samples were desalted using C18 StageTips containing octadecyl C18 disks (Supelco, Sigma, United Kingdom) as previously described20. The eluates were concentrated in a CentriVap concentrator (Labconco, USA) and re-suspended in 12 l 0.1% TFA. MS-analysis was performed as previously reported19. Tryptic peptides were separated on an Ultimate Ultra3000 chromatography system using homemade columns (100 mm length, 75 mm inside diameter packed with 1.8 m RepreosilAQ C18 (Dr Maisch, Germany)) and a 40 minute 3%-32% acetonitrile gradient at a flow rate of 200 nl/minute. Peptides were identified and quantified using a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive operated in positive ion mode with a potential of 2,000 V applied to the column and a capillary temperature of 220C. The mass spectrometer operated in automatic data-dependent switching mode, selecting the 12 most intense ions prior to tandem MS (MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (Version 1.3.0.5) was used to analyse raw mass spectrometric data files from LC-MS/MS for label free quantification (LFQ). Default settings were used unless stated otherwise, including the following parameters: Trypsin/P digest; variable modifications included Oxidation (Met) and Acetyl (Protein N-term); fixed modification included Carbamidomethyl (Cys) only; multiplicity = 1; first search at 20 ppm; main search at 6 ppm mass accuracy (MS) and 20 mass deviation for the fragment ions; data searched against a human database (Uniprot HUMAN); minimum peptide length of 6; unfiltered for labelled amino acids; false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 selected for peptides and proteins; results refined through re-quantify option; match between runs selected with 1 min time window; label free quantification (LFQ) with LFQ minimum ratio count set at 1. LFQ values for proteins identified by MaxQuant were further analysed using the Perseus software21,22. The following categories were retained from the MaxQuant proteinGroups.txt file: LFQ intensity for each replicate; Unique Peptides; Sequence coverage [%]; Identified only by site; Reverse; Contaminant; Mol. Weight [kDa]; Protein IDs; Majority protein IDs; Protein names; Gene names; Proteins. The proteinGroups list was filtered to remove proteins identified in the following categories: Only Identified by site (peptides identified by a modification site only); Reverse (identified in reversed part of decoy database); Contaminant (known contaminants). The LFQ intensities for each replicate were log base 2 transformed. The log of an LFQ intensity of zero is not a valid value and is replaced by NaN (not a number). A categorical row annotation was then created to group replicates into their respective time points (Control, 0 min, 5 min, 15 min, 30 min, 120 min). The data was then filtered to keep only those rows that contained at least 3 valid values in at least 1 group (time point). NaN was then replaced with valid values, thus enabling statistical analysis. Missing values were imputed based on the following parameters: Width – 0.3; Down Shift – 1.8; Mode – Separately for each column. Right-sided t-tests were performed to compare each time point group with the control using permutation based FDR for truncation. This produced a –log p value statistic and a t-test difference value. These were visualised as volcano plot with the x-axis representing t-test difference and the y-axis –log p value. Perseus allows an adjustable cut off curve to be plotted that allows the importance given to the –log p value and t-test difference to be adjusted. Based on visual interpretation of the data, the position of the cut off curve is adjusted by varying the False Discovery Rate (FDR) and Artificial Within Group Variance (s0). FDR of 0.1 and s0 of 0.1 were selected and used as the cut off curve for each time point and set at 250 randomisations. All points to the right (positive t-test difference) were deemed significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Interactome, Raf kinase, Braf, Raf1, Dimerization

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin
University College Dublin

### Submitter
Kieran Wynne

### Lab Head
Dr Walter Kolch
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin


