### Accession
PXD018377

### Title
mRNA display with library of even-distribution reveals cellular interactors of influenza virus NS1

### Description
The interactome of Influenza (A/WSN/33) NS1 protein (WT and D92Y mutant) was identifiedy by AP-MS.

### Sample Protocol
To obtain a detailed comparison between md-LED and AP-MS, we performed quantitative AP-MS using the same NS1. NS1 and GFP were cloned with a C-terminal 2xStrep tag into a lentiviral vector and the subsequent virus was used to transduce A549 cells. An antibody against the Strep tag was used to affinity purify the baits and affiliated protein complexes in three biological replicates. Samples were subjected to on-bead digest and the resultant peptides analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry. As NS1 is known to interact with the interferon (IFN) pathway and the basal expression level of many IFN-stimulated genes is low in A549 cells, these experiments were performed in the presence and absence of 12-hour pre-treatment with type I IFN.

### Data Protocol
Interacting proteins identified by mass spectrometry were scored for confidence based on their specificity, reproducibility, and abundance using the MiST scoring algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
A comprehensive examination of protein-protein interactions (PPIs) is fundamental for the understanding of cellular machineries. However, limitations in current methodologies often prevent the detection of PPIs with low abundance proteins. To overcome this challenge, we develop a mRNA display with library of even-distribution (md-LED) method that facilitates the detection of low abundance binders with high specificity and sensitivity. As a proof-of-principle, we apply md-LED to IAV NS1 protein. Complementary to AP-MS, md-LED enables us to validate previously described PPIs as well as to identify novel NS1 interactors. We show that interacting with FASN allows NS1 to directly regulate the synthesis of cellular fatty acids. We also use md-LED to identify a mutant of NS1, D92Y, results in a loss of interaction with CPSF1. The use of high-throughput sequencing as the readout for md-LED enables sensitive quantification of interactions, ultimately enabling massively parallel experimentation for the investigation of PPIs.

### Keywords
Influenza ns1 ppi

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
UCLA

### Submitter
Yushen Du

### Lab Head
Dr Ren Sun
Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA


