### Accession
PXD001273

### Title
Histone H3 tail interactome in MPC11 murine myeloma cells

### Description
We have used peptide capture in conjunction with super-SILAC quantification to carry out an unbiased high-throughput analysis of the composition of protein complexes that bind to histone H3K9/S10 and H3K27/S28 methyl-phospho modifications. We compared binding profiles of nuclear proteins from MPC11 myeloma cells to peptides carrying the H3K9me3, H3K27me3, H3S10ph, H3S28ph and the double H3K9me3/S10ph and H3K27me3/S28ph modifications. The analysis was carried out using peptides corresponding to amino acids 1-20 and 18-38 and the unmodified peptides were also analysed to assess binding to the unmodified histone tail. In order to  ensure that the proteins present in any of the "heavy" capture assay samples have corresponding peptides in the common "light"  internal reference, we adapted the super-SILAC approach using a reference sample that was obtained by mixing the 8 pulldowns and the negative beads-only control. The method allows us to accurately quantify binding and directly compare levels of binding to peptides that carry a number of different methyl-phospho combinations. This makes it possible for use indeatiled bioinformatic analyses.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide pulldown The peptide capture assay was performed as described (8) with the following modifications. For SILAC experiments, 108 cells were used per assay. For each assay, 3 independent extractions were performed and the extracts were pooled together. Extract adjusted to 150 mM NaCl and pre-cleared were incubated at 4C with 20 µl of NeutrAvidin beads (Pierce) coupled to biotinylated histone peptides. Beads alone were used to control for non-specific binding. After the incubation, the beads were washed 5 times with ice-cold wash buffer (20 mM Hepes, pH 7.9, 20% v/v glycerol, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.2% Triton X-100, 150 mM KCl and freshly added protease inhibitors). Bound proteins were eluted by boiling in Laemmli buffer. Heavy and light pulldown samples were mixed as indicated, then run on 10% SDS-PAGE gel and subjected to mass spectrometry analysis.  Mass spectrometry Each gel lane was excised into 3 or 5 equal pieces, which were destained with 50% of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate / 50% of acetonitrile. Proteins in the gels were reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol, then alkylated with 55mM iodoacetamide. Trypsin (20 ng) was added to each of the gel pieces followed by incubation overnight at 37ºC. Peptide extraction was carried out in 5% formic acid. LC-MS analysis was on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano LC system. Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% TFA and loaded to a 100µm id x 2cm PepMap C18 trap (100Å, 5µ) separated on a 75µm x 50cm PepMap C18 column (100Å, 2µ) (both from Thermo Fisher) using a linear gradient of 4% B to 55%B in 65min (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid (FA) /98% H2O, 2% acetonitrile (ACN), solvent B: 0.1%FA/80% ACN/20%H2O). The instrument was controlled by the Xcalibur software with a standard CID – top 6 data dependant acquisition method.  The resolution of Full MS survey was set at 15000. The parent ion’s isolation width was set at 2.0 Da, and the normalised collision energy at 35.0, activation Q at 0.25, activation time 30ms, and the lock mass at 445.120030 m/z.

### Data Protocol
3D peak detection and quantification was performed by Maxquant (v 1.3.0.5) and protein identification was performed by the embedded Andromeda search engine and the Uniprot mouse database (release 2013_05) with default parameters: the peptide mass tolerance at first search was set at 20 ppm and main search at 6 ppm; MS/MS fragment mass tolerance at 0.50 Da, and top 6 MS/MS peaks per 100 Da and a minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids were required. A maximum of 3 labelled amino acids, 5 modified amino acids and 2 missed cleavages of trypsin/P were allowed per peptide. Protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine and deamindation of aspargine and glutamine were set as variable modifications, and the carbamidomethyl on cysteine as a fixed modification. The false discovery rates for both peptide and protein were set to 1% when using a reversed database as the decoy database. The protein quantification considered the modified peptides and used razor and unique peptides with minimum ratio count at 2. The protein groups output table was filtered for common contaminants and identifications from the decoy database.

### Publication Abstract
The large number of chemical modifications that are found on the histone proteins of eukaryotic cells form multiple complex combinations, which can act as recognition signals for reader proteins. We have used peptide capture in conjunction with super-SILAC quantification to carry out an unbiased high-throughput analysis of the composition of protein complexes that bind to histone H3K9/S10 and H3K27/S28 methyl-phospho modifications. The accurate quantification allowed us to perform Weighted correlation network analysis (WGCNA) to obtain a systems-level view of the histone H3 histone tail interactome. The analysis reveals the underlying modularity of the histone reader network with members of nuclear complexes exhibiting very similar binding signatures, which suggests that many proteins bind to histones as part of pre-organized complexes. Our results identify a novel complex that binds to the double H3K9me3/S10ph modification, which includes Atrx, Daxx and members of the FACT complex. The super-SILAC approach allows comparison of binding to multiple peptides with different combinations of modifications and the resolution of the WGCNA analysis is enhanced by maximizing the number of combinations that are compared. This makes it a useful approach for assessing the effects of changes in histone modification combinations on the composition and function of bound complexes.

### Keywords
Peptide capture, Lc-msms, Histone h3 tail interactome, Histone modification

### Affiliations
MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Gene Regulation and Chromatin Group, London, UK
MRC Clinical Sciences Centre

### Submitter
Natalia Kunowska

### Lab Head
Dr Niall Dillon
MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Gene Regulation and Chromatin Group, London, UK


