### Accession
PXD042579

### Title
O-GlcNAcylation of RIPK1 Rescues Red Blood Cells from Necroptosis

### Description
Necroptosis is a type of cell death with excessive inflammation and organ damage in various human diseases. Although abnormal necroptosis is common in patients with neurodegenerative, cardiovascular, and infectious diseases, the mechanisms by which O-GlcNAcylation contributes to the regulation of necroptotic cell death are poorly understood. In this study, we reveal that O- GlcNAcylation of RIPK1 (receptor-interacting protein kinase1) was decreased in erythrocytes of the mouse injected with lipopolysaccharide, resulting in the acceleration of erythrocyte necroptosis through increased formation of RIPK1-RIPK3 complex. Mechanistically, we discovered that O- GlcNAcylation of RIPK1 at serine 331 in human (corresponding to serine 332 in mouse) inhibits  32  This is a provisional file, not the final typeset article phosphorylation of RIPK1 at serine 166, which is necessary for the necroptotic activity of RIPK1 and suppresses the formation of the RIPK1-RIPK3 complex in Ripk1 -/- MEFs. Thus, our study demonstrates that RIPK1 O-GlcNAcylation serves as a checkpoint to suppress necroptotic signaling in erythrocytes.

### Sample Protocol
The eluate of RIPK1 was run on Bolt 4-12% Bis-Tris Plus Gels (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, protein bands were excised, destained, and washed. The proteins were reduced  32  This is a provisional file, not the final typeset article with 20 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 55 mM Iodoacetamide. After dehydration, the proteins were digested with 12.5 ng/μL Trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel serially with 10% formic acid (FA), 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% FA, and 80% ACN in 0.1% FA, dried, and stored at −20°C.

### Data Protocol
The extracted peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA (solvent A). The samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis integrated with an Easy nanoLC 1200 system and an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) in triplicate. Peptides were loaded onto a C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, Thermo Fisher Scientific, 75 μm X 2 cm, 100 Å), and separated on the C18 analytical column (PepMap RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific, 75 μm X 50 cm, 100 Å) with a 70-min linear gradient from 5% to 38% solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The spray voltage of the column was set to 1.9 kV and the heated capillary was 275°C. The Q- Exactive was administrated in data-dependent acquisition mode with an MS survey scan, followed by ten MS/MS scans of the most abundant ions. The full MS scan range was from 400 to 1400 m/z and dynamic exclusion was applied for 30 s. In the event that oxonium product ions (m/z 204.0867, 138.0545) were observed in the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) spectra, EThcD with a user-defined charge-dependent reaction time with 15% or 17% HCD supplemental activation was performed in a subsequent scan on the same precursor ion selected for HCD. The EThcD MS/MS scans had a resolution of 30,000 with the AGC target set to 1e5. The maximum injection time was 120 ms. The collected MS/MS spectra were analyzed using the SEQUEST algorithm present in the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 2.3). A protein database search was performed using the Uniprot human database (Release 21_01, 194,237 entries). Full tryptic specificity and up to two missed cleavage sites were permitted. Mass tolerances for precursor and  31 fragment ions were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. The fixed modification included in the search was carbamidomethylation (Cys) and variable modifications were oxidation (Met) and HexNAc (Ser and Thr). The data were also searched against a decoy database and the results were used to calculate q-values of peptide–spectrum matches (PSMs) using the Fixed Value PSM Validator within the Proteome Discoverer. Peptide and protein results were filtered to a 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Necroptosis, O-glcnac, Ripk1

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Medicine and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School of Convergence Science and Technology and College of Medicine or College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Republic of Korea
Seoul National University

### Submitter
Eugene C Yi

### Lab Head
Dr Eugene C. Yi
Seoul National University


