### Accession
PXD041665

### Title
Multi-omics and 3D-imaging reveal bone heterogeneity and unique calvaria cells in in mice and humans

### Description
The meninges of the brain are an important component of neuroinflammatory response. Diverse immune cells move from the calvaria marrow into the dura mater via recently discovered skull-meninges connections (SMCs). However, how the calvaria bone marrow is different from the other bones and whether and how it contributes to human diseases remain unknown. Using multi-omics approaches and whole mouse transparency we reveal that bone marrow cells are highly heterogeneous across the mouse body. The mouse calvaria and the human skull harbors the most distinct molecular signature with hundreds of differentially expressed genes and proteins when compared to other bones. Our study indicates that the calvaria is more than a physical barrier, and its immune cells may present new ways to control brain pathologies.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomics analysis  was performed as described previously with slight modifications. Briefly, for mouse samples, SDC lysis buffer (2% SDC, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) was used to lyse the cell pellets at 95°C for 45 min at 600 rpm in a thermoshaker. For human samples which were fixed in PFA, prior to the SDC lysis buffer step, the samples were first resuspended in 6% SDS buffer, heat denatured, sonicated and then precipitated using 80% acetone overnight in -20°C. Next day, these samples were centrifuged and the pellet was resuspended in SDC lysis buffer. After this, the procedure remains the same for both mouse and human samples. The samples in SDC buffer were sonicated in high mode for 15 cycles (30 sec OFF, 30 sec ON)  (Bioruptor® Plus; Diagenode). The samples were again heated at 95°C for 45 min at 600 rpm in a thermoshaker. The extracted and solubilized protein concentration was estimated by BCA method and 25 µg of protein was further reduced and alkylated using a final concentrations of 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM CAA in dark, at 45°C for 10 min with 600 rpm in a thermoshaker. The protein samples were digested overnight with Trypsin and LysC (1:50, protease:protein ratio) at 37°C, 1,000 rpm shake. Resulting peptides were acidified with 1% TFA 99% isopropanol with 1:1 volume-to-volume ratio, vortexed and centrifuged to pellet residual particles. The supernatant was transferred to fresh tubes and subjected to in-house built StageTip clean-up consisted of three layers of styrene divinylbenzene reversed-phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS; 3 M Empore) membranes. Peptides were loaded on the activated (100% ACN, 1% TFA in 30% Methanol, 0.2% TFA, respectively) StageTips, run through the SDB-RPS membranes, and washed by EtOAc including 1% TFA, isopropanol including 1% TFA, and 0.2% TFA, respectively. Peptides were then eluted from the membranes via 60 µL elution buffer (80% ACN, 1.25% NH4OH) and dried using vacuum centrifuge (40 min at 45°C). Finally, peptides were reconstituted in 10 µL of loading buffer (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and peptide concentration was estimated using PierceTM Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay.

### Data Protocol
diaPASEF raw files were searched against the human uniport database using DIA-NN (Ref. PMID: 31768060). Peptides length range from seven amino acids were considered for the search including N-terminal acetylation. Oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/P with 2 missed cleavages. The FASTA digest for library-free search was enabled for predicting the library generation. The FDR was set to 1% at precursor and global protein level. Match-between-runs (MBR) feature was enabled and quantification mode was set to “Robust LC (high precision)”. The Protein Group column in DIA-NN’s report was used to identify the protein group and PG.MaxLFQ was used to calculate the differential expression.

### Publication Abstract
The bone marrow in the skull is important for shaping immune responses in the brain and meninges, but its molecular makeup among bones and relevance in human diseases remain unclear. Here, we show that the mouse skull has the most distinct transcriptomic profile compared with other bones in states of health and injury, characterized by a late-stage neutrophil phenotype. In humans, proteome analysis reveals that the skull marrow is the most distinct, with differentially expressed neutrophil-related pathways and a unique synaptic protein signature. 3D imaging demonstrates the structural and cellular details of human skull-meninges connections (SMCs) compared with veins. Last, using translocator protein positron emission tomography (TSPO-PET) imaging, we show that the skull bone marrow reflects inflammatory brain responses with a disease-specific spatial distribution in patients with various neurological disorders. The unique molecular profile and anatomical and functional connections of the skull show its potential as a site for diagnosing, monitoring, and treating brain diseases.

### Keywords
Brain, Calvaria, Proteomics, Meninges, Timstof scp

### Affiliations
Institute for Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine (iTERM) Helmholtz Zentrum München Ingolstädter Landstraße 1 85764 Neuherberg Germany
Dr. Saketh Kapoor, Ph.D.
Mass Spectrometry Unit In-Charge
Institute for Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine (iTERM)
Helmholtz Zentrum München
Ingolstädter Landstraße 1
85764 Neuherberg
Germany

+49 15129916548
saketh.kapoor@helmholtz-munich.de
http://erturk-lab.com/team/

### Submitter
Saketh Kapoor

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr.
Institute for Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine (iTERM) Helmholtz Zentrum München Ingolstädter Landstraße 1 85764 Neuherberg Germany


