### Accession
PXD025491

### Title
Circ101093 regulated proteins in Lung carcinoma (LUAD) cells.

### Description
Circ101093 was knocked down in A549 LUAD cell lines, and overexpressed in H1975 LUAD cell lines. Then, downregulated proteins in A549 cell lines and upregulated proteins in H1975 cell lines were analyzed.

### Sample Protocol
According to the results of protein quantification, one hundred microgram protein extraction was subjected with 120 μL reducing buffer (10 mM DTT, 8 M Urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) on 10K ultrafiltration tube. The solution was incubated at 60°C for 1 h and IAA was added to the solution with the final concentration of 50 mM in the dark for 40 min at room temperature. Then the solutions were centrifuged on the filters at 12000 rpm for 20 min at 4°Cand the flow-through solution were discarded from the collection tube. One hundred microliter 300 mM TEAB was added to the solutions and centrifuged at 12000 rpm for 20 min and repeat this step twice. After washing step, the filter units were transferred into new collection tubes and 100 μL 300 mM TEAB was added and followed with 3 μl sequencing-grade trypsin (1 μg/μL) in each tube, then the solutions were incubated for digestion at 37°C for 12 h. Finally, the collections of digested peptides were centrifuge at 12000 rpm for 20 min. 50 μL 200 mM TEAB were added and centrifuged again. The solutions were collected and lyophilized. For iTRAQ labelling, the lyophilized samples were resuspended in 100 μL 200 mM TEAB and 40 μL of each sample were transferred into new tubes for labeling. Two hundred microliter isopropanol was added to iTRAQ reagent vial at room temperature. The centrifuged reagents were dissolved for 5 min and mixed for centrifugation and repeat this step once. Then100 μL of the iTRAQ label reagent was added to each samplefor mixing. The tubes were incubated at room temperature for 2 h. Finally, 200 µLof HPLC water was added to each sample and incubated for 30 min to terminate reaction. The labeling peptides solutions were lyophilized and stored at -80°C

### Data Protocol
All analyses were performed by a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo, USA) equipped with a Nanospray Flex source (Thermo, USA). Samples were loaded and separated by a C18 column (15 cm × 75 µm) on an EASY-nLCTM 1200 system (Thermo, USA). The flow rate was 300 nL/min and linear gradient was 60 min (0~40 min, 5-30% B; 40~54 min, 30-50% B; 54~55 min, 50-100% B; 55~60 min, 100%B; mobile phase A = 0.1% FA in water and B = 80% ACN/0.1% FA in water). Full MS scans were acquired in the mass range of 300 – 1600 m/z with a mass resolution of 70000 and the AGC target value was set at 1e6. The ten most intense peaks in MS were fragmented with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with NCE of 32. MS/MS spectra were obtained with a resolution of 17500 with an AGC target of 2e5 and a max injection time of 80 ms. The Q-E dynamic exclusion was set for 30.0 s and run under positive mode.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fabp3, Keywords: circular rna, Luad, Cell line., A549 h1975

### Affiliations
tongji university
Shanghai Institute of Thoracic Oncology, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030

### Submitter
zhang xiao

### Lab Head
Dr Jiayi Wang
Shanghai Institute of Thoracic Oncology, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030


