### Accession
PXD012693

### Title
Pax3 interactome in mouse ES cell-derived mesodermal precursors

### Description
The skeletal myogenic lineage in developing embryos is specified within the somites and requires members of the Paired box (Pax) family of transcription factors. In particular, Pax3 is the first member of this family expressed in the central region of the dermomyotome and it is necessary for specification, migration and survival of the myogenic progenitors that will form the muscles of the limbs, diaphragm and tongue. To investigate Pax3 molecular functions in the developing mesoderm, we generated doxycycline-inducible mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells expressing untagged and HaFlag-tagged-Pax3. These cell lines were used to unbiasedly identify its interacting partners by tandem affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of the Pax3 complex was performed using approximately 300 million cells from Pax3- and Pax3HaFlag-induced mES cells. Doxycycline was added on day 3 of differentiation at the final concentration of 2µg/ml. Day4 EBs (equivalent to non-induced and 1-day induced cells) were disgregated using trypsin and gentle shaking in a 37°C water bath followed by inactivation with FBS and gentle resuspension with pipette. After centrifuge (5 min at 500g), cell pellets were washed with ice cold PBS and incubated 30 min in 10 Packed Cell Volumes (PCV) of ice cold PBS supplemented with 5µg/ml Digitonin (Sigma-Aldrich). Cells were centrifuged 5 min at 500g, gently resuspended in 5 PCV of ice cold Hypotonic buffer (20mM TRIS HCl pH 7.3, 1.5mM MgCl2, 10mM KCl, 1.5mM DTT supplemented with PMSF, Protease (Complete – Roche) and Phosphatase (PhoStop – Roche) inhibitors), incubated 10 min on ice and vortexed for 10 seconds. After centrifuge (10 min at 500g), the previous step was repeated once and the nuclei preparation was checked on a microscope using Trypan blue. Nuclei were then gently resuspended in 1 PCV of ice cold low salt buffer (10mM TRIS HCl pH 7.3, 100mM NaCl, 1.5mM MgCl2 + PMSF, Protease and Phosphatase inhibitors) and then supplemented drop-by-drop with 1 PCV of ice cold High Salt Buffer (50mM TRIS HCl pH 7.3, 800mM NaCl, 1.5mM MgCl2, 25% Glycerol + PMSF, Protease and Phosphatase inhibitors) and 4µl of Benzonase (Sigma-Aldrich). After 30 min incubation on ice, sample were centrifuged 30 min at +4°C 16000g and the supernatant was transferred into 3ml Slide-A-Lyzer® G2 Dialysis Cassette – cutoff 7000 MWCO (Thermoscientific) and dialyzed overnight at +4°C with gentle stirring using Dialysis buffer (10mM TRIS HCl pH 7.3, 100mM NaCl, 1.5mM MgCl2, 0.1mM EDTA, 10% Glycerol). Nuclear extracts were recovered, centrifuged 30 min at +4°C 16000g to remove precipitated proteins and precleared 2h with 300µl of Agarose IgG beads. This method yielded approximately 10mg of nuclear extract, which was then incubated with 200µl of anti-FLAG M2 magnetic beads (Sigma-Aldrich) for 4-5h at +4°C with gentle rotation. Aliquots were collected before (Input), after (FT) FLAG IP for quality control. Beads were washed 5 times with 10 volumes of Wash buffer_1 (10mM TRIS HCl pH 7.3, 100mM NaCl, 1.5mM MgCl2, 0.1mM EDTA, 10% Glycerol, 0.1% NP-40) and then incubated for 1h with 150µl of 0.2mg/ml 3xFLAG peptide diluted in Wash buffer_1. This step was repeated 4 more times and, ultimately, all elutions were pulled and incubated with 100µl of BSA-blocked anti-HA magnetic beads (Pierce - Thermoscientific) for 5-6h at +4°C with gentle rotation. Aliquots were collected before (termed IP αFLAG) and after (FT 2nd IP) HA immunoprecipitation for quality control. Beads were washed 5 times with 10 volumes of Wash buffer_2 (10mM TRIS HCl pH 7.3, 200mM NaCl, 1.5mM MgCl2, 0.1mM EDTA, 10% Glycerol, 0.1% NP-40) and then incubated for 1h with 100µl of 0.2mg/ml HA peptide diluted in Wash buffer_1. This step was repeated 3 more times with 50µl of 0.2mg/ml HA peptide diluted in Wash buffer_1 and, ultimately, all elutions were pulled. Two biological replicates were submitted as protein pellets following Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) precipitation.  Pellets were resuspended with ammonium bicarbonates and reduced by adding DTT at a 1mM concentration (in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 30 minutes at 60°C, then cooled to room temperature and supplemented with iodoacetamide (stock in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate) to a concentration of 5mM followed by incubation for 15 minutes in the dark at room temperature. DTT was then added to a 5mM concentration to quench the reaction. Digestion was performed by adding sequence grade trypsin at a concentration of 5ng/µl and over-night incubation at 37°C. Samples were then desalted by an in-house made desalting column. On the day of analysis, samples were reconstituted in 5 - 10 µl of HPLC solvent A (97.5% water, 2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip. After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column. A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 2.5% water and 0.1% formic acid).   As peptides eluted, they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).  All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between 1-2% peptide false discovery rate (FDR). Search settings: peptide_mass_tolerance = 2.0; digest_mass_range = 600.0000 35000.0000; max_num_internal_cleavage_sites = 2; diff_search_options = 15.9949146221 M 14.0157 C; add_C_Cysteine = 57.0214637236.

### Publication Abstract
Chromatin looping allows enhancer-bound regulatory factors to influence transcription. Large domains, referred to as topologically associated domains, participate in genome organization. However, the mechanisms underlining interactions within these&#xa0;domains, which control gene expression, are not fully understood. Here we report that activation of embryonic myogenesis is associated with establishment of long-range chromatin interactions centered on Pax3-bound loci. Using mass spectrometry and genomic studies, we identify the ubiquitously expressed LIM-domain binding protein 1 (Ldb1) as the mediator of looping interactions at a subset of Pax3 binding sites. Ldb1 is recruited to Pax3-bound elements independently of CTCF-Cohesin, and is necessary for efficient deposition of H3K4me1 at these sites and chromatin looping. When Ldb1 is deleted in Pax3-expressing cells in vivo, specification of migratory myogenic progenitors is severely impaired. These results highlight Ldb1 requirement for Pax3 myogenic activity and demonstrate how transcription factors can promote formation of sub-topologically associated domain interactions involved in lineage specification.

### Keywords
Nuclear extract, Lc-msms, Mouse, Mesoderm, Pax3, Embryoid bodies, Affinity purification, Myogenesis

### Affiliations
University of Minnesota
Dept of Medicine
Cardiology division
Twin Cities campus
Minneapolis
Department of Medicine, Cardiology division, Lillehei Heart Institute, University of Minnesota, USA

### Submitter
Alessandro Magli

### Lab Head
Dr Rita CR Perlingeiro
Department of Medicine, Cardiology division, Lillehei Heart Institute, University of Minnesota, USA


