### Accession
PXD023559

### Title
The zinc finger antiviral protein ZAP destabilises viral transcripts and restricts human cytomegalovirus

### Description
Interferon-stimulated gene products (ISGs) play a crucial role in early infection control. The ISG zinc finger CCCH-type antiviral protein 1 (ZAP/ZC3HAV1) antagonises several RNA viruses by binding to CG-rich RNA sequences, whereas its effect on DNA viruses is largely unknown. Here, we decipher the role of ZAP in the context of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection, a β-herpesvirus that is associated with high morbidity in immunosuppressed individuals and newborns. We show that expression of the two major isoforms of ZAP, the long (ZAP-L) and short (ZAP-S), is induced during HCMV infection and that both negatively affect HCMV replication. Transcriptome and proteome analyses demonstrated that the expression of ZAP decelerates the progression of HCMV infection. SLAM-sequencing revealed that ZAP restricts HCMV at early stages of infection by destabilising a distinct subset of viral transcripts with low CG content. In summary, this report provides evidence of an important antiviral role for ZAP in host defense against HCMV infection and highlights its differentiated function during DNA virus infection.

### Sample Protocol
HFF-1 WT or ZAP KO (250,000 cells/well in a 6-well format) were infected with HCMV WT at an MOI of 0.1 and the infection was enhanced by centrifugation at 684 x g at 30°C for 45 min. The moment when the virus was added to the cells was defined as time point 0. After centrifugation, cells were incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes followed by removal of the virus-containing medium, one wash with DMEM and replacement with fresh medium. At indicated time points, cells were washed with PBS once and then collected in 300 µl of fresh PBS per well. Cell pellets were frozen at -70°C. Two wells were combined to obtain a total of 500,000 cells in total per condition. Quadruplicates of HCMV infected HFF-1 cells were analysed at 48 and 72 hours post infection. For each replicate, cells were washed with PBS, lysed in SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS, 10 mM DTT, 50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6), boiled at 95°C for 5 min and sonicated (4°C, 10 min, 30 sec on, 30 sec off; Bioruptor). Protein concentrations of cleared lysates were normalised and cysteines were alkylated with 5.5 mM IAA (20 min, 25°C, in the dark). SDS was removed by protein precipitation with 80% (v/v) acetone (-20°C, overnight), protein pellets were washed with 80% (v/v) acetone and resuspended in 40 µl U/T buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 10 mM HEPES, pH 8.0). Protein digestion was performed by subsequent addition of 1 µg LysC (3h, 25°C) and 1 µg Trypsin in 160 µl digestion buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0) at 25°C overnight. Peptides were desalted and concentrated using C18 Stage-Tips as described previously. Purified peptides were loaded onto a 50 cm reverse-phase analytical column (75 µm diameter; ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin; Dr. Maisch) and separated using an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A binary buffer system consisting of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in H2O) with a 120 min gradient [5-30% buffer B (95 min), 30-95% buffer B (10 min), wash out at 95% buffer B (5 min), decreased to 5% buffer B (5 min), and 5% buffer B (5 min)] was used at a flow rate of 300 nl per min. Eluting peptides were directly analysed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data-dependent acquisition included repeating cycles of one MS1 full scan (300–1,650 m/z, R = 60,000 at 200 m/z) at an ion target of 3 x 106, followed by 15 MS2 scans of the highest abundant isolated and higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmented peptide precursors (R = 15,000 at 200 m/z). For MS2 scans, collection of isolated peptide precursors was limited by an ion target of 1 x 105 and a maximum injection time of 25 ms. Isolation and fragmentation of the same peptide precursor was eliminated by dynamic exclusion for 20 s. The isolation window of the quadrupole was set to 1.4 m/z and HCD was set to a normalised collision energy of 27%.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.14.0) using the standard settings and label-free quantification (LFQ) and match between runs options enabled. Spectra were searched against forward and reverse sequences of the reviewed human proteome including isoforms (UniprotKB, release 01.2019) and of the HCMV proteins by the built-in Andromeda search engine.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Zap, Innate immunity, Antiviral, Interferon, Isg, Human cytomegalovirus

### Affiliations
Institute of Virology, Technical University Munich
Institute of Virology, Technische Universität München, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Urban

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pichlmair
Institute of Virology, Technische Universität München, Germany


