### Accession
PXD010886

### Title
Extracellular peptide Kratos restricts cell death during vascular development and stress in Arabidopsis

### Description
During plant vascular development, xylem tracheary elements (TEs) form water conducting, empty pipes through genetically regulated cell death. Cell death is prevented from spreading to non-TEs by unidentified intercellular mechanisms, downstream of METACASPASE9 (MC9)-mediated regulation of autophagy in TEs. Here, we identified differentially abundant extracellular peptides in vascular11 differentiating wild type and MC9-downregulated Arabidopsis cell suspensions. The peptide Kratos rescued the abnormally high ectopic non-TE death resulting from either MC9 knockout or TE-specific overexpression of the ATG5 autophagy protein during experimentally induced vascular differentiation in Arabidopsis cotyledons. Kratos also reduced cell death following mechanical damage and extracellular ROS production in Arabidopsis leaves. Stress-induced but not vascular non-TE cell death was enhanced by another identified peptide, Bia. Bia is therefore reminiscent of several known plant cell death-inducing peptides acting as damage-associated molecular patterns. In contrast, Kratos plays a novel extracellular cell survival role in the context of development and during stress response.

### Sample Protocol
Wild type and MC9-RNAi cell suspensions were induced to differentiate (or not, as control) in triplicates, each replicate being in a volume of 200 mL (in 1 L Erlenmeyer flasks). After five days, when the rate of TE differentiation is peaking,concomitantly with the rise of ectopic non-TE death in MC9-RNAi, the samples were harvested. The cells and extracellular medium of each sample were separated using inert sterile membranes with a 0.45 µm pore size (Millipore Stericup-HV Filter Units). The extracellular medium fractions were further filtered using Jumbosep centrifugation devices with a 3 kDa cut-off membrane (Pall) to separate the peptides (< 3 kDa) from higher molecular weight (> 3 kDa) protein (fragments). The higher molecular weight extracellular fraction was compared to cell lysates to verify the absence of detectable intracellular contaminations in the extracellular medium (Fig. S1a). Peptides in the low molecular weight (< 3 kDa) extracellular fraction were further purified by reverse-phase C18 Solid Phase Extraction (SepPak C18, Waters) and the resulting samples were freeze-dried. Freeze-dried peptide samples were dissolved in 10 µl of 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and subsequently diluted in 200 µl ultrapure water and acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a 1% (v/v) final concentration. No digestion by trypsin or other enzymes was performed, this to preserve the structure of the endogenously generated peptides. 10 µl of each sample were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer which was operated as previously described.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data was searched against TAIR10 representative proteins and contaminant protein sequences by the built-in Andromeda search engine of the MaxQuant software (v1.5.3.30). The “unspecific cleavage” setting was selected in MaxQuant as no protease was used to prepare the samples. The minimum peptide length was set to eight amino acids, matching between-runs was enabled with an alignment time of 30 min and matching time window of 30 s. Variable modifications were oxidation of methionine and proline (+15.995 Da), and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.011 Da). The identified peptides (false discovery rate < 0.01) and their respective intensities were extracted from the “peptides.txt” output file.

### Publication Abstract
During plant vascular development, xylem tracheary elements (TEs) form water-conducting, empty pipes by genetically regulated cell death. Cell death is prevented from spreading to non-TEs by unidentified intercellular mechanisms, downstream of METACASPASE9 (MC9)-mediated regulation of autophagy in TEs. Here, we identified differentially abundant extracellular peptides in vascular-differentiating wild-type and MC9-down-regulated Arabidopsis cell suspensions. A peptide named Kratos rescued the abnormally high ectopic non-TE death resulting from either MC9 knockout or TE-specific overexpression of the ATG5 autophagy protein during experimentally induced vascular differentiation in Arabidopsis cotyledons. Kratos also reduced cell death following mechanical damage and extracellular ROS production in Arabidopsis leaves. Stress-induced but not vascular non-TE cell death was enhanced by another identified peptide, named Bia. Bia is therefore reminiscent of several known plant cell death-inducing peptides acting as damage-associated molecular patterns. In contrast, Kratos plays a novel extracellular cell survival role in the context of development and during stress response.

### Keywords
Metacaspase9, Arabidopsis, Cell death, Peptidomics, Vascular development, Extracellular, Tracheary element

### Affiliations
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology
PSB-VIB

### Submitter
Patrick Willems

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology


