### Accession
PXD033581

### Title
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell Surfaceome LC-MSMS and mRNA expression analysis

### Description
The production of biopharmaceuticals relies on robust cell systems that can produce recombinant proteins at high levels, and grow and survive in the stressful bioprocess environment. Chinese hamster ovary cells (CHO) as the main production hosts offer a variety of advantages including robust growth and survival in a bioprocess environment. Cell surface proteins are of special interest for the understanding of how CHO cells react to their environment while maintaining growth and survival phenotypes, since they enable cellular reactions to external stimuli and potentially initiate signaling pathways. To provide deeper insight into functions of this special cell surface sub-proteome, pathway enrichment analysis of the determined CHO surfaceome was conducted. Enrichment of growth/ survival pathways such as the phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K/AKT), Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), Janus kinase/signal transducers and activators of transcription (JAK-STAT) and RAP1 pathways was observed, offering novel insights into how cell surface receptors and ligand mediated signaling enable the cells to grow and survive in a bioprocess environment. When supplementing surfaceome data with RNA expression data, several growth/ survival-receptors were shown to be co-expressed with their respective ligands and thus suggesting self-induction mechanisms, while other receptors or ligands were not detectable. As data about the presence of surface receptors and their associated expressed ligands may serve as base for future studies, further pathway characterization will enable the implementation of optimization strategies to further enhance cellular growth and survival behavior.

### Sample Protocol
Biotin labeling of cell surface proteins  For cell surface capturing (CSC) sample preparation 1.5 × 108 viable CHO cells were collected by centrifugation (140 rcf, 10 min, 4°C). The pellet was resuspended in 50 ml 1× phosphate‐buffered saline (PBS), pH 6.5 with 3mM NaIO4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and incubated for 20 min on a rotary shaker at 4°C for oxidation of glycans. For biotin labeling of oxidized glycans, the cell pellet was resuspended in 20 ml 1× PBS, pH 6.5 with 5mM biocytin hydrazide (AAT Bioquest) and 50mM 2‐(aminomethyl)imidazol hydrochloride (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and incubated for 1 h on a rotary shaker at 4°C. Subsequently, the cell pellet was resuspended in 3ml PBS, pH 6.5, and was split into triplicates of 1ml each. After centrifugation (140 rcf, 10min, 4°C) each replicate was resuspended in 500‐μl lysis buffer (100mMTris [Sigma‐Aldrich] + 10mM Tris(2‐carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride [Carl Roth] + 15mM 2‐chloroacetamide [Thermo Fisher Scientific] + 1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate [Sigma‐Aldrich]). Cells were lysed by ultrasonication using a sonotrode (Reichmann). Then samples were incubated for 5 min at 100°C at 800 rpm (3mm orbit) in a thermal shaker. Immediately after heating, samples were cooled on ice and the protein concentration was measured at 280 nm using a Nanodrop‐1000 spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Trypsin (Sigma‐Aldrich) solution (10mg/ml trypsin in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate [Sigma‐Aldrich]) was added to each sample to give a final ratio of 1:20 (trypsin/protein). Proteolytic digest was performed for 16 h at 37°C at 800 rpm (3‐mm orbit). After cooling sodium deoxycholate was precipitated by adding 90 μl 10% (v/v) formic acid (Carl Roth).  For affinity capture, 200 μl of Pierce™ Streptavidin UltraLink™ Resin (Thermo Fischer Scientific) were resuspended with the peptide solution and incubated for 1 h on a rotary shaker at 4°C. After incubation, beads were washed with (i) 20‐ml detergent buffer (137mM NaCl [Carl Roth] + 50 mM Tris + 150mM glycerol [Carl Roth] + 0.5mM EDTA [Carl Roth] + 0.1% Triton X‐100 [Carl Roth]), (ii) 20ml 5MNaCl, (iii) 10 ml 80% (v/v) 2‐ propanol (Carl Roth), (iv) 20ml 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, (v) 20ml 100mM NaHCO3 (Carl Roth), (vi) 25ml 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. For elution of peptides, the beads resuspended in 500 μl 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, 2 μl PNGaseF (New England Biolabs) were added and incubated on a rotary shaker at 37°C overnight. Samples were adjusted to pH ~2–3 with 10% (v/v) formic acid. Samples were desalted with Hypersep C18 cartridge (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and dried using a vacuum concentrator (Christ).  Nano-LC-MS/MS analysis  Dried CSC samples were dissolved in 20 μl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 5 μl were injected for nanoLC‐ESI‐MS/MS analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis experiments were performed on an Ultimate 3000 nano‐RSLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q‐Exactive HF‐X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a Nanospray‐Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were concentrated and desalted on a trap column (5mm× 30 μm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 25cm×75μm nanoEase MZ HSS T3 reversed‐phase column (Waters) operated at a constant temperature of 35°C. Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using a 30‐min gradient with the following profile: 2%–55% solvent B in 30min, 55%–95% solvent B in 6min, isocratic at 95% solvent B for 5min, and 95%–2% solvent B in 6min. Solvents used were 0.5% acetic acid (solvent A) and 0.5% acetic acid in acetonitrile/H2O (80/20, v/v, solvent B).  The Q Exactive HF‐X was operated under the control of XCalibur 4.1.31.9 software. MS spectra (m/z = 300–1800) were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 (m/z = 200) using a maximum injection time (MIT) of 100 ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 1 × 106. MS/MS spectra for the 30 most abundant peptide precursors were generated in the Orbitrap using high‐energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at a resolution of 15,000 and a normalized collision energy of 27. Further settings for MS/MS spectra included an isolation width of 1.6 Da, an MIT of 50 ms and an AGC value of 2 × 105.

### Data Protocol
nano-LC-MS/MS data analysis Mascot 2.6 (Matrix Science) was used as a search engine for protein identification. Spectra were searched against the Cricetulus griseus reference proteome sequence (UP000001075) downloaded in FASTA format from UniProt. Search parameters specified trypsin or no specific enzyme as a cleaving enzyme, a 5‐ppm mass tolerance for peptide precursors, and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was defined as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation was allowed as variable modification. Mascot search results were imported into Scaffold version 4.8.6. (Proteome Software). Peptide identifications were accepted with a peptide probability >80.0% as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Proteins had to be identified by at least two peptides and a protein probability of at least 99% to be accepted. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm.  Bioinformatic analysis DAVID (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/) and Panther (http://pantherdb.org/) online tools were used for Gene Ontology (GO) annotation and classification and pathway annotation. Panther generic mapping tool (ftp://ftp. pantherdb.org/generic_mapping) was used for mapping hamster protein sequences to usable IDs for Panther online classification tool. KEGG Automatic Annotation Server (KAAS) (https://www. genome.jp/kegg/kaas/) was used for custom Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway mapping of identified hamster protein sequences. Phobius online tool (http://phobius.sbc.su.se/) was used to predict TM domains within hamster and mouse protein sequences. Numerous hamster proteins were annotated in the UniProt database only as fragments, therefore these were additionally mapped to the mouse proteome. Local NCBI BLAST + algorithm was used to blast CHO protein sequences against NCBI mouse reference proteome (RefSeq Release 109).

### Publication Abstract
The production of biopharmaceuticals relies on robust cell systems that can produce recombinant proteins at high levels and grow and survive in the stressful bioprocess environment. Chinese hamster ovary cells (CHO) as the main production hosts offer a variety of advantages including robust growth and survival in a bioprocess environment. Cell surface proteins are of special interest for the understanding of how CHO cells react to their environment while maintaining growth and survival phenotypes, since they enable cellular reactions to external stimuli and potentially initiate signaling pathways. To provide deeper insight into functions of this special cell surface sub-proteome, pathway enrichment analysis of the determined CHO surfaceome was conducted. Enrichment of growth/ survival-pathways such as the phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K)-protein kinase B (AKT), mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), Janus kinase/signal transducers and activators of transcription (JAK-STAT), and RAP1 pathways were observed, offering novel insights into how cell surface receptors and ligand-mediated signaling enable the cells to grow and survive in a bioprocess environment. When supplementing surfaceome data with RNA expression data, several growth/survival receptors were shown to be co-expressed with their respective ligands and thus suggesting self-induction mechanisms, while other receptors or ligands were not detectable. As data about the presence of surface receptors and their associated expressed ligands may serve as base for future studies, further pathway characterization will enable the implementation of optimization strategies to further enhance cellular growth and survival behavior. KEY POINTS: &#x2022; PI3K/AKT, MAPK, JAK-STAT, and RAP1 pathway receptors are enriched on the CHO cell surface and downstream pathways present on mRNA level. &#x2022; Detected pathways indicate strong CHO survival and growth phenotypes. &#x2022; Potential self-induction of surface receptors and respective ligands.

### Keywords
Signaling pathways, Mrna expression, Lc-msms, Surfaceome, Cho cells

### Affiliations
University of Hohenheim
Prof. Dr. Kerstin Otte Hochschule Biberach, University of Applied Sciences Molecular and Cell Biology Karlstraße 11 88400 Biberach Germany

### Submitter
Jens Pfannstiel

### Lab Head
Dr Kerstin Otte
Prof. Dr. Kerstin Otte Hochschule Biberach, University of Applied Sciences Molecular and Cell Biology Karlstraße 11 88400 Biberach Germany


