### Accession
PXD036016

### Title
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) Infection of Jamaican Fruit Bat Intestinal Epithelial Cells Induces Robust Interferon Activation

### Description
Bats are the most important natural reservoirs for a variety of emerging viruses that cause several illnesses in humans and other mammals. Increased viral shedding by bats is thought to be linked to an increased ability of many bat species to tolerate viral infection. The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), the causative agent of COVID-19, is thought to have originated in bats, since viruses with high sequence similarity have been detected in bat feces. However, there is no robust in vitro model for assessing the SARS-CoV-2 infection in the bat GI tract. Here, we established gastrointestinal organoid cultures from Jamaican fruit bats (JFB, Artibeus jamaicensis), which replicated the characteristic morphology of the gastrointestinal epithelium and showed tissue specific gene expression patterns and cell differentiation. To analyze whether JFB intestinal epithelial cells are susceptible to SARS-CoV-2, we performed in vitro infection experiments. Increased SARS-CoV-2 RNA was found in both cell lysates and supernatants from the infected organoids after 48 h, and sgRNA also was detected, indicating that the JFB intestinal epithelium supports limited viral replication. However, no infectious virus was released into the culture media, and no cytopathic effects were observed. Gene expression studies revealed a significant induction of type I interferon and inflammatory cytokine genes in response to active SARS-CoV-2 virus but not to TLR agonist treatment. Untargeted analysis of the organoid proteome using data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) revealed a significant increase in proteins and pathways associated with inflammatory signaling, cell turnover and repair, and SARS-CoV-2 infection. Collectively, our data suggest that primary intestinal epithelial cells from JFBs are largely resistant to SARS-CoV-2 infection and cell damage, likely because they are able to mount a strong antiviral interferon and regenerative response upon infection.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue samples. Male and female Jamaican fruit bats (Artibeus jamaicensis) were maintained as a breeding colony in an AAALAC-approved facility at Colorado State University (CSU) under Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee protocol 16-6502a. For organoid derivation, five adult bats (4 male, 1 female) were euthanized by 5% isoflurane in O2 followed by thoracotomy. The gastrointestinal tracts were harvested in RPMI medium and were shipped overnight on ice from CSU to Montana State University (MSU). Proteomics analyses: Triplicate samples of distal intestinal organoids were infected with SARS-CoV-2, MOI 10, for 48 h and then were lysed in RIPA lysis buffer (25 mM Tris/Cl, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1% SDS, 1% protease inhibitor) by passing the samples through a 26.5G needle 5 times on ice. Samples were stored at -80 °C until they were analyzed at the IDeA National Resource for Quantitative Proteomics. An Orbitrap Exploris 480 was used for data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry with a 60 min gradient per sample and gas-phase fractionation to obtain comprehensive proteomic profiles of the organoids.

### Data Protocol
Chromatogram libraries were constructed using Prosit [73], and proteins were identified and quantified using EncyclopeDIA, based on protein FASTA files retrieved from NCBI RefSeq for A. jamaicensis (BioProject PRJNA673233) [44,45]. False discovery thresholds of 1% were applied. The ProteiNorm app was used to optimize data normalization [74], and Scaffold DIA (Proteome Software, Portland, OR) was used for visualization. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Qiagen) and Enrichr [48] with combined score ranking (c = log(p) * z, where c = the combined score, P = Fisher exact test P-value, and z = z-score) were used to identify cellular signaling pathways. COVID-19 related gene sets identified by Enrichr were based on the “The COVID-19 Drug and Gene Set Library, 2021 version” website [75]. To analyze the impact of SARS-CoV-2 infection on ISGs, proteins identified in the JFB organoids were compared to a comprehensive list of ISGs [47] using a Python script.

### Publication Abstract
Bats are natural reservoirs for several zoonotic viruses, potentially due to an enhanced capacity to control viral infection. However, the mechanisms of antiviral responses in bats are poorly defined. Here we established a Jamaican fruit bat (JFB, Artibeus jamaicensis) intestinal organoid model of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection. Upon infection with SARS-CoV-2, increased viral RNA and subgenomic RNA was detected, but no infectious virus was released, indicating that JFB organoids support only limited viral replication but not viral reproduction. SARS-CoV-2 replication was associated with significantly increased gene expression of type I interferons and inflammatory cytokines. Interestingly, SARS-CoV-2 also caused enhanced formation and growth of JFB organoids. Proteomics revealed an increase in inflammatory signaling, cell turnover, cell repair, and SARS-CoV-2 infection pathways. Collectively, our findings suggest that primary JFB intestinal epithelial cells mount successful antiviral interferon responses and that SARS-CoV-2 infection in JFB cells induces protective regenerative pathways.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Jamaican fruit bats, Interferon, Dia

### Affiliations
UAMS
Montana State University, Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Bozeman, MT

### Submitter
Stephanie Byrum

### Lab Head
Dr Diane Bimczok
Montana State University, Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Bozeman, MT


