### Accession
PXD026775

### Title
In-bone digestion as a way to characterization of human maxillary and mandibular bone tissues

### Description
The project is based on in-bone digestion of proteins by trypsin directly in human maxillary and mandibular healthy and pathological bone samples without the prior reduction and alkylation of the disulfide bonds. The released peptides were then separated and identified by LC-MS/MS method.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 3 mg of each bone sample (almost the whole leftover) were placed into a 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube. The samples were divided into two groups. The first group containing 8 samples from maxillary bone and 7 samples from mandibular bone was directly subjected to tryptic hydrolysis, without any pre-incubation step. The second group of samples (7 samples from maxillary bone and 7 samples from mandibular bone) was first pre-incubated 30 min in 100 µL of propan-2-ol at temperature of 50 ºC under shaking at 700 rpm in Thermomixer compact Eppendorf (Hamburg, Germany). The supernatant was then removed by the pipette.  Subsequently, all samples were vortexed 1 min with 100 µL of 50 mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate (NH4HCO3) solution at laboratory temperature (22 ºC). After the supernatant was again removed, specific digestion was carried out in 15 µL (samples were submerged) of 20 μg/mL sequencing grade trypsin in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 37 ºC for 3 hours. This specific digestion was performed without reduction and alkylation of the disulfide bonds. The solution containing the released peptides was purified on ZipTip packed with reversed phase (C18) resin. Samples were eluted to 0.2 mL Eppendorf PCR tubes and dried in Thermomixer without shaking at 50 ºC about 2 hours.

### Data Protocol
Peptides in the raw spectra were identified and quantified by MaxQuant label-free quantification software (version 1.6.7 for Windows) using Homo sapiens NCBI protein database (assembly GRCh38.p13) and UniProt Homo sapiens proteome UP000005640. Reverse sequences were selected for target-decoy database strategy and a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was applied to both peptide spectrum match and protein group levels. Trypsin was set as the proteolytic enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed; no fixed modification was selected. Methionine oxidation and broken cysteine disulfide bonds (Cys-Cys) were searched as variable protein modifications. The Bruker Q-TOF instrument setting was used with default tolerances: 0.07 Da for the first search and 0.006 Da for the main peptide search at the MS level. Protein identification was performed using the default 40 ppm as mass tolerance at the MS/MS level for TOF analyzer. The minimum required peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Only unique peptides were used for quantification. For any subsequent analyses like Partial least squares-discriminant analysis (PLS-DA), the overall protein intensity was estimated as a sum of MaxQuant label-free quantification values (LFQ) for unique detected peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic characterization of alveolar bones in oral surgery represents an analytical challenge due to their insoluble character. The implementation of a straightforward technique could lead to the routine use of proteomics in this field. This work thus developed a simple technique for the characterization of bone tissue for human maxillary and mandibular bones. It is based on the direct in-bone tryptic digestion of proteins in both healthy and pathological human maxillary and mandibular bone samples. The released peptides were then identified by the LC-MS/MS. Using this approach, a total of 1120 proteins were identified in the maxillary bone and 1151 proteins in the mandibular bone. The subsequent partial least squares-discrimination analysis (PLS-DA) of protein data made it possible to reach 100% discrimination between the samples of healthy alveolar bones and those of the bone tissue surrounding the inflammatory focus. These results indicate that the in-bone protein digestion followed by the LC-MS/MS and subsequent statistical analysis can provide a deeper insight into the field of oral surgery at the molecular level. Furthermore, it could also have a diagnostic potential in the differentiation between the proteomic patterns of healthy and pathological alveolar bone tissue. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD026775.

### Keywords
In-bone digestion, Tandem mass spectrometry, Mandibular bone, Maxillary bone, Oral surgery

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Chemistry and Technology Prague
University of Chemistry and Technology Prague

### Submitter
Jiri Santrucek

### Lab Head
Dr Radovan Hynek
Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Chemistry and Technology Prague


