### Accession
PXD028372

### Title
Characterization of a novel membrane complex required for docking and regulated exocytosis of lysosome-related organelles in Tetrahymena thermophila

### Description
In the ciliate Tetrahymena thermophila, lysosome-related organelles called mucocysts accumulate at the cell periphery where they secrete their contents in response to extracellular events, a phenomenon termed regulated exocytosis. A forward genetic approach uncovered MDL1 (Mucocyst Discharge with a LamG domain) as essential gene for regulated exocytosis of mucocysts. The encoded protein, Mdl1p, is a 66 kD membrane-associated glycoprotein that localizes to mucocysts, and specifically to a tip domain that contacts the plasma membrane when the mucocyst is docked. Immunoisolation by affinity capture using Mdl1p-FLAG as bait, described here, revealed that Mdl1p forms a complex with 9 other proteins, all of them novel and largely restricted to Alveolates.

### Sample Protocol
10L cultures of MDL1-FLAG and CU428 wt cells were grown to 2-5 x 10^5 cells/ml, washed once with 10mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4 and re-pelleted. Supernatants were rapidly aspirated to leave a dense cell slurry. The slurries were dripped from a volumetric pipette into liquid nitrogen, and the frozen beads collected and milled to powders using a Cryogenic Grinder 6875 Freezer Mill, and stored at -75°C. For each pulldown, 95-100g of cell powder was suspended in Buffer B3 (20 mM HEPES, 250 mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton X-100), supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail tablets (Roche), gently mixed by inversion for 1h at 4°C, and then on ice until no solid matter was visible. The solutes were then centrifuged at 35000 rpm (Beckman Instruments type 45 Ti rotor) for 1.5h at 4°C, and the supernatants transferred to new tubes. The supernatants were then incubated for 2 h at 4 °C with anti-FLAG beads (EZ view Red Anti-FLAG M2 affinity Gel, Sigma), which had been pre-washed with lysis buffer for 2 h at 4 °C. The beads were then washed five times with 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 500 mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40, 1 mM DTT, 10% glycerol supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail tablets (Roche) and eluted with 60 ul of 2X LDS sample buffer + 40 mM DTT.  The co-immunoprecipitation samples were processed essentially as reported previously (PMID: 31964712). Protein samples were loaded on a 4-20% SDS-PAGE gel, electrophoresed until they migrated ~1 cm into the gel, and briefly stained with Coomassie Blue R-250 solution (0.1% w/v Coomassie, 10% acetic acid, 50% methanol). A single 1 cm gel slice per lane was excised from the Coomassie stained gel, destained, and then subjected to tryptic digest and reductive alkylation. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed by the Proteomic Facility at the University of Dundee. The samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS on a Ultimate3000 nano rapid separation LC system (Dionex) coupled to a LTQ Q-exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Sample layout:  wt control (replicate1: 1_WT (experiment 11), replicate2: 2_WT(experiment 12));  MDL1-FLAG (replicate1: 1_UC300_FLAG (experiment 21), replicate 2: 2_UC300_FLAG(experiment 22))

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using the intensity-based label-free quantification (LFQ) method of MaxQuant version 1.6.6.0 (PMID:19029910; PMID: 24942700), searching the T. thermophila annotated protein database from ciliate.org (PMID: 16933976). Minimum peptide length was set at six amino acids and false discovery rates (FDR) of 0.01 were calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins and modification sites based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tetrahymena, Mucocysts, Lysosome, Mdl1, Exocytosis, Ciliate

### Affiliations
Head of Drug Discovery and Evaluation Center for Research of Pathogenicity and Virulence of Parasites Charles University in Prague, BIOCEV Průmyslová 595 252 50 Vestec Czech Republic
Division of Biological Chemistry & Drug Discovery
School of Life Sciences
University of Dundee
Dundee DD1 5EH

### Submitter
Martin Zoltner

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Martin Zoltner
Head of Drug Discovery and Evaluation Center for Research of Pathogenicity and Virulence of Parasites Charles University in Prague, BIOCEV Průmyslová 595 252 50 Vestec Czech Republic


