### Accession
PXD008773

### Title
Heterogenous ribonucleoprotein C1 participates in the internalization of Hsa-miR-30d in endometrial exosomes

### Description
Currently, micro RNAs (miRNAs) constitute a promising models for cell-to-cell communication  since they are transferred between cells to execute essential roles in many processes. Their structure and size, in addition to various transport mechanisms, allow them to remain stable within various biological fluids, surviving in extremely adverse conditions, including low pH, boiling, and freezing. The presence of miRNAs in reproductive fluids, such as follicular, uterine and seminal fluid, indicate potential roles in the reproductive system. These extracellular miRNAs can be transported by lipoproteins (both HDL and LDL) or other proteins, including Argonaute2 (AGO2)  and nucleophosmin1 (NPM1). Another transport system is mediated by extracellular vesicles (EVs), such as apoptotic bodies, microvesicles (MVs) and/or exosome-like vesicles. EVs protect miRNAs from degradation and contribute to their stability within biological fluids. Furthermore, EVs can transport a wide range of components packaged in a selective way. For instance, Squadrito et al. (2014), used macrophages and endothelial cells to demonstrate that the sorting of miRNAs into EVs for heterotrophic cell communication is altered by both, the presence of target transcripts and the self-presence of the respectively miRNA. In addition, the signature of miRNAs found in the exosomes significantly differed for those detected in the parent cells. To date, mechanisms controlling the specific loading of miRNAs into exosomes remain unclear. Indeed, several mechanisms may govern exosome sorting of specific subsets of miRNAs. MiRNA sorting appears to be influenced by different pathways and molecules in different cell types and tissues, and miRNAs contain well defined motifs (i.e., EXOmotifs), that direct the miRNA allocation into exosomes before delivery into recipient cells. A recent study showed that this RNA sequence can be recognized by the sumoylated form of the heterogeneous ribonucleoprotein A2B1 (hnRNPA2B1). Moreover, a terminal 30 nucleotide addition in miRNAs affects their selective sorting in B cells. Another hypothesis suggests that RNAs are selectively sorted depending on the differential affinity of RNA motifs towards the raft-like region of the cytoplasmic surface of microvesicular body (MVB) limiting membranes. Current data indicate that cells can communicate with each other through the transfer of miRNA-loaded exosomes. For example, monocyte-derived exosomes deliver miR-150 to endothelial cells and enhance endothelial cell migration by reducing c-myb expression. The miRNA content of exosomes plays a critical role in such cell-to-cell communication and determines the fate of recipient cells. Thus, exosomes derived from the bone marrow mesenchymal stromal cells of myeloma patients promote tumor growth depending on the content of miR-15a in exosomes.  Our group has described a novel cell-to-cell communication mechanism involving the delivery of endometrial miRNAs from the maternal endometrium to the trophectoderm cells of preimplantation embryos. Specifically, in B6C3 derived mouse embryos, we found EV-associated and free miR-30d to cause  overexpression of genes involved in embryonic adhesion processes, including Itb3, Itga7 and Cdh5. Furthermore, supplementing murine embryos with miR-30d significantly improved embryo adhesion, suggesting that external miRNAs may have a functional role as transcriptomic modifiers of preimplantation embryos. Based on profiling of miRNAs in endometrial fluid, maternally-derived miRNAs are present within EVs in the uterine microenvironment. The internalization of maternally-derived exosomes has been visualized, but the mechanism by which miR-30d becomes incorporated into exosomes remains unknown. The present study aimed to elucidate the underlying mechanism of hsa-miR-30d transfer from human endometrial epithelial cells (hEECs) to the interior of exosomes and eventually to early-stage blastocysts, using a mir-30d knockout murine mode.

### Sample Protocol
hEEC cultures and exosome isolation  Endometrial biopsies were obtained at day LH+0 from healthy 18 to 35-year old donors. Patients diagnosed with endometriosis and/or endometritis were excluded. All patients signed informed consent prior to the sample collection; procedures were approved by the local Ethical Committee at IVI Valencia, Spain (code:1308-FIVI-127-FV). Endometrial samples were processed to separate the epithelial and stromal fractions by collagenase digestion and gravity sedimentation as previously described. When cultures reached confluence, they were washed with DMEM (Sigma-Aldrich, Madrid, Spain) to remove FBS-contaminated exosomes and then cultured in serum-depleted hECC medium (Sigma-Aldrich, Madrid, Spain). After 24 h, the conditioned medium was collected, and cells were incubated again with hEEC medium without serum for 24 h. All collected conditioned media was subjected to a series of differential centrifugations: (1) media were centrifuged at 300 x g for 10 min to pellet residual cells; (2) next, supernatants were centrifuged at 2,000 x g for 10 min; (3) the supernatants from step 2 were centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 30 min; 4) the supernatants from step 3 were passed through 0.22 µm-diameter filters (Acrodisc® syringe filters, Pall Corporation, Newquay Cornwall, UK) and centrifuged at 120,000 x g for 70 min using a P50AT4 Hitachi rotor. Step 4 supernatants were kept as EV-negative controls for further analysis. Step 4 pellets were resuspended in 1 mL PBS and centrifuged again under the same conditions (120,000 x g, 70 min). The pellet obtained contained the exosome enriched fraction. The samples were loaded in  1D PAGE but not resolved. The gel was stained with coomassie blue staining. In gel digestion of proteins  Sample was digested with sequencing grade trypsin (500 ng) (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) as described elsewhere {Shevchenko:1996wt}. Briefly, each slide was cut and small pieces of approximately 1mm2 in size were transferred into 1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes. After washing in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) in water pH=8 (Sigma Aldrich, Madrid, Spain) the gel was dehydrated in acetonitrile (ACN) (Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) (10mM in 50 mM ABC; 20 minutes at 60 ºC) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAM) (50 mM in 50 mM ABC; 30 minutes RT in the dark). For protein digestion 500 ng of trypsin in 200 µl of 50 mM ABC were added to each dried gel piece and digestion was set at 37 °C overnight. The trypsin digestion was stopped with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 1% final concentration, and the supernatant, containing the extracted digests, was carefully removed, leaving behind the sliced gels in the Eppendorf tube. Then, for additional peptide extraction, 200 µl of pure ACN, were added to each tube and incubated for 15 min at 37 °C in a shaker. The new supernatant containing the new peptide mixture was carefully withdrawn. Both supernatants were mixed in a tube and dried in a speed vacuum (ISS 110 SpeedVac System, Thermo Savant, ThermoScientific, Langenselbold, Germany) for 20 min and re-suspended in 15 µl of 2% ACN and 0.1% TFA prior to LC and MS analysis Nano LC-MS/MS analysis The peptides recovered from in-gel digestion processing were analyzed by LC using a NanoLC Ultra 1-D plus Eksigent® (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA) which was directly connected to an SCIEX TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) in direct injection mode.  Briefly, 5 µl from each digested sample were trapped on a NanoLC pre-column (3 μm particles size C18-CL, 350 µm diameter x 0.5 mm long; Eksigent) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 3µl/min during 5 min. Then, the digested peptides present in the samples were separated using an analytical LC column (3 μm particles size C18-CL, 75 µm diameter x 12 cm long, Nikkyo Technos Co®, Tokyo, Japan) equilibrated in 5% ACN 0.1% formic acid (FA) (Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The peptides were eluted from the column with a linear gradient from 5% to 40% of solvent B at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min over 120 min. Solvent A being 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water and solvent B being 0.1% FA in ACN. Eluted peptides were ionized applying 2.8 kV to the spray emitter on an ESI Nanospray III (SCIEX). Analysis was carried out in a data-dependent mode. Survey MS1 scans were acquired from 350–1250 m/z for 250 ms. The quadrupole resolution was set to ‘UNIT’ for MS2 experiments, which were acquired 100–1500 m/z for 50 ms in ‘high sensitivity’ mode. Following dynamic selection criteria were used: charge: 2+ to 5+; minimum intensity; 70 counts per second (cps). Up to 50 ions were selected for fragmentation after each survey scan. Dynamic exclusion time was set to 15 s. Collision energy was automatically set by the instrument according to its Rolling collision energy equations.

### Data Protocol
Protein Identification  The MS/MS information was sent to PARAGON algorithm via the sotware Protein Pilot v 4.5 (ABSciex). ProteinPilot default parameters were used to generate peak list directly from 5600 TripleTof. The Paragon algorithm of ProteinPilot was used to search Expasy protein database with the following parameters: trypsin specificity, cys-alkylation, no taxonomy restriction, and the search effort set to through. To avoid using the same spectral evidence for more than one protein, the identified proteins were grouped based on MS/MS spectra by the Protein-Pilot Progroup algorithm. A protein group in a Pro Group Report is a set of proteins that share some spectral evidence. Then, unobserved regions of protein sequence play no role in explaining the data. The False Discovery rate analysis was performed with the PSPEP algorithm implemented in Protein Pilot.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Crosstalk, Extracellular vesicles, Mirnas, Implantation

### Affiliations
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, Stanford University, CA, USA. Igenomix Foundation, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Hospital Clínico (INCLIVA), Valencia, Spain
Universitat de Valencia

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Felip Vilella
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, Stanford University, CA, USA. Igenomix Foundation, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Hospital Clínico (INCLIVA), Valencia, Spain


