### Accession
PXD009009

### Title
Integrated Omics Profiling Identifies Hypoxia-Regulated Genes in HCT116 Colon Cancer Cells

### Description
Hypoxia is associated with poor prognosis in most solid tumors due to its multiple effects on therapy resistance, angiogenesis, apoptotic resistance, and tumor invasion/metastasis. Here we used a comprehensive omics profiling to investigate hypoxia-regulated gene expression in HCT116 colon cancer cells. Quantitative analyses of proteome and secretome were performed in HCT116 cells cultured under hypoxic or normoxic conditions. A total of 5,700 proteins were quantified in proteome analysis and 722 proteins were quantified in secretome analysis. Both datasets were combined with the transcriptome and translatome datasets for further analysis. Verification of candidate proteins/genes in this integrated omics analysis was performed using immunoblotting and quantitative real-time RT-PCR analyses. We also performed polysome profiling to assess changes in translational efficiency of hypoxia-induced genes. Notably, several genes were differently regulated at the transcriptional and translational levels in HCT116 cells during hypoxia. Bioinformatics analysis suggested that hypoxia regulates translation of genes involved in extracellular matrix organization, extracellular exosomes, and protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum. Aberrations in these metabolic pathways appear to be correlated with an increased risk of tumor invasion/metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
2.2. SILAC labeling HCT116 cells were grown in lysine, arginine depleted DMEM (Biological industries, CT, USA) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Biological industries) at 37˚C in 5% CO2 incubator. Before use, media was re-supplemented with either normal 100 mg/L [12C6]lysine/[12C6]arginine or 100 mg/L [13C6]lysine/[13C6]arginine (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA USA) and additional 100 mg/L proline. Cells were grown for at least 6 doublings to allow full incorporation of labeled amino acids.  2.3. Conditioned media The conditioned media from HCT116 cells were collected as previous described [38]. In brief, cells were grown in the 15-cm culture dishes. The cells were washed with serum-free media and incubated in serum-free media for 24 h. The serum-free media were then harvested and removed the intact cells followed by centrifugation in Amicon Ultra-15 tubes (molecular mass cutoff, 3 kDa; Millipore, Billerica, MA) to concentrate and desalt the supernatants. The resulting supernatants were used as conditioned media. The protein concentrations of the conditioned media were determined using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  2.4. Dimethyl labeling The sample (25 μg of proteolytic peptides in 100 μl of 0.1 M TEAB buffer, pH 8) was mixed with 7.5 μl of 2 M sodium cyanoborohydride. Four microliter of 4 % (w/w) 12CH2-formaldehyde (light) or 13CD2-formaldehyde (heavy) solution was added to the mixture, and incubated for 1 h at 37°C [39, 40]. After incubation, 4 μl of 1 M ammonium bicarbonate was added to the mixture to quench the reaction. This procedure converts primary amines to dimethylamines in proteolytic peptides (N-terminus and the side chain of lysine residues). The mass shifts per labeling site were +28 Da or +34 Da for light labeling or heavy labeling samples, respectively.  2.5. Preparation and digestion of cell samples To monitor isotopic amino acid incorporation and conversion, trypsin digests were prepared from whole cell lysates and conditioned medium samples for LC-MS/MS analysis. Cell culture media were removed, and then washed twice with ice-cold PBS and lysed in lysis buffer (0.1% SDS, 20 mM HEPES, 1 mM Na3VO4 and 2.5 mM Na4P2O7, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM glycerophosphate, 1 mM benzamidine and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride) on ice. The cell lysates were collected and sonicated on ice with a probe sonicator (model W-380, Heat Systems-Ultrasonics) for 3 × 10 sec at 50% power output followed by centrifugation at 11,000 × g for 20 min at 4℃. The supernatant was used as the cell extracts and subjected to protein concentration determination by the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit. Five hundred and fifty micrograms of the SILAC samples was used for proteome analysis. The sample was subjected to reduction and alkylation by 10 mM DTT at 56°C for 1 h and 30 mM iodoacetamide at RT for 30 min in the dark and quenched by 10 mM DTT, followed by in-solution digestion with freshly prepared sequencing-grade trypsin (20 ng/μl in 25 mM NH4HCO3; Promega, Madison, WI) (protein: trypsin = 50:1) at 37°C for 16 h. The reaction was stopped by adding formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 0.05%. Micro-columns (packed with LiChrospher® 100 RP-18) were regenerated using the following steps: 100% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% FA, 80% ACN/0.1% FA, 50% ACN/0.1% FA, and 0.1% FA. The samples were acidified with 0.1% FA and desalted using a micro-column by a brief centrifugation at 840 × g for 2 min at RT. The peptides bound to the resins were sequentially eluted by 25% ACN/0.1% FA, 50% ACN/0.1% FA, and 80% ACN/0.1% FA. The eluted fractions were combined and re-concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge. Dried fractions were dissolved in 0.1% FA for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
2.6. On-line strong ion exchange/reverse phase liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry  For proteome analysis, peptides prepared from in-solution digestion were separated and analyzed via the online two-dimensional (2D) LC-MS/MS technique using a strong cation exchange (SCX) and reverse-phase 18 (RP18) nanoscale liquid chromatography system coupled with a LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, equal mixtures of SILAC peptides were injected into an in-house packed SCX column (Luna SCX, 5 μm, 0.5 × 150 mm; Phenomenex, CA, USA) and fractionated into 66 fractions using a 66 h (for secretome, sample was fractionated into 22 fractions using a 22 h analysis) continuous ammonium chloride gradient in the presence of 30% ACN and 0.1% FA. Each effluent of SCX fraction (1 μl/min) was continuously mixed with a stream of 0.1% FA/H2O (50 μl/min), and peptides were trapped on a RP column (Source 15 RPC, 0.5 X 5 mm; GE Healthcare, PA, USA) and separated using coupled BEH C18 chromatography (1.7 μm, 0.1 X 120 mm; Waters, MA, USA) with an acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% FA.MS analysis was performed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nano LC system.   2.7. MS data processing Mass spectra were acquired in the positive ion mode applying a data-dependent automatic switch between survey scan and tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) acquisition. Proteome samples were analyzed with a top 5 method; acquiring one Orbitrap survey scan in the mass range of m/z 300–2,000 followed by MS/MS of the five most intense ions in the LTQ. The target value in the LTQ-Orbitrap was 1,000,000 for survey scan at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400 using lock masses for recalibration to improve the mass accuracy of precursor ions. Fragmentation in the LTQ was performed by collision-induced dissociation with a target value of 5,000 ions. Ion selection threshold was 500 counts. Selected sequenced ions were dynamically excluded for 90 s.   2.8. Database search and protein quantification pipeline The proteome MS datasets were analyzed with the software Proteome Discoverer (version: 1.4.0.288; Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) with Mascot (version 2.2; Matrix Science, London, UK). To perform the database search against respective Swiss-Prot protein database (version: sprot_2014.fasta, number of sequences after taxonomy: 20266) for these raw data files. The search parameters used were as follows: trypsin as enzyme specificity; maximum missed cleavage sites: 2; cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification; protein N-terminal acetylation, Glnpyro Glu (N-term Q), methionine oxidation, 13C(6) (K) and 13C(6) (R) as variable modifications. The processing of secretome MS datasets were analyzed with similar setting but Dimethyl:2H(4)13C(2) (K), Dimethyl:2H(4)13C(2) (N-term), Dimethyl (K) and  Dimethyl (N-term) as variable modifications. Peptide charge: 1+ to 3+; peptide tolerance: 10 ppm; MS/MS tolerance: 0.6 Da; identify sets peptide FDR (false discovery rates): 0.01; protein FDR: 0.01; min. peptide length: 7; Minimal number of peptides: 1, Count only rank 1 peptides: True, Count Peptide only in top scored proteins: True.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Colorectal cancer/ hypoxia/ proteome/ secretome/ transcriptome/ translatome

### Affiliations
chang gung memorial hospital
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital

### Submitter
JengTing Chen

### Lab Head
Dr JengTing Chen
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital


