### Accession
PXD000490

### Title
Proteomics reveals dynamic assembly of repair complexes during bypass of DNA cross-links, part 1 of 2: CHROMASS DATA

### Description
DNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) block replication fork progression by inhibiting DNA strand separation. Repair of ICLs requires sequential incisions, translesion DNA synthesis, and homologous recombination, but the full set of factors involved in these transactions remains unknown. Here we established CHROmatin MASS spectrometry (CHROMASS) to study protein recruitment dynamics during perturbed DNA replication in Xenopus egg extracts. Using CHROMASS, we systematically monitored protein assembly and disassembly at ICL-containing chromatin. Among numerous prospective new DNA repair factors we identified SLF1 and SLF2, which form a complex with RAD18 and together define a new pathway that suppresses genome instability by recruiting the SMC5/6 cohesion complex to DNA lesions. Our study provides the first global analysis of an entire DNA repair pathway and reveals the mechanism of SMC5/6 relocalization to damaged DNA in vertebrate cells.

### Sample Protocol
Psoralen crosslinked or untreated sperm chromatin (3.3x103 sperm/μl in the final reaction) was incubated with HSS for 20 minutes followed by addition of two volumes of NPE. To isolate chromatin, 12 μl of the replication reaction was mixed with 80 μl ELB (10 mM HEPES–KOH at pH7.7, 50 mM KCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2) containing 0.2% Triton X-100 and layered over a180 μl ELB containing 500 mM sucrose in 5x44 mm micro centrifuge tubes (Beckman). Chromatin was sedimented by centrifugation (8000 rpm, 40 sec) in a swing-out rotor. The chromatin pellet was washed twice with 200 μl ELB containing 250 mM sucrose and resuspended in 50 μl denaturation buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM Tris pH=8.0). Cysteines were reduced (1 mM DTT, 45 minutes at RT) and alkylated (5 mM iodoacetamide, 45 min at RT). Proteins were digested with 2.5 μg LysC (Wako) for 3 hours at RT. Samples were diluted 1:4 with ABC (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate). 2.5 μg trypsin was added an incubated 16 hours at 30 C. NaCl was added to 400 mM final concentration and peptides were acidified and purified by stage tipping on C18 material.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.0.17) using a label-free algorithm. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins and peptides and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids were required. MS/MS spectra were searched against a non-redundant Xenopus database (see below). For the Andromeda search trypsin allowing for cleavage N-terminal to proline was chosen as enzyme specificity. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification, while protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications. Maximally two missed cleavages were allowed. Initial mass deviation of precursor ion was up to 7 ppm, mass deviation for fragment ions was 0.5 Dalton. Protein identification required one unique peptide to the protein group. Quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the built in label free quantification algorithm. “Match between run” was used to transfer identities within CHROMASS samples analyzed on the same instrumental platforms.

### Publication Abstract
DNA interstrand cross-links (ICLs) block replication fork progression by inhibiting DNA strand separation. Repair of ICLs requires sequential incisions, translesion DNA synthesis, and homologous recombination, but the full set of factors involved in these transactions remains unknown. We devised a technique called chromatin mass spectrometry (CHROMASS) to study protein recruitment dynamics during perturbed DNA replication in Xenopus egg extracts. Using CHROMASS, we systematically monitored protein assembly and disassembly on ICL-containing chromatin. Among numerous prospective DNA repair factors, we identified SLF1 and SLF2, which form a complex with RAD18 and together define a pathway that suppresses genome instability by recruiting the SMC5/6 cohesion complex to DNA lesions. Our study provides a global analysis of an entire DNA repair pathway and reveals the mechanism of SMC5/6 relocalization to damaged DNA in vertebrate cells.

### Keywords
Icl repair, Stalled replication forks, Chromatin, Dna damage response

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany


