### Accession
PXD019347

### Title
Formate-induced phospho-signalling

### Description
The mitochondrial serine catabolism to formate induces a metabolic switch to a hypermetabolic state with high rates of glycolysis, purine synthesis and pyrimidine synthesis. While formate is a purine precursor it is not obvious link between formate and pyrimidine synthesis. Methods Here we combine phospho-proteome and metabolic profiling to determine how formate induces pyrimidine synthesis. We discover that formate induces CAD phosphorylation. Mechanistically formate induces mTORC1 activity as quantified by S6K1 phosphorylation, which is known to phosphorylate CAD and increase its enzymatic activity. Treatment with the allosteric mTORC1 inhibitor rapamycin abrogates CAD phosphorylation and pyrimidine synthesis induced by formate. We conclude that formate activates mTORC1 and induces pyrimidine synthesis via increasing CAD activity.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates were reduced with 10 mM DTT and subsequently alkylated with 55 mM Iodoacetamide. Alkylated proteins were then digested first using Endoproteinase Lys-C (Alpha Laboratories) for 1 hour followed by trypsin (Promega) overnight. Peptides were then desalted using C18 SepPak (Waters) filtration and resuspended in a buffer containing 80% acetonitrile (ACN), 6% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Enrichment of phosphorylated peptides was performed using TiO2 beads (GL Sciences), and eluted from beads with a buffer 15% NH4OH, 40% ACN. Peptides were separated on a nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography (20 cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 µm resin (Dr Maisch)) performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Scientific) coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). MS data were acquired using the XCalibur software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The MS .raw files were analysed with the MaxQuant computational platform and searched against the human UniProt database using the Andromeda search engine. Trypsin with full enzyme specificity and maximum two missed cleavages were allowed. Only peptides longer than six amino acids were analysed. Oxidation (Met) and N-acetylation were set as variable modifications, as well as phospho(STY). Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification. A 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was used for peptides, proteins and phosphopeptides identification. MaxQuant output Phospho(STY)site.txt file was processed with Perseus software. Reverse and potential contaminant flagged proteins were removed, and only class I sites (= sites accurately localized with localization probability > 0.75 and score difference > 5) were used for the analysis. Intensity values were used for phosphorylation sites quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Ms, Formate, Metabolism, Cancer

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute
Tumour Microenvironment & Proteomics

### Submitter
Sara Zanivan

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Zanivan
CRUK Beatson Institute


