### Accession
PXD026741

### Title
Proteomic Investigation of Multiple Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus strains with distinct Daptomycin Tolerance and Resistance Phenotypes

### Description
Several groups have shown that through evolution experiments, tolerance and resistance evolved rapidly under cyclic antibiotic treatment. In other words, intermittent antibiotic exposure performed in a typical adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE) experiments will “train” the bacteria to become tolerant/resistant to the drug. Using this experimental strategy, we performed in vitro laboratory evolution in MRSA using daptomycin, and mine novel daptomycin tolerance and resistance mutants, which were isolated at specific time points during the evolution experiments. Three daptomycin-tolerant isolates with different tolerance level were generated from our laboratory evolution (TOL2 and TOL5 with a mild-tolerance phenotype, and TOL6 with a high-tolerance phenotype). They all bear mutations at different genes, and have no increase in MIC towards daptomycin. Besides, we also isolated three daptomycin-resistant isolates (RES1, RES2, RES3) that have a single point mutation in the same gene, mprF, but at different locations, leading to an increased MIC towards daptomycin. Through proteomics, we uncovered the differential adaptation strategies of these daptomycin tolerant and resistant MRSA strains, and how they respond differently to antibiotics compared to the ancestral wild-type.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics analysis, exponential phase ancestral, tolerant (TOL2, TOL5, TOL6) and resistant strains (RES1, RES2, RES3) were treated with sub-MIC doses of daptomycin (0.25 µg/ml) for 1 h. Exponential phase cells before antibiotic treatment were also collected. Two different strategies are used for the proteomics analysis: (i) First, the proteome profile of the evolved strains was compared to the ancestral strain as control to reveal the effect of the point mutations towards the phenotype of the tolerant/resistant strains. (ii) Next, we compared the proteome profile of each strain before and after antibiotic treatment to obtain strain-specific antibiotic response towards daptomycin exposure. For all proteomics experiments, three biological replicates were performed for each sample including the control sample.  The cell pellet was suspended in 300 µL of lysis buffer (8M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0), froze in liquid nitrogen, and sonicated for 10 min. The sample was centrifuged (16,000 ×g for 10 min) to remove cell debris and insoluble materials. An aliquot of the sample was taken for BCA protein assay (Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit). After protein quantification, the sample was reduced by dithiothreitol (DTT) (0.1 M final concentration) at 37 ⁰C for 1 h. For shotgun proteomics, 150 µg of proteins were mixed with up to 250 µl of the exchange buffer (6M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 600 mM guanidine HCl), transferred to Amicon® filter device (Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany), and centrifuged (14,000 ×g for 20 min). The proteins in the filter device were alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA, 50 mM in exchange buffer) in dark for 20 min, and then centrifuged (14,000 ×g for 20 min). To dilute the urea concentration, 250 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to the filter device and centrifuged (14,000 ×g for 20 min). This step was repeated once. Proteins were digested by sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1:50 w/w, Promega, Madison, WI) for 12 h at 37 ⁰C. Then, the sample was acidified with 10% formic acid to a final concentration of 0.1% (v/v) and centrifuged for 16,000 ×g for 5 min. Finally, the samples were desalted by C18 reverse-phase ZipTip (Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) and dried with SpeedVac (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) for 30 min.  The samples were reconstituted in 25 µl water:acetonitrile:formic acid in a 97.9:2:0.1 ratio (v/v/v), and processed through Bruker nanoElute Ultra High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (UHPLC) (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a hybrid trapped ion mobility-quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (TimsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) via a nano-electrospray ion source (Captive Spray, Bruker Daltonics). A volume of 1 µl (approximately 200 ng of the protein digest) was injected into the UHPLC system and separated on an IonOpticks 25cm Aurora Series Emitter column with Captive Spray Insert (250 mm × 75 µm internal diameter, 120 Å pore size, 1.6 µm particle size C18) at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min. The mobile phase composition is 0.1% formic acid in water for solvent A, and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile for solvent B. The gradient was applied from 2 to 5% of solvent B for 0.5 min, from 5 to 30% of solvent B for 26.5 min, and then from 30 to 95% of solvent B for 0.5 min. In the end, the mobile phase was kept at 95% of solvent B for 0.5 min, and then decreased to 2% of solvent B for 0.1 min. 2 minutes equilibration with 2% of solvent B was applied before the next injection.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were converted to mgf files by Bruker Compass DataAnalysis (version 5.2), and subsequently converted to mzML files by msconvert of the ProteoWizard (version 3.0.20229 64-bit). The mzML files were searched using Comet (version 2016.01 rev.2) with a custom database. Briefly, the genome sequence of S. aureus ATCC 43300 was converted into a protein database using GeneMark (version 3.25) gene prediction tool. The proteins were then annotated using BLASTp (version 2.7.1) from NCBI using S. aureus NCTC 8325 as the protein database. The sequences of common contaminants, such as trypsin and human keratins, and decoy sequences generated by shuffling amino acid sequences between tryptic cleavage sites were added to the database. The decoy sequences in the database are used for the false discovery rate (FDR) estimation of the identified peptides. The search parameters criteria were set as follows: 40 ppm peptide mass tolerance, monoisotopic mass type, fully digested enzyme termini, 0.05 amu fragment bin tolerance, 0 amu fragment bin offset, carbamidomethylated cysteine, and oxidated methionine as the fixed and variable modifications respectively. The search results from Comet were processed by PeptideProphet, iProphet, and ProteinProphet of the Trans-Proteomics Pipeline (TPP) in the decoy-assisted non-parametric mode. Every mzML run was analyzed independently. Protein identifications were filtered at a false discovery rate of 0.01 as predicted by ProteinProphet.

### Publication Abstract
Methicillin-resistant <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> (MRSA) is a highly dangerous pathogen, and daptomycin has been increasingly used to treat its infections in clinics. Recently, several groups have shown that tolerance and resistance of microbes can evolve rapidly under cyclic antibiotic exposure. We have previously shown that the same tolerance and resistance development occurs in MRSA treated with daptomycin in an adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE) experiment. In the present study, we performed proteomic analysis to compare six daptomycin-tolerant and resistant MRSA strains that were evolved from the same ancestral strain. The strain with a higher tolerance level than the others had the most different proteome and response to antibiotic treatment, resembling those observed in persister cells, which are small subpopulations of bacteria that survive lethal antibiotics treatment. By comparing the proteome changes across strains with similar phenotypes, we identified the key proteins that play important roles in daptomycin tolerance and resistance in MRSA. We selected two candidates to be confirmed by gene overexpression analysis. Overexpression of EcsA1 and FabG, which were up-regulated in all of the tolerant evolved strains, led to increased daptomycin tolerance in wild-type MRSA. The proteomics data also suggested that cell wall modulations were implicated in both resistance and tolerance, but in different ways. While the resistant strains had peptidoglycan changes and a more positive surface charge to directly repel daptomycin, the tolerant strains possessed different cell wall changes that do not involve the peptidoglycan nor alterations of the surface charge. Overall, our study showed the differential proteome profiles among multiple tolerant and resistant strains, pinpointed the key proteins for the two phenotypes and revealed the differences in cell wall modulations between the daptomycin-tolerant/resistant strains.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Daptomycin, Adaptive laboratory evolution, Methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus, Tolerance

### Affiliations
Chemical and Biological Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)

### Submitter
Jordy Evan Sulaiman

### Lab Head
Dr Henry Lam
Chemical and Biological Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)


