### Accession
PXD003032

### Title
Identification and Quantitative Analysis of Cellular Proteins Affected by Treatment with Withaferin A using a SILAC-based Proteomics Approach

### Description
Withaferin A (WA) is a major bioactive compound isolated from the medicinal plant Withania somnifera Dunal, also known as ‘‘Ashwagandha’’. A number of published reports suggest various uses for WA including its function as an anti-inflammatory and anti-angiogenic drug molecule. The effects of WA at the molecular level in a cellular environment are not well understood. Knowledge of the molecular mechanism of action of WA could enhance its therapeutic value and may reveal novel pathways it may modulate.

### Sample Protocol
In order to identify and characterize proteins affected by treatment with WA, we used SILAC- based proteomics analysis on a mouse microglial cell line (N9), which replicates phenotypic characteristics of primary microglial cells.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed in MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5, a quantitative proteomics software package for the analysis of large, high-resolution MS data sets. The raw files were processed and searched against the current UniprotKB database containing Mus musculus (mouse) protein sequences as well as a second MaxQuant database of known contaminants. The search parameters included a constant modification of cysteine by carbamidomethylation and variable modification of methionine oxidation. Additional parameters include multiplicity set to 2, with a heavy set of lysine-6 and arginine-10. The search tolerance was set to 6 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da with a false discovery rate of less than 1%. Statistical analysis was carried out using Perseus software, which assesses the statistical significance of protein expression based on the approach developed by Benjamini and Hochberg (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995). A threshold q-value of 0.05 for the Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Withaferin a, Proteomics, Silac, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy,Byrd Alzheimer’s Institute, University of South Florida
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Byrd Alzheimer’s Institute,  University of South Florida-Health, 4001 E. Fletcher Ave, MDC36, Tampa FL, 33613

### Submitter
Umesh Jinwal

### Lab Head
Dr Umesh Jinwal
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Byrd Alzheimer’s Institute,  University of South Florida-Health, 4001 E. Fletcher Ave, MDC36, Tampa FL, 33613


