### Accession
PXD040764

### Title
Venom Proteomics of Vespa velutina nigrithorax (Hym.: Vespidae) Queens and Workers: A Quantitative SWATH-MS Analysis

### Description
Health risks caused by stings from Vespa velutina nigrithorax (VV), also known as the yellow-legged Asian hornet, have become a public concern, but little is known about its venom composition. This study presents the proteome profile of the VV’s venom sac based on Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical Mass Spectra (SWATH-MS). The study also performed proteomic quantitative analysis and examined the biological pathways and molecular functions of the proteins in the VS of VV gynes (i.e., future queens [SQ]) and workers [SW]). The total protein content per VS was significantly higher in the SW than in the SQ (274 ± 54 µg/sac vs. 175 ± 22 µg/sac; p=0.02). We quantified a total of 228 proteins belonging to 7 different classes: Insecta (n=191); Amphibia and Reptilia (n=20); Bacilli, γ-Proteobacteria and Pisoniviricetes (n=12); and Arachnida (n=5). Phage proteins of Paenibacillus larvae, the etiological agent of American foulbrood, and genome polyprotein from deformed wing virus were quantified by SWATH-MS. Among the 228 identified proteins, 66 showed significant differential expression between SQ and SW. The well-known allergens hyaluronidase A, venom antigen 5 and phospholipase A1 were significantly downregulated in the SQ venom.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation for Mass Spectrometric Analysis In relation to tryptic digestion for mass spectrometry, 24 g protein was concentrated in a SDS-PAGE single band [1,2] and submitted to a manual digestion as describe elsewhere [3]. Finally, the peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid for further analysis.   Sequential Window Acquisition of All Theorical Mass Spectra (SWATH-MS) Quantification The quantitative proteomic analysis was made by SWATH method in a hybrid quadrupole-TOF mass spectrometer 6600+ (SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA). Once the proteins were digested, two pools (SQ and SW) were created using 3 l of each individual sample. The peptide mixtures (from sample pools) were analyzed using a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method with micro-liquid chromatography (LC) system Ekspert nLC425 (Eksigen, Dublin, CA, USA) for a total time of 40 min. Coupled with the LC was a hybrid quadrupole-TOF mass spectrometer 6600 (Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) operating with DDA in positive ion mode to build the MS/MS spectral libraries, as previously described [63-65]. Protein and peptide identification was carried out using the ProteinPilot software v.5.0.1. (Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) with a customizer database including Vespa + Vespa velutina + Apis mellifera + poison + toxins Uniprot databases (https://www.uniprot.org/) specifying iodoacetamide as alkylation of the cystines and digestion by trypsin. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both peptides and proteins with a confidence score above 99% [66]. The MS/MS spectra, the ion data, and the retention time of the identified peptides and proteins were used to generate the spectral library. This spectral library was used to create the spectral window acquisition used in the SWATH-MS method. Then, 4 l from each sample were individually analyzed. The SWATH-MS method is based on repeating a cycle that consists of the acquisition of 100 TOF MS/MS scans or time of flight mass spectrometry (TOF MS/M) windows. The width of the variable windows was optimized for each set of samples according to the ionic density found in the previous DDA by means of the SWATH variable window calculator (Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) spreadsheet.  The data extraction of fragmented ion chromatographic profiles using the SWATH method was performed with the PeakView software (version 2.2; Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) by the SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (version 2.0; Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA). Proteins with more than 10 peptides and seven transitions (fragments) were selected based on signal intensity to generate the integrated area peaks for the quantification. Any shared or modified peptides were excluded. Integrated area peaks were exported to the MarkerView software (Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) for relative quantitative analysis. MarkerView uses processing algorithms that accurately find chromatographic and spectral peaks direct from the raw SWATH data. Data alignment by MarkerView compensates for minor variations in both mass and retention time values, ensuring that identical compounds in different samples are accurately compared with one another. A most like ratio (MLR) normalization was performed to control for possible uneven sample loss across the different samples during the sample preparation process. A Student´s t-test analysis using the MarkerView software was performed for comparison among the samples based on the averaged area sums of all the transitions derived for each protein. The t-test was used to indicate how well each variable distinguishes the two groups (SQ and SW), reported as a P value. In the set of differentially expressed proteins (P < 0.05), a 1.5-fold increase or 0.66-fold decrease was selected as the cut-off point.  1. Bonzon-Kulichenko, E.; Pérez-Hernández, D.; Núñez, E.; Martínez-Acedo, P.; Navarro, P.; Trevisan-Herraz, M.; Ramos Mdel, C.; Sierra, S.; Martínez-Martínez, S.; Ruiz-Meana, M.; Miró-Casas, E.; García-Dorado, D.; Redondo, J.M.; Burgos, J.S.; Vázquez, J. A robust method for quantitative high-throughput analysis of proteomes by 18O labeling. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2011, 10, M110.003335. DOI:10.1074/mcp.M110.003335. 2. Perez-Hernandez, D.; Gutiérrez-Vázquez, C.; Jorge, I.; López-Martín, S.; Ursa, A.; Sánchez-Madrid, F.; Vázquez, J.; Yáñez-Mó, M. The intracellular interactome of tetraspanin-enriched microdomains reveals their function as sorting machineries toward exosomes. J. Biol. Che. 2013, 288, 11649–11661. DOI:10.1074/jbc.M112.445304.  3. Shevchenko, A.; Wilm, M.; Vorm, O.; Jensen, O.N.; Podtelejnikov, A.V.; Neubauer, G., Shevchenko, A.; Mortensen, P.; Mann, M.  A strategy for identifying gel-separated proteins in sequence databases by MS alone. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 1996, 24, 893–896. DOI: 10.1042/bst0240893. PMID: 8878870.

### Data Protocol
Protein Functional Analysis The differentially regulated proteins were subjected to functional analysis for biological information related to molecular functions, biological processes, cellular components and protein families.  We searched them against the protein databases UniProtKB and toxin database ToxProt (http://www.uniprot.org).

### Publication Abstract
Health risks caused by stings from <i>Vespa velutina nigrithorax</i> (VV), also known as the yellow-legged Asian hornet, have become a public concern, but little is known about its venom composition. This study presents the proteome profile of the VV's venom sac (VS) based on Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical Mass Spectra (SWATH-MS). The study also performed proteomic quantitative analysis and examined the biological pathways and molecular functions of the proteins in the VS of VV gynes (i.e., future queens [SQ]) and workers [SW]. The total protein content per VS was significantly higher in the SW than in the SQ (274 &#xb1; 54 &#xb5;g/sac vs. 175 &#xb1; 22 &#xb5;g/sac; <i>p</i> = 0.02). We quantified a total of 228 proteins in the VS, belonging to 7 different classes: <i>Insecta</i> (<i>n</i> = 191); <i>Amphibia</i> and <i>Reptilia</i> (<i>n</i> = 20); <i>Bacilli</i>, <i>&#x3b3;-Proteobacteria</i> and <i>Pisoniviricetes</i> (<i>n</i> = 12); and <i>Arachnida</i> (<i>n</i> = 5). Among the 228 identified proteins, 66 showed significant differential expression between SQ and SW. The potential allergens hyaluronidase A, venom antigen 5 and phospholipase A1 were significantly downregulated in the SQ venom.

### Keywords
Asian hornet; vespa velutina nigrithorax; vespa spp.; proteomics; swath-ms; hymenopteran; venom; allergy.

### Affiliations
Fundacion Instituto de Investigaciones Sanitarias de Santiago de Compostela
FIDIS

### Submitter
Susana Bravo

### Lab Head
Dr Susana Bravo
Fundacion Instituto de Investigaciones Sanitarias de Santiago de Compostela


