### Accession
PXD017730

### Title
Comparison of post-mating responses in the female reproductive tract among Drosophila species

### Description
Fertility depends on the coordination of complex interactions between male and female reproductive proteins inside the female reproductive tract (FRT). These interactions mediate a suite of changes in female behavior, morphology, and physiology after mating, yet little is known about how the molecular environment of the FRT may differ among species and coordinate species-specific female post-mating responses. We used semi-quantitative proteomics to compare the FRT protein composition between virgin and mated females in Drosophila melanogaster. These results are compared to those from quantitative TMT proteomic analyses of the mating-induced changes in D. simulans and D. mauritiana, and after conspecific and heterospecific inseminations. Our study highlights the value of using quantitative proteomics approaches to study the molecular composition of the FRT environment, and how its divergence may inform mechanistic studies of post-mating pre-zygotic reproductive isolation between species.

### Sample Protocol
Female reproductive tracts (i.e., lower FRTs, including the bursa, oviduct, seminal receptacle, spermathecae, parovaria, and associated fat body) of ~150 females were collected from virgin and mated females (6h after copulation). Two replicates were collected per condition. Samples were dissected in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and pooled in PBS on ice per replicate. Samples were rinsed in PBS, pelleted by centrifugation, resuspended in 100 µL 2x Laemmli with 10% TCEP, and solubilized by several cycles of maceration and heating. Protein concentration of each sample was quantified using the RCDC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad). 15 µg of each sample was separated on a 1.5 mm 12% SDS-PAGE gel and stained with colloidal Coomassie dye. Each sample was sliced into 10 bands, and reduced with DDT, alkylated with iodoacetamide, digested with trypsin, and eluted with 0.1% formic acid.  LC-MS/MS was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 rapid separation LC nanoUPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled with a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a PepMap 100 C18 pre-column (5 µm particle, 100 Å pore, 300 µm × 5 mm, Thermo Scientific) at 10 µL/min for 3 min with 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were separated on a reverse-phase nano EASY-spray C18 analytical column (2 µm particle, 100 Å pore, 75 µm × 500 mm, Thermo Scientific) with a gradient of 1.6% to 32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 90 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. All m/z values of eluting peptide ions (range between 380-1500 Da) were acquired at a resolution of 70,000. The MS1 scan was followed by data-dependent MS2 scans (top 20) to isolate and fragment the most abundant precursor ions by higher energy collision dissociation (25% normalized collision energy). Fragment ions were measured at a resolution of 17,500. Ions with +1 or unassigned charge were excluded from the analysis. Previously interrogated precursor ions were excluded using a dynamic window (60s ± 10 ppm).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were matched to peptide sequences using PEAKS X (BSI) by searching against the D. melanogaster protein database (FlyBase.org, dmel-all-translation-r6.30), appended with the cRAP v1.0 contaminant database (thegpm.org). For genes with multiple isoforms, the search database only included the longest protein sequence. Search parameters allowed a parent ion mass error tolerance of ±15 ppm, a fragment ion mass error tolerance of ±0.5 Da, a maximum of three post-translational modifications per peptide, semi-specific digestion, and a maximum of three missed tryptic cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modifications, and oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) were set as variable modifications. Peptide identifications were only accepted if their false discovery rate (FDR) was less than 1% based on the decoy-fusion approach, and protein identifications were only accepted if their FDR was less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-m, Female reproductive tract, Post-mating responses, Drosophila melanogaster

### Affiliations
Center for Reproductive Evolution, Biology Department, Syracuse University
Syracuse University

### Submitter
Erin McCullough

### Lab Head
Dr Steve Dorus
Center for Reproductive Evolution, Biology Department, Syracuse University


