### Accession
PXD026497

### Title
M1BP cooperates with CP190 to activate transcription at TAD borders and promote chromatin insulator activity

### Description
Genome organization is driven by forces affecting transcriptional state, but the relationship between transcription and genome architecture remains unclear. Here, we identified the Drosophila transcription factor Motif 1 Binding Protein (M1BP) in physical association with the gypsy chromatin insulator core complex, including the universal insulator protein CP190. M1BP is required for enhancer-blocking and barrier activities of the gypsy insulator as well as its proper nuclear localization. Genome-wide, M1BP specifically colocalizes with CP190 at Motif 1-containing promoters, which are enriched at topologically associating domain (TAD) borders. M1BP facilitates CP190 chromatin binding at many shared sites and vice versa. Both factors promote Motif 1-dependent gene expression and transcription near TAD borders genome-wide. Finally, loss of M1BP reduces chromatin accessibility and increases both inter- and intra-TAD local genome compaction. Our results reveal physical and functional interaction between CP190 and M1BP to activate transcription at TAD borders and mediate chromatin insulator-dependent genome organization.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear extracts from 18 g of mixed stage (0–24 h) Drosophila embryos27 were lysed in 5 mL HBSMT-0.3% + 1 M KCl (50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 1 M KCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.3% Triton X-100 [v/v] at pH 7) including 1 mM PMSF, and Complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Immunoprecipitation was performed using methods described above, and beads were washed twice with HBSMT-0.3% + 1 M KCl, once with HBSM (50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2), and eluted with 1% Sodium Dodecanoate. Six replicates for each IP were pooled together for mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were analyzed using tandem HPLC-mass spectrometry at the NIDDK Mass Spectrometry Facility. Mass from eluted peptides was queried in the UniProt database, and results were analyzed by MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Genome organization is driven by forces affecting transcriptional state, but the relationship between transcription and genome architecture remains unclear. Here, we identified the Drosophila transcription factor Motif 1 Binding Protein (M1BP) in physical association with the gypsy chromatin insulator core complex, including the universal insulator protein CP190. M1BP is required for enhancer-blocking and barrier activities of the gypsy insulator as well as its proper nuclear localization. Genome-wide, M1BP specifically colocalizes with CP190 at Motif 1-containing promoters, which are enriched at topologically associating domain (TAD) borders. M1BP facilitates CP190 chromatin binding at many shared sites and vice versa. Both factors promote Motif 1-dependent gene expression and transcription near TAD borders genome-wide. Finally, loss of M1BP reduces chromatin accessibility and increases both inter- and intra-TAD local genome compaction. Our results reveal physical and functional interaction between CP190 and M1BP to activate transcription at TAD borders and mediate chromatin insulator-dependent genome organization.

### Keywords
Embryo, Nuclear extract, Su(hw), Drosophila, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Nuclear Organization and Gene Expression Section, Laboratory of Biochemistry and Genetics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA
NIH

### Submitter
shue chen

### Lab Head
Dr Elissa Lei
Nuclear Organization and Gene Expression Section, Laboratory of Biochemistry and Genetics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA


