### Accession
PXD031920

### Title
Centriolar satellites expedite mother centriole remodeling to promote ciliogenesis

### Description
Centrosomes are orbited by centriolar satellites, dynamic multiprotein assemblies nucleated by PCM1. To study the requirement for centriolar satellites, we generated mice lacking PCM1. Pcm1-/- mice display partially expressive perinatal lethality with survivors exhibiting hydrocephalus, oligospermia and cerebellar hypoplasia. Pcm1-/- multiciliated ependymal cells and PCM1-/- retinal pigmented epithelial 1 (RPE1) cells showed reduced ciliogenesis. PCM1-/- RPE1 cells displayed reduced docking of the mother centriole to the ciliary vesicle and removal of CP110 and CEP97 from the distal mother centriole, indicating compromised early ciliogenesis. We show these molecular cascades are maintained in vivo, although we propose that the cellular threshold for ciliogenesis initiation varies between cell types. We propose that PCM1 and centriolar satellites facilitate efficient trafficking of proteins to and from centrioles, including the departure of CP110 and CEP97 to initiate ciliogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
MTECs were lysed in 0.1 % SDS in PBS plus 1X HALT protease inhibitor ThermoFisher Scientific, 78443), then processed by a multi-protease FASP protocol as described.(65) In brief, the SDS was removed and the proteins were first digested with Lys-C (Wako) and subsequently with Trypsin (Promega) with an enzyme to protein ratio (1:50). 10 μg of Lys-C and Trypsin digests were loaded separately and desalted on C18 Stage tip  and eluates were analyzed by HPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified with the MaxQuant software package, and label-free quantification was performed by MaxLFQ. The search included variable modifications for oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, and carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Peptides with at least seven amino acids were considered for identification. The false discovery rate, determined by searching a reverse database, was set at 0.01 for both peptides and proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Centrosomes are orbited by centriolar satellites, dynamic multiprotein assemblies nucleated by Pericentriolar material 1 (PCM1). To study the requirement for centriolar satellites, we generated mice lacking PCM1, a crucial component of satellites. <i>Pcm1<sup>-/-</sup></i> mice display partially penetrant perinatal lethality with survivors exhibiting hydrocephalus, oligospermia, and cerebellar hypoplasia, and variably expressive phenotypes such as hydronephrosis. As many of these phenotypes have been observed in human ciliopathies and satellites are implicated in cilia biology, we investigated whether cilia were affected. PCM1 was dispensable for ciliogenesis in many cell types, whereas <i>Pcm1<sup>-/-</sup></i> multiciliated ependymal cells and human <i>PCM1<sup>-/-</sup></i> retinal pigmented epithelial 1 (RPE1) cells showed reduced ciliogenesis. <i>PCM1<sup>-/-</sup></i> RPE1 cells displayed reduced docking of the mother centriole to the ciliary vesicle and removal of CP110 and CEP97 from the distal mother centriole, indicating compromised early ciliogenesis. Similarly, <i>Pcm1<sup>-/-</sup></i> ependymal cells exhibited reduced removal of CP110 from basal bodies in vivo. We propose that PCM1 and centriolar satellites facilitate efficient trafficking of proteins to and from centrioles, including the departure of CP110 and CEP97 to initiate ciliogenesis, and that the threshold to trigger ciliogenesis differs between cell types.

### Keywords
Mtecs, Cilia

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
university of edinburgh

### Submitter
Alex von kriegsheim

### Lab Head
Dr Alex von Kriegsheim
university of edinburgh


