### Accession
PXD009601

### Title
Diverged Trypanosome MICOS as a Hub for Mitochondrial Cristae Shaping and Protein Import

### Description
The mitochondrial contact site and cristae organization system (MICOS) is a complex responsible for proper cristae formation. Empirical data about this ubiquitous complex is limited to opisthokont models (e.g. yeast), impeding understanding of its core properties and adaptation potential to diverse cellular milieus. To close this knowledge gap, we characterized MICOS from the diverged excavate Trypanosoma brucei. These results allow the definition of fundamental MICOS properties, such as its role in maintaining both cristae and contacts between the inner and outer membranes plus its extrusion into the intermembrane space. Yet, surprising differences with opisthokonts indicate that MICOS can assume different forms.  T. brucei MICOS contains a novel subunit involved in the import of intermembrane space proteins, including respiratory chain complex assembly factors. We propose an evidence-based hypothesis that T. brucei MICOS populates cristae membranes with proteins needed for respiration, supported by the complex's even distribution in cristae

### Sample Protocol
Eluates of co-IP proteins from the 927 strain and the TbMic20 and TbMic60 depletomes were processed by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wiśniewski et al., 2011) with some modifications. The samples were mixed with 8M UA buffer (8M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5), loaded onto a Microcon device with MWCO 30 kDa (Merck Millipore) and centrifuged at 7,000× g (subsequent centrifugation steps done at 14,000× g) for 30 min at 20°C. The retained proteins were washed with 200 μL UA buffer. The final protein concentrates trapped in the Microcon device were mixed with 100 μL of UA buffer containing 50 mM iodoacetamide and incubated in the dark for 20 min. After the next centrifugation step, the samples were washed three times with 100 μL UA buffer and three times with 100 μL of 50 mM NaHCO3. Sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added onto the filter and the mixture was incubated for 18 h at 37°C (enzyme:protein ratio 1:100). The tryptic peptides were finally eluted by centrifugation followed by two additional elutions with 50 μL of 50mM NaHCO3. After FASP, peptides of co-IP proteins were directly extracted into LC-MS vials by 2.5% formic acid (FA) in 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and 100% ACN with addition of polyethylene glycol  (20,000; final concentration 0.001%) (Stejskal et al., 2013) and concentrated in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific) prior to LC-MS analyses. Triethylammonium bicarbonate was used instead of NaHCO3 during all FASP steps in case of depletome samples. TbMic20 or TbMic60 samples were separately labeled using Tandem Mass Tags (TMT6plex; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the manufacturer’s instructions. Labeling efficiency was checked by LC-MS analyses and database searches using variable TMT-related modifications and was found to be >96% (portion of the correctly labeled peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) out of all PSMs). Individual samples were mixed in the ratio of 1:1:1:1. Both pooled samples were offline fractionated using basic pH reverse phase liquid chromatography (mobile phase A: 20mM Ammonium Hydroxide in water; mobile phase B: 20mM Ammonium Hydroxide in 80% acetonitrile (ACN); stationary phase: XBridge C18 3.5µm, 150x3mm; Waters) using Ultimate3000 UHPLC+ system (SR-3000, LPG-3400 XRS, WPS-3000 TXRS, TCC-3000 RS, VWD-3400 RS). A 30 minute nonlinear gradient (0min: 0.5% B, 5min: 10% B, 30min: 60% B; 35min: 80% B – system wash; flow rate 0.5ml/min) was used to fractionate peptides into 33 fractions (1 fraction/min), which were pooled into 11 fractions (1+11+21, 2+12+22, etc.) that were analyzed on LC-MS system. LC-MS2 analysis of peptides LC-MS2 analyses of all peptide mixtures were done using RSLCnano system (SRD-3400, NCS-3500RS CAP, WPS-3000 TPL RS) connected to Orbitrap Elite hybrid spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted using a trapping column (100 μm × 30 mm) filled with 3.5-μm X-Bridge BEH 130 C18 sorbent (Waters). After washing of trapping column with 0.1% FA, the peptides were  eluted (flow 300 nl/min) from the trapping column onto an analytical column (Acclaim Pepmap100 C18, 3 µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) by 100 min nonlinear gradient program (1-56% of mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN). Equilibration of the trapping column and the column was done prior to sample injection to sample loop. The analytical column outlet was directly connected to the Digital PicoView 550 (New Objective) ion source sheath gas option a PicoTip emitter SilicaTip (New Objective; FS360-20-15-N-20-C12). ABIRD (Active Background Ion Reduction Device, ESI Source Solutions) was installed. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy selecting up to top 10 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (350-2000 m/z). The resolution of the survey scan was 60 000 (400 m/z) with a target value of 1×106 ions, one microscan and maximum injection time of 200 ms. HCD MS/MS (32 or 36% relative fragmentation energy used for coimmunoprecipitated or depleted samples, respectively) spectra were acquired with a target value of 50 000 and resolution of 15 000 (400 m/z). The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 500 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition and early expiration was disabled. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 2 or 1.4 m/z (co-IP or depletome samples, respectively).

### Data Protocol
The analysis of the mass spectrometric RAW data files was carried out using the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 1.4) with in-house Mascot (Matrixscience, London, UK; version 2.6) and Sequest search engine utilization. MS/MS ion searches were done at first against modified cRAP database (based on http://www.thegpm.org/crap/; 111 sequences in total) containing protein contaminants like keratin, trypsin etc. MS/MS spectra assigned by Mascot search engine to any cRAP protein peptide with Mascot ion score >30 were excluded from the next database searches.  Final database searches were done against TriTrypDB protein database (http://tritrypdb.org/common/downloads/release9.0/TbruceiTREU927/fasta/data/TriTrypDB9.0_TbruceiTREU927_AnnotatedProteins.fasta; number of proteins 11,567). Mass tolerance for peptides and MS/MS fragments were 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation (N, Q) and acetylation (protein N-terminus) as optional modification, carbamidomethylation (C) (plus TMT6plex (K, N-term) modifications in case of TMT6plex labeled samples) as fixed modification and one enzyme miss cleavage were set for all searches. A percolator was used for post-processing of the search results. Raw files from all 11 high pH fractions were searched together. Peptides with q-value <0.01, rank 1 and with at least 6 amino acids were considered only. Proteins matching the same set of peptides were reported as protein groups. Protein groups/proteins were reported only if they had at least one unique peptide. Co-IP protein abundance was assessed using protein area calculation in Proteome Discoverer. Protein group reports from all individual samples were combined into a single supergroup (SG) report where each SG is list of proteins reported within a single protein group in at least single sample report. TMT6plex reporter ion intensities of unique peptides were normalized to get equal reporter intensity sum for each channel.

### Publication Abstract
The mitochondrial contact site and cristae organization system (MICOS) is a multiprotein complex responsible for cristae formation. Even though cristae are found in all mitochondria capable of oxidative phosphorylation, only Mic10 and Mic60 appear to be conserved throughout eukaryotes. The remaining 4 or 5 known MICOS subunits are specific to the supergroup Opisthokonta, which includes yeast and mammals that are the only organisms in which this complex has been analyzed experimentally. We have isolated the MICOS from Trypanosoma brucei, a member of the supergroup Excavata that is profoundly diverged from opisthokonts. We show that it is required for the maintenance of the unique discoidal cristae that typify excavates, such as euglenids and kinetoplastids, the latter of which include trypanosomes. The trypanosome MICOS consists of 9 subunits, most of which are essential for normal growth. Unlike in opisthokonts, it contains two distinct Mic10 orthologs and an unconventional putative Mic60 that lacks a mitofilin domain. Interestingly, one of the essential trypanosomatid-specific MICOS subunits called TbMic20 is a thioredoxin-like protein that appears to be involved in import of intermembrane space proteins, including respiratory chain complex assembly factors. This result points to trypanosome MICOS coordinating cristae shaping and population of its membrane with proteins involved in respiration, the latter via the catalytic activity of TbMic20. Thus, trypanosome MICOS allows us to define which of its features are conserved in all eukaryotes and decipher those that represent lineage-specific adaptations.

### Keywords
Mitochondria;  cristae;  intermembrane space;  micos;  protein import;  trypanosoma brucei; lc-ms/ms; label-free; tmt

### Affiliations
CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 00, Brno, Czech Republic
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics
CEITEC-MU
Masaryk University
Brno, Czech Republic

### Submitter
David Potesil

### Lab Head
Dr Zbyněk Zdráhal
CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 00, Brno, Czech Republic


