### Accession
PXD035582

### Title
Co-Immunoprecipitation of transcriptional regulators of stomatal development in B. distachyon

### Description
Stomata are pores in the epidermis of plants that can open and close and allow for gas exchange vital for photosynthesis and regulate transpiration. Stomatal development is driven by a set of conserved bHLH transcription factors (SPCH, MUTE, FAMA, and their heterodimerization partners ICE1, SCRM2), that initiate and promote progression of cell fates in the stomatal lineage. Due to the shared ancestry of SPCH, MUTE and FAMA (subgroup Ia) and ICE1 and SCRM2 (subgroup IIIb) their DNA binding specificity is similar and there is some functional redundancy. However, individual bHLHs also have unique functions. For example, SPCH is required for initiation of the stomatal lineage, while FAMA is responsible for terminal differentiation of the guard cell pair. In grasses, the stomatal complex comprises the guard cell pair, and two flanking subsidiary cells. Recruitment of the latter from neighboring cell filed during development requires expression of MUTE. Remarkably, while MUTE is absolutely required for the promotion of guard mother cell fate in maize and rice, this is not the case in Brachypodium. This suggests that another TF can at least partially substitute for MUTE in this function. While different expression profiles of the bHLH dimers within the stomatal lineage may partially responsible for distinct functions of each pair, it is likely that each pair forms different transcriptional complexes and that interaction with other transcriptional regulators affects the dimer’s binding DNA binding and gene regulation properties. Given the differences in bHLH function between dicots and grasses and even within the grass family, we were interested in elucidating the protein interaction networks of the stomatal lineage regulators in Brachypodium. To this end, we performed co-immunoprecipitation coupled to LC-MS/MS of BdSPCH2-YFP, YFP-BdMUTE, YFP-BdFAMA, YFP-ICE1 and YFP-SCRM2 from the developmental zone of young B. distachyon leaves using GFP-Trap beads. All YFP-fusion proteins were expressed under the endogenous promoter in the Bd21-3 background. The only exception was BdICE1, which was expressed under the ZmUBI promoter, but was nevertheless mostly restricted to the stomatal lineage. As control lines we use the Bd21-3 wild type and a line expressing 3x YFPnls (nuclear YFP) under the MUTE promoter. Comparison of proteins enriched with the bHLH fusion proteins vs. the controls revealed overlapping and distinct putative interactors, which is in agreement with the assumption that these transcription factors have both shared and unique functions. Notably, in addition to the presumed hetero-dimerization partners, we found a number of other bHLH transcription factors that were identified with one or more of the bait proteins. This suggests the presence of a larger bHLH network acting in the stomatal lineage.

### Sample Protocol
Bd21-3 wild type and the following reporter lines in the wild type background were used: BdSPCH2pro::BdSPCH2-CitYFP, BdMUTEpro::CitYFP-BdMUTE, BdFAMApro::YFP-BdFAMA, BdSCRM2pro::CitYFP-BdSCRM2, ZmUBI1pro::YFP-BdICE1 and BdMUTEpro::3xYFPnls. The experiment was done in triplicates. For each sample, about 100 seeds were surface sterilized with 1 % bleach, 0.1 % Tween-20 for 10 min, washed thoroughly with water, stratified on ½ MS plates (Caisson labs, 1% Agar, pH 5.7) for 4-6 days at 4°C and transferred to a growth chamber set to long day conditions (16 h/8 h light/dark, 22°C). Starting from the 2nd leave until the 5th or 6th main shoot leaf, all emerging leaves were gently pulled off the plant and the bottom 4 mm containing the developmental zone were harvested, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further use. Plants were returned to the chamber to grow additional leaves after each round of harvesting. In total, about 150-220mg of plant material from 600-700 leaves were obtained per sample. Frozen plant material was ground to a fine powder in a ball mill, weighed and resuspended in 5 µl/mg extraction buffer (25 mM Tris pH 7.5, 10 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM EGTA, 75 mM NaCl, 1 % Triton-X-100, 1 mM NaF, 0.5 mM Na3VO4, 15 mM beta-Glycerophosphate, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 1x cOmplete proteasome inhibitor) by rotating at 4°C for 15 min. Cells were ruptured by 5 x 15 sec sonication in an ice bath in Bioruptor UCD-200 (Diagenode) at medium intensity with 2 min breaks on ice. To further break cell walls and digest DNA, 2 µl Lysonase (Millipore) were added and samples were incubated at 4°C for 30 min with endo-over-end rotation. The extracts were cleared by 10 min centrifugation at 12,000 rpm and the supernatant was incubated on a rotor wheel at 4°C for 3 h with 25 µl of GFP-Trap magnetic agarose bead slurry (Chromotek), pre-washed with extraction buffer. The beads were washed tree times with 500 µl wash buffer (extraction buffer with 100 mM NaCl and without proteasome inhibitor), resuspended in 50 µl 2x Leammli buffer, boiled for 5 min at 95°C and frozen at -80°C until further processing. For MS analysis, purified proteins were briefly separated by SDS-PAGE on Mini PROTEAN TGX gels (BioRad), stained with the Novex colloidal blue staining kit (Invitrogen) and excised and further processed by in-gel Tryptic digestion. Peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore) and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. LC-MS/MS was performed on a Q-Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) with an Easy LC 1200 UPLC liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher) and analytical column ES803 (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were eluted with the following conditions at a flow rate of 300 nl/min: a 100 min gradient from 5 to 28 % solvent B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid), followed by a 20 min gradient from 28 to 44 % solvent B and a short wash with 90 % solvent B. Precursor scan was from mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) 375 to 1,600 and the top 20 most intense multiply charged precursors were selection for fragmentation with higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy (NCE) 27.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label-free quantification (LFQ) were done in MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.6) using the default settings with the following modifications: LFQ minimum ratio count was set to 1, “Fast LFQ” and “Match between runs” were enabled. Peptides were searched against the B. distachyon Bd21-3 protein database (v1.1) obtained from Phytozome containing a total of 47,917 entries (https://phytozome-next.jgi.doe.gov/info/BdistachyonBd21_3_v1_1) plus a list of likely contaminants containing Trypsin, human Keratin, and YFP and against the contaminants list of MaxQuant. Search results were then analyzed in Perseus (version 1.6.2.3). LFQ intensities were imported and proteins marked as ‘only identified by site’, ‘reverse’, ‘potential contaminant’ and such that were not identified in at least two replicates of one sample group were removed. Data were log2 transformed and missing values imputed from normal distribution (width = 0.3, down shift = 1.8, total matrix mode). Significantly enriched proteins were identified by unpaired 2-sided Students t-tests (modified permutation-based FDR with 250 randomizations for multiple sample correction; S0 = 0.5) comparing the bHLH reporter lines with either of the two control lines. Only proteins that were identified in at least two replicates of the bHLH reporter line were used for the test. False discovery rates (FDRs) were chosen to get a minimum number of ‘false negatives’: 0.015 for BdSPCH2 vs. Bd21-3, 0.025 for BdMUTE/BdICE1/YFP vs. Bd21-3, 0.05 for BdFAMA/BdSCRM2 vs. Bd21-3, 0.075 for BdSPCH2/BdMUTE/BdFAMA/BdSCRM2 vs. YFP and 0.04 for BdICE1 vs. YFP and 0.035 for Bd21-3 vs. YFP. To be considered bHLH interaction candidates, proteins had to meet the following criteria: (1) they had to be identified by at least one MS/MS spectrum in the respective sample group, (2) they had to be significantly enriched vs. at least one of the controls and (3) the fold change in the bHLH samples had to be at least 1.5 times higher than that of the other control or 2 times if the other control was also significantly enriched. Data were also searched with Protein Prospector using the same databases and search parameters described in Shrestha, R., et al. (2022) ((15)N Metabolic Labeling Quantification Workflow in Arabidopsis Using Protein Prospector. Front Plant Sci, 2022. 13: p. 832562). Search results were compared using a protein and peptide FDR cutoff of 5% and 1% with keep replicates enabled to enable.

### Publication Abstract
Stomata, cellular valves found on the surfaces of aerial plant tissues, present a paradigm for studying cell fate and patterning in plants. A highly conserved core set of related basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors regulates stomatal development across diverse species. We characterized BdFAMA in the temperate grass Brachypodium distachyon and found this late-acting transcription factor was necessary and sufficient for specifying stomatal guard cell fate, and unexpectedly, could also induce the recruitment of subsidiary cells in the absence of its paralogue, BdMUTE. The overlap in function is paralleled by an overlap in expression pattern and by unique regulatory relationships between BdMUTE and BdFAMA. To better appreciate the relationships among the Brachypodium stomatal bHLHs, we used in vivo proteomics in developing leaves and found evidence for multiple shared interaction partners. We reexamined the roles of these genes in Arabidopsis thaliana by testing genetic sufficiency within and across species, and found that while BdFAMA and AtFAMA can rescue stomatal production in Arabidopsis fama and mute mutants, only AtFAMA can specify Brassica-specific myrosin idioblasts. Taken together, our findings refine the current models of stomatal bHLH function and regulatory feedback among paralogues within grasses as well as across the monocot/dicot divide.

### Keywords
Interaction partners, Co-immunoprecipitation, Brachypodium distachyon, Lc-ms/ms, Stomatal development, Bhlh transcription factor

### Affiliations
Carnegie Institution at Stanford
Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility at Stanford

### Submitter
Shouling Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Shouling Xu
Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility at Stanford


