### Accession
PXD024718

### Title
A comprehensive proteome and acetyl-proteome atlas from pre-laying to peak-laying stage in liver of hens (Gallus gallus)

### Description
TMT labeled proteome and acetylated proteome were used to reveal molecular mechanisms adapting to the physiological changes between pre- and peak-laying hens

### Sample Protocol
The total protein was extracted from liver tissues by using radio immunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) lysis buffer including 10mM Tris-HCl, 1% Triton X-100, 1% sodium deoxycholate and 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). The protein concentration was assessed by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay kit (Applygen) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Two hundred micrograms of protein were divided into two equal parts for each of samples, which was used to quantification of proteome and acetyl-proteome, respectively. For digestion, the protein was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma) and incubated for 30 min at 56 °C, subsequently alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. After washed with 100 mM TEAB buffer (Sigma Alrdich) for two times, trypsin (Promega) was added with the ratio of 1:50 (trypsin: protein) and incubated overnight at room temperature for the first digestion, then added with the ratio of 1:100 (trypsin: protein) and incubated for further 4 h for the second digestion. The trypsinized peptides were desalted with Strata X C18 (Phenomenex) and vacuum freeze-dried. The desalted peptides were then solubilized with 0.5 M TEAB and labeled using 6-plex TMT reagents (Thermo Scientific) for separation by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, each dissolved TMT label with acetonitrile was added to each of the peptide extract. After incubation at room temperature for 2 h, the reaction was quenched and subsequently the labelled samples were mixed. Finally, the labeled peptides were desalted and then vacuum freeze-dried. The peptide extracts were then subjected to C18 column (Agilent) to remove unreacted compounds and salts before strong cation exchange fractionation. The peptide gradient was set as follows: 8% - 32% acetonitrile, pH = 9. And the peptides were separated 60 components in 60 min. Final, the peptides were combined into 4 fractions, which were vacuum freeze-dried and stored for LC-MS/MS analysis. To obtain acetylated peptide segments, the peptides were dissolved in IP buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and the supernatant was transferred to pre-washed anti-acetylated resin (Jingjie) with gently shook at 4 °C overnight. After the incubation, the resin was washed 4 times with IP buffer followed twice with deionized water. Finally, the resin was eluted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for 3 times to remove the peptides bound to the resin. The elute was collected and dried by vacuum freeze-dried. After drying, the peptide was desalted according to the instructions of ZipTips C18 (Sigma), then dried by vacuum freeze-dried for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Enzymatic peptides enriched from acetylated antibodies were used for quantitative analysis of protein acetylation modifications, otherwise they were used for protein quantification by LC-MS/MS. Samples were analyzed with a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer, coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-highly performance liquid chromatography system (Thermo scientific, ). The peptides were separated using mobile phases water A and B, both containing 0.1% formic acid (v/v). The liquid phase gradients were set as follows: 0-19 min, 8%-20% B; 19-32 min, 20%-32% B; 32-36 min, 32%-80% B; 36-40 min, 80% B. The flow rate was maintained at 500 nL/min. The peptides were injected into the NSI ion source with 2.0 kV of electrospray voltage. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for a full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using the NCE setting as 28, and the fragments were detected in the OrbitraP at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion was followed. Automatic gain control was set at 5E4. The fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. Secondary mass spectrometry data were searched using Maxquant (v1.5.2.8) in the Gallus_gallus_uniprot_9031 database (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/?query=taxonomy:9031) which was from anti-acetylated resin peptides or not, respectively. An anti-library was added to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) caused by random matching. The common contamination libraries were added to eliminate the effect of contaminating proteins. The search parameters were set as follows: Trypsin/P for the enzymatic cutting mode, 2 for the number of missed cut sites; The minimum length of the peptide segment was set to seven amino acid residues; the maximum modification number of the peptide segment was set to five; the mass error tolerance of the primary parent ions of the First search and Main search was set to 20 and 5 ppm, respectively, and the mass error tolerance of the secondary fragment ions was 0.02 Da. The cysteine alkylation was set to fixed modification, and the variable modifications were oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-terminal, deamidation, and acetylation of lysine. The quantitative method was set to TMT-6 plex, the FDR of protein identification and the peptide-spectrum matches identification was set to 1%. Acetylation levels were normalized by protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Along with sexual maturity, the liver undergoes numerous metabolic processes to adapt the physiological changes associated with egg-laying in hens. However, mechanisms regulating the processes were unclear. In this study, comparative hepatic proteome and acetyl-proteome between pre- and peak-laying hens were performed. The results showed that the upregulated proteins were mainly related to lipid and protein biosynthesis, while the downregulated proteins were mainly involved in pyruvate metabolism and were capable of inhibiting gluconeogenesis and lactate synthesis in peak-laying hens compared with that in pre-laying hens. With unchanged expression level, the significant acetylated proteins were largely functioned on activation of polyunsaturated fatty acid oxidation in peroxisome, while the significant deacetylated proteins were principally used to elevate medium and short fatty acid oxidation in mitochondria and oxidative phosphorylation. Most of the proteins which involved in gluconeogenesis, lipid transport, and detoxification were influenced by both protein expression and acetylation. Taken overall, a novel mechanism wherein an alternate source of acetyl coenzyme A was produced by activation of FA oxidation and pyruvate metabolism to meet the increased energy demand and lipid synthesis in liver of laying hens was uncovered. This study provides new insights into molecular mechanism of adaptation to physiological changes in liver of laying hens.

### Keywords
Laying, Lipid synthesis, Liver, Acetylated proteins, Energy demand

### Affiliations
College of Animal Science and Technology, Henan Agricultural University
College of Animal Science and Technology, Henan Agricultural University, China

### Submitter
Zhang Wang

### Lab Head
Dr XiaoJun Liu
College of Animal Science and Technology, Henan Agricultural University, China


