### Accession
PXD012868

### Title
mice，skin, iTRAQ

### Description
Wound Induced Hair Follicle neogenesis (WIHN) is a hair neogenesis phenomenon which occurred in the center of scar. Neonatal hair follicle are separated from the preexisting follicles by a hairless circular. We analysed the differentially expressed proteins between inner and outer area of scar at post-wound day 15 by iTRAQ technology.

### Sample Protocol
In order to meet the minimum sample size and minimize potential confounding factors of iTRAQ experiments, we adopted a pooling strategy for our proteomic analyses. Each pair of pooling contained 15 mice. Healed skin was taken at PWD15 and divided into hair-growth area (inner area) and non-hair-growth area (outer area). Experiments were performed in triplicate, and only those proteins that were confidently identified in all three experiments are reported here. The samples were ground into powder in liquid nitrogen, add protein lysis buffer which is blend of urea (Sigma), NH4HCO3 (Sigma) and Complete Protease Inhibitor EASY packs (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), ultrasonically disrupted to extract the total protein. Supernatants were collected after centrifugation at 10,000 X g for 30 min at 4℃. The concentration of protein was measured by Bradford Kit (Dingguo Biology, Beijing, China). The quality of protein was tested by 10% SDS-PAGE electrophoresis and visualized using Coomassie Blue staining. The protein samples (200 µg) were mixed with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA), repeated ultrafiltration by UA (urea, Tris-HCl, pH8.0) twice and tetraethyl-ammonium bromide (TEAB) three times. Then treated with trypsin overnight at a trypsin-to-protein ratio of 1:50 at 37 ℃.  Protein peptides (100 µg) from each group were labeled using an iTRAQ reagent-8 plex multiplex kit (AB SCIEX, Framingham, USA). A 1-μl sample was removed from each group to test labeling and extraction efficiency. All samples were pooled and vacuum-dried. Then the lyophilized mixed peptides were resuspended in solution A (20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10), supernatants were collected after centrifugation at 12,000 × g for 20 min. Then, the samples were loaded onto C18 reversed-phase column (Michrom Bioresources, Inc., Auburn, CA) and eluted with a 53 min nonlinear gradient ramped from 0% to 90% mobile phase B (phase A: 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10, phase B: 20 mM ammonium formate in ACN, pH 10) at a 0.7 µL/min flow rate. The samples were collected each 1.5 min after former 5 min. A total of 60 fractions were collected and subsequently combined into 6 fractions according to peak intensities. And supernatants were collected after centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 10 min. Peptides were analyzed using an ultra-performance LC-MS/MS platform. The LC separation was performed on an Easy nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) with an in-house packed capillary column (150 µm I.D.×12 cm) with 1.9 µm C18 reverse-phase fused-silica (Michrom Bioresources, Inc., Auburn, CA). The sample was eluted with a 78 min nonlinear gradient ramped from 8% to 95% mobile phase B (phase A: 0.1% formic acid in water, phase B: 0.1% FA in ACN) at a 0.6 µL/min flow rate.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass data were processed for the peptide data analysis using Proteome Discoverer Software with a false discovery rate FDR≤0.01 for searching the Uniprot-mouse_170221.fasta database.  Protein with at least two unique peptides were identified. The upregulated or downregulated proteins in both replicates with relative quantification p values <0.05 and 1.5-fold changes were selected to be the differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tissue, Mice，scar, Itraq

### Affiliations
The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University

### Submitter
Lin Gong

### Lab Head
Dr Yuanhong Li
The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University


