### Accession
PXD004899

### Title
Proteomic profiling of ectodermal basal disc cells secretion of Hydra

### Description
Biological adhesion (bioadhesion) is referred to attachment of organisms to either biotic or abiotic surfaces. The differentiated ectodermal basal disc cells of the freshwater cnidarian Hydra secrete proteinaceous glue to temporarily attach themselves to surfaces underwater. In this study, we investigate for the first time the protein content of adhesive secretions from the freshwater cnidarian Hydra magnipapillata strain 105. This secretome were analysed using mass spectrometry and resulting MS/MS data were searched against in silico translated H. magnipapillata transcriptome and results from gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were collected from whole intact polyps in triplicates. 15 polyps were placed into a 500 µL low binding-protein tubes and were allowed to secret material for 1 h at room temperature. Secreted proteins in the 500µL sample vials were reduced with 50 µL 10 mM dithiothreitol (solved in 100 mM NH4HCO3 buffer pH 8) at 56 °C for 30 min, and alkylated with 50 µL 55 mM iodoacetamide (solved in 100 mM NH4HCO3 buffer pH 8) at RT for 20 min. Samples were digested by adding 1 µg trypsin (trypsin gold, Promega) in 100 mM NH4HCO3 buffer pH 8, and incubated at 37 °C overnight. The tryptic peptides were purified by ZipTip C18 pipette tips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions prior to nanoLC-ESI-MS analysis. Samples were analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 nano-HPLC system coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a Nanospray Flex ionization source. The peptides were separated on a homemade fritless fused-silica microcapillary column (75 µm i.d. x 280 µm o.d. x 10 cm length) packed with 3 µm reversed-phase C18 material (Reprosil). Solvent for HPLC were 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in 85% acetonitrile (solvent B). The gradient profile was as follows: 0-2 min, 4% B; 2-55 min, 4-50% B; 55-60 min, 50-100% B, and 60-65 min, 100% B. The flow rate was 250 nL/min.

### Data Protocol
The Q Exacitve Plus mass spectrometer was operating in the data dependent mode selecting the top 12 most abundant isotope patterns with charge >1 from the survey scan with an isolation window of 1.6 mass-to-charge ratio (m/z). Survey full scan MS spectra were acquired from 300 to 1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 with a maximum injection time (IT) of 120 ms, and automatic gain control (AGC) target 1e6. The selected isotope patterns were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 28 at a resolution of 35,000 with a maximum IT of 120 ms, and AGC target 5e5. Data Analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Scientific) with search engine Sequest. The raw files were searched against the Hydra transcriptome generated in the present study (HYRNA140215) which was translated into proteins using transeq pipeline implemented in Galaxy software (Blankenberg et al. 2007). This allowed for 137.663 entries. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Peptide identifications were filtered at 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
The differentiated ectodermal basal disc cells of the freshwater cnidarian Hydra secrete proteinaceous glue to temporarily attach themselves to underwater surfaces. Using transcriptome sequencing and a basal disc-specific RNA-seq combined with in situ hybridisation a highly specific set of candidate adhesive genes was identified. A de novo transcriptome assembly of 55,849 transcripts (&gt;200&#xa0;bp) was generated using paired-end and single reads from Illumina libraries constructed from different polyp conditions. Differential transcriptomics and spatial gene expression analysis by in situ hybridisation allowed the identification of 40 transcripts exclusively expressed in the ectodermal basal disc cells. Comparisons after mass spectrometry analysis of the adhesive secretion showed a total of 21 transcripts to be basal disc specific and eventually secreted through basal disc cells. This is the first study to survey adhesion-related genes in Hydra. The candidate list presented in this study provides a platform for unravelling the molecular mechanism of underwater adhesion of Hydra.

### Keywords
Bioadhesion, Basal disc, Hydra

### Affiliations
University of Innsbruck
Institute of Zoology, University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria

### Submitter
Marcelo Rodrigues

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Ladurner
Institute of Zoology, University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria


