### Accession
PXD027184

### Title
AKIRIN2 controls the nuclear import of proteasomes in vertebrates

### Description
AKIRIN2 is an essential negative regulator of nuclear protein, including oncogenic transcription factors such as MYC. To identify the mode of AKIRIN2-dependent nuclear protein regulation we performed pulldown and mass spectrometry of V5-tagged AKIRIN2 variants or nuclear GFP control.

### Sample Protocol
RKO cells were transduced with V5-AKIRIN2, V5-AKIRIN2ΔYVS or V5-GFP at high MOI and before harvest cells were treated with 10 μM MG132 for 2 h. Cells were washed 2× with ice-cold PBS, collected from plates using a cell scraper and snap-frozen for later processing. Cell pellets were lysed with NP-40 lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.3, 120 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40, 1 mM NaF, 2 mM Na3VO4) supplemented with 1× cOmplete™, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) on ice for 30 min in low-retention tubes and lysates were cleared by centrifugation for 15 min at 14,000 × g at 4 °C. V5-Tag antibody was coupled to Protein G Mag Sepharose Beads (GE Healthcare) for 2 h at 4 °C in NP-40 buffer with rotation (2.2 µg antibody per 5 µl bead slurry). Antibody-coupled beads were washed 2× with NP-40 buffer and 850 µg of protein lysate were incubated with 3 µl of bead slurry for 3 h at 4 °C with rotation. Beads were transferred to fresh tubes and washed 4× with ice-cold lysis buffer for 20 min at 4 °C and 6× with ice-cold wash buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.3, 120 mM NaCl). Pelleted beads were covered with 15 µl buffer and stored at 4 °C until processing for mass spectrometry the following day. Beads were resuspended in 50 μL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer supplemented with 400 ng of Lys-C (Wako) and incubated for 4 h at 37 °C while shaking. The supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube and reduced with 0.5 mM TCEP (Sigma) for 30 min at 60 °C and alkylated in 3 mM MMTS (Fluka) for 30 min at RT protected from light before digest with 400 ng trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C o/n. The digest was acidified by addition of TFA (Pierce) to 1%. A similar aliquot of each sample was analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The eluted peptides were analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano HPLC system coupled to either an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos, a Q Exactive HF-X, or an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Thermo, PepMap C18, 5 mm × 300 μm ID, 5 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) at a flow rate of 25 μL/min using 0.1% TFA as mobile phase. After 10 min, the trap column was switched in line with the analytical column (Thermo, PepMap C18, 500 mm × 75 μm ID, 2 μm, 100 Å) and eluted using a flow rate of 230 nl/min, and a binary 3 h gradient. For data acquisition the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo), equipped with an EASY-spray ion source (Thermo) and JailBreak 1.0 adaptor insert for a spray emitter (Phoenix S&T), was operated in data-dependent mode, using a full scan (m/z range 380-1500, Orbitrap resolution of 120,000, target value 4x105) followed by MS/MS scans for a cycle time of 3 s, applying an isolation width of 1.0 m/z, HCD fragmentation with collision energy 30, resolution of 30.000, target value of 2x105, maximum fill time 150 ms and intensity threshold of 2.5x104. Precursor ions including charge 2-6 were selected for fragmentation before being excluded for 60 s. The Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer, equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source (both Thermo), was operated in data-dependent mode, using a full scan (m/z range 380-1500, resolution of 60,000, target value 1x106) followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most abundant ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired using normalized collision energy of 28, isolation width of 1.0 m/z, resolution of 30.000, target value of 1x105, maximum fill time 105 ms. Precursor ions including charge 2-6 were selected for fragmentation before being excluded for 60 s. Additionally, the minimum AGC target was set to 5x103 and intensity threshold was calculated to be 4.8x104. The peptide match feature was set to preferred and the exclude isotopes feature was enabled. The Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer, equipped with a FAIMS pro interface and with a Nanospray Flex ion source (all parts Thermo), was operated in data-dependent mode, performing a full scan (m/z range 350-1200, resolution 60,000, target value 1x106) at 2 different CVs (-45, -60), followed each by MS/MS scans of the most abundant ions for a cycle time of 1 s per CV. MS/MS spectra were acquired using a collision energy of 30, isolation width of 1.0 m/z, resolution of 45.000, a target value of 2x105 and intensity threshold of 1x104. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation (including charge state 2-6) were excluded for 45 s. The peptide match feature was set to preferred and the exclude isotopes feature was enabled.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, the RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5.0.400) and the created MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda (v2.0.0.16129) against the Swiss-Prot or Uniprot-reference-proteome databases, taxonomy Homo sapiens (20,593 or 20,545 sequences; 11,422,650 or 11,396,349 residues, respectively), supplemented with common contaminants, with mass tolerance ±5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance ±8 ppm and number of missed trypsin cleavages ≤ 2. Peptide areas and proteins were quantified using the in-house-developed apQuant tool via intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) and sum normalization. Average enrichment between bait and control IP experiments were plotted against p-values calculated using a limma two-sided moderated t-test in the limma R package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Akirin2, Protein degradation, Nuclear import, Crispr/cas9 screen, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), 1030 Vienna,  Austria Medical University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter (VBC), 1030 Vienna, Austria
IMBA Vienna

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Johannes Zuber
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), 1030 Vienna,  Austria Medical University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter (VBC), 1030 Vienna, Austria


