### Accession
PXD021102

### Title
iTRAQ analysis of ClpP mutant treated with methyl gallate

### Description
Methyl gallate (MG) is an effective microbicide with great potential usefulness in the integrated management of plant diseases and an important potential drug for clinical application. However, its target remains unknown. This study conducted a transposon sequencing (Tn-seq) under MG treatment in plant pathogenic bacterium Ralstonia solanacearum. Tn-seq identified that the mutation of caseinolytic protease proteolytic subunit gene clpP significantly increased the resistance of R. solanacearum to MG, which was validated by the in-frame gene deletion. iTRAQ proteomics analysis was then employed and revealed that chemotaxis and flagella associated proteins were the major substrates degraded by ClpP under the tested condition. Moreover, sulfur metabolism associated proteins were also possible substrates of ClpP and were up-regulated by MG treatment in the wild type R. solanacearum but not in the clpP mutant. Furthermore, molecular docking confirmed the possible interaction between MG and ClpP. Taken together, this study revealed that MG may target bacterial ClpP, inhibit the activity of ClpP, and consequently disorder bacterial proteostasis, providing a theoretical basis for the application of MG.

### Sample Protocol
R. solanacearum wild type strain GMI1000 and mutant ΔclpP were cultured in BG liquid medium with or without 25μg/ml MG to the same concentration of the logarithmic growth phase, namely WT, WT_MG, ΔclpP, and ΔclpP_MG. Each strain and treatment was performed with two biological repeats. iTRAQ proteomics analysis was subsequently performed at Novogene (Beijing, China). Briefly, total proteins were extracted by grounding in liquid nitrogen, and lysed with lysis buffer containing 100 mM NH4HCO3(pH 8), 8 M urea, and 0.2% SDS. The extracts were then reduced with DTT and alkylated with sufficient iodoacetamide, followed by precipitation with acetone. Proteins were digested with trypsin after quantification. Purified peptides were labeled with iTRAQ labeling reagent and fractionated by HPLC.

### Data Protocol
The separated peptides were analyzed by Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) and searched separately against the proteome of R. solanacearum GMI1000 (GCA_000009125.1) by Proteome Discoverer 2.2. Identified proteins were quantified, compared between certain R. solanacearum strains and treatments. The proteins with >1.5 fold expression difference between experimental and control groups, and with p < 0.05 statistically analyzed by T-test were defined as differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Methyl gallate, Ralstonia solanacearum, Clpp protease

### Affiliations
Guangxi University

### Submitter
Dehong Zheng

### Lab Head
Dr dehong Zheng
Guangxi University


