### Accession
PXD006330

### Title
Adrenergic Receptor Stimulation Suppresses Metabolism in the Pancreatic β Cell

### Description
Glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS) is suppressed through α-adrenergic receptor stimulation by catecholamines, epinephrine and norepinephrine, in pancreatic β-cells. Previous work has elucidated a bevy of adrenergic regulatory mechanisms beyond traditional Gi-coupled signaling including regulation of ion channels and interactions with exocytotic machinery. Glucose oxidation may also be an important site for adrenergic regulation of GSIS, but the link between epinephrine and glucose oxidation in β-cells is undefined. Here, we evaluate whether adrenergic stimulation decreases oxidative metabolism in β cells. Oxygen consumption rates were determined for Min6 and isolated rat islets in 20mM glucose complete media, then epinephrine was added at either 0 nM (vehicle control) or 100nM, followed by 10uM yohimbine (a selective Adrα2A antagonist). To identify glucose oxidation as the primary metabolic pathway affected by epinephrine, oxidation of 14C(U)-labeled glucose was determined in Min6 cells with epinephrine or vehicle. Oxygen consumption and glucose oxidation experiments were conducted in the presence of cAMP and insulin secretion blockers, respectively. Proteomics was performed on Min6 cells exposed to epinephrine for 4 hours and compared to controls. Epinephrine, but not vehicle, reduced (P<0.01) oxygen consumption rates in rat islets and Min6 cells to 64 ± 6% and 65 ± 1% of baseline, respectively, and yohimbine restored oxygen consumption to rates not different from baseline. In Min6 cells incubated with epinephrine rates of 14C glucose oxidation were reduced (P<0.01) 66 ± 4% compared to vehicle controls.  These results demonstrate that acute epinephrine exposure suppresses glucose oxidation in β cells via the specific adrenergic receptor, Adrα2A, and indicate a new role for adrenergic regulation in GSIS.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Sample Preparation Confluent Min6 were collected from 3 unique passages exposed to 4 hours epinephrine or vehicle control. Cell pellets were washed with PBS and lysed with 500µl hexafluroisopropanol in a bath sonicator for 5 minutes (min). The lysate was transferred to 1.5ml tubes and evaporated using vacuum centrifugation until dry. Reduction, alkylation, and trypsin digestion were performed as described previously(He et al. 2016). Briefly, each tube of dried lysate was rehydrated using 10µl of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC).  After 5 min, 10µl of 100mM dithiothreitol (Sigma 43815), 100mM ABC was added to each tube and incubated to 30 min at 85°C. Once cooled to room temperature, 10µl of 100mM iodoacetamide (Sigma I1149), 100mM ABC was added and samples were incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Two µg trypsin (Sigma T6567) dissolved in 170µl 100mM ABC was added to each tube (final volume 200µl) and all were incubated overnight at 37°C using an Eppendorf ThermoMixer with continuous 600RPM shaking. Following digestion, each sample was desalted using a peptide trap (Optimize Technologies 10-04817-TN, Oregon City, OR) according to the manufacturer's instructions. After desalting, samples were further cleaned using a strong cation exchange trap (Optimize Technologies 10-04817-TP) to remove hydrophobic compounds, which could interfere with the mass spectrometry. Samples were then desalted a second time using the same peptide trap as above. Samples were dried and resuspended in 10μL of 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA) and transferred to low retention vials in preparation for analysis using LC-MS/MS.  Proteomic Analysis by Mass Spectrometry Peptides were analyzed using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 (ThermoFisher) high performance liquid chromatography machine (HPLC) coupled with an LTQ Velos Pro (ThermoFisher) tandem mass spectrometer. The HPLC was configured for reverse phase chromatography using an in-house prepared C18 column. The column, 75µm by 10cm, was packed with Halo 2.7µm, 90Å C18 material (MAC-MOD Analytical Inc., Chadds Ford, PA), and located in the ion source just before a silica emitter tip. Peptides were separated for mass spectrometry analysis using a 4hr acetonitrile gradient starting at 2% ACN, 0.1% FA and reaching 50% ACN, 0.1% FA in 240 min, followed by a 15 min wash of 95% ACN, 0.1% FA. Flow was set at a constant 333nl/min. Peptides were ionized using a Nanospray Flex ion source (ThermoFisher). High voltage was applied using a stainless steel liquid junction with the column located on the inlet side, and a silica emitter tip on the outlet side, minimizing dead volume between the column and emitter.  Scan parameters for the LTQ Velos Pro were one MS scan followed by 10 MS/MS scans of the 5 most intense peaks. MS/MS scans were performed in pairs, a CID fragmentation scan followed a HCD fragmentation scan. All scans were performed in enhanced resolution mode. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a mass exclusion time of 3 min and a repeat count of 1 within 30 s of initial m/z measurement.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra were converted to MGF format for spectrum matching using the MSConvert program from the ProteoWizard software suite (Chambers et al. 2012; Kessner et al. 2008). The X! Tandem and OMSSA algorithms were used to match ms/ms spectra to the FASTA databases (Craig and Beavis 2004; Geer et al. 2004). Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 0.25Da for both X! Tandem and OMSSA. Tryptic cleavage rules with up to two 2 missed cleavages were used when calculating in-silico peptide precursor masses; a, b, and y ions were used for fragment m/z matching. Amino acid modifications that were included in the database searches were single and double oxidation of methionine, oxidation of proline, carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine. The FASTA database used for spectrum matching was the mouse protein set available from UniProt on January 28, 2015. A randomized version of the database was used calculate false discovery rates (FDR). Peptide-spectrum matches with e-values <0.01 were accepted for down-stream analysis. Peptide matches were organized by protein using Perl, at which time proteins identified by a single spectrum were removed.

### Publication Abstract
Insulin secretion is stimulated by glucose metabolism and inhibited by catecholamines through adrenergic receptor stimulation. We determined whether catecholamines suppress oxidative metabolism in &#x3b2;-cells through adrenergic receptors. In Min6 cells and isolated rat islets, epinephrine decreased oxygen consumption rates compared to vehicle control or co-administration of epinephrine with &#x3b1;2-adrenergic receptor antagonist yohimbine. Epinephrine also decreased forskolin-stimulated oxygen consumption rates, indicating cAMP dependent and independent actions. Furthermore, glucose oxidation rates were decreased with epinephrine, independent of the exocytosis of insulin, which was blocked with yohimbine. We evaluated metabolic targets through proteomic analysis after 4&#x202f;h epinephrine exposure that revealed 466 differentially expressed proteins that were significantly enriched for processes including oxidative metabolism, protein turnover, exocytosis, and cell proliferation. These results demonstrate that acute &#x3b1;2-adrenergic stimulation suppresses glucose oxidation in &#x3b2;-cells independent of nutrient availability and insulin exocytosis, while cAMP concentrations are elevated. Proteomics and immunoblots revealed changes in electron transport chain proteins that were correlated with lower metabolic reducing equivalents, intracellular ATP concentrations, and altered mitochondrial membrane potential implicating a new role for adrenergic control of mitochondrial function and ultimately insulin secretion.

### Keywords
Min6, Epinephrine, Mouse, Catecholamines, Norepinephrine, Β-cells, Pancreas, Insulin

### Affiliations
Veterinary Science and Microbiology
School of Comparative Animal and Biomedical Sciences University of Arizona Tucson, AZ USA

### Submitter
Ken Pendarvis

### Lab Head
Dr Sean Limesand
School of Comparative Animal and Biomedical Sciences University of Arizona Tucson, AZ USA


