### Accession
PXD011134

### Title
TGF-β1/p65/MAT2A: a novel pathway involved in the regulation of intracellular SAM and liver fibrogenesis - Part1

### Description
Hepatic stellate cell (HSC) activation induced by transforming growth factor β (TGF-β1) plays a pivotal role in the fibrogenesis. The complex downstream mediators of TGF-β1 are largely unknown. Here, proteomics analysis and biological validation demonstrated that methionine adenosyltransferase 2A (MAT2A) was significantly upregulated in a CCl4-induced fibrosis mice model and a small molecule NPLC0393, known to block TGF-β1/Smad3 signaling, inhibited its upregulation. In HSC cells, TGF-β1 induced elevation of MAT2A and MAT2β expression as well as reduction of S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) content, which further promoted HSC activation. Functionally, in vivo and in vitro knockdown of MAT2A alleviated CCl4- and TGF-β1-induced HSC activation, whereas in vivo overexpression of MAT2A facilitated hepatic fibrosis and abolished therapeutic effect of NPLC0393. TGF-β1 induced p65 phosphorylation and NF-κB activation, thereby promoted the transcription of MAT2A and its protein expression. In addition, overexpression of p65 abrogated NPLC0393 mediated inhibition of HSC activation. This study identified a novel pathway TGF-β1/p65/MAT2A that was involved in the regulation of intracellular SAM contents and liver fibrogenesis, suggesting that this pathway is a potential therapeutic target for hepatic fibrosis.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse liver tissues were washed with ice-cold PBS and lysed in SDT lysis buffer (4% SDS (m/v), 100 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris, pH=7.6). The lysates were homogenized with sonication, denatured and reduced at 95°C for 5 min and then centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 30 min. The supernatants were collected, and protein concentration was determined by tryptophan fluorescence emission assay as described previously. Peptides were prepared following the Filter Assisted Sample Preparation (FASP) procedure.All experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) platform connected to an online EASY-nLC1000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a self-packed column (75 μm x 150mm, 3 μm ReproSil-Pur C18 beads, 120 Å, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) and separated with a 240 min gradient for each sample at a flow rate of 300nL/min. The mobile phase A of RP-HPLC was 0.1% formic acid in water, and B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Data-dependent acquisition was performed using Xcalibur software in positive ion mode. The MS1 full scan was set at a resolution of 70,000 by orbitrap mass analyzer (350-1700 m/z) with an AGC target of 300,000 and maximum injection time of 20 ms. Then ‘top 15’ MS2 scans were generated by HCD fragmentation at a resolution of 17,500. The other instrument parameters were set as follows: 27% normalized collision energy (NCE), 10,000 AGC target, 100 ms maximum injection time, 2.0 m/z isolation window.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed by search against the UniProt Mouse database using MaxQuant (1.6.0.1). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptide and protein identification. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was searched as a fixed modification, oxidized methionine and protein N-term acetylation as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P. Proteins abundance was calculated on the basis of the normalized spectral protein intensity (LFQ intensity).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics;liver fibrosis; mat2a

### Affiliations
SIMM
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica

### Submitter
Qian Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Hu Zhou
SIMM


