### Accession
PXD045349

### Title
Low-melting point agarose as embedding medium for MALDI mass spectrometry imaging and laser-capture microdissection-based proteomics

### Description
We report an investigation of low-temperature embedding media in terms of their mechanical properties and embedding temperature, with the goal of determining a reliable embedding medium for the combination of MALDI MSI of lipids, laser-capture microdissection of tissue regions, and quantitative proteomics. We compared embedded and non-embedded tissues to ensure that the embedding media did not interfere with the analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The two media that provided the best results (5% gelatin and 2% low-melting point agarose) were compared with non-embedded tissue by both MALDI mass spectrometry imaging of lipids and laser-capture microdissection followed by bottom-up proteomics by SP3 protocol

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW file were converted into mzXML format using RawConverter24 and the tool ORBIIMAGEmzXML2Tricks (v.0.10, G. Eijkel) was used to convert the mzXML spectra file and the EP-MALDI XML position file into a .mat data structure. LC-MS/MS data were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer (v.2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) and searched against the SwissProt Mus Musculus database (Uniprot, 11 June 2019, 17,021 entries). An in-house contaminant database was added to the search (253 entries), which included type I (alpha-1 and alpha-2 chains) and type III (alpha-1) porcine collagen. Searches were performed with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm using a strict FDR of 0.01. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) were set as a dynamic modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) was set as a static modification. Quantification was performed only on proteins identified by at least one unique peptide; proteins identified from the contaminant database were discarded.

### Publication Abstract
The combination of MALDI mass spectrometry imaging, laser-capture microdissection, and quantitative proteomics allows the identification and characterization of molecularly distinct tissue compartments. Such workflows are typically performed using consecutive tissue sections, and so reliable sectioning and mounting of high-quality tissue sections is a prerequisite of such investigations. Embedding media facilitate the sectioning process but can introduce contaminants which may adversely affect either the mass spectrometry imaging or proteomics analyses. Seven low-temperature embedding media were tested in terms of embedding temperature and cutting performance. The two media that provided the best results (5% gelatin and 2% low-melting point agarose) were compared with non-embedded tissue by both MALDI mass spectrometry imaging of lipids and laser-capture microdissection followed by bottom-up proteomics. Two out of the seven tested media (5% gelatin and 2% low-melting point agarose) provided the best performances on terms of mechanical properties. These media allowed for low-temperature embedding and for the collection of high-quality consecutive sections. Comparisons with non-embedded tissues revealed that both embedding media had no discernable effect on proteomics analysis; 5% gelatin showed a light ion suppression effect in the MALDI mass spectrometry imaging experiments, 2% agarose performed similarly to the non-embedded tissue. 2% low-melting point agarose is proposed for tissue embedding in experiments involving MALDI mass spectrometry imaging of lipids and laser-capture microdissection, proteomics of consecutive tissue sections.

### Keywords
Maldi msi, Laser-capture microdissection, Proteomics, Embedding media

### Affiliations
Fondazione Pisana per la Scienza, Pisa, Italy
Fondazione Toscana Gabriele Monasterio

### Submitter
Francesco Greco

### Lab Head
Dr Liam Andrew McDonnell
Fondazione Pisana per la Scienza, Pisa, Italy


