### Accession
PXD000190

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics of miR-148a in gastric cancer cells

### Description
A quantitative proteomics combined with stable isotope labeling was applied to identify the global profile of miR-148a-regulated downstream proteins in AGS cancer cells. For proteomic analysis, cells were treated with miR-148a mimic (Pre-miR-148a) or miR-148a negative control (miR-CTL) and the downstream protein expression level (Pre-miR-148a/miR-CTL) were quantified using iTRAQ approach. Bioinformatics pipeline: The peak list in the resultant MS/MS spectra were generated by Mascot Distiller v2.1.1.0  and searched using Mascot v2.2 against the International Protein Index (IPI) human database (v. 3.64, 84032 sequences). The Mascot search parameters were +-0.1 Da for MS tolerance, +-0.1 Da for MS/MS mass tolerance, allowances for two missed cleavages, and variable modifications of deamidation (NQ), oxidation (M), iTRAQ (N terminal), iTRAQ (K), and MMTS (C). Protein quantitation were calculated using the Multi-Q software v1.6.5.4 with a dynamic range filter of ion count > 30.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are noncoding RNAs that control gene expression either by degradation of mRNAs or inhibition of protein translation. miR-148a has been reported to have the impacts on tumor progression. Here, a quantitative proteomics combined with stable isotope labeling was applied to identify the global profile of miR-148a-regulated downstream proteins. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000190. A total of 2938 proteins were quantified, and 55 proteins were considered to be regulated by miR-148a. We found that not only proteins associated with cancer progression but also molecules involved in neural development were regulated by miR-148a. This study is the first to identify the function of miR-148a in neural development by using a proteomic approach. Analysis of a public clinical database also showed that the patients with neural diseases could display abnormal expression of miR-148a. Moreover, silencing of miR-148a led to the abnormal morphology and decreased expression of neuron-related markers in the developing brain of zebrafish. These results provided important insight into the regulation of neurological development elicited by miR-148a.

### Keywords
Mir-148a, Quantitative proteome, Itraq

### Affiliations
Institute of molecular and cellular biology

### Submitter
Chia-Wei Hu

### Lab Head


