### Accession
PXD020607

### Title
The component parts of bacteriophage virions accurately defined by a new machine-learning approach built on evolutionary features.

### Description
Klebsiella pneumoniae has risen to prominence as a major threat to human health, with hypervirulent and drug-resistant lineages spreading globally. Given their antimicrobial resistant phenotypes, new therapies are required for the treatment of these infections, and bacteriophages (phages) that kill Klebsiella are being identified for use in phage therapy. In order to circumvent the evolution of phage-resistance taking hold the way that drug-resistance has, clear and considered actions are needed in selecting the phages that would be used in therapeutic cocktails. It is known that annotation of phage genomes is poor, potentially obscuring those phages with the most therapeutic potential. Here we show that phages isolated from infrequently sampled environments have features of therapeutic potential and developed a computational tool called STEP3 to understand the evolutionary features that distinguish the component parts of diverse phages, features that proved particularly suitable to detection of virion proteins with only distantly related homologies. These features were integrated into an ensemble framework to achieve a stable and robust prediction performance by STEP3. Proteomics-based analysis of two phages validated the prediction accuracy of STEP3 and revealed the virions contain component parts that include DNA-binding factors, otherwise unrecognizable capsule degradation enzymes and membrane translocation factors.

### Sample Protocol
Each phage sample was solubilized in sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM HEPES pH8.5) and sonicated to assist protein extraction. The protein concentration was determined using a BCA kit (Thermo Scientific). SDS was removed according to previous work60 and the proteins were proteolytically digested with trypsin (Promega) and purified using OMIX C18 Mini-Bed tips (Agilent Technologies) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
To obtain peptide sequence information, the raw files were searched with Byonic v3.0.0 (ProteinMetrics) against the K. pneumoniae B5055 genbank file FO834906 that was appended with the phage protein sequences. Only proteins falling within a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% based on a decoy database were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Prediction, Machine learning, Phage

### Affiliations
Monash University
Infection & Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute and Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Australia

### Submitter
Cheng Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Trevor Lithgow
Infection & Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute and Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Australia


