### Accession
PXD022027

### Title
Multi-cell type proteomic profiling reveals desensitization of SARS-CoV-2-infected cells to interferon treatment

### Description
SARS-CoV-2, the coronavirus behind the ongoing pandemic, manifests itself in a broad array of symptoms involving various body organs, such as lungs, intestine, kidneys, heart, liver, and brain. To investigate how SARS-CoV-2 navigates disparate organs and alters their biology, we engineered a panel of phenotypically diverse human cell lines representing different organs that support efficient virus infection. We leveraged these infection models to profile tissue-specific host responses to SARS-CoV-2 infection by global proteomic analyses. This uncovered broad as well as cell type-specific perturbations of cellular proteins, several of which we subsequently validated by an orthogonal approach. Our detailed follow-up investigation of a number of proteins in different cell types, including a stem cell-derived model of virus infection, revealed almost complete desensitization of SARS-CoV-2-infected cells to interferon treatment. These findings elucidate the immune evasion mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 and have implications for the currently evaluated antiviral regimens involving interferon (148).

### Sample Protocol
Dried samples were reconstituted in mobile phase A solvent (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) for analysis on the Q-Exactive™ HF-X mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific), interfaced to the Easy nanoLC1200 HPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were loaded on a reversed-phase nano-trap column in mobile phase A (75μm i.d. × 2 cm, Acclaim PepMap100 C18 3μm, 100Å; ThermoFisher Scientific; # 164946) and separated over an EASY-Spray column, (ThermoFisher Scientific; # ES803A) using a gradient (6% to 19% over 58 min, then 19% to 36% over 34 min) of mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a spray voltage of 2100 volts and the data was acquired in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Precursor scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM with a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The top 12 abundant ions, with charge states ≥2, were selected for fragmentation by HCD (collision energy 29%) and analyzed at a resolution of 45,000 FWHM with a maximum injection time of 250 ms.

### Data Protocol
All raw data was processed using MaxQuant (Version 1.6.7.0). The acquired tandem spectra were searched against the reference Homo sapiens proteome (Taxonomic ID: 9606) FASTA file downloaded from UniProt on April 2017, concatenated with common contaminants and SARS-CoV-2 proteome sequences. TMT reporter ion quantification was performed on MaxQuant using default settings. For searches, cysteine carbamido-methylation was specified as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The MaxQuant output file designated “ProteinGroups.txt” was used for data normalization and statistical analyses using in-house generated scripts in the R environment.  Bioinformatic analysis was performed using R: A language and environment for Statistical Computing (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. http://www.R-project.org), version 3.6.1. The “ProteinGroups.txt” table corresponding to each cell line was filtered to eliminate entries labelled as reverse hits, potential contaminants, and “only identified by site”. Protein quantitation required at least 70% valid values across all TMT channels. The TMT intensity values were log2 transformed and Loess-normalized. Differentially regulated proteins were defined by implementing a Log2 fold-change threshold =+/-0.25 for SARS-CoV-2 vs mock-infected cells. Similar liberal thresholds have been previously described for TMT-based analyses owing to ratio compression (PMID 32492406).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Stat phosphorylation, Human cell lines, Proteomics, Interferon signaling, Immune evasion, Receptor tyrosine kinases, Virus-host interactions

### Affiliations
Boston University
Assistant Professor, Biochemistry Boston University School of Medicine Investigator, National Emerging Infectious Diseases Laboratories (NEIDL), USA

### Submitter
Christian Heckendorf

### Lab Head
Dr Mohsan Saeed
Assistant Professor, Biochemistry Boston University School of Medicine Investigator, National Emerging Infectious Diseases Laboratories (NEIDL), USA


