### Accession
PXD026750

### Title
A reference database of electrophoretic migration patterns for human proteins in a set of cell lines.

### Description
Protein denaturing electrophoresis based on sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS-PAGE) is a technique widely applied for studying proteins, either alone or in combination with specific antibody-based detection. Despite its popularity, SDS-PAGE and western blotting are poorly reproducible and can give different results depending on experimental factors affecting electrophoresis but also on the characteristics of the antibodies used for detection. We reasoned that a reference database of accurately determined migration patterns for human proteins would be very useful for the community. Using mass spectrometry and an internal calibration strategy, we have constructed a database of migration patterns for thousands of proteins in five commonly used human cell lines and one mouse cell line. We show that the electrophoretic molecular weights determined are accurate and, for a large portion of the proteome, highly reproducible across replicates and cell lines. Data exploration highlighted numerous known protein processing events that can be mapped by combining migration patterns and the sequence coverage observed. The information is freely available in a website and should constitute a useful reference for investigators trying to validate western blot results and protein migrations in general.

### Sample Protocol
Cells lines were purchased from the European Collection of Authenticated Cell Cultures (ECACC), either directly or through Sigma-Aldrich. Adherent cells were grown in RPMI +10% FBS to half dish confluence, after which the medium was removed by aspiration and layers of cells were washed with ice-cold PBS. Cells were then mechanically scraped in FASP buffer (4% SDS 100mM DTT, 100mM Tris pH 7.5) (1) and the resulting suspension was immediately heated at 95C for 5 min, sonicated with a tip sonicator for 2x20s and centrifuged at 13’000 x g  for 10 min. Protein concentration in the supernatant was determined with the tryptophan fluorescence method (2).  Suspension cells (K562), grown to a density of 5 x 10e5 cells/ml, were diluted 5x with ice-cold PBS and recovered by centrifugation at 1200 xg for 2 min. After washing two more times with excess cold PBS, cells were lysed in FASP buffer as described for adherent cells.  Light and heavy SILAC-labelled U2-OS and HCT-116 cells were grown in standard SILAC conditions in DMEM medium supplemented with 10% dialysed FBS.  While the light cells were subjected to various treatments, heavy labelled (13C6N2-L-lysine and 13C615N4-L-arginine) cells samples were untreated controls (3) . Heavy and light labelled lysates were mixed at a quantitative ratio of 1:1.  Cells were grown for at least 6 passages in SILAC medium. The extend of isotope labelling was determined to be greater than 98% and Arg to Pro conversion was lower than 5%.  For all samples, a total of 120 μg of protein from lysates was migrated on a pre-cast gradient polyacrylamide SDS gel (4-12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris minigel, product #NP0321BOX by Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) using MOPS SDS buffer (50 mM MOPS, 50mM Tris base, 0.1% SDS, 1mM EDTA, pH 7.7, Invitrogen product #NP0001). Acrylamide wells were manually modified to create larger wells for loading. Migration was carried out at 80V for 15min and then at 150 V until the visible 10 kDa marker was at 10 mm from the end of the gel. Gels were stained with colloidal Coomassie blue.  Entire lanes were cut manually into 46-48 identical gel slices (approximately 1.5mm height) using a gridcutter tool (MEE1-5-50, The Gel Company, San Francisco, CA, USA). In-gel proteolytic cleavage with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was performed robotically, according to a described protocol (4). The supernatant from the digestion was dried by evaporation and redissolved in 30 μl 0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile for LC-MS/MS. Samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) interfaced via a nanospray source to a Dionex RSLC 3000 nanoHPLC system (Dionex). Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase Acclaim PepMap nanocolumn (75 μm inner diameter x 50 cm, 2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Dionex) with a 5-85% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid (main step : 8-28% MeCN in 26 min; total method time 65 min, flow rate 0.25 ul/min). Full MS survey scans were performed at 60'000 resolution. In data-dependent acquisition controlled by Xcalibur 2.0.7 software (Thermo Fisher), the 10 most intense multiply charged precursor ions in the full MS survey scan were selected for HCD fragmentation with a relative collision energy of 27%. MS2 spectra were acquired at 17’500 resolution, after which precursors were excluded from further selection during 60s. (1) Wiśniewski JR, Zougman A, Nagaraj N, Mann M. (2008) Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat Methods. 2009;6:359 (2) Wiśniewski JR, Gaugaz FZ (2015)  Fast and sensitive total protein and Peptide assays for proteomic analysis, Anal Chem. 87(8):4110-6., doi: 10.1021/ac504689z. (3) Conde-Rubio M, Mylonas R, Widmann C,  Non-lethal stress-induced discrete proteolysis is caspase-3/7 dependent. Cell Death Discovery,  2021, in press (4) Shevchenko, A.; Wilm, M.; Vorm, O.; Mann, M., Mass spectrometric sequencing of proteins silver-stained polyacrylamide gels. Anal Chem 1996, 68, (5), 850-8.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant (5) version 1.6.14.0 , using the Andromeda search engine for identification (6). Database searches were performed on the human subset of the SWISSPROT database, downloaded on September 16th, 2020 containing 20’371 sequences and supplemented with common contaminants. Search parameters were trypsin specificity, two possible missed cleavages and mass error tolerances of 7 ppm for the precursor and 20 ppm for tandem mass spectra (dynamically adjusted by MaxQuant after the first search). The iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at 1% false discovery rate established against a reversed database, according to default MaxQuant parameters. A minimum of one unique peptide was necessary to discriminate sequences which shared peptides. Sets of protein sequences which could not be discriminated based on identified peptides were listed together as protein groups.  All gel slices in a run were analysed as separate experiments by MaxQuant, with the “match between run” option activated and applied only between adjacent slices. Total protein group intensities as determined by MaxQuant were used for all subsequent calculations and database construction. For SILAC labelled samples (HCT, U2OS cell lines) only the intensities of the H channel (untreated cells) were used. All subsequent data processing steps are described in the article (main and supplementary methods).       (5) Cox, J., & Mann, M. (2008). MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nature Biotechnology, 26(12), 1367–72. http://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.1511 (6) Cox, J., Neuhauser, N., Michalski, A., Scheltema, R. A., Olsen, J. V, & Mann, M. (2011). Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. Journal of Proteome Research, 10(4), 1794–805. http://doi.org/10.1021/pr101065j

### Publication Abstract
Native molecular weight (MW) is one of the defining features of proteins. Denaturing gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) is a very popular technique for separating proteins and determining their MW. Coupled with antibody-based detection, SDS-PAGE is widely applied for protein identification and quantitation. Yet, electrophoresis is poorly reproducible and the MWs obtained are often inaccurate. This hampers antibody validation and negatively impacts the reliability of western blot data, resulting worldwide in a considerable waste of reagents and labour. We argue that, to alleviate these problems there is a need to establish a database of reference MWs measured by SDS-PAGE. Using mass spectrometry as an orthogonal detection method, we acquired electrophoretic migration patterns for approximately 10'000 human proteins in five commonly used cell lines. We applied a robust internal calibration of migration to determine accurate and reproducible molecular weights. This in turn allows merging replicates to increase accuracy, but also enables comparing different cell lines. Mining of the data obtained highlights structural factors that affect migration of distinct classes of proteins. When combined with peptide coverage, the data produced recapitulates known post-translational modifications and differential splicing and can be used to formulate hypotheses on new or poorly known processing events. The full information is freely accessible as a web resource through a user friendly graphical interface (https://pumba.dcsr.unil.ch/). We anticipate that this database will be useful to investigators worldwide for troubleshooting western blot experiments, but could also contribute to the characterization of human proteoforms.

### Keywords
Western blot, Sds-page, Electrophoresis, Gelc-ms, Molecular weight

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Protein Analysis Facility, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Manfredo Quadroni
Protein Analysis Facility, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne, Switzerland


