### Accession
PXD011594

### Title
Arabidopsis ARF-ARFGEF interaction analyzed by AP-MS

### Description
In Arabidopsis and presumably other flowering plant species as well, there are two non-conserved putative ARF GTPases in addition to the eukaryotically conserved ARF1 (class I) and eight ARF guanine-nucleotide exchange factors (ARF-GEFs) that appear to be involved in specific membrane-trafficking pathways. The aim of the study is to analyze which of the ARFs is activated by which ARF-GEF.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from transgenic seedlings expressing YFP-tagged proteins and treated with Brefeldin A were immunoprecipitated with anti-GFP beads. For purification SDS PAGE of proteins was done followed by in-gel digestion with Trypsin.Extracted peptides were desalted using C18 StageTips. The peptide mixtures were injected onto an HPLC (C18) column in solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and subsequently eluted with an 127 minute segmented gradient of 5–33-50-90% of HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The 10 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented in each scan cycle using collision-induced dissociation (CID). In all measurements, sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 90 s. The target values were 5000 charges for MS/MS fragmentation and 106 charges for the MS scan.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were processed with MaxQuant software package version 1.5.2.8 with integrated Andromeda search engine. Database search was performed against a target-decoy Arabidopsis thaliana database obtained from Uniprot and 285 commonly observed contaminants. In database search, full specificity was required for trypsin. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Initial mass tolerance was set to 4.5 parts per million (ppm) for precursor ions and 0.5 dalton (Da) for fragment ions. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were reported at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01, estimated by the target/decoy approach. The iBAQ algorithm was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Membrane traffic, Arf gtpases, Arabidopsis, Arf-gefs

### Affiliations
Center for Plant Molecular Biology (ZMBP) University of Tübingen Tübingen, Germany
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Gerd Jürgens
Center for Plant Molecular Biology (ZMBP) University of Tübingen Tübingen, Germany


