### Accession
PXD030534

### Title
Proteomic investigation into the action mechanism of inhibitor ptsc1 against Streptococcus pneumoniae

### Description
Phenyl-thiazolylurea-sulfonamides compound 1 (ptsc1) is a new and efficient bacterial inhibitor. Although the inhibitor has antibacterial activity against several model bacteria, the details of its mechanism in Streptococcus pneumoniae (S. pneumoniae) have not been revealed. In the current study, we found that ptsc1 can significantly inhibit the growth of S. pneumoniae. To further investigate the molecular mechanism of its antibacterial effects, quantitative proteomics was performed to identify differential expressed proteins in S. pneumoniae. Compared with the normal group, the expression levels of 38 proteins were upregulated, whereas those of 88 proteins were downregulated (> 1.3 fold-change) in the experimental group (P < 0.05). KEGG pathways analysis revealed that ptsc1 regulated proteins were mainly involved in carbohydrate metabolism, DNA replication and repair, pyrimidine metabolism, fatty acid biosynthesis and oxidative phosphorylation pathways. The results of GO enrichment analysis showed that the inhibitor could lead to dysregulation of bacterial translation and energy metabolism, and cause intracellular oxidative stress.

### Sample Protocol
S. pneumoniae D39 strain NCTC 7466 was obtained from National Collection of Type Culture (NCTC, UK). According to the MIC of ptsc1, we determined 0 μM and 8 μM final concentration of ptsc1 as the normal group and experimental group, respectively. Then the same amount of S. pneumoniae D39 was inoculated into the THYE medium with or without of ptsc1. After 8 hours of routine culture at the carbon dioxide incubator (37 °C, 5% CO2), the bacteria were collected at OD600~0.5 and precipitated by centrifugation at 8000 × g for 20 min and washed three times with 1 × PBS. Total cellular proteins were extracted using the cell lysis buffer [50 mM Tris-base with 0.5% Triton-100, 2 M thio-urea, 7 M urea, 1% PMSF, 2% nuclease mix and 2% protease inhibitor (PI)], and then coupled with intermittent sonication with 45% power, 4s on/6s off for 20min on ice[15, 16]. Cell fragments are removed by high-speed centrifugation at 13,000 × g for 1 h at 4 °C. And the concentration of total proteins was determined using bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Thermo Scientific). The total proteins from each group were reduced (7 M urea and 20 mM DTT, 1 h) and then alkylated using 60 mM IAA (30 min, protected from light) at 37 °C.  The resultant peptide mixture was labeled with TMT-6Plex kit (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) following the manufacture’s instruction. The three replication of W8001 were respectively labeled by 126, 127 and 128, and the W8012 were labeled by 129, 130, 131.The labeled peptide samples were then pooled and lyophilized in a vacuum concentrator.  The peptide mixture was re-dissovled in the buffer A (buffer A: 20mM ammonium formate in water, pH~10.0, adjusted with ammonium hydroxide), and then fractionated by high pH separation using Ultimate 3000 system (ThermoFisher scientific, MA, USA) connected to a reverse phase column (Accucore C18 column, 2.1 mm x 150 mm, 2 μm, (ThermoFisher scientific, MA, USA)). High pH separation was performed using a linear gradient. Starting from 5% B to 45% B in 40 min (B: 20mM ammonium formate in 80% ACN, pH~10.0, adjusted with ammonium hydroxide). The column was re-equilibrated at initial conditions for 15 min. The column flow rate was maintained at 0.3 mL/min and column temperature was maintained at 30℃. Six fractions were collected; each fraction was dried in a vacuum concentrator for the next step.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were searched against the protein database of S. pneumonia D39.fasta (1918 entries) using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software. The main parameters of proteins identification were as follow: MS1 tolerance was 10 ppm, MS/MS fragment tolerance was 0.02 Da, enzyme was set to trypsin with be not more than two miss cleavage, fixed modification of cabamidomethylation at Cys and TMT 6plex at peptides N terminal and Lys, variable modification of oxidation at Met and Acetylation at Proteins N-terminal, both of protein FDR and peptides FDR were less than 0.01, and more than one unique peptides. For protein quantification, only unique peptides with report ion S/N greater than 15 and FDR < 0.01 were used to quantify, the signal error between different samples was normalized by the sum of the total intensity of every report ion channel. For selection of different expression proteins selection, a 1.3-fold cutoff and P-value < 0.05 was set.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
S. pneumoniae, Trna binding, Bacteriostasis, Ros

### Affiliations
Guangdong medical University,dongguan, GUANGDONG
Guangdong Medical University, Dongguan, China.

### Submitter
Kun Cao

### Lab Head
Dr Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Diagnostics
Guangdong Medical University, Dongguan, China.


