### Accession
PXD017916

### Title
Compare the SDS-insoluble proteins among 7 Amyloidosis mouse models

### Description
A hallmark pathology of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the formation of amyloid ß (Aß) deposits that exhibit diverse localization and morphologies, ranging from diffuse to cored-neuritic deposits in brain parenchyma, with cerebral vascular deposition in leptomeningeal and parenchymal compartments. Most AD brains exhibit the full spectrum of pathologic Aß morphologies. In the course of studies to model AD amyloidosis, we have generated multiple transgenic mouse models that vary in the nature of the transgene constructs that are expressed; including the species origin of Aß peptides, the levels and length of Aß that is deposited, and whether mutant presenilin 1 (PS1) is co-expressed. These models recapitulate features of human AD amyloidosis, but interestingly some models can produce pathology in which one type of Aß morphology dominates. In prior studies of mice that primarily develop cored-neuritic deposits, we determined that Aß deposition is associated with changes in cytosolic protein solubility in which a subset of proteins become detergent-insoluble, indicative of secondary proteome instability. Here, we survey changes in cytosolic protein solubility across seven different transgenic mouse models that exhibit a range of Aß deposit morphologies. We find a surprisingly diverse range of changes in proteome solubility across these models. Mice that deposit human Aß40 and Aß42 in cored-neuritic plaques had the most robust changes in proteome solubility. Insoluble cytosolic proteins were also detected in the brains of mice that develop diffuse Aß42 deposits but to a lesser extent. Notably, mice with cored deposits containing only Aß42 had relatively few proteins that became detergent-insoluble. Our data provide new insight into the diversity of biological effects that can be attributed to different types of Aß pathology and support the view that fibrillar cored-neuritic plaque pathology is the more disruptive Aß pathology in the Alzheimer’s cascade.

### Sample Protocol
The method involves sequential extraction and sedimentation in which tissues are first homogenized in PBS and centrifuged at 100,000 x g for 30 minutes. The supernatant was stored as PBS-S and the pellet fraction was then solubilized in NP40 (0.5%) and centrifuged to produce a pellet that was solubilized in buffers with deoxycholate (2%) and centrifuged. This pellet was then solubilized in buffers with 1% sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS) and centrifuged. The pellets were suspended in Laemmeli buffer and stored as the SDS-P fractions.

### Data Protocol
The tandem mass spectra were extracted using Mascot Distiller (version 2.4), while X! Tandem [The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.01)] was utilized for sample analysis. The mouse UniProt Protein Knowledgebase that had been customized by the addition of human protein data related to expressed transgenes of interest (89029 entries total) was searched based upon trypsin digestion to identify proteins from peptide spectra. X! Tandem was used to search a reverse concatenated section of the same database. Specifications within X! Tandem and Mascot included a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.01 Da and parent ion tolerance set to 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was input as a fixed modification while variable modifications included glutamine?pyroglutamate at the N-terminus, deaminated glutamate and asparagine, the oxidation of methionine and ubiquitination (Lys-Gly-Gly), as well as ammonia loss on asparagine. MS/MS-based protein/peptide identifications were confirmed using Scaffold (version Scaffold 4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR). Subsequent peptide identifications were only established if they surpassed a 50% probability according to the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. X! Tandem yielded peptide probabilities, which were assigned using the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. The threshold for accepting a particular protein resided at 99% probability and included at least two identified peptides. The Protein Prophet algorithm designated protein probabilities based upon peptide identifications. During instances in which more than one protein was supported by significant peptide evidence, these proteins were arranged into clusters. When a group of proteins could not be distinguished according to MS/MS data, they were grouped according to the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
A hallmark pathology of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the formation of amyloid &#x3b2; (A&#x3b2;) deposits that exhibit diverse localization and morphologies, ranging from diffuse to cored-neuritic deposits in brain parenchyma, with cerebral vascular deposition in leptomeningeal and parenchymal compartments. Most AD brains exhibit the full spectrum of pathologic A&#x3b2; morphologies. In the course of studies to model AD amyloidosis, we have generated multiple transgenic mouse models that vary in the nature of the transgene constructs that are expressed; including the species origin of A&#x3b2; peptides, the levels and length of A&#x3b2; that is deposited, and whether mutant presenilin 1 (PS1) is co-expressed. These models recapitulate features of human AD amyloidosis, but interestingly some models can produce pathology in which one type of A&#x3b2; morphology dominates. In prior studies of mice that primarily develop cored-neuritic deposits, we determined that A&#x3b2; deposition is associated with changes in cytosolic protein solubility in which a subset of proteins become detergent-insoluble, indicative of secondary proteome instability. Here, we survey changes in cytosolic protein solubility across seven different transgenic mouse models that exhibit a range of A&#x3b2; deposit morphologies. We find a surprisingly diverse range of changes in proteome solubility across these models. Mice that deposit human A&#x3b2;40 and A&#x3b2;42 in cored-neuritic plaques had the most robust changes in proteome solubility. Insoluble cytosolic proteins were also detected in the brains of mice that develop diffuse A&#x3b2;42 deposits but to a lesser extent. Notably, mice with cored deposits containing only A&#x3b2;42 had relatively few proteins that became detergent-insoluble. Our data provide new insight into the diversity of biological effects that can be attributed to different types of A&#x3b2; pathology and support the view that fibrillar cored-neuritic plaque pathology is the more disruptive A&#x3b2; pathology in the Alzheimer's cascade.

### Keywords
Protein homoestasis, Detergent-insoluble proteins, Transgenic mice, Amyloid, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
Neuroscience
Department of Neurscience, College of Medicine, University of Florida

### Submitter
Guilian Xu

### Lab Head
Dr David R. Borchelt
Department of Neurscience, College of Medicine, University of Florida


