### Accession
PXD005681

### Title
Mouse Liver LC-MSMS -  Food Perception Primes Hepatic ER Homeostasis via Melanocortin-Dependent Control of mTOR Activation

### Description
Mice were starved overnight and divided into three groups: a) refed for 30 min b) caged food (not able to reach, but to smell and see food) c) further fasted. The aim of the study was to determine phosphorylation events in the liver in response to visual exposure of food. See more details in the manuscript and Supplementary Tables.

### Sample Protocol
Five biological replicates of each experiment (refed, caged food and fasted) were performed. Livers were crushed in liquid nitrogen using a mortar. 6 Lys6 labeled SILAC livers were used to generate an internal standard that was the same for all performed experiments. Liver powder was then dissolved in RIPA buffer (150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.2% Na-Desoxycholat, 0.1% SDS in 10 mM Tris HCl pH = 7.5) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Biotol) using 1 mL buffer per 10 mg powder. Samples were sonicated on ice and centrifuged at 14,000xg at 4°C. Supernatant was then used for Acetone precipitation overnight at -20°C, pellet was washed with 90% acetone, dried and dissolved in 6M Urea, 2M Urea in 10 mM HEPES. Then, protein concentration was determined and 5 mg of proteins were mixed with the heavy SILAC standard at a one to one ratio. Proteins were reduced by 10 mM Dithiothreitol and alkylated using 55 mM Iodacetamide as described before {Nolte, 2014 #3616}.  Lys-C endopepitdase was added in a enzyme to protein ratio of 1 to 100 and incubated for 2h at room temperature. Urea was diluted to 2 M by adding 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate and additional Lys-C was used in the same ratio. Digestion was stopped by adding 5 % Acetonitrile and 0.2 % TFA in a one to one ratio. The procedure was similar for TiO2 beads and AMPK antibody based phosphopeptides enrichment. Peptides were desalted by C18 Cartridges including several washing steps of bound peptides by 0.1% TFA and three-step elution by 40 % and twice 60 % Acetonitrile containing 0.1 % TFA (600 µL each). Samples were dried in a speed vac and dissolved in 10 mM Ammonium hydroxide to a final volume of 1.6 mL.  Fractionation was done on an Ultimate 3000 HPLC. Complete samples were loaded via 4-step injection onto a Waters X-bridge column Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 3.5 μm 4.6 × 250 mm column. The column temperature was set to 35 °C. For peptide separation a binary buffer system was used: Buffer A) 10 mM Ammonium hydroxide and B) 90 % Acetonitrile, 10 mM Ammonium hydroxide. Peptides were loaded onto the column using 5 % B at 1 mL/min between each injection step for 1 min and after the fourth injection this was held for further 2 min. In a linear shape the buffer B content was increased from 10 % to 25 %   , ramped to 40 % in 5 min, further increased to 95 % B within 5 minutes and held for 3 min. Followed by a re-equilibration step of 5 min after ramping the gradient back to loading conditions. Fractions were collected for a total volume of 1000 µL and prior collection 200 µL of 80 % Acetonitrile and 5% TFA was added to each vial to immediately shift the pH to acidic conditions. Fractions were concentrated in a speed vac for at least 12 h to almost complete dryness and pooled. Prior to phosphopeptide enrichment TiO2 beads were washed in 40% Acetonitrile and 10 % Ammonium hydroxide, followed by 2 washing steps of 70 % Acetonitrile and 80 % Acetonitrile/ 5 % TFA. Then TiO2 beads (5 μm Titansphere, GL Sciences) were dissolved in binding buffer (80% ACN, 7% TFA by 10 μL/mg of beads) as described previously {Krishnan, 2015 #1465}. Then, 2.5 mg TiO2 beads were added to each fraction and incubated on a rotating wheel for 30 min at room temperature. Beads were collected by centrifugation (1000 x g, 30 sec) and supernatant was transferred to a fresh 5 mL tube containing further 2.5 mg of TiO2 beads. Beads were washed with 2x2 mL 80 % ACN and 7 % TFA and loaded onto C8-StageTips. Beads were washed further three times on-tip using 30 % ACN, 1% TFA, followed by 60 % ACN, 1 % TFA and 80 % ACN, 1 % TFA. Beads were dried with a syringe and phosphopeptides were eluted by 5 % Ammonium hydroxide and twice with 10 % Ammonium hydroxide, 40 % ACN. Eluate was collected fraction-wise in a 96 well plate and concentrated in a speed vac for 2.5 h for complete dryness and re-suspended in 10 µL 2.5 % ACN and 5 % formic acid.  Instrumentation consisted out of an Easy nLC 1000 coupled via a nono-spray ionization source to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated on a 50 cm column using a two-buffer system: A) 0.1 % formic acid and B) 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile. Content of buffer B was increased over 90-120 min gradient time from 5% to 23 % within 70 % of the total time, followed by an increase to 55 % and 85 % and a re-equilibration step to 5% before the next sample was loaded onto the column.  MS1 level spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z, using 3e6 as an AGC target within a maximum injection time of 20 ms.  The instrument operated in a top10 mode and sequentially isolated the top10 most intense peaks using an isolation window of 1.9 m/z for HCD fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 27. The Resolution was set to 35,000 at 200 m/z. We used an AGC target of 5e5 and a maximum injection time of 110-120 ms maximizing parallelization and high quality MS2 spectra for phosphosite localization and identification.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis and bioinformatics All raw data were processed using MaxQuant 1.5.3.8 and the implemented Andromeda search engine{Cox, 2008 #2825;Cox, 2011 #2826}. Acquired MS/MS spectra were used for identification of modified and unmodified peptides using the Uniprot reference proteome of Mus musculus (2016).  A Lys-C/P was set as the used protease and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages was tolerated. Heavy SILAC channel was defined by Lys6 as the label. Mass tolerances were kept as by default. The FDR was estimated by the implemented decoy algorithm and calculated to 0.01 at the protein, site and peptide-spectrum-match level by the revert method. Carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification while phosphorylation at Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine as well as Methionineoxidation and protein N-term acetylation were defined as variable modifications. A minimal ratio count of 1 was required for quantification and peptide length of 7 amino acids was defined. The re-quantify and match-between runs algorithms were enabled using default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Adaptation of liver to the postprandial state requires coordinated regulation of protein synthesis and folding aligned with changes in lipid metabolism. Here we demonstrate that sensory food perception is sufficient to elicit early activation of hepatic mTOR signaling, Xbp1 splicing, increased expression of ER-stress genes, and phosphatidylcholine synthesis, which translate into a rapid morphological ER remodeling. These responses overlap with those activated during refeeding, where they are maintained and constantly increased upon nutrient supply. Sensory food perception activates POMC neurons in the hypothalamus, optogenetic activation of POMC neurons activates hepatic mTOR signaling and Xbp1 splicing, whereas lack of MC4R expression attenuates these responses to sensory food perception. Chemogenetic POMC-neuron activation promotes sympathetic nerve activity (SNA) subserving the liver, and norepinephrine evokes the same responses in hepatocytes in&#xa0;vitro and in liver in&#xa0;vivo as observed upon sensory food perception. Collectively, our experiments unravel that sensory food perception coordinately primes postprandial liver ER adaption through a melanocortin-SNA-mTOR-Xbp1s axis. VIDEO ABSTRACT.

### Keywords
Mouse, Liver, Silac, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26 50931 Cologne, Germany
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD)

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Krueger
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26 50931 Cologne, Germany


