### Accession
PXD011633

### Title
iTRAQ based analysis of leaf proteome identifies important proteins in secondary metabolite biosynthesis and defence pathways crucial to cross-protection against TMV

### Description
We used milder strain of TMV mutant (TMV-43A) to cross protect Nicotiana benthamiana plants from TMV. We used iTRAQ (2 sets) quantitative proteomics approach to investigate molecular responses and identified important host proteins from secondary metabolite biosynthesis and defence pathways

### Sample Protocol
Total protein samples (100 µg) from mock and TMV infected tobacco plant used for trypsin digestion. Total protein samples were first reduced with tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), alkylated with methyl methane-thiosulfonate (MMTS), followed by trypsin digestion at 37 C for 16 hours. Digested peptides were vacuum dried and dissolved in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.5. iTRAQ reagent 8-Plex kit (ABI-SCIEX) was used to carry out labeling of total protein samples according to manufacturer’s protocol. All eight iTRAQ reagent labeled samples were pulled together and used strong-cation exchange column according to the manufacturer’s protocol (SCIEX) to remove excess iTRAQ reagents and organic solvents. For a desalting purpose, C18 Sep-Pak (Pierce) cartridge was used and lyophilized. Lyophilized samples were prepared for 2D-LC by dissolving in 1 ml 20 mM ammonium formate in water, pH10.iTRAQ labeled peptides separated by reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) equipped with C18 column. 20 mM ammonium formate in water, pH 10 were used as mobile phase A and mobile phase B was 80% ACN. Eluted fractions were pools in 10 fractions and lyophilized and reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile with 98% water. The Tendon MS analysis of 10 fractions was performed on 5600 TripleTOF system (SCIEX), whereas precursor ion selection parameters were mass range 400-1800 m/z and accumulation times 250 ms/second.

### Data Protocol
ProteinPilot Software 5.0 (AB SCIEX) was used for identification of proteins and relative iTRAQ quantification. ProteinPilot utilizes Paragon™ Algorithm for peptide identification and Pro Group™ for protein assignment. The user defined search parameters in ProteinPilot were used for the MS/MS spectra: (a) Sample type: iTRAQ 8-Plex; (b) Alkylation: MMTS; (c) Digestion: Trypsin; (d) Instrument, TripleTOF5600 (e) Special Factors: None

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Secondary metabolite biosynthesis, Nicotiana benthamiana, Cross-protection, Tmv, Itraq

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore
National university of Singapore

### Submitter
Prem Prakash Das

### Lab Head
Dr Wong Sek Man
Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore


