### Accession
PXD038104

### Title
Bacterial host adaptation through sequence and structural variations of a single type III effector gene

### Description
Molecular mechanisms underlying quantitative variations of pathogenicity remain elusive. Here, we identified the Xanthomonas campestris XopJ6 effector that triggers disease resistance in cauliflower and Arabidopsis thaliana. XopJ6 is a close homolog of the Ralstonia solanacearum PopP2 YopJ family acetyltransferase. XopJ6 is recognized by the RRS1-R/RPS4 NLR pair that integrates a WRKY decoy domain mimicking effector true targets. We identified a XopJ6 natural variant carrying a single residue substitution in XopJ6 WRKY-binding site that disrupts interaction with WRKY proteins. This mutation allows XopJ6 to evade immune perception while retaining XopJ6 virulence functions. Interestingly, xopJ6 resides in a Tn3-family transposon likely contributing to xopJ6 copy number variation (CNV). Using genetic complementation assays, we demonstrate that xopJ6 CNV allows fine-tuning of pathogen virulence on Arabidopsis through gene dosage-mediated modulation of xopJ6 expression. Together, our findings highlight how sequence and structural genetic variations restricted at a particular effector gene contribute to bacterial host adaptation.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant GST-tagged proteins were expressed in RosettaTM (DE3) E. coli cells (Novagen) co-transformed with pDUET- and pCDF-GST-based plasmids. Briefly, for each combination, bacteria were precultured in 10 mL liquid L medium with appropriate antibiotics (carbenicillin (50µg/mL) and spectinomycin (50 µg/mL)) at 37°C for 12 hours under constant shaking (180 rpm). The precultures were diluted in 50 mL liquid L medium (ration 1:25, with antibiotics) at 37°C under shaking (180 rpm). At OD600nm = 0.6, protein expression was induced with 0.2 mM IPTG for 4 hours at 28°C under shaking. Cultures were centrifuged (6500 rpm, 20 min, 4°C) and pelleted cells were concentrated 10 times in PBS (phosphate-buffered saline, pH 8.0) supplemented with 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF, Sigma Aldrich), 10 mM Sodium butyrate, 0.1% Triton, 1mM EDTA, and 2.5 mM DTT) and lysed using a French press. After centrifugation, supernatants were incubated with 30 uL of pre-equilibrated Glutathione Sepharose 4B (GE Healthcare) for 2 h at 4°C with rotation. Sepharose beads were recovered by centrifugation and then washed three times with buffer for 10 min at 4°C with rotation. Pulled-down GST-tagged proteins were denaturated in 50µl of of Laemmli buffer (2X) containing 25 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 95°C for 5 min, and cysteines were alkylated by the addition of 90 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature. Protein samples were loaded onto a 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel and subjected to short electrophoresis. After Quick Coomassie Blue (Generon) staining of the gel, gel slices were excised, washed twice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate-acetonitrile (1:1, v:v) and then washed once with acetonitrile. Proteins were in-gel digested by the addition of 60 µL of a solution of modified sequencing grade trypsin in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (20 ng/µL, sequence grade, Promega, Charbonnières, France). The mixture was incubated at 37 °C overnight. The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel by one round of incubation (15 min, 37°C) in 1% formic acid–acetonitrile (40%) and two rounds of incubation (15 min each, 37°C) in 1% formic acid–acetonitrile (1:1). The extracted fractions were air-dried. Tryptic peptides were resuspended in 14 µl of 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid for further MS analysis.   Nano LC-MS/MS analysis Peptides mixtures were analysed by nano-LC-MS/MS using nanoRS UHPLC system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Five microliters of each sample were loaded on a C18 pre-column (5 mm × 300 µm; Thermo Fisher) at 20 µL/min in 5% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid. After 5 min of desalting, the pre-column was switched on line with the analytical C18 column (15 cm × 75 µm; Reprosil C18 in-house packed) equilibrated in 95% of solvent A (5% acetonitrile + 0.2% formic acid in water) and 5% of solvent B (80% acetonitrile + 0.2% formic acid in water). Peptides were eluted using a 5-50% gradient of B during 105 min at a 300 nL/min flow rate. The Q-Exactive Plus was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the Xcalibur software. Survey scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 350-1500 m/z range with the resolution set to a value of 70 000. The ten most intense ions per survey scan were selected for HCD fragmentation, and the resulting fragments were analysed in the Orbitrap with the resolution set to a value of 17 500. Dynamic exclusion was used within 30s to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics analysis of nanoLC-MS/MS-based proteomic data Acquired MS and MS/MS data were searched with Mascot (version 2.7.0, http://matrixscience.com) against a custom-made database containing all interest protein sequences and contaminants protein sequences. The search included methionine oxydation, protein N-terminal threonine (T), serine (S) and lysine (K) acetylation, as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modifications. Trypsin P was chosen as the enzyme and 3 missed cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for the precursor ion and to 20 mmu for fragment ions. Raw MS signal extraction of identified peptides was performed across different samples. Validation of identifications was performed through a false-discovery rate set to 1% at protein and peptide-sequence match level, determined by target-decoy search using the in-house-developed software Proline software version 2.1 (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/). Then, peptide identifications were grouped into proteins. Acetylated and no acetylated ratio of peptides containing the K319 residue of AtWRKY22 lying in the conserved WRKY heptad were calculated. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Copy number variation, Arabidopsis, Ralstonia, Popp2, Cauliflower, Xopj6, Acetyltransferase, Immune receptor, Xanthomonas

### Affiliations
CNRS
CNRS, FRAIB, IPBS, France , Toulouse

### Submitter
Carole Pichereaux

### Lab Head
Dr Carole Pichereaux
CNRS, FRAIB, IPBS, France , Toulouse


