### Accession
PXD018639

### Title
Analysis of proteomic changes in Fbxl4 knock-out mouse liver and patient fibroblasts

### Description
We analyzed the proteomic changes that occur in a Fbxl4 knock-out 1-year mouse. We analyzed Liver tissue using a 6-plex TMT approach (3 KO and 3 controls). Since we observed a global decrease in mitochondrial proteins, we also explored mitoproteome changes in different tissues (liver, kidney and heart) using a label-free approach. Finally, we also did a 6-plex TMT to analize the proteomic changes in 3 patient-derived fibroblast lines compared to 3 control lines and correlated them with the results obtained in the mouse model. All together, these experiments revealed that Fbxl4 deficiency leads to a decreased mitochondrial content without major changes in mitochondria itself, pointing to an increased turnover.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were suspended in a mixture of 0.1% ProteaseMax (Promega), 4 M urea (Sigma-Aldrich), 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 10% acetonitrile (AcN); and were sonicated with a VibraCell probe (Sonics & Materials, Inc.) for 1 min, with pulse 2/2, at 20% amplitude. Following sonication in a water bath for 5 minutes, extracts were vortexed and centrifuged for 5 min at 13,000 rpm. The supernatants were thereafter transferred to new tubes and protein concentrations were determined in a 1:10 dilution with water.  Tryptic digestion with an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 was performed with 25 µg of each sample using a protocol including reduction in 6 mM dithiothreitol at 37°C for 60 min, alkylation in 22 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark, and proteolysis over night at 37°C. Tryptic peptides were cleaned with C18 HyperSep Filter Plate, bed volume 40 µL (Thermo Scientific) and dried on a Speedvac (miVac, Thermo Scientific). Six of TMT-10plex reagents (Thermo Scientific) in 100 µg aliquots were dissolved in 30 µL dry AcN, scrambled and mixed with the digested samples dissolved in 70 µL TEAB (resulting final 30% AcN), followed by incubation at 22°C for 2 h at 550 rpm. The reaction was then quenched with 12 µL of 5% hydroxylamine at 22°C for 15 min at 550 rpm. Finally, the labeled samples were pooled and dried in a Speedvac.  Samples, 2 µg aliquots, were injected into a 50 cm long C18 EASY spray column (Thermo Scientific) installed in a nano LC-1000 system on-line coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The chromatographic separation of the peptides was achieved with the organic gradient as follows: 2-26% AcN in 110 min, 26-35% AcN in 10 min, 35-95% AcN in 5 min and 95% AcN for 15 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Full mass scans were acquired in m/z 375 to 1500 at resolution of R=120,000 (at m/z 200), followed by data-dependent HCD fragmentations from maximum 15 most intense precursor ions with a charge state 2+ to 7+. The tandem mass scans were acquired with a resolution of R=60,000, targeting 5x104 ions, setting isolation width to m/z 1.4 and normalized collision energy to 35%.  Enriched mitochondria were lysed in 6 M guanidinium chloride, 10 mM TRIS-HCl, 40 mM chloroacetamide, and 100 mM Tris-HCl by heating the solution at 95°C for 10 min, followed by repeated cycles of sonication for 10 and 30 seconds and a 30 second pause on a Bioruptor (Diagnode). Samples were centrifuged for 20 min at 20000 g and the supernatant was diluted 1:10 using 20 mM Tris-HCL pH 8. Overnight digestion was done using 1 µg Trypsin Gold (Promega) at 37°C. The supernatant was acidified with 50% formic acid and the solution was desalted using home-made STAGEtips.  Peptides were separated on a 25 cm, 75 μm internal diameter PicoFrit analytical column (New Objective) packed with 1.9 μm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ media (Dr. Maisch,) using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column was maintained at 50°C. Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were separated on a segmented gradient from 6% to 25% buffer B for 135 min, from 25% to 31% for 20 min, and from 31% to 50% buffer B for 20 min at 200 nl / min. Eluting peptides were analyzed on a QExactive HF (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptide precursor m/z measurements were carried out at 60000 resolution in the 300 to 1800 m/z range. The ten most intense precursors with charge state from 2 to 7 only were selected for HCD fragmentation using 25% normalized collision energy. The m/z values of the peptide fragments were measured in the Orbitrap at 30000 resolution, using a minimum AGC target of 8e3 and 55 ms maximum injection time. Upon fragmentation, precursors were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 45 sec.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data files were loaded in Proteome Discoverer v2.2 and searched against mouse or human SwissProt protein databases (42,793 and 21,008 entries, respectively) using the Mascot 2.5.1 search engine (Matrix Science Ltd.). A maximum of two missed cleavage sites were allowed for trypsin, while setting the precursor and the fragment ion mass tolerance to 10 ppm and 0.05, respectively. Dynamic modifications of oxidation on methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and acetylation of N-termini were set. For quantification both unique and razor peptides were requested. The final quantitative data analysis was performed with an in-house developed R script.  Label-free proteomic data were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0 using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Peptide fragmentation spectra were searched against the canonical and isoform sequences of the mouse reference proteome (proteome ID UP000000589, downloaded September 2018 from UniProt). Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications; cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. The digestion parameters were set to “specific” and “Trypsin/P,” The minimum number of peptides and razor peptides for protein identification was 1; the minimum number of unique peptides was 0. Protein identification was performed at a peptide spectrum matches and protein false discovery rate of 0.01. The “second peptide” option was on. Successful identifications were transferred between the different raw files using the “Match between runs” option. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed using an LFQ minimum ratio count of two. LFQ intensities were filtered for at least two valid values in at least one genotype and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and down shift of 1.8. Analysis of the label-free quantification results was performed using RDevelopment Core Team 2010. MitoCarta annotations were added using the corresponding Gene names (primary) entry and the first of the Gene names (synonym) entries of the oldest Uniprot ID with the highest number of peptides in the column “Protein IDs”. Only mitochondrial proteins, according to MitoCarta, were used for analysis. Protein label-free intensities were normalized using vsn. Differential expression analysis was performed using the two-sided moderated t-test from the limma package. Exploratory data analysis was performed using ggplot and GGally.

### Publication Abstract
Pathogenic variants in FBXL4 cause a severe encephalopathic syndrome associated with mtDNA depletion and deficient oxidative phosphorylation. To gain further insight into the enigmatic pathophysiology caused by FBXL4 deficiency, we generated homozygous Fbxl4 knockout mice and found that they display a predominant perinatal lethality. Surprisingly, the few surviving animals are apparently normal until the age of 8-12&#xa0;months when they gradually develop signs of mitochondrial dysfunction and weight loss. One-year-old Fbxl4 knockouts show a global reduction in a variety of mitochondrial proteins and mtDNA depletion, whereas lysosomal proteins are upregulated. Fibroblasts from patients with FBXL4 deficiency and human FBXL4 knockout cells also have reduced steady-state levels of mitochondrial proteins that can be attributed to increased mitochondrial turnover. Inhibition of lysosomal function in these cells reverses the mitochondrial phenotype, whereas proteasomal inhibition has no effect. Taken together, the results we present here show that FBXL4 prevents mitochondrial removal via autophagy and that loss of FBXL4 leads to decreased mitochondrial content and mitochondrial disease.

### Keywords
Human, Mitochondria, Mouse, Liver, Fbxl4, Fibroblast

### Affiliations
Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics department, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
David Alsina

### Lab Head
Dr Nils-Göran Larsson
Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics department, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


