### Accession
PXD023051

### Title
Molecular architecture of the endocytic TPLATE complex – part2 IP-MS dataset

### Description
Eukaryotic cells rely on endocytosis to regulate their plasma membrane proteome and lipidome. Most eukaryotic groups, except fungi and animals, have retained the evolutionary ancient TSET complex as endocytic regulator. Unlike other coatomer complexes, structural insight into TSET is lacking. Here, we reveal the molecular architecture of plant TSET (TPLATE complex/TPC) using an integrative structural approach. We identify crucial roles for specific TSET subunits in complex assembly and membrane interaction. Our data therefore generates novel evolutionary insight into the difference between the hexameric TSET in Dictyostelium and the octameric TPC in plants. Structural elucidation of this ancient adaptor complex represents the missing piece in the coatomer-puzzle and vastly advances our functional as well as evolutionary insight into the process of endocytosis.

### Sample Protocol
Identification of interacting proteins using IP-MS Immunoprecipitation experiments were performed for three biological replicates as described previously (59), using 3 g of 4-day old seedlings. Interacting proteins were isolated by applying total protein extracts to α-GFP-coupled magnetic beads (Miltenyi Biotec). Three replicates of TPLATE motif substitution mutants (SWM and PFM) were compared to three replicates of Col-0 and TPLATE-GFP (in tplate(-/-)) as controls. Peptides were re-dissolved in 15 µl loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) of which 5 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were first loaded on a trapping column made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and after flushing from the trapping column the peptides were separated on a 50 cm µPAC™ column with C18-endcapped functionality (Pharmafluidics, Belgium) kept at a constant temperature of 50°C. Peptides were eluted by a linear gradient from 99% solvent A’ (0.1% formic acid in water) to 55% solvent B′ (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile, 20/80 (v/v)) in 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, followed by a 5 min wash reaching 95% solvent B’. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 5 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was 3.5 kV, and the capillary temperature was 275°C. One MS1 scan (m/z 400−2,000, AGC target 3 × 106  ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms), acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), was followed by up to 5 tandem MS scans (resolution 17,500 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 5 × 104  ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms, isolation window 2 Da, fixed first mass 140 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, intensity threshold 1.3xE4,  exclusion of unassigned, 1, 5-8, >8 positively charged precursors,  peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 12 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 25% Normalized Collision Energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.120025 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
The raw data was searched with MaxQuant (version 1.6.4.0) using standard parameters. To determine the significantly enriched proteins in bait samples versus control samples, the MaxQuant proteingroups file was uploaded in Perseus software (66). Reverse, contaminant and only identified by site identifications were removed, samples were grouped by the respective triplicates and filtered for minimal 2 valid values per triplicate. LFQ values were transformed to log2, and missing values were imputated from normal distribution using standard settings in Perseus, width of 0.3 and down shift of 1.8. Next, ANOVA (FDR=0.05, S0=1) was performed on the logged LFQ values, followed by a post-hoc Tukey test (FDR=0.05). For visualization a hierarchical clustered heatmap was created in Perseus. For visualization as volcano plots, t-tests were performed using the logged LFQ values for each bait vs control. The significantly different proteins between bait and control were determined using permutation based FDR. As cut-off, FDR=0.05, S0=1 was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic cells rely on endocytosis to regulate their plasma membrane proteome and lipidome. Most eukaryotic groups, except fungi and animals, have retained the evolutionary ancient TSET complex as an endocytic regulator. Unlike other coatomer complexes, structural insight into TSET is lacking. Here, we reveal the molecular architecture of plant TSET [TPLATE complex (TPC)] using an integrative structural approach. We identify crucial roles for specific TSET subunits in complex assembly and membrane interaction. Our data therefore generate fresh insight into the differences between the hexameric TSET in <i>Dictyostelium</i> and the octameric TPC in plants. Structural elucidation of this ancient adaptor complex represents the missing piece in the coatomer puzzle and vastly advances our functional as well as evolutionary insight into the process of endocytosis.

### Keywords
Ip-ms, Tplate complex, Arabidopsis, Tset, Structure

### Affiliations
Ghent University, Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Ghent, B-9052, Belgium
VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Ghent, B-9052, Belgium


### Submitter
Dominique Eeckhout

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Van Damme
Ghent University, Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium


