### Accession
PXD011673

### Title
Proteomics of venom from Trimeresurus malabaricus

### Description
This project mainly aims to characterize the complex toxic components present in the venom of Trimeresurus malabaricus (Malabar pit viper). Since Trimeresurus malabaricus (Malabar pit viper) species are mainly inhabited to plantation crop areas, its envenomation is a serious threat to the human population thriving in these zones, especially to the plantation workers. Therefore, exploring the venom proteome of Malabar pit viper is decisive to develop and design new antivenom and therapeutics against its envenomation. As described in this study, applying various orthogonal separation strategies helped in dissecting venom constituents of Trimeresurus malabaricus and is the first comprehensive attempt in revealing the complex venom profile of Malabar pit viper through proteomics approaches incorporating multiple database searches. In order to achieve this the crude venom components were resolved on a 12% SDS page. Further each of the bands were subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion.  The crude venom was also subjected to ion-exchange chromatography separation. The obtained fractions were subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion. All the digested peptides were then subjected to Q-TOF LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
SDS PAGE: MPV venom was dissolved in 300 μL of water and an aliquot (20 μL) of the crude venom sample components were separated on a 12% SDS gel under reducing conditions. The obtained bands were stained and visualized using Coomassie brilliant blue R-250 and the images were scanned using a gel doc system (ChemiDoc MP) and Image-Lab software from Bio-Rad. The gel bands were sliced and followed by washing steps, the gel pieces were subjected to reduction (using 10 mM DTT; incubated for 45 min at 56 °C) and alkylation (with 55 mM IAA; incubation at room temperature for 30 min in the dark) process. The gel pieces were further treated with 25 μL of 13 ng/μL trypsin followed by overnight incubation at 37 °C. The peptides were extracted out using an extraction buffer (1:1, acetonitrile (ACN): water containing 0.1 % TFA). The extracts were then concentrated using a vacuum centrifuge (Concentrator plus, Eppendorf). Ion-Exchange Chromatography: Five milligrams of the MPV venom was dissolved in 1.3 ml of 20 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 8.5 and filtered through a 0.22 µm PVDF Millipore syringe filter. 1 ml of this filtrate was injected onto an FPLC (Bio-Rad) system coupled with a UNO Q anion-exchange column (Bio-Rad, 7 mm x 35mm, 1.3 ml bed volume, 120 µm particle size) which was pre-equilibrated with 20 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 8.5. The fractions were eluted by a linear gradient using 0 to 0.5 M sodium chloride in 20 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 8.5 (0 to 30% from 5 to 30 min and 30-100% from 30 to 56 min) at a flow rate of 1 mL/min. The obtained fractions were pooled into group of six and in-solution protein digestion was performed. For this, all the samples were subjected to in-solution reduction (with 100 mM DTT; incubated for 45 min at 56 °C) followed by alkylation (using 250 mM IAA; incubation at room temperature for 30 min in the dark). The resultant solutions were digested using trypsin (2 µl from 0.1 mg/mL stock) and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Mass spectrometry analysis: LC-MS/MS analysis were done on an Agilent 1290 Infinity series capillary-nano HPLC system coupled to an 6540 Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Agilent Technologies) equipped with a chip cube source operated in positive ionization mode. Water with 0.1% FA was used as mobile phase A and 90:10, ACN: H2O with 0.1% FA was used as mobile phase B. After the sample enrichment over a 40 nL column, the analytical separation of the tryptic digested peptides were achieved using a reversed-phase column (Agilent ZORBAX SB-C18, 75 µm × 150 mm, 5 µm) incorporated in the chip along with a nanospray emitter. The capillary pump and nano pump were respectively set to deliver 3 µL/min and 300 nL/min of mobile phase. The separation of the digested peptides were achieved as follows: initial equilibration using 5% B followed by 8% B for 3 min, 45 % B over 29 min, 90% B over 49 min with a re-equilibration time of 5 min. The MS and MS/MS data acquisition parameters were set at m/z range, 250 – 3000 and 50-3000, respectively. Nitrogen was used as the collision gas. The capillary voltage was set at 2000 V and the fragmentor voltage at 150 V, with dry gas flow rate maintained at 4 L/min. The source temperature was kept at 325 °C. The MS scan speed was set at 4 spectra/s and MS/MS scan speed at 3spectra/s. The maximum number of precursor per cycle was set to five and active exclusion was enabled by excluding and releasing after 2 spectra and 0.25 min, respectively with the preferred charges states set as: 2,3,>3. MassHunter software (Agilent Technologies, VersionB.05.01) was used for the data acquisition.

### Data Protocol
The acquired, individual mass spectrometric data from SDS-PAGE bands and ion-exchange chromatographic fractions were subjected to Mascot (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science) search using the Serpentes database (created manually from NCBI, Taxonomy ID: 8570). The following search parameters were set for the Mascot search: MS tolerance, 10 ppm; MS/MS tolerance, 0.5 Da; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation of cysteine ; variable modifications, oxidation of methionine (M), deamidation of asparagine (N) and glutamine (Q); enzyme used, trypsin; number of missed cleavages, 2; decoy option, enabled. MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications were validated through Scaffold (version 4.5.0, Proteomes Software Inc.). Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability. Peptide probabilities were assigned by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm and Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 unique identified peptides representing the protein family. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm . The raw MS data were subjected to de novo sequencing using PEAKS Studio (version 8.5, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Canada) software. The data were analyzed by setting the following parameters- fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (C), variable modifications: deamidation (N and Q) and oxidation (M) followed by searching against the Serpentes database.

### Publication Abstract
The venom protein components of Malabar pit viper (Trimeresurus malabaricus) were identified by combining SDS-PAGE and ion-exchange chromatography pre-fractionation techniques with LC-MS/MS incorporating Novor and PEAKS-assisted de novo sequencing strategies. Total 97 proteins that belong to 16 protein families such as L-amino acid oxidase, metalloprotease, serine protease, phospholipase A<sub>2</sub>, 5'-nucleotidase, C-type lectins/snaclecs and disintegrin were recognized from the venom of a single exemplar species. Of the 97 proteins, eighteen were identified through de novo approaches. Immunological cross-reactivity assessed through ELISA and western blot indicate that the Indian antivenoms binds less effectively to Malabar pit viper venom components compared to that of Russell's viper venom. The in vitro cell viability assays suggest that compared to the normal cells, MPV venom induces concentration dependent cell death in various cancer cells. Moreover, crude venom resulted in chromatin condensation and apoptotic bodies implying the induction of apoptosis. Taken together, the present study enabled in dissecting the venom proteome of Trimeresurus malabaricus and revealed the immuno-cross-reactivity profiles of commercially available Indian polyvalent antivenoms that, in turn, is expected to provide valuable insights on the need in improving antivenom preparations against its bite.

### Keywords
Malabar pit viper, Trimeresurus malabaricus, Sds-page, Proteomics, Ion-exchange

### Affiliations
Associate Professor and Head-Proteomics Research, School of Biotechnology, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Amritapuri Campus, Clappana P.O, Kollam - 690525 Kerala, India, Phone-0476-2803119, 2803110
School of Biotechnology, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham

### Submitter
Sudarslal Sadasivan Nair

### Lab Head
Dr Sudarslal Sadasivan Nair
Associate Professor and Head-Proteomics Research, School of Biotechnology, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Amritapuri Campus, Clappana P.O, Kollam - 690525 Kerala, India, Phone-0476-2803119, 2803110


