### Accession
PXD006007

### Title
Characterization of the secretome of glial cells exposed to glioblastoma secreted factors

### Description
Glioblastoma (GBM), the most malignant primary brain tumor, is characterized by widespread heterogeneity, leading to poor and unpredictable clinical outcomes. Recent studies have provided evidences that the tumor microenvironment has a critical role in regulating tumor growth by establishing a complex network of interactions with tumor cells. Here we investigate how GBM cells modulate glial cells, and how this modulation can influence back on the malignant phenotype of GBM cells.  Primary mouse glial cultures were established and cultured in serum-free media (unprimed) or exposed to secretome derived from GL261 GBM cells (primed). Conditioned media (CM) from each glial culture were collected and a proteomic analysis was conducted. Glial cells CM (unprimed and primed) were also used in GL261 GBM cells to evaluate its impact in critical hallmarks of GBM cells, including viability, migration, and activation of tumor-related intracellular signaling pathways.  The proteomic analysis revealed that the pre-exposure of glial cells to CM from GBM cells led to the upregulation of several proteins related to inflammatory response, cell adhesion and extracellular structure organization within the secretome of primed glial cells, consistent with a pattern of reactive astrogliosis. At the functional levels, CM derived from unprimed glial cells favored an increase in cell migration capacity, while CM from primed glial cells was more efficient in promoting GBM cells viability. These effects on GBM cells were accompanied by activation of particular intracellular cancer-related pathways, mainly the MAPK/ERK pathway, which is a known regulator of cell proliferation. Together, our results demonstrate that glial cells can have a different impact on the progression of GBM tumors, suggesting that the secretome of GBM cells is able to modulate the secretome of neighboring glial cells, in a way that regulates the “go-or-grow” phenotypic switch of GBM cells. Together, our results suggest that glial cells can impact on the pathophysiology of GBM tumors, and that the secretome of GBM cells is able to modulate the secretome of neighboring glial cells, in a way that regulates the “go-or-grow” phenotypic switch of GBM cells.

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned media: To obtain conditioned medium (CM) from GL261, cells were plated at a density of 8,600 cells/cm2 and allowed to grow for 72 hours. Following this, cells were washed 2x with PBS and one with serum-free DMEM and the culture medium was replaced by serum-free DMEM. The CM was collected after 24 hours and filtered through 0.2 μm pore size filters. For glial cells CM production, cells were allowed to grow until they reach a monolayer (15-18 days) and then washed 2x with PBS and once with serum-free DMEM. Flasks were randomly distributed in two groups: one received serum-free DMEM for 72 hours (unexposed) and the other GL261 CM (exposed). In both groups, the medium was replaced after 48 hours by fresh medium (serum-free DMEM or GL261 CM, respectively). After 3 days, glial cells growing in serum-free DMEM (unprimed) and glial cells exposed to GL261 CM (primed) were washed as previous and serum-free DMEM was added to both groups. Twenty-four hours thereafter, CM from unprimed and primed glial cells were collected and stored as described above for GL261 CM.  Sample Preparation: Glial cells CM (unprimed and primed) spiked with the recombinant protein malE-GFP (to be used as internal standard) was firstly concentrated using a Vivaspin® Turbo 15 sample concentrator (5 kDa; Sartorius) by ultracentrifugation at 4,000 ×g. Concentrated CM was precipitated with Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) – Acetone. The washed pellets were ressuspended in 40 µL of 2× Laemmli buffer (BioRad), aided by ultrasonication and denaturation at 95 °C. Ten microlitres of each replicate (in a total of 4 replicates per condition) were used to create a pooled sample for protein identification. After denaturation, samples were alkylated with acrylamide and subjected to gel digestion using the short-GeLC approach. The entire lanes were sliced into 3 parts and each part was sliced in small pieces and processed. Gel pieces were destained, dehydrated and re-hydrated in 75 µL of trypsin (0.01 µg/µL solution in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 15 minutes, on ice. After this period, 30 µL of 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate were added and in-gel digestion was performed overnight (ON) at RT. After the digestion, the formed peptides were extracted from the gel pieces and the peptides extracted from the three fractions of each biological replicate were combined into a single sample for quantitative analysis. All the peptides were dried subjected to SPE using OMIX tips with C18 stationary phase (Agilent Technologies) as recommended by the manufacture. Eluates were dried and ressuspended with a solution of 2% ACN and 0.1% FA. Mass Spectrometry Acquisition: Samples were analyzed on a Triple TOFTM 5600 System (ABSciex®) in two phases: information-dependent acquisition (IDA) of the pooled samples and SWATH-MS acquisition of each individual sample. Peptides were resolved by liquid chromatography (nanoLC Ultra 2D, Eksigent®) on a MicroLC column ChromXPTM C18CL (300 μm ID × 15cm length, 3 μm particles, 120 Å pore size, Eksigent®) at 5μL/min with a multistep gradient: 0-2 min linear gradient from 5 to 10 %, 2-45 min linear gradient from 10 % to 30 % and, 45-46 min to 35 % of ACN in 0.1 % FA. Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer using an electrospray ionization source (DuoSprayTM Source, ABSciex®) with a 50 μm internal diameter (ID) stainless steel emitter (NewObjective). Information dependent acquisition, experiments were performed for each pooled sample and the mass spectrometer was set to scanning full spectra (350-1250 m/z) for 250 ms, followed by up to 100 MS/MS scans (100-1500 m/z from a dynamic accumulation time – minimum 30 ms for precursor above the intensity threshold of 1000 – in order to maintain a cycle time of 3.3 s). Candidate ions with a charge state between +2 and +5 and counts above a minimum threshold of 10 counts per second were isolated for fragmentation and one MS/MS spectra was collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list for 25 seconds (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.7, ABSciex®). Rolling collision was used with a collision energy spread of 5. For SWATH-MS based experiments, the mass spectrometer was operated in a looped product ion mode and the same chromatographic conditions used as in the IDA run described above. The SWATH-MS setup was designed specifically for the samples to be analyzed, in order to adapt the SWATH windows to the complexity of the set of samples to be analyzed. A set of 60 windows of variable width (containing 1 m/z for the window overlap) was constructed covering the precursor mass range of 350-1250 m/z. A 250 ms survey scan (350-1500 m/z) was acquired at the beginning of each cycle and SWATH MS/MS spectra were collected from 100-1500 m/z for 50 ms resulting in a cycle time of 3.25 s. The collision energy for each window was determined according to the calculation for a charge +2 ion centered upon the window with variable collision energy spread (CES) according with the windown.

### Data Protocol
SWATH-MS data processing: A specific library of precursor masses and fragment ions was created by combining all files from the IDA experiments, and used for subsequent SWATH processing. Peptide identification and library generation were performed with Protein Pilot software (v5.1, ABSciex®), using the following parameters: i) search against a database composed by Mus musculus from SwissProt (release at December 2015), and malE-GFP; ii) acrylamide alkylated cysteines as fixed modification; iii) trypsin as digestion type. An independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis using the target-decoy approach provided with Protein Pilot software was used to assess the quality of the identifications and positive identifications were considered when identified proteins and peptides reached a 5% local FDR.  Data processing was performed using SWATHTM processing plug-in for PeakViewTM (v2.0.01, ABSciex®). After retention time adjustment using the malE-GFP peptides, up to 15 peptides, with up to five fragments each, were chosen per protein, and quantitation was attempted for all proteins in library file that were identified below 5% local FDR from ProteinPilotTM searches. Peptides’ confidence threshold was determined based on a FDR analysis using the target-decoy approach and those that met the 1 %FDR threshold in at least three of the four biological replicates were retained, and the peak areas of the target fragment ions of those peptides were extracted across the experiments using an extracted-ion chromatogram (XIC) window of 4 minutes with 100 ppm XIC width.  The levels of the mouse proteins were estimated by summing all the filtered transitions from all the filtered peptides for a given protein and normalized to the internal standard (malE-GFP). Functional annotation: Functional clustering of the differentially secreted proteins was performed using the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) and displayed in Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and Gene Ontology (GO).  Statistical analysis: For the MS data analysis, primed/unprimed ratios were calculated per each replicate and Grubbs test was used to remove outliers. One-sample Student’s t-test against a theoretical value of one was applied to the ratios using SPSS 21.0 (IBM SPSS Statistics, IBM®). Data are presented as mean ± SEM. The level of significance in all the statistical analysis was set at p < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glial cells; gliobastome; secretome; swath-ms

### Affiliations
​Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra

### Submitter
Sandra Anjo

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Manadas
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra


