### Accession
PXD033853

### Title
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, fap genetic variants, surface associated proteomics

### Description
The surface associated proteomics of different P aeruginosa fap genetic variants were evaluated. The bacteria were grown on the glass wool, the biomass was extracted from glass wool and the surface influenced planktonics(SIP)biomass was collected.

### Sample Protocol
The biomass pellets  were dissolved in lysis buffer,after centrifugation the insoluble mass was further dissolved in 2%(v/v)SDS. The samples of each variant were divided into planktonic and biofilm. Each sample was loaded onto the gel. In-gel trysin digestion was performed . extracted peptides were concentrated and dissolved in 0.1% Formic acid for mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Information dependent acquisition was performed on Sciex 5600+ Triple TOF Mass spectrometer.IDA data was processed on Protein pilot software 5.03. For quantification SWATH Data independent acquisition (DIA) was performed. The peak extraction and peak alignment of SWATH data was performed on Peakview2.2. The data was further subjected to MarkerView 1.3.1 to obtain statistical data interpretation.

### Publication Abstract
The accessory protein ORF6 of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is a key interferon (IFN) antagonist that strongly suppresses the production of primary IFN as well as the expression of IFN-stimulated genes. However, how host cells respond to ORF6 remains largely unknown. Our research of ORF6-binding proteins by pulldown revealed that E3 ligase components such as Cullin 4B (CUL4B), DDB1, and RBX1 are potential ORF6-interacting proteins. Further study found that the substrate recognition receptor PRPF19 interacts with CUL4B, DDB1, and RBX1 to form a CRL4B-based E3 ligase, which catalyzes ORF6 ubiquitination and subsequent degradation. Overexpression of PRPF19 promotes ORF6 degradation, releasing ORF6-mediated IFN inhibition, which inhibits SARS-CoV-2 replication. Moreover, we found that activation of CUL4B by the neddylation inducer etoposide alleviates lung lesions in a SARS-CoV-2 mouse infection model. Therefore, targeting ORF6 for degradation may be an effective therapeutic strategy against SARS-CoV-2 infection.IMPORTANCEThe cellular biological function of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway as an important modulator for the regulation of many fundamental cellular processes has been greatly appreciated. The critical role of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in viral pathogenesis has become increasingly apparent. It is a powerful tool that host cells use to defend against viral infection. Some cellular proteins can function as restriction factors to limit viral infection by ubiquitin-dependent degradation. In this research, we identificated of CUL4B-DDB1-PRPF19 E3 Ubiquitin Ligase Complex can mediate proteasomal degradation of ORF6, leading to inhibition of viral replication. Moreover, the CUL4B activator etoposide alleviates disease development in a mouse infection model, suggesting that this agent or its derivatives may be used to treat infections caused by SARS-CoV-2. We believe that these results will be extremely useful for the scientific and clinic communities in their search for cues and preventive measures to combat the COVID-19 pandemic.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Fap, P. aeruginosa

### Affiliations
Medical microbiology lab, Interdisciplinary Biotechnology Unit, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, 202002, Uttar Pradesh, India
Interdisciplinary biotechnology Unit, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh 202002

### Submitter
Asad Khan

### Lab Head
Dr Asad U Khan
Medical microbiology lab, Interdisciplinary Biotechnology Unit, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, 202002, Uttar Pradesh, India


