### Accession
PXD020833

### Title
Identification of Kel1 partners during the mating response in yeast

### Description
To understand the role of Kel1 during the mating response we immunoprecipitated native Kel1 in presence or absence of alpha-factor followed by mass spectrometry to find Kel1 interactors in presence and absence of pheromone.

### Sample Protocol
Cells untreated or treated with of alpha-factor (15 mg/L) for 2 hrs. were collected, washed with cold PBS  and lysed in lysis buffer (100mM Tris-HCl pH8, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 10% Glycerol, 2mM DTT, protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails). After centrifugation, supernatants were immunoprecipitated by mixing 800 µg of cell extract with 20 µL of anti-Myc-Tag magnetic bead (Cell Signaling). After 2 hrs. incubation at 4 °C, beads were washed once with wash buffer A (100mM Tris-HCl pH8, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 5% Glycerol, 2mM DTT, protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails), twice with wash buffer B (100mM Tris-HCl pH8, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 2mM DTT, protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails) and twice with PBS. The proteins were digested directly on-beads with trypsin, and the resulting peptides were purified with C18-microcolumns. For mass spectrometry analysis 3µl of each sample was injected in triplicates to nLC-MS/MS (nEASY LC-QExactive Plus) using a 50cm C18 nLC column and 60 min separation gradient.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label-free quantification was done using MaxQuant ver 1.5.2.8., and additional data processing with Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mating, Signaling, Yeast, Kel1, Alpha-factor, Pheromone treatment

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


