### Accession
PXD017872

### Title
Huamn colon cancer cell line SW480 proteome changes following Lappaol F treatment

### Description
Lappaol F, a natural lignin isolated from the seeds of Arctium lappa L., was previously shown to have an inhibitory effect on tumour cells and might be a promising drug candidate for cancer chemotherapy. In the present study, human colon cancer cell line SW480 was treated with Lappaol F, and quantitative proteomic analysis was performed to evaluate the effects of Lappaol F on protein expression in cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
SW480 cells were divided into three groups: 2400 (control), 2425 (treated with 25 μmol/L Lappaol F for 24 h), and 2450 (treated with 50 μmol/L Lappaol F for 24 h), each containing 3 repeated samples. After Lappaol F treatment, the cells were collected and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 mol/L urea, 2 mmol/L EDTA, 10 mmol/L DTT and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4°C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at -20°C. After centrifugation at 4°C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 mol/L urea, 100 mmol/L TEAB, pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mmol/L DTT for 1 h at 37°C and alkylated with 20 mmol/L IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mmol/L TEAB to urea concentration less than 2 mol/L. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Approximately 100 μg protein for each sample was digested with trypsin for the following experiments. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 mol/L TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 6-plex TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent (defined as the amount of reagent required to label 100 μg of protein) were thawed and reconstituted in 24 μL ACN. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The sample was then fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate pH 10 over 80 min into 80 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. Quantitative proteomic analysis was performed by LC-MS/MS as follows: Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 8% to 26% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) over 22 min, 26% to 40% in 12 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system, The resulting peptides were analyzed by Q ExactiveTM plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 30; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1E4 in the MS survey scan with 30.0s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the orbitrap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against swissprot_human database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. For quantification method, TMT-6-plex was selected. All the other parameters in Maxquant were set to default values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lappaol f; huamn colon cancer cell line sw480; differentially expressed proteins

### Affiliations
Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
RuiYi Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Ruiyi Yang
Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine


