### Accession
PXD002657

### Title
Characterization of various cell lines from different ampullary cancer subtypes and cancer associated fibroblast-mediated responses

### Description
Introduction: Ampullary cancer is a relatively rare entity and usually treated by pancreatoduodenectomy followed by adjuvant therapy. The intestinal subtype is associated with markedly improved prognosis after resection. Only few cell lines are available for in vitro studies of ampullary cancer and they have not been collectively characterized.  Methods: We characterized available ampullary cancer cell lines by subtype maker expression, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) features, growth and invasion, drug sensitivity and response to cancer-associated fibroblast conditioned medium (CAF-CM).  Results: On the basis of EMT features, subtype marker expression, growth, invasion and drug sensitivity three types of cell lines could be distinguished: mesenchymal-like, pancreatobiliary-like and intestinal-like. In response to CAF-CM, enhanced growth, EMT induction as well as suppression of intestinal differentiation markers were observed, but in a heterogenous pattern. Also proteomic analysis of the CAF response distinguished intestinal-like from other cell lines.  Discussion: Most of the available AMPAC cell lines seem to reflect a poorly differentiated pancreatobiliary or mesenchymal-like phenotype, consistent with their origin. We suggest that the best cell line model for intestinal-like AMPAC is the SNU869 cell line, while others seem to reflect aggressive AMPAC subtypes.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets from harvesting were lysed using buffer containing 20 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 % (v/v) Triton X-100 in the presence of protease inhibitors protease inhibitors (5 mM ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid, 0.01 mM (2S, 3S)-trans-epoxysuccinyl-L-leucylamido-3-methylbutane ethyl ester, 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride). Lysates were kept on ice for 30 min with intermittent inverting to ensure proper lysis. Lysates were centrifuged for 10 min at 16 000 x g and 4 °C. Protein concentration of lysates was determined using bicinchoninic acid assay. Proteins were precipitated using ice-cold acetone and trypsinized (Worthington Biochemical Corp., Lakewood, NJ, USA). Cysteine residues were reduced and alkylated, followed by dimethylation of peptide N-termini and lysine residues. Samples from control treated cells were isotopically labeled using 40 mM d0-12C-formaldehyde (Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany) while samples from fibroblast conditioned medium were isotopically labeled using 40 mM d2-13C-formaldehyle (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Andover, MA, USA) [35, 36], both in the presence of 40 mM sodium cyanoborohydride for 16 hours at room temperature. Excess formaldehyde was quenched using 20 mM glycine. Samples were combined in a 1:1 (w/w) ratio manner and desalted using a reversed phase C18 Sep-Pak SPE column (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Samples were subsequently fractionated using high performance liquid chromatography, coupled to a strong cation exchange column (PolyLC, Columbia, MD, USA). Buffer A consisted of 5 mM KH2PO4 and 25 % (v/v) acetonitrile (pH 2.7), and buffer B consisted of 5 mM KH2PO, 1 M KCl, and 25 % acetonitrile (pH 2.7). Peptides were eluted in a linear gradient with increasing concentration of buffer B. Resulting fractions were collected, desalted using self-packed C18 STAGE tips (Empore, St. Paul, MN, USA) [37], and analyzed by mass spectrometry.   Mass spectrometry and data processing. Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) or an Orbitrap Q-Exactive plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. The Orbitrap XL was coupled to an Ultimate3000 micro pump (Thermo Scientific). Buffer A was 0.5 % (v/v) acetic acid, buffer B 0.5 % (v/v) acetic acid in 80 % acetonitrile (HPLC grade). Liquid phases were applied at a flow rate of 300 nl/min with an increasing gradient of organic solvent for peptide separation. Reprosil-Pur 120 ODS-3 (Dr. Maisch) was used to pack column tips of 75 µm inner diameter and 11 cm length. The MS was operated in data dependent mode and each MS scan was followed by a maximum of five MS/MS scans. The Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer was coupled to an Easy nanoLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) with a flow rate of 300 nl / min. Buffer A was 0.5 % formic acid, and buffer B was 0.5 % (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (water and acetonitrile were at least HPLC gradient grade quality). A gradient of increasing organic proportion was used for peptide separation (5 – 40 % (v/v) acetonitrile in 80 min). The analytical column was an Acclaim PepMap column (Thermo Scientific), 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, length 150 mm, inner diameter 50 μm. The mass spectrometer operated in data dependent acquisition mode with a top 10 method at a mass range of 300 – 2000 Da.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were analyzed using X! Tandem (Version 2013.09.01) [38] in conjunction with PeptideProphet [39] using a 5% peptide false discovery rate and a decoy search strategy, and ProteinProphet [40] at a protein false discovery rate of 1 %. The protein database was composed of annotated human UniProt protein sequences (without isoforms, downloaded on on November 26, 2013 with 20,240 real protein entries), combined with a randomized and a reversed decoy database X! Tandem parameters included: precursor mass error of ± 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm (Q-Exactive) or 0.4 Da (Orbitrap XL), tryptic specificity with no missed cleavage, static residue modifications: cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.02 Da), as well as lysine and N-terminal dimethylation (light formaldehyde, +28.03 Da; heavy formaldehyde, +34.06 Da). For relative peptide and protein quantification, XPRESS [41] was used. Mass tolerance for quantification was ± 0.015 Da (for Orbitrap XL), or ± 20 ppm (for Q-Exactive Plus). Ratios of each dataset were calculated as treated cells over control. XPRESS data was log2 transformed, resulting in fold-change values. Proteins were considered as being differentially regulated if the proteins are consistently expressed in 3 out of 5 cell lines with a fold-change value of greater than 0.58 (differential abundance equivalent to 50%). The list of affected proteins was submitted to STRING database version 9.1. Predicted functional connections among proteins are based on the following criteria: neighborhood, co-expression, gene fusion, experiments, co-occurrence, databases and text-mining. QIAGEN’s Ingenuity® Pathway Analysis (IPA®, QIAGEN Redwood City, www.qiagen.com/ingenuity) was further used to derive and visualize biological themes that were significantly associated to affected proteins identified from mass spectrometry analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ampullary adenocarcinoma, Cell proliferation, Dysplastic, Pancreatobiliary, Cell invasion, Differentiation, Fibroblast, Intestinal

### Affiliations
University of Freiburg

### Submitter
Zon Lai

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Schilling
University of Freiburg


