### Accession
PXD018933

### Title
Protein sequence comparison of human and non-human primate tooth proteomes

### Description
In the context of human evolution, the study of proteins may overcome the limitation of the high degradation of ancient DNA over time for providing biomolecular information useful to precise the phylogeny of hominid taxa. Here, we have analysed and compared the tooth proteome of five extant primates (human, gorilla, chimpanzee, orangutan and baboon) using a shotgun proteomics approach. Twenty five proteins were shared by the five datasets, and may be considered as the most representative tooth proteins with a chance of being retrieved from older samples. Some of them were identified by peptides specific to the species, thus allowing to draw up a combinatory panel of peptides with species signature that could be helpful for the taxonomic characterization of ancient samples

### Sample Protocol
Non-human primate teeth (2 individuals per species) were borrowed from the collections of the Universitiy of Poitiers (samples T1: Gorilla, T2: Papio, T5:Pan, T6:Pan), Toulouse (samples T3: Papio, T4: Gorilla), and Montpellier (samples T7: Pongo, T8: Pongo). Human teeth were obtained from two colleagues who kindly donated their own M3, surgically extracted three (LOS2) and fifteen (LKS2) years ago. Teeth were manipulated under a laminar flow hood and the experimenter was equipped with disposal clothes. The surface of teeth was carefully cleaned with a solution of 1% SDS  and abundantly rinsed with sterile pure water. The area to be sampled, preferably chosen on enamel at the limit above the root (in order to be invisible after repositioning the tooth on the jaw) was firstly abraded on surface by manual drilling with a micromotor STRONG 207-106 (Pouget-Pellerin, France). Then a spherical carbide drill (1-1.2 mm in diameter) was used to pierce enamel to dentine over a sterile microtube to collect the powder. Sample amounts ranged from 2 to 26 mg for non-human primates and 60 mg for humans, respectively. Collected powder was immediately processed for protein extraction. Samples were prepared as five independent series, each including an extraction blank with no material (Blk), but exactly processed as the tooth samples. Protein extraction was performed by using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol described in Froment et al. J. Proteomics 2019. It was slightly modified to include an additional step for recovering the flowthrough content of the first Amicon™ Ultra-4 (10kDa) filter unit centrifugation. After demineralization (0.5 M EDTA pH 8 for 18 h at room temperature, under rotation) and lysis of the pellet  (0.1 M Tris pH8, 0.1 M DTT, 4% SDS for 2h at 60 °C) both extracts were  mixed with 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris pH8 and ultra-filtered through an Amicon™ Ultra-4 (10kDa) centrifugal filter unit (4000g, swinging rotor, room temperature). The flowthrough was collected and ultra-filtered through an Amicon™ Ultra-4 (3kDa) centrifugal filter unit. The two filtration were then similarly processed. Finally, protein extracts were subjected to enzymatic digestion and the obtained tryptic peptides was dried by using a centrifugal vacuum concentrator and kept at -20°C. The dried peptides were resuspended with 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in 2% acetonitrile at a concentration of 1µg/µl, and analysed by online nanoLC using an UltiMate® 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Scientific, Dionex) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). 1µg of the samples were loaded on a 300 μm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 pre-column (Thermo Scientific, Dionex) at 20 μl/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid. After 5 min of desalting, peptides were on-line separated on a 75 μm ID x 50 cm C18 column (in-house packed with Reprosil C18-AQ Pur 3 μm resin, Dr. Maisch; Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark) equilibrated in 95% of buffer A (0.2% formic acid), with a gradient of 5 to 25% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) for 80 min then 25% to 50% for 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The instrument was operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using a top-speed approach (cycle time of 3s). The survey scans MS were performed in the Orbitrap over m/z 350-1550 with a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z), an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 4e5, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Most intense ions per survey scan were selected at 1.6 m/z with the quadrupole and fragmented by Higher Energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD). The monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on, the intensity threshold for fragmentation was set to 50,000 and the normalized collision energy was set to 35%. The resulting fragments were analysed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 (at 200 m/z), an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 5e4, and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. For internal calibration the 445.120025 ion was used as lock mass. Each sample was subjected to two independent LC-MS/MS runs (R1, R2) for assessing the identification reproducibility.

### Data Protocol
All raw mass spectrometry files were processed in parallel using two different protein identification softwares: Proteome DiscovererTM software 2.3.0.523 (Thermo Fischer Scientific) with Mascot 2.6.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK) combined with the Percolator algorithm (version 2.05) for PSM search optimization, and PEAKS™ Studio 10.0 software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada) using the full set of available processes PEAKS de novo > PEAKS DB > PEAKS PTM> PEAKS SPIDER. For both software, data obtained from T and Tpep samples were searched against the UniProtKB Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL protein databases (including canonical and isoform sequences, and supplemented with frequently observed contaminants (released 2015_03; 245 sequences)) corresponding to their own species: Uniprot_isoF_Human database released 2019_09 with Homo sapiens taxonomy (195349  sequences), Uniprot_isoF_Gorilla database released 2019_07 with Gorilla taxonomy (46070  sequences), Uniprot_isoF_Pan database released 2019_06 with Pan (chimpanzees) taxonomy (154055  sequences), Uniprot_isoF_Pongo released 2019_02 with Pongo (orang-utan) taxonomy (96058  sequences), Uniprot_isoF_Papio released 2019_02 with Papio (baboons) taxonomy (46692  sequences). Data obtained from the blank samples were searched against the five databases. The Proteome DiscovererTM analysis was conducted using the following parameters: mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 20 mmu, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The enzyme selectivity was selected as semi-tryptic, with a maximum of three missed cleavages. The main protein modifications affecting damaged ancient proteins were set as variable modifications: deamidation (N,Q), oxidation (M,P), carbamylation (K, N-terminal protein), and conversion to pyro-glutamic acid (N-terminal Q). No more than 3 modifications per peptide was allowed. The minimum length of peptides was fixed at 6 amino acids. The Percolator algorithm was used to validate PSM and peptides based on Posterior Error Probability (PEP) values at a false discovery rate FDR ≤ 1%. FDR was estimated by a target-decoy approach using the reversed database. The data were then filtered by only considering the PSM with rank 1 and a Mascot ion score ≥ 20, and the protein at  ≤ 5% FDR.  For PEAKS™ analysis, the following parameters was used: mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 20 mmu, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, deamidation (N,Q) and oxidation (M,P) as variable modifications. A maximum of 3 modifications per peptide was allowed. All modifications (≤ 3) were allowed in the PEAKS PTM module, with a validation based on an average local confidence (ALC) score ≥ 15%. Trypsin with semispecific digest mode and a maximum of three missed cleavages were selected. The parameters used to filter the data were adjusted on a peptide score -10lgP ≥ 20-22 to result in a FDR ≤ 1% for PSM and peptides. The de novo ALC score was set at ≥ 50%. Protein were filtered with a score (-10lgP ≥ 25 to 49) adjusted to obtain a FDR ≤ 5%  and only considering significant peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nanolc-ms/ms, Taxonomy, Paleoproteomics, Primates, Tooth

### Affiliations
IPBS CNRS
Laboratoire d’Anthropologie Moléculaire et Imagerie de Synthèse (AMIS), Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, Toulouse, France

### Submitter
Emmanuelle Mouton Barbosa

### Lab Head
Dr Catherine Mollereai
Laboratoire d’Anthropologie Moléculaire et Imagerie de Synthèse (AMIS), Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, Toulouse, France


