### Accession
PXD038181

### Title
Evaluation of cold tolerant Saccharum spontaneum and identification of proteins related to cold tolerance by proteomic analysis

### Description
Saccharum spontaneum L., the main source of tolerance gene in sugarcane variety, is one of the most valuable germplasms for sugarcane breeding. In this study, 22 clones of S.spontaneum L. were selected from more than 690 collections in our preliminary experiment, and the cold tolerance of these clones were evaluated by physiological and biochemical indicators. Then 2 clones which were designated as lines 1027 and 3217,with contrasting cold tolerance ability were selected for further proteome analysis using DIA and PRM technology.

### Sample Protocol
Twenty two clones of S. spontaneum L. selected from more than 690 collections in our preliminary experiment were planted in sand bed for germination with single bud setts.When the plants grew to 3-leaf stage, they were transplanted to pots with 2-3 plants each pot. The complete randomized block design was applied with 3 replicates. The pot is 300 mm in height and 350 mm in diameter filled with 17.5 kg mixed soil (soil: organic fertilizer: sand = 70: 20: 10, W/W). The bottom of the pot was drilled to open holes to enhance air permeability, and the pots were kept in the intelligent greenhouse for daily management. After 6 months of growth, the materials were divided into two groups: one group was under normal temperature as the control group while the other group was treated with low temperature. Treatment conditions: (1) normal temperature control (CK), 25℃, 250-300 µmol/m2•s light intensity, 12 h photoperiod, 60-70% relative humidity; (2) low temperature treatment at 4℃, and others were the same as the control. Samples were taken at 8th days. The leaf +1 were collected at 8:00 am.0.1 g of leaf tissue was put in a pre-cooled mortar, liquid nitrogen was added before being ground into powder. The powder was transferred to a 1.5 mL EP tube, followed by adding 0.5 mL of lysis buffer (containing 8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT, 1 % PMSF), vortexing for 1 min to mix. After ultrasounding at 4℃, the mixture was incubated on ice for 20 min. The supernatant was taken and 3 times of the volume of 10% pre-cooled TCA-acetone were added, kept at -20℃ for 1-2 h. The supernatant was discard after centrifugation, and the precipitate was washed with acetone reagent and then centrifuged. This step was repeated twice. The precipitate was placed on ice for 2-3 h, and then UT (8 M urea+100 mM TEAB) was added for reconstitution, resulting in the protein solution. The modified Bradford protein detection kit was used to detect the protein concentration. According to the quantitative results, 0.1 mg protein sample was taken, adding DTT to regulate the concentration to 10 mM, and incubated at 37℃ for 30 min (reduction); IAM was added to make the final concentration 25 mM, and the solution was incubated for 20 min at room temperature in dark (alkylation). After the alkylation is over, 100 mM TEAB was added to make the concentration of urea in the protein solution lower than 2 M before enzymatic hydrolysis. The enzymolysis steps were as follows: adding trypsin according to the mass ratio of 1:50, digesting overnight at 37℃, and finally adding trypsin according to the mass ratio of 1:100; performing a second enzymolysis at 37℃ for 4 h. The peptides after enzymatic hydrolysis were desalted (Ziptip C18, operated according to the product instructions) and lyophilized, then reconstituted with 0.1% formic acid (FA), and the peptide concentration was measured at the wavelength 280 nm in a micro spectrophotometer.The lyophilized peptides were resuspended in liquid A (2% ACN, pH 10). The peptides were fractionated by high pH reverse HPLC. The column was Waters Bridge Peptide BEH C18 (130Å, 3.5 μm, 4.6×250 mm). The step gradient was 2%-98% acetonitrile, pH 10.0, and flow rate 0.5 mL/min. 60 fractions were separated in 88 min, and then the peptides were combined into 20 fractions. After vacuum freeze-dried, the peptide fractions were finally desalted using a micro-chromatography column (Ziptip C18) (operated according to the product instructions), and the products were vacuum freeze-dried and stored at -20℃ for later use of mass spectrometry identification.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from DIA proteome analysis were processed and analyzed by Skyline v20.2.0.343 using default parameters. The target-bait strategy was used to control the peptide false discovery rate (FDR) to less than 1%. After peak extraction and area calculation, the results were exported to a table format for further quantitative analysis. Disclosure of differentially abundant proteins were based on the following cut-off values: a 2-fold change and FDR-adjusted p-value of 0.05. The DAPs were annotated through GO, KEGG and COG/KOG databases to determine their functions.

### Publication Abstract
Sugarcane, a cash crop, is easily affected by low temperature, which results in a decrease in yield and sugar production. Breeding a new variety with cold tolerance is an essential strategy to reduce loss from cold stress. The identification of germplasms and genes/proteins with cold tolerance is a vital step in breeding sugarcane varieties with cold tolerance via a conventional program and molecular technology. In this study, the physiological and biochemical indices of 22 genotypes of <i>S. spontaneum</i> were measured, and the membership function analysis method was used to comprehensively evaluate the cold tolerance ability of these genotypes. The physiological and biochemical indices of these <i>S. spontaneum</i> genotypes showed a sophisticated response to low temperature. On the basis of the physiological and chemical indices, the genotypes were classified into different cold tolerance groups. Then, the high-tolerance genotype 1027 and the low-tolerance genotype 3217 were selected for DIA-based proteomic analysis by subjecting them to low temperature. From the four comparison groups, 1123, 1341, 751, and 1693 differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) were identified, respectively. The DAPs based on genotypes or treatments participated in distinct metabolic pathways. Through detailed analysis of the DAPs, some proteins related to protein homeostasis, carbohydrate and energy metabolism, amino acid transport and metabolism, signal transduction, and the cytoskeleton may be involved in sugarcane tolerance to cold stress. Furthermore, five important proteins related to cold tolerance were discovered for the first time in this study. This work not only provides the germplasms and candidate target proteins for breeding sugarcane varieties with cold tolerance via a conventional program and molecular breeding, but also helps to accelerate the determination of the molecular mechanism underlying cold tolerance in sugarcane.

### Keywords
Dia technology, Cold tolerance, Saccharum spontaneum, Sugarcane

### Affiliations
 MH BioTech Co.,Ltd
Key Laboratory of Sugarcane Biotechnology and Genetic Improvement (Guangxi), Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs / Guangxi Key Laboratory of Sugarcane Genetic Improvement / Sugarcane Research Institute, Guangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences/ Sugarcane Research Center, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Nanning,China

### Submitter
miao huang

### Lab Head
Dr Bao-Qing Zhang
Key Laboratory of Sugarcane Biotechnology and Genetic Improvement (Guangxi), Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs / Guangxi Key Laboratory of Sugarcane Genetic Improvement / Sugarcane Research Institute, Guangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences/ Sugarcane Research Center, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Nanning,China


