### Accession
PXD024846

### Title
Antiviral HCV Treatment Induces Rapid Proteomic and Phospho-proteomic Changes in Hepatic Interferon and ERK1/2 Signaling Pathways

### Description
Although treatment of chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection with direct acting antivirals (DAAs) results in high rates of cure, liver fibrosis does not resolve immediately after HCV eradication. Resolution of fibrosis occurs in some, but not all patients, after HCV cure, and hepatic decompensation and hepatocellular carcinoma can still occur in patients with pre-existing cirrhosis. We hypothesized that evaluation of the host liver proteome in the context of HCV treatment would provide insight into how inflammatory and fibrinogenic pathways change upon HCV eradication.  We evaluated the whole liver proteome and phosphoproteome using paired liver biopsies from 8 HCV-infected patients collected before or immediately after treatment with DAAs in clinical trials.  We identify interferon stimulated proteins as the predominant pathways that decrease with HCV treatment, which is consistent with previous analyses of the liver transcriptome during DAA therapy.  While there was no change in the proteome of pathways associated with liver fibrosis, we identified a decrease in the phosphoproteome signature for ERK1/ERK2 as a result of HCV treatment.  Conclusion: There is a reduction in the endogenous interferon-mediated antiviral response and alterations in the phosphoproteome that may precede resolution of fibrosis in the liver immediately after treatment of HCV with DAAs.

### Sample Protocol
Sample lysates (74-501 µg protein) were reduced with 5 mM TCEP at room temperature  and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide  in the dark. Proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform.. The precipitated protein was washed twice with one volume of ice cold methanol. Protein pellets were air dried. Precipitated protein was resuspended in 200 mM EPPS pH 8. Proteins were digested with LysC overnight at room temperature followed by trypsin for 8 hours at 37oC. Peptides were quantified using the micro-BCA assay (Pierce). Up to 100 µg of peptide from each condition was labeled with tandem mass tags (TMT10plex, Thermo Scientific) reagents at a 1:4 peptide:TMT ratio for 2 hours at room temperature. Modification of tyrosine residues with TMT was reversed by the addition of 5% hydroxylamine for 20 minutes at room temperature. Labeling reactions were quenched with 0.5% TFA. For multiplexed analysis, samples  were combined, desalted by C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE, Sep-Pak, Waters), and dried by SpeedVac. Phosphopeptides were enriched using the High-SelectTM Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The unbound fraction following phosphopeptide enrichment was dried by SpeedVac, resuspended in 1% TFA, and desalted by C18 SPE. The sample was dried, resuspended in 5% acetonitrile, 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH8, prior to off-line fractionation by basic pH reversed-phase chromatography into 96 fractions. Separation was performed using a 50 minute linear gradient from 15% to 45% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 at a flow rate of 0.4mL/min on a 300 Extend C18 column (Agilent). Fractions were combined in checkerboard fashion into 24 samples and dried. For global proteomics, twelve of the 24 final fractions from the basic reverse phase were analyzed with an LC-MS3 real-time database search collection strategy (26) on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Proxeon Easy nLC 1000. Approximately 5 µg of peptide resuspended in 5% formic acid, 5% acetonitrile was loaded onto a 100 µm inner diameter fused-silica micro capillary with a needle tip pulled to an internal diameter less than 5 µm. The column was packed in-house to a length of 35 cm with a C18 reverse phase resin (GP118 resin 1.8 μm, 120 Å, Sepax Technologies). The peptides were separated using a 180 min linear gradient from 3% to 25% buffer B (100% acetonitrile  + 0.125% formic acid) equilibrated with buffer A (3% acetonitrile  + 0.125% formic acid) at a flow rate of 600 nL/min. The scan sequence for the Fusion Orbitrap began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis, resolution 120,000, 400−1500 m/z scan range, AGC target 1 × 106, maximum injection time 50 ms, dynamic exclusion of 180 seconds). The “Top10” precursors were selected for MS2 analysis, consisting of CID (quadrupole isolation set at 0.7 Da) and ion trap analysis, AGC 15000, NCE 35, maximum injection time 50 ms). MS3 analysis was triggered only when an MS2 spectrum matched the real time search database with a sufficient score.  Phosphopeptide  samples were analyzed twice with an LC-MS3 data acquisition strategy (27) on an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Proxeon Easy nLC 1000. Peptides were separated by nanoLC as described above. The scan sequence for the Orbitrap began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis, resolution 120,000, 400−2000 m/z scan range, AGC target 2 × 105, maximum injection time 50 ms, dynamic exclusion of 120 seconds). The “Top6” precursors were selected for MS2 analysis consisting of CID (quadrupole isolation set at 0.5 Da) and ion trap analysis (AGC 2 × 104, NCE 35, maximum injection time 50 ms). Ten notches were selected from each MS2 scan for MS3 analysis using synchronous precursor selection.  Precursors were fragmented by HCD prior to Orbitrap analysis (NCE 65, max AGC 2.5 × 105, maximum injection time 300 ms, isolation window 2 Da, resolution 50,000). In the second analysis, MS2 analysis was performed by HCD fragmentation (NCE 34) followed by ion trap analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using a suite of in-house software tools for .RAW file processing, including controlling peptide and protein level false discovery rates, assembling proteins from peptides, and protein quantification from peptides (28). MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human proteome reference database including common contaminants and reverse sequences using the target-decoy search strategy. Database search criteria were as follows: tryptic with two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 50 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.0 Da, static alkylation of cysteine (57.0214 Da), static TMT labeling of lysine residues and N-termini of peptides (229.1629 Da), and variable oxidation of methionine (15.9949 Da). TMT reporter ion intensities were measured using a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z for each reporter ion in the MS3 scan. Peptide spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation (<100 summed signal-to-noise across 8 channels).  Protein entries with only 1 peptide were retained. To determine the relative protein abundance, the S/N for each TMT reporter ion channel was summed. A normalization factor for each channel was determined by dividing the highest summed S/N by the S/N of each other channel.  The raw summed S/N of each ion channel for each protein was multiplied by the normalization factor of each channel and the sum was adjusted for each protein to determine the total summed signal to noise ratio. Finally, the adjusted S/N for each reporter ion channel of a given protein was divided by the summed S/N of that protein to yield the percentage of the total signal from that protein. These values were combined for both TMT experiments (8-Plex each) and filtered to retain proteins quantified in all of 16 channels. Two groups were defined (Pre and Post treatment).    Phosphopeptide searches included variable phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues (79.9663 Da). Phosphorylation site localization was scored with ModScore. Phosphorylation sites with summed signal-to-noise <100 across all 8 channels and/or <0.5 precursor isolation specificity were excluded from quantitation. Prior to statistical analysis the top 20 proteins with abundance profiles similar to hemoglobin (Hbb), indicative of erythrocyte contamination, were removed (Supplemental Figure 2 ).  To identify significantly regulated proteins and phosphorylation sites, paired, two-sided Student’s t-tests were performed using a p-value <0.05 or a permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR) <0.05 with 250 randomizations and S0 fold change parameter of 0.1 using Perseus v.1.6.14.0 (Max Plank Institute) (29)(30).  Enrichment analysis was performed to test for enrichment of annotations associated with proteins (p-value <0.05) as compared to all of the observed proteins (29).  Annotations including GO biological process (GOBP), molecular function (GOMF), cellular component (GOCC), and Reactome pathways were downloaded from the Uniprot human proteome and Reactome databases (October 2020) and uploaded into Perseus.   Phosphorylation site-specific annotations were downloaded from PhosphoSite Plus database (September 2020) (32).  Known sites of phosphorylation were annotated with residue-level regulatory function, disease correlations, protein interactions, and function and probed for enrichment of kinase consensus motifs and kinase-substrate relations.  For protein and phosphosite level enrichment analysis, the log2 transformed intensities of proteins or phosphorylation sites with a p-value <0.05 were normalized by z-score and hierarchical clustering was performed using Pearson correlation, average linkage, and preprocessing with k-means. Clusters of proteins, visualized in heatmaps, were extracted and enrichment of GO terms was evaluated using a Fisher exact test with a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR<0.02 threshold.   To account for pathways that are regulated by increasing and decreasing relative phosphorylation at specific residues, we used PTM-Signature Enrichment Analysis (PTM-SEA) to query the PTM signatures database (PTMsigDB) v1.9.0 using the seven amino acid sequence flanking the sites of phosphorylation (31).   The sign of the normalized enrichment score (NES) calculated for each signature corresponds to the direction of change in the pre or post treatment conditions. P-values for each signature were derived from 1,000 random permutations and further adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing using a Benjamini-Hochberg approach.  The p values reflect enrichment of signatures in the sample sets as compared to the PTM signatures database.

### Publication Abstract
Treatment of chronic hepatitis C virus with direct-acting antivirals usually eradicates infection, but liver fibrosis does not resolve concurrently. In patients who develop cirrhosis prior to hepatitis C virus treatment, hepatic decompensation and hepatocellular carcinoma can still occur after viral elimination due to residual fibrosis. We hypothesized the liver proteome would exhibit meaningful changes in inflammatory and fibrinogenic pathways change upon hepatitis C virus eradication, which could impact subsequent fibrosis regression. We analysed the liver proteome and phosphoproteome of paired liver biopsies obtained from 8&#xa0;hepatitis C virus-infected patients before or immediately after treatment with direct-acting antivirals. Proteins in interferon signalling and antiviral pathways decreased concurrent with hepatitis C virus treatment, consistent with prior transcriptomic analyses. Expression of extracellular matrix proteins associated with liver fibrosis did not change with treatment, but the phosphorylation pattern of proteins present within signalling pathways implicated in hepatic fibrinogenesis, including the ERK1/2 pathway, was altered concurrent with hepatitis C virus treatment. Hepatitis C virus treatment leads to reduced expression of hepatic proteins involved in interferon and antiviral signalling. Additionally, changes in fibrosis signalling pathways are detectable before alteration in extracellular matrix proteins, identifying a putative chronology for the dynamic processes involved in fibrosis reversal.

### Keywords
Liver biopsy, Phosphoproteomics, Daa, Proteomics, Hcv

### Affiliations
Medical University of SC
Medical Univeristy of South Carolina Division of Infectious Diseases Department of Microbiology and Immunology

### Submitter
Jennifer Bethard

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Meissner, M.D., Ph.D.
Medical Univeristy of South Carolina Division of Infectious Diseases Department of Microbiology and Immunology


