### Accession
PXD011473

### Title
Understanding the physiological role of asparaginyl endopeptidase (AEP)/Legumain

### Description
Understanding the regulation of lysosomal proteolytic/hidrolytic capacity has been recently advanced in a huge manner by the discovery of the lysosome-mTOR-TFEB pathway connecting nutrient sensing, autophagy and de novo lysosome generation. But, how lysosomes can adjust their proteolytic/hidrolytic capacity to meet varying conditions (more or less substrate) under normal fed conditions is not known. We have used AEP as a proxy to understand how lysosomes can compensate the lack of a key lysosomal protease to meet the requirements under physiological, fed conditions. To do this, we did compare cytoplasmic, membrane and nuclear fractions of WT and AEP MEFs that were expanded in SILAC media.  AEP knock-out mice show pale kidney, with abnormal proliferation of the epithelial proximal tubular cells. In an attempt to understand the role of AEP in the kidney, we did compare kidney obtained from WT and AEP mice using kidneys from WT mice that were fed with SILAC food.  Also, in an attempt to reproduce the changes observed in the absence of AEP in kidney and MEFs, we treated WT MEFs grown in SILAC media with MVO26630, specific inhibitor of AEP, for 12 and 48 hours.

### Sample Protocol
Generation of 13C6-Lysine SILAM mouse colony An in-house breeding colony of C57BL/6 13C6-Lysine ‘SILAM’ labelled mice was generated using specialised 13C6-Lysine mouse diet (Silantes, Martinsried, Germany) following the breeding program previously described by Krüger29. Labelling efficiency was monitored for brain, liver and skin tissues from 19 weeks old F0 (fed 13C6-Lysine mouse diet for 16 weeks), 8-week old F1 and 8-week old F2 animals. Labelling efficiencies for all confidently (1% false discovery rate) assigned peptides were calculated as: heavy_peptide_area /(heavy_peptide_area + light_peptide_area). For all tested samples approximately 90% of the peptides were >90% 13C6-Lysine-labelled at the F2 generation (data not shown). Tissues used for this study were acquired from F4 C57BL/6 13C6-Lysine SILAM females.  Kidney lysosome SILAC-based mass spectrometry Kidney lysosomes from L-lysine-13C6 labelled WT mice and unlabelled WT or AEP-/- mice were prepared as previously described26. 60μg of unlabelled WT or AEP-/- kidney lysosomal proteins were combined in a 1:1 ratio with 60μg of L-lysine-13C6 labelled WT kidney lysosomal proteins. Protein samples were prepared for LC-MS/MS using the FASP protocol as previously described64. Briefly, the protein mixture was denatured at 95ºC for 5 minutes in SDS-lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1mM DTT) and the samples were mixed with 200μL of 8M urea in 0.1 Tris-HCl pH 8.5 (UA buffer) in a Microcon YM-10 filter unit and centrifuged at 14,000rpm for 40 min. Samples were washed again with another 200μL of UA buffer and then treated with 100μL of 0.05M iodoacetamide in UA buffer for 20 minutes at room temperature. After three further washes with 100μL UA buffer and three times with 0.05M NH4CO3 (ABC buffer) centrifuging each time at 14000g for 15 minutes and discarding the flow through, the protein mixture was digested overnight at 37ºC in the YM-10 filter unit using 40μL of 0.4μg/μL trypsin in ABC buffer. The samples containing the tryptic peptides were collected by centrifugation at 14,000g for 40 minutes and 50μL of 0.5M NaCl was added to the YM-10 filters followed by centrifugation for another 20 minutes at 14000g. Tryptic peptides were finally desalted using a C18-SD cartridge, treated with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and eluted in 70% acetonitrile. MEF SILAC-based mass spectrometry MEF were cultured for at least 10 days in RPMI without arginine and lysine (Biosera) containing 10% dialysed FCS (Hyclone), 100U/mL penicillin, 100μg/mL streptomycin, 2mM L-glutamine, 1% pyruvate, 1% non-essential aminoacids and supplemented with 84 mg/L of L-arginine (Sigma) and 40 mg/L of L-lysine (Sigma) for the ‘light’ medium or 106 mg/mL of L-arginine-13C6-15N4 and 50 mg/mL of L-lysine-13C6 for the ‘heavy’ medium. Equal numbers of cells were mixed and cytoplasmic, membrane and nuclear fractions were obtained using a subcellular protein fractionation kit for cultured cells (Thermo) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 100μg of protein was size-fractionated by SDS-PAGE using 4-12% NuPAGE gels (Invitrogen) in MES running buffer, stained using SimplyBlue Safe Stain (Invitrogen) and destained using miliQ water. The gels were cut into 15 x 0.5 cm slices using a clean scalpel and cut into 1 mm cubes. After washing with 50% acetonitrile/water, 0.1 M NH4CO3 and 50% acetonitrile in 50mM NH4CO3 (0.5mL) the samples were treated with 75μL of 10mM DTT in 0.1 M NH4CO3 and incubated for 20 minutes at 37ºC. The liquid was removed and proteins in the gel pieces were carboxymethylated with 50mM iodoacetamide in 0.1 M NH4CO3 for 20 minutes at room temperature in the dark.  The gel pieces were washed with 50% acetonitrile in 50mM NH4CO3, shrunk using 0.3mL acetonitrile per piece for 15 minutes and after removal of the supernatant, dried using a Speed-Vac lyophiliser. The protein content of each piece was digested with 30μL 5μg/mL of trypsin in 25mM triethylammonium bicarbonate at 30ºC overnight. An equal volume of acetonitrile was added and the mixture was shaken at 30ºC for 15 minutes. The supernatants, containing the tryptic peptide mixture from each sample, were frozen in liquid nitrogen and dried using a Speed-Vac. Meanwhile, the gel pieces were treated with 100μL of 50% acetonitrile, 2.5% formic acid in water and shaken for 10 minutes at 30ºC. This second supernatant was combined with the first, frozen down in liquid nitrogen and then dried in a Speed-Vac.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry A nanoflow liquid chromatograph (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system, Thermo) coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo) was used to analyse the protein digests. Samples, usually 10μL, were loaded onto a C18 trap column and washed with 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were resolved using a gradient (130 minutes, 0.3μL/min) of buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.08% formic acid): 2% buffer B for 4 min followed by 2-40% buffer B for 64 min, 40-98% buffer B for 2 min, 98% buffer B for 15 min, 98-2% buffer B for 1 min and 2% buffer B for 44 min. Peptides,  initially trapped on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (100μm x 2cm, Thermo) were then separated on an Easy-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (75μm x 50cm, Thermo), and finally transferred to the LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro via an Easy-Spray source set at 50ºC and a source voltage of 1.9kV. For the identification of peptides a top 15 method (FT-MS plus 15 IT-MS/MS, 100 min acquisition) consisting of full scans and mass range (m/z) between 335 and 1800 was used. The Orbitrap was operated in a profile mode, resolution of 60000 with a lock mass set at 445.120024 and a max fill time of 500 ms. LTQ was operated in a centroid mode with isolation width = 2.00 (m/z), normalised collision energy = 35.0, activation time = 10.0 ms and max fill time of 100 ms.  Mass spectrometry data analysis LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro .RAW files were analysed, and peptides and proteins quantified using MaxQuant65, using the built-in search engine Andromeda66. All settings were set as default, except for the minimal peptide length of 5, and Andromeda search engine was configured for the UniProt Mus musculus protein database (release date: 2013_10). Peptide and protein ratios only quantified in at least two out of the three replicates were considered, and the p-values were determined by Student´s t test and corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure65.

### Publication Abstract
Diverse cellular processes depend on the lysosomal protease system but how cells regulate lysosomal proteolytic capacity is only partly understood. We show here that cells can respond to protease/substrate imbalance in this compartment by de novo expression of multiple lysosomal hydrolases. This response, exemplified here either by loss of asparagine endopeptidase (AEP) or other lysosomal cysteine proteases, or by increased endocytic substrate load, is not dependent on the transcription factor EB (TFEB) but rather is triggered by STAT3 activation downstream of lysosomal oxidative stress. Similar lysosomal adaptations are seen in mice and cells expressing a constitutively active form of STAT3. Our results reveal how cells can increase lysosomal protease capacity under 'fed' rather than 'starved' conditions that activate the TFEB system. In addition, STAT3 activation due to lysosomal stress likely explains the hyperproliferative kidney disease and splenomegaly observed in AEP-deficient mice.

### Keywords
Time course, Mvo26630, Nanolc-ms/ms, Wt mefs

### Affiliations
Cell Signaling and Immunology
Cell Signaling and Immunology, School of Life Science, University of Dundee, Dundee. United Kingdom

### Submitter
Jonathan Martinez Fabregas

### Lab Head
Dr Colin Watts
Cell Signaling and Immunology, School of Life Science, University of Dundee, Dundee. United Kingdom


