### Accession
PXD013453

### Title
R2-P2 rapid-robotic phosphoproteomics enables multidimensional cell signaling studies

### Description
Recent developments in mass spectrometry-based proteomics have enabled systems-level studies of cellular signaling, where >10,000 phosphosites can be routinely identified and quantified. Yet, current analyses are limited in throughput, reproducibility, and robustness, hampering experiments that involve multiple perturbations, such as those needed to map kinase-substrate relationships, capture pathway crosstalks, and network inference analysis. To address these challenges and fully exploit the potential of phosphoproteomics, we introduce rapid-robotic-phosphoproteomics (R2-P2), an end-to-end automated method that processes samples in a 96-well format, from a protein extract to mass spectrometry-ready phosphopeptides. R2-P2 uses magnetic particles for both protein sample cleanup and phosphopeptide enrichment. R2-P2 is more flexible, high-throughput, rapid, and robust than classical protocols. To showcase the method, we have applied it, in combination with data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry, to study signaling dynamics in the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway in the yeast model Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Our results reveal broad and specific signaling events along the mating, the high-osmolarity glycerol, and the invasive growth branches of the MAPK pathway, with robust phosphorylation of downstream regulatory proteins and transcription factors. Our method greatly facilitates large-scale signaling studies involving hundreds of perturbations and will open the door to systems-level studies aiming to capture the complexity of signaling.

### Sample Protocol
The R2-P1 purification and digestion was implemented in the following way on the KingFisher™ Flex: The 96-well comb is stored in plate #1, magnetic carboxylated beads in plate #2, lysate-ethanol mixture in plate #3, wash solutions in plates #4 to #6, elution/digestion buffer with the digestion enzyme in plate #7 and second elution (water) in plate #8 (Fig 1A).  The method was configured to collect the carboxylated beads in plate #2, move them to plate #3 for protein binding and subsequently to plate #4, #5 and #6 for protein cleanup. The protein cleanup takes 30 minutes and the protocol pauses to allow for loading of plate #7 containing the digestion enzyme, which allows for preparation of the digestion solution only immediately before use. The beads are then moved to plate #7 and proteins are eluted/digested at 37ºC for 3.5 hours with constant agitation. Carboxylated beads are subsequently moved and washed in the second elution plate #8 and afterwards discarded. At this step the robotic program ends and plates can be removed. The two elution plates (#7 and #8) are combined in one plate, acidified with formic acid, and clarified by centrifugation. At this point aliquots are taken for total proteome analysis. The rest of the peptides are dried down and can be taken for R2-P2. For the comparison experiments in this study, the different conditions were processed together in the same R2-P1 run, unless otherwise stated.  The automated phosphopeptide enrichment was implemented in the following way on the KingFisher™ Flex (Thermo Scientific): The 96-well comb is stored in plate #1, magnetic Fe3+-IMAC, Ti4+-IMAC, Zr4+-IMAC, or TiO2 beads in plate #2, resuspended peptides in plate #3, wash solutions in plates #4 to #6 and elution solution in plate #7 (Fig 1A). Shallow 96-well KingFisher plates were used.  The method was configured to collect the magnetic beads in plate #2, move them to plate #3 for phosphopeptide binding and subsequently to plate #4, #5 and #6 for washing. The phosphopeptide purification takes 40 minutes and the protocol pauses to allow for loading of plate #7 containing the elution solution, which allows for preparation of the elution solution immediately before use, avoiding evaporation of ammonia. The beads are subsequently moved to plate #7 where phosphopeptides are eluted. Plates are removed from the robot at this point and the  elution is immediately neutralized by acidification. Peptides are dried down and stored at -20ºC until MS analysis. For the comparison experiments in this study, the different conditions were processed together in the same R2-P2 run, unless otherwise stated.

### Data Protocol
DDA MS/MS spectra were searched with Comet against the S. cerevisiae proteome. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Constant modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.021463 Da) and variable modification of methionine oxidation (15.994914 Da) were used for all searches, and additional variable modification of serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylation (79.966331 Da) was used for phosphopeptide samples. Search results were filtered to a 1% FDR at PSM level using Percolator. Phosphorylation sites were localized using an in‐house implementation of the Ascore algorithm. Phosphorylation sites with an Ascore > 13 (P < 0.05) were considered confidently localized. Peptides were quantified using in‐house software measuring chromatographic peak maximum intensities.      For overlapping DIA runs MSConvert was used to deconvolute RAW files and generate mzMLs. A spectrum library was created from the Fusion Lumos DDA data using Skyline (version 4.2.0.19009). This BLIB library was imported to EncyclopeDIA (version 0.8.1), used to search the DIA gas-phase fractionated runs and a chromatogram library was generated. The resulting ELIB file was imported to Thesaurus (version 0.6.4) to analyze the DIA files, obtaining peptide identifications, site localizations, and quantifications. In Thesaurus, we used the following settings: phosphorylation (STY) as modification type, non-overlapping DIA as data-acquisition type, recalibrated (peak width only) as localization strategy, B/Y ions for fragmentation, 60,000 resolution as precursor mass tolerance, 15,000 resolution as fragment mass tolerance, minimum of 3 well-shaped fragment ions, and Percolator (v3-01) threshold of  <1% FDR .

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics / signaling / mapk / mass spectrometry / sp3 / dia/ r2-p2

### Affiliations
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA

### Submitter
Mario Leutert

### Lab Head
Dr Judit Villén
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA


