### Accession
PXD022786

### Title
Proteomic analysis of outer membrane vesicle isolation methods with an Escherichia coli tolA mutant using LC MSMS

### Description
Outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) produced by Gram-negative bacteria are mediators of cell survival and pathogenesis by facilitating nutrient transport, virulence factor dissemination, and resistance to antimicrobials. Studies of OMV properties often focus on hypervesiculating Escherichia coli mutants that have increased OMV production when compared to their corresponding wild-type (WT) strains. Currently, two conventional techniques, ultracentrifugation (UC) and ultradiafiltration (UF), are used interchangeably to isolate OMVs, however, there is concern that each technique may inadvertently alter the properties of isolated OMVs during study. To address this concern, we compared two OMV isolation methods, UC and UF, with respect to final OMV quantities, size distributions, and morphologies using a hypervesiculating Escherichia coli K-12 ∆tolA mutant. Cryo-transmission electron microscopy (cryo-TEM) visualization of isolated OMVs revealed distinct morphological differences between wild-type and ∆tolA OMVs, where ∆tolA OMVs isolated by either UC or UF method possessed a greater proportion of OMVs with two or more membranes (39.6-42.4%). Proteomic OMV analysis of WT and ∆tolA OMVs confirmed that ∆tolA enhances inner plasma membrane carryover in multi-lamellar OMVs. This study demonstrates that UC and UF are useful techniques for OMV isolation, where UF may be preferable due to faster isolation, higher OMV yields and enrichment of smaller sized vesicles.

### Sample Protocol
Samples for proteomic analysis were prepared from 1 L cultures as described for OMV isolation using the UF method for concentration. Protein from the outer membrane vesicles (OMV) were quantified using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit, with bovine serum albumin (BSA) as the standard (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). SDS was added to 100 µg of OMV protein at a final concentration of 2%, and then heated at 95ºC for 5 minutes. Upon cooling to room temperature, dithiothreitol was added to a final concentration of 100 mM, and heated at 95ºC for 5 minutes. Samples were frozen at -80⁰C until ready for use. A total of 100 µg of protein from each OMV sample was used for each digestion. Protein samples were digested with trypsin (Promega, USA) overnight using a filter-assisted sample preparation (FASP) method described previously (65) using Nanosep 30K Omega Centrifugal Devices (Pall Corporation, USA).  Following digestion, all samples were dried down and reconstituted using mass spectrometry grade water to a final concentration of 0.5µg/µl prior to mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were each separately analysed using a nano-flow Easy nLC II connected in-line to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer with a nanoelectrospray ion source at 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Peptide samples (2 µl) were loaded onto a C18-reversed phase trap column (3 cm long, 100 µm inner diameter, 5 µm particles) with 100% buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for a total volume of 30 µl, and then separated on a C18-reversed phase column (15 cm long, 75 µm inner diameter, 2.4 µm particles). Both columns were packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (Dr. Maisch) and fritted with Kasil. Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient of 5-25% buffer B (98% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over 120 min, 25%-40% buffer B for 5 minutes, 40%-80% buffer B for 5 minutes and a wash at 80% B for 8 minutes at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. Total LC/MS/MS run-time was about 165 minutes, including the loading, linear gradient, column wash, and the equilibration. Data was acquired using these setting: Dynamically choosing the top 10 most abundant precursor ions from each survey scan, each isolated with a width 2.0 m/z and fragmentation by CID. The survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap over m/z 300-1700 with a target resolution of 60000 at m/z 400, and the subsequent fragment ion scans were also acquired in the iontrap at a normal scan rate. The lower threshold for selecting a precursor ion for fragmentation was 2000. Dynamic exclusion was enabled using a m/z tolerance of 15 ppm, a repeat count of 1, and an exclusion duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
All spectra were processed using MaxQuant (v1.6.7, Max Plank Institute) using the imbedded Andromeda search engine. Searches were performed against a subset of the SwissProt database set to Ecoli K12 (4519 sequences). The following search parameters were used: Carbamidomethyl (C) was selected as a fixed modification, Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) as variable modifications, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, parent ion tolerance of 20 ppm, and trypsin enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavage. False discovery rates were set up using 0.01 for peptides, 0.01 for proteins, and at least 1 razor peptide per protein. LFQ was enabled for Quantitation.  Resulting LFQ intensities were imported into Perseus v1.6.5 (Max Plank Institute) In Perseus the data was Log2 transformed. Then all the proteins that did not have a least 3 valid log2 LFQ intensities from ID were filtered out.  All spectra were also processed using Proteome Discoverer (v2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and database searching was done with Mascot v2.6 (Matrix Science). Searches were performed against the SwissProt database (2020_01) (5461,911 sequences) The decoy database option was selected, and the following search parameters were used: Carbamidomethyl (C) was selected as a fixed modification, Oxidation (M) as a variable modification, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm, and trypsin enzyme with up to 1 missed cleavage. Mascot search results were imported into Scaffold Q+ (v4.11.0). Proteins were filtered using a 1.0% false discovery rate and assessed for significance using Fisher’s exact test (p-value < 0.05). All significant proteins were annotated by their subcellular localization using the pSORTb algorithm. String protein networks were constructed using Cytoscape (version 3.8.0), and functional protein maps were constructed using the ClueGo plugin (v2.5.6) with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) produced by Gram-negative bacteria are mediators of cell survival and pathogenesis by facilitating virulence factor dissemination and resistance to antimicrobials. Studies of OMV properties often focus on hypervesiculating <i>Escherichia coli</i> mutants that have increased OMV production when compared to their corresponding wild-type (WT) strains. Currently, two conventional techniques, ultracentrifugation (UC) and ultradiafiltration (UF), are used interchangeably to isolate OMVs, however, there is concern that each technique may inadvertently alter the properties of isolated OMVs during study. To address this concern, we compared two OMV isolation methods, UC and UF, with respect to final OMV quantities, size distributions, and morphologies using a hypervesiculating <i>Escherichia coli</i> K-12 &#x394;<i>tolA</i> mutant. Nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) indicated that UC techniques result in lower vesicle yields compared to UF. However, UF permitted isolation of OMVs with smaller average sizes than UC, highlighting a potential OMV isolation size bias by each technique. Cryo-transmission electron microscopy (cryo-TEM) visualization of isolated OMVs revealed distinct morphological differences between WT and &#x394;<i>tolA</i> OMVs, where &#x394;<i>tolA</i> OMVs isolated by either UC or UF method possessed a greater proportion of OMVs with two or more membranes. Proteomic OMV analysis of WT and &#x394;<i>tolA</i> OMVs confirmed that &#x394;<i>tolA</i> enhances inner plasma membrane carryover in multi-lamellar OMVs. This study demonstrates that UC and UF are useful techniques for OMV isolation, where UF may be preferable due to faster isolation, higher OMV yields and enrichment of smaller sized vesicles.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Escherichia coli, Tola, Omv

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases University of Manitoba 745 Bannatyne Avenue Winnipeg, MB, Canada, R3E 0J9
The University of Manitoba, Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases

### Submitter
Denice Bay

### Lab Head
Dr Denice C Bay
Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases University of Manitoba 745 Bannatyne Avenue Winnipeg, MB, Canada, R3E 0J9


