### Accession
PXD004034

### Title
Glycoproteomes of naive and LPS stimulated human monocytes  and THP-1 cells

### Description
CD14+ Monocytes from healthy volunteers were purified by MACS (negative selection) and FACSorting and either left untreated or stimulated for 24h and 48h with LPS. THP-1 cells were stimulated for 4h, 24h and 48h with LPS. Glycoproteins were captured with hydrazide chemistry and tryptic and PNGase F-released peptide fractions analyzed by MS/MS. Quantitative assessment revealed differential glycoprotein expression in activated/LPS-tolerized monocytes and naïve monocytes and THP-1 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were solubilized by 2%SDS and boiling. Sugars were oxidized with 10 mM sodium(meta)periodate and linked to hydrazide sepharose. After washing tryptic peptides were generated by on-bead digestion. Finally, N-glycopeptides were released by PNGase F treatment. The two peptide fractions from each sample were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion ETD instrument.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and protein identification + quantification was done with MaxQuant. The match between runs function was enabled. Fixed modification: carboxymethylation (C), dynamic modifications: oxidation (M) and in PNGase F fractions Deamidation (N). LFQ-values from MaxQuant were imported into Perseus and missing values imputed from normal distribution.

### Publication Abstract
Exposure of human monocytes to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induces a temporary insensitivity to subsequent LPS challenges, a cellular state called endotoxin tolerance. In this study, we investigated the LPS-induced global glycoprotein expression changes of tolerant human monocytes and THP-1 cells to identify markers and glycoprotein targets capable to modulate the immunosuppressive state. Using hydrazide chemistry and LC-MS/MS analysis, we analyzed glycoprotein expression changes during a 48&#x2009;h LPS time course. The cellular snapshots at different time points identified 1491 glycoproteins expressed by monocytes and THP-1 cells. Label-free quantitative analysis revealed transient or long-lasting LPS-induced expression changes of secreted or membrane-anchored glycoproteins derived from intracellular membrane coated organelles or from the plasma membrane. Monocytes and THP-1 cells demonstrated marked differences in glycoproteins differentially expressed in the tolerant state. Among the shared differentially expressed glycoproteins G protein-coupled receptor 84 (GPR84) was identified as being capable of modulating pro-inflammatory TNF&#x3b1; mRNA expression in the tolerant cell state when activated with its ligand Decanoic acid.

### Keywords
Monocytes glycoproteomics

### Affiliations
Host Septomics - ZIK Septomics
Jena University Hosptial
Jena
Germany
ZIK Septomics, University Hospital Jena, Germany

### Submitter
Mario Müller

### Lab Head
Dr Hortense Slevogt
ZIK Septomics, University Hospital Jena, Germany


