### Accession
PXD042762

### Title
Proteomic analysis of MNT-1 cells deficient in NPC1 protein

### Description
A novel MNT-1 cell line deficient in NPC1 protein was generated using CRISPR/CAS9 knock-out method. In the absence of the NPC1 protein the pigmentation status of the cells was changed and alterations in the melanogenesis process were observed. In order to characterize the role of NPC1 protein in the pigmentation process we compared the proteome of the MNT-1 WT cell line with the NPC1-KO cell line.

### Sample Protocol
The cells, MNT-WT and NPC1-KO, were lysed in 1% NP40 buffer for 30 min on ice, centrifuged at 14000 x g, 4ºC and the proteins were quantified using BCA assay. Equal amounts of proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, stained with Coomassie Blue and further prepared for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. The gel was cut and the slices were washed with 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate and acetonitrile. Further, the samples were incubated with DTT to reduce the disulfide bonds and the cysteine sites were alkylated with iodoacetamide. The proteins were digested in gel with trypsin O.N. at 37 °C and the resulting peptides were subjected to multiple extractions with 5% formic acid (FA) and acetonitrile. The samples were concentrated to dryness in a Speed-Vacuum. Before injection, the dried peptides were reconstituted in solvent A (0.06% FA and 2% acetonitrile) and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS connected to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were separated on a 15 cm Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 HPLC trap column using a 2-30% solvent B (0.06% FA and 80% acetonitrile).

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS files were searched against the human version of the UniProt database using the MaxQuant built-in algorithm Andromeda, with the following settings: Trypsin/P with 2 maximum  missing cleavages, Cys carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and Met oxidation, N-terminus acetylation as variable modifications. For mass accuracy 20 ppm was selected for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the second search. All the results were filtered for 1% False Discovery Rate at peptide-spectrum match (PSM) level and protein level.  The proteomic data analysis was performed in Perseus software version 2.0.6.0 using label-free quantitation (LFQ) intensity. Protein identifications from the reversed database and only identified by site entries were removed. LFQ variables were log2 transformed and the missing data were imputed from normal distribution using the following parameters: width of 0.3 and a down shift of 1.8. A two-sample t test between control (MNT-WT) and NPC1-KO was used (n=3 biological replicates). Significant entries were considered only those with p-values of less than 0.05. The heat map of differentially expressed proteins was plotted using ComplexHeatmap R package. PCA plot was performed in Perseus 2.0.6.0 using log2 transformed LFQ intensities, considering the proteins that were identified in all samples.

### Publication Abstract
Niemann-Pick type C1 (NPC1) protein is a multimembrane spanning protein of the lysosome limiting membrane that facilitates intracellular cholesterol and sphingolipid transport. Loss-of-function mutations in the NPC1 protein cause Niemann-Pick disease type C1, a lysosomal storage disorder characterized by the accumulation of cholesterol and sphingolipids within lysosomes. To investigate whether the NPC1 protein could also play a role in the maturation of the endolysosomal pathway, here, we have investigated its role in a lysosome-related organelle, the melanosome. Using a NPC1-KO melanoma cell model, we found that the cellular phenotype of Niemann-Pick disease type C1 is associated with a decreased pigmentation accompanied by low expression of the melanogenic enzyme tyrosinase. We propose that the defective processing and localization of tyrosinase, occurring in the absence of NPC1, is a major determinant of the pigmentation impairment in NPC1-KO cells. Along with tyrosinase, two other pigmentation genes, tyrosinase-related protein 1 and Dopachrome-tautomerase have lower protein levels in NPC1 deficient cells. In contrast with the decrease in pigmentation-related protein expression, we also found a significant intracellular accumulation of mature PMEL17, the structural protein of melanosomes. As opposed to the normal dendritic localization of melanosomes, the disruption of melanosome matrix generation in NPC1 deficient cells causes an accumulation of immature melanosomes adjacent to the plasma membrane. Together with the melanosomal localization of NPC1 in WT cells, these findings suggest that NPC1 is directly involved in tyrosinase transport from the trans-Golgi network to melanosomes and melanosome maturation, indicating a novel function for NPC1.

### Keywords
Mnt-1, Proteome, Npc1 protein, Melanogenesis

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy (IBRA)
Dept. of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy (IBRA)

### Submitter
Cristian Munteanu

### Lab Head
Dr Stefana M. Petrescu
Dept. of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy (IBRA)


