### Accession
PXD031323

### Title
Characterization of tumor heterogeneity in beta-catenin mutated hepatocellular adenomas

### Description
Hepatocellular adenomas (HCA) are rare benign tumours of the liver which have been extensively classified at the clinico-pathological, genetic and proteomic levels. The b-HCA subtype has several types of mutations in the ß-catenin gene (CTNNB1) with very different clinical phenotypes and risks. Recently, we revealed a glutamine synthetase (GS) positive rim in b-HCA exon 3 S45 and b-HCA exon 7/8, indicating protein expression heterogeneity into b-HCA in comparison with the rest of the tumor. A difference in vascularization had been associated with this rim revealed by a diffuse CD34 labeling only at the center of the tumor and not in the rim. In this study, we sought to characterize this tumor heterogeneity in a tumor considered monoclonal. We used laser microdissection to analyze the rim (R) at the molecular level. We cut 1mm² areas of GS+/CD34- rim on serial cuts and we analyzed in parallel, the mutation status of CTNNB1 and the levels of protein expression by mass spectrometry. Comparison of the proteomic profiles of the rim versus the tumor center (T) revealed a sufficiently large protein expression differential to distinguish them by principal component analysis. Forty proteins were significantly differentially expressed between R and T, including a large majority of amino acid and lipid metabolism proteins whose deregulations were comparable to a perivenous expression profile in a normal hepatocyte context. Our results suggest that protein expression in the rim seems not to be dependent on the mutational status of CTNNB1 but rather on the influence of venous drainage. Thanks to laser microdissection coupled with proteomic analysis on fixed tissue, we were able to analyze this tumor heterogeneity and provide elements of biological interpretation.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel. Migration was stopped when samples were entered the resolving gel and proteins were visualized by Colloidal Blue staining. Each SDS-PAGE band was cut and protein were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. Online nanoLC-MS/MS analysis were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, California, USA). Each peptide extracts were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After a 3 min desalting step, peptides were separated on a 50 cm EasySpray column (75 µm ID, 2 µm C18 beads, 100 Å pore size, ES803, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 55 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 2.0 kV needle voltage. Data was acquired using Xcalibur 4.1 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 375-1500) were recorded at a resolution of R=120000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 4x105 ions collected within 50 ms, followed by a top speed duty cycle of up to 3 seconds for MS/MS acquisition. Precursor ions (2 to 7 charge states) were isolated in the quadrupole with a mass window of 1.6 Th and fragmented with HCD@30% normalized collision energy. MS/MS data was acquired in the Orbitrap cell with a resolution of R=30000 (@m/z 200), AGC target of 5x104 ions and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Selected precursors were excluded for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, Mascot 2.5 algorithm through Proteome Discoverer 2.4 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) was used in batch mode by searching against the UniProt Homo sapiens database (73 947 entries, Reference Proteome Set, release date: November 17, 2018) from http://www.uniprot.org/ website. Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed for the trypsin. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of lysine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were searched as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was searched as static modification. Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Proline Studio for feature detection, alignment, and quantification. Proteins identification was accepted only with at least 2 specific peptides with a pretty rank=1 and with a protein FDR value less than 1.0% calculated using the “decoy” option in Mascot. Label-free quantification of MS1 level by extracted ion chromatograms (XIC) was carried out with parameters indicated previously : Henriet E et al. Hepatology. 2017. The normalization was carried out on median of ratios. The inference of missing values was applied with 5% of the background noise.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Laser microdissection, Proteomics, Tumor heterogeneity, Hepatocellular adenomas

### Affiliations
Plateforme Oncoprot, TBM-Core US 005, F-33000 Bordeaux, France
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Anne-Aurelie Raymond
Plateforme Oncoprot, TBM-Core US 005, F-33000 Bordeaux, France


