### Accession
PXD013953

### Title
Comparative integrated omics analysis of the Hfq regulon in Bordetella pertussis

### Description
This study represents the first attempt to characterize the RNA chaperone Hfq regulon in bacterial pathogen using an integrative omics approach. Gene expression profiles were analyzed by RNA-seq and protein amounts in cell-associated and cell-free fractions were determined by LC-MS/MS technique. Comparative analysis of transcriptomic and proteomic data revealed solid correlation considering the role of Hfq in post-transcriptional control of gene expression. Importantly, our study confirms and further enlightens the role of Hfq in pathogenicity of B. pertussis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Digestion Cell pellets were lysed in 100mM TEAB containing 2% SDC and boiled at 95°C for 5 min. Protein concentration was determined using BCA protein assay kit (Thermo) and 20 µg of protein per sample was used for MS sample preparation. Cysteines were reduced with 5mM final concentration of TCEP (60°C for 60 min) and blocked with 10mM final concentration of MMTS (10 min Room Temperature). Samples were digested with trypsin (trypsin/protein ration 1/20) at 37°C overnight. After digestion samples were acidified with TFA to 1% final concentration. SDC was removed by extraction to ethyl acetate (Masuda et al, 2008) and peptides were desalted on Michrom C18 column.  nLC-MS 2  Analysis Nano Reversed phase column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) was used for LC/MS analysis. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water and 0.1% formic acid . Mobile phase B was composed of acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 µm, 300 Å Wide Pore, 300 µm x 5 mm) at a flow rate of 15 μl/min. Loading buffer was composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid . Peptides were eluted with gradient of B from 4% to 35% over 60 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT- qIT, Thermo). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1400 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5 × 105  ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1,5 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS 2  ion count target was set to 104  and the max injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS 2 . The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles (Hebert, Richards et al. 2014).

### Data Protocol
All data were analyzed and quantified with the MaxQuant software (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, version 1.5.8.3), (Cox, Hein et al. 2014). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides and we specified a minimum length of seven amino acids. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against the Bordetella pertusis database (downloaded from Uniprot, containing 3 258 entries, Proteome ID UP000002676_257313). Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Dithiomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification and N- terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The “match between runs” feature of MaxQuant was used to transfer identifications to other LC-MS/MS runs based on their masses and retention time (maximum deviation 0.7 min) and this was also used in quantification experiments. Quantifications were performed with the label-free algorithms described recently (Cox et al. 2014). Data analysis was performed using Perseus 1.5.5.3 software (Tyanova et al. 2016)

### Publication Abstract
<i>Bordetella pertussis</i> is a Gram-negative strictly human pathogen of the respiratory tract and the etiological agent of whooping cough (pertussis). Previously, we have shown that RNA chaperone Hfq is required for virulence of <i>B. pertussis</i>. Furthermore, microarray analysis revealed that a large number of genes are affected by the lack of Hfq. This study represents the first attempt to characterize the Hfq regulon in bacterial pathogen using an integrative omics approach. Gene expression profiles were analyzed by RNA-seq and protein amounts in cell-associated and cell-free fractions were determined by LC-MS/MS technique. Comparative analysis of transcriptomic and proteomic data revealed solid correlation (r<sup>2</sup> = 0.4) considering the role of Hfq in post-transcriptional control of gene expression. Importantly, our study confirms and further enlightens the role of Hfq in pathogenicity of <i>B. pertussis</i> as it shows that &#x394;<i>hfq</i> strain displays strongly impaired secretion of substrates of Type III secretion system (T3SS) and substantially reduced resistance to serum killing. On the other hand, significantly increased production of proteins implicated in transport of important metabolites and essential nutrients observed in the mutant seems to compensate for the physiological defect introduced by the deletion of the <i>hfq</i> gene.

### Keywords
Bordetella pertussis, Lfq ms, Hfq regulon

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS, v. v. i.
Laboratory of Post-Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression Institute of Microbiology, v.v.i. Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic Videnska 1083; Prague; Czech Republic Tel: +420 296 442 507

### Submitter
Denisa Petrackova

### Lab Head
Dr Branislav Vecerek
Laboratory of Post-Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression Institute of Microbiology, v.v.i. Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic Videnska 1083; Prague; Czech Republic Tel: +420 296 442 507


