### Accession
PXD003535

### Title
Human blastoceol fluid LC-MSMS

### Description
The objective of this prospective study is to employ proteomic techniques and bioinformatic tools to enlight differences at the protein level in blastocoel fluid of aged and younger woman.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins of the blastocoel fluid were lysed in a buffer containing 8 M urea, 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate and the complete protease inhibitor cocktail.  After reduction and derivatization, proteins were digested with sequence grade trypsin for 16 hours at 37 °C using a protein:tripsin trypsin ratio of 1:20. The proteolytic digest were desalted using Zip-Tip C18 (Millipore) before mass spectrometric (MS) analysis. LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC System with a PicoFrit ProteoPrep C18 column (200 mm, internal diameter of 75 μm) (New Objective, USA). The eluate was electrosprayed into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) through a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source. The LTQ-Orbitrap was operated in positive mode in data-dependent acquisition mode to automatically alternate between a full scan (m/z 350-2000) in the Orbitrap (at resolution 60000, AGC target 1000000) and subsequent CID MS/MS in the linear ion trap of the 20 most intense peaks from full scan (normalized collision energy of 35%, 10 ms activation). Isolation window: 3 Da, unassigned charge states: rejected, charge state 1: rejected, charge states 2+, 3+, 4+: not rejected; dynamic exclusion enabled (60 s, exclusion list size: 200). Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 and Tune 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA USA).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5). The initial maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 20 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.5 Da for MS/MS peaks. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as a fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and asparagine/glutamine deamidation as variable modifications. The spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the human Uniprot sequence database (release 22.01.2014). The reversed sequences of the target database were used as decoy database. Protein identification required at least one unique or razor peptide per protein group.  Quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the built in XIC-based label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm using fast LFQ. False protein identifications (1% or 5%) were estimated by searching MSMS spectra against the corresponding reversed-sequence (decoy) database. The minimum required peptide length was set to 9 amino acids. Statistical analyses were performed using the Perseus software (version 1.4.0.6). Five technical replicates were carried out for each group (A and B). Only proteins present and quantified in at least 3 out of 5 technical repeats and not detected in the sample containing only the culture medium (CTR), were positively identified as blastocoel fluid components and used for statistical analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Blastocoel fluid

### Affiliations
University of Milano
Università degli Studi di Milano

### Submitter
gabriella tedeschi

### Lab Head
Dr Gabriella Tedeschi
Università degli Studi di Milano


