### Accession
PXD040351

### Title
HELZ2: a new, interferon-regulated, human 3’-5’ exoribonuclease of the RNB family is expressed from a non-canonical initiation codon

### Description
Proteins containing a RNB domain, originally identified in E. coli RNase II, are widely present throughout the tree of life. Many RNB proteins are endowed with 3’-5’ exoribonucleolytic activity but some have lost catalytic function during evolution. Database searches identified a new RNB domain containing protein in human: HELZ2. Analysis of genomic and expression data with evolutionary information suggested that the human HELZ2 protein is produced from an unforeseen non-canonical initiation codon in Hominidae. This unusual property was confirmed experimentally, extending the human protein by 247 residues. Human HELZ2 was further shown to be an active ribonuclease despite the substitution of a key residue in its catalytic center. HELZ2 harbors also two RNA helicase domains and several zinc-fingers and its expression is induced by interferon treatment. We demonstrate that HELZ2 is able to degrade structured RNAs through the coordinated ATP-dependent displacement of duplex RNA mediated by its RNA helicase domains and its 3’-5’ ribonucleolytic action. The expression characteristics and biochemical properties of HELZ2 support a role for this factor in response to viruses and/or mobile elements.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry analyses After 24 hours of stimulation with interferon or mock treatment, cells were recovered and then lysed in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH7,4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Igepal, 0,5% sodium deoxycholate, 0,1% SDS). Bradford assay was used to determine protein concentrations and equal amounts of extracts were further analyzed by mass spectrometry. The protein mixtures were precipitated with TCA 20% overnight at 4°C and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. Protein pellets were washed twice with 1 mL cold acetone and air dried. The protein extracts were solubilized in urea 2 M, reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 30 min and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. Enzymatic digestion was performed at 37°C and overnight with 500 ng trypsin (Promega, Charbonnieres les Bains, France). Peptide mixtures were then desalted on C18 spin-column and dried in a Speed-Vacuum. LC-MS/MS Analysis Samples were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC coupled in line, via the NanoFlex-electrospray ionization source, with the Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass-spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a FAIMS (high Field Asymmetric Ion Mobility Spectrometry) module. Peptide mixtures were injected in 0.1% TFA on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 trap-column (75 µm ID x 2 cm, 3 µm, 100Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 3 min at 6 µL/min with 2% ACN, 0.1% FA in H2O and then separated on a BioZen peptide XB-C18 nano-column (75 µm ID x 25 cm, 2.6 µm, Phenomenex) at 350 nl/min and 45°C with a 60 min linear gradient from 9% to 30% buffer B (A: 0.1% FA in H2O / B: 80% ACN, 0.1% FA in H2O), regeneration at 9% B. Spray voltage were set to 2.1 kV and heated capillary temperature at 280°C. The Orbitrap Exploris 480 was associated with the FAIMS module, set to -45 V as Compensation Voltage (CV). A cycle time of 1.2 second was chosen. For the full MS1 in DDA mode, the resolution was set to 120,000 at m/z 200 and with a mass range set to 330-1200. The full MS AGC target was 300% with a Max IT set to 100ms. For the fragment spectra in MS2, AGC target value was 100% (Standard) with a resolution of 30,000 and the maximum Injection Time set to Auto mode. Intensity threshold was set at 5E3. Isolation width was set at 2 m/z and normalized collision energy was set at 30%. All spectra were acquired in centroid mode using positive polarity. Default settings were used for FAIMS with voltage applied as described previously, and with a total carrier gas flow set to 4.2 L/min.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis Proteins were identified by database searching using SequestHT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Proteome Discoverer 2.5 software (PD2.5, Thermo Fisher Scientific) on human FASTA database downloaded from UniProt (reviewed, release 2022_10_27, 20607 entries, https://www.uniprot.org/). Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 7 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively, and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. For all the data, Oxidation (M, +15.995 Da) was set as variable modification, and Carbamidomethylation (C, + 57.021 Da) as fixed modification. Peptides and proteins were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) at 1%. Label-free quantification was based on the extracted ion chromatography intensity of the peptides and realized with Perseus 1.6.15.0 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry). All samples were measured in biological triplicates. The measured extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) intensities were normalized based on median intensities of the entire dataset to correct minor loading differences. For statistical tests, not detectable intensity values were treated with an imputation method, where the missing values were replaced by random values similar to the 10% of the lowest intensity values present in the entire dataset. Unpaired two tailed T-test, assuming equal variance, were performed on obtained log2 XIC intensities. All raw LC-MS/MS data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange via the PRIDE database with identifier

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Virus, Helicase, Transposons, Translation initiation, Double-stranded rna, Interferon, Nuclease, Rna decay

### Affiliations
Institut de Genetique et de Biologie Moleculaire et cellulaire (IGBMC), Centre National de Recherche scientifique (CNRS) UMR 7104 - Institut National de santé et de Recherche Médicale (Inserm) U964 - Université de Strasbourg, 1 rue Laurent Fries, Illkirch, France
CNRS

### Submitter
Luc Negroni

### Lab Head
Dr Bertrand Seraphin
Institut de Genetique et de Biologie Moleculaire et cellulaire (IGBMC), Centre National de Recherche scientifique (CNRS) UMR 7104 - Institut National de santé et de Recherche Médicale (Inserm) U964 - Université de Strasbourg, 1 rue Laurent Fries, Illkirch, France


