### Accession
PXD036744

### Title
Cellular proteomic profiling using proximity labelling by TurboID-NES in microglial and neuronal cell lines.

### Description
Different brain cell types play distinct roles in brain development and disease via cellular mechanisms. Molecular characterization of these cellular mechanisms using cell type-specific approaches, particularly at the protein (proteomic) level, can provide biological and therapeutic insights. Conventional approaches to investigate cell type-specific proteomes from brain pose several technical barriers. To overcome these, in vivo proteomic labeling with proximity dependent biotinylation of cytosolic proteins using TurboID with a Nuclear Export Sequence (TurboID-NES), coupled with mass spectrometry (MS) of labeled proteins, has emerged as a powerful strategy to sample cell type-specific proteomes in the native state of cells without need for cellular isolation. To complement in vivo proximity labeling approaches, in vitro studies are needed to ensure that cellular proteomes using the TurboID-NES approach are representative of the whole cell proteome, and capture cellular responses to stimuli without disruption of cellular processes. We generated murine neuroblastoma (N2A) and microglial (BV2) lines stably expressing TurboID-NES to biotinylate the cellular proteome for downstream purification and analysis using MS. TurboID-NES expression and biotinylation did not significantly impact homeostatic cellular proteomes of BV2 and N2A cells, and did not affect cytokine production or mitochondrial respiration of BV2 cells under resting or lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated conditions. TurboID-NES mediated biotinylation captured 59% of BV2 and 65% of N2A proteomes under resting conditions. Acute LPS treatment significantly altered microglial proteomes, but not N2A proteomes, and the LPS effect was partly captured by analysis of the TurboID-NES-labeled proteome of BV2 cells.

### Sample Protocol
From each sample, 1 mg of lysate was set aside for streptavidin affinity purification, 50ug of protein were reserved as whole-cell fractions, and the remaining protein was aliquoted and reserved for quality-control studies. Slightly modified from previous publications the AP samples were processed as follows: 1 mg of protein derived from transduced and untransduced BV2 and N2A lysates were affinity-purified onto 83μL of magnetic streptavidin beads. 1 mL of RIPA buffer was added to the beads on rotation for 2 minutes at RT. Using a magnetic stand, the buffer was removed from the beads. To each tube-containing-beads, 500μL of fresh RIPA lysis buffer was added before adding 1mg of protein. The samples incubated at 4°C overnight on a rotator. Samples were then briefly centrifuged, placed on the magnetic stand, and the supernatants were preserved and frozen at -20°C. After incubation, the beads containing the biotinylated proteins underwent series of washing procedures at RT. Beads were washed twice with 1 mL of RIPA lysis buffer for 8 minutes, 1 mL 1M KCL for 8 minutes, rapidly in 1 mL of 0.1 M sodium carbonate (Na2CO3), rapidly in 1 mL of 2M urea in 10mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), and twice with 1 mL RIPA lysis buffer for 8 minutes. 8-minute washing steps took place on a rotator, whereas rapid washing procedures took place on the magnetic stand using pipette rinsing to briefly mix the samples. Each buffer removal step was performed via manual pipetting, as aspirating the buffer with vacuum systems may deplete bead volume. The beads were resuspended in 1 mL of 1x PBS before being transferred to a new Eppendorf Lo Bind tube where they were washed once more with 1 mL of 1x PBS. Finally, AP samples were resuspended into 83μL of PBS, wherein 8μL of beads-containing solution was transferred to a new tube and placed on a magnetic stand for >2 minutes. The remaining beads-containing solution was preserved. The PBS was removed and replaced with 30μL of 4x Laemmli protein buffer supplemented with β-mercaptoethanol, 2mM biotin, 20mM DTT. Beads then incubated at 95°C for 15 minutes and 20μL were reserved for Western Blot verification of biotinylated proteins via Streptavidin 680 and 10μL were reserved for separate silver stain to verify minimal nonspecific binding between untransduced AP samples and transduced AP samples.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files of whole-cell and AP samples were searched together using the search engine Andromeda integrated into MaxQuant (Ver 1.6.17.0). Raw files were searched against the 2020 Uniprot murine database. Variable modifications include methionine oxidation, N-terminus acetylation, and deamidation of glutamine and asparagine residues. Fixed modifications include carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues. Only peptides with up to 2 missed cleavages were considered in the database search. Additional search parameters included a maximum peptide mass of 6000 Daltons (Da) and the minimum peptide length of 6 residues. Peptide spectral match (PSM) false discovery rates (FDR), protein FDR, and site FDR were all set at 1 percent.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Inflammation, N2a, Turboid, Bv2

### Affiliations
Department of Neurology, Emory School of Medicine
Emory University

### Submitter
Sydney Sunna

### Lab Head
Dr Srikant Rangaraju
Department of Neurology, Emory School of Medicine


