### Accession
PXD021880

### Title
TDP-43 aggregation induced by oxidative stress causes global mitochondrial imbalance in ALS

### Description
When mutant superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) was first linked to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), it was thought that ALS is a disease of oxidative stress. Since the discovery of multiple ALS-linked genes involved in RNA processing and proteostasis, most recent research has been focused on molecular defects induced by those mutant genes, but whether and how oxidative stress might contribute to magnification of those molecular defects have remained unaddressed. Strikingly, a hallmark of both familial and sporadic ALS is the aggregation of the essential DNA/RNA binding protein TDP-43, which is thought to cause simultaneous loss-of-nuclear function and gain-of-cytoplasmic toxicity. A central unanswered question is what triggers ALS in adult followed by rapid and irreversible progression? Here we report that neuronal cells are particularly prone to oxidative stress to trigger TDP-43 aggregation, which in turn sponges a large subset of microRNAs and proteins to cause both up-regulation and functional depletion of different sets of gene products. Remarkably, a large fraction of those functionally perturbed genes are nuclear genome-encoded mitochondrial proteins, thus resulting in a global mitochondrial imbalance, which further augments oxidative stress. We propose that this ferocious cycle driven by oxidative stress in combination with causal mutations in critical genes may underlie ALS onset and progression.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic peptides were analyzed using Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher) via a nanoelectrospray ion source. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 275°C and spray voltage set to 2.2 kV. The instrument was operated in data-dependent MS/MS acquisition mode with a resolution set to 120000 at m/z 200, and the top 20 ions were selected with a resolution of 60000. The full scan target was 3 × 106 with a maximum fill time of 20 ms, and the mass range was set to 300-1800. The precursors were isolated from a 1.6 Th window, fixed first mass of 100 m/z, and the normalized collision energy was set to 27. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 60 s.

### Data Protocol
For proteins and peptides searching, we processed raw MS data with 5 biological replicates by MaxQuant (1.5.2.8) against Mouse Uniprot (version 20180824 containing 83916 entries) database with label-free quantification (LFQ) mode, and the precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the Andromeda search. A fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications of oxidation (M) and acetyl (Protein N-term) were included. The maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 2, and the minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Bioinformatics analysis was performed with Perseus and we chose FDR <= 0.1 to identify enriched proteins in TDP-43 containing aggregates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse n2a h2o2 als let-7c

### Affiliations
Wuhan university
State Key Laboratory of Virology, Hubei Key Laboratory of Cell Homeostasis, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China

### Submitter
kai wu

### Lab Head
Dr Yu Zhou
State Key Laboratory of Virology, Hubei Key Laboratory of Cell Homeostasis, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China


