### Accession
PXD018638

### Title
AIM2 in regulatory T (Treg) cells restrains autoimmune diseases

### Description
The inflammasome initiates innate defense and inflammatory response by activating caspase-1 and pyroptotic cell death in myeloid cells1,2.  It is comprised of an innate immune receptor/effector, pro-caspase-1 and a common adaptor molecule, ASC (apoptotic speck-containing protein with a CARD). Consistent with their pro-inflammatory function, inflammasome components including caspase-1, ASC and NLRP3, are known to exacerbate autoimmunity during experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) by enhancing IL-1 and IL-18 secretion in myeloid cells3-6.  Here we show an unexpected function of a DNA-binding inflammasome effector, AIM2 (Absent in Melanoma 2)7-10, in restraining autoimmunity by performing EAE in both whole body and Treg-specific deletion of Aim2–/– mice. AIM2 is highly expressed by human and mouse Treg cells and it is essential to attenuate EAE. RNA-seq, biochemical and metabolic analyses revealed that AIM2 attenuates mTOR, Myc and immune-metabolic functions in both Treg cells isolated in vivo and Treg cells induced in vitro with TGF-. Importantly, we found AIM2 physically interacted with RACK1 in Treg cells to facility the PP2A/RACK1/Akt-mTOR signaling, which is identified as a central component downstream of AIM2 that controls Treg cell function and stability.  While AIM2 is generally accepted as an inflammasome effector in myeloid cells, this report reveals a previously unappreciated T cell-intrinsic role of AIM2 in maintaining Treg cell function to restrain autoimmunity. This is achieved by diminishing Akt-mTOR signaling to regulate Treg stability under inflammation, and altering immune-metabolism in Treg cells.

### Sample Protocol
The Aim2 immunoprecipitates were eluted in 8 M Urea, reduced with 5 mM DTT and akylated with 15 mM IAA. The solution was diluted with 25 mM Tris (pH 8)to get final 2 M of urea concentration followed by digestion by trypsin. The digests were desalted on homemade C18 tips and dried in speed-Vac. The clean peptides were dissolved in 0.1% Formic acid and ready for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant, version 1.6.0.16, was used for search against Uniprot mouse proteome database. Carbamidomethyl modification on Cys was as fixed and oxidation on Met and acetylation on protein N-terminus as variables. Both PSM and protein FDRs were set to 0.01. LFQ was used for quantification. The unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test was used for experiments comparing two sets of data. p-value for significance was set to <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Autoimmunity, Aim2 (absent in melanoma 2), Akt-mtor signaling

### Affiliations
UNC at Chapel Hill
Department of Microbiology-Immunology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC,

### Submitter
Ling Xie

### Lab Head
Dr Jenny P. -Y. Ting
Department of Microbiology-Immunology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC,


