### Accession
PXD033782

### Title
PROTEOMICS REVEALS DIFFERENTIALLY REGULATED PATHWAYS WHEN COMPARING LOW-VERSUS HIGH-GRADE ASTROCYTOMAS

### Description
Astrocytic tumors are known for their high progression capacity and for high mortality rates; in this regard, proteins correlated to prognosis can aid medical conduct. Although several genetic changes related to progression from low to high-grade astrocytoma are already known, mRNA copies do not necessarily correlate with protein abundance and, therefore could shadow further comprehension about this tumor’s biology. This motivates us to seek for complementary strategies to study tumor progression at the protein level. Here we compare the proteomic profile of biopsies from patients with low-grade (diffuse, n=6) versus high-grade astrocytoma (anaplastic and glioblastomas, n =10), using shotgun proteomics. Data analysis performed with PatternLab for proteomics  identified 5,206 and 6,004 proteins in the low- and high-grade groups, respectively. Our results revealed seventy-four differentially abundant proteins (p < 0.01); we then shortlist those related to greater malignancy. We also describe molecular pathways distinctly activated in the two groups, such as differences in the organization of the extracellular matrix, decisive both in tumor invasiveness and in signaling for cell division, which, together with marked contrasts in energy metabolism, are determining factors in the speed of growth and dissemination of these neoplasms. The degradation pathways of GABA, enriched in the low-grade group, is consistent with a favorable prognosis. Other functions such as platelet degranulation, apoptosis, and activation of the MAPK pathway were correlated to high-grade tumors and, consequently, unfavorable prognoses. Our results provide an important survey of molecular pathways involved in glioma pathogenesis for these histopathological groups.

### Sample Protocol
The sixteen tissue samples were pulverized in liquid nitrogen, as previously described (7). Then, protein extraction was performed in a solution of 0.1% of RapiGest (w/v) in 50 mM of triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Afterwards, the samples were centrifuged at 18,000 x g at 4 °C for 15 minutes and the protein content was quantified by a fluorometric assay using the Qubit 3.0 platform, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Afterwards, 100 μg of total protein from each sample was reduced with 10 mM of dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60 °C for 30 minutes. Then, all samples were cooled to room temperature and incubated in the dark with 25 mM of iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 minutes. Finally, the samples were digested for 20 hours with high sequence grade modified trypsin at a 1:50 (Enzyme/Substrate) ratio at 37 °C (8)

### Data Protocol
The data analysis was performed with the PatternLab for proteomics software, freely available at http://www.patternlabforproteomics.org (11,12). Homo sapiens’ sequences were downloaded on June 6th, 2020, from the Swiss-Prot and then a target-decoy database was generated to include a reversed version of each sequence plus those from 104 common mass spectrometry contaminants. The Comet 2016.01 rev. 3 search engine was used to identify the mass spectra (13). The search parameters considered: fully and semi-tryptic peptide candidates with masses between 550 and 5,500 Da, up to two missed cleavages, 40 ppm for precursor mass, and bins of 0.02 m/z for MS/MS. The modifications were carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine as fixed and variable, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Mass spectrometer, Low-grade astrocytoma and high-grade astrocytoma.

### Affiliations
Laboratory for structural and computational proteomics - Carlos Chagas Institute, Fiocruz Paraná, Brazil
Computational Mass Spectrometry & Proteomics Group - Fiocruz

### Submitter
Marlon D M Santos

### Lab Head
Dr Juliana de S. da G. Fischer
Laboratory for structural and computational proteomics - Carlos Chagas Institute, Fiocruz Paraná, Brazil


