### Accession
PXD027067

### Title
Identification of photosystem I components from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii grown under oxic and anoxic conditions

### Description
Photosystem I (PSI) enables photo-electron transfer and regulates photosynthesis in the bioenergetic membranes of cyanobacteria and chloroplasts. Being a multi-subunit complex, its macromolecular organization affects the dynamics of photosynthetic membranes. Here we reveal a chloroplast PSI from the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii that is organized as a homodimer.

### Sample Protocol
For 2D-PAGE, thylakoids (0.8 mg chl mL-1) isolated from control and anoxic 137c wild type cells were solubilized with 0.9 % β-DDM for 20 min. 2D-PAGE (Busch, Nield, & Hippler, 2010) and silver staining (Hippler et al., 2001) were performed as described. Excised spots from silver-stained blue native PAGE gels were destained by incubation with 15 mM potassium hexacyanoferrate (III)/50 mM sodium thiosulfate for 8 min, and then submit-ted to tryptic in-gel digestion as described in Shevchenko et al (2006). No reduction and al-kylation of cysteines was performed. After digestion, peptides extracted from the gel pieces were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20°C. Chromatographic separation of peptides was performed using an Ultimate 3000 Nano HPLC (Dionex). The mobile phases consisted of 5 % (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in ultrapure water (eluent A) and 80 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid in ultrapure water (eluent B). Dried peptides were resuspended in 5 µl of eluent A and 1 µl was loaded on a trap col-umn (C18 PepMap 100, 300 µM x 5 mm, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using eluent A at a flow rate of 25 µl/min for 4 min. Then the trap column was switched online with the separation column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 75 µm x 15 cm, 3 µM particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and employing the following gradient profile: 5-50 % B over 30 min, 50-95 % B over 1 min, 95 % B for 4 min.  The LC system was coupled via a nanospray source to an LCQ Deca XP mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan). The general mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 2.0 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; ion transfer tube temperature: 180 °C. The mass spectrom-eter was operated in positive ion mode and a data-dependent automatic switch was em-ployed between MS and MS/MS acquisition modes. MS full scans (m/z 300-2000) were ac-quired in positive ion mode. Precursor masses with m/z values 370.00 / 444.00 / 445.10 / 446.10 / 453.40 / 455.40 /462.10 / 470.00 / 495.60 /531.00 / 842.70 and 843.50 were reject-ed. The 3 most intense ions were fragmented in the linear ion trap by CID (35 % normalized collision energy). Automatic gain control (AGC) was enabled with target values of 1 x 105 and 5 x 103 for MS full scans and MS/MS, respectively. One microscan was acquired per MS/MS spectrum and maximum ion trap fill time was 30 ms. An activation q = 0.25 and activation time of 30 ms were applied in MS2 acquisitions. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion duration of 60s, repeat count of 2, list size of 50 and exclusion mass width of +/- 1.5. Unassigned charge states and charged state 1 were rejected.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data was processed with Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, version 2.4). Raw ﬁles were searched using the SequestHT and MS Amanda algorithms against a con-catenated database containing sequences of nuclear- (Chlamydomonas v5.6 gene models, www.phytozome.org), chloroplast- (GenBank BK000554.2) and mitochondrial-encoded (NC_001638.1) proteins. Furthermore, common contaminants were added (cRAP, www.thegpm.org). Search settings were: precursor and fragment mass tolerances 250 ppm and 0.25 Da, respectively; minimum peptide length: 6; maximum of missed cleavages: 2; variable modiﬁcations: oxidation of methionine, N-acetylation of protein N-termini. Identiﬁcations were ﬁltered to achieve a peptide and protein level false discovery rate of 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Photosystem I (PSI) enables photo-electron transfer and regulates photosynthesis in the bioenergetic membranes of cyanobacteria and chloroplasts. Being a multi-subunit complex, its macromolecular organization affects the dynamics of photosynthetic membranes. Here we reveal a chloroplast PSI from the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii that is organized as a homodimer, comprising 40 protein subunits with 118 transmembrane helices that provide scaffold for 568 pigments. Cryogenic electron microscopy identified that the absence of PsaH and Lhca2 gives rise to a head-to-head relative orientation of the PSI-light-harvesting complex I monomers in a way that is essentially different from the oligomer formation in cyanobacteria. The light-harvesting protein Lhca9 is the key element for mediating this dimerization. The interface between the monomers is lacking PsaH and thus partially overlaps with the surface area that would bind one of the light-harvesting complex II complexes in state transitions. We also define the most accurate available PSI-light-harvesting complex I model at 2.3&#x2009;&#xc5; resolution, including a flexibly bound electron donor plastocyanin, and assign correct identities and orientations to all the pigments, as well as 621 water molecules that affect energy transfer pathways.

### Keywords
Anoxia, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Blue native page, Psi, Photosystem i

### Affiliations
WWU Münster
IBBP Muenster

### Submitter
Martin Scholz

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hippler
WWU Münster


