### Accession
PXD002874

### Title
Circadian rhythms study of the unicellular algae Ostreococcus tauri by shotgun proteomics, sampling under dark condition.

### Description
The overall set of experiments consist of sampling a culture of  the unicellular algae Ostreococcus tauri (wild type) every 4 hours over a period of 24h (6 time points). Each time point was performed with 5 replicate culture flasks, the cultures were collected while maintained under dark condition.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to trypsin digestion, samples were normalised by protein concentration. For each sample, a trypsin solution digestion in 2M urea was performed and the digests were cleaned on SPE reverse phase columns. Approximately 500ug of clean peptide digest was used for phosphopeptide enrichment using titanium dioxide spin columns.  The LC-MS analysis was performed on a LTQ-Orbitrap XL for both the global peptide extracts and the phosphopeptide enrichment fractions.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using Mascot and quantitation was performed using an intensity based label-free approach (Progenesis).  The phosphopeptide site assignment was performed using MaxQuant. Different instances of a same phosphorylation site were merged using QPmerge for quantitation (those data are not in PRIDE but in the supplemental information table of the manuscript; QPmerge is a recently developed in-house tool, manuscript in preparation).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Non-transcriptional oscillator, Label-free quantitative analysis, Ostreococcus tauri, Phosphopeptides

### Affiliations
SynthSys – Synthetic and Systems Biology School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh Room  3.06, C.H Waddington  Building, Max Born Crescent Edinburgh, EH9 3BF  Phone +44 (0)131 651 9073  thierry.lebihan@ed.ac.uk
SynthSys – Synthetic and Systems Biology

### Submitter
Thierry Le Bihan

### Lab Head
Dr Thierry Le Bihan
SynthSys – Synthetic and Systems Biology School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh Room  3.06, C.H Waddington  Building, Max Born Crescent Edinburgh, EH9 3BF  Phone +44 (0)131 651 9073  thierry.lebihan@ed.ac.uk


