### Accession
PXD011174

### Title
Quantitative Analysis of Sheep Muscle Protein (iTRAQ) from College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University

### Description
Public description (Provide a description of the study goals and relevance): Adding the effect of exogenous antioxidants on the protein of lamb meat during storage.

### Sample Protocol
The experiment is divided into two treatments at three time points. Experiment 1:  Group 0d 5d 7d Control 5-6 5-6 5-6  5-8 5-8 5-8 LP200 6-6 6-6 6-6  6-10 6-10 6-10 Experiment 2: Group 0d 5d 7d Control 5-8 5-8 5-8  5-9 5-9 5-9 VE200 9-7 9-7 9-7  9-10 9-10 9-10

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped by Mascot Distiller version 2.6. Then the mass spectrometry datawere transformed into MGF files with Proteome Discovery 1.2 (Thermo, Pittsburgh, PA, USA)and analyzed using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.2). Protein identifications were accepted if they could achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony

### Publication Abstract
This study was designed to investigate the impact of dietary lycopene (antioxidant extracted from tomato) supplementation on postmortem antioxidant capacity, drip loss and protein expression profiles of lamb meat during storage. Thirty male Hu lambs were randomly divided into three treatment groups and housed in individual pens and received 0, 200 or 400 mg&#xb7;kg<sup>-1</sup> lycopene in their diet, respectively. All lambs were slaughtered after 3 months of fattening, and the longissimus thoracis (LT) muscle was collected for analyses. The results indicated that drip loss of LT muscle increased with storage days (<i>P</i> &lt; 0.05). After storage for 7 days, significantly lower drip loss of meat was found in fed the lycopene-supplemented diet (<i>P</i> &lt; 0.05). Dietary lycopene supplementation increased the activity of antioxidant enzymes (total antioxidant capacity (T-AOC), superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px), catalase (CAT)) (<i>P</i> &lt; 0.05) and decreased the thiobarbituric acid reactive substance (TBARS) and carbonyl contents (<i>P</i> &lt; 0.05). During the storage period (days 0, 5 and 7), a number of differentially abundant proteins (DAPs), including oxidases, metabolic enzymes, calcium channels and structural proteins, were identified based on iTRAQ data, with roles predominantly in carbon metabolism, oxidative phosphorylation, cardiac muscle contraction and proteasome pathways, and which contribute to decreased drip loss of lamb meat during storage. It can be concluded that dietary lycopene supplementation increased antioxidant capacity after slaughter, and the decreased drip loss during postmortem storage might occur by changing the expression of proteins related to enzyme activity and cellular structure in lamb muscle.

### Keywords
Lamb meat, Antioxidant, Protein

### Affiliations
Submitting organization：China Agricultural University Department：College of Animal Science and Technology
+8615600693269

### Submitter
Chenchen Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Chenchen Xu
Submitting organization：China Agricultural University Department：College of Animal Science and Technology


