### Accession
PXD008322

### Title
Tdrd6a regulates the aggregation of Buc into functional subcellular compartments that drive germ cell specification

### Description
In recent years, it has become clear that membrane-less structures formed through phase separation represent an important class of subcellular compartmentalization. However, little is known about how the formation or disassembly of such compartments is regulated. The Balbiani body (Bb) is a phase-separated structure essential for germ cell specification and home to many germ cell-specific mRNAs and proteins. Throughout oogenesis, the structure assembles all critical components required for germ cell induction upon fertilization, then referred to as germ plasm (Gp). In zebrafish, formation of the Bb requires Bucky ball (Buc), a protein with prion-like properties. We have found that Tdrd6a interacts directly with Buc and regulates its aggregation into a functional Bb. Without Tdrd6a, the morphology and mobility of the Bb and the Gp are severely affected, ultimately resulting in PGC depletion in the progeny. Since germ cells are rich in phase-separated structures, many more of such regulatory interactions exist.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were heated to 80°C for 10 min prior to loading on a 4%-12% NuPage NOVEX gradient gel (Life Technologies). The proteins were separated using MOPS buffer (Thermo) at 170V for 10 min. In-gel digestion was performed essentially as previously described (Shevchenko et al., 2007). Peptides were desalted on StageTips and stored on them until MS measurement. Peptides were eluted from StageTips with 80 percent ACN/0.5% formic acid. The mixture was separated using an EASY-nLC1000 with a reversed phase column (25 cm, 75 μm inner diameter, packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm (Dr. Maisch GmbH)) mounted directly at a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A 88 minute gradient of 2% to 40% acetonitrile at a flow of 225 nl/min was combined with a wash-out of 95% acetonitrile in an overall 105 min instrument method. Spray voltage was set to ca. 2.4 kV. The instrument performed a top10 data-dependent acquisition with up to 10 HCD fragmentations per MS full scan (70k resolution, 300-1650 m/z).

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant v.1.5.2.8 and searched with the incorporated Andromeda search engine against a Uniprot/Trembl Danio rerio fasta file (58,793 entries) (Cox and Mann, 2008). Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation, protein N-acetylation, phosphorylation and lysine/arginine dimethylation were considered as variable modifications. The search was performed with an initial mass tolerance of 7ppm mass accuracy for the precursor and 20 ppm for the MS/MS spectra in the HCD fragmentation mode. Standard settings were applied except match between runs and the LFQ quantitations were activated. Search results were filtered at a false discovery rate of 0.01 on protein and peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
Phase separation represents an important form of subcellular compartmentalization. However, relatively little is known about how the formation or disassembly of such compartments is regulated. In zebrafish, the Balbiani body (Bb) and the germ plasm (Gp) are intimately linked phase-separated structures essential for germ cell specification and home to many germ cell-specific mRNAs and proteins. Throughout development, these structures occur as a single large aggregate (Bb), which disperses throughout oogenesis and upon fertilization accumulates again into relatively large assemblies (Gp). Formation of the Bb requires Bucky ball (Buc), a protein with prion-like properties. We found that the multi-tudor domain-containing protein Tdrd6a interacts with Buc, affecting its mobility and aggregation properties. Importantly, lack of this regulatory interaction leads to significant defects in germ cell development. Our work presents insights into how prion-like protein aggregations can be regulated and highlights the biological relevance of such regulatory events.

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Peptide pulldown, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB) Ackermannweg 4 55128 Mainz
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB) Ackermannweg 4 55128 Mainz


