### Accession
PXD014359

### Title
Cross-linking mass spectrometry analysis of trimeric complex of CRM1, SNP1 and RanGTP cross-linked with BS3

### Description
An X-ray crystallography structure of the trimeric nuclear export complex of CRM1, SNP1 and RanGTP is available on the PDB database with the ID 3GJX. To get an XL-MS dataset of a clean sample of a stable protein complex for benchmarking purposes, another sample from the protein expression, purification and complex assembly employed in the crystallography study was also cross-linked and analyzed by mass spectrometry. The tools OpenPepXL, pLink 2, Kojak, StavroX, XiSearch and xQuest were used to analyze this dataset with comparable search settings.

### Sample Protocol
Human full-length wild type CRM1 and SNP1 as well as a 1-180 fragment of Ran carrying a Q69L mutation, which blocks GTPase activity, were recombinantly expressed in E. coli, purified and a  trimeric complex thereof was assembled as described before (T. Monecke et al.,2015). Prior to cross-linking, the trimeric complex was dialyzed against a buffer containing 20 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.9, 50 mM NaCl, 2 mM Mg(CH3COO)2, 1 mM DTT. One hundred pmol of the trimeric complex was cross-linked with 150 µM bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate (BS3, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 25 °C for 30 min in a volume of 50 µl and subsequently quenched for 5 min with 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8. The sample was resolved on a NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris protein gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific), followed by Coomassie staining. A slow migrating band corresponding to the BS3-cross-linked products was excised and in-gel digested with trypsin. Extracted peptides were dissolved in a sample solvent (5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). Approximately 5 pmol peptides were injected into an EASY-nLC HPLC 1,000 system coupled to Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in duplicates under each of the three tested NCE conditions using a 50-min method. A 20 cm long C18 analytical column with inner diameter of 75 µm self-packed with 5 µm beads (pore 120 Å, Dr. Maisch) was used for on-line HPLC. MS1 and MS2 resolution were set to 70,000 and 17500, respectively. Fifteen most abundant precursors with charge of 3-7 (350-1,600 m/z, isolation window 2 m/z) were selected for MS2 fragmentation at NCE 20, 24 or 28%. MS2 AGC target and injection time were limited to 200000 and 60 ms, respectively. Dynamic exclusion of 15 s was applied.

### Data Protocol
The .RAW files of all datasets were converted into mzML, mzXML and MGF files using MSConvertGUI from the ProteoWizard toolkit version 3.0.10577. Reversed sequence decoy protein databases were generated from the target protein databases using the TOPP tool DecoyDatabase from OpenMS 2.4. Because it creates its own decoys, only the target database was provided to pLink2. OpenPepXL 1.1 with the TOPP tool XFDR for False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimation, XiSearch 1.6.731 with xiFDR 1.1.27 for FDR estimation, TPP 5.1.0 with Kojak 1.6.0 and PeptideProphet for FDR estimation, xQuest 2.1.3 with xProphet for FDR estimation as well as pLink 2.3.5 and StavroX 3.6.6.5 with their built in FDR estimation algorithms were used to identify cross-links. The parameters of the different tools were set to equal values where possible and to reasonable or similar values otherwise. The parameters were: precursor tolerance = 10 ppm, fragment tolerance = 20ppm, max. number of missed cleavages = 2, enzyme = Trypsin, min. peptide length = 5, fixed modification = Carbamidomethyl (C), variable modification = Oxidation (M), max. variable modifications per peptide = 2, charges = +3 to +7 , cross-linker = BS3, cross-link mass = 138.0680796, mono-link masses = 156.07864431 and 155.094628715, linked residues = K and N-terminal. Additional filtering and post-processing was partly done with the TOPP tools IDFilter, IDMerger and TextExporter for OpenPepXL and xQuest output and otherwise using R scripts. An FDR cut-off of 5% on PSM level was applied to every tool. Additionally after this cut-off only unique residue pairs found in at least two of the remaining peptide spectrum matches (PSM) were kept. Also a filter for link distance was applied to intra-protein links. Linked residue pairs were only kept, if they were at least 4 residues apart in the database sequence.

### Publication Abstract
Cross-linking MS (XL-MS) has been recognized as an effective source of information about protein structures and interactions. In contrast to regular peptide identification, XL-MS has to deal with a quadratic search space, where peptides from every protein could potentially be cross-linked to any other protein. To cope with this search space, most tools apply different heuristics for search space reduction. We introduce a new open-source XL-MS database search algorithm, OpenPepXL, which offers increased sensitivity compared with other tools. OpenPepXL searches the full search space of an XL-MS experiment without using heuristics to reduce it. Because of efficient data structures and built-in parallelization OpenPepXL achieves excellent runtimes and can also be deployed on large compute clusters and cloud services while maintaining a slim memory footprint. We compared OpenPepXL to several other commonly used tools for identification of noncleavable labeled and label-free cross-linkers on a diverse set of XL-MS experiments. In our first comparison, we used a data set from a fraction of a cell lysate with a protein database of 128 targets and 128 decoys. At 5% FDR, OpenPepXL finds from 7% to over 50% more unique residue pairs (URPs) than other tools. On data sets with available high-resolution structures for cross-link validation OpenPepXL reports from 7% to over 40% more structurally validated URPs than other tools. Additionally, we used a synthetic peptide data set that allows objective validation of cross-links without relying on structural information and found that OpenPepXL reports at least 12% more validated URPs than other tools. It has been built as part of the OpenMS suite of tools and supports Windows, macOS, and Linux operating systems. OpenPepXL also supports the MzIdentML 1.2 format for XL-MS identification results. It is freely available under a three-clause BSD license at https://openms.org/openpepxl.

### Keywords
Technical dataset

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Interactions, Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology
Biomolecular Interactions, Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Tübingen, Germany; Applied Bioinformatics, Dept. of Computer Science, University of Tübingen, Germany; Quantitative Biology Center (QBiC), University of Tübingen, Germany; Institute for Translational Bioinformatics, University Hospital Tübingen, Germany; Institute for Bioinformatics and Medical Informatics, University of Tübingen, Germany;

### Submitter
Eugen Netz

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Kohlbacher
Biomolecular Interactions, Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Tübingen, Germany; Applied Bioinformatics, Dept. of Computer Science, University of Tübingen, Germany; Quantitative Biology Center (QBiC), University of Tübingen, Germany; Institute for Translational Bioinformatics, University Hospital Tübingen, Germany; Institute for Bioinformatics and Medical Informatics, University of Tübingen, Germany;


