### Accession
PXD015023

### Title
Identification of novel binding proteins for sphingosine 1-phosphate

### Description
Novel binding proteins for bioactive lipid mediator sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) were searched in the plasma from apolipoprotein M/albumin double deficient mice.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma from apolipoprotein M/albumin double deficient mice was fractionated by size-exclustion chromatography, followed by ion-exchange chromatography based on the S1P distribution. S1P-containing fractions were pooled and separated by SDS-PAGE. The gel was cut into 12 pieces, and the proteins contained in the gel pieces were reduced by DTT and alkylated by iodoacetamide, then digested with trypsin/Lys-C mix. The digests were extracted and subjected to analysis by a NanoFrontier eLD coupled with a nano flow HPLC system.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted into peaklist files (.mgf) using NanoFrontier eLD data processing software (version 2008) and subjected to a search against SwissProt mouse sequences (February 2016, 16772 entries) using Mascot search algorithm (Matrix Science, version 2.4.0). Searches were performed with a mass measurement tolerance of 0.2 Da for both precursor and fragment ions. A maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, and oxidation of methionine, tryptophan and histidine residues were searched as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. The ion score significance threshold was chosen to be 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
HDL-bound ApoM and albumin are protein chaperones for the circulating bioactive lipid, sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P); in this role, they support essential extracellular S1P signaling functions in the vascular and immune systems. We previously showed that ApoM- and albumin-bound S1P exhibit differences in receptor activation and biological functions. Whether the physiological functions of S1P require chaperones is not clear. We examined ApoM-deficient, albumin-deficient, and double-KO (DKO) mice for circulatory S1P and its biological functions. In albumin-deficient mice, ApoM was upregulated, thus enabling S1P functions in embryonic development and postnatal adult life. The <i>Apom:Alb</i> DKO mice reproduced, were viable, and exhibited largely normal vascular and immune functions, which suggested sufficient extracellular S1P signaling. However, <i>Apom:Alb</i> DKO mice had reduced levels (&#x223c;25%) of plasma S1P, suggesting that novel S1P chaperones exist to mediate S1P functions. In this study, we report the identification of ApoA4 as a novel S1P binding protein. Recombinant ApoA4 bound to S1P, activated multiple S1P receptors, and promoted vascular endothelial barrier function, all reflective of its function as a S1P chaperone in the absence of ApoM and albumin. We suggest that multiple S1P chaperones evolved to support complex and essential extracellular signaling functions of this lysolipid mediator in a redundant manner.

### Keywords
Plasma, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine
Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine, Japan

### Submitter
Touko Hirano

### Lab Head
Dr Hideru Obinata
Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine, Japan


