### Accession
PXD009569

### Title
Immunoproteomics of Lymph Node T-cells in Bladder Cancer

### Description
The immune-suppressive features often possessed by invasive tumors hamper effective anti-tumor immunity. In this context, tumor-infiltrating regulatory T cells (Tregs) have been widely implied, principally as unwanted suppressors of anti-tumor immune responses. However, while many studies have focused on tumor-infiltrating Tregs, the function and signaling of Tregs in tumor-associated lymph nodes is largely unknown. In this study, we set out to clarify how immune signaling in lymph nodes is impacted by its contact to the tumour. Because muscle-invasive urothelial bladder cancer (MIBC) represent an immunogenic cancer were Tregs are accumulated and sentinel nodes (SNs) can be efficiently detected, we explored the protein expression of T-cells in SNs and non-SNs of MIBC patients. Proteomic analysis of Tregs and effector T-cells in SN and non-draining lymph nodes found SN-Tregs in MIBC patients to up-regulate growth and immune signaling pathways, the cytokine IL-16 being central in the signaling network. Experimental validation showed that in Tregs, tumoral factors increase IL-16 processing into bioactive forms and increase FOXP3 expression. In conclusion, altered IL-16 processing caused by tumour-released factors stimulate expansion of SN-Tregs in MIBC, creating an immunosuppressive environment and contributing to immune escape.

### Sample Protocol
PBMCs were isolated from heparinized peripheral blood by use of Ficoll-Paque PLUS (Amersham Biosciences) density centrifugation gradient. From lymph nodes, leukocytes were extracted by gentle homogenization through a 40µm cell strainer. After the initial cell extraction, CD4+ cells were isolated using EasySep Human CD4 positive selection kit (Stemcell Technologies). Tregs and Teffs were defined as CD4+CD25hiCD127lo and CD4+CD25 lo, respectively, and sorted using flow cytometry. Cell pellets were thawed on ice and depending on the number of cells/pellet reconstituted in 50-120 μl 8M Urea with 150 mM NaCl. The cells were disrupted by probe sonication (Vibra-Cell™ CV18, Sonics & Materials, Newtown, USA) and cell debris was removed by short centrifugation at 4°C. Five micrograms of extracted protein from each sample were dissolved in 0.1% ProteaseMax, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 10% acetonitrile. The resulting protein solutions were incubated for 30 min at 50° C while shaking followed by an additional sonication bath of 10 min at room temperature. Samples were centrifuged and the supernatant was directly subjected to a tryptic digestion protocol carried out by a liquid handling robot (MultiProbe II, Perkin Elmer). This included protein reduction in 5 mM DTT at 56 °C for 30 min and alkylation in 15 mM iodacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Trypsin was added in an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:30 and digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C.  Tryptic peptides were acidified, centrifuged and cleaned with C18 StageTips (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc). About 1μg of the resulting peptide mixture was injected into a nano-Ultimate HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) in-line coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The chromatographic separation of the peptides was achieved using a 28cm long in-house packed column (C18-AQ ReproSil-Pur®, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) with the following gradient: 7−28% acetonitrile (ACN) in 115 min and 28−96% ACN in 5 min at a flow rate of 300nl/min.   The MS acquisition method was comprised of one full scan survey ranging from m/z 300 to m/z 1650 acquired with a resolution of R= 140‘000 at m/z 400, followed by data-dependent HCD scans from maximum sixteen most intense precursor ions with a charge state ≥ 2. MS2 scans were acquired with a resolution of R=17’500, a target value of 2e5, isolation width was set to 4 and normalized collision energy to 26.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted using Raw2MGF (14) and the resulting mascot generic files were searched against a SwissProt protein database using Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science Ltd.). Mascot was set up to search a concatenated SwissProt protein database (selected for Homo sapiens) using trypsin and allowing for two missed cleavage sites. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance to 0.02Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were defined as variable modifications.   Quantitative information was extracted using the software Quanti (14). This software performs extracted ion current quantification for label-free quantitation and only peptides identified with a Mascot score higher than 16 were selected. Such a threshold was set to fulfill the condition of no more than 1% FDR over the total peptide population. Only proteins quantified with at least two such peptides were considered for quantitation. Normalization of the data was done by calculating the summed intensities of all proteins in each sample and the median of all these summed intensities over the entire sample set. Each quantitative value was multiplied by the median/summed intensity and the resulting values were log10 transformed.

### Publication Abstract
In the effort of developing new immunotherapies, the sentinel node (SN) has proven a promising source from which to harness an effective antitumour T cell response. However, tumour immune escape, a process in which regulatory T cells (Tregs) play a central role, remains a major limiting factor. Therefore, there is a clear need to increase the knowledge of Treg function and signalling in sentinel nodes. Here, we set out to explore whether the proteome in SN-resident T cells is altered by the tumour and to identify key proteins in SN T cell signalling, focusing on Tregs. Five patients with muscle-invasive urothelial bladder cancer were prospectively included. Mass spectrometry was performed on two patients, with validation and functional studies being performed on three additional patients and four healthy donors. At cystectomy, SN, non-SN lymph nodes and peripheral blood samples were collected from the patients and T cell subsets isolated through flow cytometry before downstream experiments. Proteomic analysis indicated that growth and immune signalling pathways are upregulated in SN-resident Tregs. Furthermore, centrality analysis identified the cytokine IL-16 to be central in the SN-Treg signalling network. We show that tumour-released factors, through activating caspase-3, increase Treg IL-16 processing into bioactive forms, reinforcing Treg suppressive capacity. In conclusion, we provide evidence that Tregs exposed to secreted factors from bladder tumours show increased immune and growth signalling and altered IL-16 processing which translates to enhanced Treg suppressive function, indicating altered IL-16 signalling as a novel tumour immune escape mechanism.

### Keywords
Human, T-cells, Lymph nodes, Cancer

### Affiliations
Umeå University
Karolinska Institutet, Department of Medicine Solna, Unit of Translational Immunology

### Submitter
Michael Mints

### Lab Head
Dr Ola Winqvist
Karolinska Institutet, Department of Medicine Solna, Unit of Translational Immunology


