### Accession
PXD019727

### Title
Social status and ejaculate investment in the house mouse c4pr_liv

### Description
Sperm competition theory predicts that males should tailor ejaculates according to their social status. Here we test this in a model vertebrate, the house mouse (Mus musculus domesticus), combining experimental data with a quantitative proteomics analysis of seminal fluid composition. Our analyses reveal that both sperm production and the relative production of proteins found in seminal fluid differ according to social dominance.  Notably, whereas dominant males produce and ejaculate more sperm, subordinate males produce greater relative amounts of key proteins used in the formation of copulatory plugs. These findings have important implications for understanding the dynamics and outcome of sperm competition.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digestion of seminal vesicle contents The seminal vesicle secretion is a highly viscous, protein rich substance. Defrosted samples of the secretion were first diluted to approximately 50mg/ml with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate solution. A pestle and vortex were used to create a homogenous solution. To more accurately determine protein concentration a Coomassie plus protein assay was performed on each homogenate. Following a standard protocol, 100µg of protein within a total final volume of 200µl was digested using trypsin. Briefly, proteins were denatured by RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters) at 80°C for 5 minutes, to assist with enzymatic digestion. The disulphide bonds in the sample were reduced and then alkylated by incubation with Dithiothreitol (60°C 10min) followed by Iodoacetamide (RT 60 minutes in the dark). Trypsin (0.2mg/ml, Sigma-Aldrich) was added and the sample incubated overnight at 37°C. After 12 hours, 1M hydrochloric acid and additional trypsin (0.1mg/ml) was added and left to incubate for a further 4 hours to ensure complete digestion. At the end of the digestion, each sample was incubated at 37°C with trifluoroacetic acid (final concentration 0.5% (v/v)) for 45min. These samples were centrifuged at 17,000 x g and 4°C for 90 minutes and the supernatant decanted into low – bind Eppendorf tubes. The digests were further centrifuged at 17,000 x g and 4°C for a further 90 minutes, and 10µl of each digest was checked using SDS-PAGE to ensure completeness of digestion.

### Data Protocol
Mass-spectrometric analysis The seminal vesicle secretion samples were diluted 300 fold with 97:3:0.1 HPLC grade water:MeOH:TFA. The sample was diluted due to the low complexity and broad dynamic range of this sample, with eight proteins accounting for over 90% of the total protein content. The tryptic peptides were resolved over a 50 min linear organic gradient of 3-40% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile), using a nanoACQUITY (Waters) ultra-performance liquid chromatography system. The HPLC system was coupled to an electrospray ionisation source and an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), acquiring high resolution mass data in a data-dependent manner. The top 20 most intense peptides in each MS scan were selected for MSMS analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Sperm competition theory predicts that males should tailor ejaculates according to their social status. Here, we test this in a model vertebrate, the house mouse (<i>Mus musculus domesticus</i>), combining experimental data with a quantitative proteomics analysis of seminal fluid composition. Our analyses reveal that both sperm production and the composition of proteins found in seminal vesicle secretions differ according to social status. Dominant males invested more in ejaculate production overall. Their epididymides contained more sperm than those of subordinate or control males, despite similar testes size between the groups. Dominant males also had larger seminal vesicle glands than subordinate or control males, despite similar body size. However, the seminal vesicle secretions of subordinate males had a significantly higher protein concentration than those of dominant males. Moreover, detailed proteomic analysis revealed subtle but consistent differences in the composition of secreted seminal vesicle proteins according to social status, involving multiple proteins of potential functional significance in sperm competition. These findings have significant implications for understanding the dynamics and outcome of sperm competition, and highlight the importance of social status as a factor influencing both sperm and seminal fluid investment strategies. This article is part of the theme issue 'Fifty years of sperm competition'.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Lfq, Sperm competition

### Affiliations
Centre for Proteome Research, University of Liverpool
G44, Biosciences Building| Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology University of Liverpool Crown Street | Liverpool  | L69 7ZB

### Submitter
Catarina Franco

### Lab Head
Dr Rob J Beynon
G44, Biosciences Building| Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology University of Liverpool Crown Street | Liverpool  | L69 7ZB


