### Accession
PXD029463

### Title
PIM1 controls GBP1 activity to limit self-damage and guard against pathogen infection

### Description
Pathogen virulence factors interfere with various cellular activities, a disruption that can trigger innate immune responses. Interferon-gamma (IFNγ)-inducible antimicrobial factors, such as the guanylate binding proteins (GBPs), promote cell-intrinsic defense against intracellular pathogens by directly attacking intracellular pathogens and by committing the infected host cell to programmed cell death. GBPs are large GTPases that traffic to pathogens in the cytosol or that reside within membrane-bound compartments and restrict microbial growth. We discovered that ectopic expression of the prototypical IFNγ-inducible GTPase, Guanylate Binding Protein 1 (GBP1), in the absence of IFNγ kills human macrophages, accompanied by fragmentation of the Golgi apparatus. Exposure to IFNγ improved host cell survival via the activity of PIM1 kinase. PIM1 phosphorylates GBP1 and imposes its sequestration by 14-3-3σ to prevent membrane association of GBP1. Analysis by cryo-EM showed that a 14-3-3σ-dimer trapped GBP1 in an inactive monomeric state. This control mechanism becomes evident during Toxoplasma gondii infection, where the effector protein TgIST interferes with IFNγ-signaling and thereby unintentionally depletes the short-lived kinase PIM1. This, in turn, increases GBP1-driven control of the pathogen. Uninfected bystander cells are spared during inflammation, while the infected cells restrain the pathogen in a rapid GBP1-dependent manner. Our work establishes PIM1 as a bait for pathogen virulence factors, thus safeguarding the integrity of IFNγ-signaling. This work presents a new paradigm of IFNγ-dependent protection of uninfected cells against self-inflicted innate immune damage. 

### Sample Protocol
Protein eluted from the IP beads were separated by SDS-PAGE and three vertical lanes were excised for each sample. The excised gel pieces were de-stained with 50 % acetonitrile/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 10 mM DTT, and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. After alkylation, the proteins were digested with 250 ng of trypsin overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were extracted in 2 % formic acid, 1 % acetonitrile and speed vacuum dried. Prior to analysis the peptides were reconstituted in 50 µl of 0.1 % TFA. Mass spectrometry The peptides were loaded on a 50 cm Easy Spray column (75 μm inner diameter, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with an integrated electrospray emitter. Reverse phase chromatography was performed using the RSLC nano U3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a binary buffer system at a flow rate of 275 nl/min. Solvent A was 0.1 % formic acid, 5 % DMSO, and solvent B was 80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid, 5 % DMSO. The in-gel digested samples were run on a linear gradient of solvent B (2 - 30 %) in 95.5 min, total run time of 120 min including column conditioning. The nanoLC was coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer using an EasySpray nano source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode acquiring MS1 scan (R=120, 000) in the Orbitrap, followed by HCD MS2 scans in the ion trap. The number of selected precursor ions for fragmentation was determined by the “Top Speed” acquisition algorithm with a cycle time set at 3 s and a dynamic exclusion set at 30 s. For ion accumulation the MS1 target was set to 4 × 105 ions and the MS2 target to 2 × 103 ions. The maximum ion injection time utilized for MS1 scans was 50 ms and for MS2 scans was 300 ms. The HCD normalized collision energy was set at 28 and the ability to inject ions for all available parallelizable time was set to “true”.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analysed with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.13). Parent ion and tandem mass spectra were searched against UniprotKB Homo sapiens and Toxoplasma gondii databases. For the search the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with maximum of two missed cleavages. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search (used for mass re-calibration) and to 6 ppm for the main search. Product mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was specified as fixed modification, oxidized methionines and N-terminal protein acetylation were searched as variable modifications. The datasets were filtered on posterior error probability to achieve 1 % false discovery rate on protein level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
14-3-3, Bystander cells, Cell intrinsic immunity, Guanylate binding proteins, Pim1, Gbp1, Host-pathogen interaction

### Affiliations
Boston Children's Hospital
Head of Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics STP (lab head)

### Submitter
Daniel Fisch

### Lab Head
Dr Bram Snijders
Head of Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics STP (lab head)


