### Accession
PXD008176

### Title
Differential proteomics investigation of foxtail millet unravels alteration of stress responsive proteins under drought

### Description
Foxtail millet (Setaria italica L. P. Beauv) has been considered as a tractable model crop in recent years due to its short growing cycle, lower repetitive DNA, inbreeding nature, small diploid genome, and outstanding abiotic stress-tolerance characteristics. With modern agriculture often facing various adversities, it’s urgent to dissect the mechanisms of how foxtail millet responds and adapts to drought and stress on the proteomic-level.

### Sample Protocol
The foxtail millet variety, Yugu1, was used for all experiments. Plastic pots with 21-cm diameter and 21-cm height were used as experimental units. Each pot was filled with 3-kg soil which included a mixture of nutrient soil:loamy sand with a ratio of 1:1. Plants were grown in greenhouse with well-watered conditions under 30/25 °C day/night cycle with a 14-h photoperiod for three weeks. The drought treatments were performed as previously described [18]. Soil moisture of well-watered and drought treated were controlled at 60–70% and 20-30% of field capacity separately, and the treatments lasted for 7 days. The pots were randomized in four replicates between the two treatments. After drought treatments, seedlings were immediately harvested and frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C for protein and RNA extraction. Protein extraction and trypsin digestion were performed according to the methods of [19] with slight modification. Samples were first grinded in liquid nitrogen, and the tissue powder in lysis buffer was ultra-sonicated three times. The remaining debris was removed after centrifugation, and the protein was precipitated with 15% TCA and washed by cold acetone. The precipitates were re-dissolved in buffer including 100 mM TEAB and 8 M urea at pH 8.0. The protein concentration was determined using 2-D Quant kit according to the protocol. For protein digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 20 mM Iodoacetic acid. After that, the protein samples were diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB with urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, the protein was digested at the 1:50 and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratios with two replicates each, respectively. For each sample, approximately 100 μg of protein was digested for the following experiments.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Mascot search engine (v.2.3.0). Tandem mass spectra were blasted against Uniprot_foxtail_4555 (http://www.uniprot.org/taxonomy/4555) database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys, TMT6plex (N-term) and TMT6plex (K) were specified as fixed modification, and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and peptide ion score was set > 20. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). The proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. The functional description of identified protein domains were annotated by InterProScan (a sequence analysis application) based on protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain database was used. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/) was used to annotate protein pathway. Firstly, using KEGG online service tools KAAS to annotated protein’s KEGG database description. Then mapped the annotation results on the KEGG pathway database using KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper. Wolf-psort (http://www.genscript.com/wolf-psort.html), a subcellular localization predication soft was used to predict proteins subcellular localization. The Protein-Protein Interaction analysis was performed according to [20].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Expression pattern, Foxtail millet (setariaitalical.), Drought, Comparative proteomics, Stress, Western bolt, Qrt-pcr

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs Inc.
Biotechnology Research Center, Shandong Academy of Agricultural Sciences; Key Laboratory of Genetic Improvement, Ecology and Physiology of Crops, Jinan 250100, Shandong, China

### Submitter
Rachel  Green

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Liu
Biotechnology Research Center, Shandong Academy of Agricultural Sciences; Key Laboratory of Genetic Improvement, Ecology and Physiology of Crops, Jinan 250100, Shandong, China


