### Accession
PXD004423

### Title
milk-derived extracellular vesicles UHPLC-MS

### Description
Breast milk contains macromolecular components with distinctive functions, whereby milk fat globules and casein micelles provide nutrition, while whey contains molecules that stimulate the infant’s immunity. Interestingly, the importance and function of extracellular vesicles (EV) in milk has not been addressed in detail. This in part is due to the difficulty to purify EV from other milk components and consequently the molecular composition of human milk-derived EV has not been fully elucidated.  Methods: In this study, an extensive LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis was performed on EV isolated via density-based separation from human breast milk of 7 individuals. The proteome of milk-derived EV was analyzed using FunRich and compared to the Vesiclepedia database, as well as to the whole milk proteome, which was constructed from 38 previously published milk proteomics studies.

### Sample Protocol
SDS-PAGE and in gel digestion After sonication, 20 µl of each sample was added to 10 µl 200 mM DTT (Sigma ref. 43815) and 10 µl sample buffer (Biorad ref. 161-0791) and incubated for 5 min at 95°C. After short centrifuging the samples were separated on a 12% Tris-HCl gel. The gels were fixed with 50% ethanol/10% acetic acid, stained with Gelcode Blue Stain (Thermo ref. 24592) and destained with MilliQ (Millipore). Each lane was excised in 6 or 7 bands for in gel digestion using trypsin [1]. After extraction with 100% acetonitrile the samples were dried and reconstituted in 40 µl of 10% formic acid/5% DMSO (Sigma).  High-resolution LC-MS/MS analysis Samples were individually acquired in two separate runs (milk-derived EV or high-density complexes from donor 1 and 2 in the first run. Milk-derived EV or high-density complexes from donor 3 to 7 in the second run). Nanoflow LC-MS/MS was perfomed using an Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific,Odense, Denmark) with an analytical column heater (40°C) and an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite. In gel digestion fractions were dried, reconstituted in 10% FA and delivered to a trap column (ReproSil C18, (Dr Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany); 20 mm x 100 μm inner diameter, packed in-house) at 5 μl/min in 100% solvent A (0.1 M acetic acid in water). Next, peptides eluted from the trap column onto an analytical column  (Poroshell 120 EC-C18  (Zorbax,  Agilent Technologies); 40 cm length, 50 μm inner diameter, packed in-house) at approximately 100 nl/min in a 60 min gradient from 0 to 40% solvent B (0.1 M acetic acid in 8:2 (v/v) ACN/water). The eluent was sprayed via distal coated emitter tips butt-connected to the analytical column. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS. Full-scan MS spectra (from m/z 350 to 1500) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolu¬tion of 60,000 FHMW at 400 m/z using an AGC setting of 1e6 ions. After the survey scans, the 10 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent decision tree-based iontrap CID or ETD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data processing  MS raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3, Thermo Electron). Peptide identification was performed using Mascot 2.3 (Matrix Science). Peak lists were generated from the raw data files using Proteome Discoverer version 1.3 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen) and searched against the Uniprot database; Homo sapiens, supplemented with frequently observed contaminants using Mascot software version 2.3 (Matrix Science, UK). Trypsin was chosen as enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (M) was set as variable modification. The searches were performed using a peptide mass tolerance of 50 ppm and a product ion tolerance of 0.05 Da (HCD), followed by data filtering using percolator, resulting in 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Only ranked 1 PSMs with Mascot scores >20 were accepted. Keratines were not considered contamination and therefore were not removed from the dataset, since mammary epithelial cells (as possible EV producers) express keratins. The data from this study has been submitted to the Vesiclepedia database, http://www.microvesicles.org/ (accession number: Vesiclepedia_xxx).

### Publication Abstract
Breast milk contains several macromolecular components with distinctive functions, whereby milk fat globules and casein micelles mainly provide nutrition to the newborn, and whey contains molecules that can stimulate the newborn's developing immune system and gastrointestinal tract. Although extracellular vesicles (EV) have been identified in breast milk, their physiological function and composition has not been addressed in detail. EV are submicron sized vehicles released by cells for intercellular communication via selectively incorporated lipids, nucleic acids, and proteins. Because of the difficulty in separating EV from other milk components, an in-depth analysis of the proteome of human milk-derived EV is lacking. In this study, an extensive LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis was performed of EV that had been purified from breast milk of seven individual donors using a recently established, optimized density-gradient-based EV isolation protocol. A total of 1963 proteins were identified in milk-derived EV, including EV-associated proteins like CD9, Annexin A5, and Flotillin-1, with a remarkable overlap between the different donors. Interestingly, 198 of the identified proteins are not present in the human EV database Vesiclepedia, indicating that milk-derived EV harbor proteins not yet identified in EV of different origin. Similarly, the proteome of milk-derived EV was compared with that of other milk components. For this, data from 38 published milk proteomic studies were combined in order to construct the total milk proteome, which consists of 2698 unique proteins. Remarkably, 633 proteins identified in milk-derived EV have not yet been identified in human milk to date. Interestingly, these novel proteins include proteins involved in regulation of cell growth and controlling inflammatory signaling pathways, suggesting that milk-derived EVs could support the newborn's developing gastrointestinal tract and immune system. Overall, this study provides an expansion of the whole milk proteome and illustrates that milk-derived EV are macromolecular components with a unique functional proteome.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Vesicles, Human milk, Milk proteome

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry & Cell Biology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands
Molecular mass spectrometry and proteomics, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8 3584CH Utrecht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Soenita Goerdayal

### Lab Head
Dr Marca H.M. Wauben
Department of Biochemistry & Cell Biology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands


