### Accession
PXD005642

### Title
MSstats splitplot method for protein quantitation in MS datasets

### Description
Thirty commercial proteins were prepared at 1.5 pmol/µL in three different subsets of 10 proteins each. Proteins from these subsets were spiked to a 15-µg Escherichia coli background in different amounts and five different mixtures were prepared in triplicates. The final amount of each protein in each mixture was either 100, 200 or 400 fmol/µg of E. coli background for the subsets marked as 1, 2 and 4, respectively. The generated dataset with known concentrations of spiked-in proteins was used to evaluate the performance of several processing tools of MS proteomics datasets.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested using the sequential in-solution Lys-C/trypsin digestion protocol. Briefly, 15µg of each sample were dissolved in 30 µL of 6 M urea 0.2 M NH4HCO3, reduced with dithiothreitol (10 mM, 37 ºC, 60 min), and alkylated with iodoacetamide (20 mM, 25 ºC, 30 min). Subsequently, samples were diluted to 2 M urea, digested overnight with Lys-C at 37 ºC, and then diluted 2-fold again and digested overnight with trypsin at 37 ºC. Digested peptides were desalted using a C18 membrane packed on a pipette tip (3M, 66883-U), evaporated to dryness and dissolved in 30 µL of 0.1 % formic acid in water.  The peptides mixtures were analyzed by online nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC–MS/MS) using an EASY-nLC system (Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark) connected to the LTQ Orbitrap Velos instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) through a nanoelectrospray ion source. An aliquot of 2.5 µL of each mixture was loaded directly onto the analytical HPLC column (120 mm × 75 μm i.d., 3 μm particle size, Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd.) and separated by liquid chromatography. Chromatographic gradients started at 97% buffer A and 3% buffer B with a flow rate of 300 nL/min, and gradually increased to 93% buffer A and 7% buffer B in 1 min, and to 65% buffer A/35% buffer B in 120 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 10 min with 10% buffer A/90% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile.    The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.2 kV and source temperature at 250 °C. Ultramark 1621 for the FT mass analyzer was used for external calibration prior to the analyses and a subsequent internal calibration (lock-mass) was performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.1200. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, with full MS scans used over a mass range of m/z 250–2,000 with detection in the Orbitrap (1 microscan, resolution of 60,000). Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 1e6, dynamic exclusion (60 s), and charge state filtering disqualifying singly charged peptides was activated. In each cycle of data-dependent acquisition analysis, following each survey scan, the twenty most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5,000 were selected for fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 35%. Fragment ion spectra produced via collision-induced dissociation (CID) were acquired in the ion trap, with AGC set to 5e4, an isolation window of 2.0 m/z, an activation time of 0.1 ms, and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v2.2.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using Proteome Discovery software suite (v1.4) and Mascot (v2.5) as search engine. Acquired data were searched against an in-house generated database containing all the spiked-in proteins, and the E. coli Swissprot protein database (November 2015 version). Precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm at the MS1 level and to 0.5 Da at the fragment ion level. Up to three missed cleavages for trypsin were allowed. Oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were considered as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was evaluated by using a decoy database and it was set to a maximum of 1%. Peptide areas were extracted with the “Precursor Area Ion Detector” module of Proteome Discoverer with a mass tolerance of 2 ppm

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Statistics, Mass spectrometry, Msstats

### Affiliations
Centre de Regulació Genòmica
CRG/UPF Proteomics Unit, Centre de Regulació Genòmica, 08003 Barcelona, Spain

### Submitter
Eduard Sabidó

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabidó
CRG/UPF Proteomics Unit, Centre de Regulació Genòmica, 08003 Barcelona, Spain


