### Accession
PXD010255

### Title
Oxadiazolone derivatives against M. tuberculosis

### Description
Oxadiazolone (OX) derivatives have been investigated for their antimycobacterial activity against three pathogenic slow-growing mycobacteria: Mycobacterium marinum, Mycobacterium bovis BCG and the avirulent Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M. tb) mc26230. The encouraging MIC values obtained prompted us to test them against virulent M. tb H37Rv growth either in broth medium or inside macrophages. The OX compounds displayed a diversity of action and were found to act either on extracellular M. tb growth only with moderated MIC, or both intracellularly on infected macrophages as well as extracellularly on bacterial growth. One OX derivatives, HPOX, was selected and used in a competitive labelling/enrichment assay against the activity-based probe Desthiobiotin-FP in order to identify its putative target(s). This approach, combined with mass spectrometry, identified 18 potential candidates, all being serine or cysteine enzymes involved in M. tb lipid metabolism and/or in cell wall biosynthesis. Among them, Ag85A, CaeA, TesA, KasA and MetA have been reported as essential for in vitro growth of M. tb and/or its survival and persistence inside macrophages. Overall, our findings support the assumption that OX derivatives may represent a novel class of multi-target inhibitors leading to the arrest of M. tb growth through a cumulative inhibition of a large number of Ser- and Cys-containing enzymes involved in various important physiological processes.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strains and growth condition. M. marinum ATCC BAA-535/M, M. bovis BCG Pasteur 1173P2 and M. tb mc26230 (H37Rv ΔRD1 ΔpanCD28) strains were routinely grown in Middlebrook 7H9 broth (BD Difco) supplemented with 0.2% glycerol, 0.05% Tween 80 (Sigma-Aldrich), 10% oleic acid, albumin, dextrose, catalase (OADC enrichment; BD Difco) (7H9-S) and 24 µg/mL D-panthothenate (M. tb mc26230). Activity-based protein profiling (ABPP). Homogeneous bacterial suspension of M. tb mc26230 in 7H9 S was adjusted at an OD600 of 60 and then incubated with the selected HPOX inhibitor (400 µM final concentration) or DMSO (control) at 37°C for 2-3 h. under gentle shaking at 75 rpm. Bacteria were then washed 3 times with PBS containing 0.05% Tween 80, resuspended in PBS buffer at a 1:1 (w/v) ratio; and then lysed by mechanical disruption on a BioSpec Beadbeater. Both HPOX-treated M. tb mc26230 and DMSO-control lysate samples (750 µL – 0.75 mg total proteins) were labeled with 2 µM Desthiobiotin-FP probe for 90 min at room temperature. Samples were enriched for biotinylated proteins using Nanolink streptavidin magnetic beads 0.8 µm (Solulink), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The resulting captured biotinylated proteins solution was mixed with 5X Laemmli reducing sample buffer, and heated at 95°C for 5 min. The released denatured proteins were subjected to tryptic digestion, peptide extraction, and LC-MS/MS analysis as described below.  Protein identification and quantification. Protein extract were loaded and stacked on a NuPAGE gel (Life Technologies). Stained bands were submitted to an in-gel trypsin digestion.56 Peptides extracts were reconstituted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 4% acetonitrile and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) online with a an Ultimate 3000RSLC nano chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were processed using the MaxQuant computational proteomics platform, version 1.5.3.8 using a UniProt M. tuberculosis ATCC 25618 database (date 2018.01; 2164 entries). The statistical analysis was done with Perseus program (version 1.5.6.0).  The LFQ normalised intensities were uploaded from the proteinGroups.txt file. First, proteins marked as contaminant, reverse hits, and “only identified by site” were discarded. Quantifiable proteins were defined as those detected in at least 100% of samples in at least one condition. Protein LFQ normalized intensities were base 2 logarithmized to obtain a normal distribution. Missing values were replaced using data imputation by randomly selecting from a normal distribution centred on the lower edge of the intensity values that simulates signals of low abundant proteins using default parameters (a downshift of 1.8 standard deviation and a width of 0.3 of the original distribution). In this way, imputation of missing values in the controls allows statistical comparison of protein abundances that are present only in the inhibitors samples. To determine whether a given detected protein was specifically differential a two-sample t-test were done using permutation based FDR-controlled at 0.01 and 0.05 and employing 250 permutations. The p value was adjusted using a scaling factor s0 with a value of 1.

### Publication Abstract
A set of 19 oxadiazolone (OX) derivatives have been investigated for their antimycobacterial activity against two pathogenic slow-growing mycobacteria, Mycobacterium marinum and Mycobacterium bovis BCG, and the avirulent Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M. tb) mc<sup>2</sup>6230. The encouraging minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC) values obtained prompted us to test them against virulent M. tb H37Rv growth either in broth medium or inside macrophages. The OX compounds displayed a diversity of action and were found to act either on extracellular M. tb growth only with moderated MIC<sub>50</sub>, or both intracellularly on infected macrophages as well as extracellularly on bacterial growth. Of interest, all OX derivatives exhibited very low toxicity towards host macrophages. Among the six potential OXs identified, HPOX, a selective inhibitor of extracellular M. tb growth, was selected and further used in a competitive labelling/enrichment assay against the activity-based probe Desthiobiotin-FP, in order to identify its putative target(s). This approach, combined with mass spectrometry, identified 18 potential candidates, all being serine or cysteine enzymes involved in M. tb lipid metabolism and/or in cell wall biosynthesis. Among them, Ag85A, CaeA, TesA, KasA and MetA have been reported as essential for in vitro growth of M. tb and/or its survival and persistence inside macrophages. Overall, our findings support the assumption that OX derivatives may represent a novel class of multi-target inhibitors leading to the arrest of M. tb growth through a cumulative inhibition of a large number of Ser- and Cys-containing enzymes involved in various important physiological processes.

### Keywords
Tuberculosis, Lipolytic enzyme inhibitors, Activity-based probe (abp), Oxadiazolone

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
Aix-Marseille Univ, Inserm, CNRS, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, CRCM, Marseille Protéomique

### Submitter
Luc Camoin

### Lab Head
Dr Luc Camoin
Aix-Marseille Univ, Inserm, CNRS, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, CRCM, Marseille Protéomique


