### Accession
PXD012405

### Title
Environmental Arginine Controls Multinuclear Giant Cell Metabolism and Formation

### Description
Multinucleated giant cells (MGCs) are implicated in many diseases including schistosomiasis, sarcoidosis and arthritis. Formation of MGCs is energy intensive to enforce membrane fusion and cytoplasmic expansion. Here we used receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-Β ligand (RANKL) induced osteoclastogenesis to model MGC formation. We found amino acid (AA) scarcity controls MGC formation and reveal specific requirements for extracellular arginine in RANKL cellular programming. Indeed, systemic arginine restriction improved outcome in multiple murine arthritis models, by inducing preosteoclast metabolic quiescence, associated with a dysregulated tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, and diverted metabolic fluxes from central metabolic pathways independent of mTORC1 activity or global transcriptional and translational inhibition. A conserved metabolic mechanism occurred in IL-4 induced MGCs. Strikingly, we demonstrate that restriction of multiple AAs triggered metabolic adaptation and blocked MGC formation and each was rescued by their downstream metabolites. These data establish how environmental nutrients control the metabolic fate of polykaryons and suggest metabolic ways to manipulate MGC-associated pathologies and bone remodeling.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed in 8 M urea, 10 mM HEPES (pH 8), 10 mM DTT and digested sequentially with LysC and Trypsin. Peptides were desalted on stacked C18 Stage Tips and eluted using 80% acetonitrile. MS measurements were performed in four replicates on a Q-exactive HF-X instrument (Kelstrup, 2018).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.2) was used to analyze MS raw files (Cox, 2008). MS/MS spectra were searched against the mouse Uniprot FASTA database (Version July 2015, 54518 entries) and a common contaminants database (247 entries) by the Andromeda search engine (58). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was applied as fixed and N-terminal acetylation, deamidation at NQ, and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied at the peptide and protein level. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation of up to 7 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Nonlinear retention time alignment of all measured samples was performed in MaxQuant. Peptide identifications were matched across all samples within a time window of 1 min of the aligned retention times. A library for 'match between runs' in MaxQuant was built from duplicate and additional single shot MS runs from MACS enriched cell types. Protein identification required at least 1 'razor peptide' in MaxQuant. A minimum ratio count of 1 was required for valid quantification events via MaxQuant's Label Free Quantification algorithm (MaxLFQ). Downstream bioinformatic analysis was conducted in the Perseus environment (Tyanova, 2016). Each quantified protein was required to be identified in 3 out of 4 replicates of at least one condition. Protein LFQ intensities were logarithmized to the base 2 and missing values imputed from a random normal distribution centered on the detection limit. Data was imported into Perseus, filtered to keep only proteins where the coefficient of variation of overall abundance was greater than the coefficients of variation in every condition, to select for proteins that consistently vary between conditions but not between replicates, and converted to z-scores. Average abundances among different conditions were compared by Student’s t-test (permutation-based FDR = 0.05, s0 = 0.05) and used to select proteins with differential abundance between conditions. As in the transcriptomic analysis, hierarchical clustering with complete linkage of the z-score-transformed data segregated the samples by experimental conditions. Local enrichment of interactors was first evaluated and visualized with the STRING database version 10.5 for Mus musculus, displaying largest connected component with an interaction score > 0.7 allowing 10 interactors on the first or second shell (Fig. S8C).

### Publication Abstract
Multinucleated giant cells (MGCs) are implicated in many diseases including schistosomiasis, sarcoidosis and arthritis. MGC generation is energy intensive to enforce membrane fusion and cytoplasmic expansion. Using receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-&#x392; ligand (RANKL) induced osteoclastogenesis to model MGC formation, here we report RANKL cellular programming requires extracellular arginine. Systemic arginine restriction improves outcome in multiple murine arthritis models and its removal induces preosteoclast metabolic quiescence, associated with impaired tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle function and metabolite induction. Effects of arginine deprivation on osteoclastogenesis are independent of mTORC1 activity or global transcriptional and translational inhibition. Arginine scarcity also dampens generation of IL-4 induced MGCs. Strikingly, in extracellular arginine absence, both cell types display flexibility as their formation can be restored with select arginine precursors. These data establish how environmental amino acids control the metabolic fate of polykaryons and suggest metabolic ways to manipulate MGC-associated pathologies and bone remodelling.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Preosteoclasts, Rankl, Arginine

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Institute for Vascular Biology, Center for Physiology and Pharmacology, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Gernot Schabbauer
Institute for Vascular Biology, Center for Physiology and Pharmacology, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria


