### Accession
PXD008136

### Title
S2 exosome MS -  Retrovirus-like Gag Protein Arc1 Binds RNA and Traffics across Synaptic Boutons

### Description
Exosomes were isolated from S2 cells and subjected to MS. Total protein content of exsomes were compared to total proteins from S2 cells to determine which proteins were enriched and abundant in exosomes.

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes were isolated from S2 cells. Exosomes or S2 cells themselves were boilied in loading buffer and run on a short gel. The gel slices were then subjected to in gel digestion, then LC/MS/MS was performed on the samples.

### Data Protocol
Search results were loaded into the Scaffold Viewer (Proteome Software, Inc.) for assessment of protein identification probabilities and label free quantitation. Raw data files were processed with Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4) prior to searching with Mascot Server (version 2.5) against the Uniprot database.. Search results were loaded into the Scaffold Viewer (Proteome Software, Inc.) for assessment of protein identification probabilities and label free quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Arc/Arg3.1 is required for synaptic plasticity and cognition, and mutations in this gene are linked to&#xa0;autism and schizophrenia. Arc bears a domain resembling retroviral/retrotransposon Gag-like proteins, which multimerize into a capsid that packages viral RNA. The significance of such a domain in a plasticity molecule is uncertain. Here, we report that the Drosophila Arc1 protein forms capsid-like structures that bind darc1 mRNA in neurons and is&#xa0;loaded into extracellular vesicles that are transferred from motorneurons to muscles. This loading and&#xa0;transfer depends on the darc1-mRNA 3' untranslated region, which contains retrotransposon-like sequences. Disrupting transfer blocks synaptic plasticity, suggesting that transfer of dArc1 complexed with its mRNA is required for this function. Notably, cultured cells also release extracellular vesicles containing the Gag region of the Copia retrotransposon complexed with its own mRNA. Taken together, our results point to a trans-synaptic mRNA transport mechanism involving retrovirus-like capsids and extracellular vesicles.

### Keywords
Arc, Drosophila, Nmj, Exosomes, Darc1, S2

### Affiliations
Umass Medical School

### Submitter
Travis Thomson

### Lab Head
Dr Travis Carle Thomson
Umass Medical School


