### Accession
PXD045686

### Title
Targeting neddylation is a novel therapeutic strategy for lupus by reconstructing double negative T cell homeostasis

### Description
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disorder with systemic inflammation, autoantibody accumulation and organ damage. The abnormalities of double-negative (DN) T cells are considered as an important commander of SLE. Neddylation, an important type of protein post-translational modification (PTM), has been well-proved to regulate T cell-mediated immune response. However, the function of neddylation in SLE remains largely unexplored. Here, we reported that neddylation inactivation with MLN4924 or genetic abrogation of Ube2m in T cells prevented SLE development for decreased DN T cell accumulation. Further investigations revealed that inactivation of neddylation blocked Bim ubiquitination degradation and maintained Bim level in DN T cells, contributing to the apoptosis of the accumulated DN T cells for Fas mutation. Then double knockout (KO) lupus-prone mice (Ube2m-/-Bim-/-lpr) were generated and results showed that loss of Bim interrupted the improvement of DN T cell apoptosis and the consequential relieved lupus symptoms for Ube2m KO. Our findings identified that neddylation inactivation promoted Bim-mediated apoptosis of DN T cells and prevented lupus progress. Clinically, we also found the percentages of DN T cells were improved accompanied with reduced apoptosis of DN T cells in SLE patients. Moreover, the neddylation of Cullin1 was higher while Bim level was decreased in SLE patients compared with healthy control. Meantime, the inhibition of neddylation induced Bim-dependent apoptosis of DN T cells isolated from SLE patients. Together, these findings provide the first evidence of the neddylation role in lupus development, suggesting a novel therapeutic strategy for lupus.

### Sample Protocol
DN T cells of spleens from mice were isolated with fluorescent cell sorting with PE-anti mouse CD3, PE-CY7-anti mouse CD4, APC anti-mouse CD8 antibodies using BD FACSAria (BD Biosciences).

### Data Protocol
The 4D label-free quantitative proteomic analysis was performed by Jingjie PTM BioLabs including protein extraction, trypsin digestion, HPLC fractionation, LC-MS/MS analysis, and bioinformatics analysis according to the method described previously.

### Publication Abstract
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), a severe autoimmune disorder, is characterized by systemic inflammatory response, autoantibody accumulation and damage to organs. The dysregulation of double-negative (DN) T cells is considered as a crucial commander during SLE. Neddylation, a significant type of protein post-translational modification (PTM), has been well-proved to regulate T cell-mediated immune response. However, the function of neddylation in SLE is still unknown. Here, we reported that neddylation inactivation with MLN4924, a specific inhibitor of NEDD8-activating enzyme E1 (NAE1), or genetic abrogation of Ube2m in T cells decreased DN T cell accumulation and attenuated murine lupus development. Further investigations revealed that inactivation of neddylation blocked Bim ubiquitination degradation and maintained Bim level in DN T cells, contributing to the apoptosis of the accumulated DN T cells in lupus mice. Then double knockout (KO) lupus-prone mice (Ube2m<sup>-/-</sup>Bim<sup>-/-</sup>lpr) were generated and results showed that loss of Bim reduced Ube2m deficiency-induced apoptosis in DN T cells and reversed the alleviated lupus progression. Our findings identified that neddylation inactivation promoted Bim-mediated DN T cell apoptosis and attenuated lupus progression. Clinically, we also found that in SLE patients, the proportion of DN T cells was raised and their apoptosis was reduced. Moreover, compared to healthy groups, SLE patients exhibited decreased Bim levels and elevated Cullin1 neddylation levels. Meantime, the inhibition of neddylation induced Bim-dependent apoptosis of DN T cells isolated from SLE patients. Altogether, our findings provide the direct evidence about the function of neddylation during lupus, suggesting a promising therapeutic approach for this disease.

### Keywords
Neddylation; ube2m; systemic lupus erythematosus (sle); bim; double negative t cells (dn t cells); apoptosis

### Affiliations
Zhejiang Chinese Medical University,Hangzhou,China
Zhejiang Chinese Medical University

### Submitter
Yun Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yun Zhang
Zhejiang Chinese Medical University,Hangzhou,China


