### Accession
PXD009301

### Title
Engineered Peptide Barcodes for Binding Protein Generation

### Description
Binding protein generation relies on laborious screening cascades that process candidate molecules individually. To break with this paradigm, we developed NestLink, a binder selection and identification technology able to biophysically characterize thousands of library members at once without handling individual clones at any stage of the process. NestLink builds on genetically fused barcoding peptides, termed flycodes, which are designed for maximal detectability by mass spectrometry and serve as unique molecular identifiers for accurate deep sequencing. We applied NestLink to overcome current limitations of binder generation. Rare binders against an integral membrane protein were identified directly in the cellular environment of a human pathogen. Hundreds of binder candidates were simultaneously ranked according to kinetic parameters. Adverse effects of target immobilization were overcome by selecting nanobodies against an ABC transporter entirely in solution. NestLink may provide a basis for the selection of tailored binder characteristics directly in tissues or in living organisms

### Sample Protocol
Flycode isolation and LC-MS/MS 5 µl of a control binder attached to 28 different flycodes of known sequence (NB-control, see below) at an absorbance of 0.05 (280 nm) was added to both columns as an LC-MS/MS standard. The resins were resuspended in 100 µl of buffer TH (20 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8.5, 150 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM CaCl2) containing 2.4 units of thrombin (Novagen, #69671-3) and incubated over night at 20°C. The His-tagged flycodes were eluted by centrifugation at 100 g for 10 sec, followed by washing with 2 x 300 µl buffer TH. The flycodes were subsequently pulled down by incubation for 1 h at 20°C with 80 µl Ni-NTA slurry (Qiagen), followed by centrifugation at 800 g for 5 min. The resins were transferred to Mini Bio-Spin® Chromatography Columns (Bio-Rad),  washed with 500 µl of buffer TRY (50 mM TEAB pH 8.5, 50 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM CaCl2) and subsequently resuspended in 100 µl buffer TRY containing 0.5 µg trypsin (Promega, #V5113), followed by incubation over night at 37°C. The flycode mixture (severed from His-tags) was eluted from the columns by centrifugation for 30 sec at 100 g, followed by a 100 µl wash (50 mM TEAB pH 8.5, 150 mM NaCl) and addition of 20 µl of 5 % (v/v) TFA and 200 µl of 3 % (v/v) ACN, 0.1 % (v/v) TFA to the elution. The eluted flycode mixture was loaded onto ZipTips (Millipore, #ZTC185960) pre-treated by washing with 200 µl of 60 % (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) , 0.1 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 200 µl of methanol and 200 µl of 3 % (v/v) ACN, 0.1 % (v/v) TFA. The ZipTips were washed by 200 µl of 3 % (v/v) ACN, 0.1 % (v/v) TFA, followed by elution with 2 x 40 µl of 60 % (v/v) ACN, 0.1 % (v/v) TFA and lyophilization of the elution and re-solubilization of the flycodes in 15 µl of 3 % (v/v) ACN, 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid (FA). For application I, flycodes were analyzed using an Easy-nLC 1000 HPLC system operating in single column mode coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). 2 µl of the resuspended flycode solution was injected onto an in-house made capillary column packed with reverse-phase material (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm; column dimension 150 mm x 0.075 mm, Temp. 50C). The column was equilibrated with solvent A (0.1 % formic acid (FA) in water) and peptides were eluted with a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min using the following gradient: 5 - 20 % solvent B (0.1 % FA in ACN) in 60 min, 20 - 97 % solvent B in 10 min. High accuracy mass spectra were acquired with an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using the following parameter: scan range of 300-1500 m/z, AGC-target of 5e5, resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200), and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Data-dependent MS/MS spectra were recorded in rapid scan mode in the linear ion trap using quadrupole isolation (1.6 m/z window), AGC target of 1e4, 35 ms maximum injection time, HCD-fragmentation with 30 % collision energy, a maximum cycle time of 3 sec, and all available parallelizable time was enabled. Mono isotopic precursor signals were selected for MS/MS with charge states between 2 and 6 and a minimum signal intensity of 5e4. Dynamic exclusion was set to 25 sec and an exclusion window of 10 ppm. After data collection peak lists were generated using automated rule based converter control22 and Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data analysis The two LC-MS/MS runs were aligned in Progenesis QI (Nonlinear Dynamics) with an alignment score of 93.1 %, followed by peak picking with an allowed ion charge of +2 to +5. The fragment spectra with a feature rank-threshold of <5 were exported using deisotoping, charge deconvolution and an ion fragment count limit of 1,000. Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science) was used for flycode identification by a search against database p1875_db8 (release 2016-07-11, generated as described above) concatenated with an in-house built contaminant database (262 common contaminates). Precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. In addition, Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were filtered for FDR less than 0.1% by the Peptide Prophet algorithm23 and protein identifications were filtered for FDR less than 1.0% containing at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm24. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Scaffold spectrum report was imported into Progenesis QI. The two LC-MS/MS runs were normalized against the spiked reference NB-control (see below) by choosing NB-control as a standard protein (normalization factor = 0.81). The MS1 intensity integrals of all non-conflicting flycode features were summed for each binder. We refer to this sum as “binder abundance”. The ratios between the binder abundances at the two columns were plotted for each individual sybody (Fig. 4b, y-axis).

### Publication Abstract
Binding protein generation typically relies on laborious screening cascades that process candidate molecules individually. We have developed NestLink, a binder selection and identification technology able to biophysically characterize thousands of library members at once without the need to handle individual clones at any stage of the process. NestLink uses genetically encoded barcoding peptides termed flycodes, which were designed for maximal detectability by mass spectrometry and support accurate deep sequencing. We demonstrate NestLink's capacity to overcome the current limitations of binder-generation methods in three applications. First, we show that hundreds of binder candidates can be simultaneously ranked according to kinetic parameters. Next, we demonstrate deep mining of a nanobody immune repertoire for membrane protein binders, carried out entirely in solution without target immobilization. Finally, we identify rare binders against an integral membrane protein directly in the cellular environment of a human pathogen. NestLink opens avenues for the selection of tailored binder characteristics directly in tissues or in living organisms.

### Keywords
Peptide barcode

### Affiliations
Institute of Medical Microbiology University of Zurich Gloriastrasse 28/30 CH-8006 Zürich/Switzerland Office: +41 (0)44 634 53 96 Lab1: +41 (0)44 634 53 24  Lab2: +41 (0)44 634 53 37 homepage: http://www.imm.uzh.ch/research/experimental/teamseeger.html Attachments area
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Bernd Roschitzki

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Markus Seeger
Institute of Medical Microbiology University of Zurich Gloriastrasse 28/30 CH-8006 Zürich/Switzerland Office: +41 (0)44 634 53 96 Lab1: +41 (0)44 634 53 24  Lab2: +41 (0)44 634 53 37 homepage: http://www.imm.uzh.ch/research/experimental/teamseeger.html Attachments area


