### Accession
PXD000923

### Title
Rice Pistil LC-MSMS -  Analysis of Phosphoproteome in Rice Pistil

### Description
Here we report a phosphoproteomic study on mature pistil of rice

### Sample Protocol
Using IMAC enrichment, HILIC fraction and high-accuracy MS instrument (TripleTOF 5600)

### Data Protocol
the Raw data files were processed into ‘*.mgf’ files, the spectra were searched using Mascot search algorithms against forward and reverse rice protein database from MSU/TIGR Rice Genome Annotation project. Search parameters were same as the above. For obtaining Ascore values, mzIdentML-files were created using scaffold (Version 4.0.5, Proteome Software Inc.)

### Publication Abstract
As the female reproductive part of a flower, the pistil consists of the ovary, style, and stigma, and is a critical organ for the process from pollen recognition to fertilization and seed formation. Previous studies on pollen-pistil interaction mainly focused on gene expression changes with comparative transcriptomics or proteomics method. However, studies on protein PTMs are still lacking. Here we report a phosphoproteomic study on mature pistil of rice. Using IMAC enrichment, hydrophilic interaction chromatography fraction and high-accuracy MS instrument (TripleTOF 5600), 2347 of high-confidence (Ascore &#x2265; 19, p &#x2264; 0.01), phosphorylation sites corresponding to 1588 phosphoproteins were identified. Among them, 1369 phosphorylation sites within 654 phosphoproteins were newly identified; 41 serine phosphorylation motifs, which belong to three groups: proline-directed, basophilic, and acidic motifs were identified after analysis by motif-X. Two hundred and one genes whose phosphopeptides were identified here showed tissue-specific expression in pistil based on information mining of previous microarray data. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000923 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000923). This study will help us to understand pistil development and pollination on the posttranslational level.

### Keywords
Phosphorproteome, Pistil, Rice

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Plant Germplasm Enhancement and Speciality Agriculture, Wuhan Botanical Garden of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China
Wuhan botanical garden, Chinese academy of sciences

### Submitter
Kun Wang

### Lab Head
Dr wangkun  
Key Laboratory of Plant Germplasm Enhancement and Speciality Agriculture, Wuhan Botanical Garden of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China


