### Accession
PXD000417

### Title
Arabidopsis cell LC-MSMS -  Proteomics analysis reveals a highly heterogeneous proteasome composition and the post-translational regulation of peptidase activity under pathogen signaling in plants

### Description
26S proteasome was affinity-purified with anti-FLAG beads and separated by 2-DE method. Each spot was cut and digested by Trypsin enzyme, which finaly applied for LC-MS/MS nalysis using a LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific). The obtained spectra were compared against 35,386 sequences in The Arabidopsis Information Resource 10 (TAIR10; http://www.arabidopsis.org/) using the MASCOT server (version 2.4; Matrix Science) with the following search parameters: threshold set-off at 0.05 in the ion-score cut-off; protein identification cut-off set to two assigned spectra per predicted protein; peptide tolerance at 10 ppm; MS/MS tolerance at +/- 0.5 Da; peptide charge of 2+ or 3+; trypsin as the enzyme and allowing up to one missed cleavage; carboxymethylation on cysteines as a fixed modification and oxidation on methionine as a variable modification.

### Sample Protocol
26S proteasome was affinity-purified with anti-FLAG beads and separated by 2-DE method. Each spot was cut and digested by Trypsin enzyme, which finaly applied for LC-MS/MS nalysis using a LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific). The obtained spectra were compared against 35,386 sequences in The Arabidopsis Information Resource 10 (TAIR10; http://www.arabidopsis.org/) using the MASCOT server (version 2.4; Matrix Science) with the following search parameters: threshold set-off at 0.05 in the ion-score cut-off; protein identification cut-off set to two assigned spectra per predicted protein; peptide tolerance at 10 ppm; MS/MS tolerance at +/- 0.5 Da; peptide charge of 2+ or 3+; trypsin as the enzyme and allowing up to one missed cleavage; carboxymethylation on cysteines as a fixed modification and oxidation on methionine as a variable modification.

### Data Protocol
26S proteasome was affinity-purified with anti-FLAG beads and separated by 2-DE method. Each spot was cut and digested by Trypsin enzyme, which finaly applied for LC-MS/MS nalysis using a LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific). The obtained spectra were compared against 35,386 sequences in The Arabidopsis Information Resource 10 (TAIR10; http://www.arabidopsis.org/) using the MASCOT server (version 2.4; Matrix Science) with the following search parameters: threshold set-off at 0.05 in the ion-score cut-off; protein identification cut-off set to two assigned spectra per predicted protein; peptide tolerance at 10 ppm; MS/MS tolerance at +/- 0.5 Da; peptide charge of 2+ or 3+; trypsin as the enzyme and allowing up to one missed cleavage; carboxymethylation on cysteines as a fixed modification and oxidation on methionine as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
The proteasome is a large multisubunit complex that plays a crucial role in the removal of damaged or selective ubiquitinated proteins, thereby allowing quality control of cellular proteins and restricted regulation of diverse cellular signaling in eukaryotic cells. Proteasome-dependent protein degradation is involved in almost all aspects of plant growth and responses to environmental stresses including pathogen resistance. Although the molecular mechanism for specifying targets by ubiquitin ligases is well understood, the detailed characterization of the plant proteasome complex remains unclear. One of the most important features of the plant proteasome is that most subunits are encoded by duplicate genes, suggesting the highly heterogeneous composition of this proteasome. Here, we performed affinity purification and a combination of 2-dimensional electrophoresis and mass spectrometry, which identified the detailed composition of paralogous and modified proteins. Moreover, these proteomics approaches revealed that specific subunit composition and proteasome peptidase activity were affected by pathogen-derived MAMPs, flg22 treatment. Interestingly, flg22 treatment did not alter mRNA expression levels of the peptidase genes PBA, PBB1/2, PBE1/2, and total proteasome levels remained unchanged by flg22 as well. These results demonstrate the finely tuned mechanism that regulates proteasome function via putative post-translational modifications in response to environmental stress in plants.

### Keywords
26sp

### Affiliations
Faculty of Science

### Submitter
Takeo Sato

### Lab Head
Dr Takeo Sato
Faculty of Science


