### Accession
PXD015507

### Title
Identification of CTPS1 Filament Interacting Proteins_2019 dataset

### Description
CTP synthase (CTPS) catalyzes the formation of CTP in de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis pathway. Compartmentalization of CTPS into filamentous structure is evolutionarily conserved from E.coli, yeast, Drosophila, mice to humans. Previously, we demonstrated that histidine (His) mediated methylation promotes the formation of CTPS filament to suppress the enzymatic activity and preserve CTPS protein under Gln deprivation, which promotes cancer cell growth after stress alleviation. However, it remains unclear where and how these enigmatic structures are assembled. Here we used APEX2-mediated in vivo proximity labeling to identify proteins involve in the formation of human CTPS filaments.

### Sample Protocol
We exogenously expressed FLAG-CTPS1-APEX2 in HEp-2 to induce filament formation under different condition, and pull down the filaments and its interacting proteins. TMT labeling strategy followed by 2DLC-MS/MS analysis (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos) to identify CTPS1 Filament Interacting Proteins.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discover (version 2.2) (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) was used to analyze and quantify MS and MS/MS data.

### Publication Abstract
Under metabolic stress, cellular components can assemble into distinct membraneless organelles for adaptation. One such example is cytidine 5'-triphosphate synthase (CTPS, for which there are CTPS1 and CTPS2 forms in mammals), which forms filamentous structures under glutamine deprivation. We have previously demonstrated that histidine (His)-mediated methylation regulates the formation of CTPS filaments to suppress enzymatic activity and preserve the CTPS protein under glutamine deprivation, which promotes cancer cell growth after stress alleviation. However, it remains unclear where and how these enigmatic structures are assembled. Using CTPS-APEX2-mediated <i>in vivo</i> proximity labeling, we found that synaptosome-associated protein 29 (SNAP29) regulates the spatiotemporal filament assembly of CTPS along the cytokeratin network in a keratin 8 (KRT8)-dependent manner. Knockdown of SNAP29 interfered with assembly and relaxed the filament-induced suppression of CTPS enzymatic activity. Furthermore, APEX2 proximity labeling of keratin 18 (KRT18) revealed a spatiotemporal association of SNAP29 with cytokeratin in response to stress. Super-resolution imaging suggests that during CTPS filament formation, SNAP29 interacts with CTPS along the cytokeratin network. This study links the cytokeratin network to the regulation of metabolism by compartmentalization of metabolic enzymes during nutrient deprivation.

### Keywords
Tmt6 labeling, Apex2, Lc-ms/ms, Ctps1

### Affiliations
Chang Gung University
Molecular Medicine Research Center, Chang Gung University

### Submitter
Yu-Tsun Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Jau-Song Yu
Molecular Medicine Research Center, Chang Gung University


