### Accession
PXD045987

### Title
Mass spectrometry analysis of chromosomal passenger complex proteins and kinetochore proteins in Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
We performed chemical crosslinking mass spectrometry of native protein complexes purified from Trypanosoma brucei procyclic cells to obtain protein-protein interaction information for the chromosomal passenger complex (CPC) and kinetochore complex. Crosslinks among CPC subunits were detected using YFP-AUK1, while those among KKT8 complex subunits were detected in the YFP-KKIP1 sample. We also performed immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry of CPC subunits (full-length proteins and fragments) to identify co-purifying proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation crosslinking mass spectrometry (IP-CLMS): For cross-linking IP-MS experiments, Trypanosoma brucei procyclic cell cultures expressing YFP-AUK1 or YFP-KKIP1 were scaled up to 1,600 mL. Cell cultures were treated with 10 μM MG132 for 4 h to enrich for cells in metaphase. Cell lysis and immunoprecipitation steps were carried out as described above. After four washes with modified BH0.15 containing protease inhibitors, phosphatase inhibitors and 2 mM DTT, beads were washed three times with 25 mM HEPES pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl. Proteins were then cross-linked on beads with 0.4 mM BS3 (bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 30 min at RT with agitation, followed by three washes in 25 mM HEPES pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl and a further three washes in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were then incubated in 8 M urea dissolved 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate for 10 min at RT with agitation. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM TCEP for 20 min and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 40 min at RT. Proteins were then then pre-digested with 0.4 μg LysC for 2 h at 37°C. The urea concentration in the sample was brought down to < 1 M by addition of 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate before adding CaCl2 (to 2 mM) and 0.7 μg of trypsin for overnight digestion at 37°C. Formic acid was then added to 2%. The cross-linked samples were further processed and analyzed at the proteomics core facility at EMBL Heidelberg. Digested peptides were concentrated and desalted using an OASIS HLB µElution Plate (Waters) according to manufacturer instructions. Crosslinked peptides were enriched using size exclusion chromatography (Leitner et al., 2012). In brief, desalted peptides were reconstituted with SEC buffer (30% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) TFA) and fractionated using a Superdex Peptide PC 3.2/30 column (GE) on a 1200 Infinity HPLC system (Agilent) at a flow rate of 0.05 ml/min. Fractions eluting between 50-70 ul were evaporated to dryness and reconstituted in 30 μl 4% (v/v) ACN in 1% (v/v) FA. Collected fractions were analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC) ‐coupled tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system (Dionex) fitted with a trapping cartridge (µ-Precolumn C18 PepMap 100, 5µm, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, 100 Å) and an analytical column (nanoEase™ M/Z HSS T3 column 75 µm x 250 mm C18, 1.8 µm, 100 Å, Waters). Trapping was carried out with a constant flow of trapping solvent (0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in water) at 30 µL/min onto the trapping column for 6 minutes. Subsequently, peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column using a gradient composed of Solvent A (3% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (3% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) with a constant flow of 0.3 µL/min. The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific, SanJose) mass spectrometer using the nanoFlex source. The peptides were introduced into the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (CoAnn Technologies) and an applied spray voltage of 2.1 kV, instrument was operated in positive mode. The capillary temperature was set at 275°C. Only charge states of 4-8 were included. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 sec. and the intensity threshold was 5e4. Full mass scans were acquired for a mass range 350-1700 m/z in profile mode in the orbitrap with resolution of 120000. The AGC target was set to Standard and the injection time mode was set to Auto. The instrument was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with a cycle time of 3 sec between master scans and MSMS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30000, with a fill time of up to 100 ms and a limitation of 2e5 ions (AGC target). A normalized collision energy of 32 was applied. MS2 data was acquired in profile mode.   Immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry (IP-MS):  Ectopic expression of GFP-tagged CPC subunits (full length proteins or truncations) in trypanosomes was induced with 10 ng/ml doxycycline for 24 hours. YFP-AUK1 was expressed from the endogenous locus. Immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry was performed with anti-GFP antibodies using a method we previously described (Ishii and Akiyoshi, 2020). Peptides were analysed by electrospray tandem mass spectrometry over a standard 60-min gradient using QExactive (Thermo) at the Advanced Proteomics Facility (University of Oxford).

### Data Protocol
Crosslinking mass spectrometry: RAW MS files were searched by the pLink 2 software (Chen et al., 2019) using a FASTA database containing Trypanosoma brucei KKT1–20, KKT22–25, KKIP1, KKIP5, KKIP7, AUK1, CPC1, CPC2, KIN-A, KIN-B, alpha/beta tubulins, and 18 randomly chosen Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteins (as an independent way to determine the threshold of the cutoff score). Search parameters were as follows: maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, fixed modification = carbamidomethyl-Cys, variable modification Oxidation-Met. Precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm.  Immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry:  Peptides were identified by searching tandem mass spectrometry spectra against the T. brucei protein database with MaxQuant (version 2.0.1) with carbamidomethyl cysteine set as a fixed modification and oxidization (Met), phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, and Tyr), and acetylation (Lys) set as variable modifications. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The first peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm (protein FDR 1%).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kinetochore, Crosslinking mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Bungo Akiyoshi

### Lab Head
Dr Bungo Akiyoshi
University of Edinburgh


