### Accession
PXD000305

### Title
Proteomics identifies ubiquitin-proteasome targets and new roles for chromatin-remodelling in the Arabidopsis response to phosphate starvation

### Description
In order to identify new regulators of the phosphate (Pi) starvation signaling pathway in plants, we analyzed variation in the abundance of nuclear-enriched nuclear proteins isolated from Arabidopsis roots that depends on Pi supply. We used 2-D Fluorescence Difference Gel Electrophoresis and MALDI-TOF/TOF techniques for nuclear proteome separation, visualization and relative protein abundance quantification and identification. Pi-controlled proteins identified in our analysis included components of the chromatin remodeling, DNA replication, and mRNA splicing machineries. In addition, by combining Pi starvation conditions with proteasome inhibitor treatments, we characterized the role of the ubiquitin- (Ub)-proteasome system (UPS), a major mechanism for targeted protein degradation in eukaryotes, in the control of the stability of Pi-responsive proteins. Among Pi-responsive proteins, the histone chaperone NAP1;2 was selected for further characterization, and was shown to display differential nucleo-cytoplasmic accumulation in response to Pi deprivation. We also found that mutants affecting three members of the NAP1 family accumulate lower Pi levels and display reduced expression of Pi starvation-inducible genes, reflecting a regulatory role for these chromatin-remodelling proteins in Pi homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis plants used in this study, including mutants and transgenic plants, were of the Columbia-0 (Col-0) ecotype, except in the case of GFP–VIP3-expressing plants that were on the Slavice-0 (Sav-0) background [40]. Mutants in NAP1 genes correspond to the following T-DNA insertion lines; SALK_013610 (nap1;1-1), SAIL_373_H11 (nap1;2-1), and SALK_131746 (nap1;3-1) and were obtained from the ABRC stock center. Homozygous m123 triple mutants were obtained in our laboratory by genetic crossing. NAP1;2–GFP construct was obtained as follows. NAP1;2 cDNA was PCR amplified from the U25256 clone (provided by ABRC) by using Gateway™ compatible primers (Supplemental Table 1). The resulting PCR product was cloned into the pDONR207 plasmid by means of the BP reaction (Invitrogen). Next, NAP1;2 cDNA was transferred to the pGWB6 vector [41] by using the LR reaction (Invitrogen). Construct integrity was verified by Sanger sequencing before transformation of Agrobacterium C58C1 competent cells. Transformation of Arabidopsis plants (both wild type Col-0 and mutant nap1;2-1 backgrounds) was performed by the floral dip method.

### Data Protocol
In plants, the UPS is involved in Pi homeostasis and regulates many adaptive responses to Pi deprivation [36]. Despite this, the identity of its targets in these processes remains largely unknown. In order to identify Pi signaling components regulated by the UPS, we again took advantage of DIGE techniques to analyze variations in the nuclear proteome of Arabidopsis roots that depend on Pi supply but in a proteasome-dependent manner. Towards this, Pi starvation stress conditions were combined or not with proteasome inhibitor MG132 treatments (Supplemental Fig. 1). Therefore, proteome samples from Pi-starved plants were compared to those obtained from plants treated with MG132, as well as with samples from plants grown under Pi-sufficient conditions. For each condition, two biological replicates (corresponding to 4 nuclear protein extractions; see Materials and methods and Supplemental Table 2) were used in DIGE analyses (the dye swap allowed for three comparisons of each treatment combination, giving rise to a total of six gels, see Supplemental Table 3). DIGE analyses were performed using either pH 4–7 linear (L)or6–11 NL range strips for first dimension protein separation, which enabled increased resolution in protein separation compared to our previous experiments using pH 3–11 strips. Under these conditions, 1519 and 807 overlapping protein spots were resolved using pH 4–7 and pH 6–11 gels, respectively (Supplemental Fig. 1; Supplemental Table 4). Significant (p < 0.05) differential accumulation in response to both traits (Pi starvation and MG132 treatment) was observed for a total of 311 spots (146 and 165 spots from pH 4–7 and pH6–11 gels, respectively). Among them, spots exhibiting antagonistic effects by Pi starvation and proteasome inhibition (i.e. MG132 treatment reversed the effect of Pi starvation) were preferentially chosen for further analysis. Therefore, differential spots were distributed according to two main accumulation patterns: (i) Spots showing decreased levels by low Pi but increased levels when MG132 was added to the Pi-deficient media: totaling 184 spots (68 and 116 spots from pH 4–7andpH 6–11 gels, respectively; Table 2). (ii) Spots showing increased levels under low Pi conditions but decreased upon inhibition of the proteasome: 82 spots (50 and 32 spots from pH 4–7 and pH 6–11 gels, respectively; Table 2). Differential spots were analyzed by MS/MS for protein identification. As a result 33 proteins (represented by 61 spots) were identified showing decreased levels by Pi deprivation but stabilization upon MG132 addition under low Pi. This group would be presumably enriched in UPS-controlled repressors of PSR. On the other side, 16 proteins (represented by 22 spots) were identified exhibiting a totally opposite accumulation pattern, being up-regulated by low Pi but down-regulated by MG132 under low Pi. This group would presumably contain activators of PSR whose stability or expression is negatively regulated by an UPS-controlled repressor (Table 2). Functional classification of proteins was performed using MapMan tools (http://mapman.mpimp-golm.mpg.de; [57]). Similar to our previous results comparing +Pi vs −Pi conditions (DIGE pH 3–11), proteins were distributed between different functional categories, including energy metabolism and photosynthesis, cell wall generation, redox processes, and RNA processing (Table 2). However, in this case, over-representation was also found for proteins controlling hormonemetabolism, cell organization, protein synthesis and degradation, and plant development. In addition, proteins mediating transport of different molecules and ions, and vesicle trafficking were highlighted. Very interestingly, several regulatory proteins were identified, including cold, circadian rhythm, and RNA-binding proteins 1 and 2 (CCR1 and 2), 14-3-3 class- and guanine nucleotide-binding proteins, and WD-40 domain-containing proteins TIF3I1 and VIP3,which may correspond to novel UPS targets involved in PSR regulation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Histone chaperone, Dige, Arabidopsis, Phosphate starvation, Phosphate signaling, Nuclear proteome, Ubiquitin-proteasome system, Nap1;2

### Affiliations
Genetica Molecular de Plantas
Centro Nacional de Biotecnología (CNB-CSIC), Darwin, 3, 28049 Madrid, Spain

### Submitter
Vicente Rubio

### Lab Head
Dr Vicente Rubio
Centro Nacional de Biotecnología (CNB-CSIC), Darwin, 3, 28049 Madrid, Spain


