### Accession
PXD012025

### Title
Drosophila nephrocyte proteome

### Description
Podocyte injury is a major cause of chronic kidney disease, but the involved signaling pathways are largely unknown. Here, we used ultrasensitive proteomics to investigate the response of the native renal podocyte to injury and prioritized candidates by aligning proteinuria in individual mice with protein expression data. The analysis revealed large perturbations of signaling pathways known to associate with FSGS, but also showed perturbation in metabolism and proteins responding to mechanical stress. We employed Drosophila nephrocytes for further functional analysis of selected candidates and studied filtration function and endocytosis. Among the candidates identified  was the mechanosensor protein Filamin-B which is a central component of a conserved cellular response to mechanical stress in podocytes in vitro. Loss of Cher, the orthologue of Filamin-B, led to an increased endocytosis in nephrocytes. Of note, Filamin-B expression was only elevated in the Doxorubicin-induced proteome of podocytes but not after LPS induced injury  despite the regulation of multiple similar pathways on the systems level. The Filamin-B amount in glomeruli of proteinuric PAN rats correlated with the amount of albumin . In conclusion, this study identified conserved mechanisms of podocyte stress response employing state of the art ultrasensitive proteomics in isolated mouse podocytes and Drosophila nephrocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Nephrocyte garlands were solubilized with 40µL 8% SDS and heated at 95°C for 5 minutes to solubilize and denature all proteins. Next, 25µU Benzonase were added to the solution. Garland nephrocytes from single L3 larvae (5 larvae per genotype) were solubilized with 40µl 8% SDS followed by heating at 95°C. Podocyte and nephrocyte samples were reduced with 5mM DTT at 37°C for 30 minutes.  Then, proteins were alkylated at room temperature with 10mM IAA in the dark. Proteins were prepared and digested using Trypsin and LysC using the SP3 ultrasensitive proteomics technique as previously described 8.

### Data Protocol
Raw files generated by the mass spectrometry were processed using MaxQuant v 1.5.3.8 . Briefly, raw data generated by the mass spectrometer were searched against a database consisting of mouse uniprot reference database without isoforms (downloaded in January 2017), including common contaminants. Default search parameters were used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Drosophila, Nephrocyte

### Affiliations
Kidney research center cologne
University Hospital Cologne

### Submitter
Markus Rinschen

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Rinschen
University Hospital Cologne


