### Accession
PXD027857

### Title
Clathrin IP_mouse sciatic nerve axons_Roylab_UCSD

### Description
Sciatic nerve axon segments from adult mouse were isolated. Following enzymatic digestion, lysate was subjected to incubation with beads conjugated with either clathrin heavy chain antibody or control IgG antibody for clathrin immunoprecipitation. MudPIT analysis was subsequently performed to identify proteins co-precipitating with clathrin.

### Sample Protocol
To the pull down mixture, 100 μL of 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris pH 8.5 was added, followed by reduction and alkylation with 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride [Roche Applied Science] and 55 mM iodoacetamide [Sigma-Aldrich] respectively.  The sample was then diluted 4-fold by the addition of 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, followed by digestion with trypsin [Promega] (incubated at 37 °C overnight in the dark). The magnetic beads in the sample were then removed by a magnetic separator. The resulted protein digest was acidified with formic acid (final concentration 5%) and followed by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 10 min.   The supernatant was pressure-loaded onto a 250 micron i.d. fused silica capillary [Polymicro Technologies] column with a Kasil frit packed with 2.5 cm of 5 micron Partisphere strong cation exchange (SCX) resin [Whatman] and 2.5 cm of 5 micron C18 resin [Phenomenex].  After desalting, this bi-phasic column was connected to a 100 micron i.d. fused silica capillary [Polymicro Technologies] analytical column with a 3 micron pulled-tip, packed with 10 cm of 3 micron C18 resin [Phenomenex].  The entire three phase column was placed inline with a 1200 quaternary HPLC pump [Agilent Technologies] and analyzed using a modified 12-step separation described previously [Washburn et al., 2001]. As peptides were eluted from the microcapillary column, they were electrosprayed directly into a hybrid LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer [Thermo Fisher Scientific].  A cycle consisted of one full scan mass spectrum (300-1600 m/z) followed by 20 data-dependent collision induced dissociation (CID) MS/MS spectra.   Application of mass spectrometer scan functions and HPLC solvent gradients were controlled by the Xcalibur data system [Thermo Scientific].

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted using RawXtract (version 1.9.9) [McDonald et al., 2004].  MS/MS spectra were searched with the ProLuCID algorithm [Xu, 2006] against a mouse Uniprot database concatenated to a decoy database in which the sequence for each entry in the original database was reversed [Peng et al., 2003].  The ProLuCID search was performed using semi-enzyme specificity, static modification of cysteine due to carboxyamidomethylation (57.02146). ProLuCID search results were assembled and filtered using the DTASelect (version 2.0) algorithm [Tabb et al., 2002].  The protein identification false positive rate was kept below one percent and all peptide-spectra matches had less than 10ppm mass error.

### Publication Abstract
In non-neuronal cells, clathrin has established roles in endocytosis, with clathrin cages enclosing plasma membrane infoldings, followed by rapid disassembly and reuse of monomers. However, in neurons, clathrin is conveyed in slow axonal transport over days to weeks, and the underlying transport/targeting mechanisms, mobile cargo structures, and even its precise presynaptic localization and physiologic role are unclear. Combining live imaging, photobleaching/conversion, mass spectrometry, electron microscopy, and super-resolution imaging, we found that unlike in dendrites, where clathrin cages rapidly assemble and disassemble, in axons, clathrin and related proteins organize into stable "transport packets" that are unrelated to endocytosis and move intermittently on microtubules, generating an overall slow anterograde flow. At synapses, multiple clathrin packets abut synaptic vesicle (SV) clusters, and clathrin packets also exchange between synaptic boutons in a microtubule-dependent "superpool." Within synaptic boundaries, clathrin is surprisingly dynamic, continuously exchanging between local clathrin assemblies, and its depletion impairs SV recycling. Our data provide a conceptual framework for understanding clathrin trafficking and presynaptic targeting that has functional implications.

### Keywords
Axons, Clathrin, Sciatic nerves

### Affiliations
Scripps Research 
Scripps Research

### Submitter
Titus  Jung

### Lab Head
Dr John Yates
Scripps Research


