### Accession
PXD040392

### Title
Distribution of phosphorylated alpha-synuclein in non-diseased brain implicates olfactory bulb mitral cells in synucleinopathy pathogenesis.

### Description
Project aim was to identify protein-protein interactions of the post-translationally modified form of alpha-synuclein. In situ proximity labeling (BAR) was used to enrich for protein-protein interactions. We performed BAR on wild-type and alpha-synuclein knockout olfactory bulb tissues. We include negative capture conditions, where the primary antibody was omitted.

### Sample Protocol
Free-floating PFA fixed mouse OB sections gathered at intervals of 120 microns were processed as described above and previously (24). Each sample consisted of ~15-20 OB tissue sections. Sections from WT and alpha-synuclein KO mice were used. Capture conditions were conducted both with primary antibody (i.e., EP1536Y) and without primary antibody. Following the biotinyl tyramide reaction, sections were washed overnight in PBS, and then heated to 98°C in 1mL of crosslink reversal buffer (500mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 5% SDS, 150mM NaCl, and 2mM EDTA) for 30 min. Samples were then vortexed vigorously, heated for an additional 15 min, and centrifuged for 30 min at 22,000 x g. The supernatant was diluted 1:10 in dilution buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1% triton X-100, 150mM NaCl) and incubated with 25 micrograms of streptavidin magnetic beads (ThermoFisher Scientific) overnight at 4°C with nutation. The following day, beads were collected on a magnetic stand, washed 3 times for 1 h each with wash buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1% triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, and 150mM NaCl), and then 1 time with TBST for 1 h. Beads were then collected and boiled in 40 microliters sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) sample buffer containing 5% beta-mercaptoethanol for 10 min and mixed vigorously. 38 µl were run a distance of ~1 cm into an SDS-PAGE gel (Fisher Scientific), the gel was fixed (1 h in 50% ethanol, 10% acetic acid), stained with coomassie blue, and entire lane excised for subsequent trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS. Data processing

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified from the MS raw files using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK. version 2.5.1). MS/MS spectra were searched against the SwissProt mouse database. All searches included carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification and oxidized methionine, deamidated asparagine and aspartic acid, and acetylated N-terminal as variable modifications. Biotin (K), Biotin(N-term) were set as a variable modification for biotinylation detection. Three missed tryptic cleavages were allowed. A 1% false discovery rate cutoff was applied at the peptide level. Only proteins with a minimum of one peptide above the cutoff were considered for further study. Identified peptides/protein were visualized by Scaffold software (version 5.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR).

### Publication Abstract
Synucleinopathies are neurodegenerative diseases characterized by pathological inclusions called "Lewy pathology" (LP) that consist of aggregated alpha-synuclein predominantly phosphorylated at serine 129 (PSER129). Despite the importance for understanding disease, little is known about the endogenous function of PSER129 or why it accumulates in the diseased brain. Here we conducted several observational studies using a sensitive tyramide signal amplification (TSA) technique to determine PSER129 distribution and function in the non-diseased mammalian brain. In wild-type non-diseased mice, PSER129 was detected in the olfactory bulb (OB) and several brain regions across the neuroaxis (i.e., OB to brainstem). In contrast, PSER129 immunoreactivity was not observed in any brain region of alpha-synuclein knockout mice. We found evidence of PSER129 positive structures in OB mitral cells of non-diseased mice, rats, non-human primates, and healthy humans. Using TSA multiplex fluorescent labeling, we showed that PSER129 positive punctate structures occur within inactive (i.e., c-fos negative) T-box transcription factor 21 (TBX21) positive mitral cells and PSER129 within these cells was spatially associated with PK-resistant alpha-synuclein. Ubiquitin was found in PSER129 mitral cells but was not closely associated with PSER129. Biotinylation by antibody recognition (BAR) identified 125 PSER129-interacting proteins in the OB of healthy mice, which were significantly enriched for presynaptic vesicle trafficking/recycling, SNARE, fatty acid oxidation, oxidative phosphorylation, and RNA binding. TSA multiplex labeling confirmed the physical association of BAR-identified protein Ywhag with PSER129 in the OB and in other regions across the neuroaxis. We conclude that PSER129 accumulates in the mitral cells of the healthy OB as part of alpha-synuclein normal cellular functions. Incidental LP has been reported in the OB, and therefore we speculate that for synucleinopathies, either the disease processes begin locally in OB mitral cells or a systemic disease process is most apparent in the OB because of the natural tendency to accumulate PSER129.

### Keywords
Proteomics; neurodegeneration; vesicles; protein aggregation.

### Affiliations
Assisstant professor. Graduate College. Rush University Medical Center.
Rush University Medical Center

### Submitter
Bryan Killinger

### Lab Head
Dr Bryan Andrew Killinger
Assisstant professor. Graduate College. Rush University Medical Center.


