### Accession
PXD031347

### Title
Multi-omics analyses reveal the mechanical-stress-dependent changes in trabecular meshwork cytoskeletal-extracellular matrix interactions

### Description
Trabecular meshwork (TM) tissue is subjected to constant mechanical stress due to the ocular pulse created by the cardiac cycle. This induces alterations in membrane lipids and associated cell-cell adhesion and cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions triggering intracellular signaling responses to counter mechanical insults. A loss of such response can lead to elevated intraocular pressure (IOP), a major risk factor for primary open-angle glaucoma. The purpose of this study was to understand the response of TM under mechanical stretch using a multi-omics approach. We performed an unbiased mRNA sequencing for changes in transcripts, mass spectrometry (MS)-based quantitative proteomics for protein changes, and multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) profiling based MS and HPLC-based MS to identify lipid changes. With the help of the multi-omics data analysis on human TM cells under mechanical stress, we provide evidence for the regulation of TM actin cytoskeleton and ECM interactions at the mRNA and protein levels, which can further modulate the TM lipids contents effectively regulating the mechanical properties of TM membrane. Overall, in this study, we propose the mechanistic interplay of macromolecules to bring about a concerted cellular response in TM cells to achieve mechanotransduction and IOP regulation

### Sample Protocol
Human trabecular meshwork (HTM) was subjected to constant cyclic mechanical stretch for 24h. Cell pellets were lysed in 8 M urea (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc, CA, USA, 161-0731), 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA, 10812846001) by sonication in 1.5 mL Micro Tubes (TPX Plastic for Sonication from Diagende Inc.) using a Bioruptor® sonication system (Diagenode Inc., New Jersey, USA, B01020001) with 30 sec/30 sec on/off cycles for 15 min in a water bath at 4 ºC. After subsequent centrifugation at 14,000 rcf for 20 min, protein concentrations were determined by Bradford protein assay (BioRad, Hercules, 5000006). A 20 µg equivalent of protein from each sample were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP, Sigma-Aldrich, C4706) for 30 minutes at room temperature and the resulting free cysteine thiols were alkylated with 10 mM chloroacetamide (CAA, Sigma-Aldrich, C0267) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were diluted with 50 mM Tris HCl, pH 8.5 to a final urea concentration of 2 M for Trypsin/Lys-C based overnight protein digestion at 37 ºC (1:100 protease: substrate ratio, Mass Spectrometry grade, Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, V5072).

### Data Protocol
Resulting RAW files were analyzed in Proteome Discover™ 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific,) with a Homo sapiens UniProt FASTA (last modified 021517) plus common contaminants. SEQUEST HT searches were conducted with a maximum number of 2 missed cleavages; precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm; and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Static modifications used for the search were, 1) carbamidomethylation on cysteine (C) residues; 2) TMT6plex label on N-peptide N-termini, 3) TMT6plex label on lysine (K) residues. Dynamic modifications used for the search were oxidation of methionines, and acetylation, Met-loss or Met-loss plus acetylation of protein N-termini. Percolator False Discovery Rate was set to a strict setting of 0.01 and a relaxed setting of 0.05. In the consensus workflow, peptides were normalized by total peptide amount with no scaling. Co-isolation of 50% and average reporter ion S/N 10 were used as thresholds for quantification.  Resulting normalized abundance values for each sample type, abundance ratio and log2(abundance ratio) values; and respective p-values (ANOVA) from Proteome Discover™ were exported to Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
Trabecular meshwork (TM) tissue is subjected to constant mechanical stress due to the ocular pulse created by the cardiac cycle. This brings about alterations in the membrane lipids and associated cell-cell adhesion and cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions, triggering intracellular signaling responses to counter mechanical insults. A loss of such response can lead to elevated intraocular pressure (IOP), a major risk factor for primary open-angle glaucoma. This study is aimed to understand the changes in signaling responses by TM subjected to mechanical stretch. We utilized multiomics to perform an unbiased mRNA sequencing to identify changes in transcripts, mass spectrometry- (MS-) based quantitative proteomics for protein changes, and multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) profiling-based MS and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC-) based MS to characterize the lipid changes. We performed pathway analysis to obtain an integrated map of TM response to mechanical stretch. The human TM cells subjected to mechanical stretch demonstrated an upregulation of protein quality control, oxidative damage response, pro-autophagic signal, induction of anti-apoptotic, and survival signaling. We propose that mechanical stretch-induced lipid signaling <i>via</i> increased ceramide and sphingomyelin potentially contributes to increased TM stiffness through actin-cytoskeleton reorganization and profibrotic response. Interestingly, increased phospholipids and diacylglycerol due to mechanical stretch potentially enable cell membrane remodeling and changes in signaling pathways to alter cellular contractility. Overall, we propose the mechanistic interplay of macromolecules to bring about a concerted cellular response in TM cells to achieve mechanotransduction and IOP regulation when TM cells undergo mechanical stretch.

### Keywords
Lipidomic analysis, Human trabecular meshwork, Global proteomic analysis (lc-ms/ms), Mrna sequencing., Cyclic mechanical stretch

### Affiliations
Assistant Professor, Department of Ophthalmology, School of Medicine, Indiana University   Indianapolis, IN, USA
Indiana University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Emma Doud

### Lab Head
Dr Padmanabhan Paranji Pattabiraman, PhD
Assistant Professor, Department of Ophthalmology, School of Medicine, Indiana University   Indianapolis, IN, USA


