### Accession
PXD002825

### Title
Down-regulation of Vimentin Increased Drug Resistance in Ovarian Cancer Cells

### Description
Cisplatin and other platinum-based drugs are widely used in the treatment of ovarian cancer, but most patients acquire the drug resistance that greatly compromises the efficacy of drugs. Understanding the mechanism of drug resistance is important for finding new therapeutic approaches. In the present study, we found that the expression of vimentin was down-regulated in drug-resistance ovarian cancer A2780-DR and SKOV-3/DDP cells compared to the drug sensitive A2780 and SKOV-3 cells. Overexpression of vimentin in A2780-DR cells markedly increased their sensitivity to cisplatin, whereas knockdown of vimentin in A2780 cells increased the resistance to cisplatin, demonstrating that vimentin plays an important role in cisplatin resistance. Quantitative proteomic analysis identified 95 differentially expressed proteins between A2780-VIM-KN and control cells, which involved in many cellular processes. Down-regulation of endocytic proteins and the up-regulation of exocytic proteins were proposed to contribute the decreased cisplatin accumulation in A2780-VIM-KN cells. Cancer stem cell markers were found to be up-regulated in A2780-VIM-KN cells which were more facile to form spheroids as compared to control cells. Our results also showed that down-regulation of vimentin increased the 14-3-3 mediated retention of Cdc25C in the cytoplasm, leading to inactivation of Cdk1 and the prolonged G2 arrest that allows the longer period of time for cells to repair cisplatin-damaged DNA. Taken together, the down-regulation of vimentin enhances cells’ resistance to cisplatin via mediating multiple cellular processes, suggesting that vimentin is a potential target for treatment of drug resistant ovarian cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis was carried out in biological triplicate. Briefly, A2780-VIM-KN and control cells were lysed with 8M urea in PBS pH 7.4. Equal amount of proteins from each samples (200 μg) were reduced with 1 mM dithiotreitol for 1 h and alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide for 40 min in the dark. Proteins were digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin for 16 h at 37 °C. The digestion was stopped with 10 % trifluoracetic acid, after which peptides were desalted using HLB extraction cartridges and eluted using 1 ml methanol. Extracts were then centrifuged in a speedvac to reduce the volume. After that, peptides were redissolved in 100 µl 200 mM Tetraethylammonium Bromide (TEAB) and labeled with TMT sixplex labeling reagent for 1 h at room temperature according to the manufacture’s instruction. The reaction was then quenched by adding 5 µl of 5% hydroxylamine in TEAB and incubating 15 min. The TMT-labeled peptides were combined and desalted using C18 sep-pak cartridges. The elution extracts were centrifuged in a speedvac to reduce the volume. Then the TMT-labeled peptides complex was separated by HPLC. For HPLC separation, the TMT-labeled peptides were separated with a C-18 column (XbridgeTMBEH300 C18 5 μm Waters) at a flow rate 1 ml/min by the following gradient elution. Mobile phase A was 100% H2O and mobile phase B consisted of 98% acetonitrile and 2% H2O. The pH of both mobile phase A and B were adjusted to 10. The fractions were centrifuged in a speedvac to reduce the volume and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.   For LC-MS/MS analysis, the TMT-labeled peptides were separated by a 120 min gradient elution with a flow rate of 0.250 μl/min in a Thermo-Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system, which was directly connected with a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer. The analytical column was a home-made C-18 (300 Å, 5 μm, Varian, Lexington, MA) resin packed fused silica capillary column (75 μm ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The Q Exactive mass spectrometer was operated by Xcalibur2.1.2 software in the data-dependent acquisition mode and 10 data-dependent MS/MS scans at 29% normalized collision energy followed a single full-scan mass spectrum in the orbitrap (400 –1800 m/z, 60,000 resolution).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra from each LC-MS/MS run were searched against the human.fasta database downloaded from Uniprot (release date of January 10, 2015; 89105 sequences) using an in-house Sequest HT Algorithm in Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4). Common contaminants were included in the database. The search criteria were the followings: full tryptic specificity was required; one missed cleavage was allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) and TMT sixplex (K and N-terminal) were set as the fixed modifications; the oxidation (M) was set as the variable modification; precursor ion mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm for all MS acquired in an orbitrap mass analyzer; and the fragment mass tolerance was set at 20 mmu for all MS2 spectra acquired in Q Exactive mass spectrometer. Peptide spectral matches (PSM) were validated using the Percolator provided by Proteome Discoverer software based on q-values at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). A peptide whose sequence is only assigned to a given protein group was considered as unique. The false discovery rate was also set to 0.01 for protein identifications. Relative protein quantification was performed using Proteome Discoverer software (Version 1.4) according to manufacturer’s instructions on the reporter ion intensities per peptide. Proteins with at least two unique peptides were regarded as confident identifications and were further quantified. Protein ratios were calculated as the median of all peptide hits belonging to a protein. Quantitative precision was expressed as protein ratio variability.

### Publication Abstract
Tumor cells frequently evolved resistance to cisplatin that greatly compromises the efficacy of chemotherapy. Identification of the mechanisms underlying drug resistance is important for developing new therapeutic approaches. ISG15 is found to be elevated in many human carcinomas and cancer cell lines. Here, we identified that the expressions of ISG15 and ISG15-conjugating system were downregulated in drug resistant A549/DDP cells compared to drug sensitive A549 cells. Silencing of ISG15 robustly elevated the resistance to cisplatin, suggesting ISG15 plays an important role in cisplatin resistance. Quantitative proteomics identified 1296 differentially expressed proteins between the control and ISG15 knockdown cells, showing that ISG15 silencing upregulated proteins in p53 pathway, adherens junction and nucleotide excision repair (NER) pathway. We also found that ISG15 silencing induced cell cycle arrest through stabilizing p53 and increasing HnRNP K expression, which allowed the prolonged time for cells to repair cisplatin-damaged DNA. Taken together, we proved that ISG15 downregulation activated the DNA damage/repair pathway to enhance cisplatin resistance in tumor cells.

### Keywords
Ovarian cancer cell line; drug-resistance; proteomics; vimentin; cisplatin

### Affiliations
Tsinghua University
MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

### Submitter
Huo Yi

### Lab Head
Dr Haiteng Deng
MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China


