### Accession
PXD010171

### Title
Extraction of Entamoeba histolytica membrane proteins using three extraction methods

### Description
Entamoeba histolytica membrane proteins are important players in the parasite’s pathogenicity. However, most of the proteins have not been identified. This study reports the membrane proteins extracted using three extractions methods: two commercial kits (ProteoExtract® from Calbiochem and ProteoPrep® from Sigma), and a conventional laboratory method. The resulting membrane fractions (MF) and cytosolic fractions (CF)were analysed using LC-ESI-MS/MS. The proteins identified in at least two out of three biological replicates revealed a total of 490, 492, and 587 MF proteins extracted using the ProteoExtract® kit, ProteoPrep® kit and conventional method, respectively. Meanwhile, 487, 611 and 343 proteins were identified in the CF extracted using the ProteoExtract® kit, ProteoPrep® kit and conventional method, respectively. Analysis of the identified MF and CF proteins extracted by the respective extraction kits suggests that the ProteoPrep® extraction kit was the most selective in separating MF and CF among the three extraction methods.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation - Post extraction The samples were precipitated with 100% cold acetone at a ratio of 1:5 (protein to acetone), for 6 h at -20 °C. Then, the mixture was centrifuged at 15, 000 × g for 10 min. The resulting protein pellet was resuspended with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate until it was dissolved. In-solution digestion The membrane and cytosolic fraction of each extraction methods were digested. A total of 100 µg protein extract from each extraction method was made up to 100 µL with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to achieve a concentration of 1 µg/µL. Then, the mixture was solubilised with 0.05 % RapiGest SF surfactant (Waters, USA) at 80 °C for 15 min. The sample was then reduced with 5 µL of 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubated at 60 °C for 15 min. Next, the mixture was cooled to RT and alkylated with 5 µL of 200 mM iodocetamide (IAA) in the dark at RT for 30 min. Two µg of trypsin (Promega,USA) was added to the sample and incubated at 37 °C for 16 h. Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was then added at a final concentration of ~ 1 % (v/v), and the sample was incubated at 37 ˚C for 20 min. The digested proteins were then centrifuged at 14, 462 × g for 15 min. The supernatant was collected and filtered through a 0.45 µm filter (Sartorius Stedim, Germany). Subsequently, membrane and the cytosolic fraction protein identifications were performed using LC-ESI-MS/MS.   LC-ESI-MS/MS The digested samples were sent for LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis at Proteomics Core Facility, Malaysia Genome Institute, National Institutes of Biotechnology Malaysia (NIBM). Briefly, the peptide separation was performed using the Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano (Thermo Fisher Scientific,USA) nano liquid chromatography system while mass spectrometry analysis was performed using a Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. To achieve spatial discrimination of the peptides, they were packed into and eluted with EASY-Spray Column PepMap® RSLC, C18, 2 µm particle size, 50 µm id × 150 mm coupled with pre-column (µ-Precolumn PepMap 100, C18, 3 µm particle size, 300 µm id x 5 mm) at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min with mobile phase A (deionised distilled water with 0.1 % formic acid and B (ACN with 0.1 % formic acid). The sample was eluted for 101 min with a gradient of mobile phase B, 5-95% for 93 min, 95% for 2 min, and back to 5% in 2 min. For mass spectrometry analysis, the instrument was operated in the data dependent mode. The parameters for the full scan spectra were as follows: scan range 310-1800 m/z, resolving power of 120000, AGC target of 4.0 e5 (400 000), and maximum injection time of 50 ms. The method consisted of 3 s at Top Speed Mode where precursors were selected for a maximum of a 3 s cycle. Only precursors with an assigned monoisotopic m/z and a charge state of 2 – 7 were further analysed for MS/MS. All precursors were filtered using a 20 s dynamic exclusion window and an intensity threshold of 5000. The MS/MS spectra were analysed using the following parameters: rapid scan rate with a resolving power of 60000, AGC target of 1.0e2 (100), 1.6 m/z isolation window, and a maximum injection time of 250 ms. Precursors were fragmented by CID and HCD at a normalised collision energy of 30% and 28%, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis and database matching against AmoebaDB_4.1 was performed using Proteome DiscovererTM Software Version 2.1 (Thermo Scientific ,USA). The parameters used in the analysis were fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation (C), variable modification: Oxidation (M), deamidation of aspargine (N) and glutamine (Q), maximum missed cleavage set at 2, false detection rate (FDR) <0.1%, and parent mass and precursor mass tolerance at 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Identified protein with at least 2 matched peptides implied a greater confident of protein identity.

### Publication Abstract
Entamoeba histolytica membrane proteins are important players toward the pathogenesis of amoebiasis, but the roles of most of the proteins are not fully understood. Since efficient protein extraction method is crucial for a successful MS analysis, three extractions methods are evaluated for the use in studying the membrane proteome of E. histolytica: Two commercial kits (ProteoExtract from Calbiochem and ProteoPrep from Sigma), and a conventional laboratory method. The results show that ProteoExtract and the conventional method gave higher protein yields compared to ProteoPrep. LC-ESI-MS/MS identifies 456, 482, and 551 membrane fraction proteins extracted using ProteoExtract, ProteoPrep, and a conventional method, respectively. In silico analysis predicts 108 (21%), 235 (45%), and 177 (34%) membrane proteins from the extracts of ProteoExtract, ProteoPrep, and the conventional method, respectively. Furthermore, analysis of the cytosolic and membrane fractions shows the highest selectivity of the membrane proteins using the ProteoPrep extraction kit. Overall, this study reports 828 E. histolytica membrane fraction proteins that include 249 predicted membrane proteins. The data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD010171.

### Keywords
Membrane proteome, Membrane protein extraction methods, Entamoeba histolytica, Lc-esi-ms/ms

### Affiliations
UNIVERSITI SAINS MALAYSIA
Institute for Research in Molecular Medicine (INFORMM), Universiti Sains Malaysia, 11800, Penang, Malaysia

### Submitter
JORIM UJANG

### Lab Head
Dr Nurulhasanah binti Othman
Institute for Research in Molecular Medicine (INFORMM), Universiti Sains Malaysia, 11800, Penang, Malaysia


