### Accession
PXD031718

### Title
Global proteomic alterations in extracellular vesicles induced by oncogenic PIK3CA mutations

### Description
MCF10A cells, and two isogenic mutant cell lines with known mutations in PIK3CA (E545 K and H1047R) were cultured in triplicate using culture medium depleted of extracellular vesicles. Cell culture supernatants were collected to study the extracellular vesicles (EVs) released by these cells. EVs were isolated from the samples by ultracentrifugation and their proteins digested. The resulting peptides were labeled with TMT and analyzed by mass spectrometry to identify differentially expressed proteins.

### Sample Protocol
MCF10A cells were grown in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with FBS depleted of exosomes (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Gibco), A2720801) in triplicate in 15 cm cell culture dishes. Two different isogenic lines of MCF10A cells with mutations in PIK3CA, (E545K and H1047R), were grown under identical conditions. The supernatants were harvested (three cell types each with triplicates, resulting in nine tubes of medium from different experimental conditions). Cell culture supernatants from each condition were centrifuged at 2000 x g for 10 minutes. The pellets were discarded, and the supernatants centrifuged at 18,000 x g for 30 minutes. The supernatants were then ultracentrifuged at 200,000 x g for 2 hours. The pellets were washed with phosphate buffered saline (Corning, 21-040-CV) and ultracentrifuged again at 200,000 x g. The resulting pellets were retained as extracts containing extracellular vesicles. Protein quantities were estimated using the BCA assay. Equal amounts of protein from each condition were treated with 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich, D9163) at 37 ºC for one hour (with shaking) for reduction of disulfide bonds followed by alkylation with 40 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, I1149) at room temperature in the dark. Reduced and alkylated proteins were digested by trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 90057) at 37ºC overnight while shaking. Resulting peptides were cleaned up using C18 columns and labeled with tandem mass tags (TMT) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 90110) for a 9-plex mass spectrometry experiment according to the manufacturer’s protocol. An aliquot of total pooled TMT-labeled peptides was fractionated by basic pH reversed phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC) on a reversed phase C18 column (4.6 × 100 mm column) using an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC System. 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 9 and 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 9, in 90% acetonitrile were used as solvent A and B, respectively. Ninety-six collected fractions for a total run time of 120 min were then concatenated into 12 fractions. These concatenated fractions were dried down in a SpeedVac system and re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. 12 fractions of bRPLC were analyzed by Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated by liquid chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An EASY-Spray column (75 m × 50 cm, PepMap RSCL C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) packed with 2 μm C18 particles was used as a separating device with column temperature being 50 °C. 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile were solvent A and B respectively. Injected peptides were trapped on a trap column (100 mm × 2 cm, Acclaim PepMap100 Nano-Trap, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 20 ml/min. Every run was 130 minutes and flow rate used was 300 nl/min. The gradient used for separation was as follows: equilibration at 3% solvent B from 0 to 4 min, 3% to 10% sol B from 4 to 10 min, 10% to 35% sol B from 10.1 to 125 min, 35% to 80% sol B from 125 to 145 minutes followed by equilibration for next run at 5% sol B for 5 min. Ionization of eluting peptides was performed using an EASY-Spray source kept at an electric potential of 2 kV. All experiments were done in DDA mode with top 15 ions isolated at a window of 0.7 m/z and default charge state of +2. Only precursors with charge states ranging from +2 to +7 were considered for MS/MS events. MS precursor mass range was set to 375 to 2000 m/z and 100 to 2000 for MS/MS. Automatic gain control for MS and MS/MS were 106 and 1 x 105 and injection time to reach AGC were 50 ms and 250 ms, respectively. Exclude isotopes feature was set to “ON” and 60 s dynamic exclusion was applied. Data acquisition was performed with option of Lock mass (445.1200025 m/z) for all data.

### Data Protocol
The data was searched using Sequest node in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 against the Uniprot Human Reviewed protein sequences (20,432 entries) and quantitation of peptides across experimental conditions was done using TMT reporter ion intensities as surrogates using “reporter ion quantifier” node.

### Publication Abstract
PIK3CA is one of the most frequently mutated genes in human cancers, with the two most prevalent activating mutations being E545K and H1047R. Although the altered intracellular signaling pathways in these cells have been described, the effect of these mutations on their extracellular vesicles (EVs) has not yet been reported. To study altered cellular physiology and intercellular communication through proteomic analysis of EVs, MCF10A cells and their isogenic mutant versions (PIK3CA E545K and H1047R) were cultured and their EVs enriched by differential ultracentrifugation. Proteins were extracted, digested with trypsin and the peptides labeled with tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents and analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Four thousand six hundred and fifty-five peptides were identified from 579 proteins of which 522 proteins have been previously described in EVs. Relative quantitation revealed altered levels of EV proteins including several cell adhesion molecules. Mesothelin, E-cadherin, and epithelial cell adhesion molecule were elevated in both mutant cell-derived EVs. Markers of tumor invasion and progression like galectin-3 and transforming growth factor beta induced protein were increased in both mutants. Overall, activating mutations in PIK3CA result in altered EV composition with characteristic changes associated with these hotspot mutations.

### Keywords
Pik3ca, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Mcf10a cells

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, United States

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, United States


