### Accession
PXD035460

### Title
Molecular study of the Phyto-Courier Nanotechnology in Salt-Stressed Tomato

### Description
The search for more effective methods to alleviate the negative effects of abiotic stresses in plants has motivated the experimentation of new technologies, namely nanotechnologies. It is in this context that the use of formulations containing hybrid silicon (Si) nanoparticles (NPs) and acting as delivery systems of the flavonoid quercetin was here investigated. These formulations, previously referred to as phyto-couriers, proved their efficacy in protecting textile hemp against salinity. We here broaden their application spectrum by studying the effects on an important crop model, tomato (Solanum lycopersicum cv. Micro-Tom). Two phyto-courier formulations, labelled GS1 and GS3, functionalized with 25 mg of quercetin and differing in the presence of trehalose were applied to salt-stressed plants (200 mM NaCl) by foliar spraying. Microscopy showed, under stress, a preservation of the palisade mesophyll cell structure in plants treated with the formulations. A trend towards decreased expression of some stress-responsive genes was observed in the leaves treated with the phyto-couriers. Shotgun proteomics confirmed the protective effects and the nano-biostimulant nature of the formulations, since several proteins involved in cytoprotection against oxidative stress were more abundant in control leaves treated with the pyto-courier. This was especially evident for the trehalose-containing GS3 formulation. Some proteins involved in chromatin remodelling were also more abundant in control leaves treated with GS3. Overall, the formulations showed promising results to enhance abiotic stress tolerance in a model crop through the mitigation of stress symptoms. The results presented are a proof-of-concept for the use of the phyto-courier nanotechnology in horticultural applications

### Sample Protocol
Half a gram of powdered leaf sample (bottom terminal leaflets) was extracted with ice-cold extraction buffer containing 10% (w/v) TCA and 0.07% (w/v) DTT in acetone. The extracted proteins were quantified using the RC DC protein assay method (BioRad), with BSA for the standard curve. LC-MS analysis was performed on a NanoLC-425 Eksigent system coupled to TripleTOF® 6600+ mass spectrometer and carried out as previously reported. The acquired MS and MS/MS data were imported in Progenesis QI for Proteomics software.

### Data Protocol
The protein and peptide identification were done by searching the S. lycopersicum on UniprotKB (downloaded on 12-04-2021) via Mascot Daemon and matched to the peptide spectra. The Mascot research parameters were the following: peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.3 Da, max two missed cleavages, carbamido-methylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation and tryptophan to kynurenine, N-terminal glutamate to pyroglutamate as variable modifications. Only the proteins identified with a significance Mascot-calculated confidence of 95%, two peptides, at least one unique per proteins, an ANOVA p-value<0.05 and a max FC>1.5 were retained (244 in total, after removing viral/bacteria hits representing contamination of the tomato leaf samples). The hierarchical clustering of the protein abundances was obtained.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microscopy, Solanum lycopersicum, Hybrid silicon nanoparticles, Rt-qpcr, Crop protection, Shotgun proteomics, Nanotechnology, Salinity

### Affiliations
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-BEAP-HAU platform
LIST-ERIN-BEAP-HAU,  Bascharage, Luxembourg

### Submitter
Céline LECLERCQ

### Lab Head
Dr Céline LECLERCQ
LIST-ERIN-BEAP-HAU,  Bascharage, Luxembourg


