### Accession
PXD001978

### Title
Proteomic and Clinical Analysis of a Fine-needle Aspirate Biopsy from a Single Cold Thyroid Nodule: A Case Study

### Description
Purpose: To clinically and proteomically profile a fine-needle aspirate biopsy (FNAB) from a single in situ cold thyroid nodule (CTN).  Experimental Design: The FNAB lysate was digested with trypsin, and analysed by LC-MSMS on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos.  Remaining peptides were separated by reversed-phase chromatography and fractions analysed as technical duplicates.  Identified proteins were analysed by Gene Ontology and protein abundance were calculated using the Top3 label-free method.  The proteomic data was complemented with ultrasonography and scintigraphy of the thyroid gland; and cytology of the CTN FNAB. Results: Sixty seven and 2,595 non-redundant protein groups (2 unique peptides) were identified from unfractionated and fractionated CTN FNAB, respectively.  Label-free protein abundance ranged over 6 orders of magnitude from the most abundant proteins, haemoglobin and thyroglobulin; to the low-abundance protein SON.  Many previously-reported markers of thyroid cancer were in the top 23% of the identified proteins.  GO analysis revealed high-enrichment for  extracellular vesicular exosome and vesicle (cellular component);  regulation of biological quality (biological processes); and structural molecule activity (molecular function).    Conclusions and Clinical Significance: The CTN was clinically-classified as benign. Proteomic data from FNAB can provide additional diagnostic candidates indicative of benign or cancerous CTN without the need for invasive surgical intervention.

### Sample Protocol
After removal of most of the red blood cells, the fine-needle aspirate biopsy (FNAB) was lysed in 100 uL 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0 (supplemented with 2% SDS, 1 mM PMSF, 1×protease-inhibitor cocktail); and the protein content determined.  The lysate (50 ug) was processed by FASP and the resultant peptide equivalence of 2×500 ng protein was analysed by LC-MSMS on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) coupled to an Agilent 1200 HPLC nanoflow system (Agilent Biotechnologies, Palo Alto, CA).  The remainder was separated into 10 HPLC fractions and analysed as technical duplicates.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v 1.4, ThermoFisher Scientific, IL, USA) was used to convert the .raw MS files to .mgf text peak list files and to search the data against human SwissProt database v2012.05_20120529 (36,898 sequences including isoforms from varsplic.pl).  MS spectra with a signal-to-noise ratio of 1.5 were extracted from the .raw files.  The database search was performed using the search engines Mascot and SequestHT.  The MSMS search parameters were as follows: tryptic digestion with two missed cleavage sites, mass tolerances of +/-10 ppm and +/-0.6 Da for the precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Dynamic and static amino acid modifications were oxidation on methionine residues and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues, respectively.  The data was also matched against a decoy database and for each peptide-to-spectrum match, a q-value (false discovery rate) was assigned by the Percolator algorithm.  Peptide identifications with q value <0.01 were reported.  Low-scoring spectra were visually examined to further set a minimum score threshold filter per search algorithm. Protein identifications requiring a minimum of two peptides sequences were reported.   Label free quantitation utilises the protein area determined from the three most abundant distinct peptides identified per protein following the top 3 algorithm [8, 9].  Peptide peak areas were obtained by extracting precursor ions from the raw files at a 6 ppm tolerance with a 7 point weighted average Gaussian smoothing.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Orbitrap velos, Cytology, Ultrasonography, Thyroid nodule, Fnab, Proteome, Scintigraphy

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry & Proteomics CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences Vienna, Austria
Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Fernando J. Sialana

### Lab Head
Dr Keiryn L. Bennett
Mass Spectrometry & Proteomics CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences Vienna, Austria


