### Accession
PXD039605

### Title
Hypolipidemic effects of beetroot juice in SHR-CRP and HHTg rat models of metabolic syndrome: Analysis of hepatic proteome.

### Description
Recently, red beetroot has attracted attention as a health promoting functional food. Studies showed that beetroot administration can reduce blood pressure and ameliorate parameters of glucose and lipid metabolism, however, mechanisms underlying these beneficial effects of beetroot are not fully understood. In the current study, we analyzed effects of beetroot on parameters of glucose and lipid metabolism in two models of metabolic syndrome, (i) transgenic spontaneously hypertensive rats expressing human C-reactive protein (SHR-CRP rats), and (ii) hereditary hypertriglyceridemic (HHTg) rats. Treatment with beetroot juice for 4 weeks was in both models associated with amelioration of oxidative stress, reduced circulating lipids, smaller visceral fat depots, and lower ectopic fat accumulation in the liver, compared to their respective untreated controls. On the other hand, beetroot treatment had no significant effects on sensitivity of muscle and adipose tissue to insulin action in both models. Analyses of hepatic proteome revealed significantly deregulated proteins involved in glycerophospholipid metabolism, mTOR signalling, inflammation, and cytoskeleton rearrangement.

### Sample Protocol
Liver samples were pulverized in liquid nitrogen, solubilized in 1% SDS and 100 mM TEAB, reduced with 5 mM TCEP [tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine], alkylated with 10 mM MMTS (S-methyl methanethiosulfonate) and processed according to the SP4 no glass bead protocol (Anal. Chem. 2022, 94, 29, 10320-10328, PMID: 35848328). Dissolved precipitated proteins were digested sequentially with Lys-C and trypsin, desalted on Empore C18 StageTips, dried in Speedvac, and dissolved in 0.1% TFA + 2% acetonitrile. About 0.5 µg of peptide digests were separated using Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoLC on a 50 cm C18 column (EASY-Spray, ES903, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 2.5 h elution gradient and analyzed in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMS unit operated at CV -40 and -60 V.

### Data Protocol
Thermo .raw files acquired at CV -40 and -60 V were converted to .mzXML files using FAIMS MzXML Generator Release 1.1.8003 (https://github.com/PNNL-Comp-Mass-Spec/FAIMS-MzXML-Generator) and processed in MaxQuant v2.1.4.0 with the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm MaxLFQ using the rat proteome database (UP000002494_10116.fasta, UniProt Release 2022_01). MMTS alkylated cysteine was selected as a fixed modification (Methylthio (C), composition: H(2) C S, +45.988). Variable modifications were Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term). Identifications false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 at all levels and the match between runs was activated. Downstream analysis of the LFQ intensities from the proteinGroups.txt output file was performed in Perseus (v. 2.0.7.0) and visualization in GraphPad Prism 9.

### Publication Abstract
Recently, red beetroot has attracted attention as a health-promoting functional food. Studies have shown that beetroot administration can reduce blood pressure and ameliorate parameters of glucose and lipid metabolism; however, mechanisms underlying these beneficial effects of beetroot are not yet fully understood. In the current study, we analysed the effects of beetroot on parameters of glucose and lipid metabolism in two models of metabolic syndrome: (i) transgenic spontaneously hypertensive rats expressing human C-reactive protein (SHR-CRP rats), and (ii) hereditary hypertriglyceridemic (HHTg) rats. Treatment with beetroot juice for 4 weeks was, in both models, associated with amelioration of oxidative stress, reduced circulating lipids, smaller visceral fat depots, and lower ectopic fat accumulation in the liver compared to the respective untreated controls. On the other hand, beetroot treatment had no significant effects on the sensitivity of the muscle and adipose tissue to insulin action in either model. Analyses of hepatic proteome revealed significantly deregulated proteins involved in glycerophospholipid metabolism, mTOR signalling, inflammation, and cytoskeleton rearrangement.

### Keywords
Beetroot, Spontaneously hypertensive rat, Lipids, Glycerophospholipid metabolism, Mtor signaling, Hereditary hypertriglyceridemic rat

### Affiliations
Czech Academy of Sciences
Institute of Physiology of the Czech Academy of Sciences Laboratory of Developmental Cardiology

### Submitter
Marek Vrbacky

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Pravenec
Institute of Physiology of the Czech Academy of Sciences Laboratory of Developmental Cardiology


