### Accession
PXD019815

### Title
Streamlined identification of permissive non-canonical amino acid incorporation sites in mammalian cell lines with an expanded genetic code

### Description
The genetic code of mammalian cells can be expanded to allow the incorporation of non-canonical amino acids (ncAAs) by suppressing in-frame amber stop codons (UAG) with an orthogonal pyrrolysyl-tRNA synthetase (PylRS)/tRNAPylCUA (PylT) pair. However, the feasibility of this approach is substantially hampered by unpredictable variations in incorporation efﬁciencies at different stop codon positions within target proteins. Here, we apply a proteomics-based approach to quantify ncAA incorporation rates at hundreds of endogenous amber stop codons in mammalian cells. With these data, we compute iPASS (Identiﬁcation of Permissive Amber Sites for Suppression; available at www.bultmannlab.eu/tools/iPASS), a linear regression model to predict relative ncAA incorporation efﬁciencies depending on the surrounding sequence context. To verify iPASS, we develop a dual-ﬂuorescence reporter for high-throughput ﬂow-cytometry analysis that reproducibly yields context-speciﬁc ncAA incorporation efﬁciencies. We show that nucleotides up- and downstream of UAG synergistically inﬂuence ncAA incorporation efﬁciency independent of cell line and ncAA identity. Additionally, we demonstrate iPASS-guided optimization of ncAA incorporation rates by synonymous exchange of codons ﬂanking the amber stop codon. This combination of in silico analysis followed by validation in living mammalian cells substantially simpliﬁes identiﬁcation as well as adaptation of sites within a target protein to confer high ncAA incorporation rates.

### Sample Protocol
For detailed sample preparation of full proteomes and streptavidin pulldowns after in vitro chemoselective labeling of BcnK tagging with biotin-tetrazine conjugates, we refer to the methods part of the corresponding publication. For MS analysis, each sample was loaded on a 50 cm C18-based reversed phase column (in-house packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin from Dr. Maisch a total inner diameter of 75 µm) which was mounted on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) ultra-high pressure system and constantly kept at 60°C. The liquid chromatography was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nano-electrospray source and operational parameters were monitored by SprayQc. Peptides were eluted constantly at around 300 nL/min during a 120 min non-linear ACN gradient. After each set of replicates (R26MIN + wtHEK293T in triplicates and R26RS_BcnK + HEK293TRS_BcnK in quadruplicates) an additional wash step was scheduled. Data-dependent acquisition was applied; after sequential full scans (maximum injection time: 20 ms, resolution: 60,000, target value 3 x 106) the most abundant 12 ions were addressed to MS/MS scans. The m/z range was limited to 400-1650 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of raw MS data was accomplished by the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.11.0) [Cox and Mann, 2008]. The underlying FASTA files for peak list searches were derived from Uniprot by including both, reviewed and unreviewed proteomes (mouse proteome, version October 2018; human proteome, version May 2020). An additional common contaminant list comprising 262 entries was applied using the Andromeda search engine [Cox et al., 2011]. The “Match between runs” option was enabled and the FDR was set to 1% which applies on protein and peptide level (minimum of 7 amino acids). Relative quantification of proteins was accomplished by the MaxLFQ algorithm [Cox et al., 2014]. The cutoff was set to a minimal ratio count of two peptides.   For both, full proteomes and SORT-E samples the initial MaxQuant output was analyzed by Perseus (version 1.6.2.3). Here, common contaminants and protein groups measured less then twice within at least one set of replicates were filtered out and LFQ values were transformed into log2-values.  For full proteomes, imputation of missing values was based on a gaussian distribution relative to the standard deviations of measured values (width of 0.2 and a downshift of 1.8 standard deviations).  Student’s t-tests of R26BS_BcnK vs R26MIN and HEK293TRS_BcnK vs wtHEK293T were performed with a permutation-based FDR of 0.05 and a minimal log2 fold change of 1 (S0).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Genetic code expansion, Non-canonical amino acids, Amber suppression, Unnatural amino acids

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
Faculty of Biology and Center for Molecular Biosystems (BioSysM), Human Biology and BioImaging, LMU Munich & Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Enes Ugur

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Wierer
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


