### Accession
PXD043171

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of cells treated with decaged WZB117-PPG

### Description
To further understand how cells response to decaged WZB117-PPG, we performed quantitative proteomics of A549 cells under WZB117-PPG treatment (30 μM) with illumination and normal condition by TMT 10 plex labeling

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics sample preparation for A549 cells 3 replicates of A549 cells at 80% confluent were incubated with WZB117-PPG (0.5% DMSO) in serum-free medium followed by 15 minutes irradiation and then incubated for 24 h. Additional 3 replicates of cells without WZB117-PPG treatment were set as control groups. Then, all 6 replicates of cells were harvested and lysed by sonication with 8 M Urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Then the protein concentration of cell lysate was measured, and 300 μg of proteins were extracted for quantitative analysis. 300 μg extracted proteins of each replicate were reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 min and alkylated with 10 mM IAA for 30 min in the dark. After digested by 6 μg trypsin for 16 h at 37 ℃, the resulted peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters) and dried in SpeedVac. The dried peptides were reconstituted in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and labeled by TMT reagent according to manufacturer’s instructions. Then, the labeled peptides were combined, desalted, and subjected to offline basic pH reversed-phase (bRP) fractionation as previously reported [1-2]. The fractionated peptides were then dived in SpeedVac and redissolved in 0.1% FA for LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS acquisition   Synchronous precursor selection (SPS) MS3-based acquisition [3] was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled with an EASY-nLC 1200 system. In brief, peptides were loaded to an AcclaimTM PepMapTM 100 pre-column (20 mm × 75 μm, 3 μm) and separated by an RSLC C18 analytic column (150 mm × 75 μm, 2 μm) eluting with 5-35% B [A: 0.1% formic acid in water (vol/vol), B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% CH3CN (vol/vol)] during 110 min. The acquisition was performed in the positive mode. For MS scan, the resolution of orbitrap was set to 120 K with scan range of 375–1500 m/z, the maximum injection time (MIT) was set to 50 ms with 4E5 of AGC target. For dd-MS2 scan, peptides with charge states of 2-7 were selected with a isolation window of 1.2 m/z, the MIT was set to 50 ms with 1E4 of AGC target, and the mass detector was set to iontrap on rapid scan mode with a scan range of 400-1200. For dd-MS3, the HCD energy was set to 65% with 5% stepped, the resolution of orbitrap was set to 50K with a scan range of 100-500 m/z.   Proteomics data analysis The raw files were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) with default parameters. In brief, FASTA of protein sequence were downloaded from Uniprot database (H. sapiens, 9606), oxidation (+15.995 Da, M) and TMT 6plex (+229.163 Da, K) were set as dynamic modifications, carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da, C) and TMT 6plex (+229.163 Da, N-terminus) were set as static modifications. Target FDR of PSM and protein validation was set to 0.01. Unique peptides and razor peptides were used for quantification with a SPS mass matches threshold of 65%.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer cells need a greater supply of glucose mainly due to their aerobic glycolysis, known as the Warburg effect. Glucose transport by glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1) is the rate-limiting step for glucose uptake, making it a potential cancer therapeutic target. However, GLUT1 is widely expressed and performs crucial functions in a variety of cells, and its indiscriminate inhibition will cause serious side effects. In this study, we designed and synthesized a photocaged GLUT1 inhibitor WZB117-PPG to suppress the growth of cancer cells in a spatiotemporally controllable manner. WZB117-PPG exhibited remarkable photolysis efficiency and substantial cytotoxicity toward cancer cells under visible light illumination with minimal side effects, ensuring its safety as a potential cancer therapy. Furthermore, our quantitative proteomics data delineated a comprehensive portrait of responses in cancer cells under glucose deprivation, underlining the mechanism of cell death via necrosis rather than apoptosis. We reason that our study provides a potentially reliable cancer treatment strategy and can be used as a spatiotemporally controllable trigger for studying nutrient deprivation-related stress responses.

### Keywords
Glut1 inhibitor, Tmt

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Pesticide & Chemical Biology, Ministry of Education, 
College of Chemistry 
Central China Normal University, Wuhan (430079), Hubei; China.

College of Chemistry, Central China Normal University

### Submitter
Chunrong Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Chunrong Liu
College of Chemistry, Central China Normal University


