### Accession
PXD008632

### Title
Kinobeads affinity enrichment from lysate derived from stimulated cells

### Description
Investigate differential binding of kinases to Kinobeads depending on activation state

### Sample Protocol
Affinity enrichment from Jurkat lysate derived from cells stimulated with Calyculin A, Pervanadate or combinations thereof. Kinobeads affinity enrichment and subsequent elution of enriched proteins. Labeling of the different conditions (concentrations of inhibitor) with TMT label and subsequent mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using an in-house pipeline and searched with Mascot 2.4

### Publication Abstract
Protein degradation plays important roles in biological processes and is tightly regulated. Further, targeted proteolysis is an emerging research tool and&#xa0;therapeutic strategy. However, proteome-wide technologies to investigate the causes and consequences of protein degradation in biological systems are lacking. We developed "multiplexed proteome dynamics profiling" (mPDP), a mass-spectrometry-based approach combining dynamic-SILAC labeling with isobaric mass tagging for multiplexed analysis of protein degradation and synthesis. In three proof-of-concept studies, we uncover different responses induced by the bromodomain inhibitor JQ1 versus a JQ1 proteolysis targeting chimera; we&#xa0;elucidate distinct modes of action of estrogen receptor modulators; and we comprehensively classify HSP90 clients based on their requirement for HSP90 constitutively or during synthesis, demonstrating that constitutive HSP90 clients have lower thermal stability than non-clients, have higher affinity&#xa0;for the chaperone, vary between cell types, and change upon external stimuli. These findings highlight the potential of mPDP to identify dynamically controlled degradation mechanisms in cellular systems.

### Keywords
Lysate-based assay, Lc-ms/ms, Kinobeads

### Affiliations
Cellzome

### Submitter
Maria Faelth Savitski

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Bantscheff
Cellzome


