### Accession
PXD004749

### Title
Cross-Linked/Mass-spectrometry analysis of RNA-Polimerase II

### Description
The data of a previous publication (Chen et.al. 2009 doi:10.1038/emboj.2009.401) where reprocesed and then used to validate false discovery rate calculations for unique residue pairs.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation  Endogenous complete Pol II was purified as described earlier (Sydow et al, 2009) except that the final gel filtration step was performed in presence of buffer B (10 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 200 mM potassium acetate, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 10% glycerol). Fractions that contained pure and stoichiometric Pol II were concentrated to 0.7 mg/ml and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen in buffer B containing 10% glycerol.  Protein cross-linking The mixing ratio of BS3 to complex was determined for Pol II using 2.5 µg aliquots and using a protein-to-cross-linker molar ratio of 1:200, 1:600, 1:1800, 1:5400, and 1:16 200, respectively (Supplementary Figure S1). As the best condition we chose the ratio that was sufficient to convert most of the individual Pol II subunits into a high molecular weight band as judged by SDS–PAGE. The purified Pol II complex (50 µl containing 35 µg) was mixed with 150 µg BS3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) dissolved in 70 µl cross-link buffer (10 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 200 mM potassium acetate) and incubated on ice for 2 h. The reaction was stopped by adding 1 µl of 2.5 M ammonium bicarbonate for 45 min on ice. The reaction mix was separated on a NuPAGE 4–12% Bis–Tris gel using MES running buffer and Coomassie blue stain.  Sample preparation for MS analysis Bands from the SDS–PAGE gel corresponding to cross-linked complexes were excised and the proteins reduced/alkylated and digested using trypsin following standard protocols.  Pol II cross-linked peptides were fractionated using SCX-StageTips (Ishihama et al, 2006) following the published protocol for linear peptides (Rappsilber et al, 2007) and desalted using StageTips (Rappsilber et al, 2003) before MS analysis.   Mass spectrometry Peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column, packed with C18 material (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 µm; Dr Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using a self-assembled particle frit into the spray emitter (Ishihama et al, 2002), at a flow rate of 0.7 µl/min. A linear gradient going from 5% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid to 23% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid in 90 min eluted the peptides at 0.3 µl/min into an LTQ-Orbitrap classic. Peptides were analysed using a high/high strategy, detecting them at high resolution in the Orbitrap, and analysing their fragments also in the Orbitrap. FTMS spectra were recorded at 100 000 resolution. The three highest intensity peaks with a charge state of three or higher were selected in each cycle for iontrap fragmentation and Orbitrap detection of the fragments at 7500 resolution. Dynamic exclusion was set to 90 s and repeat count was 1. This resulted in a cycle time of up to 5 s and an average cycle time of 3 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw files were processed into peak lists using MaxQuant version 1.2.2.516 using default pa-rameters except the setting for “Top MS/MS peaks per 100 Da” being set to 100. Peak lists were searched against a database of all Pol II proteins using Xi for identification of cross-linked peptides. Search parameters were MS accuracy, 6 ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 20 ppm; enzyme, trypsin; specificity, fully tryptic; allowed number of missed cleavages, four; cross-linker, BS3; fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications, oxidation on methionine, hydrolyzed, amidated and loop-linked versions of BS3. The linkage specificity for BS3 was assumed to be at lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine and protein N-termini. The decoy database was generated by inverting each target protein.

### Publication Abstract
Cross-linking/mass spectrometry is an increasingly popular approach to obtain structural information on proteins and their complexes in solution. However, methods for error assessment are under current development. We note that false-discovery rates can be estimated at different points during data analysis, and are most relevant for residue or protein pairs. Missing this point led in our example analysis to an actual 8.4% error when 5% error was targeted. In addition, prefiltering of peptide-spectrum matches and of identified peptide pairs substantially improved results. In our example, this prefiltering increased the number of residue pairs (5% FDR) by 33% (n = 108 to n = 144). This number improvement did not come at the expense of reduced accuracy as the added data agreed with an available crystal structure. We provide an open-source tool, xiFDR ( https://github.com/rappsilberlab/xiFDR ), that implements our observations for routine application. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004749.

### Keywords
Cross-linking, Fdr, Polii

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, United Kingdom.  Chair of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany.
Technische Universität Berlin

### Submitter
Lutz Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, United Kingdom.  Chair of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany.


