### Accession
PXD002473

### Title
Improving Genome Annotation of Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli TW10598 by a Label-Free Quantitative MS/MS Approach

### Description
The most commonly used genome annotation processes are to a great extent based on computational methods. However, those can only predict genes that have been described earlier or that have sequence signatures indicative of a gene function. We reported a synonymous proteogenomic approach for experimentally improving microbial genome annotation based on label-free quantitative MS/MS. The approach was exemplified by analysis of cell extracts from in vitro cultured enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) strain TW10598, as part of an effort to create a new reference ETEC genome sequence. The proteomic analysis yielded identification of 2,060 proteins, out of which 274 proteins were originally described as hypothetical. For 84% of the identified proteins we have provided description of their relative quantitative levels, among others, for 20 abundantly expressed ETEC virulence factors. Proteogenomic mapping supported the existence of four protein-coding genes that had not been annotated, and led to correction of translation start positions of another nine.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell lysates were processed according to the Multiple Enzymes for sample Digestion – Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (MED-FASP) protocol. Briefly, cell lysates were first incubated with 10 mM DTT in 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (AmBic) (at solution to total protein ratio (v/w) 1:10) for 45 min at 56°C. An aliquot containing 100 μg of total protein was then mixed with 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5 (UA) in YM-30 Microcon filter units (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA) and centrifuged at 14,000 × g, 21°C, for 15 min. After discarding the eluate, the filtration unit was washed once with the UA buffer (14,000 × g, 20°C, 15 min). In the next step, 0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA was added to the filter and samples were incubated in dark for 20 min. The filter was washed twice with UA followed by two washes with 50 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.5. Proteins were digested in 0.05 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5 at 30°C for 18 h, using endoproteinase LysC (Wako Chemicals, Richmond, VA) at an enzyme to protein (v/w) ratio of 1:50. The released peptides were collected by centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 10 min, followed by two elutions with MS-grade water (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Material remaining on the filter was digested with trypsin (Promega) in 40 mM AmBic at 37 °C for 18 h (enzyme to protein ratio (v/w) of 1:100). Peptides released by trypsin were collected as described above. The resulting peptide mixtures were first desalted by using in-house made RP-C18 STAGE tips, then lyophilized at 30°C in a vacuum concentrator (Concentrator Plus®, Eppendorf) and stored in -70°C until further analysis. Prior to the LC-MS/MS analysis the peptide mixtures were resuspended in 5% formic acid (FA) and 2% acetonitrile (ACN).  The MS/MS analysis was carried out at the Proteomics Unit at the University of Bergen (PROBE) on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) connected to a linear quadrupole ion trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Velos Pro™, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Briefly, 0.5 – 1 µg protein was loaded onto a preconcentration column (Acclaim PepMap 100. 2 cm × 75 µm i.d. nanoViper column, packed with 3 µm C18 beads) at a flow rate of 5µl/min for 5 min using an isocratic flow of 0.1% FA (vol/vol) with 2% ACN (vol/vol). Peptides were separated during a biphasic ACN gradient from two nanoflow UPLC pumps (flow rate of 270 nl /min) on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 50cm x 75µm i.d. nanoViper column, packed with 3µm C18 beads). Solvent A and B was 0.1% FA (vol/vol) with 2% ACN or 90% ACN (vol/vol) respectively. Separated peptides were sprayed directly into the MS instrument during a 195 min LC run with the following gradient composition: 0-5 min 5%B, 5-5.5 min 8%B, 5.5-140 min 8–35%B, 140-155 min 35–90%B. Elution of very hydrophobic peptides and conditioning of the column was performed by isocratic elution with 90 %B (155-170 min) and 5%B (175-195 min) respectively. Desolvation and charge production were accomplished by a nanospray Flex ion source. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent-acquisition mode to automatically switch between Orbitrap-MS and linear trap quadrupole (LTQ)-MS/MS acquisition. Survey of full-scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution of R = 240.000 at m/z 400 (after accumulation to a target of 1,000,000 charges in the LTQ). The method used allowed sequential isolation of the most intense ions (up to 10, depending on signal intensity) for fragmentation on the linear ion trap using collisionally induced dissociation at a target value of 10,000 charges. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 18s. General mass spectrometry conditions were as follows: electrospray voltage, 1.8 kV; no sheath; and auxiliary gas flow. Ion selection threshold was 1000 counts for MS/MS. and an activation Q-value of 0.25 and activation time of 10 ms was also applied for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The proteomics software package MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.2) was used to analyse MS raw data. Acquired MS and MS/MS spectra were searched against the following databases: reviewed E. coli proteins from the Uniprot database (28,592 entries, downloaded on the 11st November 2014) and 6-frame translation of TW10598 genomic sequence (141,652 and 6,102 entries for chromosome and plasmids, respectively) by the Andromeda search engine integrated in the MaxQuant framework. Enzyme specificity was defined in group-specific parameters as either to trypsin or LysC, allowing N-terminal cleavage to proline. The spectra of the LysC and tryptic fractions originating from the same biological replica were combined in MaxQuant. Standard settings were used for MaxQuant searches, except that lysine acetylation and glutamate/ glutamine conversion to pyro-glutamate were set as variable modifications in addition to N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation. The “match between runs” option was enabled to match identifications across different replicates.

### Publication Abstract
The most commonly used genome annotation processes are to a great extent based on computational methods. However, those can only predict genes that have been described earlier or that have sequence signatures indicative of a gene function. Here, we report a synonymous proteogenomic approach for experimentally improving microbial genome annotation based on label-free quantitative MS/MS. The approach is exemplified by analysis of cell extracts from in vitro cultured enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) strain TW10598, as part of an effort to create a new reference ETEC genome sequence. The proteomic analysis yielded identification of 2060 proteins, out of which 312 proteins were originally described as hypothetical. For 84% of the identified proteins we have provided description of their relative quantitative levels, among others, for 20 abundantly expressed ETEC virulence factors. Proteogenomic mapping supported the existence of four protein-coding genes that had not been annotated, and led to correction of translation start positions of another nine. The addition of the proteomic analysis into TW10598 genome re-annotation project improved quality of the annotation, and provided experimental evidence for a significant portion of ETEC expressed proteome. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002473 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD002473).

### Keywords
Enterotoxigenic escherichia coli, Synonymous proteogenomics, Genome annotation, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
University of Bergen
The Gade Research Group for Infection and Immunity, Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Veronika Kucharova

### Lab Head
Dr Harald G. Wiker
The Gade Research Group for Infection and Immunity, Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Norway


