### Accession
PXD006933

### Title
THE PROTEOME SPECIATION OF AN IMMORTALIZED CYSTIC FIBROSIS CELL LINE: NEW PERSPECTIVES ON THE PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF THE DISEASE.

### Description
Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is a recessively inherited disease caused by mutations in the Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator (CFTR) gene. CFTR has a pivotal role in the onset of CF, and several proteins are directly or indirectly involved in its homeostasis. To study these CFTR interactors at protein species level, we used a functional proteomics approach combining 2D-DIGE, mass spectrometry and enrichment analysis. A human cystic fibrosis bronchial epithelial cell line (CFBE41o-) was  used for analysis. 74 differentially expressed spots were identified and some were validated by western-blot. Enrichment analysis highlighted molecular pathways in which ezrin, HSP70, endoplasmin and lamin A/C, in addition to CFTR, were considered central hubs in CFTR homeostasis. These proteins acquire different functions through post-translational modifications, emphasizing the importance of studying the CF proteome at protein species level. Moreover, serpin H1, prelamin A/C, protein-SET and cystatin-B were associated for the first time to CF, demonstrating the importance of heat shock response, cross-talk between the cytoskeleton and signal transduction, chronic inflammation and alteration of CFTR gating in the pathophysiology of the disease. These results open new perspectives for the understanding of the proteostasis network, characteristic of CF pathology, and could provide a springboard for new therapeutic strategies.

### Sample Protocol
After visualization by using a SYPRO Ruby staining protocol, all the spots of interest were mechanically excised, destained in 2.5 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 50% acetonitrile and finally, dehydrated in acetonitrile. They were then re-hydrated in trypsin solution and an in-gel protein digestion was performed by overnight with incubation at 37°C. Tryptic digests that did not produce MALDI-TOF unambiguous identifications were subjected to peptide sequencing on a nanoscale LC–ESI/MS-MS. All the analyses were carried out on an LC–MS system consisting of a PHOENIX 40 (ThermoQuest Ltd., Hemel Hempstead, U.K.) and an LCQ DECA IonTrap mass spectrometer (Finnigan, SanJose, CA, USA). The peptides, after a manual injection (5µL) into a six-port valve, were trapped in a C18 trapping column (20mm x 100µm ID x 360 µm OD, Nanoseparations, Nieuwkoop, NL) using a 100% solvent A (HPLC grade water and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) under a flow rate of 5 µl/min for 10 min. A linear gradient up to 60% solvent B (acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) for 30 min was used for analytical separation and, using a pre-column splitter restrictor, we obtained a column flow rate of 100–125 nl/min on a C18 analytical column (30cm x 50 µm ID x 360 µm OD, Nanoseparations) was obtained. Before the injection of the next sample, both the trapping and analytical columns were equilibrated for 10 min in 100% solvent B and for 10 min in 100% solvent A. The ESI emitter, a gold-coated fused silica (5cm x 25 µm ID x 360 µm OD, Nanoseparations), was heated to 195°C.  High voltage of 2 kV was applied for stable spray operation. The LC pump, the mass spectrometer as well as the automatic mass spectra acquisitions were controlled using the Xcalibur 1.2 system software (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS ions search was carried out against UniProtKB databases using MASCOT. Taxonomy was limited to Homo sapiens, peptide precursor charge was set to 2+ or 3+, mass tolerance of ±1.2Da for precursor peptide and ±0.6Da for fragment peptides was allowed and the number of accepted missed cleavage sites was set to one. Alkylation of cysteine by carbamidomethylation was taken considered as a ﬁxed modiﬁcation, while oxidation was considered as variable modification. An MS/MS protein identification was only accepted when at least two peptides, with individual ions scores p<0.05, were associated unambiguously to the same protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cftr, Laminopathies, Lc-ms/ms, Cystic fibrosis, 2d-dige

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Functional Proteomics,  Department of Life Sciences, University of Siena.  Siena, Italy.
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Michele Puglia

### Lab Head
Dr Luca Bini
Laboratory of Functional Proteomics,  Department of Life Sciences, University of Siena.  Siena, Italy.


