### Accession
PXD023952

### Title
Metabolic flexibility and expression of CD98 define the low density neutrophils mobilised in response to G-CSF

### Description
Low density neutrophils (LDN) co-purify with mononuclear cells during density-gradient separation of peripheral blood. LDN are rarely detected in healthy individuals but appear in the peripheral blood (PB) of patients with inflammatory diseases, malignancies and in individuals treated with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF).  Using human G-CSF mobilized LDN, this study reveals that LDN are transcriptionally, proteomically and metabolically distinct from other neutrophils. Single Cell RNAseq analysis reveals that LDN from these donors comprise one major population, with multiple interrelated transcriptional states, representing the continuum of neutrophil maturation. LDN can engage both glycolysis and mitochondrial respiration to meet energy demands, which affords increased metabolically flexibility in the nutrient perturbed tissue environments found in tumours and inflammatory diseases. This study also identifies upregulated expression of CD98, a transporter for branch chain and aromatic amino acids, as a cell surface marker for LDN in peripheral blood. CD98 may contribute to the functional properties of LDNs and represents a useful phenotypic marker.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were resuspended in 6M Urea, 100 mM DTT and 100 mM Tris-HCl pH7.0 and subjected to protein digestion using a FASP (filter aided sample preparation) column (ref: Wisniewski, J. R., Zougman, A., Mann, M., Combination of FASP and StageTip-based fractionation allows in-depth analysis of the hippocampal membrane proteome. Journal of proteome research 2009, 8, 5674-5678). Peptides were lyophilised to dryness and stored at -80C. Peptides were resuspended in 2% ACN/1% FA and injected and separated by reversed-phase liquid chromatography on a M-class UHPLC system (Waters, USA) using a 250 mm × 75 m column (1.6m C18, packed emitter tip; Ion Opticks, Australia) with a linear 90-min gradient at a flow rate of 400 nl/min from 98% solvent A (0.1% Formic acid in Milli-Q water) to 35% solvent B (0.1% Formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile). The nano-UPLC was coupled on-line to an Impact II mass spectrometer equipped with a CaptiveSpray ionization source (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) and column oven at 40C (Sonation, Germany). The Impact II was operated in a data-dependent mode using a 1.5 second cycle time, switching automatically between one full-scan 4Hz and subsequent MS/MS scans for the remaining time with spectra rate determined using peptide intensity. The instrument was controlled using otofControl version 4.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3). The database search was performed using the Uniprot Homo sapiens database plus common contaminants with strict trypsin specificity allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. The minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was a fixed modification while N-acetylation of proteins N-termini and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. During the MaxQuant main search, precursor ion mass error tolerance was set to 0.006 Da. PSM and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with the match between runs and LFQ options enabled.  Further analysis was performed using a custom pipeline developed in R (3.6.1), which utilizes the LFQ intensity values in the MaxQuant output file proteinGroups.txt. Proteins not found in at least 50% of the replicates in one group were removed. Missing values were imputed using a random normal distribution of values with the mean set at mean of the real distribution of values minus 1.8 s.d., and a s.d. of 0.3 times the s.d. of the distribution of the measured intensities. The probability of differential site modification expression between groups was calculated using the Limma R package (3.4.2). Probability values were corrected for multiple testing using Benjamini–Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteogenomics, Neutrophils, G-csf

### Affiliations
WEHI
Laboratory Head

### Submitter
Jarrod Sandow

### Lab Head
Dr Ian Wicks
Laboratory Head


