### Accession
PXD000512

### Title
Mouse aging oocyte proteome comparison

### Description
Here we asked if oocyte proteomes are representative of the transcriptomes, how the abundance of specific genes’ mRNA and protein responds to maternal aging, and if oocyte aging presents the features characteristic of somatic aging. To address these questions on the proteomic level, we employed stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC; Geiger et al. 2011) as the method of choice, and performed a SILAC screen of mouse metaphase II (MII) oocytes superovulated at 3, 8+-1 and 58+-10 weeks of maternal age, which correspond to pre-puberty, mature age and climacterium, respectively. We used heavy F9 embryonic carcinoma (EC) cells as internal or "Spike-in" standard for the quantification of oocytes proteins because in contrast to the oocytes they can easily be cultured feeder-free, have stem cell properties and should harbor the majority of all oocyte proteins (although with different relative abundances). The SILAC screen was conducted in parallel with conventional microarray analysis to compare the concordance of protein and transcript levels in these oocytes. Associated microarray data have been deposited to NCBI GEO with accession number GSE42959.

### Sample Protocol
F9 embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells used here as a "heavy"-labeled Spike-in standard were grown for several passages in RPMI 1640 medium (PAA, Cölbe, Germany), supplemented with 10% dialyzed foetal calf serum (Sigma, Deisenhofen, Germany), heavy amino acids 13C615N2-L-Lysine (K8) and 13C615N4-L-Arginine (R10; Silantes, Martinsried, Germany) and Glutamine, and the antibiotics penicillin and streptomycin (Gibco, Darmstadt, Germany). Zona-free oocytes and F9 cells were both lysed in SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 0.1 M DTT, total volume 70 μl). After mixing both lysates in a 1:1 ratio, the mixtures were processed by the FASP-SAX procedure (Wisniewski et al. 2009). Peptide fractions obtained from the FASP-SAX procedure were analysed by LC-MS/MS on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA 02454, USA), equipped with an Easy nano-LC system and a nano electrospray source (both from Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Peptides were separated by reversed-phase chromatography on fused silica capillary chromatography columns (15 cm length, ID 75 μm; New Objectives Inc., Woburn, MA 01801, USA) that were packed in-house with Reprosil pure C18 material (3 μm; Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). Gradients from 2 to 27% of buffer B (80% acetonitril, 0.5% acetic acid) were used for the SAX flow through fractions, for the pH 11 washing step and for the first elution at pH 8; from 5 to 35% B for SAX elution steps at pH 6 and pH 5; and from 8 to 40% B for the SAX elution steps at pH 4 and pH 3. Each gradient lasted 190 min and was followed by a gradient over 10 min to 90% B and further elution at 90% B for 5 min before the column was equilibrated again with starting buffer A (0.5% acetic acid). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (positive ion mode, source voltage 2.1 kV), automatically switching between a survey scan (mass range m/z = 350-1650, target value = 1 x 10E6; resolution R = 60 K; lock mass set to background ion 445.120025) and MS/MS acquisition of the 15 most intense peaks by collisional-induced dissociation in the ion trap (isolation width m/z = 2.0; normalized collision energy 35%; dynamic exclusion enabled with repeat count 1, repeat duration 30.0, exclusion list size 500 and exclusion duration set to 90 s; double charge and higher charges were allowed).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed by MaxQuant software (v 1.2.2.5) involving the built-in Andromeda search engine. The search was performed against the International Protein Index database (mouse IPI version 3.73; (Kerseyet al. 2004) concatenated with reversed sequence versions of all entries and supplemented with common contaminants. Parameters defined for the search were: Trypsin as the digesting enzyme, allowing two missed cleavages; a minimum length of six amino acids; carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues as fixed modification, oxidation at methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The maximum allowed mass deviation was 20 ppm for the MS and 0.5 Da for the MS/MS scans. Protein groups were identified with a false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1% for all peptide and protein identifications separately, when there were at least two matching peptides, at least one of which was unique to the protein group. Primary quantification was performed using the heavy F9 lysate mix as an internal standard, and ratios between corresponding heavy and light peptide versions were normalized to this mix and expressed as H/L (i.e. Heavy/Light SILAC internal standard/sample). All of these primary protein ratios are the means of at least two (heavy and light) peptide ratios. Direct comparison of oocyte samples was achieved by a ‘ratio-of-ratios’ calculation, which is possible because the internal standard was the same for all samples (Geiger et al. 2011, Monetti et al. 2011).

### Publication Abstract
The long-standing view of 'immortal germline vs mortal soma' poses a fundamental question in biology concerning how oocytes age in molecular terms. A mainstream hypothesis is that maternal ageing of oocytes has its roots in gene transcription. Investigating the proteins resulting from mRNA translation would reveal how far the levels of functionally available proteins correlate with mRNAs and would offer novel insights into the changes oocytes undergo during maternal ageing. Gene ontology (GO) semantic analysis revealed a high similarity of the detected proteome (2324 proteins) to the transcriptome (22&#x200a;334 mRNAs), although not all proteins had a cognate mRNA. Concerning their dynamics, fourfold changes of abundance were more frequent in the proteome (3%) than the transcriptome (0.05%), with no correlation. Whereas proteins associated with the nucleus (e.g. structural maintenance of chromosomes and spindle-assembly checkpoints) were largely represented among those that change in oocytes during maternal ageing; proteins associated with oxidative stress/damage (e.g. superoxide dismutase) were infrequent. These quantitative alterations are either impoverishing or enriching. Using GO analysis, these alterations do not relate in any simple way to the classic signature of ageing known from somatic tissues. Given the lack of correlation, we conclude that proteome analysis of mouse oocytes may not be surrogated with transcriptome analysis. Furthermore, we conclude that the classic features of ageing may not be transposed from somatic tissues to oocytes in a one-to-one fashion. Overall, there is more to the maternal ageing of oocytes than mere cellular deterioration exemplified by the notorious increase of meiotic aneuploidy.

### Keywords
Mus musculus, Spike-in, Silac, Oocyte, Embryonal carcinoma cells

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry, Röntgenstr. 20, D-48149 Münster Germany
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C.A. Drexler
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry, Röntgenstr. 20, D-48149 Münster Germany


