### Accession
PXD038912

### Title
NDR kinase Tricornered genetically interacts with Ccm3 and metabolic enzymes in Drosophila melanogaster tracheal development

### Description
The GckIII pathway is a Hippo-like kinase module defined by sequential activation of Ste20 kinases Thousand and One (Tao) and Germinal Center Kinase III (GckIII), followed by nuclear dbf2-related (NDR) kinase Tricornered (Trc). We previously uncovered a role for the GckIII pathway in regulating tube morphology in the Drosophila melanogaster tracheal (respiratory) system. The trachea form a network of branched epithelial tubes essential for oxygen transport, and are structurally analogous to branched tubular organs in vertebrates, such as the vascular system. In the absence of GckIII pathway function, aberrant dilations form in tracheal tubes characterised by mislocalized junctional and apical proteins, suggesting that the GckIII pathway is important in maintaining tube integrity in development. Here, we observed a genetic interaction between trc and Cerebral cavernous malformations 3 (Ccm3), the Drosophila ortholog of a human vascular disease gene, supporting our hypothesis that the GckIII pathway functions downstream of Ccm3 in trachea, and potentially in the vertebrate cerebral vasculature. However, how GckIII pathway signalling is regulated and the mechanisms that underpin its function in tracheal development are unknown. We undertook biochemical and genetic approaches to identify proteins that interact with Trc, the most downstream GckIII pathway kinase. We found that known GckIII and NDR scaffold proteins are likely to control GckIII pathway signalling in tracheal development, consistent with their conserved roles in Hippo-like modules. Furthermore, we show genetic interactions between trc and multiple enzymes in glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation, suggesting a potential function of the GckIII pathway in integrating cellular energy requirements with maintenance of tube integrity.

### Sample Protocol
Protein complexes containing Trc-GFP and associated interactors were purified from 0-16 hr embryos obtained from a cross between the ubiquitously expressed da-GAL4 driver (55851, Bloomington) and UAS-Trc-GFP (32090, Bloomington). Extraction and protein purification were carried out as described in Neumüller RA, et al. (2012) Genetics 190(3):931–940. Briefly, extracts were prepared using Default Lysis Buffer, spun down to clarify, incubated first with empty agarose beads, then with GFP-Trap beads, followed by washes and elution in SDS sample buffer. The eluates were loaded on SDS-polyacrylimide gel, and electrophoresed so that the dye front migrated ~1 cm in the separating gel. The gel was then stained with Coomassie blue, and the lane was cut into two 5 mm x 5 mm pieces and sent for mass spectrometry analysis (Taplin Mass Spectrometry Facility, Harvard Medical School). Samples were digested with trypsin in-gel and peptides were analyzed using Thermo Scientific Orbitrap mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometry analysis was conducted on two biological replicates for experimental samples (Trc-GFP), and two biological replicates for controls (GFP alone). See included Excel file for sample information.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Sequest and searches were run using a database of annotated Drosophila proteins. Mass tolerance = 2, mass units = amu, fragment ion tolerance = 1, ion series = nB;nY;b;y, Mods = 15.9949146221 M 14.0157 C, enzyme = trypsin. C = 57.0214 was used as a static mod (iodoacetamide). Even though the search used a large mass tolerance the data were filtered at the ppm level. Data were further analyzed using the SAINT algorithm (Choi et al., 2011)(Supplemental Table S1, included here).

### Publication Abstract
The Germinal Center Kinase III (GckIII) pathway is a Hippo-like kinase module defined by sequential activation of Ste20 kinases Thousand and One (Tao) and GckIII, followed by nuclear dbf2-related (NDR) kinase Tricornered (Trc). We previously uncovered a role for the GckIII pathway in Drosophila melanogaster tracheal (respiratory) tube morphology. The trachea form a network of branched epithelial tubes essential for oxygen transport, and are structurally analogous to branched tubular organs in vertebrates, such as the vascular system. In the absence of GckIII pathway function, aberrant dilations form in tracheal tubes characterized by mislocalized junctional and apical proteins, suggesting that the pathway is important in maintaining tube integrity in development. Here, we observed a genetic interaction between trc and Cerebral cavernous malformations 3 (Ccm3), the Drosophila ortholog of a human vascular disease gene, supporting our hypothesis that the GckIII pathway functions downstream of Ccm3 in trachea, and potentially in the vertebrate cerebral vasculature. However, how GckIII pathway signaling is regulated and the mechanisms that underpin its function in tracheal development are unknown. We undertook biochemical and genetic approaches to identify proteins that interact with Trc, the most downstream GckIII pathway kinase. We found that known GckIII and NDR scaffold proteins are likely to control GckIII pathway signaling in tracheal development, consistent with their conserved roles in Hippo-like modules. Furthermore, we show genetic interactions between trc and multiple enzymes in glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation, suggesting a potential function of the GckIII pathway in integrating cellular energy requirements with maintenance of tube integrity.

### Keywords
Tricornered, Drosophila, Trachea, Ndr kinase

### Affiliations
University of Massachusetts Boston
Biology Department University of Massachusetts Boston Boston, USA

### Submitter
Alexey Veraksa

### Lab Head
Dr Alexey Veraksa
Biology Department University of Massachusetts Boston Boston, USA


