### Accession
PXD012809

### Title
Interaction networks of Weibel-Palade body regulators syntaxin-3 and syntaxin binding protein 5 in endothelial cells

### Description
The endothelium stores the hemostatic protein Von Willebrand factor (VWF) in endothelial storage organelles called Weibel-Palade bodies (WPBs). During maturation, WPBs recruit a complex of Rab GTPases and effectors that associate with components of the SNARE machinery that control WPB exocytosis. Recent genome wide association studies have found links between genetic variations in the SNAREs syntaxin-2 (STX2) and syntaxin binding protein 5 (STXBP5) and VWF plasma levels, suggesting a role for SNARE proteins in regulating VWF release. Moreover, we have previously identified the SNARE proteins syntaxin-3 and STXBP1 as regulators of WPB release. In this study we used an unbiased iterative interactomic approach to identify new components of the WPB exocytotic machinery. An interactome screen of syntaxin-3 identifies a number of SNAREs and SNARE associated proteins (STXBP2, STXBP5, SNAP23, NAPA and NSF). We show that the VAMP-like domain (VLD) of STXBP5 is indispensable for the interaction with SNARE proteins and this capacity of the VLD could be exploited to identify an extended set of novel endothelial SNARE interactors of STXBP5. In addition, an STXBP5 variant with an N436S substitution, which is linked to lower VWF plasma levels, does not show a difference in interactome when compared with WT STXBP5.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitated proteins were reduced on-bead in 1 M urea (Life technologies), 10 mM DTT (Thermo Scientific) in 100 mM TRIS-HCl pH 7.5 (Life technologies) for 20 minutes at 20°C and alkylated with 50mM iodoacetamide (Life technologies) for 10 minutes at 20°C. Proteins were detached from the GFP-nanobody beads by incubation with 250 ng MS-grade trypsin (Promega) for 2 hours at 20°C. Beads were removed and proteins were further digested for 16 hours at 20°C with 350 ng MS-grade trypsin (Promega). Tryptic peptides were desalted and concentrated using Empore-C18 StageTips and eluted with 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile. Sample volume was reduced by SpeedVac and supplemented with 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA to a final volume of 5 μl. 3 μl of each sample was injected for MS analysis.  Tryptic peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse phase chromatography coupled on-line to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex Ion Source, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a 20 cm 75–360 µm inner-outer diameter fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH). The column was installed on a Dionex Ultimate3000 RSLC nanoSystem (Thermo Scientific) using a MicroTee union formatted for 360 μm outer diameter columns (IDEX) and a liquid junction. The spray voltage was set to 2.15 kV. Buffer A was composed of 0.5% acetic acid and buffer B of 0.5% acetic acid, 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were loaded for 17 min at 300 nl/min at 5% buffer B, equilibrated for 5 minutes at 5%  buffer B (17-22 min) and eluted by increasing buffer B from 5-28% (22-80 min) and 28-40% (80-85 min), followed by a 5 minute wash to 95% and a 5 min regeneration to 5%. Survey scans of peptide precursors from 375 to 1500 m/z were performed at 240K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 1 × 106 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation with the quadrupole with isolation window 0.7, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 3 x 104 and the max injection time was 20 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–7 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 20 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 1 s cycles. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
RAW mass spectrometry files were processed with MaxQuant 1.6.0.13 using the human Uniprot database (downloaded March 2017). MaxQuant output tables were analyzed using R/Bioconductor (version 3.4.3/3.6) ‘reverse’, ‘potential contaminants’ and ‘only identified by site’ peptides were filtered out and label free quantification values were log2 transformed. Proteins with 100% valid values in at least one experimental group were selected. Missing values were imputed by normal distribution (width=0.3, shift = 1.8), assuming these proteins were close to the detection limit. Statistical analyses were performed using moderated t-tests in the LIMMA package.  Protein interactor significance was determined with a smooth cutoff based on the log2 fold change and p-value representing a 5% FDR. Proteins that were statistically significant both between mEGPF-“target protein”/nAb beads versus mEGPF-“target protein”/CTRL beads and versus mEGFP/nAb beads were considered high confidence interactors. The .raw MS files and search/identification files obtained with MaxQuant have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange. Interaction networks were visualized in Cytoscape v3.6.1 and compared to previously identified interactions of human syntaxin-3 and STXBP5 imported from the BioGrid database.

### Publication Abstract
The endothelium stores the hemostatic protein Von Willebrand factor (VWF) in endothelial storage organelles called Weibel-Palade bodies (WPBs). During maturation, WPBs recruit a complex of Rab GTPases and effectors that associate with components of the SNARE machinery that control WPB exocytosis. Recent genome wide association studies have found links between genetic variations in the SNAREs syntaxin-2 (STX2) and syntaxin binding protein 5 (STXBP5) and VWF plasma levels, suggesting a role for SNARE proteins in regulating VWF release. Moreover, we have previously identified the SNARE proteins syntaxin-3 and STXBP1 as regulators of WPB release. In this study we used an unbiased iterative interactomic approach to identify new components of the WPB exocytotic machinery. An interactome screen of syntaxin-3 identifies a number of SNAREs and SNARE associated proteins (STXBP2, STXBP5, SNAP23, NAPA and NSF). We show that the VAMP-like domain (VLD) of STXBP5 is indispensable for the interaction with SNARE proteins and this capacity of the VLD could be exploited to identify an extended set of novel endothelial SNARE interactors of STXBP5. In addition, an STXBP5 variant with an N436S substitution, which is linked to lower VWF plasma levels, does not show a difference in interactome when compared with WT STXBP5. SIGNIFICANCE: The hemostatic protein Von Willebrand factor plays a pivotal role in vascular health: quantitative or qualitative deficiencies of VWF can lead to bleeding, while elevated levels of VWF are associated with increased risk of thrombosis. Tight regulation of VWF secretion from WPBs is therefore essential to maintain vascular homeostasis. We used an unbiased proteomic screen to identify new components of the regulatory machinery that controls WPB exocytosis. Our data expand the endothelial SNARE protein network and provide a set of novel candidate WPB regulators that may contribute to regulation of VWF plasma levels and vascular health.

### Keywords
Weibel-palade body; snare protein; syntaxin; protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
Molecular and Cellular Hemostasis and 2Research Facilities, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner Laboratory, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands Hematology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
ErasmusMC

### Submitter
Ruben Bierings

### Lab Head
Dr Ruben Bierings
Molecular and Cellular Hemostasis and 2Research Facilities, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner Laboratory, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands Hematology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.


