### Accession
PXD001620

### Title
Phosphoproteomic characterization of infulenza A virus infected human macrophages

### Description
Human primary macrophages were infected with influenza A virus (H3N2/Udorn strain, HA 256) for 6 hrs or left untreated. Cells were collected and lysed with HEPES lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 % NP-40, pH 7.4) including protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails. The cell lysates were centrifuged and the supernatant was collected and the protein content was measured with Bio-Rad DC™ protein assay (Bio-Rad). The proteins were reduced, alkylated, and enzymatically digested in-solution with trypsin. The digestion was stopped by adding FA (final c = 1 %). The samples were centrifuged 9168 x g for 10 min and desalted with Sep-Pak Vac RP C18 cartridges (Waters, MA, USA), following fractionation by strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX). The peptides were separated on a 200 x 4.6 mm, 5 μm, 200 Å PolySULFOETHYL A™ column (PolyLC, USA). The fractions were vacuum centrifuged and desalted as before, following phosphopeptide-enrichment with PHOS-Select™ Iron Affinity Gel (Sigma Aldrich, MO, USA). LC-MS/MS was performed with a Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap tandem mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 nanoflow liquid chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A 100 μm x 3 cm trap column and a 75 μm x 15 cm analytical column were in-house packed with Magic C18AQ resin (200 Å, 5 μm; Michrom Bioresources). The mobile phases were 2% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid (A) and 95% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid (B). LC gradient elution condition was 2% B (0 min), 20% B (70 min), 40% B (100 min), and then 100% B (105-110 min), with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Data dependent acquisition was performed in positive ion mode. MS spectra were acquired from m/z 300 to m/z 2000 at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 with a target value of 1,000,000 and maximum injection time of 120 ms. The 10 most abundant precursor ions of which charge states were 2+ or higher were selected for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with an isolation window of 2 and normalized collision energy of 30. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200 with a target value of 50,000, maximum injection time of 250 ms, and the lowest mass fixed at m/z 100. Dynamic exclusion duration was 30 s.

### Sample Protocol
Human primary macrophages were infected with influenza A virus (H3N2/Udorn strain, HA 256) for 6 hrs or left untreated. Cells were collected and lysed with HEPES lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 % NP-40, pH 7.4) including protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails. The cell lysates were centrifuged and the supernatant was collected and the protein content was measured with Bio-Rad DC™ protein assay (Bio-Rad). The proteins were reduced, alkylated, and enzymatically digested in-solution with trypsin. The digestion was stopped by adding FA (final c = 1 %). The samples were centrifuged 9168 x g for 10 min and desalted with Sep-Pak Vac RP C18 cartridges (Waters, MA, USA), following fractionation by strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX). The peptides were separated on a 200 x 4.6 mm, 5 μm, 200 Å PolySULFOETHYL A™ column (PolyLC, USA). The fractions were vacuum centrifuged and desalted as before, following phosphopeptide-enrichment with PHOS-Select™ Iron Affinity Gel (Sigma Aldrich, MO, USA). LC-MS/MS was performed with a Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap tandem mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 nanoflow liquid chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A 100 μm x 3 cm trap column and a 75 μm x 15 cm analytical column were in-house packed with Magic C18AQ resin (200 Å, 5 μm; Michrom Bioresources). The mobile phases were 2% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid (A) and 95% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid (B). LC gradient elution condition was 2% B (0 min), 20% B (70 min), 40% B (100 min), and then 100% B (105-110 min), with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Data dependent acquisition was performed in positive ion mode. MS spectra were acquired from m/z 300 to m/z 2000 at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 with a target value of 1,000,000 and maximum injection time of 120 ms. The 10 most abundant precursor ions of which charge states were 2+ or higher were selected for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with an isolation window of 2 and normalized collision energy of 30. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200 with a target value of 50,000, maximum injection time of 250 ms, and the lowest mass fixed at m/z 100. Dynamic exclusion duration was 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data was searched with the Mascot database search engine (version 2.4.0) through the Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3) interface. Search criteria and filters: Enzyme Name: Trypsin, Maximum Missed Cleavage Sites: 2, Peptide charge: 2+, 3+, Instrument: ESI-TRAP, Taxonomy: All entries, Precursor Mass Tolerance: 5 ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02 Da, Dynamic Modifications: Oxidation (M), Phospho (ST), Phospho (Y), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Static Modification: Carbamidomethyl (C) Database used: SIM_SwissProt_2012_04_Human_Contaminants_Rev_120508.fasta (40678 sequences) Results filters: Maximum peptide rank: 1, Mascot peptide score threshold: 30. Peptides per protein: Minimum 1, count only rank 1 peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Influenza A viruses cause infections in the human respiratory tract and give rise to annual seasonal outbreaks, as well as more rarely dreaded pandemics. Influenza A viruses become quickly resistant to the virus-directed antiviral treatments, which are the current main treatment options. A promising alternative approach is to target host cell factors that are exploited by influenza viruses. To this end, we characterized the phosphoproteome of influenza A virus infected primary human macrophages to elucidate the intracellular signaling pathways and critical host factors activated upon influenza infection. We identified 1675 phosphoproteins, 4004 phosphopeptides and 4146 nonredundant phosphosites. The phosphorylation of 1113 proteins (66%) was regulated upon infection, highlighting the importance of such global phosphoproteomic profiling in primary cells. Notably, 285 of the identified phosphorylation sites have not been previously described in publicly available phosphorylation databases, despite many published large-scale phosphoproteome studies using human and mouse cell lines. Systematic bioinformatics analysis of the phosphoproteome data indicated that the phosphorylation of proteins involved in the ubiquitin/proteasome pathway (such as TRIM22 and TRIM25) and antiviral responses (such as MAVS) changed in infected macrophages. Proteins known to play roles in small GTPase-, mitogen-activated protein kinase-, and cyclin-dependent kinase- signaling were also regulated by phosphorylation upon infection. In particular, the influenza infection had a major influence on the phosphorylation profiles of a large number of cyclin-dependent kinase substrates. Functional studies using cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors showed that the cyclin-dependent kinase activity is required for efficient viral replication and for activation of the host antiviral responses. In addition, we show that cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors protect IAV-infected mice from death. In conclusion, we provide the first comprehensive phosphoproteome characterization of influenza A virus infection in primary human macrophages, and provide evidence that cyclin-dependent kinases represent potential therapeutic targets for more effective treatment of influenza infections.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Influenza a virus, Primary human macrophages

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki


