### Accession
PXD028657

### Title
Proteome of extracellular vesicles from the filamentous fungal pathogen Fusarium graminearum

### Description
We performed a comparative study to determine the proteome of extracellular vesicles (EVs) from the cereal pathogen Fusarium graminearum (Fgr), recovered from in vitro cultures. Label-free quantitative proteomics was used to find significant enrichment of proteins between EV samples, the secretome (secreted-soluble proteins) and the cell lysate. Our results show that some proteins were exclusive to EVs and were upregulated compared to the secretome or cell lysate.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates were obtained by griding mycelia with glass beads and centrifugation at 4000 g, retaining the supernatant. Secretomes were obtained by concentrating clarified supernatant with 3000 MWCO ultrafiltration columns. EVs were recovered from liquid cultures (n=3), which were grown on YNB with supplements for 5 days at 25°C with 100 rpm of agitation. Mycelia were removed and the supernatant concentrated and purified by size-exclusion chromatography. Fractions containing EVs were pooled and concentrated. Protein content of all samples was determined with a Qubit4. 15 µg of protein from EV fractions, secretome and cell lysates were loaded on an SDS-PAGE gel and resolved for 6 min at 150 V. The gel was fixed in 50% (v/v) methanol and 7% (v/v) acetic acid. Samples were excised and proteins were reduced with 2 mM TCEP for 1 h, alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min, and digested with 1 µg trypsin for 18 h at 37°C. Peptides were recovered with 85% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (v/v) TFA. Then peptides were lyophilised and resuspended in 5% (v/v) ACN and 0.5% (v/v) TFA.

### Data Protocol
One µg of peptides was injected twice per biological replicate in a nanoflow UPLC instrument (Scientific UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Thermo Fisher Scientific) attached to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a C18 PepMap 300 μm ID x 2 cm trapping column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and washed before separation with a 90-minute linear ACN gradient on an analytical column (BEH C18, 1.7 μm, 130 Å and 75 μm ID x 25 cm, Waters). Data were collected in data-dependent acquisition mode using an MS scan range of m/z 350 – 1500 and resolution of 60,000. HCD MS/MS spectra were collected for the 15 most intense ions per MS scan at 15,000 resolution with a normalised collision energy of 28% and an isolation window of 1.4 m/z. Raw MS data were analysed using MaxQuant 1.6.3.3. Peptide matching was performed with the Fgr Uniprot proteome (UP000070720, downloaded 9th of October 2019). Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Peptide mass tolerances were 20 ppm (first search) and 4.5 ppm (main search), and false discovery rate (FDR) cut offs were 0.01 for both proteins and peptides. Minimum and maximum peptide lengths were set to 8 and 25 respectively and match between runs was not selected. Label-free quantification (LFQ) of protein abundances was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm (doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M113.031591). Fast LFQ was selected and normalisation was skipped.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Fusarium</i>&amp;nbsp;<i>graminearum</i> (<i>Fgr</i>) is a devastating filamentous fungal pathogen that causes diseases in cereals, while producing mycotoxins that are toxic for humans and animals, and render grains unusable. Low efficiency in managing <i>Fgr</i> poses a constant need for identifying novel control mechanisms. Evidence that fungal extracellular vesicles (EVs) from pathogenic yeast have a role in human disease led us to question whether this is also true for fungal plant pathogens. We separated EVs from <i>Fgr</i> and performed a proteomic analysis to determine if EVs carry proteins with potential roles in pathogenesis. We revealed that protein effectors, which are crucial for fungal virulence, were detected in EV preparations and some of them did not contain predicted secretion signals. Furthermore, a transcriptomic analysis of corn (<i>Zea</i>&amp;nbsp;<i>mays</i>) plants infected by <i>Fgr</i> revealed that the genes of some of the effectors were highly expressed in vivo, suggesting that the <i>Fgr</i> EVs are a mechanism for the unconventional secretion of effectors and virulence factors. Our results expand the knowledge on fungal EVs in plant pathogenesis and cross-kingdom communication, and may contribute to the discovery of new antifungals.

### Keywords
Fungi, Fusarium graminearum, Extracellular vesicles, Fusarium head blight

### Affiliations
La Trobe University

### Submitter
Donovan Garcia Ceron

### Lab Head
Dr Marilyn Anne Anderson
La Trobe University


