### Accession
PXD026090

### Title
Identification of phosphorylated residues on human MX2 obtained from 293T cells

### Description
Determination of MX2 positions subjected to phosphorylation using C-terminally Flag-tagged protein overexprtessed in 293T cells on on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos.

### Sample Protocol
C-terminally Flag-tagged MX2 was expressed in 293T cells and immunoprecipitated using anti-Flag magnetic beads. Immunoprecipitated protein samples were reduced, alkylated and digested in-gel using Lys-C endoproteinase. The resulting peptides were re-suspended in 20 µl sample solution (3% MeCN, 0.1% trifluroacetic acid) and LC-MSMS data acquisition was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (ThermoFisher) coupled to an RSLC3000 nanoHPLCs (ThermoFisher). The Fusion Lumos was configured with an EASYspray source using a 50 cm PepMap EASYspray emitter at 40°C. The nanoHPLC was operated with solvent A (0.1% CH2O2) and solvent B (80% MeCN, 0.1% CH2O2) at 250 nl/min with peptides resolved using a gradient rising from 3 to 40% solvent B by 60 min. MS data were acquired at 120k resolution between m/z 375 and 1500 with an AGC target of 4.0e5. MS2 isolation was performed in the quadrupole with HCD activation and 30% collision energy with fragment ions scanned in the Orbitrap at 30k resolution.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed in PEAKS 8 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Ontario). A precursor mass error tolerance of 4.0 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.02 Da was used with a Uniprot Human database (downloaded 15/01/19), with the search performed using the default 485 built-in modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Mx2, Ptm, Antiviral, Interferon

### Affiliations
Department of Infectious Diseases, School of Immunology and Microbial Sciences
King's College London

### Submitter
Gilberto Betancor

### Lab Head
Dr Michael H Malim
Department of Infectious Diseases, School of Immunology and Microbial Sciences


