### Accession
PXD003938

### Title
Mouse Smooth muscle cell secretome with Anti-miR / pre-miR treatment

### Description
Overexpression and inhibition of miR-29 (pre-miR and anti-miR to miR-29b) in murine aortic smooth muscle cells, analysis of their secretome (conditioned media after serum starvation), n=3 for all four groups (pre-miR control, pre-miR-29b, anti-miR control, anti-miR-29b).

### Sample Protocol
-Incubation in serum-free medium (72h)  -Collection of the conditioned medium (“secretome”)  -Gel-LC-MS of mouse smooth muscle cell secretome

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3). Mascot was set up to search the SwissProt_57.15 database (selected for Mus musculus and Bos taurus) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Two missed cleavages were allowed. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.80 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 ppm. Iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine was specified in Mascot as a variable modification. Scaffold (version Scaffold_3.1.4.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 independent peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Abnormal remodeling of atherosclerotic plaques can lead to rupture, acute myocardial infarction, and death. Enhancement of plaque extracellular matrix (ECM) may improve plaque morphology and stabilize lesions. Here, we demonstrate that chronic administration of LNA-miR-29 into an atherosclerotic mouse model improves indices of plaque morphology. This occurs due to upregulation of miR-29 target genes of the ECM (col1A and col3A) resulting in reduced lesion size, enhanced fibrous cap thickness, and reduced necrotic zones. Sustained LNA-miR-29 treatment did not affect circulating lipids, blood chemistry, or ECM of solid organs including liver, lung, kidney, spleen, or heart. Collectively, these data support the idea that antagonizing miR-29 may promote beneficial plaque remodeling as an independent approach to stabilize vulnerable atherosclerotic lesions.

### Keywords
Smooth muscle cell, Mouse, Mir-29

### Affiliations
Cardiovascular Proteomics, Cardiology, James Black Centre, King's College University
Cardiovascular Division, King's College London

### Submitter
Xiaoke Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Mayr
Cardiovascular Proteomics, Cardiology, James Black Centre, King's College University


