### Accession
PXD022649

### Title
The power of many: Combining published datasets to identify Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers in cerebrospinal fluid

### Description
This manuscript describes methodology for the meta-analysis of published proteomics datasets from multiple publications to mine for cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)-based diagnostic biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease (AD).The identified biomarkers are then validated in an independent cohort analyzed in house and two additional published large datasets. Specifically, the published data was mined from 6 independent and a 7th in-house acquired CSF proteomic datasets resulting in a meta-cohort with 73 AD cases and 77 controls. In-depth data analysis revealed 35 CSF biomarker candidates, many of which are associated with brain glucose homeostasis, which is described to be dysregulated in AD. Next, the list of identified biomarker candidates were then validated in a 2-pronged approach using i) an independent cohort analyzed in house, and ii) two recently published independent large scale datasets comprising in total more than 500 samples. The resulting biomarker panel consisting of three glycolytic enzymes was found to discriminate AD from controls. To our knowledge, this is the first study that described the mining and systematic re-analysis of previously published liquid chromatography mass spectrometry-based proteomics data to identify and validate biomarkers in general and CSF biomarkers for AD in particular. While the presented study focused on AD, the presented workflow can be applied to any disease for which published datasets are available.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Processing, Digestion and Clean-up CSF samples were prepared for proteomic analysis using an in-house-developed MStern Blotting protocol which was adapted for CSF samples (Bennike & Steen, 2017, Bennike et al., 2018, Berger et al., 2015). Briefly, 100 µL of CSF samples were processed using a PVDF 96-well membrane plate (Merck-Millipore, MA, USA). Initially, the 100 µL of CSF was mixed with 100 µL Urea buffer (8M in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). To further reduce the disulphide bonds on the proteins 30 µL Dithiothreitol (DTT) (0.05 M in water) was added and incubated in a thermomixer (300rpm) for 20 minutes at room temperature. To prevent the re-formation of disulphide bonds, 30 µL Iodoacetamide (IAA) (0.25 M in water) was added and incubated in a thermomixer (300rpm) for 20 minutes at room temperature in the dark.  Reduced and alkylated CSF protein suspension was transferred to a 96 well polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane (MSIPS4510, Millipore, MA, USA), which had been activated with 150 µL 70% ethanol and subsequently primed with 200 µL of urea buffer. To facilitate the transfer of the solution through the PVDF membrane a vacuum manifold was used. CSF proteins are captured on the PVDF membrane and were washed with 200 µL 50 mM ABC before applying 100 µL digestion buffer (0.4 µg Trypsin (V5111, Promega, WI, USA) in 50 mM ABC) to the 96-wells plate. The 96-wells plate was wrapped in parafilm and put in a 37°C dark humidified incubator for two hours to facilitate digestion of the proteins. After incubation, the remaining digestion buffer was evacuated from the 96-wells PVDF membrane plate using a vacuum manifold. Proteins, now peptides, were eluted twice with 150 µL of 40 % acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA). The flow-through was pooled in a 96-wells plate which was centrifuged to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge. For sample desalting, peptides were resuspended in 100 µL of 0.1% FA and transferred to a 96 wells MACROSPIN C18 plate (Targa, Nest Group, MA, USA) which had previously been activated with 100 µL of 70% ACN, 0.1% FA followed conditioning with 100 µL 0.1% FA. To transfer the solutions through the MACROSPIN C18 plate, the plates were centrifuged at 2000g for two minutes. After capturing the peptides on the C18 beads the plate was washed with 100 µL of 0.1% FA followed by eluting the peptides with 100 µL 40% ACN, 0.1% FA and 100 µL 70% ACN, 0.1% FA. The captured eluents were dried down in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -20°C until analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis To validate the biomarker candidates the prepared CSF samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). First, the tryptic digests were resuspended in 20 µL resuspension buffer (5% ACN, 5% FA) and placed into a nanoflow HPLC pump module LC autosampler (Eksigent/Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) where 4 µL of the sample was loaded onto a PicoChip column (150 μm × 10 cm Acquity BEH C18 1.7 μm 130 Å, New Objective, Woburn, MA) which was kept at 50°C. The peptides were eluted off the PicoChip column using 2% of solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN) in solvent A (0.1% FA), which was increased from 2 to 30% in a 40 min ramp gradient and back to 35% on a 5 min ramp gradient with a flow rate of 1000 nL/min. The Orbitrap settings were the following: positive DDA top 12 mode. MS1 scan settings: m/z range: 375-1400, resolution 70000 @ m/z 200, AGC target 3e6, max IT 60 ms. MS scan settings: resolution 17500 @ m/z 200, AGC target 1e5, max IT 100 ms, isolation window m/z 1.6, NCE 27, underfill ratio 1% (intensity threshold 1e4), charge state exclusion unassigned, 1, >6, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion 40 s.

### Data Protocol
All raw LC/MS data were analyzed in MaxQuant 1.6.1. using the human UniprotKB/Swiss-prot protein sequence database which was downloaded on January 17th, 2019 (37). The Uniprot database included all isoforms as well as the three APOE isoforms APOE2, APOE3 and APOE4, resulting in 42432 protein entries. In MaxQuant, standard settings were used including a first search with a 20 ppm mass tolerance and a main search of 4.5 ppm mass tolerance. A maximum of three tryptic missed cleavages was allowed. The following modification settings were used: carbamidomethylated cysteine residues (fixed), acetylation of the N-terminal of proteins (variable) and oxidation of methionine (variable). For studies that used TMT labelling, TMT 6-plex or TMT 10-plex (+229.163 Da) modification at the N terminus of the peptide as well as at lysine were set as fixed modifications. For non-TMT studies LFQ was turned on with the fast LFQ setting turned off. A 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR) was used for the identified proteins. The match between runs feature was turned on in MaxQuant with standard parameters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Biomarker, Cerebrospinal fluid, Shotgun proteomics, Alzheimer's disease, Meta-analysis

### Affiliations
Boston Childrens Hospital Steen Lab Department of Pathology Boston, MA, USA
Boston Children's Hospital
Harvard Medical School
Maastricht University

### Submitter
Patrick van Zalm

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Hanno Steen
Boston Childrens Hospital Steen Lab Department of Pathology Boston, MA, USA


