### Accession
PXD037108

### Title
Termination of STING responses is mediated via ESCRT-dependent degradation

### Description
The cGAS-STING pathway forms a major component of the innate immune system. cGAS-STING signalling is induced by detection of either foreign (i.e. pathogenic) or mislocalised host double stranded (ds)DNA present within the cytosol. STING acts as the major signalling hub, where it controls activation of transcription factors IRF3 and NF-B for expression of type I interferons and inflammatory cytokines, respectively. Under resting conditions STING resides on the ER membrane. However, following activation STING traffics to the Golgi to initiate downstream signalling, and subsequently to endolysosomal regions for degradation and termination of signalling. However, while STING is known to be degraded by lysosomes, the mechanisms controlling its delivery remain poorly defined. Here we utilised a mass spectrometry approach to assess phosphorylation changes in primary macrophages following STING activation. This identified a large number of phosphorylation events in proteins involved in intracellular transport, including vesicular trafficking. We utilised high-temporal microscopy to track STING vesicular transport in live macrophages. We observed that while macrophages exhibit rapid degradation of STING (i.e., 4-6 h), basal STING protein levels return slowly (i.e., >24 h). Despite STING protein recovery, ultimately macrophages remain unresponsive to re-challenge with STING ligands. Using a combination of imaging and biochemical approaches we subsequently identify that the endosomal complexes required for transport (ESCRT) pathway detects ubiquitinated STING on endosomes, which facilitates the degradation of STING. Disrupting ESCRT recognition of STING via knockdown of the ESCRT-0 component HRS or inhibiting ESCRT function via overexpression of a dominant negative form of VPS4a enhances STING signalling and cytokine production. Therefore, we have characterised the mechanisms that controls effective termination of STING signalling. Dysregulation of STING localisation or its degradation has been implicated in several diseases including autoimmune, autoinflammatory and neuroinflammatory diseases, hence a clearer understanding of STING degradation is imperative for a better understanding of STING-dependent disease pathologies.

### Sample Protocol
Primary BMDMs were seeded at a density of 10 x 106 in 10 cm petri dishes the day before the experiment. BMDMs were then left untreated or treated with 50 g/mL DMXAA or the corresponding dilution of DMSO for 5, 10 or 30 min. All treatments were performed in quadruplicate. Cells were then washed 3x with TBS and lysed with 1 mL of lysis buffer (4% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 100 mM HEPES) on ice. Samples were then snap frozen on dry ice. Samples were processed by the Monash Proteomics and Metabolomics Facility (MPMF) essentially as previously described (Huang, Foster et al., 2020). Briefly, protein lysates were reduced with 10 mM TCEP (ThermoFisher), alkylated with 40 mM CAA (Sigma) and digested with trypsin (Promega). The majority of each sample was subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment, whilst a small aliquot was removed for the analysis of the underlying proteome. Both sample types were analysed by LC-MS/MS on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled online to a RSLC nano HPLC (Ultimate 3000, UHPLC ThermoFisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a 100 µm, 2 cm nanoviper Pepmap100 trap column, eluted and separated on a RSLC nano column 75 µm x 50 cm, Pepmap100 C18 analytical column (ThermoFisher Scientific). The tryptic peptides or phosphopeptides were separated by increasing concentrations of 80% ACN / 0.1% formic acid at a flow of 250 nl/min for 158 min. Data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry was used to analyse the total proteome. The instrument was set to switch between a full MS scan and 43 subsequent DIA scans. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 375–1575) were acquired with 60,000 resolution (at m/z 200) after accumulating ions to an AGC (Automatic Gain Control) target of 3 x 106 with a maximum injection time of 54 ms. 43 DIA scans were acquired with 15,000 resolution (at m/z 200) covering the m/z range between 375-975 and using an isolation window of 14 m/z. The AGC target was set to 2 x 105 with a maximum injection time of 22 ms and the normalised collision energy to 27. Spectronaut v14 (Biognosys) was used to analyse all DIA data.

### Data Protocol
Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mass spectrometry was used to analyse the phosphoproteome. The instrument was set to toggle between a full MS scan and subsequent MS/MS scans. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 375–1575) were acquired with 60,000 resolution (at m/z 200) after accumulating ions to an AGC \ target of 3 x 106 with a maximum injection time of 54 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. The 30 most intense multiply charged ions (z ≥ 2) were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the collision cell by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a maximum injection time of 54 ms, 30,000 resolution and an AGC target of 1 x 105. MaxQuant (version 1.6.5.0) was used to interrogate all DDA files against a human protein sequence database. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation at serine, threonine or tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Only proteins and peptides falling below a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% were considered for subsequent analyses. All phosphoproteomics data were further analysed using R language (https://www.R-project.org/). Normalised intensity values were supplied by the Monash Proteomics and Metabolomics Facility (MPMF). Samples were visualised via uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) using the umap library. One pair of replicates (DMXAA- and DMSO-treated) at the 30 min time point exhibited abnormalities consistent with a suspected technical error, and were excluded from subsequent analysis. Log2 fold-change (Log2FC) was calculated by dividing normalised intensities with an offset of 0.1. Unpaired t tests were performed using the stats library. Differentially phosphorylated residues were selected with a threshold of p0.01 and Log2FC1. Volcano plots and Intensity plots were generated in GraphPad Prism, while heatmaps were produced using the ggplot2 library. Gene ontology (GO) and Reactome pathway analysis was performed using the STRING online platform (https://string-db.org).

### Publication Abstract
cGAS-STING signalling is induced by detection of foreign or mislocalised host double-stranded (ds)DNA within the cytosol. STING acts as the major signalling hub, where it controls production of type I interferons and inflammatory cytokines. Basally, STING resides on the ER membrane. Following activation STING traffics to the Golgi to initiate downstream signalling and subsequently to endolysosomal compartments for degradation and termination of signalling. While STING is known to be degraded within lysosomes, the mechanisms controlling its delivery remain poorly defined. Here we utilised a proteomics-based approach to assess phosphorylation changes in primary murine macrophages following STING activation. This identified numerous phosphorylation events in proteins involved in intracellular and vesicular transport. We utilised high-temporal microscopy to track STING vesicular transport in live macrophages. We subsequently identified that the endosomal complexes required for transport (ESCRT) pathway detects ubiquitinated STING on vesicles, which facilitates the degradation of STING in murine macrophages. Disruption of ESCRT functionality greatly enhanced STING signalling and cytokine production, thus characterising a mechanism controlling effective termination of STING signalling.

### Keywords
Cgas-sting/escrt/innate immunity/lysosomal degradation/vesicular trafficking

### Affiliations
Monash University
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Infection and Immunity theme, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia

### Submitter
Ralf Schittenhelm

### Lab Head
Dr Dominic De Nardo
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Infection and Immunity theme, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia


