### Accession
PXD008975

### Title
Mango-EcoliBDP -  Mango: A General Tool for Collision Induced Dissociation-Cleavable Cross-Linked Peptide Identification

### Description
Dataset presented in Mango manuscript. Contains Ecoli cross-linked with BDP-NHP. Demonstration of whole proteome in-vivo cross-linking without an instrument capable of serial fragmentation.

### Sample Protocol
Ecoli cell pellet was cross-linked with BDP-NHP, washed, then lysed. The lysate was reduced, alkyated, and digested with trypsin. The digest was the enriched for high charge state species by strong cation exchange (SCX). The resulting SCX fractions were subject to further enrichment by strepavidin capture to pull down the biotin group in BDP-NHP. These samples were then analyzed on a standard Q-Exactive Plus using a top20 DDA method excluding +1/2/3/8 charge states and NCE30 for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Files were searched using Mango to produce modified ms2 files with updated precursor masses, which were then searched using comet with the mango_search = 1 flag. Corresponding peptides were matched during post processing to reassemble cross-linked species. ReACT files were searched using Comet.

### Publication Abstract
Chemical cross-linking combined with mass spectrometry provides a method to study protein structures and interactions. The introduction of cleavable bonds in a cross-linker provides an avenue to decouple released peptide masses from their precursor species, greatly simplifying the downstream search, allowing for whole proteome investigations to be performed. Typically, these experiments have been challenging to carry out, often utilizing nonstandard methods to fully identify cross-linked peptides. Mango is an open source software tool that extracts precursor masses from chimeric spectra generated using cleavable cross-linkers, greatly simplifying the downstream search. As it is designed to work with chimeric spectra, Mango can be used on traditional high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) capable mass spectrometers without the need for additional modifications. When paired with a traditional proteomics search engine, Mango can be used to identify several thousand cross-linked peptide pairs searching against the entire Escherichia coli proteome. Mango provides an avenue to perform whole proteome cross-linking experiments without specialized instrumentation or access to nonstandard methods.

### Keywords
Cross-linking

### Affiliations
University of Washington

### Submitter
Jared Mohr

### Lab Head
Dr James Bruce
University of Washington


