### Accession
PXD018531

### Title
DPAGT1-Mediated Protein N-Glycosylation Is Indispensable for Oocyte and Follicle Development in Mice

### Description
Posttranslational modification of proteins by N-linked glycosylation is crucial for many life processes. However, the exact contribution of N-glycosylation to mammalian female reproduction remains largely undefined. Here, DPAGT1, the enzyme that catalyzes the first step of protein N-glycosyation, is identified to be indispensable for oocyte development in mice. A recessive missense mutation (c. 497A>G; p. Asp166Gly) of Dpagt1 causes female subfertility without grossly affecting other functions. Mutant females ovulate fewer eggs owing to defects of follicular development beyond the late secondary stage. Oocytes ovulated by mutants carry a thin and fragile zona pellucida, and display poor developmental competence after fertilization in vitro. Moreover, completion of the first meiosis is accelerated in mutant oocytes, which is coincident with the elevation of aneuploidy. Mechanistically, transcriptomic analysis reveals the downregulation of a number of transcripts essential for oocyte meiotic progression and preimplantation development (e.g., Pttgt1, Esco2, Orc6, and Npm2) in mutant oocytes, which could account for the defects observed. Furthermore, conditional knockout (CKO) of Dpagt1 in oocytes recapitulates the phenotypes observed in Dpagt1 mutant females, and causes complete infertility. Taken together, these data indicate that protein N-glycosylation in oocytes is essential for female fertility in mammals by specific control of oocyte development.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction 1. Add 0.6ml lysate to the sample; 2. Ultrasonic cracking for 30min;  Ultrasonic condition: pulse on 5s,Pulse off 15 s,Power 180 w; Preparation of lysate Buffer: 7M Urea,2M Thiourea and 25 mM ABC; 3. After ultrasound, centrifuge at 4℃,20000g for 30 minutes, and take the supernatant;  4. The brandford method was used for protein quantification.   Protein digestion: 1. The 300ug sample was transferred into 30KDa ultrafiltration tube, and UA buffer(8M Urea,200mM ABC, pH 8.5) was added to 200ul, The samples were centrifuged at 10,000g for 30min and repeated once; 2. Add 10 mM DTT, oscillate at 800 rpm, and incubate at 37℃ for 30 min; Centrifuge 10,000g for 30 min at room temperature and discard the filtrate; 3. Add 50mM IAA, mix it with oscillation at 800 rpm for 1 min, incubate it at dark room temperature for 30min, and centrifuge it at 10,000g ,room temperature for 30min; 4. Add 200c UA buffer, centrifuge at room temperature of 14000g for 30 min, repeat 3 times; 5. Add 200 ul 25 mM/L ABC buffer, centrifuge at 10,000g at room temperature for 2min to check the filter, continue centrifugation for 30 min, repeat 2 times; 6. Add 40 ul Trypsin buffer(0.1g/L Trypsin in 5 mM ABC buffer) and place in the moisturizing seal box for 16h at 37℃; 7. Centrifuge at room temperature of 10,000g for 30min and collect the filtrate; 8. Add 40 ul BB buffer and centrifuge at room temperature of 10,000g for 30min to collect the filtrate,Repeat once;  9. Take the filtrate, incubate it at 95℃ for 5min, inactivate the enzyme, and cool it to room temperature.  Glycosylated peptide enrichment and deglycosylated treatment  1.The filtrate was mixed with 150 ul CWR(ConA,WGA,RCA120 final concentration of 2.5mg/ml), incubated at room temperature for 1 hour, transferred into 30KDa ultrafiltration tube, and centrifuged at 10,000g for 30min; 2.1*BB buffer was added and centrifuged at 10,000g for 30 min. Repeat four times; 50 ul 25mM ABC solution (H218O) was added and centrifuged at 10,000g for 30 min. Repeat 2 times; 3.Replace with a new collection tube, add 40 ul 25mM ABC solution (H218O) and 1 ul PNGase F, the constant temperature mixer was used at 800 RPM, incubate for 3 h at 37℃, and centrifuge for 30min at 10000g,collect the filtrate; 4.50ul 25mM ABC solution was added and centrifuged at 10,000g for 30min.Collect filtrate and repeat one time; 5.Combine the filtrate and vacuum dry; 6.Store at -80℃.

### Data Protocol
LCMS analysis 1.The online nano-rplc liquid chromatography was performed in the easy-nlc 1200 system (Thermo Scientific); 2.The analytical column is self-mounted C18 reversed phase chromatographic column (C18 1.9m 75 m×200 mm). Phase A was 0.1%FA in H2O and phase B was 0.1%FA in 80%CAN. The gradients used in the experiment were 0-3min B phase from 2% to 5%, 3-43min B phase from 5% to 35%, 43-48min B phase from 35% to 44%, 48-50min B phase from 44% to 100%; 3.Fusion Lumos system (Thermo Scientific) was used for mass spectrometry with nano spray ion source. The spray voltage was 2.1kv, the capillary temperature was 300℃, and the scanning mode of mass spectrometry was Data Dependent Analysis (DDA). Each cycle was 3s. Full scan resolution: 60,000; MS/MS resolution: 15,000; Scanning range of parent ions: 400-1600 m/z; Collision energy: 30; First Mass (m/z) is 120; Isolation window (m/z) : 1.6; Maximum injection time (ms) is 22. Data analysis:  LC - MS/MS raw data using Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.3.0.523, thermo Fisher Scientific) qualitative quantitative analysis. Gap analysis:  Perseus software we use quantitative data of PD export variance analysis. All analysis is handled with default parameters. P <0.01 and the difference multiple of >2.0 were used as parameters to screen the information of glycosylated peptides with significant changes.

### Publication Abstract
Post-translational modification of proteins by <i>N</i>-linked glycosylation is crucial for many life processes. However, the exact contribution of <i>N</i>-glycosylation to mammalian female reproduction remains largely undefined. Here, DPAGT1, the enzyme that catalyzes the first step of protein <i>N</i>-glycosylation, is identified to be indispensable for oocyte development in mice. <i>Dpagt1</i> missense mutation (c. 497A&gt;G; p. Asp166Gly) causes female subfertility without grossly affecting other functions. Mutant females ovulate fewer eggs owing to defective development of growing follicles. Mutant oocytes have a thin and fragile zona pellucida (ZP) due to the reduction in glycosylation of ZP proteins, and display poor developmental competence after fertilization in vitro. Moreover, completion of the first meiosis is accelerated in mutant oocytes, which is coincident with the elevation of aneuploidy. Mechanistically, transcriptomic analysis reveals the downregulation of a number of transcripts essential for oocyte meiotic progression and preimplantation development (e.g., <i>Pttgt1</i>, <i>Esco2</i>, <i>Orc6</i>, and <i>Npm2</i>) in mutant oocytes, which could account for the defects observed. Furthermore, conditional knockout of <i>Dpagt1</i> in oocytes recapitulates the phenotypes observed in <i>Dpagt1</i> mutant females, and causes complete infertility. Taken together, these data indicate that protein <i>N</i>-glycosylation in oocytes is essential for female fertility in mammals by specific control of oocyte development.

### Keywords
Ovary, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
shang dong university
State Key Laboratory of Reproduction Medicine

### Submitter
Li Hui

### Lab Head
Dr Li Hui
State Key Laboratory of Reproduction Medicine


