### Accession
PXD002952

### Title
LFQbench enables a multi-centered benchmark study demonstrating robust proteomic label-free quantification

### Description
The consistent and accurate quantification of proteins is a challenging task for mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics. SWATH-MS uses data-independent acquisition (DIA) for label-free quantification. Here we evaluated five software tools for processing SWATH-MS data: OpenSWATH, SWATH2.0, Skyline, Spectronaut, DIA-Umpire, in collaboration with the respective developers to ensure an optimal use of each tool. We analyzed data from hybrid proteome samples of defined quantitative composition acquired on two different MS instruments applying different SWATH isolation windows setups. Using the resulting high-complexity datasets we benchmarked precision and accuracy of quantification and evaluated identification performance, robustness and specificity of each software tool. To consistently evaluate the high complexity datasets, we developed the LFQbench R-package. LFQbench results enabled developers to improve their software tools, thereby underlining the value of the reference datasets for software development and benchmarking. All tools provided highly convergent identification and reliable quantification performance, underscoring their robustness for label-free quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
The consistent and accurate quantification of proteins is a challenging task for mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics. SWATH-MS uses data-independent acquisition (DIA) for label-free quantification. Here we evaluated five software tools for processing SWATH-MS data: OpenSWATH, SWATH2.0, Skyline, Spectronaut, DIA-Umpire, in collaboration with the respective developers to ensure an optimal use of each tool. We analyzed data from hybrid proteome samples of defined quantitative composition acquired on two different MS instruments applying different SWATH isolation windows setups. Using the resulting high-complexity datasets we benchmarked precision and accuracy of quantification and evaluated identification performance, robustness and specificity of each software tool. To consistently evaluate the high complexity datasets, we developed the LFQbench R-package. LFQbench results enabled developers to improve their software tools, thereby underlining the value of the reference datasets for software development and benchmarking. All tools provided highly convergent identification and reliable quantification performance, underscoring their robustness for label-free quantitative proteomics.

### Data Protocol
Profile-mode WIFF files from shotgun data acquisition were converted to mzXML files in centroided format using the qtofpeakpicker algorithm (provided with ProteoWizard/msconvert version 3.0.6141) with the following options: --resolution=20000 --area=1 --threshold=1 --smoothwidth=1.1. The centroided mzXML files were further converted to mgf files using MzXML2Search provided with TPP version 4.7.0. The duplicate shotgun files for each organism were queried each against a customized organism-specific database based on the SwissProt database release from 2014/02/14 and each appended with common contaminants, iRT peptide sequences and the corresponding pseudo-reversed sequence decoys. The Comet35 (version 2014.02 rev. 0) database search was performed using the following parameters: semi-trypsin digest, up to 2 missed cleavages, static modifications of 57.021464 m/z for cysteines, up to 3 variable modifications of 15.9949 m/z for methionine oxidations (maximal number of variable modifications = 5). The precursor peptide mass tolerance was set to 50 p.p.m. and the fragment bin tolerance set to 0.05 m/z. The Mascot36 (version 2.4.1) database search was performed using the following parameters: semi-tryptic digest, up to 2 missed cleavages, static modifications of carbamidomethyl for cysteines, variable modifications of oxidation for methionine. The precursor peptide mass tolerance was set to +/-25 p.p.m. and the fragment bin tolerance set to +/-0.025 m/z. The identification search results were further processed using PeptipeProphet (with the options: -OAPpdlR -dreverse_) and the results of the search engines per run were combined for each organism using iProphet (TPP version 4.7.0). The search results were finally filtered at 1% protein false discovery rate (FDR) using Mayu37, which resulted in the following iProphet peptide probability cutoffs: 0.319349, 0.92054 and 0.995832 for E.Coli, yeast and human respectively. The MS/MS spectra passing this cutoff for each organism were compiled into three organism-specific redundant spectral libraries with SpectraST38 and the iRT values were computed using the linear iRT regression function embedded in spectrast (option: - c_IRTspectrast_iRT.txt -c_IRR). A consensus library for each organism was finally generated with spectrast. Each organism-specific consensus spectral library was exported to two assay lists (depending on whether the assay library will be used for extracting 32SW of 64SW SWATH files, which have different extraction exclusion windows) in TSV format complying to OpenSWATH or SWATH2.0 format using the spectrast2tsv.py script (msproteomicstools version msproteomicstools/master@7527c7b, available from https://github.com/msproteomicstools) using the following options: -l 350,2000 -s y,b -x 1,2 -o 6 -n 6 -p 0.05 -d -e -w 32swaths.txt (or -w 64swaths-variable.txt) . The assay libraries for the three organisms were merged at this stage, curated for contaminant, iRT and decoy proteins and saved for downstream targeted SWATH extraction softwares.

### Publication Abstract
Consistent and accurate quantification of proteins by mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics depends on the performance of instruments, acquisition methods and data analysis software. In collaboration with the software developers, we evaluated OpenSWATH, SWATH 2.0, Skyline, Spectronaut and DIA-Umpire, five of the most widely used software methods for processing data from sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment-ion spectra (SWATH)-MS, which uses data-independent acquisition (DIA) for label-free protein quantification. We analyzed high-complexity test data sets from hybrid proteome samples of defined quantitative composition acquired on two different MS instruments using different SWATH isolation-window setups. For consistent evaluation, we developed LFQbench, an R package, to calculate metrics of precision and accuracy in label-free quantitative MS and report the identification performance, robustness and specificity of each software tool. Our reference data sets enabled developers to improve their software tools. After optimization, all tools provided highly convergent identification and reliable quantification performance, underscoring their robustness for label-free quantitative proteomics.

### Keywords
Lfqbench, Lfq, Benchmark, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Institute for Immunology, University Medical Center of the Johannes-Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany
EBI

### Submitter
Yasset Perez-Riverol

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Tenzer
Institute for Immunology, University Medical Center of the Johannes-Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany


