### Accession
PXD029369

### Title
Adipocyte-derived extracellular vesicles promote breast cancer progression in Type 2 diabetes

### Description
Adipocytes regulate breast cancer aggressiveness through exosomes that encode patient metabolic status.

### Sample Protocol
The protein of the exosome samples was denatured by 1% SDS and heated at 95°C, followed by digestion with trypsin (Pierce Trypsin Protease, MS grade; #90057). In brief, the denatured protein was reduced with dithiothreitol at 56°C for 45 min, followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Alkylated proteins were then precipitated by 80% acetone, followed by trypsin digestion at 37°C for 16 h. The digested peptide mixture was then concentrated and desalted using C18 Zip-tip (ZTC18S960, Millipore). Reconstituted, desalted peptides were dissolved in 20 µL of 0.1% formic acid (Formic Acid Optima LC/MS (A11-50), Fisher Scientific) in LC-MS/MS grade water. Peptides (12 µL) were analyzed by 110 min LC-MS/MS run.  The LC-MS/MS analysis of samples was performed using an Orbitrap Exploris 240 Mass Spectrometer and a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (both from Thermo Scientific). The Orbitrap Exploris 240 instrument was operated in the data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Peptide mixture from each sample was loaded onto a peptide trap cartridge at a flow rate of 5 μL/min. The trapped peptides were eluted onto a reversed-phase EasySpray C18 column (Thermo) using a linear gradient of acetonitrile (3-36%) in 0.1% formic acid. The elution duration was 110 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. Eluted peptides from the EasySpray column were ionized and sprayed into the mass spectrometer, using a Nano-EasySpray Ion Source (Thermo) under the following settings: spray voltage, 1.6 kV, capillary temperature, 275°C. The 15 most intense multiply charged ions (z ≥ 2) were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the octopole collision cell by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using normalized HCD collision energy 30 with an AGC target 1×105 and a maximum injection time of 200 ms at 17,500 resolution. The isolation window was set to 2. The dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s. Charge state screening was enabled to reject unassigned and 1+ and 7+ or higher charge state ions.

### Data Protocol
The raw data file acquired from each sample was searched against UniProtKB human protein sequences database (20,547 entries, downloaded on April 20, 2020) and target protein sequences were searched using the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo) based on the SEQUEST algorithm. Carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) of cysteines was fixed modification, and Oxidation Met and Deamidation Q/N-deamidated (+0.98402 Da) were set as dynamic modifications. The minimum peptide length was specified to be five amino acids. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 15 ppm, whereas fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. The maximum false peptide discovery rate was specified as 0.01. The resulting Proteome Discoverer Report contains all assembled proteins with peptides sequences and peptide spectrum match counts (PSM#).

### Publication Abstract
Obesity and metabolic diseases, such as insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes (T2D), are associated with metastatic breast cancer in postmenopausal women. Here, we investigated the critical cellular and molecular factors behind this link. We found that primary human adipocytes shed extracellular vesicles, specifically exosomes, that induced the expression of genes associated with epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cancer stem&#x2013;like cell (CSC) traits in cocultured breast cancer cell lines. Transcription of these genes was further increased in cells exposed to exosomes shed from T2D patient&#x2013;derived adipocytes or insulin-resistant adipocytes and required the epigenetic reader proteins BRD2 and BRD4 in recipient cells. The thrombospondin family protein TSP5, which is associated with cancer, was more abundant in exosomes from T2D or insulin-resistant adipocytes and partially contributed to EMT in recipient cells. Bioinformatic analysis of breast cancer patient tissue showed that greater coexpression of <i>COMP</i> (which encodes TSP5) and <i>BRD2</i> or <i>BRD3</i> correlated with poorer prognosis, specifically decreased distant metastasis&#x2013;free survival. Our findings reveal a mechanism of exosome-mediated cross-talk between metabolically abnormal adipocytes and breast cancer cells that may promote tumor aggressiveness in patients with T2D.

### Keywords
Adipocyte exosomes; breast cancer

### Affiliations
Boston University
Boston Univdrsity School of Medicine Department of hematology and oncology

### Submitter
Naser Jafari

### Lab Head
Dr Gerald V Denis
Boston Univdrsity School of Medicine Department of hematology and oncology


