### Accession
PXD033416

### Title
Elizabethkingia anophelis Outer membrane vesicle proteomic, LC-MS/MS

### Description
In this study, we sought to understand the characteristics of E. anophelis OMVs under different antibiotic stress (imipenem) conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Gel assisted digestion.  The protein solution was extracted with SDS-PAGE sample buffer directly at 100°C for 5 min and the proteins isolated by one dimensional gel electrophoresis (1 cm).The excised gel was first de-stained, and then reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Merck) at 60°C for 45 min, followed by cysteine-blocking with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAM, Sigma) at 25°C for 30 min.Samples were digested with sequencing-grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 16 hours. The peptides were then extracted from gel, dried by vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted with 0.5% Formic acid before analyzing.  LC-MS/MS analysis.  The digested peptides were diluted in HPLC buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and loaded onto a reverse-phase column (Zorbax 300SB-C18, 0.3 × 5 mm; Agilent Technologies). The desalted peptides were then separated on a homemade column (HydroRP 2.5 µm, 75 μm I.D. × 20 cm with a 15 μm tip) using a multi-step gradient of HPLC buffer B (99.9% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) for 75 minutes with a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. The LC apparatus was coupled with a 2D linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Elite ETD; Thermo Fisher) operated using Xcalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher). The full-scan MS was performed in the Orbitrap over a range of 400 to 2,000 Da and a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400. Internal calibration was performed using the ion signal of protonated dodecamethylcyclohexasiloxane ion at m/z 536.165365 as lock mass. The 20 datadependent MS/MS scan events were followed by one MS scan for the 20 most abundant precursor ions in the preview MS scan. The m/z values selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 40 seconds with a relative mass window of 15 ppm. The electrospray voltage was set to 2.0 kV, and the temperature of the capillary was set to 200°C. MS and MS/MS automatic gain control were set to 1,000 ms (full scan) and 200 ms (MS/MS), or 3 × 106 ions (full scan) and 3,000 ions (MS/MS) for maximum accumulated time or ions, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification. The data analysis was carried out using Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The MS/MS spectra were searched against the NCBI (RefSeq) database using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5). For peptide identification, 10 ppm mass tolerance was permitted for intact peptide masses, and 0.5 Da for CID fragment ions with allowance for two missed cleavages made from the trypsin digestion: oxidized (Methionine) and acetyl (protein N-terminal) as variable modifications; carbamidomethyl (cysteine) as static modification. Peptide-spectrum match (PSM) were then filtered based on high confidence and Mascot search engine rank 1 of peptide identification to ensure an overall false discovery rate below 0.01. Proteins with single peptide hit were removed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Omv, Elizabethkingia anophelis

### Affiliations
National Defense Medical Center
Department and Graduate Institute of Biology and Anatomy, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan

### Submitter
Ming-Hsien Chiang

### Lab Head
Dr Ming-Hsien Chiang
Department and Graduate Institute of Biology and Anatomy, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan


