### Accession
PXD011307

### Title
Glycoproteomic analysis of MGL binding protein on acute T cell leukemia cells

### Description
O-glycosylation is generally initiated by the transfer of a N-acetylgalactosamine to Ser/Thr residues of proteins, forming the Tn antigen. This truncated surface glycan is expressed at high levels by tumor cells and is associated with higher metastatic behaviour and poor prognosis of patients. The Tn antigen is recognised by the C-type macrophage galactose lectin (MGL), which induces the activation of immunosuppressive responses. Here, we investigated the MGL binding proteins in Jurkat cells. The optimization of pull-down assays and subsequent glycoproteomic analysis by mass spectrometry, allowed us to identify 17 cell surface proteins as novel MGL-ligands.

### Sample Protocol
MGL ligands were pulled down from 1 mg of protein extracts from Jurkat cell line with 2 µg/mg of chimeric MGL-Fc coupled to 50 µl Dynabeads protein G (Invitrogen). The specific ligands were, then, eluted by addiction of 100 mM EDTA and concentrated under vacuum. Addiction of 100 mM EDTA was used as negative control during the whole procedure. Captured products were cleaned-up by SDS-PAGE. For MS analysis, bands of interest were cut from the gel, and the proteins subjected to reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide and in-gel trypsin digestion. Tryptic peptides were analyzed by Easy nLC 1000 gradient HPLC system (Thermo, Bremen, Germany), and a LUMOS mass spectrometer (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed with MaxQuant 1.5 using the Andromeda search engine and Homo Sapiens (2015) database. Trypsin was selected as enzyme allowing up to 2 miss cleavages. Modifications taken into account in the search are oxidation (M), acetylation (N-term) and HexNAc (ST) as variable, and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed. A maximum of 12 modifications per peptide was allowed. MGL binding proteins annotated by Andromeda were selected on unique peptide count per fraction as semi-quantitative measurement for selection. Proteins were considered candidate when fitting the following selection criteria: unique peptide found in ≥2/3 replicates in the MGL elution products with a count >0, and in 0/3 replicates in the EDTA control samples; or in 3/3 replicates in the MGL elution samples with a count >0, and 1/3 replicate in the EDTA control eluted products. Selected candidates were further filtered based on Gene Ontology (GO) subcellular location, selecting only cell surface membrane proteins.

### Publication Abstract
C-type lectins are a diverse group of proteins involved in many human physiological and pathological processes. Most C-type lectins are glycan-binding proteins, some of which are pivotal for innate immune responses against pathogens. Other C-type lectins, such as the macrophage galactose-type lectin (MGL), have been shown to induce immunosuppressive responses upon the recognition of aberrant glycosylation on cancer cells. MGL is known to recognize terminal N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc), such as the Tn antigen, which is commonly found on malignant cells. Even though this glycan specificity of MGL is well described, there is a lack of understanding of the actual glycoproteins that bind MGL. We present a glycoproteomic workflow for the identification of MGL-binding proteins, which we applied to study MGL ligands on the human Jurkat leukemia cell line. In addition to the known MGL ligands and Tn antigen-carrying proteins CD43 and CD45 on these cells, we have identified a set of novel cell-surface ligands for MGL. Importantly, for several of these, O-glycosylation has hitherto not been described. Altogether, our data provide new insight into the identification and structure of novel MGL ligands that presumably act as modulatory molecules in cancer immune responses.

### Keywords
Tn-antigen, Lectin, Glycoproteomics, Leukemia, O-glycosylation

### Affiliations
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics Leiden University Medical Center Tel +31-71-5266394 P.J.Hensbergen@lumc.nl https://www.lumc.nl/org/proteomics-metabolomics/  https://cpm.lumc.nl
LUMC/UVIC

### Submitter
Yassene Mohammed

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Hensbergen
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics Leiden University Medical Center Tel +31-71-5266394 P.J.Hensbergen@lumc.nl https://www.lumc.nl/org/proteomics-metabolomics/  https://cpm.lumc.nl


