### Accession
PXD000502

### Title
Mouse cerebellum (phospho)proteome LC-MSMS

### Description
Cerebella from wild-type  and cGKI knockout mice, on 129/Sv background, were subjected to protein digestion using trypsin o/n and chemically labeled with dimethyl labeling.  After labeling the samples were mixed and subjected to both strong cation exchange and phosphopeptide enrichment. The SCX fractions and the enriched phosphopeptides were then analyzed on an Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Data analysis: For each raw data file recorded by the mass spectrometer, peak lists were generated using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using a standardized workflow. Peak lists, generated in Proteome Discoverer, were searched against a Swiss-Prot database (version 2.3.02, taxonomy Mus musculus, 32402 protein entries) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants, using Mascot (version 2.3.02 Matrix Science, London, UK). The database search was performed by using the following paramenters: a mass tolerance of 50 ppm for the precursor masses and +/-0.6 Da for CID/ETD fragment ions and +/-0.05 Da for HCD fragments. Enzyme speciﬁcity was set to Trypsin with 2 missed cleavages allowed. Carbarmidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and dimethyl labeling (L, I, H) of lysine residues and N termini, and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) (for the phosphoproteome analysis) were used as variable modifications. Percolator was used to ﬁlter the PSMs for <1% false discovery-rate. Phosphorylation sites were localized by applying phosphoRS (pRS) (v2.0). Triplex dimethyl labeling was used as quantification method, with a mass precision for the 2 ppm for consecutive precursor mass scan. A retention time tolerance of 0.5 min was used to account effect of deuterium on retention time. To further filter for high quality data we used the following parameters: high confidence peptide spectrum matches, minimal Mascot score of 20, minimal peptide length of 6 and only unique rank 1 peptide. For the phosphopeptides analysis, the search rank 1 peptide was added to the previous filters. For the identification and quantitation of the proteins, only the unique peptides were considered.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The cyclic nucleotide cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) plays an important role in learning and memory, but its signaling mechanisms in the mammalian brain are not fully understood. Using mass-spectrometry-based proteomics, we evaluated how the cerebellum adapts its (phospho)proteome in a knockout mouse model of cGMP-dependent protein kinase type I (cGKI). Our data reveal that a small subset of proteins in the cerebellum (&#x223c;3% of the quantified proteins) became substantially differentially expressed in the absence of cGKI. More changes were observed at the phosphoproteome level, with hundreds of sites being differentially phosphorylated between wild-type and knockout cerebellum. Most of these phosphorylated sites do not represent known cGKI substrates. An integrative computational network analysis of the data indicated that the differentially expressed proteins and proteins harboring differentially phosphorylated sites largely belong to a tight network in the Purkinje cells of the cerebellum involving important cGMP/cAMP signaling nodes (e.g. PDE5 and PKARII&#x3b2;) and Ca(2+) signaling (e.g. SERCA3). In this way, removal of cGKI could be linked to impaired cerebellar long-term depression at Purkinje cell synapses. In addition, we were able to identify a set of novel putative (phospho)proteins to be considered in this network. Overall, our data improve our understanding of cerebellar cGKI signaling and suggest novel players in cGKI-regulated synaptic plasticity.

### Keywords
Cerebellum, Lc-msms, Cgki knock out, Proteome, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Biomolecular and mass spectrometry group

### Submitter
Eleonora Corradini

### Lab Head


