### Accession
PXD021105

### Title
Loss of adipose triglyceride lipase aids cancer growth in 3D

### Description
Shotgun proteomic analysis of 3D-grown or on CAM-assay grown lung cancer cells lacking or expressing the major triglyceride lipase adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL)

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in 100 mM Tris pH=8, 1 % sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS), 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, 40 mM chloroaceamide. 100 µg protein per sample was acetone precipitated overnight. Proteins were redissolved in 25 % trifluoroethanol (in 100 mM Tris pH=8.5) and diluted to 10 %  trifluoroethanol with ammonium bicarbonate. Digestion was carried out for 2 h with LysC followed by overnight digestion with trypsin while shaking at 550 rpm at 37°C. Samples were then diluted in running buffer A (0.1% formic acid; 5% acetonitrile).  3D cell culture digests were concentrated on an enrichment column (C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, 20 x 0.1 mm) for 6 minutes with 5 µl/min flow followed by separation on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 nano-column (2 µm, 50 x 75 µm)  at 60°C with 0.3 µl/min flow rate. The following chromatographic gradient was employed: 6-154 min: 4-25% B, 154-159 min: 25-95 % B, 159-169 min: 95 % B, 169.1-184 min: 4 % B. Digests from CAM tumors were separated on an Aurora Series UHPLC C18 column (250 mm x 75 µm, 1.6 µM) with 0.25 µl/min flow rate and the following chromatographic gradient: 0-18 min: 2 % B, 18-160 min: 2-25 % B, 160-167 min: 25-35 % B, 167-168 min: 35-95 % B, 168-178 min: 95-2 % B. Mass spectrometry was performed on an Orbitrap Velos Pro operated in positive mode by alternating full scan MS (m/z 300 to 2000, 60000 resolution) in the ion cyclotron resonance (ICR) cell and MS/MS by collision-induced dissociation (CID) of the 10 most intense peas in the ion trap (with dynamic exclusion enabled).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis, database search and quantitation were carried out by MaxQuant (v1.6.14.0) software. For statistical analysis Perseus (v1.6.13.0) 24 was employed. For both datasets in the search criteria false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide, peptide-to-spectrum (PSM) as well as protein matches was set to 1 %. Peptide tolerance was set to ± 20 and ± 4.5 for the first and main peptide search, respectively. Product mass tolerance was set to ± 0.5 Da. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as static while methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as dynamic modifications. Minimum required peptide length was six amino acids and maximum number of allowed tryptic mis-cleavages two. No intensity threshold for individual spectra was defined. For 3D data, SwissProt human fasta file (downloaded on 16.04.2019, 20467 sequences) containing most common contaminants was used as a database. For CAM data, TrEMBL chicken database (downloaded on 12.03.2019, 41601 sequences) was searched additionally due to mixed species samples. Technical replicates of CAM samples were treated as fractions in MaxQuant. Protein quantitation was based on label free quantitation (LFQ), with a minimum of 2 peptides per protein (unique and razor) as quantitation requirement. Match between runs was enabled in the retention time window of 1 min, and alignment window of 20 min (respectively).  For statistical analysis Perseus (v1.6.13.0) was used to filter data for contaminants and at least 3 valid values in at least one group was needed to accept a protein group. Data were log2 transformed and missing values imputed from normal distribution (downshift 2; width 0.3). Student t-tests were performed with following criteria: p-value of at least 0.05, S0 of 0.5 and permutation-based FDR set to 1% to correct for multi-testing.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer cells undergo complex metabolic adaptations to survive and thrive in challenging environments. This is particularly prominent for solid tumors, where cells in the core of the tumor are under severe hypoxia and nutrient deprivation. However, such conditions are often not recapitulated in the typical 2D in&#xa0;vitro cancer models, where oxygen as well as nutrient exposure is quite uniform. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of a key neutral lipid hydrolase, namely adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL), in cancer cells that are exposed to more tumor-like conditions. To that end, we cultured lung cancer cells lacking ATGL as multicellular spheroids in 3D and subjected them to comprehensive proteomics analysis and metabolic phenotyping. Proteomics data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD021105. As a result, we report that loss of ATGL enhanced growth of spheroids and facilitated their adaptation to hypoxia, by increasing the influx of glucose and endorsing a pro-Warburg effect. This was followed by changes in lipid metabolism and an increase in protein production. Interestingly, the observed phenotype was also recapitulated in an even more "in&#xa0;vivo like" setup, when cancer spheroids were grown on chick chorioallantoic membrane, but not when cells were cultured as a 2D monolayer. In addition, we demonstrate that according to the publicly available cancer databases, an inverse relation between ATGL expression and higher glucose dependence can be observed. In conclusion, we provide indications that ATGL is involved in regulation of glucose metabolism of cancer cells when grown in 3D (mimicking solid tumors) and as such could be an important factor of the treatment outcome for some cancer types. Finally, we also ratify the need for alternative cell culture models, as the majority of phenotypes observed in 3D and spheroids grown on chick chorioallantoic membrane were not observed in 2D cell culture.

### Keywords
Lung cancer, Atgl, Spheroids

### Affiliations
Full Professor for Analytical Chemistry Vienna University of Technology Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics Getreidemarkt 9/E164 A-1060 Vienna Austria Associate Professor for Biochemistry Medical University of Graz Diagnostic and Research Institute of Pathology Stiftingtalstrasse 24 A-8010 Graz Austria
Diagnostic and Research Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Stiftingtalstraße 6, 8010 Graz, Austria

### Submitter
Sophie Honeder

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Full Professor for Analytical Chemistry Vienna University of Technology Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics Getreidemarkt 9/E164 A-1060 Vienna Austria Associate Professor for Biochemistry Medical University of Graz Diagnostic and Research Institute of Pathology Stiftingtalstrasse 24 A-8010 Graz Austria


