### Accession
PXD000788

### Title
Human EGFR AP-MS project -  Proteomic analysis of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) interactome and post-translational modifications associated with receptor endocytosis in response to EGF and stress

### Description
Mass spectrometry was applied to comprehensively analyze the phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and interactome of wild type and endocytosis-defective EGFR variants before and after internalization in response to EGF or stress.

### Sample Protocol
Clarified whole-cell lysates (10 mg protein/sample) were extracted with immobilized anti-flag M2 beads.  After 3 h incubation, the  beads were washed 3 times with TGH buffer and twice with HPLC water.  The proteins bound on M2 beads were eluted with 150 μl of 0.15 % of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), neutralized to 100 mM NH4HCO3, digested with trypsin. The tryptic peptides were purified by 200 μl C18 stage tips (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL USA) and analyzed by Q-Exactive LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
For LC-MS/MS analysis, the tryptic peptides from anti-flag IP complexes were separated on a 50-cm Easy-Spray column with a 75-μm inner diameter packed with 2 μm C18 resin (Thermo Scientific, Odense Denmark). The peptides were eluted over 120 min (250 nl/min) using a 0 to 40% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid with an EASY nLC 1000 chromatography system operating at 50 °C (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). The LC was coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (36) by using a nano-ESI source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode with an automatic switch between a full scan and up to 10 data-dependent MS/MS scans. Target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 120 ms and a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. The ion target value for MS/MS was set to 1,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 120 ms and a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 400. Repeat sequencing of peptides was kept to a minimum by dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides for 20 s. Acquired raw files were analyzed by using MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5) for quantification. The Andromeda probabilistic search engine  was used to search peak lists against the Swiss-Prot database (2012.12 version, 20226 entries) after addition of variant EGFR protein sequences relevant to the study. The default search parameters were used as describe by Deeb et al. except the addition of phospho-serine, -threonine and -tyrosine, and Gly-Gly of lysine as variable modifications. The maximum false peptide discovery rate was specified as 0.01. Bioinformatics analysis was completed with Perseus tools within the MaxQuant environment. LFQ intensity for EGFR was used to normalize EGFR-associated proteins and modified peptides across samples.

### Publication Abstract
Aberrant expression, activation, and stabilization of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) are causally associated with several human cancers. Post-translational modifications and protein-protein interactions directly modulate the signaling and trafficking of the EGFR. Activated EGFR is internalized by endocytosis and then either recycled back to the cell surface or degraded in the lysosome. EGFR internalization and recycling also occur in response to stresses that activate p38 MAP kinase. Mass spectrometry was applied to comprehensively analyze the phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and protein-protein interactions of wild type and endocytosis-defective EGFR variants before and after internalization in response to EGF ligand and stress. Prior to internalization, EGF-stimulated EGFR accumulated ubiquitin at 7 K residues and phosphorylation at 7 Y sites and at S(1104). Following internalization, these modifications diminished and there was an accumulation of S/T phosphorylations. EGFR internalization and many but not all of the EGF-induced S/T phosphorylations were also stimulated by anisomycin-induced cell stress, which was not associated with receptor ubiquitination or elevated Y phosphorylation. EGFR protein interactions were dramatically modulated by ligand, internalization, and stress. In response to EGF, different E3 ubiquitin ligases became maximally associated with EGFR before (CBL, HUWE1, and UBR4) or after (ITCH) internalization, whereas CBLB was distinctively most highly EGFR associated following anisomycin treatment. Adaptin subunits of AP-1 and AP-2 clathrin adaptor complexes also became EGFR associated in response to EGF and anisomycin stress. Mutations preventing EGFR phosphorylation at Y(998) or in the S(1039) region abolished or greatly reduced EGFR interactions with AP-2 and AP-1, and impaired receptor trafficking. These results provide new insight into spatial, temporal, and mechanistic aspects of EGFR regulation.

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Ptm, Lc-ms/ms, Egfr

### Affiliations
Hospital for Sickkids
The Hospital For Sick Children, Program in Molecular Structure and Function, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, and Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto. Peter Gilgan Centre for Research and Learning, 686 Bay Street, Toronto M5G 0A4, Canada

### Submitter
Jiefei Tong

### Lab Head
Dr Mike Moran
The Hospital For Sick Children, Program in Molecular Structure and Function, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, and Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto. Peter Gilgan Centre for Research and Learning, 686 Bay Street, Toronto M5G 0A4, Canada


