### Accession
PXD025423

### Title
Long-term exposure to nanosized TiO2 triggers stress responses and cell death pathways in pulmonary epithelial cells

### Description
There is little in vitro data available on long-term effects of TiO2 exposure. Such data are im-portant for improving the understanding of underlying mechanisms of adverse health effects of TiO2. Here, we exposed pulmonary epithelial cells to two doses (0.96 and 1.92 µg/cm2) of TiO2 for 13 weeks and effects on cell cycle and cell death mechanisms i.e. apoptosis and autophagy were determined after 4, 8 and 13 weeks of exposure. Changes in telomere length, cellular protein levels and lipid classes were also analysed at 13 weeks of exposure. We observed that the TiO2 exposure increased the fraction of cells in G1-phase and reduced the fraction of cells in G2-phase, which was accompanied by an increase in the fraction of late apoptotic/necrotic cells. This cor-responded with an induced expression of key apoptotic proteins i.e. BAD and BAX, and an ac-cumulation of several lipid classes involved in cellular stress and apoptosis. These findings were further supported by quantitative proteome profiling data showing an increase in proteins in-volved in cell stress and genomic maintenance pathways following TiO2 exposure. Altogether, we suggest that cell stress response and cell death pathways may be important molecular events in long-term health effects of TiO2.

### Sample Protocol
TiO2 (NM-62002a) obtained from the EU Joint Research Centre (Ispra, Italy), is one test material selected by the OECD working party for manufactured nanomaterials [73]. The NANOGENOTOX dispersion protocol was applied for particle dispersion and cell expo-sure, as previously described [74]. Briefly, 2.56 mg/mL stock solution was prepared by a mixture of 15.36 mg dry TiO2 powder (pre-wetted in 0.5% (v/v) EtOH in scintillation vials and a dispersion medium of 0.05% (v/v) BSA (Sigma-Aldrich) and MilliQ-H2O. The mix-ture was sonicated (Branson Sonifier S-450D) for 16 min at 10% amplitude on ice. TiO2 stock solutions were prepared immediately prior to exposure. The TiO2 nanomaterial used in this study has previously been well characterized and reported by Rasmussen, K., et al. [75], with a reported primary diameter of 26 ± 10 (nm ± SE) and a Benchmark Z-size of 234 ± 4 nm [76]. Further analysis of characterization were performed by our group with Scan-ning Electron Microscopes (SEM), and the hydrodynamic diameter of particles in disper-sion media and in exposure media were measured by dynamic light scattering (DLS) (Zetasizer Nano, Malvern Instruments, Ltd, UK) at the time of exposure (0h) and after 72h. The levels of endotoxin were assessed by kinetic chromogenic limulus amebocyte lysate (LAL) assay according to the manufacturer's instructions (Lonza, Basel, Switzerland).  4.2. Long-term cell exposure Human bronchial epithelial cells 3KT (HBEC-3KT, ATCC® CRL-4051™) were used in this study. HBEC-3KT cells are normal non-tumorigenic cells immortalized with CDK4 and hTERT. The cells were maintained in a serum-free 1:1 mixture of LHC-9 (Gibco) and RPMI-1640 (Thermo Scientific) medium containing 100 units/mL penicillin and 100 µg/mL streptomycin, in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere at 37°C. HBEC-3KT cells were seeded at 2.5x105 cells/plate in 15 cm plate (Sarstedt, growth area: 152 cm2), and exposed twice per week to TiO2 at concentrations; 0.96 µg/cm2, designed as low-dose (LD) and 1.92 µg/cm2, designed as high-dose (HD). Control cells were only exposed to the vehicle dis-persion solution. The cells were exposed to TiO2 twice a week for 13 weeks continuously, and sub-cultured once per week. Doses were selected based on the recommended expo-sure limit (REL) of 2.4 mg/m3 for fine TiO2 and 0.3 mg/m3 for ultrafineTiO2 proposed by NIOSH, USA [77].

### Data Protocol
Quantitative LC-MS/MS using EASY-nLC 1000 UHPC system was performed essen-tially as described [65]. Briefly, proteins were precipitated by methanol/chloroform precip-itation. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 UHPC system with C18 columns interfaced with an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer via a Nanospray Flex ion source using a data-dependent strategy. A total of 5483 protein groups were identified, of which 4819 were quantified across all samples. Only proteins with 100% identification (FDR <0.01 using target-decoy protein) in at least one group were included in the analysis. Further, only proteins that were detected in all three samples (Ctrl, LD and HD), were con-sidered for the comparative analysis. Statistical analysis was carried out using Student's t-test, and only proteins with p-value <0.05 and fold change >1.5 were selected for further analysis. Given the small number of biological replicates, we refrained from inferring rig-orous statistical analysis. The complete dataset including search results has been depos-ited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository [79], with the dataset identifier PXD005970. The lists of differentially expressed proteins in LD vs. Ctrl and HD vs. Ctrl were subjected to String analysis, and the values of specifically enriched KEGG pathways were mapped using Pathview via Bioconductor version 3.11 [80].

### Publication Abstract
There is little in vitro data available on long-term effects of TiO<sub>2</sub> exposure. Such data are important for improving the understanding of underlying mechanisms of adverse health effects of TiO<sub>2</sub>. Here, we exposed pulmonary epithelial cells to two doses (0.96 and 1.92 &#xb5;g/cm<sup>2</sup>) of TiO<sub>2</sub> for 13 weeks and effects on cell cycle and cell death mechanisms, i.e., apoptosis and autophagy were determined after 4, 8 and 13 weeks of exposure. Changes in telomere length, cellular protein levels and lipid classes were also analyzed at 13 weeks of exposure. We observed that the TiO<sub>2</sub> exposure increased the fraction of cells in G1-phase and reduced the fraction of cells in G2-phase, which was accompanied by an increase in the fraction of late apoptotic/necrotic cells. This corresponded with an induced expression of key apoptotic proteins i.e., BAD and BAX, and an accumulation of several lipid classes involved in cellular stress and apoptosis. These findings were further supported by quantitative proteome profiling data showing an increase in proteins involved in cell stress and genomic maintenance pathways following TiO<sub>2</sub> exposure. Altogether, we suggest that cell stress response and cell death pathways may be important molecular events in long-term health effects of TiO<sub>2</sub>.

### Keywords
Titanium dioxide; fibrosis; carcinogenesis; proteomics; lipidomics

### Affiliations
Engineer at NTNU, Norway
National Institute of Occupational Health, Pb 8149 Dep, N-0033, Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Animesh Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Mayes Alswady-Hoff
National Institute of Occupational Health, Pb 8149 Dep, N-0033, Oslo, Norway


