### Accession
PXD010692

### Title
Proteomic analysis of plasmodesmata from Populus cell suspension cultures

### Description
In this project, we have investigated the proteome of the plasmodesmata (PD) enriched membrane fraction from poplar cell suspension cultures and quantitatively compared its protein composition with other membrane fractions. We build on the previously published literature on the PD proteome by using semiquantitative methods and, for the first time, demonstrate in vitro callose synthase activity from Populus PD proteins. To our knowledge, this study is the first proteomic investigation of the PD performed on a tree species.

### Sample Protocol
Plasmodesmata enriched fractions (PEF) were  prepared according to the protocol descibed by Fernandez-Calvino et al. (2011) and Grison et al. (2015). Proteins from the PEF were seperaed on SDS-gel followed in-gel hydrolysis with trypsin and the resulting peptides were  analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Our in-house Automated Proteomics Pipeline, which automates the processing of proteomics tasks such as peptide identification, validation and quantitation from LC-MS/MS data and allows easy integration of many separate proteomic tools , was used to analyze the MS data.

### Publication Abstract
Plasmodesmata are channels that link adjacent cells in plant tissues through which molecular exchanges take place. They are involved in multiple processes vital to plant cells, such as responses to hormonal signaling or environmental challenges including osmotic stress, wounding and pathogen attack. Despite the importance of plasmodesmata, their proteome is not well-defined. Here, we have isolated fractions enriched in plasmodesmata from cell suspension cultures of <i>Populus trichocarpa</i> and identified 201 proteins that are enriched in these fractions, thereby providing further insight on the multiple functions of plasmodesmata. Proteomics analysis revealed an enrichment of proteins specifically involved in responses to stress, transport, metabolism and signal transduction. Consistent with the role of callose deposition and turnover in the closure and aperture of the plasmodesmata and our proteomic analysis, we demonstrate the enrichment of callose synthase activity in the plasmodesmata represented by several gene products. A new form of calcium-independent callose synthase activity was detected, in addition to the typical calcium-dependent enzyme activity, suggesting a role of calcium in the regulation of plasmodesmata through two forms of callose synthase activities. Our report provides the first proteomic investigation of the plasmodesmata from a tree species and the direct biochemical evidence for the occurrence of several forms of active callose synthases in these structures. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD010692.

### Keywords
Callose synthase, Spectral counting, Populus, Plasmodesmata, Mass spectrometry, Callose

### Affiliations
Biotechnology
Division of Glycoscience, School of Engineering Sciences in Chemistry, Biotechnology and Health, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), AlbaNova University Centre, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Vaibhav Srivastava

### Lab Head
Dr Vaibhav Srivastava
Division of Glycoscience, School of Engineering Sciences in Chemistry, Biotechnology and Health, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), AlbaNova University Centre, Stockholm, Sweden


