### Accession
PXD034535

### Title
Organism-wide secretome mapping of tissue crosstalk in exercise

### Description
Physical activity is a powerful physiologic stimulus that provides benefits to multiple organ systems and confers protection against disease. These physiologic effects are in part mediated by blood-borne factors that mediate tissue crosstalk and function as molecular effectors of physical activity. To globally understand how physical activity reshapes cellular secretomes, here we applied a proximity biotinylation approach to profile cell type-specific secretomes from blood plasma following treadmill running in mice. This organism-wide, 21-cell type, 10-tissue in-vivo secretome atlas reveals complex cell type-specific and bidirectional modulation of secreted proteins across all cell types following exercise training. We identify a gradient of secretome responses across cell types, with secretomes from Pdgfra+ being one of the most exercise-responsive in the entire dataset. Peptide-level correlation analysis revealed widespread and cell type-specific exercise regulation of secreted proteoforms. Finally, we show that exercise-inducible secretion of soluble CES2 proteins from the liver suppresses obesity in high fat diet-fed mouse models. Together, these data identify specific exercise-regulated cell types and secreted proteins and illuminate the dynamic remodeling of cell and tissue crosstalk by physical activity.

### Sample Protocol
After cooling down to room temperature for 3 min, boiled streptavidin-purified plasma samples (60 μl) were digested using a Mini S-Trap protocol provided by the manufacturer (Protifi, C02-micro-80). As previously described (PMID 34950890), cysteine residues were first alkylated by incubating in 30 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma, A3221) in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Samples were then acidified with phosphoric acid at a final concentration of 1.2%. 420 μl bind/wash buffer (100 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) in 90% methanol) was added to each sample. 150ul samples were loaded onto micro S-trap columns and spun down at 4000g for 20s. The flow-through was discarded, and the centrifugation step was repeated until all the solution passed through the column. Following four washes with 150ul bind/wash buffer, 1 μg trypsin (Promega, V5113) was added to the S-trap and incubated at 47 °C for 90 min. After trypsinization, peptides were washed once with 50 mM TEAB (40 μl), once 0.2% formic acid (40 μl), once with a mixture of 50% acetonitrile and 0.2% formic acid (40 μl) and once of 0.2% formic acid in water (40 μl) by spinning down at 1,000g for 60 s. Eluted fraction from each wash was combined, lyophilized, resuspended in 0.2% formic acid, normalized to concentration using a Nanodrop Spectrophotomerter (Thermo Fisher Scientific, absorbance at 205 nm), and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. One microliter of each sample was taken and combined into a pooled sampled that was used to make the chromatogram library. Proteomics data were acquired using a spectrum-library free DIA approach that relies on gas-phase fractionation (GPF) to generate DIA-only chromatogram libraries. Peptides were separated over a 25 cm Aurora Series Gen2 reverse-phase LC column (75 µm inner diameter packed with 1.6 μm FSC C18 particles, Ion Opticks). The mobile phases (A: water with 0.2% formic acid and B: acetonitrile with 0.2% formic acid) were driven and controlled by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RPLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An integrated loading pump was used to load peptides onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 5 um particles, 20 mm length, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 5 µL/minute, which was put in line with the analytical column 5.5 minutes into the gradient. The gradient was held at 0% B for the first 6 minutes of the analysis, followed by an increase from 0% to 5% B from 6 to 6.5 minutes, and increase from 5 to 22% B from 6.5 to 66.5 minutes, an increase from 22% to 90% from 66.5 to 71 minutes, isocratic flow at 90% B from 71 to 75 minutes, and re-equilibration at 0% B for 15 minutes for a total analysis time of 90 minutes per acquisition. Eluted peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid MS system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Precursors were ionized was ionized with a spray voltage held at +2.2 kV relative to ground, the RF lens was set to 60%, and the inlet capillary temperature was held at 275 °C. Six chromatogram library files were collected through six repeated injections of the pooled sample only. Here, the instrument was configured to acquire 4 m/z precursor isolation window DIA spectra using a staggered isolation window pattern from narrow mass ranges using using window placements optimized by Skyline. DIA MS/MS spectra were acquired with an AGC target of 400,000 charges, a maximum injection time of 54 ms, beam-type collisional dissociation (i.e., HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 33, and a resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z using the Orbitrap as a mass analyzer. The six gas-phase fractionation chromatogram libraries were collected with nominal mass ranges of 400-500 m/z, 500-600 m/z, 600-700 m/z, 700-800 m/z, 800-900 m/z, and 900-1000 m/z. The exact windowing scheme was downloaded from https://bitbucket.org/searleb/encyclopedia/wiki/Home and is available in Supplementary Information here. Precursor MS1 spectra were interspersed every 25 scans with an AGC target of 400,000 charges, a maximum injection time of 55 ms, a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z using the Orbitrap as a mass analyzer, and a scan range of either 395-505 m/z, 495-605 m/z, 595-705 m/z, 695-805 m/z, 795-905 m/z, or 895-1005 m/z. For quantitative samples (i.e., the non-pooled samples) the instrument was configured to acquire 25 x 16 m/z precursor isolation window DIA spectra covering 385-1015 m/z using a staggered isolation window pattern with window placements optimized by Skyline (windowing scheme downloaded from the same link as above and available as Supplementary Information here). DIA spectra were acquired with the same MS/MS settings described above. Precursor MS1 spectra were interspersed every 38 scans with a scan range of 385-1015 m/z, an AGC target of 400,000 charges, a maximum injection time of 55 ms, and a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z using the Orbitrap as a mass analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Staggered DIA spectra were demultiplexed from raw data into mzML files with 10 ppm accuracy using MSConvert with settings described in Pino et al. Encyclopedia (version 1.12.31) was used to search demultiplexed mzML files using an internal PECAN fasta search engine called Walnut and a reviewed-plus-isoforms mouse proteome database downloaded February 25, 2022 from Uniprot. Walnut settings were: fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation, full tryptic digestion with up to 2 missed cleavages, HCD (y-only) fragmentation, 10 ppm precursor and fragment mass tolerances, and 5 quantitative ions. The chromatogram library resulting from the Walnut search was then used for Encyclopedia searching, where all similar settings to the Walnut search remained the same, and other settings included a library mass tolerance of 10 ppm, inclusion of both b- and y-type fragment ions, and a minimum number of quantitative ions set at 3. Percolator (version 3.1) was used to filter peptides to a 1% false discovery rate using the target/decoy approach and proteins to a 1% protein-level FDR assuming protein grouping parsimony. Resulting data from EncyclopeDIA were checked in Skyline before further processing with Perseus. Proteins were filtered so that only proteins with 2 or more peptides and those that were detected in all three replicates of at least one condition were retained. Data was converted to cell type-protein pairs, and the median value of the cell type-protein pair intensity was compared to the intensity of that protein detected in WT mice control samples. Only cell type-protein pairs that showed a greater than 1.5-fold intensity above the median intensity detected in WT samples were retained. Exercise-regulated cell type-protein pairs (adjusted P-values<0.05) were used for calculating exercise responsiveness scores. Each cell type-protein pair’s exercise responsiveness was calculated as abs(log10(adjusted P-values)) x  abs(log2(exercise fold change)). Exercise fold change of a cell type-protein pair was defined as median protein abundance across three exercise samples divided by median protein abundance across three sedentary samples of the same genotype. Then the exercise responsiveness scores were calculated by the summarization of the exercise responsiveness of each cell type-protein pair from the same cell type.  Peptide correlation analyses were performed using PeCorA as previously described (Dermit et al., 2021). Briefly, all peptide intensities were uploaded into PeCorA (https://github.com/jessegmeyerlab/PeCorA) for processing. The threshold_to_filter in PeCorA_preprocessing was set to 100. Then adjusted P-values reported by PeCorA were used for downstream analysis and peptides with adjusted P-values < 0.05 were considered as “uncorrelated peptides”. Boxplots of any “uncorrelated” peptide’s abundance compared to the other peptides of the same protein under sedentary and exercise conditions were generated.

### Publication Abstract
There is a significant interest in identifying blood-borne factors that mediate tissue crosstalk and function as molecular effectors of physical activity. Although past studies have focused on an individual molecule or cell type, the organism-wide secretome response to physical activity has not been evaluated. Here, we use a cell-type-specific proteomic approach to generate a 21-cell-type, 10-tissue map of exercise training-regulated secretomes in mice. Our dataset identifies &gt;200 exercise training-regulated cell-type-secreted protein pairs, the majority of which have not been previously reported. Pdgfra-cre-labeled secretomes were the most responsive to exercise training. Finally, we show anti-obesity, anti-diabetic, and exercise performance-enhancing activities for proteoforms of intracellular carboxylesterases whose secretion from the liver is induced by exercise training.

### Keywords
Plasma, In vivo, Exercise, Proteomics, Secreteome, Mice

### Affiliations
Stanford University

### Submitter
Nicholas Riley

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan Long
Stanford University


