### Accession
PXD021915

### Title
System-wide identification and prioritization of enzyme substrates by thermal analysis (SIESTA)

### Description
Despite the immense importance of enzyme-substrate reactions, there is a lack of generic and unbiased tools for identifying and prioritizing substrate proteins which are modulated in the structural and functional levels through modification. Here we describe a high-throughput unbiased proteomic method called System-wide Identification and prioritization of Enzyme Substrates by Thermal Analysis (SIESTA). The approach assumes that enzymatic post-translational modification of substrate proteins might change their thermal stability. SIESTA successfully identifies several known and novel substrate candidates for selenoprotein thioredoxin reductase 1, protein kinase B (AKT1) and poly-(ADP-ribose) polymerase-10 systems in up to a depth of 7,179 proteins. Wider application of SIESTA can enhance our understanding of the role of enzymes in homeostasis and disease, open new opportunities in investigating the effect of PTMs on signal transduction and facilitate drug discovery.

### Sample Protocol
PARP10 interacting proteins were enriched using Pierce™ His Protein Interaction Pull-Down Kit (Thermo) according to the manufacturer protocol. 100 µg of His-tagged PARP10 was incubated with 25 µl of settled HisPur™ Cobalt Resin and incubated at 4°C for at 30 for immobilization. 500 µg of HCT116 cell lysate (with 10 mM imidazole) was then added to the column, which was then incubated for 1 h at 4°C with intermittent inversion. The column was washed 7 times. The proteins were then reduced on beads with 10 mM DTT for 30 min and alkylated with 50 mM IAA for 30 min in the dark. Afterwards, urea was added to the samples to 1M final concentration and LysC (overnight) and Trypsin (6 h) were added sequentially at 1 : 100 w/w to protein. After acidification, samples were cleaned using StageTips. Samples were dissolved in 0.1% FA and 1 µg of each samples was analyzed with LC-MS over 4 h on an orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. The experiment was performed in 4 replicates.

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-MS data (SIESTA) were analyzed by MaxQuant, version 1.5.6.5. The Andromeda search engine matched MS/MS data against the Uniprot complete proteome database (human, version UP000005640_9606, 92957 entries). Label-free quantification was selected. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation was selected as a variable modification. No more than two missed cleavages were allowed. A 1% false discovery rate was used as a filter at both protein and peptide levels. For all other parameters, the default settings were used. After removing all the contaminants, only proteins with at least two peptides were included in the final dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the immense importance of enzyme-substrate reactions, there is a lack of general and unbiased tools for identifying and prioritizing substrate proteins that are modified by the enzyme on the structural level. Here we describe a high-throughput unbiased proteomics method called System-wide Identification and prioritization of Enzyme Substrates by Thermal Analysis (SIESTA). The approach assumes that the enzymatic post-translational modification of substrate proteins is likely to change their thermal stability. In our proof-of-concept studies, SIESTA successfully identifies several known and novel substrate candidates for selenoprotein thioredoxin reductase 1, protein kinase B (AKT1) and poly-(ADP-ribose) polymerase-10 systems. Wider application of SIESTA can enhance our understanding of the role of enzymes in homeostasis and disease, opening opportunities to investigate the effect of post-translational modifications on signal transduction and facilitate drug discovery.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Pulldown, Hct116, Parp10

### Affiliations
MBB, Karolinska Institutet
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Amir Ata Saei 

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Roman A. Zubarev
MBB, Karolinska Institutet


