### Accession
PXD020660

### Title
A ubiquitin variant-based affinity approach selectively identifies substrates of the ubiquitin ligase E6AP in complex with HPV-11 E6 or HPV-16 E6

### Description
The E6 protein of both mucosal high risk human papillomaviruses (HPVs) such as HPV-16, which have been causally associated with malignant tumors, and low risk HPVs such as HPV-11, which cause the development of benign tumors, interacts with the cellular E3 ubiquitin ligase E6AP. This indicates that both HPV types employ E6AP to organize the cellular proteome to viral needs. However, while several substrate proteins of the high risk E6-E6AP complex are known, e.g. the tumor suppressor p53, potential substrates of the low risk E6-E6AP complex remain largely elusive. Here, we report on an affinity-based enrichment approach that enables the targeted identification of potential substrate proteins of the different E6-E6AP complexes by a combination of E3-selective ubiquitination in whole cell extracts and high-resolution mass spectrometry. The basis for the selectivity of this approach is the use of a ubiquitin variant that is efficiently used by the E6-E6AP complexes for ubiquitination, but not by E6AP alone. By this approach, we identified approximately 190 potential substrate proteins for low risk HPV-11 E6 as well as high risk HPV-16 E6. Moreover, subsequent validation experiments in vitro and within cells with selected substrate proteins demonstrate the potential of our approach. In conclusion, our data represent a reliable repository for potential substrates of the HPV-16 and HPV-11 E6 proteins in complex with E6AP.

### Sample Protocol
An autoubiquitination assay of E6AP with either wild-type ubiquitin or the K48/63R mutant was performed in the presence or absence of HPV 16 E6 in biological triplicates and analyzed via SDS-PAGE followed by staining with colloidal Coomassie blue. The band containing E6AP and the polyubiquitinated versions thereof (≥ 100 kDa) were excised and processed essentially as described in Shevchenko et al., 2006. In short, coomassie stained bands were destained with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile (1:1, v/v), reduced with 10 mM DTT in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Then, the buffer was changed to 100 mM HEPES pH 7.8 before digestion with trypsin (13 ng/µl, Promega) at 37 °C overnight. The digested peptides were extracted twice with acetonitrile/5 % formic acid (2:1, v/v) and vacuum concentrated. Peptides were resuspended in 50 µl 100 mM HEPES pH 8 before being labelled with TMT 6-plex according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Scientific, #90064). TMT labels (126, 127, 129, 130) were thoroughly dissolved in 41 µl anhydrous acetonitrile before 20 µl were added to each sample which contained ~12 µg peptides. Labelling was performed for 60 min at 28 °C before the reaction was quenched with 4 µl 5 % hydroxylamine for 15 min. Then, all four conditions were pooled for each of the three replicates and vacuum concentrated. Prior to mass spectrometric analysis, peptides were desalted via C18 Spin Tips (Thermo Scientific, #84850), dried and resuspended in 50 µl 5 % ACN/0.1 % formic acid for MS analysis. 1 µl of TMT-labelled peptides was analysed on an Orbitrap Tribrid Fusion mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on an Acclaim PepMap C18 column (50 µm x 150 mm, 2 µm, 100 Å) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min in a 90 min gradient (4 min 0.1 % formic acid, 75 min linear gradient 0-35 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid, 1 min linear gradient from 35-80 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid, 10 min 80 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid). TMT-labelled peptides were measured using a SPS-MS3 method with a full cycle time of 3 s. Full scan mass spectrum was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120K (at 200 m/z) with a max. injection time of 50 ms, an AGC target of 4e5 and a scan range 375-1500 m/z. For MS2 scans only ions with an intensity threshold of 5e3 were isolated, fragmented with 35 % CID and measured in the Ion Trap in rapid scan mode with an isolation window of 0.7 m/z, a max. injection time of 50 ms and an AGC target of 1e4. For the MS3 scan precursor ion exclusion (low 18, high 5), TMT as isobaric tag loss exclusion as well as synchronous precursor selection (SPS) set to 10 precursor ions were selected. The MS3 scan was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60K with a MS isolation window of 2 m/z, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 65 %, a scan range of 100-500 m/z, a max. injection time of 118 ms and an AGC target of 1e5.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer v 2.2.0.388 (Thermo Scientific). MS/MS data were searched via the SEQUEST search node with the following parameter settings: trypsin digestion allowing for up to 2 missed cleavages, min. peptide length 5 amino acids, 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.6 ppm fragment mass tolerance. Fixed modifications were set to carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues and the TMT label at peptide N-termini and dynamic modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues, diglycine modification at lysine residues and TMT label at lysine residues. Reporter ions were quantified via the Reporter Ions Quantifier node from MS3 spectra based on their S/N ratio with a co-isolation threshold ≤ 30 and average reporter S/N threshold ≥ 50. Quantification results were visualized as grouped abundances of the summed abundances of all replicates for the respective channel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Human papillomavirus, Protein degradation, Oncogene, Tmt, E3 ubiquitin ligase, E6 oncoprotein, Tumor virus, E6ap/ube3a

### Affiliations
Universität Konstanz
Department of Biology  University of Konstanz Germany

### Submitter
Florian Stengel

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Florian Stengel
Department of Biology  University of Konstanz Germany


