### Accession
PXD021085

### Title
Chromatin modifiers and recombination factors promote a telomere fold-back structure, that is lost during replicative senescence

### Description
Telomeres have the ability to adopt a lariat conformation and hence, engage in long and short distance intra-chromosome interactions. Budding yeast telomeres were proposed to fold back into subtelomeric regions, but a robust assay to quantitatively characterize this structure has been lacking. Therefore, it is  not well understood how the interactions between telomeres and non-telomeric regions are established and regulated. We employ a telomere chromosome conformation capture (Telo-3C)approach to directly analyze telomere folding and its maintenance in S. cerevisiae. We identify the histone modifiers Sir2, Sin3 and Set2 as critical regulators for telomere folding, which suggests that a distinct telomeric chromatin environment is a major requirement for the folding of yeast telomeres. We demonstrate that telomeres are not folded when cells enter replicative senescence, which occurs independently of short telomere length. Indeed, Sir2, Sin3 and Set2 protein levels are decreased during senescence and their absence may thereby prevent telomere folding. Additionally, we show that the homologous recombination machinery, including the Rad51 and Rad52 proteins, as well as the checkpoint component Rad53 are essential for establishing the telomere fold-back structure. This study outlines a method to interrogate telomere-subtelomere interactions at a single unmodified yeast telomere. Using this method, we provide insights into how the spatial arrangement of the chromosome end structure is established and demonstrate that telomere folding is compromised throughout replicative senescence.

### Sample Protocol
1 OD600 unit of exponentially growing cells was resuspended in 1X LDS buffer supplemented with 100 mM DTT. Cells were heated for 10 min at 95 °C and separated on a 4-12 % NuPAGE Bis –Tris precasted PAGE gel (Thermo Scientific). Samples were run at 180 V for 10 min and processed by ingel digestion (85). Briefly, samples were reduced in reduction buffer (10 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer) for 1 h at 56 °C and alkylated in alkylation buffer (50 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ABC buffer) for 45 min in the dark. Proteins were digested with 2 μg Protease LysC (Wako Chemicals) overnight at 37 °C in 50 mM ABC buffer. Digested peptides were desalted on a C18 StageTip as described (86) and analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were separated on a self-packed reverse phase capillary (75 μm diameter, 25 cm length packed with C18 beads of 1.9 μm (Dr Maisch GmbH). The capillary was clamped on an electrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex™, Thermo Scientific). A 90 min gradient starting from 2 % - 60 % gradient acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid was used at a flow of 225 nl/min. Data was collected in data-dependent acquisition mode with one MS full scan followed by up to 10 MS/MS scan with HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) and the ENSEMBL S. cerevisiae protein database (Saccharomyces_cerevisiae.R64-1-1.24). LFQ quantitation and match between run options were activated. MaxQuant output files were analyzed using an in-house R script.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)


