### Accession
PXD001361

### Title
Direct evidence of milk consumption from ancient human dental calculus, northern Europe

### Description
This study investigated the consumption of milk products in the archaeological record, utilizing human dental calculus as a reservoir of dietary proteins from archaeological samples from across Eurasia. Protein extraction and generation of tryptic peptides from dental calculus was performed using a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol, modified for ancient samples, on 92 samples of archaeological dental calculus. Samples were extracted at three laboratories; the Functional Genomics Centre Zürich (FGCZ), the Centre for GeoGenetics at the National History Museum of Denmark, and BioArCh at the University of York. Sample extracts were sequenced (LC-MS/MS) using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (FGCZ), a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole Orbitrap and an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Central Proteomics Facility, Target Discovery Institute, Oxford).

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic peptides were extracted from decalcified dental calculus using a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol modified for degraded samples. Samples from Greenland were analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry at the Functional Genomics Centre Zürich (FGCZ) using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an Eksigent-NanoLC-Ultra 1D plus HPLC system (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin (CA), USA). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.2% formic acid, 1% acetonitrile for channel A and 0.2% formic acid, 100% acetonitrile for channel B. Peptides were loaded on a self-made tip column (75 µm × 80 mm) packed with reverse phase C18 material (AQ, 3 μm 200 Å, Bischoff GmbH, Leonberg, Germany) and eluted with a flow rate of 250 nl per min by a gradient from 0.8% to 4.8% of B in 2 min, 35% B at 57 min, 48% B at 60 min, 97% at 65 min. Full-scan MS spectra (300−1700 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30 000 at 400 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 1,000,000. Higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) MS/MS spectra were recorded in data dependent manner in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 7500 at 400 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 100, 000. Precursors were isolated from the ten most intense signals above a threshold of 500 arbitrary units with an isolation window of 2 Da. Three collision energy steps were applied with a step width of 15.0% around a normalized collision energy of 40% and an activation time of 0.1 ms. Charge state screening was enabled excluding non-charge state assigned and singly charged ions from MS/MS experiments. Precursor masses already selected for MS/MS were excluded for further selection for 45 s with an exclusion window of 20 ppm. The size of the exclusion list was set to a maximum of 500 entries.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS spectra were converted to searchable Mascot generic format using Proteowizard version 3.0.4743 using the 200 most intense peaks in each MS/MS spectrum. MS/MS ion database searching was performed on Mascot (Matrix ScienceTM, version 2.4.01), against all available sequences in UniProt and the Human Oral Microbiome Database (HOMD)34. Searches were performed against a decoy database to generate false discovery rates. Peptide tolerance was 10ppm, and with a semi-tryptic search with up to two missed cleavages. MS/MS ion tolerance was set to 0.07 Da. Based on previous observations of ancient proteome degradation, we set post-translational modifications were as carbamidomethylation (fixed modification) and acetyl (protein N-term), deamidated (NQ), glutamine to pyroglutamate, methionine oxidation and hydroxylation of proline (variable modifications). Mascot search results were filtered using an ion score cut-off of 25 and significance threshold of p<0.05. BLAST was used to verify matches to β-lactoglobulin, and taxonomic assignment is reported based on the consensus peptide assignments for each individual.

### Publication Abstract
Milk is a major food of global economic importance, and its consumption is regarded as a classic example of gene-culture evolution. Humans have exploited animal milk as a food resource for at least 8500 years, but the origins, spread, and scale of dairying remain poorly understood. Indirect lines of evidence, such as lipid isotopic ratios of pottery residues, faunal mortality profiles, and lactase persistence allele frequencies, provide a partial picture of this process; however, in order to understand how, where, and when humans consumed milk products, it is necessary to link evidence of consumption directly to individuals and their dairy livestock. Here we report the first direct evidence of milk consumption, the whey protein &#x3b2;-lactoglobulin (BLG), preserved in human dental calculus from the Bronze Age (ca. 3000 BCE) to the present day. Using protein tandem mass spectrometry, we demonstrate that BLG is a species-specific biomarker of dairy consumption, and we identify individuals consuming cattle, sheep, and goat milk products in the archaeological record. We then apply this method to human dental calculus from Greenland's medieval Norse colonies, and report a decline of this biomarker leading up to the abandonment of the Norse Greenland colonies in the 15(th) century CE.

### Keywords
Human, Beta-lactoglobulin, Dental calculus, Dental plaque, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
BioArCh, University of York, UK
University of York

### Submitter
Jessica Hendy

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Collins
BioArCh, University of York, UK


