### Accession
PXD008952

### Title
Evaluation of NCI-7 Cell Line Panel

### Description
Reference materials are vital to benchmarking the reproducibility of clinical tests and essential for monitoring laboratory performance for clinical proteomics. The reference material utilized for mass spectrometric analysis of the human proteome would ideally contain enough proteins to be suitably representative of the human proteome, as well as exhibit a stable protein composition in different batches of sample regeneration. Previously, The Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium (CPTAC) utilized PDX-derived comparative reference (CompRef) materials for the longitudinal assessment of proteomic performance, however, inherent drawbacks of PDX-derived material has resulted in efforts to identify a new source of CompRef material. In this study, we examined the utility of using a panel of seven cancer cell lines, NCI-7 Cell Line Panel, as a reference material for mass spectrometric analysis of the human proteome. Our results showed that not only is the NCI-7 material suitable for benchmarking laboratory sample preparation methods, but NCI-7 sample generation is highly reproducible at both the global and phosphoprotein levels. In addition, the predicted genomic and experimental coverage of the NCI-7 proteome suggests the NCI-7 material may also have applications as a universal standard proteomic reference.

### Sample Protocol
All cell lines (A549, COLO205, NCI H226, NCI H23, T-47D, CCRF-CEM and RPMI 8226) were grown to 90% confluence and pelleted. Individual cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (8M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 2 ug/mL aprotinin, 10 ug. mL leupeptin, 1 mM PMSF, 10 mM NaF, Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 2 and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 3 (1:100 dilution), and 20 uM PUGNAc), and homogenized using a Branson Sonifier 250 probe sonicator. Protein concentration was measured via BCA Protein Assay and 1 mg of protein from each cell line was mixed to generate the NCI-7 reference material. NCI-7 reference material was trptically digested, TMT labeled, and sujected to off-line fractionation, followed by concatenationg. 5% of the sample was utilized for global proteomics and the remaining sample enirched for phosphopeptides using Fe-IMAC. 1 ug of peptide was separated using Easy nLC 1200 UHPLC system on an in-house packed 20 cm x 75 um diameter C18 column (1.9 um Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ beads; Picofrit 10 um opening). The column was heated to 50°C using a column heater. The flow rate was 0.300 μl/min with 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid, 90% acetonitrile (B). The peptides were separated with a 6–30% B gradient in 84 mins and analyzed using the Thermo Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
All LC-MS/MS files were analyzed by a cloud-based proteomic pipeline developed in Johns Hopkins University to perform database search for spectrum assignments using MS-GF+ in this study against a combined human and mouse RefSeq database (version 20160914). A decoy database was used to assess the false discovery rate (FDR) at PSM, peptide and protein levels. Peptides were searched with two tryptic ends, allowing up to two missed cleavages. Search parameters included 20 ppm precursor tolerance and 0.06 Da fragment ion tolerance, static modification of carbamidomethylation at cysteine (+57.02146), TMT-label modification of N-terminus and lysine (+229.16293)  and variable modifications of oxidation at methionine (+15.99491) and phosphorylation at serine, threonine, and tyrosine (+79.96633). Filters used for global data analysis included one PSM per peptide and two peptides per protein, with a 1% FDR threshold at the protein level. Filters used for phosphoproteome data included one PSM per peptide and one peptide per protein, with a 1% FDR threshold at the protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Reference materials are vital to benchmarking the reproducibility of clinical tests and essential for monitoring laboratory performance for clinical proteomics. The reference material utilized for mass spectrometric analysis of the human proteome would ideally contain enough proteins to be suitably representative of the human proteome, as well as exhibit a stable protein composition in different batches of sample regeneration. Previously, The Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium (CPTAC) utilized a PDX-derived comparative reference (CompRef) materials for the longitudinal assessment of proteomic performance; however, inherent drawbacks of PDX-derived material, including extended time needed to grow tumors and high level of expertise needed, have resulted in efforts to identify a new source of CompRef material. In this study, we examined the utility of using a panel of seven cancer cell lines, NCI-7 Cell Line Panel, as a reference material for mass spectrometric analysis of human proteome. Our results showed that not only is the NCI-7 material suitable for benchmarking laboratory sample preparation methods, but also NCI-7 sample generation is highly reproducible at both the global and phosphoprotein levels. In addition, the predicted genomic and experimental coverage of the NCI-7 proteome suggests the NCI-7 material may also have applications as a universal standard proteomic reference.

### Keywords
Proteomics reference standard, Nci-7, Cptac, Nci-60

### Affiliations
Clinical Chemistry Division, Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
The Johns Hopkins University

### Submitter
David Clark

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Zhang
Clinical Chemistry Division, Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA


