### Accession
PXD017093

### Title
A Spirodela polyrhiza genome and proteome reveal conserved chromosomal structure and translation favoring energy production

### Description
Duckweeds are a monophyletic group of rapidly reproducing aquatic monocots in the Lemnaceae family. Spirodela polyrhiza, the Greater Duckweed, has the largest body plan yet the smallest genome size in the family (1C = 150 Mb). Given their clonal, exponentially fast reproduction, a key question is whether genome structure is conserved across the species in the absence of meiotic recombination. We generated a highly contiguous, chromosome-scale assembly of Spirodela polyrhiza line Sp7498 using Oxford Nanopore plus Hi-C scaffolding (Sp7498_HiC) that is highly syntenic with a related line (Sp9509). Both the Sp7498_HiC and Sp9509 genome assemblies reveal large chromosomal misorientations in a recent PacBio assembly of Sp7498, highlighting the necessity of orthogonal long-range scaffolding techniques like Hi-C and BioNano optical mapping. Proteome analysis of Sp7498 verified the expression of nearly 2,250 proteins and revealed a high level of proteins involved in photosynthesis and carbohydrate metabolism among other functions. In addition, a strong increase in chloroplast proteins was observed that correlated to chloroplast density. This Sp7498_HiC genome was generated cheaply and quickly with a single Oxford Nanopore MinION flow cell and one Hi-C library in a classroom setting. Combining these data with a mass spectrometry-generated proteome, demonstrates that duckweed is a model for genomics- and proteomics-based education.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted at 4°C from pulverized Spirodela polyrhiza 7498 and Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0 leaf tissue into 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 5 mM Na2EDTA, 2 mM dithiotreitol, and 1X plant protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich).  The samples were further homogenized using a Pyrex Potter-Elvehjem tissue grinder (Fisher Scientific) and clarified by centrifugation at 16,000 x g. 150 µl of the protein extract was precipitated in 4:1:3 (v/v) methanol/chloroform/water and collected by centrifugation. The resulting pellet was washed, lyophilized to dryness, and resuspended into 100 µl of 8 M urea, reduced for 1-hr at 22 °C with 10 mM dithiothreitol, followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 1-hr. The reaction was quenched with 20 mM dithiotreitol and diluted with with 900 µl of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reduce the urea concentration below 1.5 M, and digested overnight at 37°C with 0.5 µg of sequencing-grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega).  The resulting peptides were lyophilized to a final volume of ~250 µl, acidified with 0.5% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (pH<3.0), and desalted and concentrated using a 100 µl Bond Elut OMIX C18 pipette tip (Agilent Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The peptides were eluted in 50 µl of 75% acetonitrile and 0.1% acetic acid, lyophilized, and resuspended in 20 µl 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid.  Nano-scale LC separation of the tryptic peptides was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation system equipped with a 75 µm x 25 cm Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), in combination with a 2-hr linear 4% to 36% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid and a flow rate of 250 nl/min.  Eluted peptides were analyzed online by a Q Exactive Plus spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in the positive ESI mode.  Data-dependent acquisition of full MS scans (mass range of 380-1500 m/z) at a resolution of 70,000 was collected, with the automatic gain control (AGC) target set to 3 x 106, and the maximum fill time set to 200 msec. High-energy collision-induced dissociation fragmentation of the 15 strongest peaks was performed with an intensity threshold of 4 x 104 counts and an isolation window of 3.0 m/z, and excluded precursors that had unassigned, +1, +7, +8, or >+8 charge states. MS/MS scans were conducted at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target of 2 x 105 and a maximum fill time of 100 msec. Dynamic exclusion was performed with a repeat count of 2 and an exclusion duration of 30 sec, while the minimum MS ion count for triggering MS/MS was set to 4 x 103 counts. Each sample was analyzed in quadruplicate to enable broad coverage; the first two runs were performed without an exclusion list, while the third and fourth runs were performed with an exclusion list containing the 5,000 most abundant peptides that were detected in the first two runs, to increase sample coverage and maximize suppression of abundant peptides. Raw MS2 files from all four runs were merged, resulting in two technical replicates per sample (McLoughlin et al., 2018).

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS datasets were queried by Proteome Discoverer (version 2.0.0.802; Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the Spirodela Sp7498 (Spolyrhiza_290_v2.protein.primarytranscriptonly.header.fa; http:/phytozome.jgi.doe.gov) and Arabidopsis (TAIR10_PEP_20101214_UPDATED.fa; http:/www.arabidopsis.org) databases and a list of common protein contaminants. Peptides were assigned by SEQUEST HT (Eng et al., 1994), allowing a maximum of 1 missed tryptic cleavage, a minimum peptide length of 6, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerances of 0.02 Da.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteines and oxidation of methionine were specified as static and dynamic modifications, respectively.  The target false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 (strict, high confidence) and 0.05 (relaxed, medium confidence) were used as validation for peptide spectral matches (PSMs), protein modifications are only reported at high PSM confidence (FDR 0.01) and peptides and protein grouping was performed excluding all protein groups that are not strictly necessary to explain the identified peptides (strict). Label-free quantification as previously described (Silva et al., 2006) was performed in Proteome Discoverer™ with a minimum Quan value threshold set to 0.0001 using unique peptides, and “3 Top N” peptides used for area calculation (Silva et al., 2006). Three biological replicates were analyzed in quadruplicate, and the resulting values were averaged resulting in 2163 master protein identifications. Data was log2 transformed and missing values were imputed while assuming a normal distribution using a width distribution shrinkage of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8 standard deviations if necessary using the Perseus computational platform (Tyanova et al., 2016). Peptides were analyzed and significance was determined by plotting values in a volcano plot using a t-test with a number of randomizations of 250 with a FDR of 0.05 and an S0 of 0.1. GO enrichments were identified by the AgriGO analysis toolkit (Tian et al., 2017). GO-annotation categories shown here were selected based on their uniqueness, p-value significance, and degree of completeness.

### Publication Abstract
Duckweeds are a monophyletic group of rapidly reproducing aquatic monocots in the Lemnaceae family. Given their clonal, exponentially fast reproduction, a key question is whether genome structure is conserved across the species in the absence of meiotic recombination. Here, we studied the genome and proteome of Spirodela polyrhiza, or greater duckweed, which has the largest body plan yet the smallest genome size in the family (1C=150 Mb). Using Oxford Nanopore sequencing combined with Hi-C scaffolding, we generated a highly contiguous, chromosome-scale assembly of S. polyrhiza line Sp7498 (Sp7498_HiC). Both the Sp7498_HiC and Sp9509 genome assemblies reveal large chromosomal misorientations relative to a recent PacBio assembly of Sp7498, highlighting the need for orthogonal long-range scaffolding techniques such as Hi-C and BioNano optical mapping. Shotgun proteomics of Sp7498 verified the expression of ~2250 proteins and revealed a high abundance of proteins involved in photosynthesis and carbohydrate metabolism among other functions. In addition, a strong increase in chloroplast proteins was observed that correlated to chloroplast density. This Sp7498_HiC genome was generated cheaply and quickly with a single Oxford Nanopore MinION flow cell and one Hi-C library in a classroom setting. Combining these data with a mass spectrometry-generated proteome illustrates the utility of duckweed as a model for genomics- and proteomics-based education.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Spyrodela, Proteome composition

### Affiliations
Auburn University, Alabama
Washington University in Saint Louis

### Submitter
Fionn McLoughlin

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Harkess
Auburn University, Alabama


