### Accession
PXD036108

### Title
Identification of sites of ubiquitination in WT and R->K mutant forms of RAD23A and UBQLN1 by Mass Spectrometry

### Description
To identify sites of ubiquitination in Myc-6His-Tagged forms of RAD23A and UBQLN1 for wild-type and forms with some arginine residues mutated to lysines (see FASTA file for details).

### Sample Protocol
Myc-6His-tagged RAD23A and UBQLN1 in both WT and R->K mutant forms were purified from three confluent 10-cm dishes of transfected U2OS cells using denaturing immunoprecipitation using Myc-trap beads (ChromoTek). A control purification from cells transfected with empty vector alone was performed in parallel. The protein was eluted from the beads with 20 μL NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen) and separated by SDS-PAGE using Novex 4-20% Tris-Glycine gels (Invitrogen). The gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue (Sigma). Proteins from the regions of the gel relating to modified and unmodified forms were in-gel trypsin digested (Shevchenko A, et al Nat Protoc. 2006;1(6):2856-60. PMID: 17406544.) alkylated with chloroacetamide and final peptides were resuspended in 0.1% TFA 0.5% acetic acid before analysis by LC-MS/MS. This was performed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific), using an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Scientific) running a 75 μm x 500 mm EASY-Spray column at 45ºC. Two MS runs (of 60 and 150 minutes) were prepared using approximately 15% total peptide sample each. To boost sensitivity a top 3 data-dependent method was applied employing a full scan (m/z 300–1800) with resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200 (after accumulation to a target value of 1,000,000 ions with maximum injection time of 20 ms). For the 60 minute gradient the 3 most intense ions were fragmented by HCD and measured with a resolution of R = 70,000 (60 minute run) or 35,000 (150 minute run) at m/z 200 (target value of 1,000,000 ions and maximum injection time of 500 ms) and intensity threshold of 2.1x104. Peptide match was set to ‘preferred’. Ions were ignored if they had unassigned charge state 1, 8 or >8 and a 10 second (60 minute run) or 25 second (150 minute run) dynamic exclusion list was applied.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis used MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0 (Cox J, Mann M. Nat Biotechnol. 2008 PMID: 19029910.). Default settings were used with a few exceptions. A database of the 4 transfected proteins was used as main search space (see below) with a first search using the whole human proteome (Uniprot 73920 entries – April 2019). Digestion was set to Trypsin/P (ignoring lysines and arginines N-terminal to prolines) with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages. Match between runs was not enabled. Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term) and GlyGly (K) were included as variable modifications, with a maximum of 4 per peptide allowed. Carbamidomethyl (C) was included as a fixed modification. Only peptides of maximum mass 8000 Da were considered. Protein and peptide level FDR was set to 1% but no FDR filtering was applied to identified sites. Manual MS/MS sequence validation was used to verify GlyGly (K) peptide identifications and only peptides with an Andromeda score >100, localization probability>0.75 and a mass error <1ppm were considered. Peptide intensity data were reported for each sample loaded on the original gel by pooling data from the two MS runs for only the upper (modified protein) gel slices of each lane.

### Publication Abstract
In terms of its relative frequency, lysine is a common amino acid in the human proteome. However, by bioinformatics we find hundreds of proteins that contain long and evolutionarily conserved stretches completely devoid of lysine residues. These so-called lysine deserts show a high prevalence in intrinsically disordered proteins with known or predicted functions within the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS), including many E3 ubiquitin-protein ligases and UBL domain proteasome substrate shuttles, such as BAG6, RAD23A, UBQLN1 and UBQLN2. We show that introduction of lysine residues into the deserts leads to a striking increase in ubiquitylation of some of these proteins. In case of BAG6, we show that ubiquitylation is catalyzed by the E3 RNF126, while RAD23A is ubiquitylated by E6AP. Despite the elevated ubiquitylation, mutant RAD23A appears stable, but displays a partial loss of function phenotype in fission yeast. In case of UBQLN1 and BAG6, introducing lysine leads to a reduced abundance due to proteasomal degradation of the proteins. For UBQLN1 we show that arginine residues within the lysine depleted region are critical for its ability to form cytosolic speckles/inclusions. We propose that selective pressure to avoid lysine residues may be a common evolutionary mechanism to prevent unwarranted ubiquitylation and/or perhaps other lysine post-translational modifications. This may be particularly relevant for UPS components as they closely and frequently encounter the ubiquitylation machinery and are thus more susceptible to nonspecific ubiquitylation.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin rad23a ubqln1

### Affiliations
School Of Life Sciences, University of Dundee
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Mike Tatham

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald T. Hay
School Of Life Sciences, University of Dundee


