### Accession
PXD005527

### Title
Unbiased proteomic study of the axons of cultured rat cortical neurons

### Description
We have conducted quantitative proteomic analyses of the axons of cultured rat cortical neurons. Axons are isolated by using glass chips that enable the axons and their cell bodies of neurons to grow in separated regions on the chip surface. Proteins extracted from the isolated axons, as well as those extracted from whole cortical neurons are subjected to two-dimensional liquid chromatography (2D-LC)-mass spectrometry (MS)-MS analyses. The abundances of proteins in the axon are found to be strongly correlated with their average abundances in whole neurons. Based upon these data, a quantitative description of the protein distribution among various subcellular structures in the axon has been generated. The proteins extracted from the axons and whole neurons are also subjected to stable isotope dimethyl labeling reaction and then to 2D-LC-MS/MS analysis. Proteins enriched in the axon compartment of rat cortical neurons are thus identified.

### Sample Protocol
Cells dissociated from the cortices of rat fetuses at embryonic day 18 (E18) were cultured on the glass chips. From these chips, axons and whole neurons were collected separately. The axon and whole-cell samples containing equal amounts of proteins were subjected to exhaustive tryptic digestion. The resultant peptide samples were subjected to 2D-LC-MS/MS analyses in label-free experiments and dimethyl labeling experiments. Peptide analyses were performed by using an online 2D-strong cation exchange (SCX)/RP-liquid chromatography (LC) system. The axon and whole-cell peptide samples and the mixture of dimethylated whole-cell and axon peptides were first dissolved in 50% (v/v) ACN containing 0.1% (v/v) FA and then loaded onto a SCX column (0.38 × 100 mm , packed with Luna-SCX particles, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) and eluted by a gradient of 0– 0.5 M NH4Cl in 30% ACN and 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 0.5 µl/min. The separation was divided into 22 65-min segments. The eluate of each segment was diluted online with H2O containing 0.1% FA before passing through a RP trapping column. The peptides-loaded trapping column was then connected to a second-dimensional RP column and eluted by a continuous ACN gradient (5-40% in 50 min, 40-100% in 4 min, 100% for 3 min, 100-5% in 1 min and 5% for 7 min). The eluate from the RP-analytical column was analyzed by an Orbitrap Elite Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion Source. The instrument was operated in positive ion mode with an orbitrap resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400 to gain the full-scan MS spectra between m/z 400–m/z 2,000. In a full-scan MS spectrum, the top fifteen intense ions with ion intensities greater than 5,000 were selected for collision-induced fragmentation (CID) to obtain MS/MS spectra. Each of the selected precursor ions was sequenced only once with an exclusion duration of 40 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification of the MS data were performed by using MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.2.8). Extracted MS/MS peak lists were subjected to database search against Rattus database (Swiss-Prot database version 2014_04; 7,911 proteins) by Andromeda search engine. Enzyme specificity was set as trypsin and the maximum missed cleavages were set to 2. Acetyl (Protein N-term), gln->pyro-glu (N-term Q) and oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification. The iBAQ values calculated by MaxQuant were used to evaluate the abundance of axon and whole cell samples. The iBAQ intensities, expressed as percentages of the abundances of individual proteins of the total abundance of all proteins, were log-transformed for Spearman’s rank correlation analysis. The proteins identified in label-free or dimethyl labeling experiments were classified according to the cellular component by using the functional annotation tool DAVID (DataBase for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery; Bioinformatics Resources 6.8, NIAID/NIH).

### Publication Abstract
The axon is a long projection connecting a neuron to its targets. Here, the axons of cultured rat cortical neurons were isolated with micropatterned chips that enable the separation of axons from their cell bodies. Proteins extracted from isolated axons and whole neurons were subjected to analyses using two-dimensional liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (2D-LC-MS/MS) analyses without and with stable isotope dimethyl labeling, resulting in the identification of &gt;2500 axonal proteins and 103 axon-enriched proteins. A strong correlation exists between the abundances of axonal proteins and their counterparts in whole neurons. The proteomic results confirm the axonal protein constituents of the subcellular structures documented in earlier electron microscopic studies. Cortical axons have proteins that are components of machineries for protein degradation and the synthesis of soluble, membrane, and secretory proteins, although axons lack conventional Golgi apparatus. Despite the fact that axons lack nucleus, nuclear proteins were identified, and 67 of them were found enriched in axons. Some of the results obtained by the MS-based studies were validated by quantitative Western blotting and immunofluorescence staining analyses. The results represent the first comprehensive description of the axonal protein landscape. The MS proteomics data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005527.

### Keywords
2d-lc-msms, Rat, Dimethyl-labeling quantitative proteomics, Axon, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Medicine, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, Republic of China
Institute of Systems Neuroscience, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, Republic of China

### Submitter
Chih-Fan Chuang

### Lab Head
Dr Yen-Chung Chang
Institute of Systems Neuroscience, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, Republic of China


