### Accession
PXD035401

### Title
A Quantitative Assessment of Arsenite-induced Perturnation of Ubiquitinated Proteome

### Description
Arsenic contamination in food and ground water constitutes a public health concern to more than 100 million people worldwide. Individuals chronically exposed to arsenic through drinking and ingestion exhibit a higher risk in developing cancers and cardiovascular diseases. Nevertheless, the underlying mechanisms of arsenic toxicity are not fully understood. Arsenite is known to bind to and deactivate RING finger E3 ubiquitin ligases; thus, we reason that a systematic interrogation about how arsenite exposure modulates global protein ubiquitination may reveal novel molecular targets for arsenic toxicity. By employing liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, in combination with stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and immunoprecipitation of di-glycine-conjugated lysine-containing tryptic peptides, we assessed the alterations in protein ubiquitination in GM00637 human skin fibroblast cells upon arsenite exposure at the entire proteome level. We observed that arsenite exposure led to altered ubiquitination of many proteins, where the alterations in a large majority of ubiquitination events are negatively correlated with changes in expression of the corresponding proteins, suggesting their modulation by the ubiquitin-proteasomal pathway. Moreover, we observed that arsenite exposure confers diminished ubiquitination of  a rate-limiting enzyme in cholesterol biosynthesis, HMGCR, at Lys248. In addition, we revealed that TRC8 is the major E3 ubiquitin ligase for HMGCR ubiquitination in HEK293T cells, and the arsenite-induced diminution of HMGCR ubiquitination is abrogated with depletion of TRC8. In summary, we systematically characterized arsenite-induced perturbations in ubiquitinated proteome in human cells, and found that the arsenite-elicited diminution of HMGCR ubiquitination involves TRC8.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC Labeling and As(III) Exposure GM00637 cells were cultured in light or heavy RPMI 1640 medium. The heavy medium contained [13C6,15N2]-L-lysine (K8) and [13C6]-L-arginine (R6) instead of their unlabeled counterparts. The cells were cultured in the heavy medium for at least 10 days, with a labeling efficiency of > 95% as confirmed by LC-MS/MS analysis. The cells were then cultured for 24 hr in heavy medium containing 5 M As(III) or mock-treated in light medium (forward SILAC), and vise verse (reverse SILAC), followed by a 1-hr treatment with 5 M MG132. The light- and heavy-labeled cells were harvested and the whole cell lysates were combined at 1:1 ratio (by mass).  Ubiquitin Remnant Peptide Immunoprecipitation  A mixture of 10 mg of the light and heavy protein lysates was reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide, followed by an overnight digestion with trypsin at an enzyme/substrate mass ratio of 1:50. The tryptic peptides were subjected to a Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters) for sample desalting and purification, following published procedures.32 The eluted peptides after desalting were subsequently incubated with the antibody provided in the PTMScan Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-ε-GG) Kit (Cell Signaling). The immunoprecipitated peptides were eluted with 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid, desalted with ZipTip (EMD Millipore), and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS Analysis of Ubiquitinated Peptides and Database Search The samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled with an EASY-nLC1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) in a data-dependent acquisition mode, where the 20 most abundant ions observed in MS were selected for MS/MS analyses. Mobile phases A and B contained 0.1% formic acid in water and acetonitrile, respectively. The flow rate was 230 nL/min, and the gradient included: 0 min, 0% B; 5 min, 9% B; 155 min, 39% B; 156 min, 88% B; 166 min, 95% B; and 181 min, 95% B. Full-scan MS were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer in the m/z range of 200-1200 with a resolution 35000 at m/z 200. Twenty most abundant ions were fragmented in the HCD collision cell, and full-scan MS/MS were recorded in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 17500 at m/z 200. The maximum injection time for full-scan MS and MS/MS were 100 ms and 75 ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-MS and MS/MS data were subjected to search using Maxquant34 for protein identification against the FASTA human whole proteome database with a false discovery rate of 0.01. Trypsin was chosen as the digestion enzyme, where di-Gly modification on lysine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were set as variable and fixed modifications, respectively.  A cutoff ratio of 1.5 was imposed to consider a substantial change in peptide ubiquitination level.

### Publication Abstract
Arsenic contamination in food and groundwater constitutes a public health concern for more than 200 million people worldwide. Individuals chronically exposed to arsenic through drinking and ingestion exhibit a higher risk of developing cancers and cardiovascular diseases. Nevertheless, the underlying mechanisms of arsenic toxicity are not fully understood. Arsenite is known to bind to and deactivate RING finger E3 ubiquitin ligases; thus, we reason that a systematic interrogation about how arsenite exposure modulates global protein ubiquitination may reveal novel molecular targets for arsenic toxicity. By employing liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, in combination with stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and immunoprecipitation of di-glycine-conjugated lysine-containing tryptic peptides, we assessed the alterations in protein ubiquitination in GM00637 human skin fibroblast cells upon arsenite exposure at the entire proteome level. We observed that arsenite exposure led to altered ubiquitination of many proteins, where the alterations in a large majority of ubiquitination events are negatively correlated with changes in expression of the corresponding proteins, suggesting their modulation by the ubiquitin-proteasomal pathway. Moreover, we observed that arsenite exposure confers diminished ubiquitination of a rate-limiting enzyme in cholesterol biosynthesis, HMGCR, at Lys<sup>248</sup>. We also revealed that TRC8 is the major E3 ubiquitin ligase for HMGCR ubiquitination in HEK293T cells, and the arsenite-induced diminution of HMGCR ubiquitination is abrogated upon genetic depletion of TRC8. In summary, we systematically characterized arsenite-induced perturbations in a ubiquitinated proteome in human cells and found that the arsenite-elicited attenuation of HMGCR ubiquitination in HEK293T cells involves TRC8.

### Keywords
Immunocapture, Lc-ms/ms, Ubiquitome, Arsneite exposure, Human cells, Data dependent acuisition, Silac lableing

### Affiliations
UCR
Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside, California 92521-0403, United States

### Submitter
JI JIANG

### Lab Head
Dr Yinsheng Wang; Ji Jiang
Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside, California 92521-0403, United States


