### Accession
PXD020099

### Title
Populus (P. tremula X tremuloides-'T89) Lipidbody proteome

### Description
Seed lipid bodies (LB), previously viewed as paradigmatic, possess a restricted proteome and serve carbon and energy storage. Albeit present in minute quantities, LBs are widespread in post-germinative tissues, where they display vigorous movement, mediate transient organellar interactions, and shuttle enzymes, and signaling molecules. Storage as well as motility and signaling are relevant in shoot meristems of woody perennials, which ahead of winter produce buds that like seeds establish dormancy, dehydrate, express OLEOSIN genes and accumulate LBs. Unlike seeds, buds do not completely desiccate and LBs retain potential signaling functions. Here, we mapped bud LB production under dormancy-inducing conditions. We found that over an 8-week period LBs enlarged significantly. Concomitantly, three major OLEOSIN family genes were transiently upregulated at the start of bud formation, while in their wake expression of lipid biosynthesis gene DGAT1a/b and lipase gene SDP1a/b increased. In parallel, LDAPa/b, LDAP2a, and LDAP3a/b were upregulated, especially LDAP1b. All LDAPs were localized to LBs. The conclusion that OLEOSINs were replaced by LDAPs was supported by the finding that PUX10a, PUX10b and CDC498A1, involved in OLESOSIN ubiquitination and degradation, were significantly upregulated. Our proteomic analysis identified 723 putative LB proteins. These included LB-anchored Caleosin and LDIP, peripherally associated LDAP1/3 and OBL1, and numerous proteins that reflect storage, transport, organellar interaction, opportunistic cargo and contaminants. There is a significant overlap with proteins identified earlier in plasmodesmal proteomes. Collectively, the data support a model in which LBs are part of a pre-installed mechanism that serves dormancy release, survival through winter and regrowth.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly harvested Populus (P. tremula X tremuloides-'T89) buds were kept in ice until all the hard bud scales were carefully removed. Buds were rinsed thrice in cold distilled water and proceeded to lipid body extraction and purification. Lipid bodies were purified using the methods described earlier (Jolivet et al 2004) with two modifications. Firstly, we have omitted the NaCl ionic elution step in order to save the proteins loosely attached to the lipid body in our proteome and secondly, proteins were precipitated using ice cold methanol instead of acetone. A fraction of the floating “fat pads” containing purified LDs were collected and examined under confocal microscope for their purity and integrity using Nile Red (0.5% w/v in acetone and stained for 5 min) staining before they were proceeded for protein precipitation. The precipitated lipid body pellet was rinsed with methanol, air dried and proteins were extracted in appropriate volume of 2X laemmli buffer. The extracted proteins were loaded on a 10% Bio Rad mini protein gel and allowed to run approximately 1.5cm into the gel. The protein gel was stained with Coomassie brilliant blue for an hour and destained for overnight. The region of the gel showing stained proteins was isolated and excised in to 6 fractions. The gel pieces were reduced (DTT) and alkylated (iodoacetamide) before overnight digestion by trypsin. After digestion, the peptides were extracted from the gel by sonication in 0.1 % TFA solution and cleaned up using a reversed phase (C18) spin-tip procedure. Eluted peptides were dried and re-dissolved in loading solution (2% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA in MilliQ water). Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS, with UltimateTM 3000 RSLC nano system coupled with – Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific). More information on the specification of chromatography and MS details in the Supplementary details. Thermo raw files were converted using the msfileconvert module of the Proteowizard (v 3.0.7076) software suite. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6.1). Mascot was setup to search the Populus trichocarpa database (txid_unknown, 53583 entries). Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0,02 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10,0 PPM. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the n-terminus were specified in Mascot as variable modifications.

### Data Protocol
Scaffold (version Scaffold 4.9., Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95,0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99,0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Protein was considered identified only if it contained at least two unique peptides in all 3 biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lipidbody, Lipid droplet, Populus

### Affiliations
NMBU, IPV
Department of Plant Sciences Tårnbygningen T229 Norwegian University of Life Sciences (NMBU) 1433-Ås, Norway

### Submitter
Manikandan  Veerabagu

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Christiaan van der Schoot
Department of Plant Sciences Tårnbygningen T229 Norwegian University of Life Sciences (NMBU) 1433-Ås, Norway


