### Accession
PXD034782

### Title
LC-MS/MS Proteomics analysis of LncRNA SNHG6 in HEPG2 cell line

### Description
To identify the proteins interact with LncRNA SNHG6 in human cell lines, we analyzed the protein using RNA-Pulldown followed by mass spectrometry in HEPG2. We identified proteins associated with the SNHG6 sense/anti-sense in the isolated complexes using MS and searched the human databases for these proteins.

### Sample Protocol
The excised gel bands described above were cut into approximately 1-mm3 pieces, which were then subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and dried. Samples were reconstituted in 5 μl of high-performance liquid chromatography solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). A nanoscale reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography capillary column was created by packing 5-μm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100-μm inner diameter × ~20-cm length) using a flame-drawn tip. After the column was equilibrated, each sample was loaded onto the column using an autosampler. A gradient was formed, and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). As peptides eluted, they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
MS peptide sequences and, hence, protein identity were determined by matching fragmentation patterns in protein databases using the Mascot software program (Matrix Science, Boston, MA). Enzyme specificity was set to partially tryptic with two missed cleavages. Modifications of the peptides included carboxyamidomethyl (cysteines, variable), oxidation (methionine, variable), phosphorylation (S, T, Y, H, variable) and acetylation (N-term, K, variable). Mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions and fragment ions. The database searched was Swiss-Prot (Homo sapiens) . Spectral matches were filtered to contain the false-discovery rate to less than 1% at the peptide level using the target-decoy method, and protein inference was considered following the general rules with manual annotation applied when necessary. This same principle was used for protein isoforms when they were present. Generally, the longest isoform was reported.

### Publication Abstract
Cholesterol contributes to the structural basis of biological membranes and functions as a signaling molecule, whose dysregulation has been associated with various human diseases. Here, we report that the long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) SNHG6 increases progression from non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) by modulating cholesterol-induced mTORC1 activation. Mechanistically, cholesterol binds ER-anchored FAF2 protein to promote the formation of a SNHG6-FAF2-mTOR complex. As a putative cholesterol effector, SNHG6 enhances cholesterol-dependent mTORC1 lysosomal recruitment and activation via enhancing FAF2-mTOR interaction at ER-lysosome contacts, thereby coordinating mTORC1 kinase cascade activation with cellular cholesterol biosynthesis in a self-amplified cycle to accelerate cholesterol-driven NAFLD-HCC development. Notably, loss of SNHG6 inhibits mTORC1 signaling and impairs growth of patient-derived xenograft liver cancer tumors, identifyifng SNHG6 as a potential target for liver cancer treatment. Together, our findings illustrate the crucial role of organelle-associated lncRNA in organelle communication, nutrient sensing, and kinase cascades.

### Keywords
Lncrna, Snhg6

### Affiliations
MOE Laboratory of Biosystem Homeostasis and Protection, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University; Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310058, China
MOE Laboratory of Biosystem Homeostasis and Protection, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University; Hangzhou, Zhejiang

### Submitter
Aifu Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Aifu Lin
MOE Laboratory of Biosystem Homeostasis and Protection, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University; Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310058, China


