### Accession
PXD041957

### Title
Cathelicidin deficiency disrupts goblet cell mucus secretion but not mucus associated proteins in Citrobacter rodentium-induced colitis

### Description
Colonic goblet cells respond to invading enteropathogens by secreting Muc2 mucin and other specific goblet cell proteins that physically entrap and expel microbes away from the epithelium. At present, it is unclear how innate effectors in the gut, including small cationic cathelicidin peptides secreted by the intestinal epithelium and leukocytes, contribute to mucus barrier defense during infections. In this study, we used cathelicidin-deficient (Camp-/-) mice, colonoids, and human colonic LS174T goblet cells to elucidate the mechanisms by which cathelicidin regulates goblet cell secretions in innate host defense against attaching/effacing Citrobacter rodentium. We showed that even though Camp-/- littermates infected with C. rodentium displayed increased fecal shedding and epithelial colonization, Muc2 mucin granules were retained in bloated colonic goblet cells that impaired mucus secretion and expressed less mucus-associated proteins, as quantified by proteomic analysis. C. rodentium infected Camp-/- littermates showed impaired reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and transcriptomic profiling associated with decreased ROS biosynthesis and an increase in ROS negative regulators. Camp-/- bone marrow derived macrophages produced less ROS than their wild-type counterparts. In LS174T goblet cells, human cathelicidin LL-37 promptly induced the secretion of goblet cell-associated TFF3 and RELMβ, which was dependent on ROS production. These findings demonstrate that cathelicidin signaling in colonic goblet cells regulates mucus and mucin-associated protein secretion via an ROS-dependent mechanism to clear bacterial infections and restore gut homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Colons from C. rodentium infected Camp+/+ and Camp-/- littermates were snap frozen in dry ice immediately after collection and stored at -80C. Protein samples were lysed with 1% SDS (VWR;0227-100g), 0.1M EDTA (VWR; BHD9232-500g) in HEPES (200nM, pH 8), and protease inhibitor tablets (Sigma; 11836153001). Proteins were denatured with 10 mM DTT, and cysteines were alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide (VWR; Rpn6302v) in dark for 25 min at RT with pH adjusted to 6.5 with HCl (VWR; 46414-463). Samples were incubated with isotopically heavy formaldehyde [40mM 13CD2O + 20mM NaBH3CN (sodium cyanoborohydride)] (VWR; 41860-360) or light formaldehyde [40mM light formaldehyde [CH2O) + 20mM NaBH3CN] (1CCDLM4599-1MLOFS) (18 h, 37°C) and subjected to C18 chromatography before being subjected to liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).   LC-MS/MS experiments were carried out using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid MS (Thermo Scientific) operated with Xcalibur (4.0.21.10) coupled to a Thermo Scientific Easy-nLC (nanoflow Liquid Chromatography) 1,200 system (Southern Alberta Mass Spectrometry, SAMS, University of Calgary). Tryptic peptides (2 μg) were loaded onto a C18 trap (75 μm × 2 cm; Acclaim PepMap 100, P/N 164946; ThermoScientific) at a flow rate of 2 μL/min of solvent A (0.1% formic acid and 3% acetonitrile in LC-MS grade water). Peptides were eluted using a 120 min gradient from 5 to 40% (5–28% in 105 min followed by an increase to 40% B in 15 min) of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% LC-MS grade acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min and separated on a C18 analytical column (75 μm x 50 cm; PepMap RSLC C18; P/N ES803; Thermo Scientific). The peptides were electrosprayed using a 2.3 kV voltage into the ion transfer tube (300°C) of the Orbitrap Lumos operating in positive mode. Orbitrap first performed a full MS scan at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM to detect the precursor ion with m/z between 375 and 1,575 and a +2 to +7 charge. The Orbitrap AGC (Auto Gain Control) and maximum injection times were set at 4x105 and 50 ms, respectively. The Orbitrap was operated in the top speed mode with a 3 s cycle time for precursor selection. The most intense precursor ions presenting a peptidic isotopic profile and having an intensity threshold of at least 5,000 were isolated using the quadrupole and fragmented with HCD (30% collision energy) in the ion routing multipole. Fragment ions (MS2) were analyzed in an ion trap at a rapid scan rate. The AGC and maximum injection time were set at 1x104 and 35 ms, respectively, for the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s to avoid acquisition of the same precursor ion with a similar m/z (+ 10 ppm).

### Data Protocol
For proteomic data and bioinformatics analysis, spectral data were matched to peptide sequences in the murine UniProt protein database using the Andromeda algorithm 92 as implemented in MaxQuant93 (v.1.6.10.23), at a peptide-spectrum match FDR of <0.01. The search parameters included a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for the parent ion, 0.5 Da for the fragment ion, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021464 Da), variable N-terminal modification by acetylation (+42.010565 Da), and variable methionine oxidation (+15.994915 Da). N-terminal and lysine heavy (+34.063116 Da) and light (+28.031300 Da) dimethylations were defined as labels for relative quantification. The cleavage site specificity was set to trypsin/P for the proteomics data, with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Significant outlier cutoff values were determined after log (2) transformation by boxplot-and-whisker analysis using the BoxPlotR tool.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Colonic epithelium; cathelicidin; goblet cells; mucus; citrobacter rodentium; reactive oxygen species

### Affiliations
University of Calgary
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; The Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada

### Submitter
Luiz Gustavo de Almeida

### Lab Head
Dr Antoine Dufour
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; The Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada


