### Accession
PXD019900

### Title
Grad-seq shines light on unrecognized RNA and protein complexes  in the model bacterium Escherichia coli

### Description
22 total proteome samples from E. coli wild type resolved on a glycerol gradient resulting in 20 fractions and a pellet fraction. A lysate sample is given as input control. Further, 2 affinity purification samples comparing YggL-3xFLAG pulldown vs. the wild type is given. In this case, each sample was run on a gel and the lanes cut into 15 gel pieces each.

### Sample Protocol
NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a PicoView Ion Source (New Objective) and coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on capillary columns (PicoFrit, 30 cm x 150 µm ID, New Objective) self-packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch) and separated with a 140 min linear gradient from 3% to 40% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. Both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60,000 for MS scans and 15,000 for MS/MS scans. HCD fragmentation with 35% normalized collision energy was applied. A Top Speed data-dependent MS/MS method with a fixed cycle time of 3 s was used. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 60 s; singly charged precursors were excluded from selection. Minimum signal threshold for precursor selection was set to 50,000. Predictive AGC was used with a target value of 2x105 for MS scans and 5x104 for MS/MS scans. EASY-IC was used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.7.4. The search was performed against the UniProt database for E. coli MG1655 (organism identifier: ECOLI), a database containing the UPS2 spike-in and a database containing common contaminants. The search was performed with tryptic cleavage specificity with 3 allowed miscleavages. Protein identification was under control of a false-discovery rate of 1% on both protein and peptide level. In addition to the MaxQuant default settings, the search was performed against the following variable modifications: Protein N-terminal acetylation, Gln to pyro-Glu formation (N-terminal Q) and oxidation on Met. For protein quantitation, the LFQ intensities were used. Proteins with less than 2 identified razor/unique peptides were dismissed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rbp, Srna, Interactome, Complexome, Grad-seq

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research (HIRI), Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (HZI), D-97080 Würzburg, Germany Institute of Molecular Infection Biology, University of Würzburg, D-97080 Würzburg, Germany
University of Würzburg

### Submitter
Jens Hör

### Lab Head
Dr Jörg Vogel
Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research (HIRI), Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (HZI), D-97080 Würzburg, Germany Institute of Molecular Infection Biology, University of Würzburg, D-97080 Würzburg, Germany


