### Accession
PXD027166

### Title
iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis of nuclear proteome in VPS35-depleted HeLa cells

### Description
Stable VPS35 knockdown HeLa cells were generated using lentiviral short hairpin RNA (shRNA) construct. Isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ)-based mass spectrometry was used to measure the changes of nuclear protein abundance in VPS35-depleted HeLa cells.

### Sample Protocol
Two independent nuclear protein extracts from shControl and shVPS35a HeLa cells were performed as two biological replicates. Then the nuclear protein samples were digested with trypsin, labeled with iTRAQ tags, fractionated by strong cation exchange chromatography, and analyzed by NanoLC-MS/MS technique. In biological replicate 1, shControl and shVPS35a samples were labeled with 113 and 114 iTRAQ tags respectively, and they were labeled with 116 and 119 iTRAQ tags respectively in biological replicate 2. The final ratios of 114:113 and 119:116 indicated the relative abundance of the nuclear proteins in VPS35-depleted HeLa cells compared to controls.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4; Thermo Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) and searched using Mascot (version 2.3.0; Matrix Science, Massachusetts, USA) against the UniProt-Human_9606 Database. The parameters used were as follows: peptide tolerance = 15 ppm; MS/MS tolerance = 20 mmu; enzyme = trypsin; max missed cleavage = 1; minimum of peptides = 2; minimum of unique peptide = 1; oxidation (M), iTRAQ 8plex (Y) as the variable modifications; and carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), iTRAQ 8plex (K) as the fixed modifications. Decoy database search was used to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification, using a screening criterion of FDR ≤ 1%. Differential protein expression, defined as an iTRAQ ratio between control cells and VPS35-depleted cells, was set to > 1.2 or < 0.83 and p-value < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Vacuolar protein sorting 35 (VPS35) is a major component of the retromer complex that regulates endosomal trafficking in eukaryotic cells. Recent studies have shown that VPS35 promotes tumor cell proliferation and affects the nuclear accumulation of its interacting partner. In this study, isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ)-based mass spectrometry were used to measure the changes in nuclear protein abundance in VPS35-depleted HeLa cells. A total of 47 differentially expressed proteins were identified, including 27 downregulated and 20 upregulated proteins. Gene ontology (GO) analysis showed that the downregulated proteins included several minichromosome maintenance (MCM) proteins described as cell proliferation markers, and these proteins were present in the MCM2-7 complex, which is essential for DNA replication. Moreover, we validated that loss of VPS35 reduced the mRNA and protein expression of MCM2-7 genes. Notably, re-expression of VPS35 in VPS35 knockout HeLa cells rescued the expression of these genes. Functionally, we showed that VPS35 contributes to cell proliferation and maintenance of genomic stability of HeLa cells. Therefore, these findings reveal that VPS35 is involved in the regulation of MCM2-7 gene expression and establish a link between VPS35 and cell proliferation.

### Keywords
Itraq; vps35; nuclear proteome; hela cells

### Affiliations
Qiqihar Medical University

### Submitter
Zhi-Hui Deng

### Lab Head
Dr Zhi-Hui Deng
Qiqihar Medical University


