### Accession
PXD022618

### Title
Plasmodium falciparum Proteomic Analyses

### Description
Plasmodium falciparum cultures in different growth stages were collected. The proteomics experiment was performed in biological duplicates.

### Sample Protocol
Plasmodium falciparum cultures in different growth stages were collected. The proteomics experiment was performed in biological duplicates.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific). Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were searched against the protein database constructed by using the PacBio sequencing and the database of small protein (< 100 amino acids) from identified lncRNA with the acquired fragmentation pattern by SEQUEST HT algorithm. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. One missed cleavage site of trypsin was allowed. Oxidation (M) was used as variable modifications. All spectra were searched against protein database using a target false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. The proteins identified in both channels were additionally filtered by at least two spectral counts and one unique peptides in each experimental replicate. Protein ratios were calculated as the median of peptide with S/N ratio higher than 10 of a protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Mengquan Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Mengquan Yang
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences


