### Accession
PXD028320

### Title
Forward and reverse degradomics defines the proteolytic landscape of human knee osteoarthritic cartilage and the role of the serine protease HtrA1

### Description
Proteolytic destruction of articular cartilage is a major pathogenic mechanism in osteoarthritis (OA), but was not previously investigated on a proteome-wide scale. We sought to define the human knee OA cartilage degradome and the contribution therein of the serine protease HtrA1, using an N-terminomics strategy, terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates (TAILS).

### Sample Protocol
Healthy cartilage digested with/without active HtrA1, were labeled by reductive dimethylation, followed by trypsin digestion, enrichment of N-terminally labeled/blocked peptides, tandem mass spectrometry and positional annotation to identify cleavage sites. HtrA1-digested biglycan was analyzed by ATOMS to define cleavage sites.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometer .raw files were imported into Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (PD 2.3) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Analysis parameters were set as precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Static modification was set as carbamidomethyl (C), whereas dynamic modifications included the light (28 Da)and heavy (34 Da) dimethyl formaldehyde (N-terminal, K), oxidation (M, P), deamidation (N, R), acetylation (N-terminal), and Gln to pyro-Glu N-terminal. The human database with isoforms was downloaded on 10/01/2018 from Uniprot containing 20332 sequences. False discovery rate (FDR) was calculated by creating a decoy database using percolator node from PD 2.3 and a strict cutoff was applied at 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Degradomics, N-terminomics, Atoms, Htra1, Osteoarthritis

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic 
Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Sumit Bhutada

### Lab Head
Dr Suneel Apte
Cleveland Clinic


