### Accession
PXD018460

### Title
Peptidylarginine Deiminase inhibition abolishes the production of large extracellular vesicles from Giardia intestinalis, affecting host-pathogen interactions by hindering adhesion to host cells

### Description
Giardia intestinalis is a microaerophilic protozoan that is an important etiologic agent of diarrhea worldwide. There is evidence that under diverse conditions, the parasite is capable of shedding extracellular vesicles (EVs) which modulate the physiopathology of giardiasis. Here we describe new features of G. intestinalis EV production, revealing its capacity to shed two different enriched EV populations (large (LEV) and small extracellular vesicles (SEV)) and identified relevant adhesion functions associated with the larger population. Proteomic analysis revealed differences in proteins relevant for virulence and host-pathogen interactions between the two EV subsets. We assessed the  effect of two recently identified inhibitors of EV release in mammalian cells, namely peptidylarginine deiminase (PAD) inhibitor and cannabidiol (CBD), on EV release from Giardia and their putative effects on host-pathogen interactions. PAD-inhibitor Cl-amidine and CBD were both able to effectively reduce EV shedding, the PAD-inhibitor specifically affecting the release of LEVs and reducing  parasite attachment to host cells in vitro. The strong efficacy of the PAD-inhibitor on Giardia EV release indicates a phylogenetically conserved pathway of PAD-mediated EV release, most likely affecting the Giardia arginine deiminase (GiADI) homolog of mammalian PADs. Our results suggest that LEVs and SEVs are differently involved in protozoa communication, and that treatment with EV-inhibitors may be a novel strategy for recurrent giardiasis treatment.

### Sample Protocol
G. intestinalis isolates and cell culture: G. intestinalis isolate WB (ATCC 50803) were grown in TYI-S-33 medium (Keister, 1983) supplemented with 10% adult bovine serum with 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin 1000 U (Gibco ™) and 0.05% bovine bile (ThermoFisher ™) at 37ºC under microaerophilic conditions. The cultures were maintained until confluent and thereafter sub-cultured, each for 72 hours. Human colorectal adenocarcinoma cells, caco-2 (ATCC CRL-2102) were cultured in RPMI supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum and 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin 1000 U (Gibco™). Cells were incubated at 37ºC, 5% CO2 until a confluent cell monolayer was reached.   EV isolation:  Parasites from confluent cultures were decanted by chilling for 15 min in ice, centrifuged twice (600xg/5min) and the pellets suspended with fresh TYI-S-33 without adult bovine serum (FBS). Parasites were then counted using a hemocytometer, and diluted to 1x106 per sample according to Evans-Osses et al.(2017). 1mM of CaCl2 were added to the parasite culture for EV induction and incubated for 1 hour at 37ºC. Then, EV pellets were collected via step-wise centrifugation: first, at 600xg/5 min; 4000xg/30 min to eliminate cellular debris, thereafter the supernatant was centrifuged at 15,000xg for 1h and the resulting pellet was washed and resuspended in phosphate buffered saline (PBS). The remaining supernatant was then ultracentrifuged for 100,000xg for 4 h, and the resulting EV-containing pellets were washed once in PBS. Both samples were kept at 4◦C until further use. To determine cell viability post-EV isolation, parasites were adjusted to 1x106 per sample and submitted to the vesiculation protocol for 1, 3 or 6 hours. Then, trophozoite pellets were subcultured. For mammalian EV purification, caco-2 were cultured until confluence, and then medium was removed. Cultures were washed twice with fresh RPMI-1640 and kept for 1 h with medium without FBS. The supernatant was processed in the same manner as for protozoa. EVs were stocked at 4ºC until further use for host-pathogen interaction assays. EVs preparation was resuspended in 8M Urea containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich). Samples were subjected to six cycles of freeze and thaw before being quantified by a fluorometric assay using the Qubit™ Protein Assay Kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) platform according to the manufacturer's instructions. A total of ± 100 μg proteins were reduced with 10mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) at 30° C for 45 minutes, followed by alkylation of cysteine residues with 40 mM of iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. After that, the samples were incubated with DTT 5mM for 15 minutes at 30° C. The samples were digested with trypsin (Promega, Cat#: V5111) (1:50, Enzyme: Substrate) during 18h at 30° C. Following digestion, all reactions were acidified with 10% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (1 % v/v final concentration) to stop proteolysis. The samples were centrifuged for 10 minutes at 12,000 x g for 10 minutes to remove insoluble materials. The tryptic peptides were desalted prior to LC-MS analysis using two C18 disks (3 M Empore TM C18 extraction disk) stage-tips. The nLC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Easy nano LC1000 (Thermo) HPLC coupled with an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo), where 10 µL of sample were applied using a 300 nL/min flow rate of Mobile phase A (5% ACN 0.1% formic acid) in a C18 EASY-column (2cm x 5 µm x 100 µm; 120 Å pore, Thermo) and separated in a C18 PicoFrit PepMap (10 cm x 10 µm x 75 µm; 135 Å pore, New Objective), over 105 min using a linear gradient 2-30% of mobile phase B (100% ACN; 0,1% formic acid). The eluted peptides were ionized using electrospray. The top 20 most intense precursor-ions with charge-state ≥ 2 were fragmented using CID at 35 normalized collision energy and 10 ms activation time. The MS scan range was set between 350-1500 m/z, the MS scan resolution was 60.000, the MS1 ion count was 1x10e6 and the MS2 ion count was 3x10e4. The experiment were analyzed in biological triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were imported to MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8 with Andromeda search machine and searched against Uniprot Giardia intestinalis strain ATCC 50803 WB clone C6 database (November 28, 2019 release; 7,156 entries) with 20 ppm for MS/MS. The followed parameters were used: carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.021464 Da) as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine (15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation protein (42.010565 Da) were selected as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to full trypsin with maximum of two missed cleavages. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Giardia intestinalis, Peptidylarginine deiminase inhibitor, Extracellular vesicles, Cannabidiol (cbd), Host-pathogen interaction

### Affiliations
University of Sao Paulo
Departamento de Bioquímica e Biologia Molecular, Universidade Federal do Paraná, PR, Brasil. Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil

### Submitter
Giuseppe Palmisano

### Lab Head
Dr Marcel Ivan Ramirez
Departamento de Bioquímica e Biologia Molecular, Universidade Federal do Paraná, PR, Brasil. Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil


