### Accession
PXD044371

### Title
Comprehensive Landscape of SA-AKI Revealed by Integrated Proteomics and Metabolomics Analysis

### Description
Sepsis-associated acute kidney injury (SA-AKI) is a severe and life-threatening condi-tion with high morbidity and mortality among emergency patients, and it poses a sig-nificant risk of chronic renal failure. Clinical treatments for SA-AKI remain reactive and non-specific, lacking effective diagnostic biomarkers or treatment targets. In this study, we established an SA-AKI mouse model using LPS and performed proteomics and metabolomics analyses. A variety of bioinformatic analyses, including Gene Set En-richment Analysis (GSEA), Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis (WGCNA), protein and protein interactions (PPI), and MetaboAnalyst analysis, were conducted to investigate the key molecules of SA-AKI. Proteomics and metabolomics analyses re-vealed that sepsis led to impaired renal mitochondrial function and metabolic disorders. Immune-related pathways were found to be activated in kidneys upon septic infection. The catabolic products of polyamines accumulated in septic kidneys. Overall, our study provides a more comprehensive understanding of SA-AKI and identifies potential pathways for this condition.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from renal tissue using 8 M urea in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (Wisent, Nanjing, China) containing 1X protease inhibitor cocktail (Bimake, Shanghai, China). Tissue samples were homogenized for 2 minutes with a tissue grinder and centrifuged, collecting the supernatants. Protein concentrations were determined using a BCA protein assay kit (Solarbio, Beijing, China). In-solution digestion was performed. A total of 100 µg of protein extracted from renal tissue was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at room temperature and alkylated with 12.5 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) in the dark at room temperature. Next, proteins were diluted to 1.5 M urea with PBS and digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) overnight at 37 °C. The tryptic peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak desalting columns (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and then labeled with tandem mass tags (TMT) 10-plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The combined TMT-labeled peptides were desalted by Sep-Pak columns and separated on a UPLC 3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) using an XBridgeTM BEH300 C18 column (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) at a flow rate of 1 mL/min. The mobile phase A was H2O (pH 10), and the mobile phase B was 98% acetonitrile (pH 10). Peptides were separated using a gradient elution that increased from 8% to 18% phase B for 30 minutes, followed by an increase from 18% to 32% phase B for 22 minutes. Forty-eight fractions were dried using a speed vacuum concentrator and recombined into 12 fractions. The fractions were dissolved in 20 µL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) and analyzed by LC–MS/MS. Labeled peptides were separated using a high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) connected to a Q Exactive HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The mass spectrometer operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using Xcalibur 4.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The parameters were as follows: a single full-scan mass spectrum was performed in the Orbitrap (300-1800 m/z, 60,000 resolution), with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3 × 106; MS/MS spectra acquisition settings were 45,000 for resolution with an AGC target of 1 × 105 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms; the isolation window width was 0.4 Da; and the normalized collision energy for dissociation was 35%.

### Data Protocol
The UniProt mouse database was used by the Sequest HT in Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) to search the MS/MS spectra. The searching process used the following criteria: full tryptic specificity required, two missed cleavages tolerance, fixed modifications were carbamidomethylation and TMT 10-plex, variable modification was oxidation. The searched data were further processed with the percolator function in Proteome Discoverer to filter with 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR). Relative protein quantification was carried out using PD 2.1 according to the intensities of reporter ions per peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Sepsis-associated acute kidney injury (SA-AKI) is a severe and life-threatening condition with high morbidity and mortality among emergency patients, and it poses a significant risk of chronic renal failure. Clinical treatments for SA-AKI remain reactive and non-specific, lacking effective diagnostic biomarkers or treatment targets. In this study, we established an SA-AKI mouse model using lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and performed proteomics and metabolomics analyses. A variety of bioinformatic analyses, including gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA), protein and protein interactions (PPI), and MetaboAnalyst analysis, were conducted to investigate the key molecules of SA-AKI. Integrated proteomics and metabolomics analysis revealed that sepsis led to impaired renal mitochondrial function and metabolic disorders. Immune-related pathways were found to be activated in kidneys upon septic infection. The catabolic products of polyamines accumulated in septic kidneys. Overall, our integrated analysis provides a multidimensional understanding of SA-AKI and identifies potential pathways for this condition.

### Keywords
Sa-aki; proteomics; metabolomics; biomarker; mitochondrial dysfunction

### Affiliations
Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College
Emergency Department, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College

### Submitter
Jiatong Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Huadong Zhu
Emergency Department, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College


