### Accession
PXD026181

### Title
pTINCR microprotein promotes epithelial differentiation and suppresses tumor growth through CDC42 SUMOylation and activation

### Description
The human transcriptome contains thousands of small open reading frames (sORFs) that encode microproteins whose functions remain largely unexplored. Here, we show that TINCR lncRNA encodes pTINCR, an evolutionary conserved ubiquitin-like protein (UBL) expressed in many epithelia and upregulated upon differentiation and under cellular stress. By gain- and loss-of-function studies, we demonstrate that pTINCR is a key inducer of epithelial differentiation in vitro and in vivo. Interestingly, low expression of TINCR associates with worse prognosis in several epithelial cancers, and pTINCR overexpression reduces malignancy in patient-derived xenografts. At the molecular level, pTINCR binds to SUMO through its SUMO interacting motif (SIM) and to CDC42, a Rho-GTPase critical for actin cytoskeleton remodeling and epithelial differentiation. Moreover, pTINCR increases CDC42 SUMOylation and promotes its activation, triggering a pro-differentiation cascade. Our findings suggest that the microproteome is a source of new regulators of cell identity relevant for cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in a buffer containing 50mM Tris-Hcl pH 7.5-8, 150mM NaCl, 1%Triton X-100 and protease inhibitors, and homogenized for thirty minutes in a rotor wheel. Lysates (3mg) were immunoprecipitated with 5g of monoclonal HA-Tag antibody overnight. Immunocomplexes were collected using PureProteome™ Protein A Magnetic Beads (MERCK) and eluted by competition with a synthetic HA peptide (Sigma). Eluate was digested with trypsin and analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos instrument (ThermoFisher).

### Data Protocol
Progenesis ® QI for proteomics software v3.0 (Nonlinear dynamics, UK) was used for MS data analysis using default settings. The LC-MS runs were automatically aligned to an automatically selected reference sample with manual supervision Peak lists were generated from Progenesis and loaded to Proteome Discoverer v2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for protein identification. Proteins were identified using Mascot v2.5 (Matrix Science, London UK) to search the SwissProt database (2018_11, taxonomy restricted to human proteins, 20,240 sequences). Significance threshold for the identifications was set to p<0.05, minimum ions score of 20. Statistical analysis was performed using Progenesis software. Proteins displaying greater than 2-fold change, and p<0.05 (T-test) between IP and control groups were considered significantly differential. Interactions were analyzed using CRAPome algorithm [141].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sorfs; non-canonical orfs; microproteins; micropeptides; lncrnas; ubls; sumo; cdc42; cell identity; cellular plasticity; cell differentiation; epidermis; cancer; squamous carcinoma

### Affiliations
VHIO
Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology

### Submitter
Olga Boix

### Lab Head
Dr María Abad Méndez
Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology


