### Accession
PXD014244

### Title
EndoC-betaH1 cells treated with interferon alpha

### Description
EndoC-betaH1 cells were treated with 2000 U/mL interferon alpha for 8 or 24h and submitted to proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were dissolved in 50 mM NH4HCO3 containing 8 M urea and 10 mM dithiothreitol and vortexed at 800 rpm for 1h at 37ºC. Sulfydryl groups were alkylated by using 400 mM iodoacetamide (40 mM final concentration), and incubating for 1h in the dark at room temperature. Samples were then diluted 8-fold with 50 mM NH4HCO3, and CaCl2 was added to a final concentration of 1 mM. The digestion was performed with trypsin at 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio and incubation at 37ºC for 5h. The final peptides were extracted using C18 cartridges (Discovery, 50 mg, Sulpelco) and concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge. Peptides quantification was done by BCA, normalized and labeled with tandem mass tags (TMT-10plex, ThermoFisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Labeled peptides were extracted using C18 cartridges and fractionated into 24 fractions using high-pH reversed phase chromatography. Peptide fractions were loaded into a C18 column (70 cm × 75 μm i.d. packed with Phenomenex Jupiter, 3 μm particle size, 300 Å pore size) connected to Waters NanoAquity UPLC system. A gradient of water (solvent A) and acetonitrile (solvent B), both containing 0.1% formic acid, was used to elute the peptides, which were directly analyzed by nanoelectrospray ionization on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Scans were collected with a resolution of 35,000 at 400 m/z in a 400-2000 m/z range. High-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation were set for the 12 most intense parent ions using the following parameters: peptide charge > 2, 2.0 m/z isolation width, 30% normalized collision energy and 17,500 resolution at 400 m/z. Each parent ion was fragmented only once before being dynamically excluded for 30s.

### Data Protocol
The collected data were processed using Decon2LS_v2.0 (Mayampurath et al. 2008) and DTARefinery (Petyuk et al. 2010), both with default parameters, to generate peak lists. Peptide identification was done using MS-GF+ (Kim and Pevzner 2014) by searching peak lists against islet protein sequences deduced from transcriptomic experiments (Eizirik et al. 2012) and supplemented with keratin sequences (32,780 total protein sequences). For MS-GF+ searches, a parent ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm, partially tryptic digestion and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The following modifications were also considered during searches: cysteine carbamidomethylation and N-terminal/lysine TMT addition as static modifications, and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. Results were filtered in two steps to a final false-discovery rate <1%: spectral-peptide matches - MS-GF probability < 10-9, and protein level < 10-10. The intensity of TMT reporter ions was extracted using MASIC (Monroe et al. 2008). Finally, the data was log2 converted and normalized by standard median centering. Proteins were quantified using a Bayesian proteoform discovery methodology (BP-Quant) in combination with standard reference-based median quantification (Webb-Robertson et al. 2014). Proteins were considered significant with a cutoff of p ≤ 0.05 based on a paired t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Interferon-&#x3b1; (IFN&#x3b1;), a type I interferon, is expressed in the islets of type 1 diabetic individuals, and its expression and signaling are regulated by T1D genetic risk variants and viral infections associated with T1D. We presently characterize human beta cell responses to IFN&#x3b1; by combining ATAC-seq, RNA-seq and proteomics assays. The initial response to IFN&#x3b1; is characterized by chromatin remodeling, followed by changes in transcriptional and translational regulation. IFN&#x3b1; induces changes in alternative splicing (AS) and first exon usage, increasing the diversity of transcripts expressed by the beta cells. This, combined with changes observed on protein modification/degradation, ER stress and MHC class I, may expand antigens presented by beta cells to the immune system. Beta cells also up-regulate the checkpoint proteins PDL1 and HLA-E that may exert a protective role against the autoimmune assault. Data mining of the present multi-omics analysis identifies two compound classes that antagonize IFN&#x3b1; effects on human beta cells.

### Keywords
Human, Type 1 diabetes, Proteomics, Beta cell, Interferon alpha

### Affiliations
Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Ernesto Nakayasu

### Lab Head
Dr Ernesto S. Nakayasu
Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


