### Accession
PXD023472

### Title
Cockayne syndrome group A and ferrochelatase finely tune ribosomal gene transcription and its response to UV irradiation

### Description
CSA and CSB proteins are key players in transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair (TC-NER) pathway that removes UV-induced DNA lesions from the transcribed strands of expressed genes. Additionally, CS proteins play relevant but still elusive roles in other cellular pathways whose alteration may explain neurodegeneration and progeroid features in Cockayne syndrome (CS). Here we identify a CSA-dependent chromatin-associated protein complex that modulates rRNA transcription. Besides RNA polymerase I (RNAP1) and specific ribosomal proteins (RPs), the CSA complex includes ferrochelatase (FECH), a well-known mitochondrial enzyme whose deficiency causes erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP). Impairment of either CSA or FECH functionality leads to reduced RNAP1 occupancy on rDNA promoter that is associated to reduced transcription when CSA is affected and abnormal ribosomal transcript accumulation after FECH silencing. Accordingly, primary fibroblasts from CS and EPP fibroblasts show opposed amount of total rRNAs. After cell irradiation with UV light, CSA triggers the dissociation of the CSA-FECH-RNAP1-RPs complex from the chromatin while it stabilizes its binding to FECH. Besides disclosing a function for FECH within nucleoli, this study sheds light on the still unknown mechanisms through which CSA modulates rRNA transcription.

### Sample Protocol
Total cell extracts from 1x109 of CS3BE-cassette1 or CS3BE-wtCSAFlag-HA cells were subjected to TAP, as described. All samples were loaded and resolved on 9-16% home-made polyacrylamide linear gradient gels (18 x 20 cm x 1,5mm) at 40 mA/gel constant current, at 9°C [50]. Gels were stained according to a MS-compatible silver staining protocol [51] and digitized with Image Scanner III laser densitometer controlled by LabScan 6.0 software (GE Healthcare). Each visible band was manually excised, de-stained in 2.5 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 50% (v/v) acetonitrile, and 100% (v/v)acetonitrile dehydrated. Before protein digestion, protein bands were reduced with 10 mM DTE in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (1 hr at 56°C) and then alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature (45 min, in darkness). After 10 min of incubation with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, protein bands were dehydrated with 100% (v/v) acetonitrile. Dehydrated protein bands were, then, rehydrated in trypsin solution (Sigma Aldrich) and in-gel protein digestion was performed by an overnight incubation at 37°C.Protein identification was carried out by Peptide Mass Fingerprinting (PMF) on an ultrafleXtreme™ MALDI-ToF/ToF instrument (Brucker Corporation). 1.25 μl of each digested protein solution, from each excised band, was spotted onto the MALDI target and allowed to dry. Then 0.75 μl of matrix solution (5mg/ml alpha-ciano 4 hydroxycynnamic acid in 50% v/v Acetonitrile and 0.5% v/v trifluoroacetic acid) was applied to the dried sample, which was dried again.

### Data Protocol
After acquiring the mass of the peptides, a mass fingerprinting search was carried out in Swiss-Prot/TrEMBL and NCBInr databases using MASCOT search engine available on-line (Matrix Science Ltd). Taxonomy was limited to Homo sapiens, mass tolerance was 50 ppm, and the acceptable number of missed cleavage sites was set at one. Alkylation of cysteine by carbamidomethylation was assumed as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was considered as a possible modification. The criteria used to accept identifications included the extent of sequence coverage (>15%), the number of matched peptides (>4) and the MASCOT algorithm assigned probabilistic score (>80 or p <0.001).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Uv-induced dna damage, Fech, Rnap1 transcription, Nucleolus, Cs proteins

### Affiliations
University of Siena
Istituto di Genetica Molecolare CNR, Pavia 27100, Italy

### Submitter
Claudia Landi

### Lab Head
Dr Donata Orioli
Istituto di Genetica Molecolare CNR, Pavia 27100, Italy


