### Accession
PXD041574

### Title
Distinguishing natural infections of the bovine mammary gland by Staphylococcus from Streptococcus spp using quantitative milk proteomics

### Description
This study was aimed at determining the quantitative variations in the milk proteome caused by natural infection by Staphylococcus and Streptococcus species, in order to gain further understanding of any discrepancies in pathophysiology and host immune responses, independent of the mastitis level.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein concentration was determined with the Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) by following the manufacturer's protocol. Secondly, 35 µg of proteins per sample was transferred into both sample and internal standard tubes and were diluted with 0.1M triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) to a final volume of 50 µL per sample. Therefore, an internal standard solution was made by blending 35 µg of proteins from all samples in the experiment. Consecutive bottom-up proteomics sample preparation steps were performed: (1) reduction (2.5 µL of 200 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) solution at 55 ˚C for 60 min), (2) alkylation (2.5 µL of 375 mM (IAA, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) solution at RT for 30 min), (3) protein precipitation with of 300 µl of ice-cold acetone (over-night at -20 ˚C, followed by centrifugation at 9000 x g, 4 ˚C, 15 min) and (4) protein digestion with trypsin solution (Promega, 1 mg/ml, trypsin:protein ratio = 1:35, over-night at 37 ˚C). TMT 6-plex solutions (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) were freshly dissolved and used for the labelling of tryptic peptides by following the producer's instructions. Briefly, 19 µl of the appropriate TMT-label was added to every sample and internal standard. Incubation was performed at RT for 60 min and was stopped by the addition of 8 µL of 5 % (vol/vol) hydroxylamine in 0.1M TEAB (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Lois, MO, USA). Finally, five appropriate TMT-labelled peptide samples were mixed with the internal standard into one TMT 6-plex, and these were divided into aliquots, which were vacuum dried and stored at -20 ºC until nano-LC-MS/MS analysis, no more than two days. In total, 28 TMT 6-plex mixtures were prepared and analysed.

### Data Protocol
A Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-labelled quantitative proteomic LC-MS/MS technique using a modular Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q Exactive Plus was applied on aseptically sampled milk from Holstein cows, after identification of Staphylococcus (N=51) and Streptococcus (N=67) spp. The trap column (C18 PepMap100, 5 μm, 100A, 300 μm × 5 mm) and analytical column (PepMap™ RSLC C18, 50 cm × 75 μm) were from Thermo Fisher Scientific. The mass spectrometer was set to positive ion mode and Top8 data-dependent acquisition method. MS spectra were collected from m/z 350.0 to m/z 1800.0, and the HCD fragmentation was used. Raw data were processed in the Proteome Discoverer (v.2.3., Thermo Fisher Scientific) with implemented SEQUEST algorithm. To identify bovine proteins present in milk, raw MS and MS/MS data were searched against Bos taurus FASTA files (downloaded from Uniprot/SwissProt on 21/01/2021, 120378 sequences). For the latter, two trypsin missed cleavages were allowed, precursor (10 ppm) and fragment (0.02 Da) mass tolerance and protein modifications (carbamidomethyl (C) as static and oxidation (M) and TMT 6-plex (K, peptide N-terminus) as dynamic) were fixed. To accept protein identification, the following criteria had to be met: detection of at least two unique peptides per protein with a false detection rate (FDR) less than 1%. The total peptide amount approach was chosen to normalize samples in one 6-plex, while an average of internal standard (TMT m/z 126 quan channel) was selected as a scaling mode between diverse 6-plex combinations.

### Publication Abstract
Bovine mastitis is the most frequent disease on dairy farms, which leads to a decrease in the health welfare of the animals and great economic losses. This study was aimed at determining the quantitative variations in the milk proteome caused by natural infection by <i>Staphylococcus</i> and <i>Streptococcus</i> species in order to gain further understanding of any discrepancies in pathophysiology and host immune responses, independent of the mastitis level. After identification of <i>Staphylococcus</i> (N = 51) and <i>Streptococcus</i> (N = 67) spp., tandem mass tag (TMT)-labeled quantitative proteomic and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) techniques on a modular Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q Exactive Plus was applied on aseptically sampled milk from Holstein cows. Proteome Discoverer was used for protein identification and quantitation through the SEQUEST algorithm. Statistical analysis employing R was used to identify differentially abundant proteins between the groups. Protein classes, functions and functional-association networks were determined using the PANTHER and STRING tools and pathway over-representation using the REACTOME. In total, 156 master bovine proteins were identified (two unique peptides, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05 and FDR &lt; 0.001), and 20 proteins showed significantly discrepant abundance between the genera (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05 and FDR &lt; 0.5). The most discriminatory proteins per group were odorant-binding protein (higher in staphylococci) and fibrinogen beta chain protein (higher in streptococci). The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve showed that protein kinase C-binding protein NELL2, thrombospondin-1, and complement factor I have diagnostic potential for differentiating staphylococci and streptococci intramammary infection and inflammation. Improved understanding of the host response mechanisms and recognition of potential biomarkers of specific-pathogen mastitis, which may aid prompt diagnosis for control implementation, are potential benefits of this study.

### Keywords
Lcmsms, Proteomics, Cow, Milk

### Affiliations
Faculty of veterinary medicine, Internal diseases clinic, University of Zagreb
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine of University of Zagreb

### Submitter
Dina Rešetar Maslov

### Lab Head
Dr Vladimir Mrljak
Faculty of veterinary medicine, Internal diseases clinic, University of Zagreb


