### Accession
PXD012734

### Title
Identification of mitotic substrates of phospho-regulated USP9X

### Description
We previously identified the deubiquitylase USP9X as a G2/M-specific CDC14B interactor (PXD012732) and subsequently identified USP9X as a specific CDC14B target (PXD012733). To investigate relevant mitotic substrates of phospho-regulated USP9X, we next performed a Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based screen in which ubiquitylated proteins were purified from control or USP9X depleted HEK 293T cells that were either asynchronous or synchronized in mitosis. Stable expression of recombinant His-tagged ubiquitin has been used for selective enrichment of ubiquitinylated proteins in both conditions.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC-based ubiquitin-purification His-Ubiquitin over expression HEK 293T cells grown in either “heavy” (K-8/R-10) (USP9X shRNA) or “medium” (K-4/R-6) medium (control shRNA) were lysed in buffer containing 8M urea, 300mM NaCl, 0.5% NP40, 50mM Na2HPO4, 50mM Tris pH8.0, 20mM imidazole and proteasome inhibitors. For synchronization in mitosis HEK 293T cells were treated with nocodazole. The two samples were combined immediately after lysis using equal amounts of total protein to purify ubiquitinated proteins with Ni-NTA-Agarose. After 1.5h incubation, Ni-NTA-Agarose were washed once with lysis buffer, twice with Buffer A and twice with Buffer B (Buffer A: 8M urea, 300mM NaCl, 0.5% NP40, 50mM Na2HPO4, 50mM Tris pH (6.3); Buffer 1B: 8M urea, 300mM NaCl, 0.5% NP40, 50mM Na2HPO4, 50mM Tris pH (6.3), 10mM imidazole). Proteins were proteolytically cleaved with trypsin in 50mM Ammoniumbicarbonate pH 8.0 supplemented with 1% RapiGestTM directly on the Ni-NTA-Agarose, over night. Prior to proteolysis, Cysteine residues were reduced by DTT following carbamylation by Chloroacetamide. After proteolysis, the RapiGestTM surfactant was hydrolysed by TFA according to the manufacturer’s protocol and samples were subsequently desalted with StageTips (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Vacuum-dried samples were re-dissolved in 0.5% TFA and Extracted peptides were subsequently subjected to LC-MS/MS-analysis:  Tryptic peptide mixtures were injected automatically and loaded at a flow rate of 30 μl/min in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-grade water onto a nano trap column (300 μm inner diameter × 5 mm precolumn, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific). After 3 min, peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (75 μm inner diameter × 25 cm, Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) by a linear gradient from 2% to 30% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 147 min. Remaining peptides were eluted by a short gradient from 33% or 30% to 95% buffer B in 5 or 10 min. Analysis of the eluted peptides was done on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). From the high-resolution MS prescan in the Orbitrap with a mass range of 335 to 1,500 at a resolution of 120,000, at least doubly charged precursors were selected for fragment analysis with the top speed method and 3s cycle time. The normalized collision energy for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was set to a value of 30. The lock mass option was activated; the background signal with a mass of 445.12003 was used as lock mass. Every ion selected for fragmentation was excluded for 20 or 60 s by dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were analysed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.6.5) against the human subset of the Swiss-Prot database (release 2016_08) with the following settings: Lys-8/Arg-10 (referred as “heavy” label) and Lys-4/Arg-6 (referred as “medium” label) as isotopic pairs (multiplicity=2); Carbamidomethyl as fixed and Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as well as diGly (K) as variable modifications. The MaxQuant results were further processed with in house R-scripts for visualization and statistical analysis. Hits were reported as significantly enriched using the Significance B test at p=0.01 (Cox and Mann 2008).   References: Cox, J., and M. Mann. 2008. 'MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification', Nat Biotechnol, 26: 1367-72.

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of mitosis secures cellular integrity and its failure critically contributes to the development, maintenance, and treatment resistance of cancer. In yeast, the dual phosphatase Cdc14 controls mitotic progression by antagonizing Cdk1-mediated protein phosphorylation. By contrast, specific mitotic functions of the mammalian Cdc14 orthologue CDC14B have remained largely elusive. Here, we find that CDC14B antagonizes CDK1-mediated activating mitotic phosphorylation of the deubiquitinase USP9X at serine residue 2563, which we show to be essential for USP9X to mediate mitotic survival. Starting from an unbiased proteome-wide screening approach, we specify Wilms' tumor protein 1 (WT1) as the relevant substrate that becomes deubiquitylated and stabilized by serine 2563-phosphorylated USP9X in mitosis. We further demonstrate that WT1 functions as a mitotic transcription factor and specify CXCL8/IL-8 as a target gene of WT1 that conveys mitotic survival. Together, we describe a ubiquitin-dependent signaling pathway that directs a mitosis-specific transcription program to regulate mitotic survival.

### Keywords
Usp9x, Ubiquitinylation

### Affiliations
(1) German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), 72076 Tübingen, Germany (2) University of Tübingen, Center for Ophthalmology, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, 72074 Tübingen, Germany
DZNE

### Submitter
Johannes Gloeckner

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Johannes Gloeckner
(1) German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), 72076 Tübingen, Germany (2) University of Tübingen, Center for Ophthalmology, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, 72074 Tübingen, Germany


