### Accession
PXD042954

### Title
Integration of Meta-Multi-Omics Data Using Probabilistic Graphs and External Knowledge

### Description
Multi-omics has the promise to provide a detailed molecular picture for biological systems. Although obtaining multi-omics data is relatively easy, methods that analyze such data have been lagging. In this paper, we present an algorithm that uses probabilistic graph representations and external knowledge to perform optimum structure learning and deduce a multifarious interaction network for multi-omics data from a bacterial community. Kefir grain, a microbial community that ferments milk and creates kefir, represents a self-renewing, stable, natural microbial community. Kefir has been shown to associate with a wide range of health benefits. We obtained a controlled bacterial community using the two most abundant and well-studied species in kefir grains: Lentilactobacillus kefiri and Lactobacillus kefiranofaciens. We applied growth temperatures of 30°C and 37°C, and ob-tained transcriptomic, metabolomic, and proteomic data for the same 20 samples (10 samples per temperature). We obtained a multi-omics interaction network, which generated insights that would not have been possible with single-omics analysis. We identified interactions among transcripts, proteins, and metabolites suggesting active toxin/antitoxin systems. We also observed multifarious interactions that involved the shikimate pathway. These observations helped explain bacterial adaptation to different stress conditions, co-aggregation, and increased activation of L. kefiranofa-ciens at 37°C.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets washed with cold PBS were further washed once with 70% ethanol and air-dried. The proteins were solubilized in 400 μL of 7M urea, 2M thiourea, 5mM DTT, 0.1M Tris, pH 8 and reduced for 2h at 37°C. Protein amounts were assayed using the CBX kit (G-Bioscience, Missouri, USA) and an aliquot of each sample was alkylated with iodoacetamide. Lys-C digestion was carried out at 1:20 w/w ratio for 4 h in 4 M urea before dilution to 1 M urea and digestion with trypsin (1:20 ratio) for 20 h at 37°C. 5ug of each digest was diluted to 45 uL with 0.5% TFA and 5 uL of 100 fmol/μL of phosphorylase B (MassPREP, Waters) added. 0.5 μg (5 μL) of each sample was ana-lyzed containing 50 fmol of phosphorylase B. Each digest was run by Thermo Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS using a 2h gradient on a Waters CSH 0.075mmx250mm C18 column feeding into a Thermo Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, UK; version 2.7.0) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was set to search the cRAP_database from the global proteome machine (version 1.0), the JCM5818_ (2,027 sequences); and JCM6985 (1,831 sequences) databases and the phosphorylase Bsearched assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.6 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Deamidated of asparagine and glu-tamine, oxidation of methionine, were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as fixed modification. The quan-titation of the proteins was done using Proteome Discoverer (ThermoFisher; version 2.4). The data were searched using a decoy database to set the false discovery rate to 1% (high confidence). Only proteins with a minimum of 2 peptides and 5 peptide spec-trum matches (PSMs) were reported. The peptides were quantified using the precursor abundance based on intensity, normalized based on the specified protein, and raw abundances are reported. The protein ratios are calculated using summed abundance for each replicate separately. The significance of differential expression is tested using t-test with adjusted p-values based on the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
Multi-omics has the promise to provide a detailed molecular picture of biological systems. Although obtaining multi-omics data is relatively easy, methods that analyze such data have been lagging. In this paper, we present an algorithm that uses probabilistic graph representations and external knowledge to perform optimal structure learning and deduce a multifarious interaction network for multi-omics data from a bacterial community. Kefir grain, a microbial community that ferments milk and creates kefir, represents a self-renewing, stable, natural microbial community. Kefir has been shown to have a wide range of health benefits. We obtained a controlled bacterial community using the two most abundant and well-studied species in kefir grains: <i>Lentilactobacillus kefiri</i> and <i>Lactobacillus kefiranofaciens</i>. We applied growth temperatures of 30 &#xb0;C and 37 &#xb0;C and obtained transcriptomic, metabolomic, and proteomic data for the same 20 samples (10 samples per temperature). We obtained a multi-omics interaction network, which generated insights that would not have been possible with single-omics analysis. We identified interactions among transcripts, proteins, and metabolites, suggesting active toxin/antitoxin systems. We also observed multifarious interactions that involved the shikimate pathway. These observations helped explain bacterial adaptation to different stress conditions, co-aggregation, and increased activation of <i>L. kefiranofaciens</i> at 37 &#xb0;C.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Kefir, Proteomics, Lentilactobacillus, Lactobacillus

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Metabolomics Facility, University of Nebraska - Lincoln
University of Nebraska - Lincoln

### Submitter
Sophe Alvarez

### Lab Head
Dr Sophie Alvarez
Proteomics and Metabolomics Facility, University of Nebraska - Lincoln


