### Accession
PXD003119

### Title
Protein stable isotope fingerprinting (P-SIF): Chocolate Pots (Yellowstone) biomass

### Description
Protein stable isotope fingerprinting (P-SIF) is a method to measure the carbon isotope ratios of whole proteins separated from complex mixtures, including cultures and environmental samples. The goal of P-SIF is to expose the links between identity and function in microbial ecosystems by (i) determining the values of δ13C for different taxonomic divisions, and (ii) using those values as clues to the metabolic pathways employed by the respective organisms.  This project measures >200 protein fractions and δ13C values for a sample of Cyanobacteria + Chloroflexi dominated microbial mat from Yellowstone National Park, USA.

### Sample Protocol
Biomass was extracted with B-PER Protein Extraction Reagent (Thermo Scientific) and a micro-bead beater.  The supernatant was precipitated in acetone, and the resulting protein pellet dissolved in 100 mM NH4HCO3 + DTT, 5% isopropanol, and 200 mM glycine.  The total extract was separated by HPLC on a PL-SAX column (4.6 × 50 mm, 8 μm particle size) at 50 °C in a gradient of 50 mM to 1M NH4HCO3 (both pH 9.0).  Twenty SAX fractions were collected, and each fraction was then separated by HPLC on a Poroshell 300SBC3 column (2.1 × 75 mm, 5 μm particles) at 65 °C in a gradient of H2O to 1:1 isopropanol/acetonitrile, both containing 3% formic acid, into 48 wells of a 96-well plate.  This procedure yielded a total of 960 fractions of pre-digestion proteins.  Plates were dried by centrifugal vacuum evaporation, resuspended in NH4HCO3+DTT, then alkylated with iodoacetamide, digested with trypsin (overnight, 37°C), dried, and dissolved in H2O containing 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were analyzed by HPLC-QToF-MS/MS in a gradient of H2O to acetonitrile, both containing 0.1% formic acid, on a Kinetex C18 column (2.1 mm × 100 mm, 2.6 μm particles) at 50°C.  Only some of the 960 total tryptic digests from the original sample were analyzed.

### Data Protocol
Peptide LC−MS/MS data were processed in Spectrum Mill (Agilent Rev.A.03.03.084 SR 4) by searching all MS2 spectra against databases of predicted proteins. Databases were created from in silico digestion of protein sequence files translated from publically available genomes or environmental metagenomes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Geobiology, Lc-qtof-ms/ms, Microbial mats, Environmental proteomes

### Affiliations
Harvard University
Murray and Martha Ross Professor of Environmental Sciences, Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA USA

### Submitter
Susan Carter

### Lab Head
Dr Ann Pearson
Murray and Martha Ross Professor of Environmental Sciences, Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA USA


