### Accession
PXD015057

### Title
Extracellular matrix analysis of human keloid scars

### Description
Fibrosis is vaguely described as connective tissue deposition that can be excessive in pathological conditions. This suggests a quantitative spectrum of fibrosis wherein there can be more or less extracellular matrix (ECM), which in the context of a repairing skin wound could reflect the range from normal scar to keloid. This depiction, however, does not encompass the potential qualitative differences between normal and pathological scars. In keloids, the markedly different physical (hard and dense) and histological (hyalinization) characteristics compared to normal scars indicate an altered and inappropriate matrix, rather than simply too much. With this quantitative discovery-based proteomics we provide a thorough molecular description of keloid lesions relative to normal scars, which is an essential step towards our understanding of this problem.

### Sample Protocol
Dermis samples (de-epithelialized) from normal skin, normal scar and keloid were subjected to a three-step sequential extraction procedure. Briefly, after rinsing the tissue with cold PBS, the samples were incubated in 0.5M sodium chloride (NaCl) plus proteinase and phosphatase inhibitors for 2 hours to extract loosely/ionically bound matrix proteins. Next, tissue was decellularization using 0.08% SDS (not analysed in this study). Finally, integral ECM proteins were extracted using 4M guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl) for 48h. The salt and guanidine fractions were deglycosylated in O18-water, reduced by the addition of DTT, alkylated by the addition of iodoacetamide, precipitated with acetone, and then trypsin-digested. Tryptic peptide samples were purified using a 96-well C18 spin plate and then lyophilized. The lyophilised peptide samples were reconstituted with 0.05% TFA in 2% ACN and separated on a nanoflow LC system (Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano). Samples were injected onto a nano-trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 Trap, 5mm x 300µm, 5µm, 100 Å), at a flow rate of 25µL/min for 3 mins, using 2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA) in H2O. Spectra were collected from a Q Exactive Plus using full MS mode (resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z) over the mass-to-charge (m/z) range 350–1600. Data-dependent MS2 scan was performed using the top 15 ions in each full MS scan (resolution of 17,500 at 200 m/z) with dynamic exclusion enabled.

### Data Protocol
Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.1.14) was used to search raw data files against the human database (UniProtKB/Swiss,Prot version 2016_02, 20,198 protein entries) using Mascot (version 2.3.01, Matrix Science). Scaffold (version 4.1.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications with the following filters: a peptide probability of greater than 95.0% (as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm), a protein probability of greater than 99.0%, and at least two independent peptides per protein. File for submission to PRIDE (*.msf to mzIdentML 1.1/*.mgf) were exported from Scaffold 4.7.3.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human skin scar dermis lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
King's College London
King's College London Centre for Inflammation Biology & Cancer Immunology School of Immunology & Microbial Sciences 1st Floor New Hunt's House, Guy's Campus London, UK SE1 1UL

### Submitter
Tanya Shaw

### Lab Head
Dr Tanya Shaw
King's College London Centre for Inflammation Biology & Cancer Immunology School of Immunology & Microbial Sciences 1st Floor New Hunt's House, Guy's Campus London, UK SE1 1UL


