### Accession
PXD039570

### Title
Data-independent acquisition proteomics reveals the effects of red and blue light on the growth and development of moso bamboo(Phyllostachys edulis) seedlings

### Description
Moso bamboo is a fast-growing bamboo species with high economic, social and cultural value. The method of transplanting moso bamboo seedlings for afforestation has become a more economical and effective method. The effect of light on the growth of plant seedlings is mainly reflected in the regulation of different light quality on the growth and development of seedlings, including light morphogenesis, photosynthesis and secondary metabolites. Therefore, studying the effects of specific wavelength light on the physiology and proteome of moso bamboo seedlings will play an important role in growing seedlings and seed cultivation of moso bamboo. Here, moso bamboo seeds were germinated in the dark and then were transferred to the blue and red-light conditions. After 14 days, we observed the effects of different light treatments on the growth and development of seedlings, and then compared and analyzed their proteome.

### Sample Protocol
The seedlings of moso bamboo grown for 14 days under different light conditions were collected and immediately frozen and ground in liquid nitrogen. Three samples of 0.5 g powder under different conditions were weighed (3 repetitions), and then were added 2 ml lysis buffer [0.5 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 50 mM EDTA, 0.1 % SDS, 0.1 M KCl, 0.7 M Sucrose, 50 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT), Protease Inhibitor], mixed well, and then placed on ice for lysing for 30 min. The lysates were centrifuged at 12000 rpm for 30 min at 4 ℃ and the supernatants were added phenol for extraction of whole protein. 6 volumes of precooled 100% acetonitrile (ACN) were added to the supernatants and then were placed in -20 ℃ overnight. The protein precipitates were washed three times with precooled acetone, and then concentrated in vacuum for 5 minutes. The protein was resuspended in solution buffer (8 M Urea, 0.1 M Tris HCl pH 8.0). Protein concentration is determined by Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (23227, Thermo Scientific)   500 μg dissolved protein was reduced by 50 mM DTT (3483-12-3, Sigma-Aldrich) at 37 ℃ for 1h. 150 mM iodoacetamide (144-48-9, Sigma) was added to alkylate the reduced sulfydryl groups. After 30 min in the dark at room temperature, the protein was diluted by 4 volumes 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and digested with trypsin (V5111, Promega). Digestive product was desalted with MonoSpin C18 spin column (GL Sciences, 5010-21701), eluted with 60% acetonitrile, and dried in rapid vacuum. The dried protein sample was resuspended with solvent A (A: water with 0.1% formal acid) and added with iRT peptides (ki-3002-2, Biognosys). Mass spectrometry analysis was conducted by online nanospray LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos coupled to an EASY nano LC system (Thermo Scientific). During LC-MS/MS operation, 1 µg peptide sample was loaded into trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap C18, 100 µ m × 2 cm), the flow rate was 10 µ L/min, and then in the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 µ m × 15 cm), 3-32% solvent B (B: ACN with 0.1% formal acid) linear gradient was used to separate polypeptides for 120 min. The column flow rate was maintained at 300 nL/min. The electric spray voltage of Nanospray Flex ion source was 2.3 kV. Using full scan in Orbitrap, AGC target was 8 × 104, the max injection time was 120 ms and a resolution of 60000. Data independent acquisition (DIA) scanning was performed after each MS scan. AGC target was 4 × 105 and the max injection time was 22 ms. A total of 42 variable DIA windows were set, and the acquisition range was from m/z 350 to m/z 1500 with resolution of 30000. Fragmented by higher energy collision-induced dispersion (HCD) with 32% collision energy.

### Data Protocol
Before signal extraction and quantification, the "DirectDIA" mode of Spectronaut 16 (Biognosys) was used to generate DIA spectrum library using the raw data described previously(Yu et al., 2019) (http://forestry.fafu.edu.cn/pub/cells) and the moso bamboo protein FASTA file (http://forestry.fafu.edu.cn/db/PhePacBio/download.php) . The DIA raw file was directly analyzed using the default parameters. A maximum of two miss cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed decoration, and Occupation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were set as variable decoration. FDR at peptide and protein levels was set at 1%. The retention time was corrected with iRT peptide

### Publication Abstract
Moso bamboo is a rapidly growing species with significant economic, social, and cultural value. Transplanting moso bamboo container seedlings for afforestation has become a cost-effective method. The growth and development of the seedlings is greatly affected by the quality of light, including light morphogenesis, photosynthesis, and secondary metabolite production. Therefore, studies on the effects of specific light wavelengths on the physiology and proteome of moso bamboo seedlings are crucial. In this study, moso bamboo seedlings were germinated in darkness and then exposed to blue and red light conditions for 14 days. The effects of these light treatments on seedling growth and development were observed and compared through proteomics analysis. Results showed that moso bamboo has higher chlorophyll content and photosynthetic efficiency under blue light, while it displays longer internode and root length, more dry weight, and higher cellulose content under red light. Proteomics analysis reveals that these changes under red light are likely caused by the increased content of cellulase CSEA, specifically expressed cell wall synthetic proteins, and up-regulated auxin transporter ABCB19 in red light. Additionally, blue light is found to promote the expression of proteins constituting photosystem II, such as PsbP and PsbQ, more than red light. These findings provide new insights into the growth and development of moso bamboo seedlings regulated by different light qualities.

### Keywords
Moso bamboo, Red light, Dia-based quantitavie proteomics, Blue light, Photosynthesis, Cell wall

### Affiliations
JiLin University
JiLin university

### Submitter
Li Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Zecheng Zuo
JiLin university


