### Accession
PXD004351

### Title
Aquifer metaproteomics -  Candidate Brocadiales dominates C, N and S cycling in anoxic groundwater of a pristine limestone-fracture aquifer

### Description
Groundwater-derived microorganisms are known to play an important role in biogeochemical C, S and N cycling. Thereby, the presence and majorly the activity of microorganisms in aquifers affect enormously the nutrient cycling. However, the diversity and their functional capability in natural aquifers are still rare and therefore a better knowledge of the core microbial communities is urgently needed. Metaproteome analysis was applied to characterize the repertoire of microbes in the depth and to identify the key drivers of major biogeochemical processes. Therefore, 1000 L water from the aquifer was sampled by filtration on 0.3 µm glass filters. After protein extraction, proteolytic cleavage and mass spectrometric analysis (Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC coupled to Q Exactive HF instrument), 3808 protein groups (2371 proteins with ≥2 peptides) were identified from 13,204 peptides. The findings of our study have broad implications for the understanding of aquifer cycling’s which finally leads to a greatly improved understanding of the ecosystem services provided by the microbial communities present in aquifers. In the future, functional results would allow to monitor and to assess pollution effects which would beneficially assist groundwater resource management.

### Sample Protocol
Groundwater was sampled at wells H4-2 (HTU) and H5-2 (HTU). The sampling campaign was in autumn 2015. First, stagnant water was pumped out without usage; after continuous flow was reached, about 1,000 L groundwater were pumped to the surface on site using a submersible pump (Grundfos SQ5-70, Grundfos, Denmark) as described in Schwab et al., (2016 submitted). Briefly, the water flow was filtered directly connected to a stainless filter device (diameter 293 mm, Millipore Corp. USA). A glass fibre filter (0.3 µm, Sterlitech, USA) was applied that allow a water flow of about 20 L/min. After the 1,000 L filtration, the glass filter was carefully removed from the device and stored on dry ice. The filter were cut into four pieces and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Three pieces of the filter per well were used as a technical replicates. Filters were disrupted in mortar with liquid nitrogen into tiny pieces, in several places to powder. In total, 13 µL of SDS buffer (0.15 M Tris HCL, pH 8.8, 1.25% w/v SDS, 20 mM dithiotreitol) was added to filters and heated in water bath for 15 min at 60°C. After that were samples shake for 45 min on a horizontal shaker. Samples were centrifuged (14,000 rpm, 12 min, 4°C) and the supernatant was collected. The equal volume of phenol solution (10 g/mL) was mixed with supernatant and incubated at room temperature for 15 min. Samples were centrifuged and the phenol phase was collected. The water phase was again mixed with the equal volume of phenol solution, incubated 15 min at room temperature with shaking and centrifuge (14,000 rpm, 12 min, 4°C). The both phenol phases were collected together and washed (two times) with the equal volume of Millipore water with 15 min incubation by shaking. After centrifugation (14,000 rpm, 12 min, 4°C) was the water phase discard and the proteins in phenol phase were precipitated over night at -20°C with cold ammonium acetate (100 mM ammonium acetate in methanol, fivefold). Protein pellets were harvested by centrifugation (14,000 rpm, 12 min, 4°C). Dried pellets were re-suspended in 20 µL of SDS sample buffer (2% w/v SDS, 2 mM beta-mercaptoethanol, 4% v/v glycerol, 40 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 0.01% w/v bromophenol blue), heated at 90 °C for 4 min and separated by SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Proteins were stained in gel with Coomassie G-250 (Merck). Gel was cut into small pieces (band per sample), distained, dehydrated and proteolytically cleaved overnight at 37°C by trypsin (Promega). Extracted peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTip column (Merck Millipore). Peptide lysates were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and injected to liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
The software Proteome Discoverer (v1.4, Thermo Scientific) was used for protein identification. Therefore, the measured MS/MS spectra (*.raw files) were searched with the Sequest HT algorithm against the metagenome database (containing 1,251,068 protein-coding sequences). The following settings were selected: enzyme specificity was trypsin with up to two missed cleavages allowed using 10 ppm peptide ion tolerance and 0.02 Da MS/MS tolerances. Oxidation (methionine) and acetylation (any N-terminus) were selected as a dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation (cysteine) as a static modification. Only peptides with a false discovery rate (FDR) <0.01 calculated by Percolator {Kall, 2007 #848}, peptide rank =1 and XCorr >2 were considered as identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Groundwater, Metaproteomics, Microbial community

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ Head of Department for Molecular Systems Biology http://www.ufz.de/index.php?de=17634  Permoserstr. 15 Building 6, R 521 04318 Leipzig GERMANY  Tel.: +49-341-235-1211 Fax: +49-341-235-451211
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Martin von Bergen
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ Head of Department for Molecular Systems Biology http://www.ufz.de/index.php?de=17634  Permoserstr. 15 Building 6, R 521 04318 Leipzig GERMANY  Tel.: +49-341-235-1211 Fax: +49-341-235-451211


