### Accession
PXD030728

### Title
FastCAT accelerates absolute quantification of proteins by using multiple short non-purified chimeric standards

### Description
Absolute (molar) quantification of proteins provides the analytical rationale for system-level modelling of diverse molecular mechanisms. FastCAT method employs multiple short (<50 kDa) stable-isotope labeled chimeric proteins (CPs) composed of concatenated quantotypic (Q-) peptides representing the quantified proteins. Each CP also comprises scrambled sequences of reference (R-) peptides that relate its abundance to a single protein standard (BSA). FastCAT not only alleviates the need in purifying CP or using SDS-PAGE, but also improves the accuracy, precision and dynamic range of the absolute quantifications by grouping Q-peptides according to the expected abundance of target proteins. We benchmarked FastCAT against the reference method of MS Western and tested it in the direct molar quantifications of neurological markers in human cerebrospinal fluid at the low ng/mL level.

### Sample Protocol
Aliquots of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of 20 µL volume were in-solution digested with trypsin/Lys-C protease mix (1:20) in the presence of RapiGest (Waters) detergent. Samples were further off-line fractionated using commercial (Thermo) Peirce high pH kit. CSF samples were obtained from patients diagnosed with multiple sclerosis and stored as freshly frozen aliquots. All patients gave their prior written consent. The study was approved by the institutional review board of the University Hospital Dresden (EK348092014). Protein digests were loaded onto a trap column for 5 min at 7 µL/min and separated on the Acclaim PepMap 100 column (C18, 3 µm, 75 um x 150 mm) using 120 min gradients (5-45% B) at 300 nL/min in data-dependent acquisition (DDA). DDA method consisted of MS1 scan from m/z 350 to 1700 with automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3×106; maximum injection time (IT) of 60 ms and targeted mass resolution R(m/z=200) of 60,000. Top-12 DDA method employed the precursor isolation window of 1.6 Th; AGC of 1×105; maximum IT of 50 ms; R(m/z=200) of 15,000; normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25% and dynamic exclusion of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data from DDA experiments were processed by Progenesis LC-MS v.4.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics, UK) software for RT alignment, peak picking and extracting the peptide features. To match peptides to target proteins, MS/MS spectra were searched by Mascot v.2.2.04 software (Matrix Science, London, UK) against a human proteome datbase. Precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm; fragment mass tolerance of 0.03 Da; fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications: acetyl (protein N-terminus) and oxidation (M); cleavage specificity: trypsin with up to 2 missed cleavages allowed).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Absolute quantification of proteins; ms western; qconcat; targeted quantitative proteomics; cerebrospinal fluid; neurodegeneration; neuroinflammation

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics
1Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden, Germany

### Submitter
Ignacy Rzagalinski

### Lab Head
Dr Andrej Shevchenko
1Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden, Germany


