### Accession
PXD019360

### Title
Oxidative modifications of urinary proteins increase kidney stone risk

### Description
Clinical and animal studies have demonstrated the increasing evidence of oxidative stress in kidney stone disease. Recent findings have shown that the interactions between calcium oxalate (CaOx) crystals and renal tubular cells can promote many cellular events such as cell proliferation, cell death, cellular injury, mitochondrial dysfunction and inflammatory cascade. All of these cellular events are associated with oxidative stress and overproduction of free radicals and reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as superoxide and hydrogen peroxide in renal tubular cells. However, almost all of these references have shown that oxidative stress occurs after the causative crystals have been deposited in the kidney or exposed to renal tubular cells, whereas its primary role as the etiology remained unclear. In this study, we examined effects of oxidative modifications of urinary proteins on CaOx stone formation processes. Urinary proteins were modified by performic oxidation and the presence of oxidatively modified urinary proteins was verified, quantified and characterized by Oxyblot assay and tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-ESI-LTQ-Orbitrap-MS/MS). Subsequently, activities of oxidatively modified urinary proteins on CaOx stone formation processes were examined.

### Sample Protocol
Urine collection and sample preparation The experiments involving human subjects and clinical samples in this study were approved by the Siriraj Institutional Review Board, Human Research Protection Unit, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Thailand (ethical approval no. Si473/2015). All the experiments were conducted according to the international guidelines. For initial experiments to characterize oxidatively modified urinary proteins, 100 ml midstream random urine samples were collected from 20 healthy individuals (aged 20-40 years) who had no recent medication or illness and then pooled. All urine samples were immediately subjected to low-speed centrifugation (1,000 g for 15 min) to remove cell debris and particulate matters. These individual or pooled urine samples were dialyzed against deionized (18 MΩ·cm) water at 4°C overnight. Thereafter, the dialyzed urine were lyophilized and then harvested. Performic oxidation of urinary proteins The lyophilized urinary proteins were resuspended with formic acid (Fisher Scientific; Loughborough, UK) to make the final protein concentration at 1 µg/µl and 3× volume of freshly prepared performic acid (1:20 v/v of 30% H2O2 (Fisher Scientific) in formic acid) was added. After 3-h incubation on ice, 5× volume of ice-cold deionized water was added and then lyophilized. The powder of oxidatively modified proteins was collected and subjected to subsequent experiments. In-solution tryptic digestion by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method An equal amount of 50 µg proteins from modified or non-modified urine samples was tryptic digested into peptides according to the FASP protocol as described previously 33,34. Briefly, protein samples were resuspended in SDT lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, and 100 mM Tris-HCl; pH 7.6) and were reduced by heating at 95°C for 5 min. After cooling down at 25°C, each protein sample was transferred to an Omega Nanosep 10K device (Pall Corporation; Port Washington, NY), added with 200 µl of 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), and then centrifuged at 14,000 g and 25°C for 15 min. This buffer exchange step was repeated one more cycle. The recovered proteins were then alkylated with 100 µl of 50 mM iodoacetamide in 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) at 25°C in the dark using a ThermoMixer C (Eppendorf; Hauppauge, NY) for 20 min. Thereafter, buffer exchange was performed twice by centrifugation at 14,000 g and 25°C for 15 min each using 200 µl of 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5). The proteins were then finally exchanged into 50 mM NH4HCO3 and digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega; Madison, WI) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at a ratio of 1:50 (w/w) trypsin/protein at 37°C for 16-18 h in a ThermoMixer C. The digested peptides were collected by transferring the filter unit to a new collection tube and centrifuged at 14,000 g and 25°C for 10-20 min. Trypsin activity was then stopped by adding 10 µl of 5% formic acid in 80% acetronitrile (ACN), and the digested peptides were dried by a SpeedVac concentrator (Savant; Holbrook, NY). The peptides were finally resuspended in 0.1% formic acid prior to MS/MS analysis. Identification of oxidatively modified urinary proteins by nanoLC-ESI-LTQ-Orbitrap-MS/MS analysis Each sample was run with 3 technical replicates. Separation of the digested peptides was performed using EASY-nLC II (Thermo Scientific; Waltham, MA). Briefly, peptides were loaded from a cooled (7°C) autosampler into an in-house, 3-cm-long pre-column containing 5-µm C18 resin (Dr.Maisch GmbH; Ammerbuch, Germany) and then to an in-house, 15-cm-long analytical column packed with 3-µm C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) using mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid). The peptides were then separated by mobile phase B (ACN/0.1% formic acid) gradient elution with four steps as follows: 2-9% for 15 min, 9-35% for 85 min, 35-95% for 20 min, and then 95% for 10 min at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Peptide sequences were then analyzed by LTQ-Orbitrap-XL (Thermo Scientific) in positive mode with ESI nanosprayer ion source. Data were acquired in a collision-induced dissociation (CID) top-12 mode under the control of the Xcalibur 2.1.0 and LTQ Tune Plus 2.5.5 software (Thermo Scientific). The cycle of one full scan was performed at a resolution of 30,000 (300-2,000 m/z) in the Orbitrap followed by 12 data-dependent MS/MS scans in the linear ion trap with enabled preview mode for FTMS master scan. The minimum signal threshold at 1×105 was required for a precursor ion to be selected for further fragmentation. Accumulation target values of full MS and MS/MS scan were 5×105 and 3×104 ions, respectively. Singly charged ions and unassigned charge states were excluded for fragmentation. Helium was used as a collision gas and the normalized collision energy was set at 35%. The activation time was 30 ms for acquiring mass spectra. The duration of dynamic exclusion was 180 s.

### Data Protocol
Data analyses  The MS/MS raw spectra were deconvoluted and then extracted into output searchable .mgf files using Proteome Discoverer v.1.4.1.14 software (Thermo Scientific). Mascot software version 2.4.0 (Matrix Science; London, UK) was used to search MS/MS spectra against human Swiss-Prot database with the following standard Mascot parameters for CID: Enzyme = trypsin, maximal number of missed cleavages = 1, peptide tolerance = ±2 ppm, MS/MS tolerance = ±0.2 Da, fixed modification = carbamidomethyl (C), variable modification = oxidation (M, C, W), dioxidation (M, C, W) and trioxidation (C, W), charge states = 2+ and 3+, and decoy database on false discovery rate (FDR) <1%.  Additionally, the MS raw files were analyzed by integrated MaxQuant software suite version 1.5.3.30 (www.maxquant.org). The derived peak lists files were search against the human Swiss-Prot database using built-in Andromeda search engine which was integrated into MaxQuant software. Fix modification was carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues, whereas variable modification was oxidation at methionine, tryptophan and cysteine, dioxidation at methionine, tryptophan and cysteine, and trioxidation at tryptophan and cysteine residues. Enzyme specified was trypsin and only one missed cleavage per peptide was allowed. Data searches were performed with a precursor tolerance of 4.5 ppm and fragmentation tolerance of 0.5 Da with +2 and +3 charge state. The FDR was performed by searching the decoy database and adjusted to 1% at protein level.  Moreover, the unique oxidatively modified peptides were classified as the “unambiguous” oxidatively modified peptides, whereas those that shared peptide sequences with other proteins were considered as the “ambiguous” oxidatively modified peptides. Only the “unambiguous” ones were counted and compared between the non-modified and modified urine samples.  Statistical analysis All quantitative data are reported as mean ± SEM, unless stated otherwise. Statistical analyses were achieved using SPSS software version 18.0 (SPSS; Chicago, IL). Comparisons between two sets of data were performed by unpaired Student’s t-test. P-values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
The incidence/prevalence of kidney stone disease has been increasing around the globe, but its pathogenic mechanisms remained unclear. We evaluated effects of oxidative modifications of urinary proteins on calcium oxalate (CaOx) stone formation processes. Urinary proteins derived from 20 healthy individuals were modified by performic oxidation, and the presence of oxidatively modified urinary proteins was verified, quantified, and characterized by Oxyblot assay and tandem MS (nanoLC-electrospray ionization-linear trap quadrupole-Orbitrap-MS/MS). Subsequently, activities of oxidatively modified urinary proteins on CaOx stone formation processes were examined. Oxyblot assay confirmed the marked increase in protein oxidation level in the modified urine. NanoLC-electrospray ionization-linear trap quadrupole-Orbitrap-MS/MS identified a total of 193 and 220 urinary proteins in nonmodified and modified urine samples, respectively. Among these, there were 1121 and 5297 unambiguous oxidatively modified peptides representing 42 and 136 oxidatively modified proteins in the nonmodified and modified urine samples, respectively. Crystal assays revealed that oxidatively modified urinary proteins significantly promoted CaOx crystallization, crystal growth, and aggregation. By contrast, the nonmodified urinary proteins had inhibitory activities. This is the first direct evidence demonstrating that oxidative modifications of urinary proteins increase the risk of kidney stone disease by switching their modulatory activities from inhibiting to promoting CaOx crystallization, crystal growth, and aggregation.

### Keywords
Calcium oxalate; kidney stone; oxidative stress; post-translation modification; uromodulin

### Affiliations
Mahidol University
Medical Proteomics Unit, Office for Research and Development, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand

### Submitter
Visith Thongboonkerd

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Visith Thongboonkerd
Medical Proteomics Unit, Office for Research and Development, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand


