### Accession
PXD014690

### Title
Microflow SWATH data analysed with DIA-NN

### Description
We have developed DIA-NN, an integrated software suite for fully-automated processing of raw SWATH/DIA data. DIA-NN enables deep and confident proteome coverage with fast chromatographic methods, paving the way for a new generation of high-throughput proteomics. This data set illustrates the capabilities of DIA-NN when analysing microflow SWATH data acquired with 19 - 23 minute gradients as well as the use of DIA-NN to generate spectral libraries directly from SWATH/DIA data.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: The yeast protein extracts were prepared from ​Saccharomyces cerevisiae (BY4743-pHLU​) grown to exponential phase in minimal synthetic nutrient media and processed in a beadbeater for 5min at 1500rpm (Spex Geno/Grinder). Plasma samples were prepared from commercial plasma (Human Cord Blood Plasma, Stemcell Technologies). Proteins were denatured in 8M urea/0.1M ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 before they were reduced and alkylated in 5mM dithiothreitol and 10mM iodoacetamide, respectively. The sample was diluted to <1.5M urea/0.1M ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 before the proteins were digested overnight with trypsin (37​C). Peptides were cleaned-up with 96-well MacroSpin plates (Nest Group) and iRT peptides (Biognosys) were spiked in. The digested human K562 cell lysate was bought commercially (Promega - V6951) and spiked with iRT peptides.  Mass spectrometry: The digested peptides were analysed on a nanoAcquity (Waters) coupled to a TripleTOF6600 (Sciex). 2 µg of the protein digest was injected and the peptides were separated with a 23-minute (yeast), 21-minute (plasma) or 19-minute (K562) non-linear gradient starting with 4% acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid and increasing to 36% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. A Waters HSS T3 column (150mm x 300µm, 1.8µm particles) was used and the flow rate was set to 5µl/min. The DIA method consisted of an MS1 scan from m/z 400 to m/z 1250 (50ms accumulation time) and 40 MS2 scans (35ms accumulation time) with variable precursor isolation width covering the mass range from m/z 400 to m/z 1250. The library generation with “gas-phase fractionation” was performed using the same LC-MS/MS setup as mentioned above. The peptides were separated with a 120 minute (plasma samples) and 45 minute (yeast samples) linear gradient (3% acetonitrile/0.1% formicacid to 60% acetonitrile/0.1 formic acid). Repetitive injections were performed to cover the following scan ranges: m/z 400 – 500, m/z 495 – 600, m/z 595 – 700, m/z 695 – 800, m/z 795– 900, m/z 895 – 1000, m/z 995 – 1100, m/z 1095 – 1250 (yeast) and m/z 400 – 500, m/z 500– 600, m/z 600 – 700, m/z 700 – 800, m/z 800– 900, m/z 900 – 1000, m/z 1000 – 1250 (plasma). The precursor selection windows were m/z 4 (m/z 1 overlap) for all acquisitions except the yeast m/z 1095 – 1250, for which m/z 5 (m/z 1 overlap) windows were used. For the plasma acquisitions, each acquisition cycle was split into two subcycles with the second subcycle having the isolation windows shifted by m/z 1.5.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed using DIA-NN 1.6.0. Yeast and plasma spectral libraries were created from the gas-phase fractionation acquisitions and subsequently used to analyse the respective short-gradient acquisitions. A human-maize compound spectral library was created from previously published libraries (PXD005573) and used to analyse the K562 acquisitions. The presence of maize peptides in the spectral library allowed to independently control the false discovery rate, assuming that all calls of these peptides in the human sample are false.

### Publication Abstract
We present an easy-to-use integrated software suite, DIA-NN, that exploits deep neural networks and new quantification and signal correction strategies for the processing of data-independent acquisition (DIA) proteomics experiments. DIA-NN improves the identification and quantification performance in conventional DIA proteomic applications, and is particularly beneficial for high-throughput applications, as it is fast and enables deep and confident proteome coverage when used in combination with fast chromatographic methods.

### Keywords
Plasma, Yeast, K562, Swath, High-throughput proteomics, Dia, Gas-phase fractionation

### Affiliations
Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin
The Francis Crick Institute; Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin

### Submitter
Vadim Demichev

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Ralser
The Francis Crick Institute; Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin


