### Accession
PXD016001

### Title
Predictive signatures of 19 antibiotics-induced Escherichia coli proteomes

### Description
Identifying the mode of action (MOA) of antibacterial compounds is the fundamental basis for the development of new antibiotics, and the challenge increases with the emerging secondary and indirect effect from antibiotic stress. Although various omics-based system biology approaches of defining antibiotic MOA are currently available, they still need improved throughput, accuracy and comprehensiveness. Using high resolution accurate mass (HR/AM) based proteomics, we present here a comprehensive reference map of proteomic signatures of Escherichia coli under antibiotics challenge. With state-of-the-art label-free approach, we quantified > 1,500 protein groups in response to 19 FDA-approved antibiotics. Applying several machine learning techniques, we derived a panel of 14 proteins that can be used to classify antibiotics into different MOAs with nearly 100% accuracy. Interestingly, these proteins tend to mediate diverse bacterial cellular and metabolic processes. Transcriptomic level profiling correlates well with changes in protein expression in discriminating different antibiotics. Such expression signatures will aid future studies in identifying MOA of unknown compounds and facilitate the discovery of novel antibiotics. In summary, our study offers a practical approach for effective and rapid proteomic profiling, establishes a high quality reference compendium of microbial proteome in response to a wide range of antibiotics exposure, and provides a previously undescribed group of proteins and RNAs that allows rapid antibiotic classification and MOA determination.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli celll pellets were processed using Suspension Trapping (STrap) method; LC-MS/MS was performed on Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-Q Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitation by MaxQuant (v1.4); downstream bioinformatics analyses were performed on Perseus software (v1.4).

### Publication Abstract
Identifying the mode of action (MOA) of antibacterial compounds is the fundamental basis for the development of new antibiotics, and the challenge increases with the emerging secondary and indirect effect from antibiotic stress. Although various omics-based system biology approaches are currently available, enhanced throughput, accuracy, and comprehensiveness are still desirable to better define antibiotic MOA. Using label-free quantitative proteomics, we present here a comprehensive reference map of proteomic signatures of <i>Escherichia coli</i> under challenge of 19 individual antibiotics. Applying several machine learning techniques, we derived a panel of 14 proteins that can be used to classify the antibiotics into different MOAs with nearly 100% accuracy. These proteins tend to mediate diverse bacterial cellular and metabolic processes. Transcriptomic level profiling correlates well with protein expression changes in discriminating different antibiotics. The reported expression signatures will aid future studies in identifying MOA of unknown compounds and facilitate the discovery of novel antibiotics.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics; label-free; suspension trapping (s-trap); escherichia coli; antibiotics; mode of action (moa)

### Affiliations
University of Delaware
J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, MD 20850

### Submitter
Yanbao Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Yanbao Yu
J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, MD 20850


