### Accession
PXD015231

### Title
Defining the interactome of CHD4 in fusion-positive rhabdomyosarcoma

### Description
The goal of this study was to explore in detail how the chromatin remodeler and NuRD subunit CHD4 controls the oncogenic signature of the tumor driver and fusion protein PAX3-FOXO1 in fusion-positive rhabdomyosarcoma. To this aim, we defined the interactome of CHD4 by LC-MS, identified its location in the genome by ChIP-seq, assessed its influence on DNA accessibility by DNase I hypersensitivity assays, and determined its target genes by RNA-seq.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing protocol: The nuclei of RH4 cells expressing either endogenous N- or C-terminus 3xFlag tagged CHD4 were collected and lysed in presence of benzonase. Then, CHD4 was pulled-down with an anti-flag antibody (clone M2, #F1804, Sigma Aldrich). Finally, immunoprecitates were eluted in 50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150mM NaCl and 200µg/ml of flag peptide. Three biological replicates were performed per condition and flag pull-downs in wildtype RH4 cells were used as negative controls. For MS analysis, samples were digested with trypsin and proteins were separated by reverse-phase column. Mass spectra were acquired with an Orbitrap Fusion operated in DDA mode.

### Data Protocol
First, the MS raw data were converted to mzXML profile files using ProteoWizard (version 3.0.7494). Regarding the analysis, the TPP (TPP v4.7 POLAR VORTEX rev 0, Build 201403121010) (Deutsch et al. 2010) with the search engines X! TANDEM Jackhammer TPP (2013.06.15.1 - LabKey, Insilicos, ISB), omssacl (version 2.1.9) (Geer et al. 2004), MyriMatch 2.1.138 (2012-12-1), and Comet (version 2016.01 rev. 3) (Eng, Jahan, and Hoopmann 2013) was used against a FASTA-file containing non-redundant canonical reviewed homo sapiens protein sequences obtained from uniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (downloaded on 2019.04.01). Briefly, we used the following search parameters: precursor mass error of 10 ppm, 0.4 fragment error, 2 miss-cleavages, carbamidomethylation on cysteins as static modification, and a protein FDR of 1 % (controlled with prot-mayu). The resulting protein matrix was pre-filtered and submitted to probabilistic scoring with SAINTexpress to identify significant interaction partners.

### Publication Abstract
The NuRD complex subunit CHD4 is essential for fusion-positive rhabdomyosarcoma (FP-RMS) survival, but the mechanisms underlying this dependency are not understood. Here, a NuRD-specific CRISPR screen demonstrates that FP-RMS is particularly sensitive to CHD4 amongst the NuRD members. Mechanistically, NuRD complex containing CHD4 localizes to super-enhancers where CHD4 generates a chromatin architecture permissive for the binding of the tumor driver and fusion protein PAX3-FOXO1, allowing downstream transcription of its oncogenic program. Moreover, CHD4 depletion removes HDAC2 from the chromatin, leading to an increase and spread of histone acetylation, and prevents the positioning of RNA Polymerase 2 at promoters impeding transcription initiation. Strikingly, analysis of genome-wide cancer dependency databases identifies CHD4 as a general cancer vulnerability. Our findings describe CHD4, a classically defined repressor, as positive regulator of transcription and super-enhancer accessibility as well as establish this remodeler as an unexpected broad tumor susceptibility and promising drug target for cancer therapy.

### Keywords
Chd4, Nurd, Alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma, Rh4

### Affiliations
Department of Oncology, Children’s Hospital Zurich, Steinwiesstrasse 75, 8032 Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Fabian Frommelt

### Lab Head
Dr Beat W. Schäfer
Department of Oncology, Children’s Hospital Zurich, Steinwiesstrasse 75, 8032 Zurich, Switzerland


