### Accession
PXD042543

### Title
Screening of exosome-derived proteins and their potential as biomarkers to diagnostic and prognostic for pancreatic cancer

### Description
This study aimed to investigate the proteomic landscape of plasma exosomes from patients diagnosed with PDAC and IPMN, compared to healthy controls (CT), in order to identify potential biomarkers with prognostic and diagnostic values. Additionally, the study aimed to understand the functional role of the exosome's proteome in pancreatic neoplasia. We isolated the plasma exosomes and analyzed its proteome by nano electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS), and performed downstream statistical and bioinformatics analysis, using the Perseus (v. 6.2.2), MSigDB (v. 2023.1), STRING (v. 11.5), and NCG (v. 7.1) databases. A total of 319 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified among the exosome samples, but our analyses focused on the 135 proteins that were expressed in at least 70% of each group's samples to ensure their representative proteomes. Comparing PDAC and IPMN exosome proteomes to controls, we identified 24 and 33 differentially expressed proteins, respectively. Some of the most upregulated proteins in PDAC exosomes were CPN1, IGHV2-26, ITIH3, and CLU, while some of the most downregulated were C4BPB, APOB, CFH, and C1QB. In IPMN exosomes, KLKB1, LBP, CFB, and SERPINA1 were the most upregulated proteins while C5, APOD, C3, and C1QA were downregulated. In general, the protein-protein networks and enrichment analyses revealed interesting interaction clusters and pathways related to cancer development, such as the immune system, complement cascade, clotting-related and vesicle-mediated processes, regulation of insulin-like growth factor transport, platelet activation signaling, and G-protein signaling. Our analyses also highlighted candidate cancer drivers, including the upregulated IGLL, LBP, SERPINA1, SERPINA4, SERPING1, and the downregulated APOB, and C3, which were identified in these pathways and may have potential roles in pancreatic tumorigenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Exosome isolation was performed by the commercial kit miRCURY® Exosome Serum/Plasma Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) following the manufacturer instructions for an initial volume of 0.6 mL of plasma. After extraction of exosomes from plasma, the protein content of 34 samples was quantified by tryptophan fluorescence (Wiśniewski JR, Gaugaz FZ. Fast and sensitive total protein and Peptide assays for proteomic analysis, then 20 ug of each sample was separated by SDS-PAGE 13% (v/v), followed by a standardized In-Gel digestion protocol. Briefly, each lane was cut into small cubes and the proteins inside were reduced with 10 mM ditiothreitol and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide before digestion with 12.5 ng/uL trypsin sequencing grade (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) for 16-18 hours at 37 ºC. The following day peptides were eluted from the gel twice with 400 uL of  40% acetonitrile (ACN), 3% TFA, and twice with 400uL of 100% ACN, then the collected fractions were dried using Speed Vac (Thermo Scientific). The dried samples were resuspended in 100 uL of 0.1% formic acid and proceeded to desalination with an adapted protocol of stop and go extraction tips. After desalination, the eluted samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and the concentration of peptides was determined by absorbance (280 nm) in nanodrop (Thermo Fisher), then the peptide concentration of the samples was adjusted to 0.1 ug/uL prior to NanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The digested samples (0.5 micrograms) were separated by online nanoscale capillary liquid chromatography and analyzed by nano electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC MS/MS) in duplicate injection. The chromatography was performed on a Ultimate 3000 nanoLC (Thermo Scientific) followed by nanoelectrospray ionization, MS and MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific). The chromatographic conditions were as follows: mobile phase A 0.1% formic acid, mobile phase B 0.1% formic acid, 95% acetonitrile. Flow of 250 nL/min, with a 90 min non-linear (Xcalibur type 6 curve) gradient from 5 to 40% B. The separation was carried out on an in-house C18 packed emitter with 15 cm length, 75 μm Internal diameter, packed with 3,0 μm C18 particles (Dr. Maisch - ReproSil-Pur). MS and MS/MS scan parameters were as follows: MS1 acquisition in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 120,000, m/z window of 300 to 1500, positive profile mode with maximum injection time of 50 ms. MS2 analysis was performed in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode of ions with 2-7 charges, 2 s per cycle where the most intense ions were subjected to high energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy, followed by acquisition in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 15,000 in centroid mode. Dynamic exclusion list of 60 s was applied as well as the internal mass calibration for the MS1 scans. The nESI voltage was 2.3 kV and the ion transfer capillary temperature was 175 ºC.

### Data Protocol
The spectra identification was carried out in MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 with the following settings: specific search, trypsin as protease, carbamidomethylation on cysteine as fixed modification, oxidation on methionine and acetylation on protein N-terminal as variable modifications, Homo sapiens reference database downloaded from Uniprot on January 11, 2021 containing 75,777 entries used as database, the reverse database used as decoy for FDR estimation, 1% FDR for both PSM and protein assignment was accepted, match between runs and LFQ intensity enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exosome, Pancreatic cancer, Proteomics, Biomarkers, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Applied Science and Technology in Health, Carlos Chagas Institute, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (Fiocruz),Curitiba, Brazil
Fiocruz

### Submitter
Michel Batista

### Lab Head
Dr Mateus Nobrega Aoki
Laboratory for Applied Science and Technology in Health, Carlos Chagas Institute, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (Fiocruz),Curitiba, Brazil


