### Accession
PXD028434

### Title
Perturbation of JAK-STAT signaling in macrophages by arachidonic acid with implications for the ovarian cancer microenvironment

### Description
Progression and relapse-free survival of ovarian carcinoma are associated with the abundance of immunosuppressed CD163highCD206high tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) and high levels of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), in particular arachidonic acid (AA), in the tumor microenvironment.  In the present study, we have investigated whether both associations are functionally linked. Methods: The effect of PUFAs on cytokine-mediated pro-inflammatory signal transduction was studied in primary monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs) by transcriptomics, bioinformatics, phosphoprotein analysis of signal transduction proteins and MS-based proteomics of lipid rafts. Results: Pathway analysis of transcriptional profiles revealed that high CD163 and CD206/MRC1 expression in TAMs is strongly associated with an inhibition of cytokine-triggered signal transduction. This is mirrored by an impairment of the transcriptional response to interferon-beta (IFNbeta), IFNgamma and IL-6 in monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs) by AA. This AA-mediated inhibition of pro-inflammatory signaling is caused by dysfunctions of the cognate receptors, as indicated by the inhibition by PUFAs of JAK1, JAK2, STAT1 and STAT3 phosphorylation, with the strongest inhibitory effects exerted by AA and its non-metabolizable analog ETYA. AA/ETYA treatment of MDMs results in altered composition of lipid rafts, including reduced amounts of the interferon receptor IFNAR1, STAT1 and other immune-regulatory proteins. The AA-mediated inhibition of IFN-triggered STAT1 phosphorylation was reversed by water-soluble cholesterol, known to prevent the perturbation of lipid raft structure by PUFAs.   Conclusion: Our data suggest that AA, and to a lesser degree other PUFAs, impair pro-inflammatory signaling in macrophages, at least in part by altering the structure of lipid rafts, and thereby contribute to the reeducation of tumor-associated macrophages. Our findings also suggest that the pharmacologic restoration of lipid raft functions in TAM may be a promising strategy for the development of new therapeutic approaches.

### Sample Protocol
MDMs were cultured as described previously. Isolation of lipid rafts was carried out according to a previously described method (PMID: 32770506). Shortly, 8x107 cells (four 100 mm diches) were treated with 50 µM AA, ETYA or solvent for 1 hr, rinsed three times with ice cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and harvested by gentle scraping in 1.4 ml ice-cold membrane raft isolation buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1% Triton X-100 and protease inhibitor). Cells were incubated for 1 hr on ice followed by 15 strokes in a Dounce homogenizer. Nuclei and unbroken cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 1000 rpm for 8 min and 1 ml of the supernatant was mixed with 1 ml of 85% sucrose (w/v), transferred to Ultra-Clear centrifuge tubes (#344059; Beckmann), sequentially overlayed with 5 ml of 35% sucrose (w/v) and 3.5 ml of 5% sucrose (w/v). and centrifuged at 38,000 rpm (SW41 Ti; Beckman Coulter) for 18 hrs at 4 C. Eleven 1-ml fractions from the top were collected from each gradient. Thirty microliters of each fraction were analyzed by immunoblotting.  Fraction #4 was used for proteomic analysis. Proteomic analysys of lipid raft samples in biological pentuplicate was performed by GeLC/MS2 (in gel digest/liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry) as described (PMID: 29141914).

### Data Protocol
Peptide/spectrum matching as well as label free quantification was performed using the MaxQuant suite of algorithms (v. 1,6,17,0; PMIDs: 19029910, 21254760, 24942700) against the human uniprot database (PMID: 30395287; canonical and isoforms; 194237 entries; downloaded 2021/02/08). Instrument parameters were extracted and summarized using MARMoSET (PMID: 31097673) and along with the relevant MaxQuant configuration are included in Table LCMS-Parameters.xlsx. Downstream data processing was performed using the R and limma (PMID: 25605792) based package autonomics (https://bioconductor.org/packages/autonomics). Data were filtered for completeness,  logarithmized, quantile normalized and consistently missing non-detects imputed. limma based linear modeling for detection of differentially detected protein features used replicates as an additional covariate.

### Publication Abstract
Survival of ovarian carcinoma is associated with the abundance of immunosuppressed CD163<sup>high</sup> CD206<sup>high</sup> tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) and high levels of arachidonic acid (AA) in the tumor microenvironment. Here, we show that both associations are functionally linked. Transcriptional profiling revealed that high CD163 and CD206/MRC1 expression in TAMs is strongly associated with an inhibition of cytokine-triggered signaling, mirrored by an impaired transcriptional response to interferons and IL-6 in monocyte-derived macrophages by AA. This inhibition of pro-inflammatory signaling is caused by dysfunctions of the cognate receptors, indicated by the inhibition of JAK1, JAK2, STAT1, and STAT3 phosphorylation, and by the displacement of the interferon receptor IFNAR1, STAT1 and other immune-regulatory proteins from lipid rafts. AA exposure led to a dramatic accumulation of free AA in lipid rafts, which appears to be mechanistically crucial, as the inhibition of its incorporation into phospholipids did not affect the AA-mediated interference with STAT1 phosphorylation. Inhibition of interferon-triggered STAT1 phosphorylation by AA was reversed by water-soluble cholesterol, known to prevent the perturbation of lipid raft structure by AA. These findings suggest that the pharmacologic restoration of lipid raft functions in TAMs may contribute to the development new therapeutic approaches.

### Keywords
Ovarian cancer; arachidonic acid; monocyte-derived macrophages; tumor associated macrophages;  macrophages; jak/stat; lipid rafts

### Affiliations
Center for Tumor Biology and Immunology (ZTI), Philipps University, Hans-Meerwein-Strasse 3, 35043 Marburg, Germany
Institute of Translational Proteomics, Faculty of Medicine, Philipps-Universität Marburg

### Submitter
Johannes Graumann

### Lab Head
Dr Rolf Müller
Center for Tumor Biology and Immunology (ZTI), Philipps University, Hans-Meerwein-Strasse 3, 35043 Marburg, Germany


