### Accession
PXD025995

### Title
Digestion of TSN2 and TSN89 synthetic peptides by proteasomes

### Description
Proteasomes are large multi-subunit enzymes that act as the main producers of antigenic peptides presented at the cell surface to CD8+ T cells. They can simply cut proteins or ligate non-contiguous peptide fragments thereby generating novel sequences, i.e. spliced peptides via a process called proteasome-catalysed peptide splicing (PCPS). In order to benchmark methods for spliced peptide identification, we here perform in vitro digestions of TSN2 and TSN89 synthetic polypeptide substrates by K562-derived 20S proteasome followed by LC-MS/MS measurements using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Michele Mishto, Head of the research group Molecular Immunology at King’s College London and the Francis Crick Institute, London (UK). Email: michele.mishto@kcl.ac.uk

### Sample Protocol
All peptides were synthesized using Fmoc solid phase chemistry. 20S proteasomes were purified from K562 cell line, as described elsewhere. The synthetic polypeptides TSN2 [VSRQLRTKAWNRQLYPEWTEAQR] and TSN89 [RTKAWNRQLYPEW] (final concentration of 40 M) were digested for different time points (0, 4, 20 h) at 37°C by either 0.75 g (TSN2) or 1.5 g (TSN89) 20S proteasomes in 40 l TMD buffer (20 mM Tris/KOH-pH 7.2, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT). In vitro digestions were measured through Orbitrap Fusion Lumos at Proteomics Core Facility (KCL).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to peak list files in mascot generic format (mgf) using Msconvert software (ProteoWizard). Peptides were identified using the Mascot version 2.7.01 (Matrix Science) search engine. Data was searched against custom databases for each synthetic substrate. The following mass tolerances were set for MS and MS2 for Orbitrap Fusion Lumos: 5 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. The post-translational modifications that were set include NQ deamidation and M oxidation as variable modifications

### Publication Abstract
Noncanonical epitopes presented by Human Leucocyte Antigen class I (HLA-I) complexes to CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells attracted the spotlight in the research of novel immunotherapies against cancer, infection and autoimmunity. Proteasomes, which are the main producers of HLA-I-bound antigenic peptides, can catalyze both peptide hydrolysis and peptide splicing. The prediction of proteasome-generated spliced peptides is an objective that still requires a reliable (and large) database of non-spliced and spliced peptides produced by these proteases. Here, we present an extended database of proteasome-generated spliced and non-spliced peptides, which was obtained by analyzing in vitro digestions of 80 unique synthetic polypeptide substrates, measured by different mass spectrometers. Peptides were identified through invitroSPI method, which was validated through in silico and in vitro strategies. The peptide product database contains 16,631 unique peptide products (5,493 non-spliced, 6,453 cis-spliced and 4,685 trans-spliced peptide products), and a substrate sequence variety that is a valuable source for predictors of proteasome-catalyzed peptide hydrolysis and splicing. Potential artefacts and skewed results due to different identification and analysis strategies are discussed.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Synthetic peptides, Digestion, Proteasome

### Affiliations
King's College London
Head of research group Quantitative and Systems Biology; Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences; Goettingen; Germany

### Submitter
Michele Mishto

### Lab Head
Dr Juliane Liepe
Head of research group Quantitative and Systems Biology; Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences; Goettingen; Germany


