### Accession
PXD003625

### Title
A differential proteomics pipeline for unsequenced species

### Description
Shotgun proteomics experiments often take the form of a differential analysis, where two or more samples are compared against each other. The objective is to identify proteins that are either unique to a specific sample or a set of samples (qualitative differential proteomics), or that are significantly differentially expressed in one or more samples (quantitative differential proteomics). However, the success depends on the availability of a reliable protein sequence database for each sample. In order to perform such an analysis in the absence of a database, we here propose a novel, generic pipeline comprising a modified spectral similarity score derived from database search algorithms that compares samples at the spectrum level to detect unique spectra. We applied our pipeline to compare the two parasitic tapeworms: Taenia solium and Taenia hydatigena, of which only the former poses a threat to humans. Furthermore, because the genome of Taenia solium recently became available, we were able to prove the effectiveness and reliability of our pipeline a posteriori

### Sample Protocol
Taenia data sets were processed as following: T. solium metacestode collection from a naturally infected pig and 24h in vitro excretion/secretion protein (ESP) production were done in Zambia as described by Victor and coworkers [1]. T. hydatigena metacestodes of various sizes (n = 14) were collected from the omentum and liver of naturally infected Zambian goats and carefully separated from the host tissue. ESPs were prepared as described for T. solium, except that the number of cysts per culture dish was adapted according to the size of the cysts. Protein concentration of the ESPs was determined with a Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Rockford, IL). Species confirmation of the Taenia metacestodes was done with a polymerase chain reaction assay followed by enzymatic digestion (PCR-RFLP) as previously described28. T. solium and T. hydatigena ESP aliquots (40 μg) were precipitated in four volumes of ice-cold acetone and pellets were re-suspended in NuPAGE Sample Reducing Agent (10x) and NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (4x). Protein separation was done on a 4-12% NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris gel. Gels were stained overnight with the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (all reagents from Invitrogen). In-gel tryptic digestion, liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry were performed as described previously in detail [1].  Briefly, each gel lane was cut in 48 identical slices. All slices were transferred to a 96-well plate (one slice/well) where the cysteines were reduced with DTT. The resulting cysteines were alkylated with the addition of iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C with sequencing grade porcine trypsin. Peptides were collected from each well and analyzed on an amaZon ETD ion trap mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) equipped with an Apollo II ESI source coupled on-line with a NanoLC-Ultra 2D plus LC (Eksigent, Dublin, CA, USA).  E coli data set was processed as described by Mostovenko and coworkers [2] [1] Victor, B.; Kanobana, K.; Gabriël, S.; Polman, K.; Deckers, N.; Dorny, P.; Deelder, A. M.; Palmblad, M. Proteomic analysis of Taenia solium metacestode excretion-secretion proteins. Proteomics 2012, 12 (11), 1860–1869 [2] Mostovenko, E.; Hassan, C.; Rattke, J.; Deelder, A. M.; van Veelen, P. A.; Palmblad, M. Comparison of peptide and protein fractionation methods in proteomics. EuPA Open Proteomics 2013, 1, 30–37

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data were converted to mzXML formats using the Bruker compassXport tool (version 3.0.4) and then to MGF formats using msconvert (ProteoWizard, version 3.0.4388) with the assumption that all spectra are either doubly or triply charged. Search settings to perform contaminant, host protein and six reading frame translated database search were as following: The searches were performed against three protein sequence databases: the T. solium host organism database Sus scrofa (Ensembl, http://www.ensembl.org, assembly: Sscrofa10.2; 25,883 protein sequences; downloaded on 18 December 2012) for T. solium spectra, the T. hydatigena host organism database Capra hircus (UniProtKB, http://www.uniprot.org; filtered by taxonomy identifier 9925; 1,841 protein sequences; downloaded on 21 February 2013) for T. hydatigena spectra, and the common contaminant database (cRAP) (version 1.0 from the Global Proteome Machine, http://www.thegpm.org; 115 protein sequences; downloaded on 27 February 2013) for all data sets. In addition to these three protein databases, a proteogenomics search was also performed on the draft genome of T. solium in order to validate our findings (draft genome from the National Autonomous University of Mexico, UNAM, Mexico, with 11,237 sequences created on 17 August 2012). The genome sequence was translated in all six reading frames (6RF tr) with the compomics-utilities library; a pseudo protein sequence was split off whenever a stop codon was encountered. Entries shorter than five amino acids was subsequently discarded from the resulting translated protein database by DBToolKit (version 4.2.2), yielding a total of 7,962,304 translated pseudo protein sequences.  Database searches and peptide identification post-processing steps were carried out with SearchGUI and PeptideShaker. The precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 0.9 Da and 0.5 Da, respectively. The digestion enzyme was set to trypsin allowing one missed cleavage. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification, while pyro-glutamate formation for amino-terminal glutamine and oxidation of methionine were selected as variable modifications. SearchGUI was configured to create a concatenated target-decoy version of the database, and to employ both X!Tandem and OMSSA as search engines. The SearchGUI output files were imported, merged and analyzed by PeptideShaker with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% at the peptide-to-spectrum-match (PSM) level.    E coli data set was processed as following The E. coli data set to train the spectrum quality tool (SpecQual) represents high-quality (HQ) and low-quality (LQ) MS/MS spectra. The HQ training data set consists of 2,273 previously identified E. coli MS/MS spectra with p>=0.9995 whereas the LQ training data set consists of 6,663 non-identified E. coli MS/MS spectra with p<=0.05 according to PeptideProphet.

### Publication Abstract
Shotgun proteomics experiments often take the form of a differential analysis, where two or more samples are compared against each other. The objective is to identify proteins that are either unique to a specific sample or a set of samples (qualitative differential proteomics), or that are significantly differentially expressed in one or more samples (quantitative differential proteomics). However, the success depends on the availability of a reliable protein sequence database for each sample. To perform such an analysis in the absence of a database, we here propose a novel, generic pipeline comprising an adapted spectral similarity score derived from database search algorithms that compares samples at the spectrum level to detect unique spectra. We applied our pipeline to compare two parasitic tapeworms: Taenia solium and Taenia hydatigena, of which only the former poses a threat to humans. Furthermore, because the genome of T. solium recently became available, we were able to prove the effectiveness and reliability of our pipeline a posteriori.

### Keywords
Escherichia coli, Taenia hydatigena, Taenia solium

### Affiliations
VIB-Ghent University
UGent-VIB

### Submitter
Sule Yilmaz

### Lab Head
Dr Lennart Martens
VIB-Ghent University


