### Accession
PXD006503

### Title
NOVEL ROLE OF FATTY ACID SYNTHASE IN ANGIOGENESIS THROUGH MODULATION OF LYSINE MALONYLATION OF MTOR

### Description
The role of fatty acid synthesis (FAS) in endothelial cells (ECs) remains incompletely characterized. In this project, we found that silencing of fatty acid synthase (FASN) impedes vessel sprouting by reducing EC proliferation. Moreover, loss of FASN in ECs impaired angiogenesis in vivo, and FASN blockade reduced pathological ocular neovascularization. FASN silencing increased malonyl-CoA levels and immunoblotting of EC lysates for malonylated lysine residues (Kmal) revealed that this led to increased levels of protein malonylation. To identify the nature of some of the malonylated proteins we performed a proteomics screen using an anti-Kmal antibody to enrich Kmal peptides from a tryptic digest of EC lysates, and then analyzed Kmal peptides by LC-MS/MS. In proteomics analysis, we identified malonylation of mTOR at lysine 1218, a poorly characterized post-translational modification. Malonylation of mTOR did not compromise the mTORC1 complex stability or lysosomal membrane localization, but reduced the kinase activity of the complex.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in 50 mM TEAB ph 8, protease inhibitors, and 10mM Nicotinamide, followed by sonication and centrifugation. Reduction was done with 5mM DTT at 50°C for 30 min, and afterwards alkylated using 15 mM of iodoacetamide, at room temperature for 30 min in darkness. Digestion to peptides was carried out using trypsin (Promega), keeping an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1/50 (w/w). The digestion was performed at 37C with gentle shaking overnight and stopped by boiling at 95°C for 10 min. For desalting the tryptic peptides, SPE C18 cartridges (Waters) were used. Prior to loading the samples, the cartridges were activated by passing 3ml of Conditioning /Elution Solution ((70% Acetonitrile/Water with 0.1% TFA (v/v/v)) through the packing bed. The cartridges were then equilibrated by passing 6ml of Equilibration /Loading solution (0.1% TFA in Water (v/v)) through the packing bed. The pH of each tryptic peptide sample was adjusted to 3 with formic acid, and subsequently loaded in the SPE cartridges (up to 1 ml) by passing slowly (no faster than 1 drop/second) into the cartridge packing. Loading was completed by slowly passing 1ml of Equilibration/Load solution. Each sample was then washed by passing 6ml Desalting Solution (2% Acetonitrile/Water with 0.1% TFA (v/v/v)) through the packing bed. Finally, each sample was eluted by slowly (less than 1 drop/second) passing 1ml of Conditioning /Elution Solution through the cartridge bed. The eluates were dried in a Speed-Vac overnight, and resuspended in NETN buffer (50mM Tris, 100mM NaCl, lmM EDTA, 0,5 % NP40, pH 8). The resuspended peptides were immunoprecipitated using Protein A dynabeads conjugated to Anti-Pan Malonyl Lysine (Kmal) (PTM Biolabs) antibody. The peptides were incubated with the dynabeads for 4 hours at 4C, washed twice in NETN buffer, and once in NETN buffer without NP40. Finally, the peptides were eluted in 3 fractions in 0,1% TFA, and dried overnight in a Speedvac.  The dried peptide mixtures were redissolved in 20 µl 0.1% TFA in water/ acetonitrile, 2/98 (v/v)). 2.5 µl was loaded on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to perform an LC-MS/MS analysis. The peptides were first loaded onto a trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and after flushing from the trapping column, peptides were loaded on an analytical column (made in-house, 75 μm I.D. × 150 mm, 3 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch) packed in the needle (PicoFrit SELF/P PicoTip emitter, PF360-75-15-N-5, New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA). Peptides were loaded with loading solvent and separated with a linear gradient from 98% solvent A’ (0.1% formic acid in water) to 55% solvent B′ (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile, 20/80 (v/v)) in 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, followed by a 9 min wash reaching 99% solvent B’ ending with an equilibration of 9 min with 98% solvent A’.   The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 10 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was 3.5 kV, and the capillary temperature was 275°C. One MS1 scan (m/z 400−2,000, AGC target 3 × 106  ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms), acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), was followed by up to 10 tandem MS scans (resolution 17,500 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 5 × 104  ions, maximum ion injection time 60 ms, isolation window 2 m/z, fixed first mass 140 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, underfill ratio 2%, intensity threshold 1.7xE4,  exclusion of unassigned, 1, 5-8, >8 positively charged precursors,  peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 50 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 25% Normalized Collision Energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.120025 Da was used as internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
Mascot Generic Files were created using Distiller software (version 2.5.1.0 Matrix Science, www.matrixscience.com/Distiller). Next, these peak lists were searched with the Mascot search engine using the Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science) against the SwissProt database restricted to human proteins (release-2015_04, 20273 entries). Variable modifications were set to pyro-glutamate formation of amino terminal glutamine, oxidation of methionine and malonylation of lysine embedding a neutral loss scoring of CO2. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Mass tolerance on MS was set to 10ppm (with Mascot’s C13 option set to 1), MS/MS tolerance at 20 mmu. The peptide charge was set to 1+,2+,3+ and instrument setting was put on ESI-QUAD. Enzyme was set to trypsin/P, allowing 2 missed cleavages. Only peptides that were ranked one and scored above the threshold score, set at 99% confidence, were withheld.

### Publication Abstract
The role of fatty acid synthesis in endothelial cells (ECs) remains incompletely characterized. We report that fatty acid synthase knockdown (FASN<sup>KD</sup>) in ECs impedes vessel sprouting by reducing proliferation. Endothelial loss of FASN impaired angiogenesis in&#xa0;vivo, while FASN blockade reduced pathological ocular neovascularization, at &gt;10-fold lower doses than used for anti-cancer treatment. Impaired angiogenesis was not due to energy stress, redox imbalance, or palmitate depletion. Rather, FASN<sup>KD</sup> elevated malonyl-CoA levels, causing malonylation (a post-translational modification) of mTOR at lysine 1218 (K1218). mTOR K-1218 malonylation impaired mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) kinase activity, thereby reducing phosphorylation of downstream targets (p70S6K/4EBP1). Silencing acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1 (an enzyme producing malonyl-CoA) normalized malonyl-CoA levels and reactivated mTOR in FASN<sup>KD</sup> ECs. Mutagenesis unveiled the importance of mTOR K1218 malonylation for angiogenesis. This study unveils a novel role of FASN in metabolite signaling that contributes to explaining the anti-angiogenic effect of FASN blockade.

### Keywords
Endothelial cell metabolism, Protein malonylation, Fatty acid synthesis

### Affiliations
(1) Laboratory of Angiogenesis and Vascular Metabolism, Vesalius Research Center, Department of Oncology, University of Leuven, Leuven, B-3000, Belgium; (2) Laboratory of Angiogenesis and Vascular Metabolism, Vesalius Research Center, VIB, Leuven, B-3000, Belgium
Ghent University - VIB

### Submitter
Evy Timmerman

### Lab Head
Dr Carmeliet Peter
(1) Laboratory of Angiogenesis and Vascular Metabolism, Vesalius Research Center, Department of Oncology, University of Leuven, Leuven, B-3000, Belgium; (2) Laboratory of Angiogenesis and Vascular Metabolism, Vesalius Research Center, VIB, Leuven, B-3000, Belgium


