### Accession
PXD039661

### Title
Isolation, enrichment and identification of p62 condensates components by GFP-Trap Agarose Beads pulldown followed by Label Free and Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) mass spectrometry analysis from Hap1 cells

### Description
Selective autophagy contributes to the removal of harmful proteins from the cytoplasm. This cargo material is selected by cargo receptors such as p62/SQSTM1 and finally degraded. However, the molecular composition of the p62 condensates and therefore the nature of the cargo delivered by them is incompletely understood. In order to obtain insights into their composition, we have developed a method to isolate these condensates followed by TMT and Label Free mass spectrometry-based identification of their protein content.

### Sample Protocol
The sample processing protocol includes several steps performed in treated and untreated Hap1 STG-p62 and Hap1 p62 KO cell lines. Label free and TMT mass spectrometry analysis. The full version of the protocol can be retrieved from (insert biorxiv link).

### Data Protocol
MS raw data of label-free samples were analyzed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.17.0) and the Uniprot human reference proteome (version 2021.03, www.uniprot.org), as well as the target sequence and a database of the most common contaminants. The search was performed with full trypsin specificity and a maximum of two missed cleavages at a protein and peptide spectrum match false discovery rate of 1%. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine, and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. For label-free quantification the “match between runs” feature and the LFQ function were activated - all other parameters were left at default. MaxQuant output tables were further processed using Cassiopeia_LFQ in R (https://github.com/moritzmadern/Cassiopeia_LFQ ). Contaminant proteins, protein groups identified only by one peptide, and protein groups with less than two quantitative values in one experimental group were removed for further analysis. Missing values were replaced by randomly drawing data points from a normal distribution model on the whole dataset (data mean shifted by -1.8 standard deviations, a width of the distribution of 0.3 standard deviations). Differences between groups were statistically evaluated using the LIMMA package at 5% FDR (Benjamini-Hochberg).  Mass spectrometry raw data of TMT samples were analyzed using MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.7) and the Uniprot human reference proteome (version 2020.01)(www.uniprot.org) as well as a database of the most common contaminant. The search was performed with TMT6plex, full trypsin specificity and a maximum of two missed cleavages at a protein and peptide spectrum match false discovery rate of 1%. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine, and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Reporter ion isotopic distributions were used to correct for impurities of the TMT6-plex labels (Lot: ND169074A). All other parameters were left at default. MaxQuant output tables were further processed in Perseus (version 1.6.2.1, https://www.maxquant.org/perseus/). Contaminant proteins, reversed sequences, and only ID by site were removed. Protein groups were further filtered for PIF > 0.75. Corrected intensities were divided by total summed intensity for normalization, scaled back with column sum of max. intensity channel. After log-transformation differences between groups were statistically evaluated using the LIMMA package at 5% FDR (Benjamini-Hochberg).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Autophagy; cargo receptor; sqstm1; translation

### Affiliations
Max Perutz Labs, University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter, Dr Bohr-Gasse 9/3,
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Laboratories Support GmbH

### Submitter
WeiQiang Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Sascha Martens
Max Perutz Labs, University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter, Dr Bohr-Gasse 9/3,


