### Accession
PXD008993

### Title
Acrylamide acute neurotoxicity in adult zebrafish

### Description
Acute exposure to acrylamide (ACR), a type-2 alkene, may lead to a ataxia, skeletal muscles weakness and numbness of the extremities in exposed human and laboratory animals. Recently, a zebrafish model for ACR neurotoxicity mimicking most of the pathophysiological processes described in mammalian models, was generated in 8 days post-fertilization larvae. In order to better understand the predictive value of the zebrafish larvae model of acute ACR neurotoxicity, in the present manuscript the ACR acute neurotoxicity has been characterized in the brain of adult zebrafish, and the results compared with those obtained with the whole-larvae. Although qualitative and quantitative analysis of the data shows important differences in the ACR effects between the adult brain and the whole-larvae, the overall effects of ACR in adult zebrafish, including a significant decrease in locomotor activity, altered expression of transcriptional markers of proteins involved in synaptic vesicle cycle, presence of ACR-adducts on cysteine residues of some synaptic proteins, and changes in the profile of some neurotransmitter systems, are similar to those described in the larvae. Thus, these results support the suitability of the zebrafish ACR acute neurotoxicity recently developed in larvae for screening of molecules with therapeutic value to treat this toxic neuropathy.

### Sample Protocol
Five pools of brains from control and acrylamide exposed fish were proteolyzed and analysed by capillary chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (μLC-MS/MS)using Q Exactive plus (Thermo)

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data was analyzed using the MaxQuant software 1.5.2.8 (www.maxquant.org)(Cox and Mann 2008) fitted with the Andromeda search engine searching against the Danio rerio Uniprot database

### Publication Abstract
Acute exposure to acrylamide (ACR), a type-2 alkene, may lead to a ataxia, skeletal muscles weakness and numbness of the extremities in human and laboratory animals. In the present manuscript, ACR acute neurotoxicity has been characterized in adult zebrafish, a vertebrate model increasingly used in human neuropharmacology and toxicology research. At behavioral level, ACR-treated animals exhibited "depression-like" phenotype comorbid with anxiety behavior. At transcriptional level, ACR induced down-regulation of regeneration-associated genes and up-regulation of oligodendrocytes and reactive astrocytes markers, altering also the expression of genes involved in the presynaptic vesicle cycling. ACR induced also significant changes in zebrafish brain proteome and formed adducts with selected cysteine residues of specific proteins, some of them essential for the presynaptic function. Finally, the metabolomics analysis shows a depletion in the monoamine neurotransmitters, consistent with the comorbid depression and anxiety disorder, in the brain of the exposed fish.

### Keywords
Neurotoxicity, Zebrafish, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
2IDAEA-CSIC, Jordi Girona 18, 08034, Barcelona, Spain
Technion

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Demetrio Raldúa
2IDAEA-CSIC, Jordi Girona 18, 08034, Barcelona, Spain


