### Accession
PXD018911

### Title
The domesticated transposase ALP2 mediates formation of a novel Polycomb protein complex by direct interaction with MSI1, a core subunit of Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2)

### Description
A large fraction of plant genomes is composed of transposable elements (TE), which provide a potential source of novel genes through “domestication” – the process whereby the proteins encoded by TE diverge in sequence, lose their ability to catalyse transposition and instead acquire novel functions for their hosts.  In Arabidopsis, ANTAGONIST OF LIKE HETEROCHROMATIN PROTEIN 1 (ALP1) arose by domestication of the nuclease component of Harbinger class TE and acquired a new function as a component of POLYCOMB REPRESSIVE COMPLEX 2 (PRC2), a histone H3K27me3 methyltransferase involved in regulation of host genes and in some cases TE.  It was not clear how ALP1 associated with PRC2, nor what the functional consequence was.  Here, we identify ALP2 genetically as a suppressor of  Polycomb-group (PcG) mutant phenotypes and show that it arose from the second, DNA binding component of Harbinger transposases.  Molecular analysis of PcG compromised backgrounds reveals that ALP genes oppose silencing and H3K27me3 deposition at key PcG target genes.  Proteomic analysis reveals that ALP1 and ALP2 are components of a variant PRC2 complex that contains the four core components but lacks plant-specific accessory components such as the H3K27me3 reader LIKE HETEROCHROMATION PROTEIN 1 (LHP1).  We show that the N-terminus of ALP2 interacts directly with ALP1, whereas the C-terminus of ALP2 interacts with MULTICOPY SUPPRESSOR OF IRA1 (MSI1), a core component of PRC2.  Proteomic analysis reveals that in alp2 mutant backgrounds ALP1 protein no longer associates with PRC2, consistent with a role for ALP2 in recruitment of ALP1.  We suggest that the propensity of Harbinger TE to insert in gene-rich regions of the genome, together with the modular two component nature of their transposases, has predisposed them for domestication and incorporation into chromatin modifying complexes.

### Sample Protocol
IPs were performed using 1-3g of inflorescence tissue harvested from plants grown in cabinets at 18oC under 23 hours light: 1 hour dark cycles.  Proteins were extracted in two volumes of buffer ((10mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCL, 0.5% Igepal, 1% Triton) containing 1X protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and 0.1mM PMSF or 1mM Pefabloc (Roche).  The IP was performed as described earlier [18] using GFP-trap agarose beads (Chromotek).  Proteins were separated by NuPAGE Novex 4-12% Bis-Tris gel, (Life Technologies, UK), in NuPAGE buffer (MES) (Life Technologies, UK) and visualised using InstantBlueTM stain (Sigma Aldrich, UK). The stained gel bands were excised and de-stained with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich, UK) and 100% (v/v) acetonitrile (Sigma Aldrich, UK) and proteins were digested with trypsin, as previously described (Shevchenko et al. 1996). Briefly, proteins were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich, UK) for 30 min at 37°C and alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, UK) for 20 min at ambient temperature in the dark. They were then digested overnight at 37°C with 12.5 ng μL-1 trypsin (Pierce, UK).  Following digestion, samples were diluted with equal volume of 0.1% TFA and spun onto StageTips as described by [52].  Peptides were eluted in 40 μL of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and concentrated down to 1 μL by vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, UK). Samples were then prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis by diluting them to 5 μL with 0.1% TFA. LC-MS-analyses were performed on a Q Exactive Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) and and on an Orbitrap FusionTM LumosTM TribridTM mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK), both coupled on-line, to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano Systems (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) assembled in an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) and operated at a constant temperature of 50oC. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid (Sigma Aldrich, UK) in deionised water while mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.3 μL min-1 and eluted at a flow rate of 0.2 μL min-1 according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% mobile phase B in 90 min, then to 95% in 11 min and returned at 2% 6 min after.  For the Rhino-ALP2 project the gradient was slightly different; 2 to 40% mobile phase B in 150 min, then to 95% in 11 min. For Q Exactive, FTMS spectra were recorded at 70,000 resolution (scan range 350-1400 m/z) and the ten most  peaks with charge ≥ 2 of the MS scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.0 Thomson for MS2 (filling 1.0E6 ions for MS scan, 5.0E4 ions for MS2, maximum fill time 60 ms, dynamic exclusion for 60 s). Only ions with charge between 2 and 6 were selected for MS2. The normalized collision energy for the HCD fragmentation [53] that was used was set at 27. For the Orbitrap FusionTM LumosTM , survey scans were performed at resolution of 120,000 (scan range 350-1500 m/z) with an ion target of 4.0e5. MS2 was performed in the Ion Trap at a rapid scan mode with ion target of 2.0E4 and HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 27 (Olsen et al, 2007). The isolation window in the quadrupole was set at 1.4 Thomson. Only ions with charge between 2 and 7 were selected for MS2.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software platform [54] version 1.6.6.0 was used to process raw files and search was conducted against the complete Arabidopsis thaliana database (Uniprot, released October 2016), using the Andromeda search engine[54].  The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm while the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 pm. Isotope mass tolerance was 2 ppm and maximum charge to 7. Maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-terminal as well as the Gly-Gly (diglycil) on lysine were set as variable modifications. For peptide and protein identifications FDR was set to 1%.  For the volcano plot statistical analysis, the spectra obtained from the mass spectrometric analysis of the Trypsin-digested IP-MS experimental samples were searched against the Arabidopsis thaliana proteome database (UniprotKB_aratha downloaded on 15.03.2015) and label free quantification performed using the MaxQuant programme [55] and the following search parameters: Digestion mode = Trypsin; Variable modifications = Acetyl (protein N terminus), Oxidation (M); Maximum missed cleavages = 4. The output of this analysis was analysed by a two sample T-test using Perseus software [56] to find proteins whose increased abundance in a given sample relative to the negative control (e.g. in sample expressing GFP-tagged protein of interest relative to the sample expressing GFP alone) was statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
A large fraction of plant genomes is composed of transposable elements (TE), which provide a potential source of novel genes through "domestication"-the process whereby the proteins encoded by TE diverge in sequence, lose their ability to catalyse transposition and instead acquire novel functions for their hosts. In Arabidopsis, ANTAGONIST OF LIKE HETEROCHROMATIN PROTEIN 1 (ALP1) arose by domestication of the nuclease component of Harbinger class TE and acquired a new function as a component of POLYCOMB REPRESSIVE COMPLEX 2 (PRC2), a histone H3K27me3 methyltransferase involved in regulation of host genes and in some cases TE. It was not clear how ALP1 associated with PRC2, nor what the functional consequence was. Here, we identify ALP2 genetically as a suppressor of Polycomb-group (PcG) mutant phenotypes and show that it arose from the second, DNA binding component of Harbinger transposases. Molecular analysis of PcG compromised backgrounds reveals that ALP genes oppose silencing and H3K27me3 deposition at key PcG target genes. Proteomic analysis reveals that ALP1 and ALP2 are components of a variant PRC2 complex that contains the four core components but lacks plant-specific accessory components such as the H3K27me3 reader LIKE HETEROCHROMATION PROTEIN 1 (LHP1). We show that the N-terminus of ALP2 interacts directly with ALP1, whereas the C-terminus of ALP2 interacts with MULTICOPY SUPPRESSOR OF IRA1 (MSI1), a core component of PRC2. Proteomic analysis reveals that in alp2 mutant backgrounds ALP1 protein no longer associates with PRC2, consistent with a role for ALP2 in recruitment of ALP1. We suggest that the propensity of Harbinger TE to insert in gene-rich regions of the genome, together with the modular two component nature of their transposases, has predisposed them for domestication and incorporation into chromatin modifying complexes.

### Keywords
Harbinger transposable elements, Arabidospsis thaliana, Alp2, Alp1, Polycomb repressive complex 2

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
University of Ediniburgh

### Submitter
Justin Goodrich

### Lab Head
Dr Justin Goodrich
University of Edinburgh


