### Accession
PXD017199

### Title
DECIPHERING THE SIGNALING NETWORK LANDSCAPE OF BREAST CANCER IMPROVES DRUG SENSITIVITY PREDICTION

### Description
Although genetic and epigenetic abnormalities in breast cancer have been extensively studied, it remains difficult to identify those patients who will respond to particular therapies. This is due in part to our lack of understanding of how the variability of cellular signaling affects drug sensitivity. Here, we used mass cytometry to characterize the single-cell signaling landscapes of 62 breast cancer cell lines and five lines from healthy tissue. We quantified 34 markers in each cell line upon stimulation by the growth factor EGF in the presence or absence of five kinase inhibitors. These data – on more than 80 million single cells from 4,000 conditions – were used to fit mechanistic signaling network models that provide unprecedented insights into the biological principles of how cancer cells process information. Our dynamic single-cell-based models more accurately predicted drug sensitivity than static bulk measurements for drugs targeting the PI3K-MTOR signaling pathway. Finally, we identified genomic features associated with drug sensitivity by using signaling phenotypes as proxies, including a missense mutation in DDIT3 predictive of PI3K-inhibition sensitivity. This provides proof of principle that single-cell measurements and modeling could inform matching of patients with appropriate treatments in the future.

### Sample Protocol
DIGESTION Cell lysates from independent biological replicates were aliquoted in equivalent volumes containing 100 μg of proteome sample (quantified with a BCA assay). The samples were then reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (ThermoFisher Scientific) for 30 minutes at 37 °C and then alkylated in the dark for 30 minutes at 25 °C with 40 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich). Samples were diluted with 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich) to a final concentration of 1% DOC before overnight digestion at 37 °C with lysyl endopeptidase (Wako Chemicals) and sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme-substrate ratio of 1:100 for both. Trypsin was inactivated by adding formic acid (AppliChem) to a final concentration of 1% v/v, and the precipitated DOC was removed by centrifugation. The acidified peptide mixtures were loaded into 96-well elution plates (Waters), desalted, and eluted with 80% acetonitrile. Samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge, solubilized in 0.1% formic acid, and analyzed by mass spectrometry. SPECTRAL LIBRARY SAMPLE PREPARATION The spectral libraries were obtained from all cell lines with at least three biological replicates (12 cell lines) or with eight fractions from two independent cell line pools. The cell lines pools were composed of 27 and 28 cell lines, respectively. The four central fractions were measured twice. The fractionation was performed using the Pierce™ high pH, reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and iRT peptides (Byognosis AG) were added.  PEPTIDE SEPARATION Digested samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source and a nano-flow LC system (Easy-nLC 1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was performed on a 40 cm x 0.75 μm i.d. column (New Objective, PF360-75-10-N-5) in-house packed with 1.9-µm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch Reprosil-Pur 120) and heated to 50 °C. Buffer A was 0.1% w/v formic acid, and buffer B was 0.1% w/v formic acid in acetonitrile. The flow rate was 300 nL/min. The gradient was as follows (buffer B in buffer A): linear from 5% to 25% over 100 minutes, 25% to 40% over 10 minutes, and 40% to 90% over 5 minutes, finishing with isocratic 90% for 5 minutes.  SPECTRAL LIBRARY DATA-DEPENDENT ACQUISITION For the spectral library, the 55 samples were analyzed by shotgun LC-MS/MS data dependent acquisition (DDA) by injection of 1 μL peptide digests at a concentration of 1 μg/μL. The MS1 spectra were acquired from 350 to 1,500 m/z at a resolution of 70,000, and the 20 most intense precursors exceeding 1,300 ion counts were selected for fragmentation at 25 eV normalized collision energy. The MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 with maximally 100,000 ions, collected for 55 ms maximally. All multiply charged ions triggered MS-MS scans followed by a 30-second dynamic exclusion, and singly charged precursor ions and ions of undefinable charged states were excluded from fragmentation. PEPTIDE IDENTIFICATION AND SPECTRAL LIBRARY GENERATION The DDA spectra were searched against the canonical Human Uniprot fasta database (version August 2018) using the Sequest HT database search engine in Protein Discoverer (version 2.2.0.388, Thermo Fisher Scientific). We allowed for up to two missed cleavages, excluded cleavage of KP and RP peptide bonds and applied a full tryptic digestion rule. Cysteine carboxyamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) and methionine oxidation (+15.995) were allowed as static and dynamic modifications, respectively. Monoisotopic peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. The identified proteins were filtered using the high peptide confidence setting (1% false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide level). For generation of the spectral library the DDA spectra analyzed as described above were imported in the software Spectronaut Pulsar (11.0.18108.11.30271 Asimov, Biognosys AG) (Bruderer et al., 2015).  DATA-INDEPENDENT ACQUISITION After addition of iRT peptides (Biognosys AG), 1 μL of peptide digest from each biological replicate was injected independently at a concentration of 1 μg/μL and measured in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode. The DIA-MS method was as previously described (Piazza et al., 2018). Briefly, an MS1 survey scan was performed from 350 to 1,500 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 with AGC target of 3×106 and a 120-ms injection time. The twenty variable-width windows optimized to equally distribute the number of precursor ions had a 1 m/z overlap. MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35,000 with a fixed first mass of 150 m/z and an AGC target of 1×106. In order to mimic DDA fragmentation, the normalized collision energy was 25 eV based on the doubly charged center m/z of the isolation window. The maximum injection times were automatically chosen to maximize parallelization resulting in an approximate 3-second duty cycle.

### Data Protocol
DIA-MS TARGETED DATA EXTRACTION Targeted data extractions of DIA-MS acquisitions were performed with Spectronaut Pulsar (11.0.18108.11.30271 Asimov, Biognosys AG) with default settings (Bruderer et al., 2015). Retention time prediction was set to dynamic with correction factor 1 for XIC extraction window determination. Non-linear calibration was used for retention time correction, and MS2 level interference correction was enabled (Bilbao et al., 2015). The FDR was set to 1% at peptide precursor level and was estimated with mProphet (Reiter et al., 2011). The method compares time-resolved MS/MS maps measured with the DIA-MS method as previously described (Gillet et al., 2012). QUANTIFICATION Subsequently the data were analyzed with MSstats (using Tukey's median polish, R package version 3.10.6) for differential protein abundance in comparison to five cell lines derived from normal breast tissue (184A1, 184B5, MCF 10A, MCF 10F, and MCF 12A) (Choi et al., 2014). For quantification, only proteotypic peptides, which are uniquely present in the sequence of one protein, were used. The default settings for SpectronauttoMSstatsFormat and the dataProcess functions were used with the exception that the normalization was provided by Spectronaut Pulsar and zero intensities were censored. For each cell line comparison, MSstats (with the groupComparison function) was used to determine model-based estimates of fold changes. The adjusted p-values were determined using the Benjamini-Hochberg method to control the FDR at the cut-off level of 0.05 (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995). Proteins with a fold change of at least 2 were considered as differentially abundant. For plotting, -Inf, NA, and Inf values were set to the dataset’s minimum, zero, and maximum, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Cell lines, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Marco Tognetti

### Lab Head
Dr Paola Picotti
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


