### Accession
PXD014949

### Title
Brugia malayi glycophosphatidylinositol-anchored proteome

### Description
A proteomics strategy was used to identify putative GPI-APs from adult B. malayi.  Three different sample types were prepared for analysis.  Firstly, intact adult worms were treated with PI-PLC to enzymatically release and solubilize the protein away from the lipid moiety. A mock-treatment with no PI-PLC was performed as a negative control.  The samples derived from treatment of the intact worms have been named “Surface” but it should be noted that the proteins could originate from any exposed surface like the mouth, vagina, or rectum of the worm.  Secondly, a membrane fraction of B. malayi adult female worms was prepared by ultracentrifugation of a total lysate in a sucrose buffer to separate membrane proteins from soluble proteins.  This membrane fraction was also treated with PI-PLC or mock-treated without PI-PLC as a negative control.  Lastly, a GPI-AP enriched sample was prepared by performing a series of organic solvent partitions to extract GPI-APs from a membrane fraction.  This sample was not treated with PI-PLC.  Proteins in all three samples types were digested with trypsin and the resulting peptides analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Surface: Brugia malayi adult worms (TRS Labs Inc., Athens GA) were cultured in plates containing 40 ml GIBCO RPMI-1640 culture medium (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham MA) supplemented with 0.4 ml of 100X Antibiotic Antimycotic Solution which contains 10,000 units penicillin, 10 mg streptomycin and 25 μg amphotericin B per ml (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA). Each plate had approximately 100 female worms and 90 male worms. After 48 hours at 37°C in 5% CO2 in air, worms were washed 4 times in 10 ml of the same medium.  Worms from two plates were transferred to new plates with 5 ml medium and served as the mock control while worms from a different set of two plates were transferred to new plates with 5 ml culture medium containing 15 g Bacillus cereus phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C (PI-PLC). After incubation for 30 minutes at 37°C, the medium was collected and worms were washed with an additional 10 ml fresh medium. The samples containing the released proteins for either mock treated or PI-PLC treated were pooled and were each filtered through a 0.22-micron filter and concentrated using VivaSpin 10,000 MWCO concentrator (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). Surface samples were digested with Trypsin-ultra, Mass Spectrometry Grade (New England Biolabs, Ipswich MA) overnight at 37°C using a filter aided sample preparation kit (Expedeon, San Diego CA). Each sample was analyzed using an automated 3-step MudPIT protocol on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham MA) using HCD fragmentation. Membrane: 150 B. malayi adult female worms were resuspended in 2 ml cold sucrose buffer with 1X Calbiochem protease inhibitor cocktail set III (MilliporeSigma), homogenized, and total lysate was prepared as described above. The lysate was then centrifuged at 100,000 x g for 1 hour at 4°C to pellet the membrane fraction away from cytosolic supernatant.  The resulting pellet was washed with 10 ml of 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 and ultracentrifugation was repeated. The pellet containing the washed membrane fraction was collected.  The washed membrane pellet was resuspended in 2 ml cold 1X phosphate buffered saline and divided into 2 x 1ml aliquots.  3 g PI-PLC was added to one aliquot and both samples were incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes.  An equal volume of sucrose buffer was added to each sample to fill the ultracentrifuge tubes and both samples were centrifuged at 100,000 x g for 1 hour at 4°C.  The supernatants were collected and concentrated using VivaSpin 5000 MWCO (GE Healthcare) concentrators and then dialyzed into 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.5 containing 40 mM  An additional washed membrane sample was prepared from 18 female and 12 male worms as described above without the PI-PLC treatment and then GPI-AP enriched as previously described [35].  Briefly, the washed membrane pellet was resuspended in 0.1 ml water and then brought to 10:10:3 dichloromethane:methanol: water by adding 0.7 ml 1:1 dichloromethane:methanol until the pellet was solubilized. Then 1:1 methanol:water in 0.1 ml increments was added until a phase separation occurred.  The sample was centrifuged at 2000 x g for 10 minutes. The upper aqueous phase and interphase was collected and the extraction was repeated by adding one volume dichloromethane.  The upper aqueous phase was collected and dried to a pellet in a Speed Vac. This delipidated pellet was resuspended in 0.1 ml PBS and mixed with an equal volume of water-saturated butanol and centrifuged at 1000 x g for 10 minutes after mixing well.  The upper butanol phase was removed and the extraction was repeated on the lower aqueous phase.  The aqueous phase containing the GPI-AP enriched sample from the second butanol extraction was collected and dried in a Speed Vac. Membrane samples were digested with Trypsin-ultra, Mass Spectrometry Grade (New England Biolabs) upon addition of ProteaseMax (Promega, Madison WI) for 3 hours at 37°C.  Each sample was analyzed using an 8-step MudPIT protocol on an LTQ-Orbitrap XL (ThermoFisher Scientific) using CID fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Spectral data were searched against the combined B. malayi proteome (brugia_malayi.PRJNA10729.WBPS10.protein.fa) from Wormbase and the Wolbachia endosymbiont of B. malayi proteome from NCBI, both downloaded in May 2018 and then analyzed using Byonic software (Protein Metrics, Cupertino, CA). Common contaminants such as keratins, caseins, trypsin, and BSA were removed from the analysis.  Protein output was set at 1% FDR. Other parameters used for each Mass Spectrometry dataset were: QExactiveQTOF: Cleavage site= RK; C terminal side=Fully specific; missed cleavage=2; Mass tolerance=10 ppm; QTOF/HCD fragmentation with 20 ppm fragment mass tolerance. Fixed modifications=carbamidomethyl @ C/+57.021464. Variable Modifications=Oxidation/ +15.994915 @ M, Deamidation /+0.984016 @ N,Q, Carbamyl @ K/ 43.005814. LTQ-Orbitrap XL: Cleavage site= RK; C terminal side=Fully specific; missed cleavage=2; Mass tolerance=20 ppm; CID low energy fragmentation with 0.6 Dalton fragment mass tolerance. Fixed modifications=carbamidomethyl @ C/+57.021464. Oxidation/ +15.994915 @ M, Deamidation /+0.984016 @ N,Q

### Publication Abstract
Further characterization of essential systems in the parasitic filarial nematode Brugia malayi is needed to better understand its biology, its interaction with its hosts, and to identify critical components that can be exploited to develop novel treatments. The production of glycophosphatidylinositol-anchored proteins (GPI-APs) is essential for eukaryotic cellular and physiological function. In addition, GPI-APs perform many important roles for cells. In this study, we characterized the B. malayi GPI-anchored proteome using both computational and experimental approaches. We used bioinformatic strategies to show the presence or absence of B. malayi GPI-AP biosynthetic pathway genes and to compile a putative B. malayi GPI-AP proteome using available prediction programs. We verified these in silico analyses using proteomics to identify GPI-AP candidates prepared from the surface of intact worms and from membrane enriched extracts. Our study represents the first description of the GPI-anchored proteome in B. malayi and lays the groundwork for further exploration of this essential protein modification as a target for novel anthelmintic therapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Pi-plc, Phosphatidylinositol specific phospholipase c, Brugia malayi, Membrane, Glycophosphatidylinositol, Gpi-ap

### Affiliations
Protein Expression and Modification Division Research Department New England Biolabs United States
New England Biolabs

### Submitter
Fana Mersha

### Lab Head
Dr Jeremy Michael Foster
Protein Expression and Modification Division Research Department New England Biolabs United States


