### Accession
PXD017051

### Title
Identification of Novel Biomarkers in Pancreatic Tumor Tissue to Predict Response to Neoadjuvant ChemotherapyIdentification of Novel Biomarkers in Pancreatic Tumor Tissue to Predict Response to Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy

### Description
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) has been of recent interest as an alternative to upfront surgery followed by adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). However, a subset of patients does not respond to NAC and may have been better managed by upfront surgery. Hence, there is an unmet need for accurate biomarkers for predicting NAC response in PDAC. This project aimed to identify upregulated proteins in tumor tissue from poor- and good-NAC responders.

### Sample Protocol
All tissue samples were lysed in 100 mM TEAB and 1% sodium deoxycholate buffer using a probe sonicator. Protein concentrations were estimated using the bicinchoninic acid protein assay (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). The cysteine residues were reduced in the presence of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) at 60 °C and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Bio-Rad) at room temperature in the dark. Trypsin (sequencing grade; Promega, Madison, WI) was added in a 1:50 ratio and proteins were enzymatically degraded overnight at 37 °C. By adding 1 µL formic acid (FA; Thermo Scientific) the digestion was quenched and the SDC precipitated and removed by centrifugation (14,000 rpm) for 5 min. Samples were lyophilized and reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile (CAN; Sigma Aldrich, St. Louise, MO) and 0.1% FA.  Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis for tissue samples were performed on an Ekspert NanoLC 400 with cHiPLC system (SCIEX, Framingham, MA) coupled to a TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX). A 200 µm x 0.5 mm nano cHiPLC trap column and 15 cm x 200 µm nano cHiPLC columns (ChromXPTM C18-CL 3 μm 120 Å) were used with 140 min ACN gradients.  Digested samples were pooled, by combining a small fraction of each tissue sample from the tumor and adjacent normal pancreas, and subjected them to basic reverse phase chromatography high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), using an extended C18 column 2.1mm x 150 mm, 3.5 µm (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA), on an Agilent 1200 series HPLC. 100 µg of peptides per pool were pre-cleaned with Sep-Pak C18 and then injected at a flow rate of 0.3mL/min at room temperature onto the column. The peptides were separated over a 1 hour gradient from using Buffer A of 5 mM ammonia at approximately pH 10.4 and Buffer B of 90% ACN / 5 mM ammonia, and eluting peptides were collected in fractions of 1 min. Concatenated pooling of the fractions was performed.  For data dependent MS/MS acquisition to build a spectral library of the basic reverse phase fractionated samples, the 20 most intense m/z values exceeding a threshold >250 cps on the TripleTOF 6600 with charge stages between 2+ and 4+ were selected for analysis from a full MS survey scan and excluded from analysis for 20 s to minimize redundant precursor sampling.   In data independent acquisition, a 100 variable window method was used over a range of 400 – 1250 m/z with window sizes based on precursor densities in the LC-MS/MS acquisition. Collision energies were calculated for 2+ precursors with m/z values of lowest m/z in window + 10% of the window width. The data were acquired over an 80 min ACN gradient.

### Data Protocol
Spectral libraries for SWATH-MS quantitation were generated with ProteinPilotTM software 5.0 using the ParagonTM algorithm (SCIEX) in the thorough ID mode including biological modifications and chemical modifications. MS/MS data were searched against the human UniProt database (release February 2016, 20198 entries) with carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification for cysteine residues. An Unused Score cut-off was set to 0.05 and the FDR analysis was enabled.  Generated Paragon group files were imported into PeakViewTM software 2.1 using the SWATH MicroApp 2.0 (release 25/08/2014) to generate a sample specific spectral library which was matched against SWATH-MS data. After retention time calibration with endogenous peptides, data were processed using following processing settings; 100 maximal peptides per protein, maximal 6 transitions per peptide, peptide confidence threshold of 99%, transition false discovery rate < 1%, 5 min extraction window and fragment extraction tolerance of 75 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> Neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) has been of recent interest as an alternative to upfront surgery followed by adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). However, a subset of patients does not respond to NAC and may have been better managed by upfront surgery. Hence, there is an unmet need for accurate biomarkers for predicting NAC response in PDAC. We aimed to identify upregulated proteins in tumor tissue from poor- and good-NAC responders. <b>Methods:</b> Tumor and adjacent pancreas tissue samples were obtained following surgical resection from NAC-treated PDAC patients. SWATH-MS proteomic analysis was performed to identify and quantify proteins in tissue samples. Statistical analysis was performed to identify biomarkers for NAC response. Pathway analysis was performed to characterize affected canonical pathways in good- and poor-NAC responders. <b>Results:</b> A total of 3,156 proteins were identified, with 19 being were significantly upregulated in poor-responders compared to good-responders (log<sub>2</sub> ratio &gt; 2, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). Those with the greatest ability to predict poor-NAC response were GRP78, CADM1, PGES2, and RUXF. Notably, canonical pathways that were significantly upregulated in good-responders included acute phase signaling and macrophage activation, indicating a heightened immune response in these patients. <b>Conclusion:</b> A novel biomarker signature for poor-NAC response in PDAC was identified.

### Keywords
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy, Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, Proteomics, Biomarkers, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
University of Sydney

### Submitter
Sumit Sahni

### Lab Head
Dr Anubhav Mittal
The University of Sydney


