### Accession
PXD001429

### Title
Carbonylation proteome of rice embryo

### Description
Using affinity chromatography to enrich carbonylated proteins from rice embryos germinated for 0, 24, 48, 72 h. Sequential window acquisition of all therotical spectra (SWATH) technology was used to quantify carbonylated proteins. Mass spectra data was searched to discover carbonylated peptides and their corresponding proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysized in lysis buffer, then, biotin hydrazide was used to label carbonylated proteins. Monomeric advin column was used to enrich biotin hydrazide labeled proteins. Each sample was analyzed using the Eksigent nanoLC-Ultra™ 2D System (AB SCIEX, USA) combined with the cHiPLC™-Nanoflex system (AB SCIEX) in Trap-Elute mode. MS data were searched with ProteinPilot software to find carbonylated peptides.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were searched using ProteinPilot 4.5 to generate the SWATH library. The library contained information of targeted proteins

### Publication Abstract
Seed germination is an important aspect of the plant life cycle, during which, reactive oxygen species (ROS) accumulate. The accumulation of ROS results in an increase in protein oxidation of which carbonylation is the most canonical one. However, there is insufficient information concerning protein oxidation, especially carbonylation and its contribution to seed germination. In this study, biotin hydrazide labeled chromatography combined with sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra (SWATH) method was used to analyze the dynamic pattern of protein carbonylation in rice embryos during germination. A total of 1872 unique proteins were quantified, among which 288 carbonylated peptides corresponding to 144 proteins were determined based on the filtering through mass shifts of modified amino acids. In addition, 66 carbonylated proteins were further analyzed based on their carbonylation intensity in four stages of germination. These identified carbonylated proteins were mainly involved in maintaining the levels of ROS, abscisic acid and seed reserves. Remarkably, a peroxiredoxin was found with 23 unique carbonylated peptides, and the expression of which was consistent with its increased activity. This study describes the dynamic pattern of carbonylated proteins during seed germination, and may help to further understand the biochemical mechanisms on this process.

### Keywords
Carbonylation, Germination, Swath, Rice

### Affiliations
Wuhan botanical garden, University of Academy of Sciences, China
Wuhan botanical garden

### Submitter
Zhang Hui

### Lab Head
Dr Pingfang Yang
Wuhan botanical garden, University of Academy of Sciences, China


