### Accession
PXD008087

### Title
PROTEOME OF BOVINE MITOCHONDRIA AND ROD OUTER SEGMENT DISKS: COMMONALITIES AND DIFFERENCES.

### Description
The retinal rod outer segment (OS) isa stack of diskssurrounded by the plasma membrane,housing proteins related to phototransduction as well asmitochondrial proteins involved in oxidative phosphorylation (OxPhos). This prompted us to compare the proteome of bovine OS disks and mitochondria, to assess the significant top gene signatures of each sample.The two proteomes, obtained byLTQ-OrbitrapVelos mass spectrometry, were compared by statistical analyses. 4139 proteins were identified, 2045 of which overlapping in the two sets. Non-hierarchical Spearman’s correlogram revealed that the groups were clearly discriminated. Partial Least Square Discriminant plus Support Vector Machine analysis identified the major discriminative proteins, implied in photo-transduction and lipid metabolism, respectively. Gene ontology analysis identified top gene signatures of disk proteome, enriched in vesiculation, glycolysis, and OxPhos proteins. The tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and the electron transport proteinswere similarly enriched in the two samples: Notably thelatterwas up regulated in disks.Data suggest that the OxPhos proteins may derive from mitochondria becoming a true OS component, and acquiring different functionality once in ectopic location. Understanding theyet unanswered issue of chemical energy supply in the rod OS, can positively influence our vision of retinal physiology and pathology.

### Sample Protocol
The pellets were lysed, solubilized, denatured and reduced using a solution of 6M GdmCl, 10 mM TCEP, 40mM CAA, 100mMTris pH 8.5. Afterwards, samples were loaded into a 30 kDa filtration devices and mixtures of sequencing grade of Lys C and Trypsin were added at a ratio of 1:50 and 1:100 (µg enzyme: µg protein) respectively. After an overnight digestion at 37°C, peptides were collected with one wash of 50% CH3OH, 45% H2O, and 5% TFA. The samples were subsequently acidified and desalted on C18 StageTips before injection into Mass Spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
in order to allow the identification of statistical changes with a probability p=0.05 and power =80% [32]. Each Label-free quantification data was log2-converted and normalized. After normalization, unsupervised hierarchical clustering analyses associated with Spearman's Correlation, was performed to identify outlier and samples similarity. Proteins differentially expressed between disks and mitochondria were detected using a non-parametric test for the two groups, with unpaired sample (U Mann-Whitney test). P-values for each protein were adjusted using the method of Benjamini-Hochberg[33]. Proteins were considered to be significantly differentially expressed with an adjusted P-value ≤ 0.05, ifidentified in at least 100% of one of cohorts and with and a fold change ≤-2 or ≥2. Volcano plot was used to quickly visualize the statistical differences and the cutoff lines were established using the function y = c/(x - x0) [34]. A further selection intended to identify the proteins that maximize the discrimination between the two samples was obtained thanks to  Partial Least Squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) and Support Vector Machine (SVM) [35]. In SVM, a Cross-validation approach (4-fold) was applied to estimate the accuracy of this classification. The proteome profile of the selected proteins and their ability to cluster in two groups was shown by means of heat map associated with hierarchical clustering analysis (using Euclidean distances) after z-score normalization and two-dimensional scatter plots.

### Publication Abstract
The retinal rod outer segment (OS) is a stack of disks surrounded by the plasma membrane, housing proteins related to phototransduction, as well as mitochondrial proteins involved in oxidative phosphorylation (OxPhos). This prompted us to compare the proteome of bovine OS disks and mitochondria to assess the significant top gene signatures of each sample. The two proteomes, obtained by LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometry, were compared by statistical analyses. In total, 4139 proteins were identified, 2045 of which overlapping in the two sets. Nonhierarchical Spearman's correlogram revealed that the groups were clearly discriminated. Partial least square discriminant plus support vector machine analysis identified the major discriminative proteins, implied in phototransduction and lipid metabolism, respectively. Gene Ontology analysis identified top gene signatures of the disk proteome, enriched in vesiculation, glycolysis, and OxPhos proteins. The tricarboxylic acid cycle and the electron transport proteins were similarly enriched in the two samples, but the latter was up regulated in disks. Data suggest that the mitochondrial OxPhos proteins may represent a true OS proteome component, outside the mitochondrion. This knowledge may help the scientific community in the further studies of retinal physiology and pathology.

### Keywords
Atp synthase; disks;electron transfer chain; mass spectrometry; mitochondria; oxidative phosphorylation; rod outer segment; transmission electron microscopy.

### Affiliations
Istituto Gaslini
Istituto G.Gaslini

### Submitter
Chiara Lavarello

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
Istituto Gaslini


