### Accession
PXD034850

### Title
HDX-MS Analysis of the protein ALT51

### Description
HDX-MS analysis of the protein ALT51, comparing deuterium uptake between the full length protein and a truncated construct missing the CBM-like domain

### Sample Protocol
HDX reactions comparing ALT51 Truncation with ALT51 Full Length were carried out in 20 µL reactions. Reactions contained either 5 µM ALT51 Truncation (20 pmol, 4 µL) or 5 µM ALT51 Full Length (20 pmol, 4 µL). Exchange reactions were initiated by the addition of 16 µL of D2O buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 94.34% D2O (V/V)) to 4 µL of protein mixture (final D2O concentration of 75.47%). The reactions proceeded for 3, 30, 300, or 3000s at room temperature, before being quenched with ice cold acidic quench buffer resulting in a final concentration of 0.6 M guanidine-HCl and 0.9% formic acid post quench. All conditions and timepoints were created and run in independent triplicate. Samples were flash frozen immediately after quenching and stored at -80°C until injected onto the ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system for proteolytic cleavage, peptide separation, and injection onto a QTOF for mass analysis. Protein samples were rapidly thawed and injected onto an integrated fluidics system containing a HDx-3 PAL liquid handling robot and climate-controlled (2°C) chromatography system (LEAP Technologies), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system, as well as an Impact HD QTOF Mass spectrometer (Bruker). The full details of the automated LC system are described in {PMID: 33877613}. The protein was run over one immobilized pepsin column (Trajan; ProDx protease column, 2.1 mm x 30 mm PDX.PP01-F32) at 200 µL/min for 3 minutes at 8°C. The resulting peptides were collected and desalted on a C18 trap column (Acquity UPLC BEH C18 1.7mm column (2.1 x 5 mm); Waters 186003975). The trap was subsequently eluted in line with an ACQUITY 1.7 μm particle, 100 × 1 mm2 C18 UPLC column (Waters), using a gradient of 3-35% B (Buffer A 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B 100% acetonitrile) over 11 minutes immediately followed by a gradient of 35-80% over 5 minutes. Mass spectrometry experiments acquired over a mass range from 150 to 2200 m/z using an electrospray ionization source operated at a temperature of 200°C and a spray voltage of 4.5 kV.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from the non-deuterated samples of ALT51 Truncation and ALT51 Full Length using data-dependent acquisition following tandem MS/MS experiments (0.5 s precursor scan from 150-2000 m/z; twelve 0.25 s fragment scans from 150-2000 m/z). MS/MS datasets were analysed using PEAKS7 (PEAKS), and peptide identification was carried out by using a false discovery-based approach, with a threshold set to 0.1% using a database of purified proteins and known contaminants. The search parameters were set with a precursor tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass error 0.02 Da, charge states from 1-8, leading to a selection criterion of peptides that had a -10logP score of 34.8 and 32.7 for ALT51 Truncation and ALT51 Full Length respectively. HD-Examiner Software (Sierra Analytics) was used to automatically calculate the level of deuterium incorporation into each peptide. All peptides were manually inspected for correct charge state, correct retention time, appropriate selection of isotopic distribution, etc. Deuteration levels were calculated using the centroid of the experimental isotope clusters. Results are presented as relative levels of deuterium incorporation and the only control for back exchange was the level of deuterium present in the buffer (75.47%). Differences in exchange in a peptide were considered significant if they met all three of the following criteria:  ≥4.5% change in exchange, ≥0.45 Da difference in exchange, and a p value <0.01 using a two tailed student t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Akkermansia muciniphila is key member of the human gut microbiota that impacts many features of host health. A major characteristic of this bacterium is its interaction with host mucin, which is abundant in the gut environment, and its ability to metabolize mucin as a nutrient source. The machinery deployed by A.&#xa0;muciniphila to enable this interaction appears to be extensive and sophisticated, yet it is incompletely defined. The uncharacterized protein AMUC_1438 is encoded by a gene that was previously shown to be upregulated when the bacterium is grown on mucin. This uncharacterized protein has features suggestive of carbohydrate-recognition and peptidase activity, which led us to hypothesize that it has a role in mucin depolymerization. Here, we provide structural and functional support for the assignment of AMUC_1438 as a unique O-glycopeptidase with mucin-degrading capacity. O-glycopeptidase enzymes recognize glycans but hydrolyze the peptide backbone and are common in host-adapted microbes that colonize or invade mucus layers. Structural, kinetic, and mutagenic analyses point to a metzincin metalloprotease catalytic motif but with an active site that specifically recognizes a GalNAc residue &#x3b1;-linked to serine or threonine (i.e., the Tn-antigen). The enzyme catalyzes hydrolysis of the bond immediately N-terminal to the glycosylated residue. Additional modeling analyses suggest the presence of a carbohydrate-binding module that may assist in substrate recognition. We anticipate that these results will be fundamental to a wider understanding of the O-glycopeptidase class of enzymes and how they may contribute to host adaptation.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Alt51

### Affiliations
University of Victoria

### Submitter
John Burke

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. John E. Burke
University of Victoria


