### Accession
PXD044681

### Title
A NET4-RabG3 couple mediate the link between actin and the tonoplast and is essential for normal actin cytoskeletal remodelling in stomatal closure to flg22

### Description
Members of the NETWORKED (NET) family are involved in actin-membrane interactions. Here we show that two members of the NET family, NET4A and NET4B, are essential for normal guard cell actin reorganization, which is a process critical for stomatal closure in plant immunity. NET4 proteins interact with F-actin and with members of the Rab7 GTPase RABG3 family through two distinct domains, allowing for simultaneous localization to actin filaments and the tonoplast. NET4 proteins interact with GTP-bound, active RABG3 members, suggesting their function being downstream effectors. We also show that RABG3b is critical for stomatal closure induced by microbial patterns. Taken together, we conclude that the actin cytoskeletal remodelling during stomatal closure involves a molecular link between actin filaments and the tonoplast, which is mediated by the NET4-RABG3b interaction. We propose that stomatal closure to microbial patterns involves the coordinated action of immune-triggered osmotic changes and actin cytoskeletal remodelling likely driving compact vacuolar morphologies.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem Affinity Purification coupled to mass spectrometry (TAP-MS) was performed according to the protocol as described by Van Leene et al., 2015 with minor changes. Briefly, NET4A ORF was cloned from pDONR207 into a GSrhino tag vector by gateway cloning where it is fused to a double affinity tag, which consists of a double protein G domain and a streptavidin-binding peptide separated by a very specific protease cleavage site. Arabidopsis cell suspension culture was transformed and a series of protein extracts produced using four different detergents. Thereto, crude protein extracts were prepared in extraction buffer without NP-40. After the mixing step, detergent (DDM, Digitonin, C12E8 or Triton-X-100) was added to a final concentration of 1% and extracts were incubated for 1 h at 4°C under gentle rotation. Extracts were cleared and 25 mg protein input was used for binding to IgG-Sepharose beads (first step). In the subsequent steps, 0.1% NP-40 was replaced with 0.2% DDM, Digitonin, C12E8 or Triton-X-100. Before eluting from the Streptavidin beads (second step) a final wash with washbuffer without detergent was added to the protocol. Proteins were eluted and separated on SDS-PAGE with a short run and digested in-gel with Trypsin as described before (Van Leene et al., 2015). In total four NET4A TAP samples were analyzed on LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific), each extracted and purified in the presence of a different detergent, DMM, digitonin, Triton-X-100 and C12E8.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed with Mascot. First, Mascot Generic Files were created using the Mascot Distiller software (version 2.4.3.1, Matrix Science, London, UK). Grouping of spectra was allowed with a maximum intermediate retention time of 30 seconds and a maximum intermediate scan count of 5 was used where possible. Grouping was done with 0.005 Da precursor tolerance. A peak list was only generated when the MS/MS spectrum contained more than 10 peaks. There was no de-isotoping and the relative signal-to-noise limit was set to 2. These peak lists were then searched with the Mascot search engine (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science) using the Mascot Daemon interface. Spectra were searched against the TAIRplus database (Van Leene et al., 2015) containing 35839 protein sequence entries. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine and methylation of aspartic acid and glutamic acid. Peptide mass tolerance was set to ±?10?ppm (with Mascot's C13 option set to 1), and the fragment mass tolerance was set to ±?0.5 Dalton (Da). The peptide charge was set to 2+?and 3+,?and instrument setting was ESI-TRAP. The enzyme setting was trypsin allowing for one missed cleavage, and cleavage was allowed when arginine or lysine were followed by proline. Minimum peptide length was six. Peptide- and protein-level FDR were both set to 0.01. Proteins with at least two matched peptides of which at least one was unique, were retained. Background proteins were filtered out based on frequency of occurrence of the co-purified proteins in a large dataset containing 543 TAP experiments using 115 different baits classified into 62 unrelated bait groups (Van Leene et al., 2015). Thereto, the identified protein lists were compared to the list of 760 nonspecific proteins as published (Van Leene et al. 2015) and only the specific binders were retained.

### Publication Abstract
Members of the NETWORKED (NET) family are involved in actin-membrane interactions. Here we show that two members of the NET family, NET4A and NET4B, are essential for normal guard cell actin reorganization, which is a process critical for stomatal closure in plant immunity. NET4 proteins interact with F-actin and with members of the Rab7 GTPase RABG3 family through two distinct domains, allowing for simultaneous localization to actin filaments and the tonoplast. NET4 proteins interact with GTP-bound, active RABG3 members, suggesting their function being downstream effectors. We also show that RABG3b is critical for stomatal closure induced by microbial patterns. Taken together, we conclude that the actin cytoskeletal remodelling during stomatal closure involves a molecular link between actin filaments and the tonoplast, which is mediated by the NET4-RABG3b interaction. We propose that stomatal closure to microbial patterns involves the coordinated action of immune-triggered osmotic changes and actin cytoskeletal remodelling likely driving compact vacuolar morphologies.

### Keywords
Tap, Net4, Rabg3

### Affiliations
Department of Biosciences, University of Durham, South Road, Durham, DH1 3LE, UK
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Ghent, B-9052, Belgium
VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Ghent, B-9052, Belgium


### Submitter
Dominique Eeckhout

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Hussey
Department of Biosciences, University of Durham, South Road, Durham, DH1 3LE, UK


