### Accession
PXD001541

### Title
Quantifying histone PTMs by bottom-up MS

### Description
Histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) contribute to chromatin function through their chemical properties which influence chromatin structure, and their ability to recruit chromatin interacting proteins. Nanoflow liquid chromatography coupled with high resolution tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) has emerged as the most suitable technology for global histone modification analysis due to the high sensitivity and the high mass accuracy that provide confident identification. However, the histone nanoLC-MS/MS data analysis is even more challenging due to the large number and variety of isobaric histone peptides, and the high dynamic range of histone peptide abundances. Here, we introduce EpiProfile, a software tool that discriminates isobaric histone peptides using the distinguishing fragment ions in their tandem mass spectra and extracts the chromatographic area under the curve using previous knowledge about peptide retention time. The accuracy of EpiProfile was evaluated by analysis of mixtures containing different ratios of synthetic histone peptides. In addition to label-free quantification of histone peptides, EpiProfile is flexible, and can quantify different types of isotopically labeled histone peptides. EpiProfile is much more convenient when compared to manual quantification, filling the need of an automatic and freely available tool to quantify labeled and non-labeled modified histone peptides. In summary, EpiProfile is a valuable nanoLC-MS/MS based quantification tool for histone modifications, which can also be adapted to analyze non-histone protein samples.

### Sample Protocol
Endogenous histones from HeLa cells HeLa Cell Culture - As previously described (1), HeLa cells were cultured in suspension with Minimum Essential Medium Eagle (MEM) Joklik modification for Suspension Cultures with 10% Newborn Calf Serum (Thermo Scientific SH30118.03), 1% Glutamax (Gibco, 35050-079), and 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin (Gibco, 15140-122). The cell density was maintained within the range of 1-10×105 cells/mL. Histones were acid extracted and subjected to chemical derivatization using propionic anhydride and trypsin digestion as previously described (2). Samples were then desalted and loaded by auto-sampler onto an online nanoLC-MS/MS as described in (2).  Nanoflow Liquid Chromatography Tandem Mass Spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) - The samples were loaded onto an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer at 300 nL/min. Histone peptides were resolved on a two-step gradient from 2% ACN to 30% ACN in 0.1% formic acid over 40 minutes, then from 30% ACN to 95% ACN in 0.1% formic acid over 20 minutes. Orbitrap Velos Pro was operated in the data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with dynamic exclusion enabled (repeat count: 1, exclusion duration: 0.5 min). MS instrument methods were set up as previously reported (3). Every cycle one full MS scan (m/z 290 to 1600) was collected and followed by 12 MS2 scans using collision induced dissociation (CID). The isolation window was set at 2.0 m/z. Ions with a charge state of one and a rejection list of common contaminant ions (including keratin, trypsin and BSA) (exclusion width=10 ppm) were excluded from MS2 spectra.  1. Zee, B. M., Britton, L. M., Wolle, D., Haberman, D. M., and Garcia, B. A. (2012) Origins and formation of histone methylation across the human cell cycle. Mol Cell Biol 32, 2503-2514. 2. Lin, S., and Garcia, B. A. (2012) Examining histone posttranslational modification patterns by high-resolution mass spectrometry. Methods Enzymol 512, 3-28. 3. Zee, B. M., Levin, R. S., Dimaggio, P. A., and Garcia, B. A. (2010) Global turnover of histone post-translational modifications and variants in human cells. Epigenetics Chromatin 3, 22.

### Data Protocol
We developed the quantification program, named EpiProfile, for high-resolution mass spectra. Figure 1d shows the workflow of EpiProfile. The input of EpiProfile is m/z values and charge states of peptides. After one peptide is inputted, elution profiles of the peptide expected isotopes are reconstructed from MS scans. The extracted elution profile of the mono-isotopic mass for each given peptide is then selected. Three data types are extracted: RT, AUC, and full width at half maximum (FWHM). The final output contains both Excel tables and PDF figures.  The main challenges in quantifying histone peptides are determining the RTs of peptides and discriminating isobaric peptides. We modified EpiProfile to solve these problems. To accurately quantify histone peptides, we set the following parameters: xtract 1.0.0.2 in pFind Studio (pfind.ict.ac.cn) to generate peak lists, precursor mass tolerance ±10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance ±0.4 Da for CID, trypsin only cleaving after arginine and up to 2 miscleavages, Propionyl[Peptide N-term]/+56.026 as the fixed modification, Propionyl[K]/+56.026, Acetyl[K]/+42.011, Methyl_Propionyl[K]/+70.042, Dimethyl[K]/+28.031, Trimethyl[K]/+42.047, and Phospho[ST]/+79.966 as variable modifications. The quantification of histone peptides in EpiProfile consists of four steps: (1) extracting RT and AUC for the unmodified peptides; (2) locating RT for the modified peptides; (3) extracting RT and AUC for the modified peptides; (4) producing layouts and combining results.

### Publication Abstract
Histone post-translational modifications contribute to chromatin function through their chemical properties which influence chromatin structure and their ability to recruit chromatin interacting proteins. Nanoflow liquid chromatography coupled with high resolution tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) has emerged as the most suitable technology for global histone modification analysis because of the high sensitivity and the high mass accuracy of this approach that provides confident identification. However, analysis of histones with this method is even more challenging because of the large number and variety of isobaric histone peptides and the high dynamic range of histone peptide abundances. Here, we introduce EpiProfile, a software tool that discriminates isobaric histone peptides using the distinguishing fragment ions in their tandem mass spectra and extracts the chromatographic area under the curve using previous knowledge about peptide retention time. The accuracy of EpiProfile was evaluated by analysis of mixtures containing different ratios of synthetic histone peptides. In addition to label-free quantification of histone peptides, EpiProfile is flexible and can quantify different types of isotopically labeled histone peptides. EpiProfile is unique in generating layouts (i.e. relative retention time) of histone peptides when compared with manual quantification of the data and other programs (such as Skyline), filling the need of an automatic and freely available tool to quantify labeled and non-labeled modified histone peptides. In summary, EpiProfile is a valuable nanoflow liquid chromatography coupled with high resolution tandem mass spectrometry-based quantification tool for histone peptides, which can also be adapted to analyze nonhistone protein samples.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Quantification, Proteomics, Isobaric peptide, Retention time, Histone

### Affiliations
UPenn
Epigenetics Program, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania

### Submitter
Zuo-Fei Yuan

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin A. Garcia
Epigenetics Program, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania


