### Accession
PXD019963

### Title
iTRAQ in proteomic analysis of potential biomarkers in invasive cancer, ductal carcinoma in situ, and mammary fibroadenoma

### Description
Breast malignancy is a serious threat to women’s health around the world. However, for invasive, ductal carcinomas, and mammary fibroadenoma, there is an urgent demand for better breast malignancy-linked biomarkers. The current study was designed to identify diagnostic and/or therapeutic protein biomarkers for breast tumors. iTRAQ proteomic analysis was employed to characterize differentially expressed protein biomarkers. We identified several potential protein biomarkers that can be recommended for further testing as diagnostic and/or therapeutic targets in breast tumors.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 140 individuals were included in this study, comprising 35 healthy women, 35 IBC, 35 DCIS, and 35 fibroadenoma patients.Tissue samples were sectioned and stored in liquid nitrogen. Proteins were extracted in lysis buffer combined with 1% PMSF. Following this, protein samples were sonicated (25%W) on ice for 3 min using a pause pattern (10 second sonication, followed by 10 second break). To precipitate proteins, pre-chilled acetone was added to the samples (5 ml acetone: 1 ml samples). The mixture was stored overnight at -20℃. The suspension was centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4℃. Then the supernatant was removed. The precipitate was mixed with 2 ml pre-chilled acetone. The mixture was centrifuged twice at 12,000 g for 15 min at 4℃. The pellet was air-dried at room temperature after the supernatant was removed. Following this, the precipitate was dissolved in 0.5 ml 1M TEAB and centrifuged for 15 min at room temperature. The collected supernatant was transferred to a fresh 1 ml tube and stored at -20℃until further analysis. Samples from patients diagnosed with the same type of disease were mixed. The protein concentration was quantified using the Bradford Protein Assay.iTRAQ 8-plex experiments were performed to analyze tissue extracts. Two iTRAQ labels, 113 and 114, were chosen for the normal breast tissue analysis. Cancerous and matched adjacent tissues were tested using the following labels (in brackets): IBC tissues (115) and corresponding adjacent tissues (116), DCIS tissues (117) and corresponding adjacent tissues (118), fibroadenoma tissues (119) and corresponding adjacent tissues (121). The samples were analyzed using Triple TOF^TM 4600 (AB SCIEX). Proteins (100 g) in each group were precipitated using fivefold acetone at -20℃ for 1 h. Following this, the mixture was centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4℃. The collected suspension of proteins was dried using a vacuum centrifuge. The dried protein was resuspended in 50 μl dissolution buffer, reduced by 4 μl reducing reagent for 1 h at 60℃, and alkylated by 2 μl cysteine blocking reagent for 10 min at room temperature. The protein samples were then digested with 50 μl trypsin (50 ng/μl) at 37℃ for 12 h. Tryptic peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and labeled using the iTRAQ regents for 2 h at room temperature. Afterwards, 100 μl distilled water was added to stop the reaction. The samples were dried using a vacuum centrifuge and stored till identification analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative iTRAQ quantification were performed using ProteinPilot™ Software 4.5 (AB SCIEX) and Paragon™ algorithm for the peptide recognition. According to the iTRAQ experimental data obtained from ProteinPilot database, PDST (ProteinPilot Descriptive Statistics Template) data analysis software was used to further collate and analyze iTRAQ data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Invasive breast cancer, Fibroadenomas, Breast ductal carcinomas in situ, Isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation.

### Affiliations
Harbin Medical University

### Submitter
Hao Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Da Pang
Harbin Medical University


