### Accession
PXD038201

### Title
A CRISPR/Cas9-mediated screen identifies regulators of early plasma cell differentiation

### Description
The differentiation of B cells into antibody-secreting cells depends on cell division-coupled, epigenetic and other cellular processes that are incompletely understood. We have developed a CRISPR/Cas9-based screen that models an early stage of T cell-dependent plasma cell differentiation and measures B cell survival or proliferation versus the formation of CD138+ plasmablasts. Here, we refined and extended this screen to more than 500 candidate genes that are highly expressed in plasma cells. Among known genes whose deletion preferentially affected plasmablast formation were the transcriptional regulators Prdm1, Irf4 and Pou2af1, and the Ern1 gene encoding the ER stress sensor IRE1a. Moreover, we newly identified several genes involved in NF-kB or p38 signaling (Pim2, Nfkbia, Mapk14), vesicle trafficking (Arf4, Preb) and epigenetic regulators that form part of the NuRD complexes (Hdac1, Mta2, Mbd2). Defective plasmablast formation caused by Ern1 deletion could not be rescued by spliced XBP1 (XBP1s), a transcription factor dependent on and downstream of IRE1a, suggesting that in early plasma cell differentiation IRE1a acts independently of XBP1s. The deletion of ARF4, a small GTPase required for ER-to-Golgi transport, impaired plasmablast formation by blocking antibody secretion. Plasmablast formation after Hdac1 deletion was consistently reduced by about 50%, while deletion of the closely related Hdac2 gene had no effect. Hdac1 knock-out led to strongly perturbed protein expression of antagonistic transcription factors that specify plasma cell versus B cell identity (by decreasing IRF4 and BLIMP1 and increasing BACH2 and PAX5). Taken together, our results highlight specific and non-redundant roles for Ern1, Arf4 and Hdac1 in the early steps of plasma cell differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
TMT proteomics was carried out as previously described (Mertins, Nat Protoc, 2018). Briefly, an amount of 100 µg of each tryptic peptide sample was labelled using randomly assigned channels from TMT10 reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were fractionated into 24 fractions using an UltiMate 3000 Systems (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and measured on a Q Exactive HF-X and a Q Exactive Plus orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an EASY-nLC system 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For analysis, MaxQuant version 1.6.0.13 (Cox, Nat Biotechnol, 2008) was used employing MS2-based reporter ion quantitation. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and deamidation on asparagine and oxidised methionine as variable modifications. A PIF filter was applied with a threshold of 0.5. For database search, a Uniprot mouse database (2018) plus common contaminants were used. For data analysis, corrected log2-transformed reporter ion intensities were used to calculate ratios of treatment over control. The resulting log fold changes were normalized by median-MAD and subjected to a Bland-Altman reproducibility filtering procedure with an alpha value of 0.1 before applying a one-sample moderated t-test (Ritchie, Nucleic Acids Res, 2015). P-values were adjusted using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Regulators, Plasmablasts, Screen, Plasma cell differentiation, Gene knockout, Crispr/cas9, Antibody-secreting cells, Plasma cells and antibody secretion

### Affiliations
Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC), Immune Regulation and Cancer, Berlin, Germany
MDC Berlin

### Submitter
Oliver Popp

### Lab Head
Dr Van Trung Chu
Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC), Immune Regulation and Cancer, Berlin, Germany


