### Accession
PXD015416

### Title
The alarmone (p)ppGpp is part of the heat shock response of Bacillus subtilis

### Description
Here, B. subtilis was used as a model organism to investigate how cells respond and adapt to proteotoxic stress conditions. Our experiments suggested that the stringent response, caused by raised levels of the (p)ppGpp alarmone, plays a role during thermotolerance development and the heat shock response. Accordingly, our experiments revealed a rapid increase of cellular (p)ppGpp levels upon heat shock as well as salt- and oxidative stress. Strains lacking (p)ppGpp exhibited increased stress sensitivity, while raised (p)ppGpp levels conferred increased stress tolerance to heat- and oxidative stress. During thermotolerance development, stress response genes were highly up-regulated together with a concurrent transcriptional down-regulation of the rRNA, which was influenced by the second messenger (p)ppGpp and the transcription factor Spx. Remarkably, we observed that (p)ppGpp appeared to control the cellular translational capacity and that during heat stress the raised cellular levels of the alarmone were able to curb the rate of protein synthesis. Furthermore, (p)ppGpp controls the heat-induced expression of Hpf and thus the formation of translationally inactive 100S disomes.  These results indicate that B. subtilis cells respond to heat-mediated protein unfolding and aggregation, not only by raising the cellular repair capacity, but also by decreasing translation involving (p)ppGpp mediated stringent response to concurrently reduce the protein load for the cellular protein quality control system.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were subjected to SP3 sample preparation (pubmed 30464214). Briefly, to each sample 4x lysis buffer was added (4% SDS, 40 mM TCEP, 160 mM chloroacetamide, 200 mM HEPES pH 8) and proteins were denatured, reduced and alkylated during incubation at 95°C for 5 minutes. 0.8 µL Benzonase (NEB) was added and samples were incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes. Ten µg of a 1:1 mixture of hydrophilic and hydrophobic carboxyl-coated paramagnetic beads (SeraMag, #24152105050250 and #44152105050250, GE Healtcare) were added for each µg of protein. Protein binding was induced by addition of acetonitrile to a final concentration of 50% (v/v). Samples were incubated for 10 minutes at room temperature. The tubes were placed on a magnetic rack and beads were allowed to settle for three minutes. The supernatant was discarded and beads were rinsed three times with 200 µL of 80% ethanol without removing the tubes from the rack. Beads were resuspended in digestion buffer containing 50 mM triethylammmoniumbicarbonate and both Trypsin (Serva) and Lys-C (Wako) in a 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio. Protein digestion was carried out for 14 hours at 37°C in a PCR cycler. Afterwards the supernatant was recovered and 1 µL was used to perform peptide quantification using a quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Pierce, #23275) following the manufacturer’s instructions.  Peptide labeling and fractionation TMT 11plex (Pierce, #A37725) was used for peptide multiplexing and quantification. Briefly, equal amounts of peptides were dried down in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5. Additionally, 10% from each sample was pooled to create a common sample as internal standard. TMT reagents were allowed to equilibrate to room temperature for 30 minutes and were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile to a final concentration of 59 mM. To each sample TMT was added to a final concentration of 11.8 mM and tubes were incubated at 25°C for 60 minutes with mixing at 500 rpm on a ThermoMixer. Labeling was quenched by addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.4%. Samples were mixed, desalted using solid phase extraction (Seppak 1cc/50mg, Waters), dried down in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 20 µL 2% acetonitrile. Basic reversed phase fractionation was performed on a quaternary Agilent 1290 Infinity II UPLC system equipped with a Kinetex Evo-C18 column (150 x 2.1 mm, 2.6µm, 100 Å, Phenomenex) that was operated at 40°C. Solvent A consisted of water, solvent B consisted of 100% acetonitrile, and solvent C consisted of 25 mM ammoniumbicarbonate. Fractionation was carried out at a constant flow rate of 100 µl/min using a linear gradient from 2-25% acetonitrile within 50 minutes, followed by column washing and equilibration. Over the whole gradient solvent C was kept constant at 10%. In total 32 fractions were collected in conical 96well plates. The organic solvent was removed in a vacuum concentrator for one hour and fractions were concatenated into 8 final samples. Peptides were acidified with formic acid, desalted using OASIS HLB 96well cartridges (Waters, #186001828BA), dried down and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) prior MS analysis.  Mass spectrometry All samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to a 3000 RSLC nano UPLC (Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded on a pepmap trap cartridge (300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, C18, Thermo) with 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 20 µL/min. Peptides were separated over a 50 cm analytical column (Picofrit, 360 µm O.D., 75 µm I.D., 10 µm tip opening, non-coated, New Objective) that was packed in-house with Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7 µm (Agilent). Solvent A consists of 0.1% formic acid in water. Elution was carried out at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using a 180 minute method: 8-33% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) within 120 minutes, 33-48% solvent B within 25 minutes, 48-98% buffer B within 1 minute, followed by column washing and equilibration. Data acquisition on the Q-Exactive HF was carried out using a data-dependent method in positive ion mode. MS survey scans were acquired from 375-1500 m/z in profile mode at a resolution of 120,000. AGC target was set to 3e6 charges at a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The ten most abundant peptides were isolated within a 0.7 m/z window offset by +0.1 m/z and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 32%. The MS2 AGC target was set to 2e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 78 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 45,000. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Scientific). Briefly, peak lists were extracted from raw files and searched using SEQUEST HT against a Uniprot bacillus subtilis database (version 190614, taxonomy ID 224308) and a database containing sequences of common contaminants (derived from Maxquant v.1.6.0.1). Trypsin/p was set as enzyme specificity, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as fixed modification. Protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine, and TMT on lysines and peptide n-termini were allowed as variable modifications. Mass tolerances for MS1 and MS2 were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Peptide-spectrum-matches (PSMs) were filtered to a 1% FDR level using Percolator employing a target/decoy approach. Only rank 1 peptides were allowed. TMT reporter ion intensities were quantified within 20 ppm windows and quan value correction was used to correct for reagent isotope impurities. Only unique peptides were used for protein quantification. PSM with a co-isolation value of >50% were rejected. Further data processing was carried out in R and Perseus (v. 1.6.2.3). Only proteins identified with at least two peptides were included in the analysis. All contaminant proteins and proteins that have not been quantified in all 18 samples were filtered out. A three step normalization procedure was applied. First, the sum of the reporter ion intensities for each TMT channel was normalized to the average grand total to correct for mixing errors. Next, the common internal standard in each TMT 11plex set was used for internal reference scaling (pubmed ref 28325852) in order to correct for batch effects. Afterwards the data was normalized applying trimmed mean of M values (TMM) using the edgeR package. Statistical analysis was performed using two-sample t-tests and multiple sample ANOVA tests. Resulting p-values were corrected for multiple testing using a permutation-based FDR approach or by the method of Benjamini-Hochberg. Hierarchical clustering was performed on the z-scored averaged intensities using Euclidian distances.

### Publication Abstract
Bacillus subtilis cells are well suited to study how bacteria sense and adapt to proteotoxic stress such as heat, since temperature fluctuations are a major challenge to soil-dwelling bacteria. Here, we show that the alarmones (p)ppGpp, well known second messengers of nutrient starvation, are also involved in the heat stress response as well as the development of thermo-resistance. Upon heat-shock, intracellular levels of (p)ppGpp rise in a rapid but transient manner. The heat-induced (p)ppGpp is primarily produced by the ribosome-associated alarmone synthetase Rel, while the small alarmone synthetases RelP and RelQ seem not to be involved. Furthermore, our study shows that the generated (p)ppGpp pulse primarily acts at the level of translation, and only specific genes are regulated at the transcriptional level. These include the down-regulation of some translation-related genes and the up-regulation of hpf, encoding the ribosome-protecting hibernation-promoting factor. In addition, the alarmones appear to interact with the activity of the stress transcription factor Spx during heat stress. Taken together, our study suggests that (p)ppGpp modulates the translational capacity at elevated temperatures and thereby allows B. subtilis cells to respond to proteotoxic stress, not only by raising the cellular repair capacity, but also by decreasing translation to concurrently reduce the protein load on the cellular protein quality control system.

### Keywords
Bacillus subtilis; heat stress response; stringent response; (p)ppgpp; alarmone; rel; spx

### Affiliations
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens, Chariteplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Frese

### Lab Head
Dr Christian K. Frese
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens, Chariteplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany


