### Accession
PXD039547

### Title
Unchanged PCNA and DNMT1 dynamics during replication in DNA ligase I-deficient cells but abnormal chromatin levels of non-replicative histone H1

### Description
DNA ligase I (LigI), the predominant enzyme that joins Okazaki fragments, interacts with PCNA and Pol d. LigI also interacts with UHRF1, linking Okazaki fragment joining with DNA maintenance methylation. Okazaki fragments can also be joined by a relatively poorly characterized DNA ligase IIIa (LigIIIa)-dependent backup pathway. Here we examined the effect of LigI-deficiency on proteins at the replication fork. Notably, LigI-deficiency did not alter the kinetics of association of the PCNA clamp, the leading strand polymerase Pol e, DNA maintenance methylation proteins and core histones with newly synthesized DNA. While the absence of major changes in replication and methylation proteins is consistent with the similar proliferation rate and DNA methylation levels of the LIG1 null cells compared with the parental cells, the increased levels of LigIIIa/XRCC1 and Pol d at the replication fork and in bulk chromatin indicate that there are subtle replication defects in the absence of LigI. Interestingly, the non-replicative histone H1 variant, H1.0, is present in the chromatin of LigI-deficient mouse and human cells. This alteration was not corrected by expression of wild type LigI, suggesting that it is a stable epigenetic change that may contribute to the immunodeficiencies linked with inherited LigI-deficiency syndrome.

### Sample Protocol
Identification of proteins by mass spectrometry following aniPOND was performed (. Briefly, CH12F3 cells were grown in T175 flasks for 48 hours until approximately 1 x 108 cells were present in exponential growth phase. Cells were pulse labelled with 10 μM EdU (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. T511285) for 15 mins followed by centrifugation and aspiration of the EdU-containing medium. No-click control (NCC) and pulse (T0) samples were resuspended in ice cold buffer A (20 mM HEPES-NaOH pH 7.2, 50 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 300 mM sucrose, 0.5% IGEPAL CA630) and thymidine chase samples were resuspended in thymidine (Sigma-Aldrich, cat. no. T9250) containing medium to a final concentration of 10 µM for indicated chase times lengths following which the chase samples were also resuspended in buffer A to lyse the cells and obtain the nuclei. The nuclei were  then washed with ice-cold PBS and treated with Click /No click reaction mixture (25 μM biotin-PEG3-azide; Sigma-Aldrich, cat.no. 762024 (DMSO used for NCC), 10 mM sodium L-ascorbate, 2 mM copper (II) sulfate in PBS). Following an ice-cold wash in phosphate-buffered saline, nuclei were treated with buffer B (25 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1% IGEPAL CA630, protease inhibitors) and subjected to sonication on ice (6 rounds of 10” on and 10” off cycles at 10W output). The sonicated chromatin fraction (20 µl) was removed to be used as INPUT. Streptavidin-coated beads (Pierce, cat. No. 20359) were added to the rest of the chromatin fraction and rotated at 4°C overnight to immunoprecipitate the biotin labelled chromatin. The sample was extensively washed with Buffer B without protease inhibitors and all of the buffer was aspirated after the last wash. The beads were resuspended in 2X Laemmli buffer with 5% v/v β-mercaptoethanol and boiled for 15 mins to elute the bead bound proteins). Briefly, CH12F3-WT and LIG1 null cells were grown either in light or heavy SILAC media and processed by aniPOND as described earlier except that prior to the click reaction, samples from light and heavy labeled cells were mixed 1:1 and then separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue. Gel regions above and below the streptavidin band were excised and then processed as described. Tryptic peptides were separated by MudPIT using an 8-step salt gradient and then identified by mass spectrometry as described (MS) in the Vanderbilt Mass Spectrometry Research Center Proteomics Core

### Data Protocol
For peptide and protein identification, data were analyzed using the Maxquant software package, version 1.3.0.5 with MS/MS spectra searched against the UniprotKB protein database. Peptide intensities for specific proteins were normalized by dividing by the intensity value for H4 histone peptides. The ratio of the normalized values for a protein were calculated by the dividing normalized values from the heavy isotope-labeled extract from the LIG1 null cells by the normalized values from the light isotope-labeled extract from the wild type parental cells (Run 1). Similar experiments were carried out in which the heavy and light isotope media were switched (Run 2). For the analysis of bulk chromatin, the arithmetic mean of the ratios for specific proteins from the run 1 and run 2 were calculated used as the average ratio shown on the plots. The calculations and graphics were performed by programming in R 4.0.1 [58] using the free platform RStudio 2022.02.03.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dna ligase i, Dna replication, Anipond-ms

### Affiliations
department of internal medicine, university of new mexico
University of New Mexico

### Submitter
Seema Khattri Bhandari

### Lab Head
Dr Alan E Tomkinson
department of internal medicine, university of new mexico


