### Accession
PXD006338

### Title
Evaluation of a bead-free immunoprecipitation technique coupled with tandem mass spectrometry for identification of plant-virus protein interactions (DeBlasio_JBT_2017)

### Description
Potato leafroll virus (PLRV) is an aphid-borne, RNA virus in the Luteoviridae that causes significant loss to potato production worldwide. Precision methods to block virus infection in plants or the transmission of a virus by the insect represent new approaches to virus disease management and require an in depth knowledge of the protein interactions used by viruses in their plant hosts and aphid vectors. In this study, we evaluated the feasibility of using an inexpensive, bead-free assay to identify plant proteins that interact with wild-type (WT) and PLRV mutant form. Comparison of host and viral proteins identified as enriched ³2-fold in both WT and mutant experiments using the bead-free method revealed a ~65% overlap with proteins identified as forming high-confident interactions with PLRV using antibody coated-magnetic beads with 19 of these proteins also detected as significant interactions in the bead-free assay. An additional 18 virus-host interactions were only identified in the bead-free assay. Two prey proteins, a 14-3-3 signal transduction protein and malate dehydrogenase 2, were identified as having a weakened or lost association with the mutant form of the virus in both immunoprecipitation assays, showing that the method is sensitive enough to detect quantitative differences between different, yet closely related viral bait proteins. Collectively, our analysis shows that the bead-free platform is a low-cost alternative that can be used by core facilities and other investigators to reproducibly identify plant and viral proteins interacting with virions.

### Sample Protocol
One hundred microliters of -PLRV capture antibody (Agdia, Elkhart IN) diluted 1:200 in coating buffer (15 mM Na2CO3, 35 mM NaHCO3) were added to individual wells of a 96-well microtitre plate (Agdia, Elkhart IN). Plates were incubated at 37°C for 2 h. Antibody solution was removed with a pipette and each well washed 4X with 100 L of 1X PBS, pH 7.2 (PBS) made with nanopure H2O using detergent free glassware. For the first wash, 100 L of 1X PBS was quickly pipetted up and down within the well 4X before being discarded. For the additional three washes, wells were incubated with 100 L of 1X PBS for 5 min at room temperature before solution discarded. Plates were dried between each washing step by inverting and tapping plate firmly on lint-free Kimtech kimwipes (Kimberly-Clark Professional, Roswell GA). One hundred microliters of the 1X PBS-extracted N. benthamiana homogenate (locally infected with PLRV or mock infiltrated with Agrobacterium strain LB4404) was added to antibody-coated wells. Plates were sealed with Parafilm M and incubated at 4C for ~16 h in a humid chamber. Plant homogenate was carefully removed with a pipette and individual wells washed and dried following the same procedure mentioned above. Plates were stored at  –80C until the on-plate sample preparation for MS analysis. A total of 2-3 technical replicates were performed for each biological replicate. Data represents two independent experiments. Protein complexes resulting from the microtitre plate co-IP were reduced by adding 22 L of 6M Urea and 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC, Sigma, St. Louis, MO) to each well and pipetting vigorously to resuspend captured host-virus protein complexes. Plates were sealed with foil and Parafilm, sonicated for 2 min and incubated at 37C for 1 hr. Samples were alkylated with 30 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) for 1 hr at 37C. Microtiter plates were sonicated for 2 min and the urea in each sample diluted to 1M with 100 mM ABC. Proteins were then digested with 100 ng of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, WI) overnight at 37C. After digestion, plates were sonicated for 10 min and dried in a speed vac. Samples were re-suspended in 20 uL of 0.1% formic acid, sonicated and desalted using C18 Zip-tip (Merck Millipore, Co. Cork, UK) following manufacture’s instructions. Peptides were stored at -80°C prior to MS analysis. For mass spectrometric analysis, tryptic peptides were solubilized in 5-8 l of Solvent A by vortexing for 10 min at 37 C and bath sonication for 5 min. Splitless nanoflow chromatography was performed in the vented column configuration using a Waters NanoAcquity LC system (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). Solvents A and B were 99.9/0.1 water/formic acid and 99.9/0.1 acetonitrile/formic acid, respectively. A flow rate of 2 μL/min (98%A/2% B) flushed sample out of a 5 μL loop and onto a self-packed capillary trap column (100 μm ID × 4 cm). After 10 μL of wash, the six-port valve switched and closed the vent that initiated the gradient flow (250 nL/min) and data acquisition. A 60 min analysis was in which Solvent B ramped from 2-32 % B over 40 min (1-41 min); held constant at 80% for 5 min (41-46 min) and initial conditions were restored for the final 14 min (46-60 min). An Orbitrap-Velos (ThermoFisher, Bremen Germany) was operated in data dependent mode where the top 10 most abundant ions were selected for tandem MS per precursor scan. For MS1 analysis performed in the orbitrap, a scan range of m/z 400-1400 with a resolving power of 60,000 @ m/z 400 was employed. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 1,000,000 ions with a max ion injection time of 200 ms. For data dependent MS2 scans, performed in the ion trap with an AGC of 10000 ions and a max ion injection time of 80 ms. A 60s exclusion window was used to avoid repeated interrogation of abundant ions. For selection of ions, monoisotopic precursor selection was on with the exclusion of unassigned and 1+ charge states. Each sample was analyzed once due to the small sample volume used to maximize peptide concentration.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label-free quantification of mass spectrometry data was performed following methods described in DeBlasio et al. (2015)1 with the following exceptions: 1) oxidized methionine and methylthio on cysteines were the only variable and fixed modifications used, respectively, for the dataset presented and ; 2) a separate mascot search was done using lysine acetylation and phosphorylation of serine and threonine as variable modifications to identify post-translational modifications of PLRV CP/RTD; 3) a peptide and protein identification threshold of 95% and  90%, respectively, was used for cluster analysis in Scaffold Q+ v4.4.6 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR) and the total spectral counts detected per biological replicate for individual proteins reported. The false discovery rate for this analysis was < 1% on the protein and peptide level. The relative levels of PLRV CP (gi|21040163), immunoglobulin gamma1 constant region (IGG, gi|89242507) and bovine serum albumin (gi|3336842) were also quantified in Skyline2 using precursor ion (MS1) peak integration of 3-4 peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Protein interactions between virus and host are essential for viral propagation and movement, as viruses lack most of the proteins required to thrive on their own. Precision methods aimed at disrupting virus-host interactions represent new approaches to disease management but require in-depth knowledge of the identity and binding specificity of host proteins within these interaction networks. Protein coimmunoprecipitation (co-IP) coupled with mass spectrometry (MS) provides a high-throughput way to characterize virus-host interactomes in a single experiment. Common co-IP methods use antibodies immobilized on agarose or magnetic beads to isolate virus-host complexes in solutions of host tissue homogenate. Although these workflows are well established, they can be fairly laborious and expensive. Therefore, we evaluated the feasibility of using antibody-coated microtiter plates coupled with MS analysis as an easy, less expensive way to identify host proteins that interact with Potato leafroll virus (PLRV), an insect-borne RNA virus that infects potatoes. With the use of the bead-free platform, we were able to detect 36 plant and 1 nonstructural viral protein significantly coimmunoprecipitating with PLRV. Two of these proteins, a 14-3-3 signal transduction protein and malate dehydrogenase 2 (mMDH2), were detected as having a weakened or lost association with a structural mutant of the virus, demonstrating that the bead-free method is sensitive enough to detect quantitative differences that can be used to pin-point domains of interaction. Collectively, our analysis shows that the bead-free platform is a low-cost alternative that can be used by core facilities and other investigators to identify plant and viral proteins interacting with virions and/or the viral structural proteins.

### Keywords
Molecular virology, Phloem-limited, Potato leafroll virus, Luteoviridae, Bead-free immunoprecipitation; plant-virus interactome; tandem mass spectrometry, Polerovirus, Host-pathogen interactions

### Affiliations
USDA-ARS, Boyce Thompson Institute, Cornell University
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
Stacy DeBlasio

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle Cilia
USDA-ARS, Boyce Thompson Institute, Cornell University


