### Accession
PXD011474

### Title
Deoxynivalenol and A431 epidermoid squamous carcinoma cells: proteomic profiling reveals the pathways connecting ribosomal inhibition with the loss of function of the cell membrane

### Description
The possibility to combine proteomics workflows to classical experimental approaches is continuously opening new insights in all branches of biological sciences. Deoxynivalenol (vomitoxin, DON) is a secondary metabolite produced by Fusarium spp. fungi and it is one of the most recurrent mycotoxins worldwide. DON is known to inhibit protein synthesis and as such interact with the cell models in multiple and complex ways whose comprehension enormously benefit of the system toxicology approach. For the purpose of this study epidermoid squamous cell carcinoma cells A431 were incubated with DON for 24h and toxin dependent variation of the proteome profile was obtained with a LC-MS/MS approach using a reversed phase nanoLC-System (Ultimate 3000RSLC Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) hyphenated to a High Resolution Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific™ Q Exactive™ Classic). DON significantly down-regulated ribosomal proteins, as well as mitochondrial respiratory chain elements and transport proteins (TOMM22; TOMM40; TOMM70A). In line with the loss of mitochondrial function, altered metabolic capability was observed, with particular impairment of lipid synthesis cascade. Effect of the mycotoxin on cell membrane was verified by confocal microscopy (morphology) and by membrane fluidity measures (biophysical properties).

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture For the characterization of the toxicity of DON in the biomechanical stimulated environment the epidermoid carcinoma cell line A431 was used. Cells were cultivated in Minimum Essential Medium (MEM) supplemented with L-glutamine (4.5 g/L), 10% (v/v) heat inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% (v/v) penicillin/streptomycin and maintained in humidified incubators at 37°C and 5% CO2. For the performance of the biomechanical stimulation experiments, cells were seeded on a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) membrane functionalized with Matrigel Matrix (Corning, Discovery Labware, MA; USA). At the day of the experiments, medium was substituted by phenol-red free medium D-2909 supplemented with 10% (v/v) heat inactivated fetal serum (FBS), 1% (v/v) penicillin/streptomycin and 25mM HEPES (pH 7.4). If not otherwise specified, cell culture media and supplements were purchased from GIBCO Invitrogen (Karlsruhe, Germany), Sigma-Aldrich Chemie GmbH (Munich, Germany) and Sarstedt AG & Co (Nuembrecht, Germany), VWR International GmbH (Vienna, Austria) and Thermo Fisher Scientific GmbH (Vienna, Austria). Deoxynivalenol DON was purchased from Romer Labs Diagnostic GmbH (Tulln, Austria). For cellular experiments, solid substance was dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO; Carl Roth GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany) at the respective stock solutions were stored at -80°C and dilutes in cell culture medium (1:1000) for the performance of the experiments.  Proteomic analysis For the proteomic analysis cells were seeded in 6-well plates, allowed to settle for 48h and incubated with DON (0.1, 1, 10µM) or solvent control (DMSO 1:1000) for 24h. At the end of the incubation, cells were lysed in isotonic lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES/NaOH, pH 7.4, 0.25 M sucrose, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.5% Triton X-100) supplemented with Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail  (Sigma-Aldrich, Vienna, Austria) and 1 mM PMSF under mechanical shear stress. By centrifugation at 3500 g and 4 ° C for 5 min, the cytoplasmic proteins were separated from the nuclei and precipitated overnight with ice-cold ethanol at −20 °C. MS-sample preparation 50 μg of each sample was loaded on an SDS-PAGE and allowed to separate for 0.3 cm, after what proteins in the gel were stained by an MS-compatible silver staining procedure. Afterward, each protein band was cut into pieces. Upon reduction with DTT (37°C, 30 min) and alkylation with IAA (30°C, 30 min in the dark), the proteins were digested for 14 h and 4 h at 37 °C using Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (MS grade; Promega Corporation, Madison, WI). The digested peptides were eluted, three times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and twice with 5% FA. The eluted peptide samples were collected and dried. LC-MS analysis Dried samples were reconstituted in 5µl 30% formic acid (FA) containing 10fmol each of four synthetic standard peptides and diluted with 40µl mobile phase A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA). 5µl of this solution were then injected into the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC-system coupled to a QExactive orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria). As a pre-concentration step, peptides were loaded on a 2cm x75µm C18 Pepmap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) at a flow rate of 10µl/min using mobile phase A. Elution from the pre-column to a 50cm x75µm Pepmap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) and subsequent separation was achieved at a flow rate of 300nl/min using a gradient of 8% to 40% mobile phase B (80% ACN, 2% H2O, 0.1% FA) over 90min. For mass spectrometric detection, MS scans were performed in the range from m/z 400-1400 at a resolution of 70000 (at m/z =200). MS/MS scans of the 8 most abundant ions were achieved through HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy and analyzed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17500 (at m/z =200).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.338 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification searching against the SwissProt Database (version 01/2018 with 20 258 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 50ppm for MS spectra and 100mmu for MS/MS spectra, a FDR < 0.01 and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Deoxynivalenol (vomitoxin, DON) is a secondary metabolite produced by Fusarium spp. fungi and it is one of the most prevalent mycotoxins worldwide. Crop infestation results not only in food and feed contamination, but also in direct dermal exposure, especially during harvest and food processing. To investigate the potential dermotoxicity of DON, epidermoid squamous cell carcinoma cells A431 were compared to primary human neonatal keratinocytes (HEKn) cells via proteome/phosphoproteome profiling. In A431 cells, 10&#xa0;&#xb5;M DON significantly down-regulated ribosomal proteins, as well as mitochondrial respiratory chain elements (OXPHOS regulation) and transport proteins (TOMM22; TOMM40; TOMM70A). Mitochondrial impairment was reflected in altered metabolic competence, apparently combined with interference of the lipid biosynthesis machinery. Functional effects on the cell membrane were confirmed by live cell imaging and membrane fluidity assays (0.1-10&#xa0;&#xb5;M DON). Moreover, a common denominator for both A431 and HEKn cells was a significant downregulation of the squalene synthase (FDFT1). In sum, proteome alterations could be traced back to the transcription factor Klf4, a crucial regulator of skin barrier function. Overall, these results describe decisive molecular events sustaining the capability of DON to impair skin barrier function. Proteome data generated in the study are fully accessible via ProteomeXchange with the accession numbers PXD011474 and PXD013613.

### Keywords
Vomitoxin); a431 cells; phosphoproteomics, Deoxynivalenol (don

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


