### Accession
PXD030599

### Title
VRK1 is required in VRK2-methylated cancers of the nervous system

### Description
Collateral lethality occurs when loss of one paralog renders cancer cells dependent on the remaining paralog. Combining genome scale CRISPR/Cas9 screens coupled with RNA-sequencing in over 900 cancer cell lines, we found that cancers of nervous system lineage, including adult and pediatric gliomas and neuroblastomas, required the nuclear kinase Vaccinia-Related Kinase 1 (VRK1) for their survival. VRK1 dependency was inversely correlated with expression of its paralog VRK2. VRK2 knockout in VRK2-expressing cell lines sensitized cells to VRK1 knockout, and conversely, VRK2 overexpression increased cell fitness in VRK1-dependent cell lines upon suppression of VRK1. DNA methylation of the VRK2 promoter was associated with low VRK2 expression in human neuroblastomas, and adult and pediatric gliomas. Mechanistically, depletion of VRK1 reduced Barrier-to-Autointegration Factor (BAF) phosphorylation, induced abnormal chromosome segregation. and dysregulated nuclear membrane re-formation following mitosis, resulting in increased DNA damage and apoptosis. Together, these observations identify VRK1 as a synthetic lethal target in VRK2-methylated adult and pediatric gliomas and neuroblastomas.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed with the SL-TMT protocol and phospho-enrichment methods described previously [Navarrete-Perea, Jose; Yu, Qing; Gygi, Steven P.; Paulo, Joao A. Journal of Proteome Research (2018), 17 (6)], [Olesja Popow, Xinyue Liu, Kevin M Haigis, Steven P Gygi, Joao A Paulo; J Proteome Res. 2021 Jul 2;20(7):3678-3688].  Data were acquired with Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer with FAIMS and coupled to a Proxeon NanoLC-1200 UHPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific)

### Data Protocol
In-house software tools were used to for .RAW file processing and controlling peptide and protein level false discovery rates, assembling proteins from peptides, and protein quantification from peptides as previously described (Li et al., Nat Methods. 2020 Apr;17(4):399-404). MS/MS spectra were searched against a Uniprot Mouse database.  Phosphorylation site localization was determined using the AScore algorithm[Nat Biotechnol. 2006 Oct;24(10):1285-92] using a threshold of 13 corresponding to 95% confidence in site localization. TMT reporter ion intensities were measured using a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z for each reporter ion. Proteins with <100 summed signal-to-noise across all channels and <0.5 precursor isolation specificity were excluded from the final dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Collateral lethality occurs when loss of a gene/protein renders cancer cells dependent on its remaining paralog. Combining genome-scale CRISPR/Cas9 loss-of-function screens with RNA sequencing in over 900 cancer cell lines, we found that cancers of nervous system lineage, including adult and pediatric gliomas and neuroblastomas, required the nuclear kinase vaccinia-related kinase 1 (VRK1) for their survival in vivo. VRK1 dependency was inversely correlated with expression of its paralog VRK2. VRK2 knockout sensitized cells to VRK1 loss, and conversely, VRK2 overexpression increased cell fitness in the setting of VRK1 loss. DNA methylation of the VRK2 promoter was associated with low VRK2 expression in human neuroblastomas and adult and pediatric gliomas. Mechanistically, depletion of VRK1 reduced barrier-to-autointegration factor phosphorylation during mitosis, resulting in DNA damage and apoptosis. Together, these studies identify VRK1 as a synthetic lethal target in VRK2 promoter-methylated adult and pediatric gliomas and neuroblastomas.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Thermo Fisher Scientific Center  for Multiplexed Proteomics

### Lab Head
Dr William Hahn
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute


