### Accession
PXD006256

### Title
Proteomic profiling of archeological human bone

### Description
We performed shotgun proteomics of human remains using rib bones from the Hitotsubashi site (1657–1683 AD) in Tokyo, called Edo in ancient times.  Two infants and six adults, including four elderly adults, were obtained from the skeletal collection of the Hitotsubashi site in Tokyo, Japan. The individuals buried in this graveyard are townspeople, known from the fact that the largest proportion of graves consisted of the wooden coffins typically used for the lower social classes. The sex and age at death of the adult skeletons were estimated using the diagnostic standards of Nagaoka and Hirata (Nagaoka et al., 2007). Sex was determined by the sexual dimorphism of the pelvis (e.g., Bruzek, 2002). This study estimated age at death for each individual by the observation of the auricular surface of the ilium using the method of Buckberry and Chamberlain. Each obtained stage of the auricular surface of the ilium is then transformed into an average age at death with standard deviation shown in the data of Buckberry and Chamberlain. The age at death of sub-adults was estimated by the degree of formation and eruption of teeth.

### Sample Protocol
Samples (30–50 mg) were ground and used for protein extraction. Powdered bone samples were washed three times with 300 μl 0.5 M EDTA (pH 8.0), followed by incubation at 4 ˚C for 24–48 hours with agitation. Samples were washed again three times with 100 μl 0.1 M Tris (pH 8.0). Samples were suspended in 300 μl 6 M Guanidinium hydrochloride (GuHCl), 10 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, 20 mM chloroacetamide and 200 mM Tris (pH 8.0), and then smashed using a pestle. Samples were heated at 80 ˚C for 2 hours, and cooled to room temperature. LysC-Trypsin mix by 1/100 amount of protein was added to the samples for protein digestion. Mixed samples were incubated at 25 ˚C for 30 min then diluted to 2 M GuHCl with 25 mM Tris (pH 8.0), followed by incubation at 37 ˚C overnight with agitation. Digestion was terminated with 10% trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1%. After centrifugation at 14,000 g for 10 min, the tryptic peptides in the supernatant were immobilized on C18 stage tips as previously described (Cappellini et al., 2012). Peptide mixtures were analyzed by online nanoflow reversed-phase C18 LC-MS/MS, as described previously (Cappellini et al., 2012).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were processed with Maxquant version 1.5.3.28 and Andromeda against the human reference proteome (UniProtKB). In every search, spectra matched against the common contaminants database were removed except ALB, a common protein in bones. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M and P), Gln → pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Glu → pyro-Glu (N-term E), deamidation (N and Q) and hydroxyproline were used as variable modifications. Up to seven modifications per peptide and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The false-discovery rate was set at 1%. Other parameters were used as those pre-set in the software. In order to compare the amount of proteins among samples, detected proteins were quantified using the exponentially modified protein abundance index (emPAI) score. The emPAI score is calculated using the number of detected peptides normalized by the number of theoretically observable ones. The emPAI score of basic salivary proline-rich protein 3 (PRB3) was quite high because the number of theoretically observable peptides is two, which is too small for calculating emPAI. We therefore excluded this protein.

### Publication Abstract
Ancient protein analysis provides clues to human life and diseases from ancient times. Here, we performed shotgun proteomics of human archeological bones for the first time, using rib bones from the Hitotsubashi site (AD 1657-1683) in Tokyo, called Edo in ancient times. The output data obtained were analysed using Gene Ontology and label-free quantification. We detected leucocyte-derived proteins, possibly originating from the bone marrow of the rib. Particularly prevalent and relatively high expression of eosinophil peroxidase suggests the influence of infectious diseases. This scenario is plausible, considering the overcrowding and unhygienic living conditions of the Edo city described in the historical literature. We also observed age-dependent differences in proteome profiles, particularly for proteins involved in developmental processes. Among them, alpha-2-HS-glycoprotein demonstrated a strong negative correlation with age. These results suggest that analysis of ancient proteins could provide a useful indicator of stress, disease, starvation, obesity and other kinds of physiological and pathological information.

### Keywords
Human, Ancient proteins, Edo period, Bone

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, the Uni- versity of Tokyo, 7–3–1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113–0033, Japan.
The University of Tokyo

### Submitter
Rikai Sawafuji

### Lab Head
Dr Shintaroh Ueda
Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, the Uni- versity of Tokyo, 7–3–1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113–0033, Japan.


