### Accession
PXD039480

### Title
Rhabdomyosarcoma surfaceome profiling with six fusion-positive (FP) RMS cell lines, five fusion-negative (FN) RMS cell lines, and three ARMS patient-derived xenografts (PDXs)

### Description
Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft tissue sarcoma in children. Prognosis for patients with high grade and metastatic disease is still very poor, and survivors are burdened with long-lasting side effects. Therefore, more effective and less toxic therapies are needed. Surface proteins are ideal targets for antibody-based therapies, like bispecific antibodies, antibody drug conjugates, or chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell. Specific surface targets for RMS are scarce. Here, we performed a surfaceome profiling based on differential centrifugation enrichment of surface/membrane proteins and detection by LC-MS on six fusion-positive (FP) RMS cell lines, five fusion-negative (FN) RMS cell lines, and three RMS patient-derived xenografts (PDXs). 699 proteins were detected in the three RMS groups. Ranking based on expression levels and comparison to expression in normal MRC-5 fibroblasts and myoblasts, followed by statistical analysis, highlighted known RMS targets such as FGFR4, NCAM1, and CD276/B7-H3, and revealed AGRL2, JAM3, MEGF10, GPC4, CADM2, as potential targets for immunotherapies of RMS. L1CAM expression was investigated in RMS tissues and strong L1CAM expression was observed in more than 80% of alveolar RMS tumors, making it a practicable target for antibody-based therapies of alveolar RMS.

### Sample Protocol
Alveolar (fusion positive) RMS cell lines: Rh4, Rh5, Rh30, JR, RMS, RUCH-3,  Embryonal (fusion negative) RMS cell lines: Rh18, Rh28, RD, TTC-442, Rh36 Human RMS cell lines RD, Rh4, Rh5, Rh18, Rh28, Rh30, Rh36, JR, RMS, RUCH-3, TTC-442 were a kindly provided by Prof. Beat Schäfer, University Children’s Hospital Zurich, Switzerland. PDX IC-pPDX-104 (referred to as PDX_104), IC-pPDX-29 (referred to as PDX_29), and IC-pPDX-35 (referred to as PDX_35) were established at the Institut Curie in Paris, France as described in [100,101]. IC-pPDX-29: 14 years old female, with recurrent primary paravertebral ARMS (PAX3-FOXO1 translocation status unknown). IC-pPDX-35: 13 years old male, with recurrent metastatic ARMS with PAX3-FOXO1 translocation to the mediastinum. IC-pPDX-104: 7 years old female, with recurrent pri-mary ARMS with PAX3-FOXO1 translocation to the tibia. Immortalized human healthy primary myoblasts KM155C25Dist (referred to as myoblasts), kindly provided by the platform for immortalization of human cells from the Institut de Myologie (Sorbonne University, Paris, France), and the MRC-5 cell line (ATCC) were used as negative con-trols. All cell lines, with the exception of human myoblasts, were cultured in DMEM (BioConcept, #1-26F01-I), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Thermofish-er, #10270106), L-glutamine 2 mM (BioConcept, #5-10K00-H) and 100 U/ml Penicillin-Streptomycin (BioConcept, #4-01F00-H) at 37°C and 5% CO2 in a humidified incubator. Myoblasts were cultured in Skeletal Muscle Cell Growth Medium (PromoCell, #C-23060) supplemented with Skeletal Muscle Cell Growth Medium SupplementMix (Pro-moCell, #C-39365). IC-pPDX-104, IC-pPDX-29, and IC-pPDX-35 were cultured in five P15 dishes, pre-coated with 1:10 diluted matrigel (Corning, 354234) into 3 ml of pre-cooled neurobasal medium (Gibco, #10888022), supplemented with Glutamax (Gibco, #35050), 100 U/ml Penicillin-Streptomycin (BioConcept, #4-01F00-H), 2x B-27 (Life Tech-nologies, #17504044), 20 ng/ml bFGF (PeproTech, #AF-100-18B), 20 ng/ml EGF (Pepro-Tech, #AF-100-15).  Membrane/surface proteins were enriched with a two-step protocol of ultracentrifugation and high salt washes (Lin, P.H.; Selinfreund, R.; Wakshull, E.; Wharton, W. Rapid and efficient purification of plasma membrane from cultured cells: characterization of epidermal growth factor binding. Biochemistry 1987, 26, 731-736, doi:10.1021/bi00377a012). Briefly, 1x10e7 cells were seeded on five P15 dishes. On the day of the experiment, 80-90% confluent cells were gently washed twice with PBS at RT, collected with a scraper, and centrifuged at 700xg at RT for 5 min. After resuspension in 1ml cold hypotonic buffer (50 mM Mannitol, 5 mM HEPES, pH 7.4), the cells were homogenized with 1 min sonication (10% duty cycle, Branson Sonifer 250), and centrifuged at 600xg at 4°C for 10 min. The supernatant was then processed following differential centrifugations: 15’000xg, 4°C for 5 min; wash in 10 mM CaCl2; shaking at 4°C for 10 min; 3’000xg at RT for 15 min; 48’000xg for 30 min at RT; wash in 1 M KCl; 48’000xg at RT for 30 min; wash in 0.5 mL 100 mM Na2CO3; 48’000xg at RT for 30 min. Next, all the samples were resuspended in 20µL Laemmli buffer (62.5 mM TrisHCl, pH 6.8, 1% SDS, 10% Glycerol, 40 mM DTT) and separated by 1D gel-electrophoresis, 1.5 cm long gel-migration. For all the cell lines, three replicates were obtained. The SDS gel was fixed with 10% glacial acetic acid / 40% EtOH, stained with 0.1% Brilliant Blue G in 45% EtOH / 10% acetic acid and destained with 10% glacial acetic acid / 40% EtOH in order to visualize the protein bands. Each lane was cut in four horizontal bands, and each band was further cut in six gel cubes. The six pieces of gel were then stored in 20% EtOH at 4°C until processing. Proteins were in-gel digested as previously described (Gunasekera, K.; Wuthrich, D.; Braga-Lagache, S.; Heller, M.; Ochsenreiter, T. Proteome remodelling during development from blood to insect-form Trypanosoma brucei quantified by SILAC and mass spectrometry. BMC Genomics 2012, 13, 556, doi:10.1186/1471-2164-13-556). Digests were loaded onto a pre-column (C18 PepMap 100, 5µm, 100A, 300µm i.d. x 5mm length) at a flow rate of 50µL/min with solvent C (0.05% TFA in water/acetonitrile 98:2). After loading, peptides were eluted in back flush mode onto a homemade C18 CSH Waters column (1.7 μm, 130 Å, 75 μm × 20 cm) by applying a 40 min gradient of 5% acetonitrile to 40% in water, 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column effluent was directly coupled to a Fusion LUMOS mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer, Bremen; Germany) via a nano-spray ESI source.

### Data Protocol
The samples were searched and quantified with MaxQuant [103] version 2.0.1.0. using the Swiss-Prot (UniProt, C. UniProt: a worldwide hub of protein knowledge. Nucleic Acids Res 2019, 47, D506-D515, doi:10.1093/nar/gky1049)  Homo sapiens database (April 2021 release) containing isoforms, and to which common contaminants were added. Search parameters were the following: enzyme was set to strict trypsin, with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages allowed; first search peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and MS/MS match tolerance to 0.4 Da; Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, while me-thionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Match between runs was enabled, with the corresponding fractions labelled 1 to 4. Top3 values were calculated by first normalizing peptide forms with variance stabilization normalization (Huber, W.; von Heydebreck, A.; Sultmann, H.; Poustka, A.; Vingron, M. Variance stabilization applied to microarray data calibration and to the quantification of differential expression. Bioinformatics 2002, 18 Suppl 1, S96-104, doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/18.suppl_1.s96) and imputing them (see below) before summing the top 3 intensities.  Imputation at peptide level was performed as follows: if there was at most 1 non-zero value in a group of replicates, then the remaining missing values were drawn from a Gaussian distribution of width 0.3 times the sample standard deviation and centered at the sample distribution mean minus 2.8 times the sample standard deviation; any remaining missing values were imputed by the Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) method Silver, J.D.; Ritchie, M.E.; Smyth, G.K. Microarray background correction: maximum likelihood estimation for the normal-exponential convolution. Biostatistics 2009, 10, 352-363, doi:10.1093/biostatistics/kxn042.

### Publication Abstract
Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft tissue sarcoma in children. The prognosis for patients with high-grade and metastatic disease is still very poor, and survivors are burdened with long-lasting side effects. Therefore, more effective and less toxic therapies are needed. Surface proteins are ideal targets for antibody-based therapies, like bispecific antibodies, antibody-drug conjugates, or chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cells. Specific surface targets for RMS are scarce. Here, we performed a surfaceome profiling based on differential centrifugation enrichment of surface/membrane proteins and detection by LC-MS on six fusion-positive (FP) RMS cell lines, five fusion-negative (FN) RMS cell lines, and three RMS patient-derived xenografts (PDXs). A total of 699 proteins were detected in the three RMS groups. Ranking based on expression levels and comparison to expression in normal MRC-5 fibroblasts and myoblasts, followed by statistical analysis, highlighted known RMS targets such as FGFR4, NCAM1, and CD276/B7-H3, and revealed AGRL2, JAM3, MEGF10, GPC4, CADM2, as potential targets for immunotherapies of RMS. L1CAM expression was investigated in RMS tissues, and strong L1CAM expression was observed in more than 80% of alveolar RMS tumors, making it a practicable target for antibody-based therapies of alveolar RMS.

### Keywords
Rhabdomyosarcoma, Surfaceome

### Affiliations
Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of Bern, Switzerland
Insel University Hospital Bern

### Submitter
Michele Bernasconi

### Lab Head
Dr Michele Bernasconi
Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of Bern, Switzerland


