### Accession
PXD021066

### Title
LC-MS/MS in MFS over-expression PAO1 strains

### Description
Proteomics analysis of envelope proteins was undertaken to understand the mechanisms and changes within the cell once Mfs1 and Mfs2 were over-expressed.

### Sample Protocol
Overnight cultures in MHB with antibiotic selection as required was sub-cultured into fresh MHB broth with selection and incubated until bacterial growth reached late log phase (OD600nm of 0.6-0.8). The cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 4,000 rpm at 4 °C for 15 min. The pellets were resuspended in 30 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 then sonicated 1 s on, 1 s off for 3 min with 63% amplitude. Cell lysates were centrifuged at 10,000 rpm at 4 °C for 30 min. The supernatant was recentrifuged at 20,000 rpm at 4 °C for 60 min. The pellets were air-dried and resuspended in 30 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 containing 0.5 % w/v SDS. 5 µg of proteins was loaded onto 11 % w/v SDS-PAGE and run until the dye-front reach 1 cm into the separating gel. Proteins within the gels were stained with Instant Blue Protein Stain (Expedeon), cut and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion (ProGest automated digestion unit, Digilab, UK). Solubilized peptides in 1 % v/v formic acid were fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC system connected with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific) with gradient mobile phase of 0.1 % v/v formic acid in water and 80 % v/v acetonitrile with 0.1 % v/v formic acid.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v1.2 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against P. aeruginosa strain PAO1 (ATCC 15692) database, which contains 5,563 proteins using the SEQUEST (Ver. 28 Rev. 13) algorithm. Data from three biological replicates were calculated for relative quantity compared to the control strain as previously described (Jiménez-Castellanos et al., 2018). Unpaired t-test was used for statistical analysis from three biologically independent experiments.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Mfs, Efflux pump

### Affiliations
Director of Laboratory of Biotechnology, Chulabhorn Research Institute, Bangkok, Thailand
Research Associate

### Submitter
Punyawee Dulyayangkul

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Skorn Mongkolsuk
Director of Laboratory of Biotechnology, Chulabhorn Research Institute, Bangkok, Thailand


