### Accession
PXD020712

### Title
IP-MS analysis of the human INO80 complex composition and interactome

### Description
The project aimed to investigate the composition/interactome of the human INO80 complex. To this end, INO80B - a core INO80 complex subunit - was endogenously tagged with V5 epitope tag at its C terminus in MCF-7 cells, and co-immunoprecipitation followed by LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using anti-V5 Abs.

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) Approximately 1.0 x 107 MCF-7 WT or INO80B-V5 cells were used for nuclear extract preparations as described previously (Bartke et al., 2010). The nuclear extract was diluted with IP buffer (20 mM HEPES (pH 7.9), 50 mM NaCl, 0.2 mM EDTA, 5% Glycerol, 0.1% NP-40, 1 mM DTT, and protease inhibitors cocktail (Roche)) to a final protein concentration of ~1 µg/µl and a NaCl concentration of 160 mM and subsequently cleared by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 min. at 4°C. 1 ml of cleared nuclear extract was mixed with 5 μl of anti-V5 antibodies (Abcam, ab15828) and incubated on a rotating wheel overnight at 4˚C. The next day, 20 µl of a 1:1 mixture of protein A and protein G Dynabeads (Invitrogen) were added to the sample followed by 1 h incubation on a rotation wheel at 4°C. Magnetic beads were washed 3 times with the IP buffer containing 150 mM NaCl. Co-immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted from the beads by boiling in 20 µl of Laemmli sample buffer for 5 min. at 95°C. Eluted proteins were subsequently used for western blotting and LC-MS experiments.  Proteomic analysis of co-IP samples (IP-MS) Sample processing and peptide purification for IP-MS samples For LC-MS sample preparation of INO80-V5 co-IP samples 10 µl aliquots of protein mixtures in Laemmli sample buffer obtained in the anti-V5 co-IP experiments were diluted with 200 µl of 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5. For protein reduction 1 µl of 1 M DTT was added to each sample and samples were incubated for 30 min. at 60°C. After cooling the samples to room temperature, 300 µl of freshly prepared UA buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5) was added to each sample. Proteins were alkylated by the addition of 10 µl of 300 mM iodoacetamide solution and subsequent incubation for 30 min. at RT in the dark. Samples were centrifuged through a 30 kDa cut-off centrifugal filter (Millipore) and washed 3 times with 200 µl UA buffer and 2 times with 200 µl of 50 mM TEAB. 40 µl of 50 ng/µl trypsin solution in 50 mM TEAB was added to each sample and protein digestion was performed overnight at 37°C. Peptides were collected by centrifugation and acidified by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v).  Mass spectrometry of IP-MS samples For LC-MS analysis of INO80-V5 IP-MS samples the acidified peptide mixtures were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, U.S.A.) coupled to a nano-RSLC (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). Briefly, samples were automatically loaded onto a nano trap column (300 µm inner diameter × 5 mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18. 5 µm, 100 Å; LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA) before separation by reversed-phase chromatography (HSS-T3 M-class column, 25 cm, Waters) in a 95 minutes non-linear gradient from 3 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Eluted peptides were analyzed by the Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-flex ionization source. Full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 1500) and MS/MS fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 or 15,000 respectively, with maximum injection times of 50 ms each. Up to ten most intense ions were selected for HCD fragmentation depending on signal intensity. Dynamic exclusion was set for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
IP-MS raw data files from the Q-Exactive HF instrument were analyzed using the Progenesis QI software for proteomics (Version 4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) for label-free quantification. All features were exported as a Mascot generic file (mgf) and used for peptide identification with Mascot (version 2.6.2) in the Swiss-Prot taxonomy human database (20 237 sequences). Search parameters used were: 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance, 20 mmu fragment mass tolerance, one missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation set as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation, asparagine or glutamine deamidation were allowed as variable modifications. A Mascot-integrated decoy database search calculated an average false discovery rate (FDR) of < 1% using the mascot percolator algorithm. For the subsequent analysis, only proteins identified based on 3 or more unique peptides were considered. The quantified MS1 protein abundances were normalized by the IGHG1 abundance. Differential enrichment analysis was performed using two tailed t-test. P values were adjusted for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini-Hochberg approach.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ip-ms, Ino80

### Affiliations
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany

### Submitter
Andrey Tvardovskiy

### Lab Head
Dr Till Bartke
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany


