### Accession
PXD026664

### Title
Cyclotides isolated from violet plants of Cameroon are inhibitors of human prolyl oligopeptidase

### Description
Traditional medicine and the use of herbal remedies are well established in the African health care system. For instance, Violaceae plants are used for antimicrobial or anti-inflammatory applications in folk medicine. This study describes the phytochemical analysis and bioactivity screening of four species of the violet tribe Allexis found in Cameroon. Allexis cauliflora, Allexis obonensis, Allexis batangae and Allexis zygomorpha were evaluated for the expression of circular peptides (cyclotides) by mass spectrometry. The unique cyclic cystine-rich motif was identified in several peptides of all four species. Knowing that members of this peptide family are protease inhibitors, the plant extracts were evaluated for the inhibition of human prolyl oligopeptidase (POP). Since all four species inhibited POP activity, a bioactivity-guided fraction approach was performed to isolate peptide inhibitors. These novel cyclotides, alca 1 and alca 2 exhibited IC50 values of 8.5 and 4.4 µM, respectively. To obtain their amino acid sequence information, combinatorial enzymatic proteolysis was performed. The proteolytic fragments were evaluated in MS/MS fragmentation experiments and the full-length amino acid sequences were obtained by de novo annotation of fragment ions. In summary, this study identified inhibitors of the human protease POP, which is a drug target for inflammatory or neurodegenerative disorders.

### Sample Protocol
3.3 Extraction of plant peptides The plant material was dried and stored at 25°C in a humidity-free environment. To obtain a powder for extraction, the dried plant material was crushed using a kitchen grinder. The powder was extracted with 1:1 (v/v) DCM/MeOH mixture with continuous stirring at room temperature for 24 h. The liquid extraction solution was separated from the solid material by filtration, and the liquid introduced into a separatory funnel. Then, 0.5 L of double distilled H2O (dd H2O) was added for the liquid-liquid phase extraction to separate the aqueous phase containing the peptides from the organic phase. The extract was then batch processed by solid phase extraction (SPE) with octadecyl modified silica gel (Zeoprep 60 Å, irregular C18 material 40–63 μm from Zeochem, Uetikon, Switzerland) similar as described earlier (44, 45). The C18 material was preconditioned (activation and cleaning) with one column volume of MeOH and twice with buffer A (100% ddH2O/0.1% TFA, v/v). The crude extract solution in buffer A was loaded onto the SPE column. Subsequently, three column volumes of 20% AcN in buffer A were used to remove the non-adherent and polar plant constituents. The peptide-containing fraction was eluted with 80% AcN in buffer A. The eluate was lyophilized and will be referred to as ‘peptide enriched extract’. 3.6 Screening for cysteine-rich peptides Peptide enriched extracts were evaluated using established peptidomics workflows to elucidate the number of cysteines in the peptide and a cyclic backbone (44-46) with few modifications. Samples were prepared in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 buffer pH 8.2. Reduction of disulfide bonds was performed with 15 mM DTT at 37°C for 45 min. The reactive sulfhydryl groups were derivatized with 75 mM IAA at room temperature for 10 min in darkness. Excess of alkylating reagent was quenched with the addition of DTT. Compared to the native precursor peptide a mass shift of +58 Da per reacted residue is observed after reduction and alkylation. For confirmation of the cyclic backbone, the S-carbamidomethylated samples were site-specifically processed with endoprotease GluC at 37°C for 16 h. Enzyme activity was quenched with addition of acetic acid 3% (v/v) final concentration. The mass shift for a single cleavage site in a cyclic peptide is +18 Da compared to the native analyte. The described mass shifts were evaluated in the recorded MS spectra with a tolerance of ±25 ppm to the native mass of the compound.

### Data Protocol
The data have not been processed. Raw data in vendor data formate are provided

### Publication Abstract
Traditional medicine and the use of herbal remedies are well established in the African health care system. For instance, Violaceae plants are used for antimicrobial or anti-inflammatory applications in folk medicine. This study describes the phytochemical analysis and bioactivity screening of four species of the violet <i>tribe</i> Allexis found in Cameroon. <i>Allexis cauliflora</i>, <i>Allexis obanensis</i>, <i>Allexis batangae</i> and <i>Allexis zygomorpha</i> were evaluated for the expression of circular peptides (cyclotides) by mass spectrometry. The unique cyclic cystine-rich motif was identified in several peptides of all four species. Knowing that members of this peptide family are protease inhibitors, the plant extracts were evaluated for the inhibition of human prolyl oligopeptidase (POP). Since all four species inhibited POP activity, a bioactivity-guided fractionation approach was performed to isolate peptide inhibitors. These novel cyclotides, alca 1 and alca 2 exhibited IC<sub>50</sub> values of 8.5 and 4.4&#xa0;&#xb5;M, respectively. To obtain their amino acid sequence information, combinatorial enzymatic proteolysis was performed. The proteolytic fragments were evaluated in MS/MS fragmentation experiments and the full-length amino acid sequences were obtained by <i>de novo</i> annotation of fragment ions. In summary, this study identified inhibitors of the human protease POP, which is a drug target for inflammatory or neurodegenerative disorders.

### Keywords
Allexis cauliflora, Cyclic cystine-rich peptides, Peptide, Prolyl oligopeptidase (pop), Protease inhibitor

### Affiliations
Medical University of Vienna Center for Physiology and Pharmacology
Medical University of Vienna, Center for Pharmacology and Physiology

### Submitter
Roland  Hellinger

### Lab Head
Dr Roland Hellinger
Medical University of Vienna Center for Physiology and Pharmacology


