### Accession
PXD022010

### Title
The dimeric SFiNX complex enables piRNA-guided co-transcriptional silencing through molecular condensate formation

### Description
Nuclear Argonaute proteins, guided by their bound small RNAs, orchestrate heterochromatin formation at transposon insertions and repetitive genomic loci. The molecular mechanisms that, besides recruiting heterochromatin effector proteins, are required for this silencing process are poorly understood. Here, we show that the SFiNX complex, the central silencing mediator downstream of nuclear Piwi-piRNA complexes in Drosophila, enables co-transcriptional silencing via the formation of molecular condensates. Condensate formation is stimulated by nucleic acid binding and requires SFiNX to form a homodimer. The dynein light chain dLC8, a highly conserved dimerization hub protein, mediates homo-dimerization of SFiNX. Point mutations preventing dLC8-mediated SFiNX dimerization result in transposon de-repression and sterility. dLC8’s function can be bypassed with a heterologous dimerization domain, suggesting that dimerization is a constitutive rather than a regulated feature of SFiNX. We propose that nucleic-acid stimulated condensate formation enables co-transcriptional silencing through the retention of the target RNA at chromatin, thereby allowing effector proteins to establish heterochromatin at the target locus.

### Sample Protocol
OSCs/mES cells were collected after trypsinization by centrifugation and washed with PBS. For isolation of nuclei the cell pellet was resuspended in Buffer1 (10 mM Tris-HCl pH=7.5, 2 mM MgCl2, 3 mM CaCl2, supplemented with Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche)), incubated at 4°C for 20 min followed by a centrifugation step. The pellet was resuspended in Buffer3 (10 mM Tris-HCl pH=7.5, 2 mM MgCl2, 3 mM CaCl2, 0,5 % IGEPAL CA-630, 10 % glycerol, supplemented with Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche)), incubated at 4°C for 10 min followed by a centrifugation step. The isolated nuclei were lysed in Buffer3 (20 mM Hepes pH=7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 0,3 % Triton X-100, 0,25 % IGEPAL CA-630, 10 % glycerol, supplemented with Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche)), incubated at 4°C for 20 min followed by sonication using Diagenode Bioruptor for 10 min (30 se ON/30 sec OFF) at low intensity. Lysate was cleared by centrifugation and incubated for 2h at 4°C with magnetic GFP-Trap magnetic agarose (Chromotek).  The beads were washed 3x 10 min with Buffer3 and were either used for mass spectrometry analysis or the proteins were eluted in 1× SDS buffer with 5 min incubation at 95°C for western blotting. For co-immunoprecipitation of dLC8 from OSCs and ovaries isolation of nuclei was omitted and cells were directly lysed in Buffer3 and processed as described above.    Mass spectrometry analysis Co-immunoprecipitated proteins coupled to magnetic beads were digested with LysC on the beads, eluted with glycine followed by trypsin digestion. Peptides were analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, PepMap C18, 5 mm × 300 μm ID, 5 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) at a flow rate of 25 μL/min using 0.1% TFA as mobile phase. After 10 min, the trap column was switched in line with the analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, PepMap C18, 500 mm × 75 μm ID, 2 μm, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted using a flow rate of 230 nl/min and a binary 3h gradient. The gradient starts with the mobile phases: 98% A (water/formic acid, 99.9/0.1, v/v) and 2% B (water/acetonitrile/formic acid, 19.92/80/0.08, v/v/v), increases to 35%B over the next 180 min, followed by a gradient in 5 min to 90%B, stays there for 5 min and decreases in 2 min back to the gradient 98%A and 2%B for equilibration at 30°C. The Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, using a full scan (m/z range 380-1500, nominal resolution of 60,000, target value 1E6) followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most abundant ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired using normalized collision energy of 27, isolation width of 1.4 m/z, resolution of 30.000 and the target value was set to 1E5. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation (exclude charge state 1, 7, 8, >8) were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 60 s. Additionally, the minimum AGC target was set to 5E3 and intensity threshold was calculated to be 4.8E4. The peptide match feature was set to preferred and the exclude isotopes feature was enabled.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, the RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.0.81, Thermo Scientific). All hereby created MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda v2.1.5.9849, Engine version v2.0.0.9849 69. For the first step search the RAW-files were searched against Drosophila melanogaster reference translations retrieved from Flybase (dmel_all-translation-r6.13; 21,983 sequences; 20,112,742 residues), using the following search parameters: The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 15ppm. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2. The result was filtered to 1 % FDR on protein level using Percolator algorithm integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer. A sub-database was generated for further processing. Peptide areas were quantified using an in-house developed tool APQuant: http://ms.imp.ac.at/index.php?action=peakjuggler

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sfinx, Cut up/dlc8, Co-transcriptional gene silencing, Condensate formation, Pirna pathway, Dimerization

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry - Protein Chemistry Facility
IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology
Vienna Biocenter, Dr. Bohrgasse 3, A-1030 Wien, Austria
Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences (IMBA), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Julius Brennecke
Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences (IMBA), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria


