### Accession
PXD026227

### Title
Ribosome heterogeneity in Drosophila melanogaster gonads through paralog-switching

### Description
Ribosomes have long been thought of as homogeneous macromolecular machines, but recent evidence suggests they are heterogeneous and could be specialised to regulate translation. Here, we have isolated ribosomal complexes and characterised their protein content across 4 tissues of Drosophila melanogaster via TMT-MS. We find that testes and ovaries contain the most heterogeneous ribosome populations, which occurs through a combination of ribosomal protein paralog-enrichment and ribosomal protein paralog-switching. We have also solved structures of ribosomes isolated from tissues by cryo-EM, revealing differences in precise ribosomal arrangement for testis and ovary 80S ribosomes. Differences in the amino acid composition of paralog pairs and their localisation on the ribosome exterior indicate paralog-switching could alter the ribosome surface, enabling different proteins to regulate translation. One testis-specific paralog-switching pair is also found in humans, suggesting this is a conserved site of ribosome heterogeneity. Overall, this work allows us to propose that mRNA translation might be regulated in the gonads through ribosome heterogeneity, providing a potential means of ribosome specialisation.

### Sample Protocol
80S and polyribosomal complexes were isolated via UV-Vis fractionation of sucrose gradients from testis, ovary, 0-2hr embryo and head tissue. An equal amount (TMT1=40 µg, TMT=40 µg, TMT3=35 µg) of each sample was digested with trypsin (2.5 µg trypsin per 100 µg protein; 37°C, overnight), labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) six or ten plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the labelled samples pooled.100 µg aliquots of pooled samples were evaporated to dryness, resuspended in 5% formic acid and then desalted using a SepPak cartridge according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Waters). Eluates from the SepPak cartridge was again evaporated to dryness and resuspended in buffer C (20 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) prior to fractionation by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). In brief, samples were loaded onto an XBridge BEH C18 Column (130Å, 3.5 µm, 2.1 mm X 150 mm, Waters) in buffer C and peptides eluted with increasing gradient of buffer D (20 mM Ammonium Hydroxide in acetonitrile, pH 10) from 0-95% over 60 minutes. The resulting fractions were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). High pH RP fractions were further fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 minute organic gradient, using 7 gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1 minute, 6-15% B over 58 minutes, 15-32% solvent B over 58 minutes, 32-40% solvent B over 5 minutes, 40-90% solvent B over 1 minute, held at 90% solvent B for 6 minutes and then reduced to 1% solvent B over 1 minute) with a flow rate of 300 nl minutes−1.  Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0 kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 275°C. All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow. FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200 000 and a max injection time of 50 ms. Precursors were filtered with an intensity threshold of 5000, according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic peak determination set to peptide. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (60 s +/-10 ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 1.2 m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 10 000, max injection time of 70 ms and CID collision energy of 35%. For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 50 000 resolution with an AGC target of 50 000 and a max injection time of 105 ms. Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 60% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield.  Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) was enabled to include up to 5 MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Drosophila melanogaster database (downloaded March 2018; 41,157 sequences) using the SEQUEST HT algorithm. Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6 Da.  Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da) and acetylation of the protein N-terminus (+42.011 Da) as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) and the addition of the TMT mass tag (+229.163 Da) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The reverse database search option was enabled and all data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5% (Consortium 2019) and reported.  Peptide IDs not corresponding to D. melanogaster proteins were removed from all TMT replicates. Using the protein grouping decided by PD2.1, master protein selection was improved using an in-house script to select the UniProt accession (database downloaded Jan 2021; 42,818 sequences) with the best annotation whilst maintaining confidence in protein identification and quantitation. This resulted in a list of 1906 proteins for TMT1, 3613 proteins for TMT2 and 1869 proteins for TMT3. Abundances are the sum of the S/N values for the TMT reporter groups for all peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs)matched to the protein. Normalised abundances of these values were obtained by normalising the Total Peptide Amount in each sample such that the total signal from each TMT tag is the same. Scaled abundances are either normalised abundances scaled to a pooled sample or the normalised abundance scaled to the average of all samples within that replicate. Data from all three replicates was merged into one data sheet from which comparisons between tissues were made with statistical analyses for all proteins detected (Sup Table 1). Pair-wise comparisons were made to calculate the log2 fold-change difference of proteins across different tissue samples. For TMT1 and 3, normalised abundances were used, and for TMT2 the normalised abundance was scaled to a pooled sample to allow comparison between TMT runs. Standard t-test was used to test the statistical significance of the log2 fold-changes between tissue samples.  Analysis of TMT data and hierarchical clustering were performed in R. Fold-change differences between highly similar peptides were determined to estimate relative abundances of different RP paralog pairs between tissue samples. PSMs were only used for this purpose if the peptides were of identical length and had fewer than 2 amino acid changes.

### Publication Abstract
Ribosomes have long been thought of as homogeneous macromolecular machines, but recent evidence suggests they are heterogeneous and could be specialised to regulate translation. Here, we have characterised ribosomal protein heterogeneity across 4 tissues of Drosophila melanogaster. We find that testes and ovaries contain the most heterogeneous ribosome populations, which occurs through a combination of paralog-enrichment and paralog-switching. We have solved structures of ribosomes purified from in vivo tissues by cryo-EM, revealing differences in precise ribosomal arrangement for testis and ovary 80S ribosomes. Differences in the amino acid composition of paralog pairs and their localisation on the ribosome exterior indicate paralog-switching could alter the ribosome surface, enabling different proteins to regulate translation. One testis-specific paralog-switching pair is also found in humans, suggesting this is a conserved site of ribosome heterogeneity. Overall, this work allows us to propose that mRNA translation might be regulated in the gonads through ribosome heterogeneity, providing a potential means of ribosome specialisation.

### Keywords
Testis, Ovary, Ribosome, Tmt-ms, Paralog, Gonads, Drosophila melanogaster

### Affiliations
University of Leeds
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK.

### Submitter
Karl Norris

### Lab Head
Dr Julie L Aspden
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK.


