### Accession
PXD000299

### Title
Proteomic analysis of fluids from the genital tract of ewes during the estrous cycle

### Description
Fluids samples of oviduct, uterus and cervical mucus were collected in sheep D0 (J0) and D10 (J10) in spontaneous (N) and synchronized (I) by flushing with PBS 1X. Proteins for each fluid were included in-gel (3-4 bands) followed by Coomassie Blue staining. After reduction and alkylation, proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin and peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using LTQ velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Raw data files were converted to MGF with Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.2; Thermo Fischer Scientific, San Jose, USA). Precursor mass range of 350-5000 Da and signal to noise ratio of 1.5 were the criteria used for generation of peak lists. In order to identify the proteins, the peptide and fragment masses obtained were matched automatically against the mammalia section of a locally maintained copy of nr NCBI (01/01/2013). MS/MS ion searches were performed using MASCOT Daemon and search engine (version 2.3; Matrix Science, London, UK). The parameters used for database searches include trypsin as a protease with allowed two missed cleavage, carbamidomethylcysteine (+57 Da), oxidation of methionine (+16) and N-terminal protein acetylation (+42) as variable modifications. The tolerance of the ions was set to 5 ppm for parent and 0.8 Da for fragment ion matches

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The female genital tract includes several anatomical regions whose luminal fluids successively interact with gametes and embryos and are involved in the fertilisation and development processes. The luminal fluids from the inner cervix, the uterus and the oviduct were collected along the oestrous cycle at oestrus (Day 0 of the cycle) and during the luteal phase (Day 10) from adult cyclic ewes. The proteomes were assessed by GeLC-MS/MS and quantified by spectral counting. A set of 940 proteins were identified including 291 proteins differentially present along the cycle in one or several regions. The global analysis of the fluid proteomes revealed a general pattern of endocrine regulation of the tract, with the cervix and the oviduct showing an increased differential proteins abundance mainly at oestrus while the uterus showed an increased abundance mainly during the luteal phase. The proteins more abundant at oestrus included several families such as the heat shock proteins (HSP), the mucins, the complement cascade proteins and several redox enzymes. Other proteins known for their interaction with gametes such as oviductin (OVGP), osteopontin, HSPA8, and the spermadhesin AWN were also overexpressed at oestrus. The proteins more abundant during the luteal phase were associated with the immune system such as ceruloplasmin, lactoferrin, DMBT1, or PIGR, and also with tissue remodeling such as galectin 3 binding protein, alkaline phosphatase, CD9, or fibulin. Several proteins differentially abundant between estrus and the luteal phase, such as myosin 9 and fibronectin, were also validated by immunohistochemistry. The potential roles in sperm transit and uterine receptivity of the proteins differentially regulated along the cycle in the female genital tract are discussed.

### Keywords
Reproduction, Uterus, Fertility, Lc-ms/ms, Cervical mucus, Oviduct

### Affiliations
INRA-Nouzilly-PRC

### Submitter
G HARICHAUX

### Lab Head


