### Accession
PXD033498

### Title
Hspa13 Interactors in HEK239T cells, and changes in protein abundances and solubility following Hspa13 overexpression

### Description
We determined Hspa13 interactors based on affinity purication of Hspa13.Flag. We also looked at the effect of Hspa13 overexpression on protein abundances and solubility.

### Sample Protocol
In the first experiment, Hspa13.Flag was overexpressed in HEK293T cells. Cells were crosslinked using 1 mM DSP, quenched, and lysed in RIPA with protease inhibitor cocktail. Hspa13 was immunopurified over anti-Flag beads overnight, the beads were washed well with RIPA, and protein eluted into Laemmli. In the second experiment, HEK293T cells overexpressing untagged Hspa13 were lysed with RIPA, aliquots of total protein reserved, and insoluble protein isolated by 77,000 x g ultracentrifugation for four hours. Pellets were washed well and resuspended over 4 days in 8 M urea. All samples were cleaned up by chloroform methanol precipitation, resuspended in Rapigest/HEPES buffer, reduced with TcCEP, alkylated with iodoacetamide, digested with trypsin, TMT-labeled (6plex), quenched with ammonium bicarbonate, acidified with formic acid, and separated by MuDPIT. Data was acquired in DDA mode on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro at 3.0 kV, with 30000 resolving power MS1, 7500 MS2, top 10 isolation, stepped collision energy fragmentation (HCD) of 32%, 38%, and 44% and 100 msec activation. Dynamic exclusion was used with a 120 s exclusion window.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to mzml files using MSConvert and searched in FragPipe against a 07/11/2021 Uniprot release (longest entry for each protein group) with 20429 proteins plus reverse sequences and common contaminants, with a FDR of 0.01 at the peptide level. TMT modification on N-termini and lysine, as well as cysteine alkylation, were included as fixed modifications. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were included as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stch, Ap-ms, Hspa13

### Affiliations
University of California, Riverside
University of California, Riverside Department of Chemistry

### Submitter
Joseph Genereux

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph Genereux
University of California, Riverside Department of Chemistry


