### Accession
PXD001200

### Title
Hela-S3 ATPome -  Proteome-Wide Discovery of Unknown ATP-Binding Proteins and Kinase Inhibitor Target Proteins Using an ATP Probe

### Description
ATP binding proteins (ATPome) dataset and ATPome-wide selectivity profiling of staurosporine and (s)-crizotinib

### Sample Protocol
Hela-S3 lysate was labeled by ATP probe with competitor. After tryptic digestion, labeled peptides were enriched and analysed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data was analysed by Maxquant 1.3.0.5 with Andromeda search engine. Desthiobiotin modification of lysine (+196.1212 Da, C(10) H(16) N(2) O(2)) was set as a static modification. Label-free quantitation was used for ATPome analysis and spike-in SILAC quantitaion was used for selectivity profiling.

### Publication Abstract
ATP-binding proteins, including protein kinases, play essential roles in many biological and pathological processes and thus these proteins are attractive as drug targets. Acyl-ATP probes have been developed as efficient probes for kinase enrichment, and these probes have also been used to enrich other ATP-binding proteins. However, a robust method to identify ATP-binding proteins with systematic elimination of nonspecific binding proteins has yet to be established. Here, we describe an ATP competition assay that permitted establishment of a rigorous ATP-binding protein list with virtual elimination of nonspecific proteins. A total of 539 ATP-binding protein candidates were identified, including 178 novel candidates. In informatics analysis, ribosomal proteins were overrepresented in the list of novel candidates. We also found multiple ATP-competitive sites for several kinases, including epidermal growth factor receptor, serine/threonine-protein kinase PRP4 homologue, cyclin-dependent kinase 12, eukaryotic elongation factor 2 kinase, ribosomal protein S6 kinase alpha-1, and SRSF protein kinase 1. Using our cataloged ATP-binding protein list, a selectivity profiling method that covers the kinome and ATPome was established to identify off-target binding sites of ATP-competitive kinase inhibitors, staurosporine and crizotinib.

### Keywords
Hela-s3, Atp binding protein

### Affiliations
NIBIO
National Institute of Biomedical Innovation, JAPAN

### Submitter
Jun Adachi

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Adachi
National Institute of Biomedical Innovation, JAPAN


