### Accession
PXD017900

### Title
Rats cortex proteomics mass spectrometry analysis

### Description
In our research, applying a two-dimensional differential in gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) and the tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) method to investigate the differential expression of proteins of rats' cortex in the sham group, 3 day post sipnal cord transection, 14 day post sipnal cord transection, and 28 day post sipnal cord transection.

### Sample Protocol
Cortex samples from sham and SCT group were stained with 0.1ml of 50 mM NH4HCO3 and 50% acetonitrile for 20 min then dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile for 10 min and then the spots were incubated at 37°C for 5min. 10 μl trypsin (12.5 mg/ml) were added at 4°C for 30 min followed by overnight incubation at 37°C. Next, peptides were extracted twice by 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 50% acetonitrile for 30 min then dried with Nitrogen stream, and then dissolved in 0.8 μl of mixed liquid α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (α-CHCA, Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA), 0.1% TFA and 50% acetonitrile. Results were calculated by a 4700 Proteomics Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Using internal calibration mode, the trypsin-digested myoglobin peptides were added to six calibration spots on the Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/ Ionization (MALDI) plate to calibrate the mass equipment. A 20 kV accelerating voltage was performed to the sample plate, and then a UV (ultraviolet) laser was operated at a repetition frequency of 200-Hz with a wave length of 335 nm.

### Data Protocol
data interpretation of the gained mass spectrometry (MS) and MS/MS peptide spectra were performed using Data Explorer TM software (version 4.5, Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Parent mass peak was chosen for tandem time of flight (TOF/TOF) analysis. The generated MS and MS/MS spectra were then transmitted to MASCOT (version 2.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) via GPS Explorer software (version 3.6, Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA).

### Publication Abstract
Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a fatal disease that can cause severe disability. Cortical reorganization subserved the recovery of spontaneous function after SCI, although the potential molecular mechanism in this remote control is largely unknown. Therefore, using proteomics analysis, RNA interference/overexpression, and CRISPR/Cas9 <i>in vivo</i> and <i>in vitro</i>, we analyzed how the molecular network functions in neurological improvement, especially in the recovery of motor function after spinal cord transection (SCT) via the remote regulation of cerebral cortex. We discovered that the overexpression of pyridoxal kinase (PDXK) in the motor cortex enhanced neuronal growth and survival and improved locomotor function in the hindlimb. In addition, PDXK was confirmed as a target of miR-339 but not miR-124. MiR-339 knockout (KO) significantly increased the neurite outgrowth and decreased cell apoptosis in cortical neurons. Moreover, miR-339 KO rats exhibited functional recovery indicated by improved Basso, Beattie, and Bresnehan (BBB) score. Furthermore, bioinformatics prediction showed that PDXK was associated with GAP43, a crucial molecule related to neurite growth and functional improvement. The current research therefore confirmed that miR-339 targeting PDXK facilitated neurological recovery in the motor cortex of SCT rats, and the underlying mechanism was associated with regulating GAP43 in the remote cortex of rats subjected to SCT. These findings may uncover a new understanding of remoting cortex control following SCI and provide a new therapeutic strategy for the recovery of SCI in future clinical trials.

### Keywords
Rat，cortex，proteomics mass spectrometry analysis

### Affiliations
Institute of Neurobiological Disease, Department of Anesthesiology, Translational Neuroscience Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University
Institute of Neurobiological Disease, Department of Anesthesiology, Translational Neuroscience 5 Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China

### Submitter
Ting-Hua Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Ting-Hua Wang
Institute of Neurobiological Disease, Department of Anesthesiology, Translational Neuroscience 5 Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China


