### Accession
PXD039132

### Title
Large-scale qualitative and quantitative research of dityrosine crosslinking omics in Escherichia coli

### Description
Excessive reactive oxygen species cause oxidative stress in cells. Two molecules of tyrosine can generate dityrosine, which is not only a product of natural posttranslational processes, but also a putative biomarker for protein oxidation. Few studies have investigated dityrosine crosslinking under endogenous or exogenous oxidative conditions in Escherichia coli at the proteome level so far. In this study, in order to investigate qualitative and quantitative dityrosine crosslinking, two mutant strains were constructed as endogenous oxidative stress model, as well as one mutant strain added with 1mM H2O2 as exogenous oxidative stress model. We integrated label-free LC-MS/MS and bioinformatics to research dityrosine crosslinking in Escherichia coli. A large-scale dataset of dityrosine crosslinking was provided. 352 proteins were identified to participate in dityrosine crosslinking by pLink. The subcellular localization included cytoplasmic (61.93%), periplasmic (21.31%), outer membrane (7.95%), inner membrane (5.97%) and extracellular (2.84%). Quantitative analysis of dityrosine crosslinking indicated that the three oxidative stress models could be separated at dityrosine linked peptides level. We expect that our research will guide efforts to comprehend the detailed features of dityrosine crosslinking in future.

### Sample Protocol
The mutant strains E. coli MG1655/ΔAhp and E. coli MG1655/ΔAhpΔKatEΔKatG, are preserved by our laboratory. The two mutant strains, as well as E. coli MG1655/ΔAhpΔKatEΔKatG added with 1mM H2O2 (final concentration), were cultured in sterilized fresh LB liquid medium at 37°C until the exponential phase. Each strain was prepared in six biological replicates.Every bacteria sample was centrifuged and the pellet was collected and washed with 50 mM PBS. The bacterial pellet was resuspended in the lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 2 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, 50 mM NH4HCO3). Then, the cells were disrupted in ice bath by sonication for 8 min. After that, the sample was centrifuged, and supernatant was transferred into a new tube. The protein concentration was measured by the BCA protein method. Each sample was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 56 °C, alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min, and then diluted and digested for 16 h at 37°C by trypsin at an enzyme/protein ratio of 1:50. The residual trypsin activity was quenched by the addition of 3% formic acid (v/v). The peptides were desalted using a C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) column and dried using a vacuum centrifuge. Peptide concentration was determined by the BCA peptide assay. The peptide mixture was dissolved in water containing 0.1% FA and analyzed using an on-line U3000-nano coupled with an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA). Peptides were separated through using a 15 cm house-made C18 reversed-phase column (100-μm inner diameter, 1.9 μm resin) and a 110 min elution gradient. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% FA and H2O and mobile phase B consisted of 20% H2O and 80% ACN. A 110 min gradient (mobile phase B: 5% at 0 min, 5% at 4 min, 10% at 20 min, 22% at 64 min, 35% at 94 min, 99% at 99 min, 99% at 104 min, 5% at 105 min) was used at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The data were acquired in a data-dependent mode. For mass spectrometry parameters, the scan range was set to be 350-2000 m/z. The top 20 most intense ions in MS1 were selected for MS/MS analysis and the dynamic exclusion time was 45 s.

### Data Protocol
The RAW mass spectrometry files were processed using pLink for qualitative research of dityrosine crosslinking. The three groups (E. coli MG1655/ΔAhp, E. coli MG1655/ΔAhpΔKatEΔKatG and E. coli MG1655/ΔAhpΔKatEΔKatG with 1mM H2O2) were processed by pLink respectively. For identification, flow type was conventional crosslinking (HCD).The protein database of Escherichia coli was ECOLI_UP000000625_83333 downloaded from Uniprot. The enzyme was trypsin, up to 3 missed cleavages. The peptide mass was set to be between 600 and 6000, and the peptide length was set to be between 6 and 60. The precursor tolerance was set as ±20 ppm, and the fragment tolerance was set as ±20 ppm. The fixed modification was carbamidomethyl [C], and the variable modification was oxidation [M]. The filter tolerance was set as ±10ppm. FDR was set to be ≤ 5% at PSM level.After pLink task, pQuant was executed for quantification. MS1 and MS2 files of the three groups were used for the process, with all the rows in filtered_cross-linked_spectra or filtered_loop-linked_spectra file as required identification results.

### Publication Abstract
Excessive hydrogen peroxide causes oxidative stress in cells. The oxidation of two tyrosine residues in proteins can generate <i>o,o'</i>-dityrosine, a putative biomarker for protein oxidation, which plays critical roles in a variety of organisms. Thus far, few studies have investigated dityrosine crosslinking under endogenous or exogenous oxidative conditions at the proteome level, and its physiological function remains largely unknown. In this study, to investigate qualitative and quantitative dityrosine crosslinking, two mutant <i>Escherichia coli</i> strains and one mutant strain supplemented with H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> were used as models for endogenous and exogenous oxidative stress, respectively. By integrating high-resolution liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry and bioinformatic analysis, we created the largest dityrosine crosslinking dataset in <i>E. coli</i> to date, identifying 71 dityrosine crosslinks and 410 dityrosine loop links on 352 proteins. The dityrosine-linked proteins are mainly involved in taurine and hypotaurine metabolism, citrate cycle, glyoxylate, dicarboxylate metabolism, carbon metabolism, etc., suggesting that dityrosine crosslinking may play a critical role in regulating the metabolic pathways in response to oxidative stress. In conclusion, we have reported the most comprehensive dityrosine crosslinking in <i>E. coli</i> for the first time, which is of great significance in revealing its function in oxidative stress.

### Keywords
Dityrosine crosslinking, Hydrogen peroxide, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Beijing Institute of Technology
School of Life Science, Beijing Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Zhou Xiangzhe

### Lab Head
Dr Yongqian Zhang
School of Life Science, Beijing Institute of Technology


