### Accession
PXD005214

### Title
Phosphoproteins in extracellular vehicles as candidate markers for breast cancer

### Description
The state of protein phosphorylation can be a key determinant of cellular physiology such as early stage cancer, but the development of phosphoproteins from biofluids for disease diagnosis remains elusive. Here we demonstrate, for the first time, a strategy to isolate and identify phosphoproteins in extracellular vehicles from human plasma as potential markers to differentiate disease from healthy states. We identified close to 10,000 unique phosphopeptides, representing 2108 phosphoproteins, in EVs isolated from small volume of plasma samples. Using label-free quantitative proteomics, we quantified 144 phosphoproteins in plasma EVs that are significantly higher in patients diagnosed with breast cancer than in healthy controls. Multiple novel biomarkers were validated in 13 patients using Paralleled Reaction Monitoring and antibody- and non-antibody based assays. The study demonstrated that the development of phosphoproteins in plasma EV as disease biomarkers is highly feasible and may transform cancer screening and monitoring.

### Sample Protocol
A total 5.5ml pool plasma samples were collected from both healthy control and breast cancer patient group for technical replicates phosphoproteomics. Plasma samples were centrifuged at 20,000 xg at 4 oC for 1hr. Pellets were washed with cold PBS and centrifuged again at 20,000 xg at 4 oC for 1 hr, the pellets were microvesicles. Supernatant of first centrifugation were further centrifuged at ultra-high speed 100,000 xg at 4 oC for 1hr. Pellets were wash with cold PBS and centrifuged at 100,000 xg for 1hr again. The pellets from ultra-high speed centrifugation were exosome. The digestion was performed with phase transfer surfactant aids (PTS) digestion. Extracellular vesicles were solubilized in lysis buffer containing 12mM sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 12mM sodium lauroyl sarcosinate (SLS) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) in 100mM Tris-HCl, pH8.5. Proteins were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TECP) and 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) at 95 °C for 5 min. Alkylated proteins were diluted to 5 fold by 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and digested with Lys-C (Wako, Japan) in a 1:100 (w/w) enzyme-to-protein ratio for 3 hr at 37 °C. Trypsin was added to a final 1:50 (w/w) enzyme-to-protein ratio for overnight digestion. The digested peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to final concentration of 0.5% TFA, and 250ul of Ethyl acetate was added to 250ul digested solution. The mixture was shaken for 2 min, then centrifuged at 13,200 rpm for 2 min to obtain aqueous and organic phases. The aqueous phase was collected and desalted using a 100 mg of Sep-pak C18 column . Next, the phosphopeptide enrichment was performed according to the reported protocol with some modifications. The in-house-constructed IMAC tip was made by capping the end with a 20μm polypropylene frits disk (Agilent, Wilmington, DE, USA). The tip was packed with 5 mg of Ni-NTA silica resin by centrifugation. Prior to sample loading, Ni2+ ions were removed by 100 mM EDTA solution. Furthermore, the beads were chelating with Fe3+ and equilibrated with loading buffer (6% (v/v) acetic acid (AA) at pH 2.7). Tryptic peptides were reconstituted in loading buffer and loaded onto the IMAC tip. After successive washes with 4% (v/v) AA, 25% ACN, and 6% (v/v) AA, the bound phosphopeptides were eluted with 200 mM NH4H2PO4. The eluted phosphopeptides were desalted using C-18 StageTips.  The phosphopeptides were dissolved in 4 µL of 0.3% formic acid (FA) with 3% ACN and injected into an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 45 cm in-house packed column (360 µm OD × 75 µm ID) containing C18 resin (2.2 µm, 100Å, Michrom Bioresources) with a 30 cm column heater (Analytical Sales and Services) and the temperature was set at 50 °C. The mobile phase buffer consisted of 0.1% FA in ultra-pure water (buffer A) with an eluting buffer of 0.1% FA in 80% ACN (buffer B) run over either with a linear 45 min or  60 min gradient of 6%-30% buffer B at flow rate of 250 nL/min. The Easy-nLC 1000 was coupled online with a Velos Pro LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode in which a full-scan MS (from m/z 350-1500 with the resolution of 30,000 at m/z 400). The 10 most intense ions were subjected to collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation (normalized collision energy (NCE) 30%, AGC 3e4, max injection time 100 ms).  For the PRM validation, peptide samples were dissolved in 8 μl of 0.1% formic acid and injected 6ul into easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo) HPLC system. Eluent was introduced into the mass spectrometer using 10cm PicoChip® columns filled with 3uM Reprosil-PUR C18 (New Objective, Woburn, MA) operated at 2.6 kV. The mobile phase buffer consists of 0.1% formic acid in water with an eluting buffer of 0.1% formic acid (Buffer A) in 90% CH3CN (Buffer B). The LC flow rate was 300nl/min. The gradient was set as 0–30% Buffer B for 30 mins and 30-80% for 10mins. The sample was acquired on Q Exactive-HF (Thermo, Germany). Each sample was analyzed under parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) with an isolation width of ±0.7 Th. In all experiments, a full mass spectrum at 60,000 resolution relative to m/z 200 (AGC target 3 × 106, 100 ms maximum injection time, m/z 400–1600) was followed by up to 20 PRM scans at 15000 resolution (AGC target 1e5, 50 ms maximum injection time) as triggered by a unscheduled inclusion list. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was used with 30eV normalized collision energy.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were searched directly UniprotKB database version Jan2015 with no redundant entries using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.4.1)  with Andromeda search engine. Initial precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 p.p.m. and the final tolerance was set at 6 p.p.m., and ITMS MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6 Da. Search criteria included a static carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.0214 Da) and variable modifications of (1) oxidation (+15.9949 Da) on methionine residues, (2) acetylation (+42.011 Da) at N-terminus of protein, and (3) phosphorylation (+79.996 Da) on serine, threonine or tyrosine residues were searched. Search was performed with Trypsin/P digestion and allowed a maximum of two missed cleavages on the peptides analyzed from the sequence database. The false discovery rates of proteins, peptides and phosphosites were set at 0.01. The minimum peptide length was six amino acids, and a minimum Andromeda score was set at 40 for modified peptides. A site localization probability of 0.75 was used as the cut-off for localization of phosphorylation sites. All the peptide spectral matches and MS/MS spectra can be viewed through MaxQuant viewer. All the localized phosphorylation sites and corresponding phosphoproteins were submitted to pLogo software and Panther  to determine the phosphorylation motifs and gene ontology, respectively. PRM data were manually curated within Skyline (version 3.5.0.9319) Quantitative Data Analysis All data were analyzed by using the Perseus software (version 1.5.4.1) (7). For quantification of both proteomic and phosphoproteomic, the intensities of peptides and phosphopeptides were extracted through MaxQuant, and the missing values of intensities were replaced by normal distribution with a downshift of 1.8 standard deviations and a width of 0.3 standard deviations. The significantly increased phosphosites or proteins in patient samples were identified by the p-value is significant from a two sample t-test with a permutation-based FDR cut-off 0.05 with S0 set on 0.2 for all of data sets.

### Publication Abstract
The state of protein phosphorylation can be a key determinant of cellular physiology such as early-stage cancer, but the development of phosphoproteins in biofluids for disease diagnosis remains elusive. Here we demonstrate a strategy to isolate and identify phosphoproteins in extracellular vesicles (EVs) from human plasma as potential markers to differentiate disease from healthy states. We identified close to 10,000 unique phosphopeptides in EVs isolated from small volumes of plasma samples. Using label-free quantitative phosphoproteomics, we identified 144 phosphoproteins in plasma EVs that are significantly higher in patients diagnosed with breast cancer compared with healthy controls. Several biomarkers were validated in individual patients using paralleled reaction monitoring for targeted quantitation. This study demonstrates that the development of phosphoproteins in plasma EV as disease biomarkers is highly feasible and may transform cancer screening and monitoring.

### Keywords
Plasma, Biomarker, Phosphoproteomics, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN USA
Purdue University

### Submitter
I-Hsuan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Weiguo Andy Tao
Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN USA


