### Accession
PXD015126

### Title
MYB-regulated pancreatic cancer secretome

### Description
Earlier we have shown important roles of MYB in pancreatic tumor pathobiology. To better understand the role of MYB in the tumor microenvironment and identify MYB-associated secreted biomarker proteins, we conducted mass spectrometry analysis of the secretome from MYB-modulated and control pancreatic cancer cell lines. We also performed in silico analyses to determine MYB-associated biofunctions, gene networks and altered biological pathways. We further investigated the secreted proteins for their potential biomarker properties.

### Sample Protocol
Stable MYB knockdown (MiaPaCa-shMYB) and MYB overexpressing (BxPC3-MYB) and their respective control cell lines; non-targeting scrambled (MiaPaCa-Scr) and empty vector control (BxPC3-Neo), respectively; were generated previously our lab. For the collection of conditioned media (CM), cells were first grown in 100 mm cell culture dishes (Corning, NY, USA) under regular culture conditions until they reached  ~70% confluence. Thereafter, cells were washed with PBS (x3, 5 min each) and FBS- phenol- and antibiotics (SPA) -free RPMI-1660 medium after 15 min incubation at 37 °C with intermittent gentle shaking followed by another rinse. Fresh SPA-free RPMI-1660 medium (3.5 ml) was added in each culture dish and cells incubated for another 16h. Thereafter, conditioned media (CM) was collected and subjected to further processing. Cell number and viability were determined at the time of CM collection using trypan blue exclusion assay.  After collection, 10 ml of conditioned media (CM) was acidified with 200 µl of acetic acid and centrifuged at 800 × g for 10 min under cold (4 °C) temperature. The secreted proteins were then isolated using a C2 solid phase extraction column (Sep-Pak, 0.3 × 5 mm (Waters, Milford, MA)). The column was first washed with 3-column volumes (3ml) of 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and equilibrated with 3ml of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water with a flow rate of 1 ml/min. After equilibration, CM was loaded onto the column and washed with 0.1% TFA in water to remove salts. The protein fraction was then eluted with 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and dried in a speed vac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Dried protein samples were further dissolved in 50µl of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO) and 10mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Alfa-Aesar,Ward Hill, MA, USA) and digested overnight at 37°C with using 1µl of 10 µM sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison,WI, USA). The processed samples were subjected to three technical replicate LC-MS/MS analyses  with an Agilent 1200 series nano-liquid HPLC coupled to a linear ion trap/Orbitrap hybrid MS (LTQ-Orbitrap XL, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The HPLC mobile phases consisted of 3% ACN and 0.2% formic acid in water (solvent A), 3% water and 0.2% formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B). The sample was loaded onto a C18 pre-column (5uM; 5 by 0.3mm Zorbax, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) with a 4ul/minute flow rate of 5% solvent B. A flow rate of 1ul/minute was used to elute the sample from the pre-column onto a Hypersil Gold C18 column (30mm by 0.18mm; ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). A linear solvent gradient was used to slowly ramp to 40% B over a period of 70 minutes for peptide elution from the column, maximizing separation and coverage. The gradient was then ramped to 90% B for 20 minutes to wash the column at the end of each run. The total run time for each sample injection was two hours. Blanks of 0.1% TFA were run in-between each set of triplicate injections to minimize and monitor for carryover between samples. Peptide ionization was achieved using electrospray ionization in positive mode.  Samples were analyzed in a data dependent manner, with full MS1 scans from 400-2000 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap mass analyzer, collecting at least 10 points across each peak for accurate integration. The top five multiply charged parent ions per MS1 scan were selected for MS2 scans in the LTQ mass analyzer with CID fragmentation.  Selected ions were then added to a dynamic exclusion list to prevent repeated sampling of abundant peptides for 120 seconds to allow deeper coverage of the sample. Thermo’s Xcalibur software was used to generate RAW files of each MS experiment.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (PD)(version 2.1.081; Thermo Fisher Scientific)  to provide protein identification across all samples. Within the processing workflow, the nodes for both the Mascot and Sequest search engine s were used to search a custom database (consisting of  71485 sequences and 45902068 residues ) created from the non-redundant NCBI RefNCBInr database (version 12/08/14) , which was combined the human immunoglobulin A, G, and M, lambda, and kappa constant region sequences from the SwissProt dataset (version 11/28/12). Identification was limited to unmodified  semi-tryptic peptides only (cleaved at arginine and lysine residues)  with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites , excluding those outside of a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6Da  and a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm . Within the percolator node, the target FDR (strict) was 0.01 and target FDR (relaxed) was 0.05, with validation based on q-value . Within the consensus workflow, the peptide and protein quantifier node used both unique and razor peptides for quantification purposes, using the top 3 peptides of each protein for area calculation. Peptides were further filtered using the peptide and protein filter node to only include those of high confidence with a minimum peptide length of 6 . Proteins were grouped by master protein using the strict parsimony principle parameter, to decrease redundancy based on sequence homology . The protein areas from three technical LC-MS/MS replicates of each sample were averaged, to provide one area per protein per sample.  The protein areas from each identified protein were then used for comparison between conditions.  The areas of individual proteins present in triplicate injections of all four samples of the MiaPaCa and BxPC3 variants (BxPC3-Neo and BxPC3-MYB; MiaPaCa-Scr and MiaPaCa-shMYB) were compared statistically using the t-test function in Microsoft Excel 2010. Relative fold changes were calculated by dividing the average peak area of the identified proteins of MiaPaCa-Scr by the MiaPaCa-shMYB or BxPC3-MYB by BxPC3-Neo, respectively, while the proteins present only in one sample was divided by one. Proteins identified with at least 3 peptides per protein in two of the three technical replicates with a differential expression of |2| fold change and p-value ≤ 0.05 were used for further data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Earlier we have shown important roles of MYB in pancreatic tumor pathobiology. To better understand the role of MYB in the tumor microenvironment and identify MYB-associated secreted biomarker proteins, we conducted mass spectrometry analysis of the secretome from MYB-modulated and control pancreatic cancer cell lines. We also performed in silico analyses to determine MYB-associated biofunctions, gene networks, and altered biological pathways. Our data demonstrated significant modulation (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05) of 337 secreted proteins in MYB-silenced MiaPaCa cells, whereas 282 proteins were differentially present in MYB-overexpressing BxPC3 cells, compared to their respective control cells. Alteration of several phenotypes such as cellular movement, cell death and survival, inflammatory response, protein synthesis, etc. was associated with MYB-induced differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in secretomes. DEPs from MYB-silenced MiaPaCa PC cells were suggestive of the downregulation of genes primarily associated with glucose metabolism, PI3K/AKT signaling, and oxidative stress response, among others. DEPs from MYB-overexpressing BxPC3 cells suggested the enhanced release of proteins associated with glucose metabolism and cellular motility. We also observed that MYB positively regulated the expression of four proteins with potential biomarker properties, i.e., FLNB, ENO1, ITGB1, and INHBA. Mining of publicly available databases using Oncomine and UALCAN demonstrated that these genes are overexpressed in pancreatic tumors and associated with reduced patient survival. Altogether, these data provide novel avenues for future investigations on diverse biological functions of MYB, specifically in the tumor microenvironment, and could also be exploited for biomarker development.

### Keywords
Pancreatic cancer, Myb, Biomarkers, Secretome

### Affiliations
University of South Alabama
Department of Pathology, University of South Alabama, Mobile, AL

### Submitter
Ajay Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Ajay P Singh
Department of Pathology, University of South Alabama, Mobile, AL


