### Accession
PXD029655

### Title
Proteomic discovery of chemical probes that perturb protein complexes in human cells

### Description
Most proteins in the human proteome lack chemical probes, and several large-scale and generalizable small-molecule binding assays have been introduced to address this problem. How compounds discovered in such “binding-first” assays affect protein function, nonetheless, often remains unclear. Here, we describe a “function-first” proteomic strategy that uses size exclusion chromatography (SEC) to assess the global impact of electrophilic compounds on protein complexes in human cells. Integrating the SEC data with cysteine-directed activity-based protein profiling identifies changes in protein-protein interactions that are caused by site-specific liganding events, including the stereoselective engagement of cysteines in PSME1 and SF3B1 that disrupt the PA28 proteasome regulatory complex and stabilize a dynamic state of the spliceosome, respectively. Our findings thus show how multidimensional proteomic analysis of focused libraries of electrophilic compounds can expedite the discovery of chemical probes with site-specific functional effects on protein complexes in human cells.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were treated and subject to processing as described in the methods section.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were convereted to MS1/MS3/MS3 files as necessary using Integrated Proteomics Pipeline (IP2) and searched using ProLuCID or MaxQuant. All downstream processing are described in methods section.

### Publication Abstract
Most human proteins lack chemical probes, and several large-scale and generalizable small-molecule binding assays have been introduced to address this problem. How compounds discovered in such "binding-first" assays affect protein function, nonetheless, often remains unclear. Here, we describe a "function-first" proteomic strategy that uses size exclusion chromatography (SEC) to assess the global impact of electrophilic compounds on protein complexes in human cells. Integrating the SEC data with cysteine-directed activity-based protein profiling identifies changes in protein-protein interactions that are caused by site-specific liganding events, including the stereoselective engagement of cysteines in PSME1 and SF3B1 that disrupt the PA28 proteasome regulatory complex and stabilize a dynamic state of the spliceosome, respectively. Our findings thus show how multidimensional proteomic analysis of focused libraries of electrophilic compounds can expedite the discovery of chemical probes with site-specific functional effects on protein complexes in human cells.

### Keywords
Human, Chemoproteomics, Immunopeptidomics, Covalent ligands, Size-exclusion

### Affiliations
Scripps Research Institute
Professor, Gilula Chair in Chemical Biology, The Department of Chemistry, Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The Scripps Research Institute 10550 North Torrey Pines Rd,  La Jolla, CA 92037

### Submitter
Jarrett Remsberg

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin F. Cravatt
Professor, Gilula Chair in Chemical Biology, The Department of Chemistry, Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The Scripps Research Institute 10550 North Torrey Pines Rd,  La Jolla, CA 92037


