### Accession
PXD027955

### Title
Hypoxia-reoxygenation stress response in the marine facultative anaerobe Mytilus edulis

### Description
Hypoxia is a characteristic feature of marine environments and a major stressor for marine organisms inhabiting benthic and intertidal zones. Several studies have explored the responses of these organisms to hypoxic stress at the whole organism level with a focus on energy metabolism and mitochondrial response, but the instrinsic mitochondrial responses that support the organelle’s function under hypoxia and reoxygenation (H/R) stress are not well understood. We studied the effects of acute H/R stress (10 min anoxia followed by 15 min reoxygenation) on mitochondrial respiration, production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and posttranslational modifications (PTM) of the proteome in a marine facultative anaerobe, the blue mussel Mytilus edulis. The mussels’ mitochondria showed increased OXPHOS  respiration and suppressed proton leak resulting in a higher coupling efficiency after H/R stress. ROS production decreased in both the resting (LEAK) and phosphorylating (OXPHOS) state indicating that M. edulis is able to prevent oxidative stress and mitochondrial damage during reoxygenation. Hypoxia did not stimulate the rearrangement of the mitochondrial supercomplexes but impacted the mitochondrial phosphoproteome including the proteins involved in OXPHOS, amino acid and fatty acid catabolism, and protein quality control. This study indicates that mussels’ mitochondria possess intrinsic mechanisms (including regulation via PTM mechanisms such as reversible protein phosphorylation) that ensure high respiratory flux and mitigate oxidative damage during H/R stress and contribute to the hypoxia-tolerant mitochondrial phenotype of this metabolically plastic species.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of mitochondrial phosphoproteins was done using a chromatography approach with the Pro-Q® Diamond Phosphoprotein Enrichment Kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Briefly, 40-60 mg of mitochondrial suspension was lysed with proprietary Invitrogen’s buffer, diluted to 0.1-0.2 mg ml-1 protein and applied to a prewashed chromatographic column. After the lysate passed through the column, the column was intensively washed to remove unbound proteins, followed by elution of an enriched fraction of phosphoproteins. The phosphoproteins were concentrated using several rounds of centrifugation with Vivaspin concentrators (Sartorius, Goettingen, Germany). Samples were stored at -80°C in 25 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 0.25% CHAPS until further analyses. Mass spectrometric analysis of enriched M. edulis mitochondrial phosphoproteins was performed as described in detail previously (Sokolov et al., 2019). In short, protein extracts were concentrated to 15 µl, mixed with sample buffer (200 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 50 mM EDTA pH 8.0, 40 % glycerol, 8% SDS, 0.08% bromophenol blue, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)), denatured at 90°C for 10 min, and only briefly separated in 10% SDS mini gels. After Coomassie staining, the protein-containing gel areas (upper 10 mm of each gel band) were excised, dried in a vacuum centrifuge, reduced (20 mM DTT, 30 min, 55 °C, 800 rpm), alkylated (40 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min, room temperature in the dark), and dehydrated (100% acetonitrile HPLC grade, 2 min, room temperature). Proteins were then digested (4 µg/µl trypsin solution, 37°C, 16 h), and peptides were purified by StageTipping, adjusted to 2 µg/µl and frozen at -80 °C until analysis. Purified peptides were analyzed by reversed phase liquid chromatography (LC) electrospray ionization (ESI) MS/MS using a Q Exactive™ Plus Hybrid Quadrupol-Orbitrap™ mass specrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA), in-house self-packed nano-LC columns (100 µm x 20 cm) and an EASY-nLC II system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) as described previously (Sokolov et al., 2019) in five biological replicates per condition (i.e., hypoxia/reoxygenation and normoxic control).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted and analyzed using the Sorcerer-Sequest software (v5.1.1, Sage-N Research) and a combined target-decoy database. As a dedicated complete M. edulis genome sequence was not yet available at the time, we constructed the database from all available related Mytilus species. To this end, all NCBI protein entries listed for the taxon “Mytilus” (77,824 proteins on 09/08/2020) were retrieved and clustered at 97% identity with CD-Hit (Li & Godzik, 2006) to remove redundant proteins. A set of common laboratory contaminants was added and all sequence entries were reversed and appended to the database as decoy sequences (to allow for false discovery rate (FDR) calculation), resulting in a total of 127,890 sequences in the database. MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications of all 10 samples were merged and evaluated with Scaffold version 4.8.4 (http://www.proteomesoftware.com), with the clustering feature enabled. Protein level FDR and peptide level FDR were set to 1%. A minimum of 2 peptides was required for protein identification. For semi-quantitative analysis and comparison of relative protein abundances between samples, normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAF) were calculated (Zybailov et al., 2006) using total spectrum counts.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Taurine, Supercomplexes, Mitochondria, Hypoxia-reoxygenation, Phosphoproteins, Mussels

### Affiliations
Universität Greifswald Institut für Pharmazie, AG Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie Greifswald, Germany
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Stephanie Markert

### Lab Head
Dr Stephanie Markert
Universität Greifswald Institut für Pharmazie, AG Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie Greifswald, Germany


