### Accession
PXD001245

### Title
Functional proteomics identifies acinus L as a direct insulin- and amino acid-dependent mTORC1 substrate

### Description
The serine/threonine kinase mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) governs growth, metabolism, and aging in response to insulin and amino acids (aa), and is often activated in metabolic disorders and cancer. Much is known about the regulatory signaling network around mTOR, but surprisingly few direct mTOR substrates have been established to date. To tackle this gap in our knowledge, we took advantage of a combined quantitative phosphoproteomic and interactomic strategy. We analyzed the insulin- and aa-responsive phosphoproteome upon inhibition of the mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) component raptor, and analyzed in parallel the interactome of endogenous mTOR. By overlaying these two datasets, we identified acinus L as a potential novel mTORC1 target. We confirmed acinus L as a direct mTORC1 substrate by co-immunoprecipitation and MS-enhanced kinase assays. Our study delineates a triple proteomics strategy of combined phosphoproteomics, interactomics, and MS-enhanced kinase assays for the de novo-identification of mTOR network components, and provides a rich source of potential novel mTOR interactors and targets for future investigation.<br><br>Additional contact details:<br>
<a href="mailto:k.thedieck@umcg.nl">Prof. Dr. Kathrin Thedieck</a><br>
Department of Pediatrics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG), 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands.<br>
Faculty VI - School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Carl von Ossietzky University Oldenburg, 26111 Oldenburg, Germany.<br>
<br>
Prof. Dr. Bettina Warscheid<br>
Faculty of Biology, Institute of Biology II, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.<br>
BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.<br>

### Sample Protocol
In vitro kinase assay: For mTOR in vitro kinase assays, co-IPs with anti-raptor antibody clone 20D12 were performed. The mock IP was carried out using anti-rat IgG clone 7H8 (kind gift of Dr. Elisabeth Kremmer). The lysis buffer (40 mM HEPES, 120 mM NaCl, 0.3% CHAPS, pH 7.5) was supplemented with 500 nM benzamidine (Sigma-Aldrich) and 20 μg/mL heparin (Sigma-Aldrich). Following raptor or rat IPs, 26 μL of the kinase reaction mix [MnCl2 4mM, DTT 10 mM and protease inhibitors without EDTA (Roche), heparin (2 μg/mL, Sigma Aldrich) in lysis buffer and 1 μg 4E-BP (ProSpec, East Brunswick, NJ, USA) or 12 μg of purified acinus L N-terminal construct] were added to each eluate. The reaction mix was incubated with 250 nM or 500 nM Torin 1 (Tocris Bioscience, Bristol, UK) for 30 min at 30°C with slight agitation. For the conditions without Torin 1, DMSO (Sigma-Aldrich) was added. The reaction was started by adding 4 μL 1 mM ATP in lysis buffer under shaking at 1,400 rpm and stopped after 60 min at 30°C with 1x sample buffer. Coomassie staining and in-gel digestion: The samples of the kinase assay were loaded onto 4-20% Tris-Glycine gels (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). After SDS-PAGE, proteins were stained with SimplyBlue™ SafeStain (Invitrogen, Life Technologies) according to the manufacturers’ manual. For in-gel digestion, the bands were cut out and destained with 50% buffer A (10 mM ammonium bicarbonate in water) with 50% buffer B (100% ACN). Proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT in buffer A at 65°C for 30 min, alkylated with 55 mM iodacetamide in buffer A at RT for 30 min in the dark, and digested with trypsin (Promega) in buffer A at 37°C overnight or at 42°C for 4 h. The peptides were eluted twice in 50% Buffer C (0.1% TFA in water) with 50% buffer B for 10 min in an ultrasonic bath. The eluates were dried in vacuo and resuspended in 15 μL buffer C for LC/MS measurement. High-performance liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry: Samples from mTOR in vitro kinase assays were measured on the RSLCnano/LTQ-FT for the first replicate and the RSLCnano/LTQ-Orbitrap XL for the second replicate. In brief, peptides were washed on a C18 μ-precolumn with 0.1% TFA for 5 min and separated on an Acclaim® PepMapTM analytical column (ID: 75 μm x 500 mm, 2 μm, 100 Å, Dionex LC Packings/Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The analytical column was equilibrated in 99% solvent A [4% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 0.1% FA] and 1% solvent B (4% DMSO, 0.1% FA, 30% ACN, 50% MeOH) or 95% A and 5% B. Samples were separated by a gradient of 1% (or 5% B) to 30% solvent B in 85 min (or 75 min), followed by a gradient from 30% to 45% solvent B in 30 min (or 40 min), 45% to 70% solvent B in 35 min and 70% to 99% solvent B in 5 min. Before re-equilibration for 15 min, the column was washed for 5 min with 99% solvent B. Both instruments were operated as described above. MSA was enabled on the LTQ-FT (see above, dynamic exclusion 45 s) and on the LTQ-Orbitrap XL using neutral loss masses of 98, 49 and 32.3 Da and a dynamic exclusion window of 45 s. For further details please refer to our manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics: For protein identification, peak lists were generated and searched against the Uniprot Human Proteome set (release 03.04.2013, 87,656 protein entries) and the contamination file supplied with MaxQuant using Andromeda/MaxQuant 1.3.0.5 (65, 66). The species was restricted to homo sapiens because only proteins from human cells were analyzed. MaxQuant was operated using default settings with slight modifications. Database searches were performed with trypsin as proteolytic enzyme allowing up to three missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine as well as phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues was commonly set as variable modification and carbamidomethlyation was set as fixed modification for in vitro kinase assays. Raw data were recalibrated using the “first search” option of Andromeda with the full database using a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. Mass spectra were searched with Andromeda using default settings. The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was 5 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. For automated quantification of protein groups, only “razor and unique” peptides and a minimum ratio count of two were considered. In addition, "re-quantify", "filter labeled amino acids" and “match between runs” with a 2 min time window were enabled. Low-scoring peptides were excluded. A false discovery rate of 1% was applied on both peptide-spectrum-matches (on modified peptides separately) and protein lists. For quantification of MS data from in vitro kinase assays, the label-free protein quantification option in MaxQuant was enabled using default settings. Only peptides with at least two unique peptides with a minimum length of seven aa are reported in this work. If proteins were not distinguishable based on the set of peptides identified, they were combined by MaxQuant and listed as protein group. Raw files of the in vitro kinase assay were analyzed with an in-house build software for peptide quantification based on extracted ion chromatograms (XIC). The XIC of the S240 or S243 mono-phosphorylated peptide LSEGSQPAEEEEDQETPSR observed at m/z 1099.44 in the MS spectrum was extracted and the area under the curve applying a 5% intensity threshold (AUC FW5PM, area under the curve at full width at 5% peak height) was calculated. The respective retention time of the phosphopeptide of interest was retrieved from the evidence.txt file of the MaxQuant 1.3.0.5 search for each replicate and a retention time window of 7 min (LTQ-FT) or 4 min (LTQ-Orbitrap XL) was used for XIC calculation. The values for the AUC FW5PM were normalized to the reported LFQ intensities of acinus L total levels in the proteingroups.txt file. The highest normalized AUC FW5PM value was set to 100% relative intensity for each replicate (corresponding to raptor IP with GST-acinus NT-myc-FLAG).

### Publication Abstract
The serine/threonine kinase mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) governs growth, metabolism, and aging in response to insulin and amino acids (aa), and is often activated in metabolic disorders and cancer. Much is known about the regulatory signaling network that encompasses mTOR, but surprisingly few direct mTOR substrates have been established to date. To tackle this gap in our knowledge, we took advantage of a combined quantitative phosphoproteomic and interactomic strategy. We analyzed the insulin- and aa-responsive phosphoproteome upon inhibition of the mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) component raptor, and investigated in parallel the interactome of endogenous mTOR. By overlaying these two datasets, we identified acinus L as a potential novel mTORC1 target. We confirmed acinus L as a direct mTORC1 substrate by co-immunoprecipitation and MS-enhanced kinase assays. Our study delineates a triple proteomics strategy of combined phosphoproteomics, interactomics, and MS-enhanced kinase assays for the de novo-identification of mTOR network components, and provides a rich source of potential novel mTOR interactors and targets for future investigation.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human, Ms-based in vitro kinase assay, Mtor

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Pediatrics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG), 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Kathrin Thedieck
Department of Pediatrics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG), 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands


