### Accession
PXD013257

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of pepper (Capsicum annuum L.) seedlings under selenium stress

### Description
Selenium (Se) is an essential trace element for human and animal health. Se fertilizer has been used to increase the Se content in crops to meet the Se requirements in humans and animals. To address the challenge of Se poisoning in plants, the mechanisms underlying Se-induced stress in plants must be understood. Here, to elucidate the effects of Se stress on the protein levels in pepper, we used an integrated approach involving tandem mass tag labeling, HPLC fractionation, and mass spectrometry-based analysis. A total of 4,693 proteins were identified, 3,938 of which yielded quantitative information. Among them, the expression of 172 proteins was up-regulated, and the expression of 28 proteins was down-regulated in the Se/mock treatment comparison. According to the above data, we performed a systematic bioinformatics analysis of all identified proteins and differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). The DEPs were most strongly associated with the terms ‘metabolic process’, ‘posttranslational modification, protein turnover, chaperones,’ and ‘protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum’ according to GO, KOG classification, and KEGG enrichment analysis, respectively. Furthermore, several heat shock proteins were identified as DEPs. These results provide insights that may facilitate further studies on the pepper proteome expressed downstream of the Se stress response. Our data revealed that the responses of pepper to Se stress involve various pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction and Trypsin Digestion Samples were removed from storage at -80°C, and fixed amounts of tissue samples were ground to powder while liquid nitrogen was added. The samples in each group were treated with four volumes of phenol extraction buffer (containing 10 mM dithiothreitol, 1% protease inhibitor, and 2 mM EDTA), then sonicated three times on ice with a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ningbo, China). The supernatant was centrifuged for 10 min at 4°C and 5,500 g with an equal volume of Tris equilibrium phenol. The supernatant was collected and precipitated overnight with five volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate/methanol. The protein precipitate was washed with methanol and acetone successively. Finally, the precipitate was re-dissolved in 8 M urea, and the protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit (code P0010, Beyotime, Beijing, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the final concentration of dithiothreitol in protein solution was 5 mM, and reduction was performed by incubation at 56°C for 30 minutes. The mixture was then alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 15 minutes. Finally, the urea concentration of the sample was diluted to less than 2 M by addition of 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin was added at a mass ratio of 1:50 (trypsin:protein), and enzymatic hydrolysis was carried out overnight at 37°C. Trypsin was then added at a mass ratio of 1:100 (trypsin:protein), and enzymatic hydrolysis continued for 4 h. TMT Labeling and HPLC Fractionation  The trypsinized peptide segments were desalted with a Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex, Torrance, US) and then freeze-dried under vacuum. The peptides were dissolved in 0.5 M triethyl ammonium bicarbonate and labeled with a TMT kit (ThermoFisher, Shanghai, China) kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The procedure was as follows: the labeled reagent was dissolved in acetonitrile after thawing, incubated at room temperature for 2 h after mixing with the peptide segments, then desalinated after mixing with the labeled peptide segment and freeze-dried in a vacuum. Peptide segments were classified with high pH reverse-phase high performance liquid chromatography with an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm diameter, 4.6 mm inner diameter, 250 mm length) (Agilent, Shanghai, China). The gradient of peptide segments was 8–32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0), and more than 60 minutes was required to separate the peptide segments into 60 components. The peptide segments were then merged into 18 components, which were then vacuum freeze-dried.  LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and directly loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 reverse-phase pre-column (ThermoFisher, Shanghai, China). The gradient comprised an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, from 23% to 35% in 8 min, and to 80% in 3 min; then the concentration was held at 80% for the last 3 min. All steps were performed at a constant flow rate of 500 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-high performance liquid chromatography system. After equilibration, the peptides were ionized with an NSI ion source and analyzed by MS/MS (Q ExactiveTM mass spectrometer; ThermoFisher, Shanghai, China) coupled online to ultra-high performance liquid chromatography. The ion source voltage was set to 2.0 kV, and the parent ions of peptide segments and their secondary fragments were detected and analyzed with a high resolution Orbitrap. The scanning range of the primary MS was set to 350–1,800 m/z, and the scanning resolution was set to 70,000. The scanning range of the secondary MS was set to 100 m/z, and the scanning resolution of the secondary MS was set to 17,500. The data acquisition mode used a data-dependent scanning program; that is, the first 20 peptide ions with the highest signal intensity were selected to enter the higher collision dissociation collision pool in turn after the first scan, and the fragmentation energy was 28% for fragmentation. Similarly, secondary MS analysis was carried out sequentially. To improve the efficiency of MS, AGC was set to 5E4, the signal threshold was set to 2E4, the maximum injection time was set to 100 ms, and the dynamic elimination time of MS/MS scanning was set to 30 s to avoid repeated scanning of parent ions.

### Data Protocol
Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed and searched against a public proteome Capsicum annuum database (https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/?query=proteome:UP000222542) with the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8, https://maxquant.org/) concatenated with a reverse decoy database. The retrieval parameter settings were as follows: trypsin/P was used for digestion; the number of missing digestion sites was set to two; and the minimum length of peptide segments was set to seven amino acids. The maximum number of modifications of the peptide segment was set to five. The mass error tolerance of the primary parent ions of the first search and main search was set to 20 ppm and 5 ppm, respectively. The mass error tolerance was 0.02 Da. Cysteine alkylation was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation on Met was specified as a variable modification. The quantitative method was set to TMT-6plex, and the false discovery rate for protein identification and PSM identification was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomic analysis, Capsicum annuum l., Selenium stress, Seedlings

### Affiliations
zhejiang scientific technology universitiy
Institute of Agricultural Equipment, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou 310021, China

### Submitter
xiaonan fu

### Lab Head
Dr Chenghao Zhang
Institute of Agricultural Equipment, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou 310021, China


