### Accession
PXD020183

### Title
Phosphoproteomic Survey of Human iPSC-derived Lung Alveolar Type 2 Cells Reveals Cytopathogenic Host Responses to SARS-CoV-2 Infection

### Description
Human transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS‐CoV‐2), the causative pathogen of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, is exerting a massive health and socioeconomic burden. The virus infects pneumocytes, also known as alveolar epithelial type 2 (AT2) cells, leading to impaired gas exchange and acute lung injury, but the mechanisms driving infection and pathology are unclear. Here, we report a quantitative phosphoproteomic time-course survey of a validated human AT2 cell model, derived from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), that reveals rapid, profound and switch-like rewiring of lung cell functional modules upon SARS-CoV-2 infection. Maladaptive responses driven by viral propagation include altered host cell signaling pathways, remodeled host translational processes, impaired RNA processing, cytoskeletal-microtubule disruption coincident with interphase arrest, and a pronounced innate immune response. Our study provides a data-rich resource that defines the native host systems hijacked by SARS-CoV-2 and potential therapeutic avenues for COVID-19.

### Sample Protocol
Human induced pluripotent stem cell line underwent directed differentiation to generate iPSC-derived alveolar epithelial type II like cells (iAT2s) in 3D Matrigel cultures. To establish air-liquid interface (ALI) cultures, single cell suspensions of iAT2s were prepared by plating on Transwell inserts. Two days after plating, or upon establishment of confluent monolayered epithelial cultures, apical media was aspirated to initiate ALI culture. SARS-CoV-2 was propagated and titrated in Vero E6 cells. To remove confounding cytokines and other factors, viral stocks were purified by ultracentrifugation. SARS-CoV-2 titers were determined in Vero E6 cells by 50% tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50) assay. SARS-CoV-2 infections of iAT2s were performed at a multiplicity of infection of 140 for 2 hours in 100 ul inoculum on the apical surface. To allow for synchronization during infection, the cells were incubated at 16 C for the first hour before being returned to 37C. After the hour of viral binding at 16 C, the cells were returned to 37C to allow for viral entry and were cultured for either 1, 3, 6, or 24 hours. Inoculum was removed at the 1 hour point. Mock-infections were performed in the same manner for each time-point. The iAT2 cells were harvested at the indicated time points. They were lysed and the virus inactivated by re-suspending the cell pellets in GuHCl lysis buffer supplemented with phosphatase inhibitor cocktail followed by heating to 100°C for 15 minutes. Lysates were sonicated with a Branson probe sonicator, diluted with 100 mM Tris ph 8.5 trypsinzied overnight at 37C with shaking. Trypsinization was terminated with the addition of TFA to below pH 3 and the peptide digests were desalted via reversed-phase C18 Sep-pak columns. The desalted peptides were then TMT-labelled with TMTPro 16plex reagent. The TMT-labelled peptides were fractionated via basic reversed-phase chromatography. Peptides were injected via the autosampler and eluted from the column over 48 minutes in 30s fractions. The 96 fractions collected were orthogonally concatenated into 8 pooled fractions. Five percent of each fraction was aliquoted and saved for global proteomic profiling and the remaining 95% of peptides were used for phosphopeptide enrichment. Peptide samples were sequenced on either the Orbitrap Exploris 480 equipped with FAIMS, or Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer, respectively. Each mass spectrometer was interfaced to the Easy nanoLC1200 HPLC system. The peptides were first loaded onto a reverse-phase nano-trap column in mobile phase A, and separated over an EASY-Spray column, using a gradient of mobile phase B at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 275°C and a spray voltage of 2100 volts. All data was acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Precursor scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM with a maximum injection time of 120 ms in the Orbitrap analyzer. The twelve most abundant ions, with charge states greater than 1, were selected for fragmentation by HCD (MS/MS) and analyzed at a resolution of 45,000 FWHM with a maximum injection time of 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
All acquired MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human complete proteome FASTA database downloaded on 2020_02_10, and the SARS-CoV-2 proteome downloaded from SwissProt on 2020-05-03 using the MaxQuant software Version 1.6.7.0 that integrates the Andromeda search engine. TMT reporter ion quantification was performed using MaxQuant. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications. For phosphopeptides serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation were specified as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at 1% FDR using the target-decoy database search strategy (Ref). The MaxQuant output files designated “Phospho(STY)sites” and “ProteinGroups” were used for data normalization and other statistical analysis using in-house generated scripts in the R environment. Bioinformatic analysis was performed using R, version 3.6.1. The MaxQuant tables of protein group and phosphosite feature intensities was log transformed. For the 24 hour iAEC2 timepoint, the data were normalized by loess. For the 1, 3, and 6 hour iAEC2 timepoints, the data were normalized by quantile normalization and a batch correction was applied across the two TMT sets using the ComBat algorithm from the sva R package. For differential analysis, the LIMMA(Ritchie et al., 2015) R package was used to fit a linear model accounting for the infection vs mock condition at each timepoint.  Moderated t-tests were corrected with the Benjamini-Hochberg method for false discover rate (FDR). Gene set enrichment analysis was performed using the fgsea R package(Sergushichev, 2016) using gene libraries for (cite bader lab enrichment map and hallmark gene sets).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Infection, Signaling, Lung organoids, Drug targets, Phosphoproteomics, Covid-19, Host pathways, Pathogenesis, Mass spectrometry, Human alveolar cells

### Affiliations
Boston University
Center for Network Systems Biology, Boston University

### Submitter
Ryan Hekman

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Emili
Center for Network Systems Biology, Boston University


