### Accession
PXD008079

### Title
Integrated proteomics reveals apoptosis-related mechanisms associated with past-chronic stage of placental malaria

### Description
Malaria in pregnancy remains a substantial public health concern in malaria-endemic areas. Accumulation of maternal immune cells in the placenta and increased levels of inflammatory cytokines caused by sequestration of Plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocytes (IE) in the placental intervillous blood spaces have been associated to poor neonatal outcomes, including low birth weight due to fetal growth restriction. However, little is known about the molecular changes occurring in the placenta in past-stages of P. falciparum infection when the hemozoin pigment is present in the absence of parasites. We conducted an integrated proteome, phosphoproteome and glycoproteome analysis in P. falciparum infected and non-infected placentas aiming to find molecular changes occurring in past-stage infection. A total of 2946 proteins, 1733 glycosites and 4100 phosphosites were identified and quantified in this study, disclosing overrepresented processes related to oxidative stress, protein folding and regulation of apoptosis, as well as AKT and ERK signaling pathways activation, which together with clinical data and literature-based information were further correlated to an increased apoptosis in infected placentas. This study showed apoptosis-related mechanisms associated with past-stage of malaria infection that can be further explored as therapeutic target against adverse pregnancy outcomes in placental malaria.

### Sample Protocol
Pieces of mouse placentas were homogenized in liquid nitrogen by using mortar and pestle, and resuspended in a PBS extraction buffer containing 8M urea, 10mM DTT and cocktail inhibitor protease. Later, the human placenta tissues (~50mg) were washed in 80% acetonitrile (cold) to remove the RNA and resuspended in an extraction buffer containing 6M urea, 10mM DTT extraction buffer containing 6M urea, 10mM DTT, 1mM NaF, 1mM Sodium orthovanadate and a cocktail inhibitor protease. Human placenta tissues were lysed through a 2-minute shaking at 30Hz with a 5mm stainless steel bead in a TissueLyser (Qiagen, Chadstone, VIC, Australia). Protein concentration was determined by Qubit fluorimetric detection method. Proteins were reduced by adding DTT to a final 10 mM concentration and 30-minute incubation. Prior to the digestion by the addition of IAA to a final 40mM concentration and the 30min incubation in the dark at room temperature, proteins were alkylated. To quench the reaction, DTT was added to a final concentration of 5mM. Trypsin was added (1:50, w/w), and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37°C. Resulting peptide mixtures were desalted with hydrophilic−lipophilic-balanced solid phase extraction (SPE) (Waters) and peptides eluted in 1mL of 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN), 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 70% ACN/1% TFA. Samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in the appropriate buffer for glycopeptides and phosphopeptide enrichment steps. A total of 100ug of each human placenta samples was diluted to a final concentration of 100mM of TEAB labeled with TMT10plex Mass Tag labeling (Thermo), according to the instructions provided by the manufacturer.  One of the aliquots from the placenta TMT-labeled samples was submitted to a sialic acid enrichment containing glycopeptides by using TiO2, according to Palmisano et al. The second placenta TMT-labeled sample aliquot was reconstituted in 100µl 80% (v/v) acetonitrile and 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were loaded onto an in-house PolyHYDROXYETHYL A™ HILIC resin (PolyLC Inc) packed onto a C8 disk (Empore) in a p200 pipette tip.A TiO2 or HILIC-enriched glycopeptides (from protein trypsin digestion and endogenous glycopeptides) aliquot was resuspended in 50mM TEAB, pH 8.0 and deglycosylated with 500U of PNGase F (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) and 0.1U Sialidase A (Prozyme Hayward, CA) for 12 h at 37°C. After incubating, peptides were purified on an Oligo R3 reversed phase micro-column, dried by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 50µl of 0.1% formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.The peptides (resuspended in 0.1% FA) were automatically injected and loaded on a ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) in-house packed trap column (2cm x 100µm inner diameter; 5µm). Peptides were separated at 250nl/min on an analytical ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) packed in house column (17cm x 75µm; 3µm) by reversed phase chromatography, which was operated on an EASY-nanoLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark). Mobile phase was 95% ACN/0.1% FA (B) and water/0.1% FA (A). Gradient was from 3% to 28% solvent B in 52 minutes, 28 - 47% B in 5min, 45 - 100% B in 5min and 8min at 100% B. The nanoLC was connected online to a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in positive ion mode and using data-dependent acquisition. The Orbitrap acquired the full MS scan with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3x106 ions and a maximum filling time of 100ms. Each MS scan was acquired at 120,000 full width half maximum (FWHM) high-resolution at m/z 200 in the Orbitrap with 400-1600 Da mass range. The 10 most abundant peptide ions were selected from MS for higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (collision energy: 29V) in case they were at least doubly charged. Fragmentation was performed at high resolution (60,000 FWHM) for a 1x105 target and 200ms maximum injection time by using an isolation a 1.2 m/z window and a 30s. dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were imported into a MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30 for the protein identification and quantification (22). For protein identification in MaxQuant, the database search engine Andromeda (23) was used to search for the MS/MS spectra against a database composed by the Uniprot Mouse Protein Database (April 15, 2015 release; 45,185 entries) and Uniprot Plasmodium berghei (strain Anka) Protein Database (April 13, 2015 release; 11,656 entries) or Reviewed Uniprot Human Protein Database (April 15, 2015 release; 45,185 entries) with a 4.5ppm tolerance level for MS, and 20ppm for MS/MS. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with maximum two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.021464 Da) was set as fixed modification, and the oxidation of methionine (15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation protein (42.010565 Da) were selected as variable modifications. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. For label-free quantification, it was used the ‘match between runs’ feature of the MaxQuant that enables to identify the transfer between samples based on the accurate mass and retention time applied with a 0.7 minute match time window and 20 minute alignment time window. For the TMT-labeling quantification, the ion MS2: 10plex TMT reporter was included in the search parameters. All identifications were filtered in order to achieve a 1% protein-false discovery rate (FDR).Label-free protein quantification was based on the MaxQuant label-free algorithm by using both unique and razor peptides for the protein quantification; at least 2 ratio counts were required for a protein quantification to be considered valid. Protein abundance was calculated based on the normalized spectral protein intensity (LFQ intensity)(24). Statistical analyses of the proteome data were performed by using the Perseus v.1.5.4.1 available in the MaxQuant environment. First, proteins identified in the reverse database, potential contaminants and proteins only identified per site were excluded for further analysis. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and the mean two technical replicates values for each independent experiment was calculated. The T-test analysis was applied both in the control and infected groups with p value set to p<0.05. For the TMT labeled samples, the reporter ion intensities from redundant peptides were summed. Quantitation of each identified formerly N-glycopeptide, phosphopeptide or non-modified peptides was determined by the normalized reporter ion intensities by log2 and then subtracting them by the log2 mean of each sample. Student T-test with p<0.05 was applied to identify the regulated glycopeptides or non-modified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Malaria in pregnancy is a public health concern in malaria-endemic areas. Accumulation of maternal immune cells in the placenta and increased levels of inflammatory cytokines caused by sequestration of <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i>-infected erythrocytes have been associated to poor neonatal outcomes, including low birth weight because of fetal growth restriction. Little is known about the molecular changes occurring in a <i>P. falciparum</i>-infected placenta that has developed placental malaria during pregnancy but had the parasites cleared by pharmacological treatment (past infection). We conducted an integrated proteome, phosphoproteome and glycoproteome analysis in past <i>P. falciparum</i>-infected placentas aiming to find molecular changes associated with placental malaria. A total of 2946 proteins, 1733 <i>N</i>-linked glycosites and 4100 phosphosites were identified and quantified in this study, disclosing overrepresented processes related to oxidative stress, protein folding and regulation of apoptosis in past-infected placentas Moreover, AKT and ERK signaling pathways activation, together with clinical data, were further correlated to an increased apoptosis in past-infected placentas. This study showed apoptosis-related mechanisms associated with placental malaria that can be further explored as therapeutic target against adverse pregnancy outcomes.

### Keywords
Glycoproteome, P. falciparum, Proteome, Phosphoproteome, Placental malaria

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of São Paulo São Paulo, Brazil

### Submitter
Rebeca Kawahara

### Lab Head
Dr Giuseppe Palmisano
Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of São Paulo São Paulo, Brazil


