### Accession
PXD015802

### Title
Molecular characterization of the eukaryotic Uba4/Urm1 system

### Description
Ubiquitin-like protein activator 4 (Uba4) is required for the thiolation of uridine bases in eukaryotic transfer RNA. Uba4 catalyzes the sequential adenylation and thiocarboxylation of the C-terminus of Ubiquitin related modifier 1 (Urm1), acting as a hybrid between an E1-like activating enzyme and a sulfur-transferase. Structural and mechanistic details of the eukaryotic Uba4 protein and its respective reaction intermediates remained elusive. Here, we report the high-resolution crystal structures of full length Uba4 from Chaetomium thermophilum and its heterodimeric complex with Urm1. The structures show, how the aligned adenylation and rhodanese-like domains of Uba4 orchestrate substrate binding and specifically recognize and activate Urm1 at its C-terminus. We use complementary assays in vitro and in vivo to functionally validate all our structural findings. Furthermore, we uncover that under oxidative stress the specific relay of catalytic cysteines, similar to E1-E2 cascades, protects Uba4 from covalent conjugation by its own product, namely thiocarboxylated Urm1.

### Sample Protocol
The gel bands were cut out and destained by washing four times alternately in 25% and 50% acetonitrile in 25 mM NH4HCO3. Proteins were reduced with 50 mM DTT at 37 °C for 45 minutes and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 2 h in the dark. Residual reagents were removed with 50% acetonitrile in 25 mM NH4HCO3. The bands were dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile, dried and rehydrated in 25 μl of chymotrypsin solution (10 ng/μl; 25 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.0; 10 mM CaCl2,). After 15 minutes, additional 40 μl of 25 mM NH4HCO3 was added. After overnight incubation at 25 °C, the digestion was stopped by adding 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were extracted by sonication and drying with 100% acetonitrile. The extracts were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile with 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid. Samples were analysed with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with a nanoHPLC (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 75 μm x 20 mm, 3 μm particle, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 2% acetonitrile with 0.05% TFA at a flow rate of 5 μl/min and further separated on analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm x 500 mm, 2 µm particle, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 50 °C with a 60 minutes gradient from 2% to 40% acetonitrile in 0.05% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The eluted peptides were ionised using a Digital PicoView 550 nanospray source (New Objective). The Q-Exactive was operated in a data dependent mode using top eight method with 35 s of dynamic exclusion. Full scan MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1e6. The MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 35,000 at m/z 200 with an AGC target of 3e6. The maximum ion accumulation times for the full MS and the MS/MS scans were 120 ms and 110 ms, respectively. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy.

### Data Protocol
The raw files acquired by the MS system were processed using the Proteome Discoverer platform (v.1.4; Thermo Scientific). Obtained peak lists were searched using an in-house MASCOT server (v.2.5.1; Matrix Science, London, UK) against the cRAP database (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/, released August 2019) with manually added CtUba4C202K, CtUba4C202S and CtUrm1 protein sequences (122 entries in total). The following search parameters were applied: chymotrypsin enzyme specificity (C-term of ADEFLMWY); up to five missed cleavages allowed; peptide mass tolerance: 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 20 mmu; fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications: oxidation (M) and GlyGlyHis (K), which is a remnant motif of Urm1 generated after chymotrypsin digestion. MS/MS spectra of peptides containing modified lysine were manually inspected and identifications with Mascot score higher than 40 were considered reliable. For Uba4C202S-Urm1 data were obtained in two independent experiments with two technical replicates.

### Publication Abstract
The chemical modification of tRNA bases by sulfur is crucial to tune translation and to optimize protein synthesis. In eukaryotes, the ubiquitin-related modifier 1 (Urm1) pathway is responsible for the synthesis of 2-thiolated wobble uridine (U<sub>34</sub> ). During the key step of the modification cascade, the E1-like activating enzyme ubiquitin-like protein activator 4 (Uba4) first adenylates and thiocarboxylates the C-terminus of its substrate Urm1. Subsequently, activated thiocarboxylated Urm1 (Urm1-COSH) can serve as a sulfur donor for specific tRNA thiolases or participate in ubiquitin-like conjugation reactions. Structural and mechanistic details of Uba4 and Urm1 have remained elusive but are key to understand the evolutionary branch point between ubiquitin-like proteins (UBL) and sulfur-relay systems. Here, we report the crystal structures of full-length Uba4 and its heterodimeric complex with its substrate Urm1. We show how the two domains of Uba4 orchestrate recognition, binding, and thiocarboxylation of the C-terminus of Urm1. Finally, we uncover how the catalytic domains of Uba4 communicate efficiently during the reaction cycle and identify a mechanism that enables Uba4 to protect itself against self-conjugation with its own product, namely activated Urm1-COSH.

### Keywords
Urmylation, Uba4, Urm1

### Affiliations
Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology (MCB), Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University

### Submitter
Urszula Jankowska

### Lab Head
Dr Urszula Jankowska
Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology (MCB), Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland


