### Accession
PXD004994

### Title
Rice pollen plasma membrane iTRAQ

### Description
The coordination of pollen tube (PT) growth, guidance and timely growth arrest and rupture mediated by PT-pistil interaction is crucial for the PT to transport sperm cells into ovules for double fertilization. The plasma membrane (PM) represents an important interface for cell–cell interaction, and PM proteins of PTs are pioneers for mediating PT integrity and interaction with pistils. Thus, understanding the mechanisms underlying these events is important for proteomics. Using the efficient aqueous polymer two-phase system and alkali buffer treatment, we prepared high-purity PM from mature and germinated pollen of rice. We used iTRAQ quantitative proteomic methods and identified 1,121 PM-related proteins (PMrPs) (matched to 899 loci); 192 showed differential expression in the two pollen cell types, 119 up- and 73 down-regulated during germination. The PMrP and differentially expressed PMrP sets all showed a functional skew toward signal transduction, transporters, wall remodeling/metabolism and membrane trafficking. Their genomic loci had strong chromosome bias. We found 37 receptor-like kinases (RLKs) from 8 kinase subfamilies and 209 transporters involved in flux of diversified ions and metabolites. In combination with the rice pollen transcriptome data, we revealed that in general, the protein expression of these PMrPs disagreed with their mRNA expression, with inconsistent mRNA expression for 74% of differentially expressed PMrPs. This study, for the first time, identified genome-wide pollen PMrPs, and provided insights into the membrane profile of receptor-like kinases and transporters important for pollen tube growth and interaction with pistils. These pollen PMrPs and their mRNAs showed discordant expression. This work provides novel resource and knowledge to further dissect mechanisms by which pollen or the PT controls PMrP abundance and monitors interactions and ion and metabolite exchanges with female cells in rice.

### Sample Protocol
Each SCX faction was reconstituted with 100 μL 0.1% formic acid in water. After the removal of salt on a Vydac C18 SPE cartridge by centrifugation, the desalted fraction was supplemented with 50 μL 60% acetonitrile and dried with a speed-vac. Each dried fraction was solved in 20 μL 0.1% formic acid, and 10 μL of the solution was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis by use of AB SCIEX Triple TOF 5600 MS (Concord, Ontario, Canada) equipped with a splitless Eksigent nano Ultra 2D Plus nanoLC system and a cHiPLC-Nanoflex microchip system (Dublin, CA, USA). The cHiPLC-system used changeable microfluidic traps (200 μm × 5 mm) and analytical columns (75 μm × 150 mm) packed with ChromXP C18 (3 μm, 120 Å) for online separation analysis. Sample loading, trapping and desalting involved 100% of mobile phase A (2% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid, 98% water) at a flow rate of 2 μL/min for 10 min. Peptide elution was started with 5% mobile phase B (98% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid, 2% water), then the gradient increased linearly to 24% in 70 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The total gradient length was 120 min. MS data acquisition was performed in the information dependent acquisition (IDA) mode. Triple TOF 5600 MS was operated with a resolving power of 30,000 (FWHM) for TOF MS scans. IDA survey scans were acquired in 250 ms with mass range of m/z 350-1250. As many as 30 product ion scans were collected for 100 ms with mass range of m/z 100-1500, if exceeding a threshold of 120 cps (counts/s) and with a charge state of +2 to +5. Dynamic exclusion was set for 18 sec. Collision energies were calculated on-the-fly for all precursor ions by using empirical equations based on mass and charge (Rolling CE on), and the Enhance iTRAQ function was turned on to improve the efficiency of the collision-induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files (*.wiff) generated by Triple TOF 5600 were analyzed by using ProteinPilot 4.0 (revision 460, AB SCIEX), which involved two different algorithms; Paragon and Pro Group. Paragon is a search engine that uses feature probabilities and sequence temperature values to identify peptides from MS/MS spectra [23]. Database and parameters used for searching were as follows: NCBI Oryza sativa nonredundant database (136,389 protein entries, downloaded on 24 August 2011); Sample Type-iTRAQ 4plex labeled; Cys Alkylation-Iodoacetamide; Digestion-Trypsin; Instrument-Triple TOF 5600; Quantitate; Bias Correction; Background Correction; Biological modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was 0.05 Da and fragment mass tolerance was 0.1 Da. As part of the Paragon analysis method, false discovery rate analysis was performed by searching the decoy database to assess the rate of inaccurately identified proteins. Paragon search results were further processed by the Pro Group algorithm to determine the smallest justifiable set of detected proteins. Each detected protein has an unused protein score, a measurement of all the peptide evidence for a protein that is not better explained by a higher ranking protein, and this score is the true indicator of protein confidence. Unused protein scores 2.0, 1.3, 1.0, and 0.47 correspond to peptide confidence 99%, 95%, 90%, and 66% respectively (score 1.3, 95% confidence was threshold of this work), as shown in the ProteinPilot Software Beta Help (AB SCIEX). Protein quantitative analysis was also performed by use of ProteinPilot 4.0. The software calculates protein expression change ratios between different samples based on the relative intensities of iTRAQ-labeled peptides. Only ratios from the spectra that are distinct to each protein or protein form were used, to eliminate any masking of changes in expression due to peptides shared between proteins. For each protein expression change ratio reported, the program calculates a p-value that indicates the probability of randomly detecting a ratio different from 1. If an expression change ratio is extremely well determined, a real change can be detected even when the ratio is not very different from 1. To obtain a more accurate quantified result, we chose bias correction and background correction when searching the database by Paragon.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma membrane, Pollen, Itraq

### Affiliations
Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences
IBCAS

### Submitter
Ning Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Ning Yang
Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences


