### Accession
PXD001331

### Title
Insight into the proteome of axenic Crithidia fasciculata choanomastigotes

### Description
Total protein extracts (days 1, 2, 3 and 4 of the growth curve; separation of peanut lectin-agglutinating and non-agglutinating choanomastigotes at day 4). Taxonomy: Crithidia fasciculata (Kinetoplastida, Trypanosomatidae)

### Sample Protocol
Isoelectrofocusing was performed on IPG strips in a Protean® IEF Cell system. A seven step program was used. The second dimension was run by 12% SDS-PAGE in a pre-cooled MiniProtean® 3 Dodeca Cell system (BioRad) at 0.5 W/gel for 30 min and then at 1.5 W up to 5 min. Staining with SYPRO Ruby and imaging with EXQuest Spot Cutter system.

### Data Protocol
PDQuest analysis. Input data:  Normalized intensities (Total Quantity in Valid Spots method) Analysis intent:  Finding proteins with differential abundance at any time of the 4-day-growth curve of C. fasciculata choanomastigotes. Finding proteins constitutively expressed throughout the growth curve of C. fasciculata choanomastigotes. Type:  T-test (p< 0.05) Number of replicates per group: 3 Parameters:  Differential expression Samples (groups): days 1, 2, 3 and 4 of the growth curve

### Publication Abstract
The life cycle of the trypanosomatid Crithidia fasciculata is monogenetic, as the unique hosts of these parasites are different species of culicids. The comparison of these non-pathogenic microorganisms evolutionary close to other species of trypanosomatids that develop digenetic life cycles and cause chronic severe sickness to millions of people worldwide is of outstanding interest. A ground-breaking analysis of differential protein abundance in Crithidia fasciculata is reported herein. The comparison of the outcome with previous gene expression profiling studies developed in the related human pathogens of the genus Leishmania has revealed substantial differences between the motile stages of these closely related organisms in abundance of proteins involved in catabolism, redox homeostasis, intracellular signalling, and gene expression regulation. As L. major and L. infantum agglutinate with peanut lectin and non-agglutinating parasites are more infective, the agglutination properties were evaluated in C. fasciculata. The result is that choanomastigotes are able to agglutinate with peanut lectin and a non-agglutinating subpopulation can be also isolated. As a difference with L. infantum, the non-agglutinating subpopulation over-expresses the whole machinery for maintenance of redox homeostasis and the translation factors eIF5a, EF1&#x3b1; and EF2, what suggests a relationship between the lack of agglutination and a differentiation process.

### Keywords
2d-e, Full proteome, Maldi

### Affiliations
Vaccine and Gene Expresion head
Proteomics - Bioinformatics

### Submitter
J. Alberto Medina-Aunon

### Lab Head
Dr Vicente Larraga
Vaccine and Gene Expresion head


