### Accession
PXD028526

### Title
Metabolic Remodeling during Nitrogen Fixation in Zymomonas

### Description
This project investigates the proteomic remodeling associated with N2 fixation and NH4+ assimilation in Zymomona mobilis. Previous work has elucidated the metabolic and proteomic response of Zymomona mobilis during steady state N2 fixation. These experiments examine the proteomic profile during the dynamic shift of N2 and NH4+.

### Sample Protocol
Zymomona mobilis samples were prepared by lysing cells with 900 µL of methanol (>90% v/v).Samples were kept at 4°C for 30 min and then centrifuged for 20 min at 15,000 X g. The protein pellet was resuspended in 50 µL 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris (pH 8.0)–10 mM TCEP, and 40 mM chloroacetamide and then bath sonnicated for 10 minutes. The protein concentration was determined with nanodrop using the A280 method. Protein resuspension was then diluted to 1.5 M urea in 100 mM Tris (pH 8.0) and sonicated for 10 minutes. Trypsin was added at an estimated 50:1 ratio, and samples were incubated overnight (12 hours) at ambient temperature. After incubation with digestion enzyme, each sample was prepared for desalted using a 96-well Strata polymeric reversed phase 10 mg SPE (styrene divinylbenzene) cartridge. Desalted peptides were dried then resuspended in 0.2% formic acid and the peptide mass was assayed with the nanodrop A280 method for a final concentration close to 1 µg/µL.   For each analysis, 1 µg of peptides was loaded onto a 75-µm-inside-diameter (i.d.) 30-cm-long capillary with an imbedded electrospray emitter and packed in a 1.7-m-particle-size C18 BEH column (stationary phase). The mobile phases used were as follows: phase A, 0.2% formic acid; phase B, 0.2% formic acid–70% acetonitrile. The peptides were eluted with a gradient of acetonitrile increasing from 0% to 50% B over 74 min followed by a 1-min increase to 100% B, 5-min sustained at 100% B, and a final 10 mins of equilibration in 100% A. The eluting peptides were analyzed with an Orbitrap Eclipse (Thermo Fischer Scientific) mass spectrometer. Survey scans were performed at a resolution of 240,000 with an isolation analysis at m/z 300 to 1,350 and 250% normalized automatic gain control (AGC) target. Data-dependent top-speed (1-s) tandem MS (MS/MS) sampling of peptide precursors was enabled with dynamic exclusion set to 10 s on precursors with charge states 2 to 5. Data dependent MS/MS sampling was performed with 0.5-Da quadrupole isolation, fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normal collisional energy (NCE) value of 300%. The mass analysis was performed in the ion trap using the “turbo” scan speed for a mass range of 150-1350 m/z with a maximum inject time of 14 ms, and the normalized AGC target set to 300%.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.5.8.3 (54). Spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine against a decoy target list. The fasta database “Zm4.CDS.AA.fasta” was used to generate the protein list utilizing the ZM4 tag for protein names. Label-free quantitation and match between runs were toggled on, MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.4 Da, and the number of measurements for each protein was set to 1. Default values were used for all other analysis parameters. The peptides were grouped into subsumable protein groups and filtered to reach 1% FDR, based on the target decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nitrogen fixation, Zymomonas

### Affiliations
Department of Biomolecular Chemistry and Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA
Morgridge Institute for Research
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Katherine Overmyer

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua J Coon
Department of Biomolecular Chemistry and Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA


