### Accession
PXD028882

### Title
TERRA interactome in human ALT cancer cells identified by iDRiP-MS method

### Description
Alternative Lengthening of Telomeres (ALT) cancer cells are a subset of cancers that depend on the homologous recombination mechanism to extend their telomere length independent of telomerase. ALT cells contain elevated levels of the telomeric-repeat containing long noncoding RNA (TERRA), which is an RNA transcribed by RNA polymerase II and can form RNA:DNA (R-loops) hybrids at telomeres. Lines of evidence have shown that the formation of R-loops at telomeres could be one of the mechanisms to trigger DNA repair to lengthen telomeres. We perform iDRiP-MS, a method to capture specific RNA interacting protein by UV light crosslinking using antisense probe capture (Chu et al., 2017a; Minajigi et al., 2015), to explore the TERRA interactomes in human ALT cancer cell. Our TERRA interactome data reveals that TERRA interacts with an extensive subset of DNA repair proteins in ALT cells including the endonuclease XPF, suggesting that TERRA R-loops activate DDR via XPF to promote homologous recombination and telomere replication to drive ALT.

### Sample Protocol
U2OS cells (3.75 x 10^8 cells) were irradiated with UV light at 400 mJ energy (Stratagene 2400) in a minimal amount of cold PBS, cells were treated with CSKT-0.5% (10 mM PIPES, pH 6.8, 100 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.3 M sucrose, 0.5% Triton X-100, 1 mM PMSF) for 10 min at 4°C. Snap-freezing cells were stored at -80°C. UV-crosslinked cells were treated with 8 ml of DNase I (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 0.5% Nonidet-P 40, 0.1% sodium lauroyl sarcosine, 1x protease inhibitors, SuperaseIn, 600U DNase I) at 37°C for 20 minutes to solubilize the chromatin. The samples were further lysed in 1% sodium lauroyl sarcosinate, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.5 M lithium chloride, 20 mM EDTA, and 20 mM EGTA and incubated at 37°C for 5 min.  The lysates were spun at the highest speed and the supernatants were collected. The pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 0.5 M LiCl, 1% Nonidet-P 40, 1% sodium lauroyl sarcosine, 0.1% sodium lauroyl sarcosine, 20 mM EDTA, 20 mM EGTA), incubated on ice for 10 min, heated to 65°C for 5 min, immediately spun at room temperature for 1 min, and stored on ice. The supernatants were collected and combined with the previous supernatants (the total volume was around 11-12 ml). The combined supernatants (3 ml for each probe capture) were precleaned by incubation with MyOne streptavidin C1 beads (ThermoFisher). To conjugate DNA probes to beads, beads were incubated with probes (0.5 nmol/ml of bead) in 1X binding buffer (5 mM Tri-HCl (pH7.5), 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 M NaCl) at room temperature for 20 min, washed with 1X binding buffer twice, and then resuspended in lysis buffer. Precleaned lysates and probes-conjugated beads were preheated to 65°C, mixed, and incubated at 65°C for 15 min (100 μl beads for 1ml of lysate). Followed by slowly reducing the temperature to 37°C, lysates were incubated at 37°C for one hour. The beads were washed three times in Wash Buffer 1 (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 0.3 M LiCl, 1% SDS, 0.5% Nonidet-P 40, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 1X protease inhibitors) at 37°C followed by treatment with 20 U of Turbo DNase I in DNase I digestion buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 0.5% Nonidet-P 40, 0.1% sodium lauroyl sarcosine) with the addition of 0.2 M LiCl, protease inhibitors, and superaseIn at 37°C for 10 min. Then, beads were washed two more times at 37°C in the Wash Buffer 1. The lysates were further washed at 37°C for 5 min in Wash Buffer 2 (1% SDS, 1 mM DTT, 5 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM PMSF). Proteins were eluted in an elution buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA) at 70°C for 5 min. DNA probes for iDRiP were ordered from Integrated DNA Technologies and labeled with 3’ biotin-TEG.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectrometer raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer v2.3 (Thermo Scientific) and the tandem MS data were then searched using SEQUEST algorithms against a human UniProt (Swiss-Prot only) database (released June 2019) with common contaminant proteins. The search parameters included trypsin as the protease with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages allowed; oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were set as a dynamic modification while static modifications included carbamidomethyl (alkylation) at cysteine and TMT as a static modification of lysine residues and peptides’ N-termini (+229.16293 Da). Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated by carrying out decoy database searches and peptides scoring better than 1% FDR score cut-off were considered for further analysis. Reporter ions for TMT labeled peptides were quantified using the Reporter Ions Quantifier Node in Proteome Discoverer and peak integration tolerance was set at 20 ppm by considering most confident centroid peaks.

### Publication Abstract
Alternative Lengthening of Telomeres (ALT) utilizes a recombination mechanism and break-induced DNA synthesis to maintain telomere length without telomerase, but it is unclear how cells initiate ALT. TERRA, telomeric repeat-containing RNA, forms RNA:DNA hybrids (R-loops) at ALT telomeres. We show that depleting TERRA using an RNA-targeting Cas9 system reduces ALT-associated PML bodies, telomere clustering, and telomere lengthening. TERRA interactome reveals that TERRA interacts with an extensive subset of DNA repair proteins in ALT cells. One of TERRA interacting proteins, the endonuclease XPF, is highly enriched at ALT telomeres and recruited by telomeric R-loops to induce DNA damage response (DDR) independent of CSB and SLX4, and thus triggers break-induced telomere synthesis and lengthening. The attraction of BRCA1 and RAD51 at telomeres requires XPF in FANCM-deficient cells that accumulate telomeric R-loops. Our results suggest that telomeric R-loops activate DDR via XPF to promote homologous recombination and telomere replication to drive ALT.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, U2os, Alt, Lncrna, Idrip-ms, Terra

### Affiliations
National Taiwan University, Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology
Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University, No. 1 Sec. 4 Roosevelt Road, Taipei, Taiwan

### Submitter
Chia Yu Guh

### Lab Head
Dr Hsueh-Ping Chu
Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University, No. 1 Sec. 4 Roosevelt Road, Taipei, Taiwan


