### Accession
PXD002183

### Title
Fgf and Esrrb integrate epigenetic and transcriptional networks that regulate self-renewal of Trophoblast Stem Cells

### Description
Esrrb is a transcription factor implicated in embryonic stem (ES) cell self-renewal, yet its knockout causes intrauterine lethality due to defects in trophoblast development. Here we show that in trophoblast stem (TS) cells, Esrrb is a downstream target of fibroblast growth factor (Fgf) signalling and is critical to drive TS cell self-renewal. In contrast to its occupancy of pluripotency-associated loci in ES cells, Esrrb sustains the stemness of TS cells by direct binding and regulation of TS cell-specific transcription factors including Elf5 and Eomes. To elucidate the mechanisms whereby Esrrb controls the expression of its targets, we characterized its TS cell-specific interactome by mass spectrometry. Unlike in ES cells, Esrrb interacts in TS cells with the histone demethylase Lsd1 and with the RNA Polymerase II-associated Integrator complex. Our findings provide new insights into both, the general and context-dependent wiring of transcription factor networks in stem cells by master transcription factors.

### Sample Protocol
co-IP of FLAG-tagged Esrrb and Cdx2 interactors, reduction/carbamidomethylation, trypsin digestion, nanoLC-MS/MS of LTQ Orbitrap Velos

### Data Protocol
Protein identification by Mascot database search, peptide peak areas determined by Proteome Discoverer, and further filtering in Scaffold.

### Publication Abstract
Esrrb (oestrogen-related receptor beta) is a transcription factor implicated in embryonic stem (ES) cell self-renewal, yet its knockout causes intrauterine lethality due to defects in trophoblast development. Here we show that in trophoblast stem (TS) cells, Esrrb is a downstream target of fibroblast growth factor (Fgf) signalling and is critical to drive TS cell self-renewal. In contrast to its occupancy of pluripotency-associated loci in ES cells, Esrrb sustains the stemness of TS cells by direct binding and regulation of TS cell-specific transcription factors including Elf5 and Eomes. To elucidate the mechanisms whereby Esrrb controls the expression of its targets, we characterized its TS cell-specific interactome using mass spectrometry. Unlike in ES cells, Esrrb interacts in TS cells with the histone demethylase Lsd1 and with the RNA Polymerase II-associated Integrator complex. Our findings provide new insights into both the general and context-dependent wiring of transcription factor networks in stem cells by master transcription factors.

### Keywords
Self-renewal, Transcription factors, Esrrb, Lc-ms/ms, Ts cells

### Affiliations
Babraham Institute Cambridge UK
Babraham Institute

### Submitter
David Oxley

### Lab Head
Dr david oxley
Babraham Institute Cambridge UK


