### Accession
PXD024883

### Title
Deep time-course proteomics of SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 infected human lung epithelial cells (Calu-3) reveals strong induction of interferon-stimulated gene (ISG) expression by SARS-CoV-2 in contrast to SARS-CoV

### Description
In the present study, we used data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) to analyse the protein expression in Calu-3 cells infected with SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 over the time-course of 24 hours. About 8400 proteins were identified, from which about 90% could be quantified across the experiment. This results in a deep and comprehensive proteome map, which reflects time-dependent protein expression changes during SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 infections and provides deep insights into the virus-specific immunmodulation of human lung cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and infection. Calu-3 cells (ATCC HTB-55) were cultivated in EMEM containing 10 % FCS, 2mM L-Gln and non-essential amino acids at 37°C and 5% CO2 in a humified atmosphere. Medium was removed and cells were infected with SARS-CoV or SARS-CoV-2 at an MOI of 5. Mock samples were treated with medium only. After one hour post infection (p.i.), cells were washed with PBS and fresh medium was added. After 2, 6, 8, 10 and 24 h p.i. the medium was removed and, cells were washed with PBS and prepared for proteomics as described below. For each time point and virus triplicate samples were taken. Additionally, triplicate mock samples per time point were taken. Sample preparation. Samples were prepared for proteomics using Sample Preparation by Easy Extraction and Digestion (SPEED). Resulting peptides were desalted using 200 µL StageTips packed with three Empore™ SPE Disks C18 and concentrated using a vacuum concentrator. Dried peptides were suspended in 20 µL 0.1 % TFA and quantified by measuring the absorbance at 280 nm using an Implen NP80 spectrophotometer. Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry. Peptides were analyzed on an EASY-nanoLC 1200 coupled online to a Q Exactive™ HF mass spectrometer. 1 µg of peptides were loaded on a μPAC™ trapping column and on a 200 cm μPAC™ column using a stepped 160 min gradient of 80 % acetonitrile (solvent B) in 0.1 % formic acid (solvent A) at 300 nL/min flow rate. Column temperature was kept at 50°C using a butterfly heater. The Q Exactive™ HF was operated in a data-independent (DIA) manner in the m/z range of 350 – 1,150. Full scan spectra were recorded with a resolution of 120,000 using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3 × 106 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. The Full scans were followed by 84 DIA scans of dynamic window widths using an overlap of 0.5 Th. For the correction of predicted peptide spectral libraries, a pooled sample was measured using gas-phase separation (8 x 100 Th) with 25 x 4 Th windows in each fraction using a shift of 2 Th for subsequent cycles. DIA spectra were recorded at a resolution of 30,000 using an AGC target value of 3 × 106 with a maximum injection time of 55 ms and a first fixed mass of 200 Th. Normalized collision energy (NCE) was set to 25 % and default charge state was set to 3. Peptides were ionized using electrospray with a stainless-steel emitter, I.D. 30 µm, at a spray voltage of 2.0 kV and a heated capillary temperature of 275°C.

### Data Protocol
Protein sequences of homo sapiens (UP000005640, 95915 sequences, 23/5/19), SARS-CoV (UP000000354, 15 sequences, downloaded 21/9/20), and SARS-CoV-2 (UP000464024, 14 sequences, downloaded 21/9/20) were obtained from UniProt. A combined spectral library was predicted for all possible peptides with strict trypsin specificity (KR not P) in the m/z range of 350 – 1,150 with charges states of 2 – 4 and allowing up to one missed cleavage site using Prosit. The in-silico library was corrected using the data of the gas-phase fractionated pooled sample in DIA-NN (Version 1.7.10). Mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm for MS1 and 20 ppm for MS² spectra and the “unrelated run” option was enabled with the false discovery rate being set to 0.01. The single-run data were analysed using the corrected-library with fixed mass tolerances of 10 ppm for MS1 and 20 ppm for MS² spectra with enabled “RT profiling” using the “robust LC (high accuracy)” quantification strategy. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for precursor identifications and proteins were grouped according to their respective genes. The resulting identification file was filtered using R (Version 3.6) in order to keep only proteotypic peptides and proteins with protein q-values < 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Calu-3, Human lung cells, Sars-cov

### Affiliations
ZBS1, Highly Pathogenic Viruses, Robert Koch-Institute, Germany
Robert Koch Institute

### Submitter
Marica Grossegesse

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Nitsche
ZBS1, Highly Pathogenic Viruses, Robert Koch-Institute, Germany


