### Accession
PXD027735

### Title
MS proteomic datasets for "Development of methodology to investigate the surface SMALPome of mammalian cells".

### Description
In this study, mass spectrometry proteomics was used to investigate whether there are qualitative or quantitative differences in the mammalian plasma membrane proteins extracted with SMA compared to a detergent control.  For this, cell surface proteins of 3T3L1 fibroblasts were biotinylated and extracted using either styrene maleic acid (SMA) or detergent. Following affinity pull-down of biotinylated proteins with NeutrAvidin beads, samples were analysed by nanoLC-MS. Here, we report for the first time, a global proteomics protocol for detection of a mammalian cell ‘SMALPome’, membrane proteins incorporated into SMA nanodiscs.

### Sample Protocol
Surface Biotinylation Media was removed from the fibroblasts before following the protocol from the Cell Surface Protein Isolation Kit. In summary, cells were washed twice with cool PBS (12.5 mM Sodium phosphate dibasic dodecahydrate 154 mM NaCl, pH 7.4) before adding 5 mL of labelling solution, sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin EZ-link (0.5 mg/mL in PBS) for 30 minutes on ice with gentle agitation. Quenching buffer solution was added for 5 minutes. Cells were washed 4 times with 5 mL PBS before adding extraction buffer, either 1 mL of 1.5 % (w/v) SMA, 1x Protease inhibitor cocktail in PBS or 1 mL of RIPA buffer (1 % Triton X-100, 0.2 % SDS, 1 % Sodium Deoxycholate in PBS), 1x Protease inhibitor cocktail for 5 minutes at 4°C. Cell culture dishes were scraped with a cell scraper and extracts were rotated for a further 30 minutes and then centrifuged using a Beckmann Coulter TLA-100.3 fixed-angle rotor at 100,000 rpm for 30 min at 4°C. Supernatants were collected and pellets were resuspended in 1 mL PBS for further analysis.   NeutrAvidin Pull-down Supernatants (pre bead supernatants) were added to 100 µL of pre-washed NeutrAvidin slurry in 1.5 mL microfuge tubes and left overnight at 4°C on a rotator. Microfuge tubes were centrifuged at 100 x g to pellet NeutrAvidin beads. Supernatants (post bead supernatants) were removed for further analysis. Beads were washed by three rounds of 1 mL washing buffer, centrifugation at 100 x g and removal of washing buffer. Following the final wash, wash buffer was removed, and beads were sent for proteomics analysis. Three different wash protocols were used as follows.   Washing of NeutrAvidin beads Wash Protocol 1: Beads were washed with 4 x 1 ml PBS  Wash Protocol 2: Beads were washed with 2 x 1 ml RIPA, 2 x 1 ml RIPA 1.2 M NaCl, 3 x PBS Wash Protocol 3: Beads were washed with 2 x 1 ml RIPA, 2 x TBS (TBS: 0.9 % NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4; 0.1% Tween 20), 2 x 50 mM CaCl2, 2 x TBS (0.1% Tween 20), 2 x PBS   MS-proteomics Sample Processing Samples were reduced (10mM TCEP, 55°C for 1h), alkylated (18.75mM iodoacetamide, room temperature for 30min) and then digested from the beads with trypsin (2.5µg trypsin; 37°C, overnight). The resulting peptides were desalted using a SepPak cartridge according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA).  Eluate from the SepPak cartridge was evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  Nano-LC Mass Spectrometry The resulting peptides were fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7  gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1 min., 6-15% B over 58min., 15-32% B over 58 min., 32-40% B over 5 min., 40-90% B over 1 min., held at 90% B for 6 min and then reduced to 1% B over 1 min.) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.2 kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 300°C.  All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 3.0 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.  FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000 over a scan range (m/z) of 350-1550, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 4 x 105 and a max injection time of 50ms.  Precursors were filtered according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7), with monoisotopic peak determination set to peptide and using an intensity threshold of 1 c 103. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (40s +/-10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7 m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 2 x 104, max injection time of 35 ms and HCD collision energy of 30%.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Mouse database (downloaded February 2020; 83561 sequences) using the SEQUEST HT algorithm.  Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6 Da.  Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.995  Da), biotinylation of lysine (+389.6 Da), acetylation of the protein N-terminus (+42.011 Da) and Methionine loss plus acetylation of the protein N-terminus (-89.03 Da) as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) as a fixed modification. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed.  The reverse database search option was enabled, and all data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%.      The outputs from the Proteome Discoverer were filtered to identify transmembrane proteins and proteins that have a signal sequence. Firstly, any non-mouse contaminants were removed (i.e. contaminants = TRUE) from the data sets. Next, proteins with ≤ 1 unique peptide were removed from the data sets. The filtered data sets were compared with mouse proteins (86521 proteins) in the Uniprot database identified by the following searches:  To identify integral membrane proteins: Organism [OS], Mus musculus (mouse) AND Keyword [KW] Transmembrane helix (18359 proteins, downloaded December 2020).   To identify proteins with a signal sequence but not a transmembrane domain: Organism [OS] mus musculus (mouse) AND PTM Processing>molecule processing.signal peptide, NOT Keyword [KW] transmembrane helix (6683 proteins, downloaded April 2021).  To identify GPI anchor proteins associated with lipid rafts: keyword:"GPI-anchor [KW-0336]" AND organism:"Mus musculus (Mouse) [10090]" (226 proteins, downloaded July 2021).  To identify mitochondrial transmembrane proteins: keyword:"Transmembrane [KW-0812]" keyword:"Mitochondrion [KW-0496]" AND organism:"Mus musculus (Mouse) [10090]" (810 proteins, downloaded June 2021).   Uniprot annotation was used to determine whether a membrane protein was a single or multi-spanning transmembrane protein, using the Accession number. For those proteins where Uniprot annotation was unclear the number of TM-helices was predicted using TMpred from the amino acid sequence (Hofmann and Stoffel, 1993).  Statistical analysis  Data handling was conducted through R software using {dplyr} and {tidyr} packages (comparing datasets) or Microsoft Excel (for removal of contaminants and ≤ 1 unique peptides). Please see Supplementary table 1 for raw data and step-by-step filters. Scatterplot and notched-box plot figures were presented using R software with the {ggplot2} package.  Results were presented as mean ± SD where indicated. Two-tailed paired t-tests were used to determine statistical significance (p value < 0.05) between total protein pull-down from SMA and RIPA extracts. A minimum of 3 experiments were used for statistical comparisons calculated in Microsoft Excel.  Protein abundances were also statistically determined using two-tailed t-test (p value <0.001). Correlation coefficient was calculated using Pearson’s correlation coefficient in R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, 3t3l1 fibroblasts, Nano-lc-ms

### Affiliations
Department of Biology and Biochemistry University of Bath Bath UK
University of Bath

### Submitter
Kerrie Morrison

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Whitley
Department of Biology and Biochemistry University of Bath Bath UK


