### Accession
PXD012225

### Title
Molecular Mapping of FXIIIa Crosslinks

### Description
Here we present characterization of fibrin clots generated in vitro and ex vivo to obtain molecular detail regarding the specificity of FXIIIa cross-linking sites and substrates.

### Sample Protocol
For development, human blood from a healthy donor was allowed to clot (contact activation), and the insoluble material was isolated with strong chaotrope washes. This remaining clot was subjected to chemical digestion with hydroxylamine followed by further digestion with trypsin as previously reported (Barrett, A.S. et al. Hydroxylamine Chemical Digestion for Insoluble Extracellular Matrix Characterization. Journal of proteome research 16, 4177-4184, 2017)

### Data Protocol
Peptide spectral matching was performed with Mascot (Ver. 2.5) against the Swiss-Prot database (release 201701).  Mass tolerances were +/- 10 ppm for parent ions, and +/- 0.03 Da for fragment ions. C-terminal N and trypsin were used, allowing for 1 missed cleavage. Met oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and peptide N-terminal pyroglutamic acid formation were set as variable modifications with Cys carbamidomethylation set as a fixed modification. Hydroxyproline was also considered as a variable modification for the in vivo clot sample due to the presence of collagen in this sample. Scaffold was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability as specified by the Mascot scoring algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least two identified unique peptides.  A FASTA subset database was exported from these results for crosslink identification.  Crosslink Analysis. MS/MS spectra were extracted from raw data files and converted into .mgf files and crosslink identification was performed with pLink2.04. The crosslinker (TG) was entered manually. Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/NH2OH and missed cleavages were set to 4. Peptide mass range was 500 to 6000 and peptide length was 5 to 60. Precursor tolerance was ±20 ppm and fragment tolerance was ±20 ppm. Fixed modification was carbamidomethyl(C) and variable modifications were oxidation(M),. Filter tolerance was set to ±8 ppm. FDR was set to ≤1% at spectral level and E-values were calculated. A proXL conversion script was used to generate xml files for submission to the proXL website.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fibrin, Matrix, Insoluble protein, Cx-ms, Ecm, Clot

### Affiliations
University of Colorado, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics
University of Colorado

### Submitter
Kirk  Hansen

### Lab Head
Dr Kirk C Hansen
University of Colorado, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics


