### Accession
PXD005976

### Title
Delineating changing partners of Akt1 protein as a function of its active state in HEK-293 Cells

### Description
Akt1 is a multi-functional protein, implicated and activated in multiple human solid tumors. Functional diversity of Akt1 is a result of its interactions with other proteins; which changes with changing context. This study was designed to capture the dynamics of Akt1 Interactome as a function of its active state. This could help us comprehend the indigenous composition of Akt1 interactome and how it changes as a function of inhibition of its active form.

### Sample Protocol
Light and heavy labeled Akt1 expressing cells were sub-cultured separately for relative quantitation of protein expression, in the presence and absence of Akt1 inhibitor (MK-2206). Equal number of cells were  pooled, lysed and subjected to AP-MS. Four biological replicates were there.

### Data Protocol
Wiff files generated from AB SCIEX 5600 TRIPLE TOP Mass Spectrometer were submitted to protein pilot software, which resulted in 16 group files. Following search parameters were selected: Homo sapiens as species, LysC, Trypsin, as enzyme categories for different runs, two missed cleavages allowed; with cys alkylation as methyl methanethiosulphonate. Identification & SILAC (Lys8, Arg10) as sample types and the “Search Effort” parameter “Thorough ID”, which gives us a broad search of various protein modifications. Identification and quantification of differentially expressed proteins was strictly checked employing following filters - (1) Auto Bias correction for heavy to light ratio. (2) Threshold of 1% accepted global false discovery rate from fit (G-FDR-fit) proteins; (3) Minimum protein confidence threshold cut-off of 95%.

### Publication Abstract
Akt1 is a multi-functional protein, implicated in multiple human solid tumors. Pertaining to its key role in cell survival, Akt1 is under focus for development of targeted therapies. Functional diversity of Akt1 is a result of its interactions with other proteins; which changes with changing context. This investigation was designed to capture the dynamics of Akt1 Interactome as a function of its active state. Delineating dynamic changes in association of Akt1 with its interactors could help us comprehend how it changes as a function of inhibition of its active form. Similar information on changes in Akt1 interactome as of now is not well explored. Akt1 expressing HEK293 cells were cultured in light and heavy labeled SILAC media. Normal lysine and arginine were incorporated as light labels while for heavy labeling the isotopes were 8 and 10&#xa0;Da heavier. Light labeled cells represented the indigenous state of Akt1 interactome while heavy labeled cells represented Akt1 interactome in presence of its allosteric inhibitor, MK-2206. Equal number of cells from both conditions were pooled, lysed and subjected to Affinity Purification coupled to Mass Spectroscopy (AP-MS). Additionally, SILAC labeling aided in quantitative estimation of changing association of a number of proteins which were common to the two experimental conditions, with Akt1. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005976.

### Keywords
Interactome, Akt1, Apms, Silac

### Affiliations
RCB
Drug Discovery Research Center. THSTI. Faridabad, Haryana, INDIA.

### Submitter
Shweta Duggal

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Kanury V.S. Rao
Drug Discovery Research Center. THSTI. Faridabad, Haryana, INDIA.


