### Accession
PXD033978

### Title
Charting the proteoform landscape of serum proteins in individual donors by high-resolution native mass spectrometry

### Description
Most proteins in serum are glycosylated, with several annotated as biomarkers and thus diagnostically important and of interest for their role in disease. Most methods for analyzing serum glycoproteins have used either glycan release or glycopeptide centric mass spectrometry-based approaches, which provide excellent tools for analyzing known glycans, but neglect previously undefined or unknown glycosylation and/or other co-occurring modifications. High-resolution native mass spectrometry is a relatively new technique for the analysis of intact glycoproteins, providing a ‘what you see is what you get’ mass profile of a protein, allowing the qualitative and quantitative observation of all modifications present. So far, a disadvantage of this approach has been that it centers mostly on just one specific serum glycoprotein at the time. To address this issue, we introduce an IEX-based fractionation method capable of isolating and analyzing, in parallel, over 20 serum (glyco)proteins, covering a mass range between 30 and 190 kDa, from 150 µL of serum. The proteoform profiles of four selected proteins of interest, i.e., alpha-1-antitrypsin, ceruloplasmin, hemopexin and complement protein C3, are characterized and discussed in-depth. Our detailed analyses enabled the annotation of N- and O-glycans, protein cysteinylation, metal-ion binding, endogenous proteolysis and the detection of co-occurring genetic variants. Finally, we applied our approach to a small set of serum samples from healthy and diseased individuals. In these, we qualitatively and quantitatively monitored the changes in proteoform profiles of ceruloplasmin and reveal a substantial increase in fucosylation and glycan occupancy in patients with late-stage hepatocellular carcinoma and pancreatic cancer as compared to healthy donor samples. 

### Sample Protocol
Aliquots of 150 µL serum from each donor were filtered using a 0.22 µm filter (WAT200516 Acrodisc, USA) on a 1 mL syringe. To remove IgG, serotransferrin and albumin, aliquots were loaded on a 3-in-1 depletion column (HD-0301-10GFC, Good Biotech Corp., Taiwan) following the manufacturer’s instructions. This process was automated using an elution robot (Favonian, Apeldoorn, The Netherlands). In brief, serum aliquots were loaded on the column and incubated with 1 mL PBS for 10 min, followed by six elution steps of 1 mL PBS (pH 7.5). Unwanted proteins were washed off using 40 mL 0.1 M glycine solution (pH 2.0). Each depleted serum sample was concentrated to approximately 150 µL using Millipore 4 mL (UFC801096, Merck Millipore, Ireland) 10 kDa MWCO filter spin tubes at 4,000 rcf for 10 minutes twice.Aliquots of 150 µL serum from each donor were used. These serum samples, depleted for 3 proteins, were fractionated over an ion-exchange setup comprised of a tandem of cationic and anionic columns (PolyCAT A 204CT0510 and PolyWAX LP 204WX0510, PolyLC, USA). The columns were equilibrated with 100 µg of bovine serum albumin (BSA). One fraction was collected every 0.5 minutes (400 µL, 13-27 min). Elution of A1AT, CER, HPX and C3 was validated by comparing the retention times of commercial standards and their MS spectra.  Protein fractions were buffer exchanged into 150 mM AMAC (pH 7.5) by ultrafiltration with a 10 kDa cut-off filter. Sialidase was used to remove sialic acid residues from several studied proteins and PNGase F was used to cleave off N-glycans. Deglycosylation was performed in PBS or 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC). Enzyme-treated samples were buffer exchanged prior to native MS analysis.Protein samples were analyzed on a modified Exactive Plus Orbitrap instrument with an extended mass range using a m/z range of 500-15,000. Voltage offsets on the transport multi-poles and ion lenses were tuned to achieve optimal transmission of the protein ions. Nitrogen was used in the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) cell at a gas pressure of 6-8 x 10-10 bar. Spray voltage was set to 1.3 kV. Source fragmentation and collision energy were optimized for the analysis of each protein. Source temperature was set to 250 °C. Acquisition time per transient was set to obtain a resolution (at m/z 200) of 30,000. The instrument was mass calibrated using a solution of CsI.  For bottom-up, C3 protein samples were digested in solution by adding 5 µg in 200 mM TRIS and reducing with 50 mM TCEP for 30 min at 60 °C. After cooling to RT, samples were alkylated with 200 mM CAA. This reaction was quenched with 50 mM TCEP and sodium deoxycholate (SDC) was added to 1%. Protein samples were digested for 4h using trypsin at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:100, then overnight with Glu-C enzyme at a ratio of 1:75, at 37 °C. All digests were desalted using OASIS plates (Waters, Wexford, Ireland), dried and dissolved in 2% FA prior to LC-MS analysis.Peptides of protein samples (100 ng) were separated and analyzed using an Ultimate HPLC nanoflow system coupled to an Exploris Orbitrap mass spectrometer.analysis was performed in positive ion mode using electrospray ionization. MS1 scans were obtained in a mass range from m/z 375 to 1600 at a resolution of 60,000. Data-dependent MS2 acquisition was at a resolution of 15,000 with a mass range from m/z 40 to 2500.

### Data Protocol
For native MS data, accurate masses of proteoforms were extracted by deconvolution of the raw native MS spectra to zero-charge spectra using PMi Intact Mass software (ProteinMetrics, version 4.1-4.3). Resulting data were manually cross-checked with raw spectra. Analysis of PTM composition after deconvolution was done manually. Glycan structures and other PTMs were deduced based on reported glycopeptide data and removal of sialic acids and glycans. Cysteinylation was confirmed by reduction with TCEP. For calculations, average masses were used, namely hexose/mannose/galactose (Hex/Man/Gal, 162.1424 Da), N-Acetylglucosamine (NAc, 291.26 Da), fucose (Fuc, 146.14 Da), neuraminic acid (NeuAc, 291.26 Da) and cysteinylation (Cys, 121.16 Da). Symbols and text nomenclature are based on the recommendations of the Consortium for Functional Glycomics. Quantification of CER proteoforms for comparison between donors was done using relative intensities. Differences in glycosylation of CER in healthy and diseased individuals were measured by dividing the relative intensities of the proteoforms of 3-N-ceruloplasmin by 4-N-ceruloplasmin (number of N-glycosylation sites occupied). The difference between groups was statistically tested using Welch’s t-test. All statistics were performed in Graphpad Prism software (version 9.0.0). For bottom-up MS data,Raw data were searched manually to identify glycan fragment ions and confirm results obtained by data interpretation with Byonic software (v4.3.4, Protein Metrics Inc., San Fransisco, USA). Modifications included in the search were human N- and O-glycans, Glu- and Gly-pyrolysis, Met- and Try-oxidation.

### Publication Abstract
Most proteins in serum are glycosylated, with several annotated as biomarkers and thus diagnostically important and of interest for their role in disease. Most methods for analyzing serum glycoproteins employ either glycan release or glycopeptide centric mass spectrometry-based approaches, which provide excellent tools for analyzing known glycans but neglect previously undefined or unknown glycosylation and/or other co-occurring modifications. High-resolution native mass spectrometry is a relatively new technique for the analysis of intact glycoproteins, providing a "what you see is what you get" mass profile of a protein, allowing the qualitative and quantitative observation of all modifications present. So far, a disadvantage of this approach has been that it centers mostly on just one specific serum glycoprotein at the time. To address this issue, we introduce an ion-exchange chromatography-based fractionation method capable of isolating and analyzing, in parallel, over 20 serum (glyco)proteins, covering a mass range between 30 and 190 kDa, from 150 &#x3bc;L of serum. Although generating data in parallel for all these 20 proteins, we focus the discussion on the very complex proteoform profiles of four selected proteins, i.e., &#x3b1;-1-antitrypsin, ceruloplasmin, hemopexin, and complement protein C3. Our analyses provide an insight into the extensive proteoform landscape of serum proteins in individual donors, caused by the occurrence of various <i>N</i>- and <i>O</i>-glycans, protein cysteinylation, and co-occurring genetic variants. Moreover, native mass intact mass profiling also provided an edge over alternative approaches revealing the presence of apo- and holo-forms of ceruloplasmin and the endogenous proteolytic processing in plasma of among others complement protein C3. We also applied our approach to a small cohort of serum samples from healthy and diseased individuals. In these, we qualitatively and quantitatively monitored the changes in proteoform profiles of ceruloplasmin and revealed a substantial increase in fucosylation and glycan occupancy in patients with late-stage hepatocellular carcinoma and pancreatic cancer as compared to healthy donor samples.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Proteomics, Native ms, Serum, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Science, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, Utrecht, 3584 CH, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Dario Cramer

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Science, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, Utrecht, 3584 CH, The Netherlands


