### Accession
PXD015336

### Title
Proteomic analysis of differentially expressed proteins in the serum of patients with acute renal allograft rejection using iTRAQ labelling technology

### Description
Transplantation is currently the best treatment option for end-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients. However, acute rejection (AR) is the main source of failure in renal transplantation. The current gold standard for diagnosis of AR involves renal biopsy, but it is invasive, time consuming, costly and inconvenient. Sensitive and less invasive detection of AR episodes in renal transplant patients is essential to preserve the allograft function. Here, we applied isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantisation (iTRAQ) mass spectrometry to analyse serum protein expression in AR patients and healthy controls. Overall, 1399 proteins were identified. Using a cut-off of Q<0.05 and a fold change > 1.2 for the expressed variation, 109 proteins showed distinct differential expression between the AR and control groups, of whom 72 were upregulated and 37 were downregulated. Several proteins, such as properdin, keratin 1, lipoprotein (a) and vitamin D-binding protein, may play roles in the pathogenesis of AR. This study focused on iTRAQ-based proteomic profiling of serum samples in AR. Insights from our work might help advance our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of AR and identify potential novel biomarkers of AR for further characterization.

### Sample Protocol
Protein preparation and tryptic digestion Serum samples were disrupted in lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 0.2% SDS, 20 mM Tris) with enzyme inhibitors (1X Cocktail, 1 mM EDTA). After centrifuging the mixtures at 25,000 g for 20 min, the supernatants were mixed with 5 volumes of cold acetone and stored at -20 °C for 2 h to overnight. The mixtures were centrifuged again and the protein pellets were dissolved with lysis buffer, to which 10 mM DTT was added before storage at 56 °C for 1 h in order to reduce the disulfide bonds of peptides. A volume of 55 mM IAM was added to the solution before storage in the dark for 45 min, followed by addition of 5 volumes of chilled acetone and storage at -20 °C for 2 h. The solution was centrifuged again, and the pellet was dissolved with lysis buffer to obtain the protein solution. The protein concentration of the supernatant was determined by BSA (0.2 μg/μL) assay according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For each sample, 100 μg protein was digested with Trypsin Gold with the ratio of protein:trypsin 20:1 at 37 °C for 4 h. Fresh Trypsin Gold was added with the ratio of protein:trypsin 20:1 again and incubated for an additional 8 h. iTRAQ labelling and peptide fractionation The peptides were vacuum centrifuged to dryness after trypsin digestion. The product was redissolved with 0.5 M TEAB, and the iTRAQ labelling of peptide samples were performed using iTRAQ Reagent 8-plex Kit (AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. The peptides for healthy controls were labelled with iTRAQ-113 isobaric tags and those from AR patients with iTRAQ-121 isobaric tags and incubated for 2 h. The iTRAQ labelled peptides were fractionated using RP. For RP chromatography using a Shimadzu LC-20AB HPLC Pump system, the digested peptides were reconstituted with 2 mL buffer A (5% ACN, 95% H2O, adjusted to pH 9.8 with ammonia) and loaded onto a 4.6×250 mm Gemini C18 column containing 5-μm particles (Phenomenex). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 mL/min with a gradient of 5% buffer B (5% H2O, 95% ACN, adjusted to 9.8 with ammonia) for 10 min, followed by 5-35% buffer B gradient for 40 min, and 35-95% buffer B gradient for 1 min. The system was maintained in 95% buffer B for 3 min, which was switched to 5% within 1 min before equilibrating with 5% buffer B for 10 min. Elution was monitored by measuring the absorbance at 214 nm, and fractions were collected every 1 min. The eluted peptides in 20 fractions were pooled and vacuum-dried. LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis Each fraction was resuspended in buffer A (5% ACN, 0.1% FA) and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min, and the final concentration of peptides was approximately 0.5 g/L. The supernatant was loaded on a LC-20AD nanoHPLC (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) by an autosampler onto a 2-cm C18 trap column. The peptides were eluted into an 18-cm analytical C18 column (inner diameter 75 μm, packed in-house). The samples were loaded in the following order: 8 μL/min for 4 min, 41 min gradient running at 300 nL/min from 5 to 35% B (95% ACN, 0.1% FA), 5 min linear gradient to 80% buffer B (maintained for 5 min), followed by a return to 5% in 1 min. Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) fitted with a Nanospray III source (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON), a pulled quartz tip as the emitter (New Objectives, Woburn, MA) controlled Analyst 1.6 software (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON). Data were acquired under the following MS conditions: ion spray voltage 2.5 kV, curtain gas of 30 psi, nebulizer gas of 15 psi, and interface heater temperature of 150 °C. The resolution was approximately 30000. For IDA, survey scans were acquired at 250 ms, and 30 production scans were collected if exceeding a threshold of 120 counts per second (counts/s) and with a 2+ to 5+ charge state. The total cycle time was set to 3.3 sec. The Q2 transmission window was 100 Da for 100%. A total of four time bins for each scan was performed at a pulse frequency value of 11 kHz through monitoring of the 40 GHz multichannel TDC detector with four-anode channel detection. An iTRAQ adjust rolling collision energy was apply to all precursor ions for collision-induced dissociation. The dynamic exclusion set for 1/2 of peak width (15 sec), and the precursor was refreshed off the exclusion list.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis After separating the peptides, the identification and quantification of detected proteins was performed. The MS/MS spectra were searched using Mascot software (version 2.3.02 Matrix Science, London, UK). For protein identification, the search parameters were as follows: fragment mass tolerance 0.1 Da, peptide mass tolerance 0.05 Da, MS/MS Ion as the type of search, trypsin as the enzyme, mass values of monoisotopic, variable modifications of iTRAQ8plex (Y) and oxidation (M), fixed modifications of iTRAQ8plex (K), iTRAQ8plex (N-term) and carbamidomethyl (C), database of human201512 (132,191 sequences). Protein identifications were considered reliable if they involved at least one unique peptide. An automated software called IQuant for quantitatively analyzing the labeled peptides with isobaric tags. It integrates Mascot Percolator and advanced statistical algorithms to process the MS/MS signals generated from the peptides labeled by isobaric tags. The main IQuant quantitation parameters were as follows: Quant_peptide of use all unique peptide, Quant_number of at least one unique spetra, Normalization of VSN, Protein_Ratio of weighted average, permutation tests as Statistical Analysis. High confidence peptide identification was obtained by setting a false discovery rate (FDR) of <1% at peptide level. One unique peptide per protein group was required for identification of proteins and two quantified peptides for quantification of proteins at least. A functional enrichment analysis was performed using the Clusters of Orthologous Groups of proteins (COGs) and the Gene Ontology (GO) (http://www.geneontology.org/) database. Pathway analysis was also performed by KEGG mapping (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/). For biological pathways analysis and GO term enrichment, P <0.05 was considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
Transplantation is currently the best treatment for patients with end&#x2011;stage renal disease. However, acute rejection (AR) is the major source of failure in renal transplantation. The current best practice for the diagnosis of AR involves renal biopsy, but it is invasive, time&#x2011;consuming, costly and inconvenient. Sensitive and less invasive detection of AR episodes in renal transplant patients is essential to preserve allograft function. The present study applied isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) mass spectrometry to analyze serum protein expression in patients with AR and healthy controls. Overall, 1,399 proteins were identified. Using a cut&#x2011;off of Q&lt;0.05 and a fold change of &gt;1.2 for the variation in expression, 109 proteins were identified to be differentially expressed between the AR and control groups, 72 of which were upregulated and 37 were downregulated. Several proteins, including properdin, keratin&#xa0;1, lipoprotein(a) and vitamin D&#x2011;binding protein, may have roles in the pathogenesis of AR. The present study focused on iTRAQ&#x2011;based proteomic profiling of serum samples in AR. Insight from the present study may help advance the understanding of the molecular mechanisms of AR and identify potential novel biomarkers of AR for further characterization.

### Keywords
Acute rejection, Proteomics, Serum, Renal allograft, Itraq

### Affiliations
1. Nephrology Department of Guilin No. 924 Hospital, Guangxi Key laboratory of Metabolic Diseases Research, Guilin Key laboratory of Kidney Diseases Research, 541002, Guilin, Guangxi, People’s Republic of China. 2. Clinical Medical Research Center, the Second Clinical Medical College of Jinan University (Shenzhen People’s Hospital), 518020, Shenzhen, Guangdong, People’s Republic of China.
Nephrology Department of Guilin No. 924 Hospital, Guangxi Key laboratory of Metabolic Diseases Research, Guilin Key laboratory of Kidney Diseases Research, 541002, Guilin, Guangxi, People’s Republic of China

### Submitter
Yue Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Dai
1. Nephrology Department of Guilin No. 924 Hospital, Guangxi Key laboratory of Metabolic Diseases Research, Guilin Key laboratory of Kidney Diseases Research, 541002, Guilin, Guangxi, People’s Republic of China. 2. Clinical Medical Research Center, the Second Clinical Medical College of Jinan University (Shenzhen People’s Hospital), 518020, Shenzhen, Guangdong, People’s Republic of China.


