### Accession
PXD014308

### Title
Clemastine Fumarate in Plasmodium

### Description
The binding target for clemastine fumarate in Plasmodium Falciparum 3D7 strain is identified by two techniques: SPROX and TPP.

### Sample Protocol
The Plasmodium lysate was acquired and applied to different conditions (temperatures for TPP and urea concentrations in SPROX). The SPROX/TPP protocols are done and the samples are digested by iFASP protocol. The samples are labelled by TMT 10-plex tags and cleaned by C18 columns. The raw data are generated by Thermo Fusion LUMOS.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was searched by Thermo Proteome Discoverer. After qualify filtering, the data are normalized and fitted to specific equations described before. Hits are selected based on how different the control and ligand groups are from each other.

### Publication Abstract
The antihistamine clemastine inhibits multiple stages of the <i>Plasmodium</i> parasite that causes malaria, but the molecular targets responsible for its parasite inhibition were unknown. Here, we applied parallel chemoproteomic platforms to discover the mechanism of action of clemastine and identify that clemastine binds to the <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> TCP-1 ring complex or chaperonin containing TCP-1 (TRiC/CCT), an essential heterooligomeric complex required for de novo cytoskeletal protein folding. Clemastine destabilized all eight <i>P. falciparum</i> TRiC subunits based on thermal proteome profiling (TPP). Further analysis using stability of proteins from rates of oxidation (SPROX) revealed a clemastine-induced thermodynamic stabilization of the <i>Plasmodium</i> TRiC delta subunit, suggesting an interaction with this protein subunit. We demonstrate that clemastine reduces levels of the major TRiC substrate tubulin in <i>P. falciparum</i> parasites. In addition, clemastine treatment leads to disorientation of <i>Plasmodium</i> mitotic spindles during the asexual reproduction and results in aberrant tubulin morphology suggesting protein aggregation. This clemastine-induced disruption of TRiC function is not observed in human host cells, demonstrating a species selectivity required for targeting an intracellular human pathogen. Our findings encourage larger efforts to apply chemoproteomic methods to assist in target identification of antimalarial drugs and highlight the potential to selectively target <i>Plasmodium</i> TRiC-mediated protein folding for malaria intervention.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Anti-malarial, Clemastine fumarate

### Affiliations
Duke University
Professor, Department of Chemistry, Duke University, USA

### Submitter
Baiyi Quan

### Lab Head
Dr Michael C. Fitzgerald
Professor, Department of Chemistry, Duke University, USA


