### Accession
PXD008533

### Title
Defining targets of the bacterial ADP-ribosyltransferase EspJ

### Description
Tyrosine phosphorylation is key for signal transduction from exogeneous stimuli, including the defence against pathogenic microbes. Pathogens have acquired mechanisms to subvert protein phosphorylation as a means to control host immune responses and facilitate invasion and dissemination. The bacterial effector protein EspJ is injected into host cells by pathogenic strains of Escherichia coli, Salmonella and Citrobacter rodentium where it can prevent phagocytosis via the inhibitory amidation and ADP ribosylation of Src kinase E310. Here, we found that EspJ can ADP ribosylate members of the Src, Abl, Csk, Tec and Syk kinase families. ADP ribosylation of Csk inhibits its kinase activity, giving EspJ ultimate control over the Src/Csk signalling axis.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa/A549/Caco2/Thp1 cell lysate was incubated with MBP EspJEHEC and 2 ethynyl-adenosine-NAD (Jena Biosciences) for 3 hours at room temperature. Proteins were then precipitated with 4 x volume methanol, 1.5 x volume chloroform, 2 x volume water, and washed 2x with ice cold methanol before resuspension in 25 μl of 2% SDS/PBS by vortex mixing for 30 minutes. Resuspended proteins were diluted to 0.5% SDS/PBS by addition of 75 μl PBS. Azide biotin was conjugated onto proteins by click chemistry reactions containing 100 μM AzRB (structure 3, figure 1 from Broncel et al 2015), 1 mM CuSO4, 1 mM TCEP and 100 μM TBTA for 2 hours with vortex mixing. Reactions were quenched by chloroform/methanol precipitation and washed 2x with methanol, before resuspension in 50 μl 2% SDS/PBS. Samples were diluted with 450 μl of PBS to 0.2% SDS/PBS and incubated with Neutravidin resin – 30 μl of slurry per sample washed 3 x with PBS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) - for 1 hour at room temperature with gentle vortex mixing. Resin was washed with 3x 1% SDS/PBS, 2 x 4M urea/PBS, 3x 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate/H2O pH 8 before digestion with 0.4 μg of trypsin in 50 μl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 overnight at 37°C with vortex mixing. Digested peptides supernatants were combined with supernatants from 80 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 80 μl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid subsequent washes. Peptides were  loaded onto methanol activated and pre equilibrated SDB-XC (Empore) solid phase extraction medium home made stage tips, before desalting on SDB-XC stage tips by washing with H2O and eluted with 79% acetonitrile before vacuum drying and storage at -80°C. Prior to analysis samples were resuspended in 15 µl of 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% acetonitrile and transferred to LC MS vials.  Label free analysis was performed using an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column of 50 cm by 75 cm inner diameter (Thermo Fischer Scientific), with a 2h acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% aqueous formic acid, using a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Easy nLC 1000 was coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer via an easy spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Q Exactive was operated in a data dependent acquisition mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 75,000 at m/z 200 (transient time 256 ms). Up to ten of the most abundant isotope patterns with charge +2 or higher from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 3.0 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energies of 25. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200) were 20 and 120 ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 106 and for MS/MS to 105, and the intensity threshold was set to 8.3 × 102.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.7.4) and peptides identified by matching MS/MS spectra against the human proteome using Andromeda search engine. No fixed modifications were set. Methionine oxidation and N terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Reference proteomes were digested in silico using the trypsin/P setting with up to three missed cleavages. The standard settings for label free quantification were selected, and the false discovery rate for peptides, proteins and sites set to 0.01, and peptides matched between runs. All other parameters were used as pre set in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Tyrosine phosphorylation is key for signal transduction from exogenous stimuli, including the defense against pathogens. Conversely, pathogens can subvert protein phosphorylation to control host immune responses and facilitate invasion and dissemination. The bacterial effectors EspJ and SeoC are injected into host cells through a type III secretion system by enteropathogenic and enterohemorrhagic <i>Escherichia coli</i> (EPEC and EHEC, respectively), <i>Citrobacter rodentium</i>, and <i>Salmonella enterica</i>, where they inhibit Src kinase by coupled amidation and ADP-ribosylation. <i>C. rodentium</i>, which is used to model EPEC and EHEC infections in humans, is a mouse pathogen triggering colonic crypt hyperplasia (CCH) and colitis. Enumeration of bacterial shedding and CCH confirmed that EspJ affects neither tolerance nor resistance to infection. However, comparison of the proteomes of intestinal epithelial cells isolated from mice infected with wild-type <i>C. rodentium</i> or <i>C. rodentium</i> encoding catalytically inactive EspJ revealed that EspJ-induced ADP-ribosylation regulates multiple nonreceptor tyrosine kinases <i>in vivo</i> Investigation of the substrate repertoire of EspJ revealed that in HeLa and A549 cells, Src and Csk were significantly targeted; in polarized Caco2 cells, EspJ targeted Src and Csk and the Src family kinase (SFK) Yes1, while in differentiated Thp1 cells, EspJ modified Csk, the SFKs Hck and Lyn, the Tec family kinases Tec and Btk, and the adapter tyrosine kinase Syk. Furthermore, Abl (HeLa and Caco2) and Lyn (Caco2) were enriched specifically in the EspJ-containing samples. Biochemical assays revealed that EspJ, the only bacterial ADP-ribosyltransferase that targets mammalian kinases, controls immune responses and the Src/Csk signaling axis.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Enteropathogenic and enterohemorrhagic <i>Escherichia coli</i> (EPEC and EHEC, respectively) strains cause significant mortality and morbidity worldwide. <i>Citrobacter rodentium</i> is a mouse pathogen used to model EPEC and EHEC pathogenesis <i>in vivo</i> Diarrheal disease is triggered following injection of bacterial effectors, via a type III secretion system (T3SS), into intestinal epithelial cells (IECs). While insights into the role of the effectors were historically obtained from pathological, immunologic, or cell culture phenotypes, subtle roles of individual effectors <i>in vivo</i> are often masked. The aim of this study was to elucidate the role and specificity of the ADP-ribosyltransferase effector EspJ. For the first time, we show that the <i>in vivo</i> processes affected by a T3SS effector can be studied by comparing the proteomes of IECs extracted from mice infected with wild-type <i>C. rodentium</i> or an <i>espJ</i> catalytic mutant. We show that EspJ, the only bacterial ADP-ribosyltransferase that targets mammalian kinases, regulates the host immune response <i>in vivo</i>.

### Keywords
Human, Ehec, Adp-ribosyltransferase, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Center for Molecular Bacteriology and Infection, Imperial College London
Imperial College London

### Submitter
Dominic Pollard

### Lab Head
Dr Gad Frankel
Center for Molecular Bacteriology and Infection, Imperial College London


