### Accession
PXD005724

### Title
Phagolysosomal proteomics identifies different macrophage activation profiles in response to Aspergillus fumigatus conidia

### Description
An Aspergillus fumigatus infection is initialized by the inhalation and germination of airborne asexual spores (conidia). Alveolar macrophages are the first immune cells to counteract an infection by phagocytosis of conidia and intracellular degradation of the pathogen. However, A. fumigatus circumvents its intracellular killing by the manipulation of the phagolysosomal maturation. With a comparative proteomic study of the phagolysosomal proteome of a virulent wild type A. fumigatus strain and an avirulent mutant strain we aimed at the identification of proteins and processes that are hijacked by the virulent strain. We found that wild type conidia strongly modulate the protein composition of the phagolysosome. Assembly and activity of vATPase, formation of lipid rafts, signal transduction pathways as well as the generation of energy and metabolites were significantly regulated in the wild type conidia containing phagolysosomes. In different experimental setups we confirmed a disassembly of the vATPase complex, reduced formation of lipid rafts and altered abundances of mTOR, MAPK signaling molecules, Rab5 and Vamp8 mediators of endosomal trafficking as well as LAMP1 and cathepsin Z lysosomal markers. Our interactome analysis indicates that A. fumigatus proteins target small GTPases of the endosomal trafficking system and signal transducers of the host, which might lead to a reduced fungicidal activity of the phagolysosome.

### Sample Protocol
Cells and Strains RAW 264.7 macrophages (ATCC TIB-71) were provided from ?? and cultured in DMEM (Biozyme) with FBS (GE Healthcare), ultraglutamine (Biozyme) and gentamycin at 37 °C and 5 % CO2. ATCC 46645 Aspergillus fumigatus wild type and pksP mutant (Jahn et al 1997, Langenfelder et al 1998) strains were cultured on Aspergillus minimal medium (AMM) agar plates and conidia were harvested after 5 days of incubation at 37 °C.  Magnetic labeling of conidia Conidia were incubated with LZ-NHS-biotin linker (lifetechnologies) in 50 mM Na2CO3 for 2 h at 4 °C, washed and streptavidin-coupled magnetic beads (Miltenyi) were added in labeling buffer (PBS containing 2 mM EDTA) for 15 min, 4 °C.  Purification of phagolysosomes RAW 264.7 cells were grown overnight in 4-well plates and infected at MOI = 5 (multiplicity of infection) with magnetically labeled conidia. Co-incubation was stopped after 2 h, the cells were washed with PBS, scratched off and collected in homogenization buffer (imidazole, sucrose and proteinase inhibitors, Roche) with benzonase nuclease (Merck). Cell lysis was achieved by pressing the cell suspension 60 times through a needle (27G) with a syringe and monitored with light microscopy. DNase (Epicentre) was added and the lysate incubated for 5 min at 37 °C. For the sampling of the whole cell proteome, proteins of the lysate were precipitated and processed as described later on. To purify the for phagolysosomal fraction the lysate was loaded onto the QuadroMACS separator (Miltenyi). Phagolysosomes with magnetically labeled conidia were retained on the stand and the protein was eluated directly from the column with heated elution buffer (2 % SDS, 100 mM TEAB, 10 % glycerol, 1 mM TCEP).  Procession of proteins The eluated proteins were set to 100 µL volume and precipitated with methanol and chloroform [19]. Each 100 µg of the precipitate protein was resuspended in 100 mM TEAB buffer, reduced with 5 µL of 200 mM TCEP, alkylated with 5 µL of 375 mM iodoacetamide, and digested with 4 µg trypsin over night at 37°C. Reaction was stopped with formic acid and the sample was resuspended in loading solution (0.05% TFA in acetonitrile-water 2:98 (v/v) for LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS of protein samples For the sub-proteome analysis of the conidia-containing phagolysosomal fraction we applied the following analytical method  LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system coupled to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were enriched and desalted online based on a pre-concentration set-up using a nano trap column (Acclaim Pep Map 100, 2 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min. After 4 min, a valve switch was performed to elute the pre-concentrated peptides onto the analytical column. For separation of peptides, Acclaim Pep Map RSLC nano columns with 15 cm length was used as stationary phase (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The binary mobile phase consisting of A) 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in H2O and B) 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 90/10 ACN/H2O was applied for 135 min gradient elution using the following gradient: 0-5 min at 4% B, 10 min at 6.5% B, 15 min at 7.5% B, 20 min at 8% B, 25 min at 8.6% B, 30 min at 9.2% B, 35 min at 9.9% B, 40 min at 10.6% B, 45 min at 11.3% B, 50 min at 12.2% B, 55 min at 13.4% B, 60 min at 14.9% B, 65 min at 17% B, 70 min at 19.1% B, 75 min at 22.4% B, 80 min at 26% B, 88 min at 32% B, 94 min at 40% B, 100 min at 52% B, 103 min at 68% B, 106-114 min at 96% B, 115-135 min at 4% B. The Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) provided with a stainless steel emitter was used to generate positively charged ions at 2.2 kV spray voltage. The hybrid quadrupole/orbitrap mass analyser was operated in Full MS / dd MS2 (TopN) mode. Precursor ions were measured in full scan mode within a mass range of either m/z 300-1600 at a resolution of 70k FWHM using a maximum injection time of 120 ms and an AGC (automatic gain control) target of 1e6. For data-dependent acquisition, up to 10 most abundant precursor ions per scan cycle with an assigned charge state of z = 2-6 were selected in the quadrupole for further fragmentation using an isolation width of m/z 2.0. Fragment ions were generated in the HCD cell at a normalized collision energy of 30 V using nitrogen gas. Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 35 s. Fragment ions were monitored at a resolution of 17.5k (FWHM) using a maximum injection time of 120 ms and an AGC target of 2e5. The fixed first mass was set to m/z 120. The LC-MS/MS instrument was operated by means of the Thermo/Dionex Chromeleon Xpress v6.80 SR13 build 3818 software and the Thermo QExactive Plus Tune / Xcalibur v3.0.63 2.3 build 1765 graphical interface software.

### Data Protocol
Protein database search and label-free quantitation Thermo raw files were processed by the Proteome Discoverer (PD) software v1.4. Tandem mass spectra were searched against monthly updated databases of Mus musculus (UniProt) and Aspergillus fumigatus (Aspergillus Genome Database, AspGD) using the algorithms of Mascot v2.4.1 (Matrix Science, UK), Sequest HT and MS Amanda. Two missed cleavages were allowed for tryptic peptides. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Dynamic modification was oxidation of Met. Static modification was based on the carbamidomethylation of Cys by iodoacetamide. Percolator node and a reverse decoy database was used for (qvalue) validation of the peptide spectral matches (PSMs) using a maximum Delta CN of 0.05 and a strict target false discovery (FDR) rate of < 1%. At least 2 peptides per protein were required for positive protein hits. Label-free quantification was performed by two different methods: The Precursor Ions Area - Top3 method compares the 3 most abundant peptides of each protein by using the peak area of the respective precursor ion. The mass tolerance was set to 2 ppm and the signal-to-noise ratio should be >3. Only unique peptides were considered for quantification. The significance threshold for differential protein regulation was set to factor ≥2.0 (up- or down-regulation).

### Publication Abstract
Invasive infections by the human pathogenic fungus <i>Aspergillus fumigatus</i> start with the outgrowth of asexual, airborne spores (conidia) into the lung tissue of immunocompromised patients. The resident alveolar macrophages phagocytose conidia, which end up in phagolysosomes. However, <i>A. fumigatus</i> conidia resist phagocytic degradation to a certain degree. This is mainly attributable to the pigment 1,8-dihydroxynaphthalene (DHN) melanin located in the cell wall of conidia, which manipulates the phagolysosomal maturation and prevents their intracellular killing. To get insight in the underlying molecular mechanisms, we comparatively analyzed proteins of mouse macrophage phagolysosomes containing melanized wild-type (wt) or nonmelanized <i>pksP</i> mutant conidia. For this purpose, a protocol to isolate conidia-containing phagolysosomes was established and a reference protein map of phagolysosomes was generated. We identified 637 host and 22 <i>A. fumigatus</i> proteins that were differentially abundant in the phagolysosome. 472 of the host proteins were overrepresented in the <i>pksP</i> mutant and 165 in the wt conidia-containing phagolysosome. Eight of the fungal proteins were produced only in <i>pksP</i> mutant and 14 proteins in wt conidia-containing phagolysosomes. Bioinformatical analysis compiled a regulatory module, which indicates host processes affected by the fungus. These processes include vATPase-driven phagolysosomal acidification, Rab5 and Vamp8-dependent endocytic trafficking, signaling pathways, as well as recruitment of the Lamp1 phagolysosomal maturation marker and the lysosomal cysteine protease cathepsin Z. Western blotting and immunofluorescence analyses confirmed the proteome data and moreover showed differential abundance of the major metabolic regulator mTOR. Taken together, with the help of a protocol optimized to isolate <i>A. fumigatus</i> conidia-containing phagolysosomes and a potent bioinformatics algorithm, we were able to confirm <i>A. fumigatus</i> conidia-dependent modification of phagolysosomal processes that have been described before and beyond that, identify pathways that have not been implicated in <i>A. fumigatus</i> evasion strategy, yet.Mass spectrometry proteomics data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD005724 and PXD006134.

### Keywords
Phagolysosome, Macrophages, Aspergillus fumigatus, Host-pathogen interaction

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute of Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Jena, Adolf-Reichwein-Str. 23, D-07745 Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute of Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Jena, Adolf-Reichwein-Str. 23, D-07745 Jena, Germany


