### Accession
PXD016397

### Title
male and female poplar leaves phosphoproteome

### Description
Nitrogen is a key factor impacting plant physiological processes and protein abundance. Although many proteins were changed substantially in poplar  under N deficiency, the post-translational modifications  in male and female poplars are still unclear. Therefore, we selected male and female poplars and analysed the changes of protein phosphorylation  in response to N-deficient conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins from the leaves were isolated using acetone extraction.For phosphopeptide enrichment, TiO2 beads (GL Sciences, Tokyo, Janpan) were used. The peptide mixture was desalted on a Strata-X C18 column (Phenomenex, USA), and then nano-LC-MS/MS analysis was started. The MS analysis was performed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
The MS data were extracted using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and with Mascot 2.3.01 as the search algorithm. Proteome Discoverer setting parameters were as follows: precursor ions mass scan range 350-6000Da. The data were searched against the SwissProt subset of the Populus UniProt database (3694) with 47,352 sequences (https://www.uniprot.org/). Searches were carried out with a precursor peptide mass tolerance of 15 ppm and product ion mass tolerance of 20mmu. In addition, searches were conducted with trypsin specificity allowing one missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. The variable modifications were Oxidation (M), Gln→Pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Phospho (ST), Phosphor (Y), iTRAQ 8 plex (K), iTRAQ 8 plex (Y), iTRAQ 8 plex (N-term).The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to below 1.0% for peptide identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Nitrogen (N) is a key factor impacting physiological processes in plants. Many proteins have been investigated in male and female poplars under N limitation. However, little is known about sex differences in the protein modifications and metabolites that occur in poplar leaves in response to N deficiency. In this study, as compared to N-deficient males, N-deficient females suffered greater damage from N deficiency, including chloroplast disorganization and lipid peroxidation of cellular membranes. Male poplars had greater osmotic adjustment ability than did females, allowing greater accumulation of soluble metabolites. In addition, as compared to that in N-deficient males, glycolysis was less suppressed in N-deficient females for increased enzyme activities to consume excess energy. Moreover, we found that pronounced protein phosphorylation occurred during carbon metabolism and substance transport processes in both sexes of poplar under N-limiting conditions. Sex-specific metabolites mainly included intermediates in glycolysis, amino acids, and phenylpropanoid-derived metabolites. This study provides new molecular evidence that female poplars suffer greater negative effects from N deficiency than do male poplars.

### Keywords
Poplar, Phosphoproteome, Leaf

### Affiliations
College of Life Science in Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
songhaifeng@imde.ac.cn

### Submitter
Haifeng Song

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng Zhang
College of Life Science in Sichuan University, Chengdu, China


