### Accession
PXD002971

### Title
LC-MS/MS identification of Mycolactone protein targets

### Description
Mycolactone is a diffusible macrolide produced by the skin pathogen Mycobacterium ulcerans that suppresses the development of protective immunity against Buruli ulcer disease. In this proteomics study we aimed to identify proteins of which the expression levels changed upon mycolactone treatment. Jurkat T cells were labeled light or heavy by stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), then treated with mycolactone (light) or vehicle (heavy) for 1h prior to activation with PMA/IO for 6h. After mixing light- and heavy-labeled cultures, cells were lysed and extracted proteins were digested with trypsin. The resulting peptide mixture was analyzed by LC-MS/MS and proteins were identified by the MaxQuant software and quantified based on the intensity of the light and heavy signals in the MS spectra of their peptides. The analysis was repeated with reversed labeling, leading to a total of 4,636 proteins that were quantified in both analyses. Interestingly, 52 proteins were down-regulated in mycolactone-treated cells (mycolactone/control ratio < 1.4), while only two proteins were up-regulated (mycolactone/control ratio > 1.4). Gene ontology analysis further revealed that the down-regulated proteins were significantly enriched in proteins located in the plasma membrane and endoplasmic reticulum and we could show that this enrichment was not due to a bias in protein extraction, since the distribution of all identified proteins across different subcellular compartments was similar to those of all human proteins. Analysis of SP-PIR Family-Domains keywords in the UniProt database confirmed this observation and showed an additional enrichment in glycoproteins, proteins with an immunoglobulin domain and proteins involved in immune responses. Furthermore, we observed that the down-regulated proteins were significantly enriched in single-pass type I/II membrane proteins. In contrast, the fraction of multi-pass membrane proteins was comparable among the down-regulated and all identified proteins, suggesting that multi-pass membrane proteins may at least partially resist mycolactone-mediated down-regulation.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC labeling, Jurkat T cells were cultured in DMEM medium without L-lysine, L-arginine, or L-glutamine (Silantes Gmbh) supplemented with 10% FCS (Invitrogen), 2 mM GlutaMAX and either natural L-arginine HCl and L-lysine HCl (light labeling) (Sigma) or 13C615N2 L-lysine HCl and 13C6 L-arginine HCl (heavy labeling) (Silantes Gmbh). L-Lysine HCl was added at its normal concentration in DMEM (146 mg/L), but the concentration of L-arginine HCl was reduced to 30 mg/L (36% of the normal concentration in DMEM) to prevent metabolic conversion of arginine to proline. Cells were kept for at least six population doublings to ensure complete incorporation of the labeled lysine and arginine. Light (L) and heavy (H) SILAC labeled Jurkat T cells were treated with 40 nM mycolactone or vehicle as control for 1h, then activated with PMA/IO for 6h. Two experiments were performed in reverse labeling conditions, yielding four samples. From each condition, 5.106 cells were harvested, washed twice with PBS and cell pellets were frozen at -80˚C until further use. Each pellet was resuspended in 500 µL lysis buffer (9 M urea in 20 HEPES mM HEPES pH 8.0), sonicated (three bursts of 15'' at and amplitude of 20%) and centrifuged for 15' at 16,000xg at 4˚C to remove insoluble material. The protein concentration in the supernatants was measured using a Bradford assay (Biorad) and equal protein amounts of mycolactone treated and untreated cell lysates were mixed to obtain two replicate samples with reversed SILAC labeling for further analysis, each containing 5.6 mg total protein (sample 1: vehicle (H) + mycolactone (L); sample 2: vehicle (L) + mycolactone (H)). Proteins in each sample were reduced with 5 mM DTT and incubation for 30 minutes at 30˚C and then alkylated by addition of 100 mM chloroacetamide for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Both samples were further diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 2 M and proteins were digested with 50 µg trypsin (Promega) (1/113, w/w) overnight at 37 ˚C. Peptides were then purified on a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters) and 500 µg peptides of each sample was re-dissolved in 10 mM ammonium acetate pH 5.5 in water/acetonitrile (98/2, vol/vol) and injected on a capillary RP-HPLC column (Zorbax 300SB-C18, 2.1 mm internal diameter, 150 mm length, Agilent Technologies) using a Agilent 1200 Series HPLC system. Peptides were separated by a linear gradient of acetonitrile (from 2% to 70% in 100 min, in 10 mM ammonium acetate pH 5.5) and peptides that eluted between 20 and 92 min were collected in 72 fractions of 1 min each. Fractions with 12 min difference in retention time were pooled to obtain total of 12 fractions for LC-MS/MS per sample. Peptides in each fraction were dried and re-dissolved in 12 µl solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile (98:2, v/v)) of which 5 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer with a Nanospray Flex Ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 3 min in solvent A on a PepMapTM C18 column (0.3 mm inner diameter × 5 mm (Dionex)) and following back-flushing from the trapping column, the sample was loaded on a reverse-phase column (made in-house, 75 µm I.D. x 500 mm, 1.9 µm beads C18 Reprosil-Pur, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted by an increase in solvent B (0.08% formic acid in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) in linear gradients from 5% to 20% in 47 minutes, then from 20% to 40% in 150 minutes and finally from 40% to 55% in 30 minutes, all at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the fifteen most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (300-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 after accumulation to a target value of 1,000,000 with a maximum fill time of 100 ms. The fifteen most intense ions above a threshold value of 100,000 were isolated (window of 2.5 Th) for fragmentation by CID at a normalized collision energy of 27% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 160 ms with an underfill ratio of 0.1%. The S-lens RF level was set at 55 and we excluded precursor ions with single, unassigned and charge states above six from fragmentation selection.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.4.1.2) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the human proteins in the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of January 2014 containing 20,272 human protein sequences, www.uniprot.org) with a mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions of 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. To enable the identification of SILAC labeled peptides the multiplicity was set to two with Lys8 and Arg6 settings in the heavy channel, allowing for a maximum of 3 labeled amino acids per peptide. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini. Carbamidomethyl formation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. In total, 6503 proteins were identified in both samples of which 4636 proteins were quantified. Proteins with log2 (mycolactone/untreated)  <-0.5  in both samples were considered as specific mycolactone targets that are downregulated upon treatment.

### Publication Abstract
Mycolactone is a bacteria-derived macrolide that blocks the biogenesis of a large array of secretory and integral transmembrane proteins (TMP) through potent inhibition of the Sec61 translocon. Here, we used quantitative proteomics to delineate the direct and indirect effects of mycolactone-mediated Sec61 blockade in living cells. In T lymphocytes, dendritic cells and sensory neurons, Sec61 substrates downregulated by mycolactone were in order of incidence: secretory proteins (with a signal peptide but no transmembrane domain), TMPs with a signal peptide (Type I) and TMPs without signal peptide and a cytosolic N terminus (Type II). TMPs without a signal peptide and the opposite N terminus topology (Type III) were refractory to mycolactone inhibition. This rule applied comparably to single- and multi-pass TMPs, and extended to exogenous viral proteins. Parallel to its broad-spectrum inhibition of Sec61-mediated protein translocation, mycolactone rapidly induced cytosolic chaperones Hsp70/Hsp90. Moreover, it activated an atypical endoplasmic reticulum stress response, differing from conventional unfolded protein response by the down-regulation of Bip. In addition to refining our mechanistic understanding of Sec61 inhibition by mycolactone, our findings thus reveal that Sec61 blockade induces proteostatic stress in the cytosol and the endoplasmic reticulum.

### Keywords
Mycolactone, Jurkat t-cells, Silac

### Affiliations
Unité d’Immunobiologie de l’Infection, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Francis Impens

### Lab Head
Dr Caroline Demangel
Unité d’Immunobiologie de l’Infection, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France


