### Accession
PXD031812

### Title
Synthetic peptide library

### Description
Synthetic peptides are commonly used in biomedical science for many applications in basic and translational research. Here, we assembled a large dataset of synthetic peptides whose identity was validated using mass spectrometry. We analyzed the mass spectra and used them for method validation as well as the creation of ground truth datasets and cognate databases. Contact: Michele Mishto, Head of the research group Molecular Immunology at King’s College London and the Francis Crick Institute, London (UK). Email: michele.mishto@kcl.ac.uk,

### Sample Protocol
The validation peptide library contained 9, 10, or 15 amino acid long peptides related to CD4+ and CD8+ T cell response to Dengue and VZV viruses. The Dengue and VZV synthetic peptides utilized in this study were selected for analysis because they were already available in-house and synthesized for separate epitope identification studies. The selection and characterization of these peptides has been described previously (Chiu et al., 2014; Li et al., 2017; Weiskopf et al., 2015a; Weiskopf et al., 2013; Weiskopf et al., 2016; Weiskopf et al., 2014; Weiskopf et al., 2015b; Weiskopf et al., 2015c). Each of the peptides in synthetic peptide libraries was derived from respective Dengue and VZV proteomes. Peptides were originally selected for other studies based on bioinformatic analyses of predicted capacity to bind various common MHC-I and -II alleles in the general worldwide population. The set of Dengue protein sequences of provenance represent all four Dengue serotypes and several different variant isolates. The VZV peptides were primarily derived from the attenuated varicella vaccine strain vOka and a few variant isolates. The synthetic peptide library for the validation dataset consisted of 9,604 synthetic peptides, which were subdivided into eight batches, with each measured at two concentrations (100 fmol and 500 fmol of each peptide were loaded in the mass spectrometer). We obtained 32 MS RAW files (8 synthetic peptide library batches x 2 concentrations x 2 technical replicates). The RAW MS data were first converted with ms-convert 4.1.12 from ProteoWizard (Chambers et al., 2012) to the open mzML format, which is readable by most MS software platforms. MzML files were analyzed by both Mascot and PEAKS DB. Two databases in FASTA format were generated: (i) a target database containing all synthetic peptide sequences included in the peptide library, and (ii) a synthesis error database. Both databases were used to search the MS1/MS2 spectra of the validation dataset. As we were only interested in assigning the exact peptide sequence as found in the target database or the synthesis error database, enzyme specificities were set to ‘no processing’ in PEAKS DB. Precursor mass tolerances were set to 5 ppm, and fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 0.02 Da for measurements on Fusion Lumos. MS2 spectra assigned by PEAKS, after filtering peptides for 1% FDR, were extracted.

### Data Protocol
MS measurement of these peptide samples was performed Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer was coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano pump (both from ThermoFisherScientiﬁc). Briefly, peptides were loaded and separated by a nanoflow HPLC (RSLC Ultimate 3000) on an Easy-spray C18 nano column (50 cm length, 75 mm internal diameter; ThermoFisherScientific), coupled on-line to a nano-electrospray ionization Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisherScientific). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 5%–45% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 90 min at 50°C. The instrument was programmed within Xcalibur 4.1 to acquire MS data using a “Universal” method by defining a 3s cycle time between a full MS scan and MS/MS fragmentation. This method takes advantage of multiple analyzers in the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos and drives the system to use all available parallelizable time, resulting in a decreased dependence on method parameters (such as Data Dependent Acquisition; DDA). We acquired one full-scan MS spectrum at a resolution of 120,000 at 200m/z with automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 2x105 ions and a scan range of 350~1550m/z. The MS2 fragmentation was conducted using HCD collision energy (30%) with an orbitrap resolution of 30000 at 200 m/z. The AGC target value was set up as 5x104 with a max injection time of 120 ms.  A dynamic exclusion of 30 s and 1-4 included charged states were defined within this method.

### Publication Abstract
The discovery of many noncanonical peptides detectable with sensitive mass spectrometry inside, outside, and on cells shepherded the development of novel methods for their identification, often not supported by a systematic benchmarking with other methods. We here propose iBench, a bioinformatic tool that can construct ground truth proteomics datasets and cognate databases, thereby generating a training court wherein methods, search engines, and proteomics strategies can be tested, and their performances estimated by the same tool. iBench can be coupled to the main database search engines, allows the selection of customized features of mass spectrometry spectra and peptides, provides standard benchmarking outputs, and is open source. The proof-of-concept application to tryptic proteome digestions, immunopeptidomes, and synthetic peptide libraries dissected the impact that noncanonical peptides could have on the identification of canonical peptides by Mascot search with rescoring via Percolator (Mascot+Percolator).

### Keywords
Predictor, Peptide synthesis, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
King's College London
Head of research group Quantitative and Systems Biology; Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences; Goettingen (D); Germany (lab head).

### Submitter
Michele Mishto

### Lab Head
Dr Juliane Liepe
Head of research group Quantitative and Systems Biology; Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences; Goettingen (D); Germany (lab head).


