### Accession
PXD031403

### Title
Proteomic analysis underlying the impact of early life nutrition on the molecular control of testicular development in the young bull calf.

### Description
It has been established that enhanced early life nutrition progresses sexual development in the bull calf through neuroendocrine signalling via the hypothalamic-pituitary-testicular axis. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms regulating this process have not been fully elucidated. This study measured the impact of contrasting feeding regimes in the first 12 wk of life, known to impact age at puberty, on the proteomic landscape of the testes of bull calves. Holstein bull calves with a mean (±SD) bodyweight and age of 48.8 (± 5.3) kg and 17.5 (± 2.8) days, were designated to high (HI; n=10) or moderate (MOD; n=10) dietary groups, with diets designed to provoke growth rates of 1.0 and 0.5 kg/day, respectively. At 12 wk of age, all calves were euthanized, and testes parenchyma harvested. HI calves were heavier at slaughter (112.4 v 88.7 (2.98) kg, P<0.001), and had a greater average daily gain (ADG) of (0.88 v 0.58 kg, P<0.001). The turquoise network from the protein analyses contained the protein CDH13 which is involved in testes development. Gene ontology analysis of the turquoise network revealed enrichment of genes with functions related to cholesterol biosynthesis, IGF-1 signalling, insulin receptor/secretion signalling, androgen signalling and Sertoli cell junction signalling.

### Sample Protocol
Global proteomics analysis was undertaken on the same cohort of samples used for RNAseq (HI n=10; MOD, n=10). For each sample, proteins were extracted using a tissue homogenizer (TissueLyser II, Qiagen) and digested by using a commercial iST Kit (PreOmics, Germany). Briefly, 50 µl of ‘Lyse’ buffer and around 50 ug of glass beads (425-500 µm, Sigma) were added to the thawed tissue. After 2 cycles of protein extraction (2 min each, 30 Hz) and 10 min at 95°C, the tubes were centrifuged at 16,100 × g for 15 min, and the supernatant was pipetted into a fresh Eppendorf tube for proteomics analysis. The solubilization of the extracted proteins was enhanced by processing the samples with High Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU) for 1 min setting the ultrasonic amplitude to 85%. The protein concentration was estimated using the Qubit® Protein Assay Kit (Life Technologies, Zurich, Switzerland). For each sample, 50 µg of protein were transferred to the cartridge and digested by adding 50 µl of the ‘Digest’ solution. After 60 min of incubation at 37 °C the digestion was stopped with 100 µl of ‘Stop’ solution. The solutions in the cartridge were removed by centrifugation at 3,800 g, while the peptides were retained by the iST-filter. Finally, the peptides were washed, eluted, dried and re-solubilized in 20 µL of injection buffer (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine (Cox and Mann, 2008). Spectra were searched against a Uniprot Bos taurus reference proteome (taxonomy 9913, version from 2017-08-17), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. MaxQuant Orbitrap default search settings were used. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label free quantification was enabled and a 2 minute window for match between runs was applied. In the MaxQuant experimental design template, each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values. Protein fold changes were computed based on Intensity values reported in the proteinGroups.txt file. A set of functions implemented in the R package SRMService (Wolski et al., 2018) was used to filter for proteins with 2 or more peptides allowing for a maximum of 10 missing values, and to normalize the data with a modified robust z-score transformation and to compute p-values using the t-test with pooled variance. If all measurements of a protein were missing in one of the conditions, a pseudo fold change was computed replacing the missing group average by the mean of the 10% smallest protein intensities in that condition.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nutrition, Early life, Testes, Bull calf, Protein

### Affiliations
Animal Bioscience Department, Teagasc (lab head)
Teagasc

### Submitter
Stephen Coen

### Lab Head
Dr David Kenny
Animal Bioscience Department, Teagasc (lab head)


