### Accession
PXD032191

### Title
Lysosomal alterations and altered electrophysiological activity in atypical juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (CLN3 1 kb deletion, E295K)  patient-derived cortical neurons

### Description
Juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (JNCL) is a lysosomal storage disorder associated with fatal neurodegeneration that is caused by mutations in CLN3. Most individuals with JNCL carry at least one allele with 1 kb deletion in CLN3 which results in the deletion of exons 7 and 8. There is a need for more physiologically relevant human cell-based JNCL models to better understand the cellular changes during the disease process. Using CRISPR/Cas9, we have corrected a 1 kb deletion mutation in human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) of a compound heterozygous patient (CLN3 Δ1 kb and E295K), to generate an isogenic control to be used for disease modeling along with the unedited CLN3 patient iPSCs. iPSC-derived neurons carrying this particular CLN3 mutation, CLN3 neurons, had lower levels of spike, burst and network burst activity for most of the culture period. Proteomics analysis showed downregulation of proteins related to axon guidance and endocytosis on day in vitro (DIV) 14 and 42  in CLN3 neurons. This was accompanied by an increase in lysosomal-related proteins in CLN3 neurons. Western blot analysis of LAMP1 expression revealed a new finding where LAMP1 was hyperglycosylated in CLN3 neurons  on DIV 14, 28 and 42, which was not apparent in control neurons. Ultrastructural analysis of CLN3 neurons showed numerous membrane-bound vacuoles containing diverse types of storage material, ranging from curvilinear deposits, multilamellar structures to osmiophilic deposits. Our findings suggest alterations in lysosomal function and neurodevelopment involving axon guidance and synaptic transmission in CLN3-deficient neuronal derivatives, which could be potential targets for therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were harvested from CLN3 and CLN3-Cor neurons (n=3 independent cultures/cell line) which had been plated in 12-well plates. Protein was extracted using 100 µL of lysis buffe r(7 M urea (Sigma), 2 M thiourea (Sigma) and 30 mM Trizma base (Sigma) containing protease (Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). Cell lysates were sonicated for 3 cycles of 15 seconds pulse with 5 seconds interval on ice. Cell lysates were mixed gently on a rotary suspension mixer at 4°C for 2 hours, centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 15 minutes before supernatant was collected. Protein concentration was determined by performing Pierce™ 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher) according to manufacturer’s instructions.  Proteins (30 µg/sample) were sequentially reduced and alkylated then cleaned up using the SP3 method

### Data Protocol
DIA-MS files were processed using Spectronaut software (V14.8) using the Pulsar search engine to search the Human UniProt protein sequence database and for targeted quantitation of the MS2 spectra.

### Publication Abstract
CLN3 disease is a lysosomal storage disorder associated with fatal neurodegeneration that is caused by mutations in CLN3, with most affected individuals carrying at least one allele with a 966&#x2005;bp deletion. Using CRISPR/Cas9, we corrected the 966&#x2005;bp deletion mutation in human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) of a compound heterozygous patient (CLN3 &#x394; 966&#x2005;bp and E295K). We differentiated these isogenic iPSCs, and iPSCs from an unrelated healthy control donor, to neurons and identified disease-related changes relating to protein synthesis, trafficking and degradation, and in neuronal activity, which were not apparent in CLN3-corrected or healthy control neurons. CLN3 neurons showed numerous membrane-bound vacuoles containing diverse storage material and hyperglycosylation of the lysosomal LAMP1 protein. Proteomic analysis showed increase in lysosomal-related proteins and many ribosomal subunit proteins in CLN3 neurons, accompanied by downregulation of proteins related to axon guidance and endocytosis. CLN3 neurons also had lower electrophysical activity as recorded using microelectrode arrays. These data implicate inter-related pathways in protein homeostasis and neurite arborization as contributing to CLN3 disease, and which could be potential targets for therapy.

### Keywords
Neurological disease models, Lysosomal storage disorder, Human induced pluripotent stem cells, Juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses

### Affiliations
University of Tasmania
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Richard Wilson
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania


