### Accession
PXD035934

### Title
Mechanism of client kinase dephosphorylation by the HSP90-CDC37-PP5 complex

### Description
Activation of client protein kinases by the HSP90 molecular chaperone system is affected by phosphorylation at multiple sites on HSP90, on the kinase specific co-chaperone CDC37, and the client itself. Removal of regulatory phosphorylation from client kinases and release from the HSP90-CDC37 system depends on a Ser/Thr phosphatase PP5, which associates with HSP90 via its N-terminal TPR domain. Here we present the cryoEM structure of the oncogenic client kinase BRAFV600E bound to HSP90-CDC37, and structures of complexes of PP5 with that. Together with proteomic analysis of its phosphatase activity, our results reveal how PP5 is activated by recruitment to HSP90 complexes to dephosphorylate client proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were split in two equal parts and diluted up to 100 μL with 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) followed by one-step reduction/alkylation with 5 mM TCEP and 10 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature. Proteins were then digested overnight with 50 ng/μL trypsin (Pierce). Peptides were labelled with the TMT-10plex reagents (four labels used) according to manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo) followed by C18 clean-up using the Pierce Peptide Desalting Spin Columns. Phosphopeptides were enriched with the High-Select™ Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo). Both the enrichment eluent and flowthrough (FT) were further subjected to mass spectrometry analysis. LC-MS analysis was performed on the Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the Orbitrap Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Each sample was reconstituted in 30 μL 0.1% formic acid and 15 μL were loaded to the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm C18, 5 μm trapping column at 10 μL/min flow rate of 0.1% formic acid loading buffer. Peptides were analysed with an Acclaim PepMap (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) C18 capillary column connected to a stainless-steel emitter with integrated liquid junction (cat# PSSELJ, MSWIL) fitted on a PSS2 adapter (MSWIL) on the EASY-Spray source at 45 °C. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The gradient separation method at flow rate 300 nL/min was the following: for 65 min (or 95 min for FT) gradient from 5%-38% B, for 5 min up to 95% B, for 5 min isocratic at 95% B, re-equilibration to 5% B in 5 min, for 10 min isocratic at 5% B. Each sample was injected twice. Precursors between 375-1,500 m/z were selected at 120,000 resolution in the top speed mode in 3 sec and were isolated for HCD fragmentation (collision energy 38%) with quadrupole isolation width 0.7 Th, Orbitrap detection at 50,000 resolution (or 30,000 for FT sample), max IT 100 ms (or 50 ms for FT) and AGC 1×105. Targeted MS precursors were dynamically excluded for further isolation and activation for 30 or 45 sec seconds with 7 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) with the SequestHT search engine for peptide identification and quantification. The precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were 20 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum 2 miss-cleavages. TMT6plex at N-terminus/K and Carbamidomethyl at C were selected as static modifications. Oxidation of M, Deamidation of N/Q and Phosphorylation of S/T/Y were selected as dynamic modifications. Spectra were searched against reviewed UniProt human protein entries, peptide confidence was estimated with the Percolator node and peptides were filtered at q-value<0.01 based on decoy database search. The reporter ion quantifier node included a TMT quantification method with an integration window tolerance of 15 ppm. Only peptides with average reporter signal-to-noise>3 were used, and phosphorylation localization probabilities were estimated with the IMP-ptmRS node. Statistical analysis was performed in Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
Activation of client protein kinases by the HSP90 molecular chaperone system is affected by phosphorylation at multiple sites on HSP90, the kinase-specific co-chaperone CDC37, and the kinase client itself. Removal of regulatory phosphorylation from client kinases and their release from the HSP90-CDC37 system depends on the Ser/Thr phosphatase PP5, which associates with HSP90 via its N-terminal TPR domain. Here, we present the cryoEM structure of the oncogenic protein kinase client BRAF<sup>V600E</sup> bound to HSP90-CDC37, showing how the V600E mutation favours BRAF association with HSP90-CDC37. Structures of HSP90-CDC37-BRAF<sup>V600E</sup> complexes with PP5 in autoinhibited and activated conformations, together with proteomic analysis of its phosphatase activity on BRAF<sup>V600E</sup> and CRAF, reveal how PP5 is activated by recruitment to HSP90 complexes. PP5 comprehensively dephosphorylates client proteins, removing interaction sites for regulatory partners such as 14-3-3 proteins and thus performing a 'factory reset' of the kinase prior to release.

### Keywords
Neuronal differentiation, M6a methylation, Imp1 regulation

### Affiliations
ICR
Functional Proteomics, ICR

### Submitter
Graeme Benstead-Hume

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Functional Proteomics, ICR


