### Accession
PXD010351

### Title
Identification and validation of stage-associated serum biomarkers in colorectal cancer_discovery phase H

### Description
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most prevalent and lethal cancer diseases worldwide. Here, we aimed to identify and quantify CRC serum biomarkers by combining a robust label-free quantification procedure followed of two consecutive steps of targeted parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) for biomarker validation in a fully inclusive proteomic strategy.  For the discovery phase pooled serum samples were used for shotgun proteomics and label-free quantification. On the identification phase, 116 potential biomarkers were selected based on their statistical significance and their relative expression in disease stages respect to healthy stage and their functional relation with cancer progression. Verification phase was conducted in 2 steps. In the first step, 318 peptides from 116 proteins were used for PRM verification giving place to 23 PRM-quantifiable, potential CRC biomarkers. In a second step, 7 peptides corresponding to CO9, APOC3, CRP, THSB1, ECM1 and IGF2 proteins were reproducibly confirmed by PRM in every CRC stage for these unfractionated samples. Finally, a different cohort composed by individual serum samples was used in the final validation phase.  In individual serum samples, 5 peptides belonging to 4 proteins were consistently quantified and validated. ROC analyses indicated that peptides GWVTDGFSSLK and LCNNPTPQFGGK were suitable candidates for predicting the separation between control and CRC patients. Two assays for absolute quantification of significant peptides in serum samples were established using AQUA peptides. In conclusion, a set of serum peptides were validated by PRM as potential biomarkers for differentiating control from CRC patients.

### Sample Protocol
Serum samples for discovery and verification were depleted of the 14 most abundant proteins using a Human-14 Multiple Affinity Removal Column (Agilent Technologies, 4.6 × 50 mm) connected to an Agilent 1260 HPLC. On the validation cohort, individual serum samples were depleted of albumin and gamma-globulins using the “Top 2 abundant protein depletion spin columns” (Pierce).   The depleted fractions were concentrated using 5 KDa Vivaspin 15R (Sartorius), followed by buffer exchange with 50 mM NH4HCO3. Depleted samples were vacuum-dried and stored at -80°C until further analysis. Total protein concentration was determined with the Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad). Then, eluted proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with 1 μg trypsin overnight at 37ºC.  For the discovery cohort, digested peptides were dried and electrofocused in a 3100 OFFGEL fractionator (Agilent Technologies) using a pH 3-10 gradient. After focusing, peptides were recovered into 24 fractions, desalted using C18 OMIX tips (Agilent Technologies) and stored at -80°C until LC/MS/MS analysis. For the rest of the samples, peptides were recovered and vacuum-dried for analysis without further fractionation.

### Data Protocol
Project has been distributed in discovery, verification and validation phases. Shot gun proteomics were followed in the discovery phase. Data were analyzed by MaxQuant. PRM based analyses were performed in the verification and validation phases. Skyline software was used for data analyses. For global proteome analyses, Perseus software (vs. 1.6.1.1) was used for principal component analyses (PCA) and replicates reproducibility with scatter plots analyses 20. For PCA, Benjamini-Hochberg cut-off method was used at a 5% FDR. CRAPOME database was used to delete unspecific proteins 21.  Unpaired Student´s t-test was used to obtain the statistical significance of pairwise comparisons when technical replicates were analyzed. The Mann-Whitney test was used for analyzing individual patient data in validation phase, where data dispersion is higher.   Genomatix online resource was used for categorizing proteins related with cancer. Panther and Gorilla databases 22-23 were used for Gene Ontology and Enrichment analyses, respectively. In the enrichment analyses performed with the statistically significant proteins, the entire list of quantified proteins was used as background list. R, SPSS and XLStat softwares were used for ROC analyses and statistical tests.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Diagnosis., Colorectal cancer, Disease biomarkers, Parallel reaction monitoring

### Affiliations
Functional proteomics group; Molecular Biomedicine department; CIB-CSIC
CIB-CSIC

### Submitter
CONSUELO MARIN VICENTE

### Lab Head
Dr José Ignacio Casal Alvarez
Functional proteomics group; Molecular Biomedicine department; CIB-CSIC


