### Accession
PXD009102

### Title
Stress hormones induce breast intra-tumor heterogeneity

### Description
Diversity within or between a tumour and metastases, known as intra-patient tumour heterogeneity develops during disease progression, and is a serious hurdle for therapy1,2,3. Metastasis is the fatal hallmark of cancer and mechanisms of colonization, the most complex step of the metastatic cascade4,5, remain ill-defined. Better understanding of cellular and molecular processes underlying intra-patient tumour heterogeneity and metastasis are pivotal for the success of personalized cancer treatment. Here, transcriptional profiling of tumours and matched metastases showed cancer site-specific phenotypes, and identified increased glucocorticoid receptor (GR) activity in the distant metastases. GR has been shown to mediate the effects of stress hormones and of their synthetic derivatives, widely used in the clinic as anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive.

### Sample Protocol
. MDA-MB 231 cells propagated for seven days in charcoal stripped FCS in presence of dexamethasone or vehicle were mechanically detached, washed and snap frozen. Cells were lysed in 8M Urea (Sigma), 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate in presence of phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma P5726&P0044) using strong ultra-sonication (Bioruptor, 10 cycles, 30 seconds on/off, Diagenode, Belgium). Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a small sample aliquot. 250μg of proteins were digested as described previously (PMID:27345528), reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 60 min at 37 °C and alkylated with 10 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at 37 °C. After diluting samples with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer to a final urea concentration of 1.6M, proteins were digested by incubation with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin) overnight at 37°C. After acidification using 5% TFA, peptides were desalted on C18 reversed-phase spin columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Macrospin, Harvard Apparatus) and dried under vacuum.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (v2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Limited), which was used to extract peptide precursor ion intensities across all samples applying the default parameters. The generated mgf-files were searched using MASCOT as above using the following search criteria: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY) were applied as variable modifications; mass tolerance of 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.02 Da (fragments). The database search results were filtered using the ion score to set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 1% on the peptide and protein level, respectively, based on the number of reverse protein sequence hits in the datasets. The relative quantitative data obtained were normalized and statistically analyzed using our in-house script as above (PMID:27345528).

### Publication Abstract
Diversity within or between tumours and metastases (known as intra-patient tumour heterogeneity) that develops during disease progression is a serious hurdle for therapy<sup>1-3</sup>. Metastasis is the fatal hallmark of cancer and the mechanisms of colonization, the most complex step in the metastatic cascade<sup>4</sup>, remain poorly defined. A clearer understanding of the cellular and molecular processes that underlie both intra-patient tumour heterogeneity and metastasis is crucial for the success of personalized cancer therapy. Here, using transcriptional profiling of tumours and matched metastases in patient-derived xenograft models in mice, we show cancer-site-specific phenotypes and increased glucocorticoid receptor activity in distant metastases. The glucocorticoid receptor mediates the effects of stress hormones, and of synthetic derivatives of these hormones that are used widely in the clinic as anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive agents. We show that the increase in stress hormones during breast cancer progression results in the activation of the glucocorticoid receptor at distant metastatic sites, increased colonization and reduced survival. Our transcriptomics, proteomics and phospho-proteomics studies implicate the glucocorticoid receptor in the activation of multiple processes in metastasis and in the increased expression of kinase ROR1, both of which correlate with reduced survival. The ablation of ROR1 reduced metastatic outgrowth and prolonged survival in preclinical models. Our results indicate that the activation of the glucocorticoid receptor increases heterogeneity and metastasis, which suggests that caution is needed when using glucocorticoids to treat patients with breast cancer who have developed cancer-related complications.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Tmt, Cancer

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland


