### Accession
PXD036444

### Title
Proteomic analysis of cooperating yeast metabolic communities during ageing

### Description
Yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) cooperating metabolic communities (SeMeCos) were chronologically aged in minimal media (no amino acid supplementation). Samples were collected during exponential, early stationary and stationary phases for proteomic analysis. Comparison was performed between wild-type (knock-in, "kin"), 4p-SeMeCo ("4p") and MET15-3p-SeMeCo ("3p") cultures. Four independent biological replicates were acquired for each timepoint measured.

### Sample Protocol
500 uL of each culture were collected into a 96-deep-well plate. Samples were centrifuged at 4,000 g for 3 min and supernatants (SN) were discarded. Samples were centrifuged again at 4,000 g for 1 min to fully remove any residual SN. Cell pellets were immediately placed on dry ice before being stored at -80ºC, until all samples were collected. Cell pellets were processed in a bead beater for 5 min at 1500 rpm (Spex Geno/Grinder), in a lysis buffer where proteins were denatured in 8M urea (Sigma-Aldrich, 33247) plus 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich, 09830) at pH 8.0. Samples were spun down for 1 min at 4000 rpm, before they were reduced in 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich, 43815) for 1h at 30 ºC and then alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, I1149) for 30 min at RT protected from light. Samples were diluted to less than 1.5 M urea in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate at pH 8.0, before proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C with trypsin (Promega, V511X). Trypsin was neutralised with 1% formic acid (FA) (Fisher Scientific, 13454279), before peptides were cleaned-up in 96-well MacroSpin plates (Nest Group): 1. plates were first equilibrated in a series of Methanol (1x) (Greyhound Chromatography, BIO-13684102), 50% ACN (2x) (Greyhound Chromatography, Bio-012041-2.5L), and 3% ACN 0.1% FA (2x), between each wash plates were spun down for 1 min at 100 g and flow through was discarded; 2. samples were loaded into the plates and peptides were cleaned-up in a series of 3% ACN, 0.1% FA (3x), between each wash samples were spun down for 1 min at 100 x g and flow through was discarded; 3. peptides were eluted into a new collection plate with 50% ACN (3x) and spun dried overnight at RT in speed vacuum. Peptides were then dissolved in 40 uL of 3% ACN 0.1% FA. Peptide concentration was measured via absorbance at 280 nm using the Lunatic (Unchained Labs).  The digested peptides were analysed on a nanoAcquity (Waters) (running 5 µl/min microflow liquid chromatography) coupled to a TripleTOF 6600 (SCIEX). Protein digest (2 µg) was injected and the peptides were separated with a 23 min non-linear gradient starting with 4% acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid and increasing to 36% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. A Waters HSS T3 column (150 mm × 300 µm, 1.8 µm particles) was used. The DIA method consisted of an MS1 scan from m/z 400 to m/z 1250 (50 ms accumulation time) and 40 MS2 scans (35 ms accumulation time) with a variable precursor isolation width covering the mass range from m/z 400 to m/z 1250.

### Data Protocol
Raw data analysis was performed using DIA-NN 1.7.10. The mass accuracies were fixed to 20 ppm (MS2) and 12 ppm (MS1), the scan window was set to 8, quantification strategy was set to 'Robust LC (high-precision)'.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Ageing, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin
Charite – Universitaetsmedizin Berlin

### Submitter
Clara Correia Melo

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Ralser
Charite – Universitaetsmedizin Berlin


