### Accession
PXD046646

### Title
Proteomic Landscape of Endoplasmic Reticulum Remodeling During Neurogenesis via Combinatorial Selective ER-phagy

### Description
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) functions in protein and lipid synthesis, calcium ion flux, and inter-organelle communication, all of which are driven by the ER proteome landscape. ER is remodeled in part through autophagy-dependent protein turnover involving membrane-embedded ER-phagy receptors1,2. A refined tubular ER network is formed in neurons within highly polarized dendrites and axons3,4. Autophagy-deficient neurons in vivo display axonal ER accumulation within synaptic ER boutons, associated with hyper-excitability,5 and the ER-phagy receptor FAM134B has been genetically linked with human sensory and autonomic neuropathy6,7. However, mechanisms and receptor selectivity underlying ER remodeling by autophagy in neurons is limited. Here, we employ genetic, proteomic and computational tools to create a quantitative landscape of ER proteome remodeling via selective autophagy during conversion of stem cells to induced neurons in vitro.  Through analysis of single and combinatorial ER-phagy receptor mutants coupled with an allelic series computational framework, we delineate the extent to which each of five receptors contributes to both the magnitude of ER turnover by autophagy and the selectivity of clearance for individual ER proteins. We define specific subsets of reticulon-domain containing ER-tubule shaping proteins or luminal proteins as preferred clients for autophagic turnover via distinct receptors. Using spatial sensors and flux reporters, we demonstrate receptor-specific autophagic capture of ER in axons, which correlates with aberrant accumulation of ER in axonal structures in ER-phagy receptor or autophagy-deficient cells. This molecular inventory of ER proteome remodeling and versatile genetic toolkit provides a quantitative framework for understanding the contributions of individual ER-phagy receptors for reshaping this critical organelle during transitions in cell states.

### Sample Protocol
Induced neuron pellets were lysed in 8M Urea buffer 8M Urea, 150 mM TRIS pH, NaCl) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor tablet, sonicated, and clarified. 100ug Sample were reduced with TCEP (0.5 M for 30 min at room temperature) and alkylated with Chloroacetamide (20 mM for 20 min at room temperature). Samples were methanol chloroform precipitate and then resuspended in in 50L, 200 mM EPPS, pH8.5. Peptide digestion was with LysC (1:100) for 2h at 37oC followed by Trypsin (1:100) overnight. 25 L of the digested peptides were then labelled with TMT reagent (at 20 mg/ml stock in ACN) for 2h. Reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine (final concentration of 0.5% (w/v) for 20 min) and sample combined. Samples were combined 1:1 such that each channel consisted of the same amount of peptide. The pooled peptide sample was desalted with a 100 mg Sep-Pak solid phase extraction column and then fractionated with basic pH reversed-phase (BPRP) HPLC. Fractionation was executed using an Agilent 1200 pump with an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (3.5 μm particles, 2.1 mm ID, and 250 mm in length). A 50 min linear gradient from 5% to 35% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 at a column flow rate of 0.25 mL/min was used for peptide fractionation. A total of 96 fractions were collected and then concatenated down to 24 superfractions, as described previously [1]. These 24 superfractions were divided into two sets of 12 non-adjacent superfractions and were acidified by adding formic acid to a concentration of 1%. One set of fractions (n=12) were vacuum centrifuged to near dryness, and each was desalted via StageTip, dried by vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data were collected on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to a Proxeon NanoLC-1200 UHPLC and a FAIMSpro interface [2]. The 100 μm capillary column was pulled in-lab and packed with 35 cm of Accucore 150 resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å; ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted over a gradient of 90 or 110 min. consisting of 5% acetonitrile to 30% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid. The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis, resolution 60,000, scan range 350–1350 or 400-1600 Th, automatic gain control (AGC) target was set as “standard,” maximum injection time was set to auto). SPS-MS3 analysis was used to reduce ion interference [3,4]. MS2 analysis consisted of collision-induced dissociation (CID) and quadrupole ion trap analysis (automatic gain control (AGC) 2 x104, normalized collision energy (NCE) 35, q-value 0.25, maximum injection time 35 ms, isolation window 0.7 Th). Following the acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, we collected an MS3 spectrum in which multiple MS2 fragment ions were captured in the MS3 precursor population using an isolation waveform with multiple frequency notches. MS3 precursors were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and analyzed using the Orbitrap (NCE 55, AGC 1.5 x105, maximum injection time 150 ms, resolution 50,000). We used the Real Time Search (RTS) using Orbiter[5] with a H. sapiens database (UniProt, downloaded August 2020) and we limited MS3 scans to 2 peptides per protein per fraction. A total of 24 RAW files were collected with data for 12 non-adjacent superfractions acquired using a compensation voltage (CV) set of -40/-60/-80V with a 1.25-sec TopSpeed cycle was used for each CV.  Spectra were converted to mzXML via MSconvert [6]. Database searching included all H. sapiens entries from UniProt. The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in that database in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were selected to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with SEQUEST [7] searches and linear discriminant analysis [8,9]. TMT labels on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.207 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) [10,11]. PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, also as described previously [9] and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1% [11]. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, as described previously [12]. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications. The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed and normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent thereby accounting for equal protein loading (column normalization). Finally, each protein abundance measurement was scaled to a percent of the total across all channels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human induced neurons, Er-phagy, Tmt 18-plex, Selective autophagy

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA 02115
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Melissa Hoyer

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffrey Wade Harper
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA 02115


