### Accession
PXD007251

### Title
Pitcher fluid protein profiling of Nepenthes x ventrata

### Description
We studied protein profile in the first three days upon pitcher opening to understand carnivory trait of Nepenthes x ventrata. The proteome analysis of pitcher fluid from N. × ventrata was performed by mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MSALL).

### Sample Protocol
Control set consists of pitcher fluids collected within 24 h of pitcher opening. For longevity experiment, emptied pitchers from control set were replenished with the filtrate depleted of proteins bigger than 10 kDa and sealed with parafilm for 3 days before sample collection. Proteins from pitcher fluid were separated from other impurities using commercially available 1 cc SPE cartridges with Waters Oasis HLB sorbent (Waters, USA), followed by reduction with DTT and alkylation with IAA before digestion with trypsin. Digestion was done overnight at 37°C. Three biological replicates were pooled for LC-MS detection. TripleTOF 5600 system (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA) coupled with an Eksigent NanoLC-ultra 2D+ with Nanoflex cHiPLC system (AB SCIEX) were used for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All spectra generated from IDA acquisitions were searched against the against predicted peptide database from in-house N. x ventrata transcriptome reference using ProteinPilot™ v4.5 (AB SCIEX) for protein and peptide identifications. Peptide detected was filtered by false discovery rate, FDR < 0.001.

### Publication Abstract
Carnivorous plants have the ability to capture and digest insects for nutrients, which allows them to survive in land deprived of nitrogenous nutrients. Nepenthes spp. are one of the carnivorous plants, which uniquely produce pitcher from the tip of an elongated leaf. This study provides the first transcriptome resource from pitcher of a Nepenthes ventricosa&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;Nepenthes alata hybrid, Nepenthes&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;ventrata to understand carnivory mechanism in Nepenthes spp., as well as in other carnivorous species. Raw reads and the transcriptome assembly project have been deposited to SRA database with the accession numbers SRX1389337 (day 0 control), SRX1389392 (day 3 longevity), and SRX1389395 (day 3 chitin-treated).

### Keywords
Chitinase, Enzymes, Carnivorous, Pithcer fluid, Nepenthes

### Affiliations
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Institute of Systems Biology, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, 43600 UKM Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia.

### Submitter
Hoe-Han Goh

### Lab Head
Dr Hoe-Han Goh
Institute of Systems Biology, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, 43600 UKM Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia.


