### Accession
PXD027383

### Title
A Multiplexed Parallel Reaction Monitoring Assay to monitor bovine Pregnancy-Associated Glycoproteins throughout pregnancy and after gestation

### Description
Bovine pregnancy-associated glycoproteins (boPAGs) are extensively glycosylated secretory proteins of trophoblast cells. Roughly 20 different boPAG members are known but their distribution patterns and degree of glycosylation during pregnancy are not well characterized. The objective of the present study was the development of a parallel reaction monitoring-based assay for the profiling of different boPAGs during pregnancy and after gestation. Furthermore, we investigated the effects of N-glycosylation on our analytical results. BoPAGs were purified from cotyledons of four different pregnancy stages. The assay detects 25 proteotypic peptides from 18 boPAGs in a single run. The significantly highest protein abundances were found for boPAG 1 in both, glycosylated and deglycosylated samples. Strongest effects of glycosylation were detected during mid and late pregnancy as well as in afterbirth samples. Furthermore, we identified different boPAG-clusters based on the observed relative protein abundances between glycosylated and deglycosylated samples. A linkage between the impact of glycosylation and potential N-glycosylation sites or phylogenetic relation was not detected. In conclusion, the results of this study provide new starting points to address further research on boPAGs to better understand their physiological role during pregnancy.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were reconstituted in 1× NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (Invitrogen) and separated on 4-12 % NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris Minigels (Invitrogen) aufgetrennt. Gels were stained with Coomassie Blue for visualization purposes, and each lane sliced into 15 equidistant regardless of staining. After washing, gel slices were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with 2-iodoacetamide and digested with Endopeptidase Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) overnight. The resulting peptide mixtures were then extracted, dried in a SpeedVac, reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid/ (v:v) and prepared for nanoLC-MS/MS as described previously (Atanassov and Urlaub, 2013). For mass spectrometric analysis samples were enriched on a self-packed reversed phase-C18 precolumn (0.15 mm ID x 20 mm, Reprosil-Pur120 C18-AQ 5 µm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and separated on an analytical reversed phase-C18 column (0.075 mm ID x 200 mm, Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 µm, Dr. Maisch) using a 30 min linear gradient of 5-35 % acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v:v) at 300 nl min-1). The eluent was analyzed on a Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole/orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) equipped with a FlexIon nanoSpray source and operated under Excalibur 2.4 software using a data-dependent acquisition method. Each experimental cycle was of the following form: one full MS scan across the 350-1600 m/z range was acquired at a resolution setting of 70,000 FWHM, and AGC target of 1*10e6 and a maximum fill time of 60 ms. Up to the 12 most abundant peptide precursors of charge states 2 to 5 above a 2*10e4 intensity threshold were then sequentially isolated at 2.0 FWHM isolation width, fragmented with nitrogen at a normalized collision energy setting of 25%, and the resulting product ion spectra recorded at a resolution setting of 17,500 FWHM, and AGC target of 2*10e5 and a maximum fill time of 60 ms. Selected precursor m/z values were then excluded for the following 15 s. Two technical replicates per sample were acquired.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant Software version 1.5.7.4 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). Proteins were identified against the UniProtKB bovine reference proteome (v2020.01) along with a set of common lab contaminants. The search was performed with trypsine (excluding proline-proximal cleavage sites) as enzyme and iodoacetamide as cysteine blocking agent. Up to two missed tryptic cleavages were allowed for, and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation variable modifications. Instrument type ‘Orbitrap’ was selected to adjust for MS acquisition specifics. Following an initial internal recalibration, this translated into an MS mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm and an MS/MS mass tolerance of 20 ppm. Protein and peptide results lists were thresholded at False Discovery Rates (FDR) of 0.01, respectively, using a forward-and-reverse decoy database approach.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pregnancy-associated glycoprotein; cattle; pregnancy; mass spectrometry; prm; glycosylation

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen, Goettingen/Germany

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen, Goettingen/Germany


