### Accession
PXD007186

### Title
Mouse kidney cisplatin TAILS -  The proteome microenvironment determines the protective effect of preconditioning in cisplatin-induced acute kidney injury

### Description
Profiling of proteolytic events mouse kidneys during cisplatin-induced kidney damage. Kidneys from vehicle-treated mice are compared to cisplatin-treated mice and cisplatin treatment in animals preconditioned by hypoxia or calory restriction regimes.

### Sample Protocol
19 - 21 week old, male C57Bl6 wildtype mice originally obtained by Charles River (Sulzfeld, Germany) were kept under specific pathogen free conditions with a daily 12 hour light and 12 hour dark rhythm. All mice received ad libitum water and all mice except calorie restricted mice received ad libitum standard food provided by sniff (Soest, Germany). Calorie restricted mice received 70 % of the usual daily intake (3 g per day) for 28 days prior to cisplatin injection. Hypoxic preconditioning was performed by reduction of oxygen to 8.3 % in a hypoxia chamber for 2 h, 4 h and 8 h on three following days. Intraperitoneal cisplatin injection (20 mg/kg bodyweight) was performed at least 1 h after the hypoxic preconditioning protocol was finished. Cisplatin [1 mg/ml] was provided by the central cytostatic drugstore of the university hospital of cologne. Standard sodium-chloride solution (0.9 %) was used as vehicle-control. Intraperitoneal injections were performed under isoflurane-insufflation. 72 h hours after injection urine was taken if possible and afterwards the mice were anaesthetized by intrapertitoneal ketamine/xylazin-injection. Blood was taken by cardial punctuation and afterwards the mice were perfused with phosphate buffered saline via the heart. Kidneys were cut into two halves and one of them was macroscopically divided into cortex and medulla. The other halves were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Proteins were extracted from renal cortex as described (Rinschen et al J Am Soc Nephrol doi: 10.1681/ASN.2016101119). Enrichment of N-terminal peptides was performed by Terminal Amine Isotope Labeling of Substrates using triplex formaldehyde for labeling and blocking of primary amines as described (Demir et al Methods Mol Biol 1574:35-50, 2017). The following labeling schemes were used in two separate experiments: 1) Light label, control; medium label, cisplatin treatment; heavy label, cisplatin treatment after hypoxia-preconditioning. 2) Light label, control; medium label, cisplatin treatment; heavy label, cisplatin treatment after calory restriction. Samples were analysed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCDnano HPLC (Thermo) operated in a two-column setup (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, particle size 3µm, ID 75µm, trap column length 2cm, analytical column length 25cm, Thermo) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The nanoLC system was on-line coupled to an Impact II high resolution Q-TOF (Bruker) via a CaptiveSpray nano ESI source (Bruker) essentially as described (Beck et al Mol Cell Proteomics 14:2014-29, 2015)

### Data Protocol
Spectra were matched to peptide sequences at a false discovery rate of 0.01 using the Andromeda algorithm as implemented in the MaxQuant Software package v.1.5.8.3, using the UniProt mouse proteome (release 2015_10) as database for searches with standard Bruker QTOF settings. Search parameters were set as follows: Semi-specific (free N-terminus) ArgC as digestion enzyme , isotope labeling by light (+28.031300), medium (+32.056407) or heavy (+ 36.075670) dimethylation of Lys residues and peptide N-termini, Cys carbamidomethylation as fixed and Met oxidation, N-terminal acetylation (+42.010565) or N-terminal pyroGlu formation from Glu (-18.010565) or Gln (-17.026549) as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Acute kidney injury (AKI) leads to significant morbidity and mortality; unfortunately, strategies to prevent or treat AKI are lacking. In recent years, several preconditioning protocols have been shown to be effective in inducing organ protection in rodent models. Here, we characterized two of these interventions-caloric restriction and hypoxic preconditioning-in a mouse model of cisplatin-induced AKI and investigated the underlying mechanisms by acquisition of multi-layered omic data (transcriptome, proteome, N-degradome) and functional parameters in the same animals. Both preconditioning protocols markedly ameliorated cisplatin-induced loss of kidney function, and caloric restriction also induced lipid synthesis. Bioinformatic analysis revealed mRNA-independent proteome alterations affecting the extracellular space, mitochondria, and transporters. Interestingly, our analyses revealed a strong dissociation of protein and RNA expression after cisplatin treatment that showed a strong correlation with the degree of damage. N-degradomic analysis revealed that most posttranscriptional changes were determined by arginine-specific proteolytic processing. This included a characteristic cisplatin-activated complement signature that was prevented by preconditioning. Amyloid and acute-phase proteins within the cortical parenchyma showed a similar response. Extensive analysis of disease-associated molecular patterns suggested that transcription-independent deposition of amyloid P-component serum protein may be a key component in the microenvironmental contribution to kidney damage. This proof-of-principle study provides new insights into the pathogenesis of cisplatin-induced AKI and the molecular mechanisms underlying organ protection by correlating phenotypic and multi-layered omics data.

### Keywords
Mouse; kidney

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Jülich
Forschungszentrum Juelich ZEA-3 Analytics

### Submitter
Pitter Huesgen

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Huesgen
Forschungszentrum Juelich ZEA-3 Analytics


