### Accession
PXD035002

### Title
Identification of potential substrates of TRABID in HeLa cells using SILAC

### Description
Immune checkpoint blockades (ICBs) have been approved for treating multiple cancer types, but the response rate is limited for many solid tumors. Much efforts have been devoted to understand the mechanisms governing ICB therapy efficacy and the abundance of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes is among the factors that influence on ICB responsiveness. The deubiquitinase TRABID was identified in our previous study as a positive regulator of autophagy by stabilizing VPS34, the class III PI3K critical for autophagosome formation. In this study, we identify an upregulation of TRABID in mitosis and its critical role in mitotic progression through deubiquitination and stabilization of AURKB and BIRC5, two subunits of the chromosome passenger complex governing multiple mitotic steps. Furthermore, TRABID depletion induces micronuclei phenotype, which is likely mediated by the combinatory defects in mitosis and autophagy. Consequently, TRABID depletion or inhibition activates cGAS/STING pathway to induce type I interferon production and inflammatory responses. TRABID depletion in tumors cells reduces tumor burden and promotes anti-tumor immune surveillance by increasing tumor infiltration of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and NK cells and reducing Treg cells. Clinically, TRABID expression in multiple cancer types correlates negatively with the infiltration of anti-tumor immune cells and positively with that of pro-tumor immune cells. Our study supports a suppressive role of tumor-intrinsic TRABID in anti-tumor immunity and suggests TRABID inhibitor as a promising agent for enhancing the sensitivity of solid tumors to ICB therapy.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC-Labeling and Cell Culture For SILAC experiments, HeLa cells stably expressing control shRNAs and TRABID shRNAs were cultured in DMEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) deficient in L-arginine and L-lysine and supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Biological Industries), penicillin, and streptomycin. Specifically, control and TRABID knockdown cells were supplied with [13C6, 15N4]HCl (Arg-10) and L-lysine [13C6]HCl (Lys-6) (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and L-arginine (Arg-0) and L-lysine (Lys-0) (Thermo Fisher Scientific), respectively. Cells were cultured in SILAC medium for 2 weeks before harvesting. Each 100 million cell per cell line were seeded and grew overnight, followed by washed twice with PBS, then harvested. Cell Lysis, Protein Digestion Briefly, cell pellets were lysed in an room-temperature urea lysis buffer containing, 9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0 and protease inhibitors. The lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 15000 rpm for 10 min at RT. Braford assay was used to determine the protein concentration of each sample. Respective SILAC mixes were created by combining 15 mg of protein per SILAC state. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol at 37℃ for 70 min and subsequently alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide at RT for 60 min, in the dark. Lysates were diluted to 4 M urea with 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, and proteins were digested with Lys-C, using an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50, at 37℃ for 4 hours. The peptide mixtures were further diluted to 1.5M urea and subsequently digested with Trypsin using an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50, at 37℃ for O/N. Digests were quenched with trifluroacetic acid (TFA) and the peptide solutions were cleared by centrifugation prior to desalting. Peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak PlusC18 cartridges and aliquot 50 g desalted for peptide fractionation. Then, samples were lyophilized by SpeedVac.  Fractionation for Proteome Analysis Peptides fractionation was performed according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Briefly, dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% TFA and then loaded onto an equilibrated, high-pH, reversed-phase fractionation spin column. Peptides were bound to the hydrophobic resin under aqueous conditions and desalted by washing the column with water. Subsequently, bound peptides were eluted into eight different fractions collected by centrifugation with a step gradient of increasing acetonitrile concentration. Each fraction was then dried by SpeedVac.

### Data Protocol
NanoLC−nanoESi-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Thermo UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system connected to an Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanospray interface (New Objective, Woburn, MA). Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a 75 μm ID, 25 cm length PepMap C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) packed with 2 μm particles with a pore with of 100 Å and were separated using a segmented gradient in 120 min from 5% to 35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependant mode. Briefly, survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1600 m/z were performed at 240K resolution with a 2×105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation window at 1.6 Da with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 1×104 and the max injection time was 50 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS2. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles; the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 15 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. 
The raw data were processed for protein identification and SILAC quantification using the MaxQuant software (Version 1.6.15.0, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry). Protein identification were performed using the Andromeda search engine against the Swiss-prot Homo sapiens database (20,376 entries total). Search criteria used were trypsin digestion, allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. The search tolerance parameters were 20 ppm for first search mass accuracy tolerance, 4.5 ppm for main search mass accuracy, and 0.5 Da for ITMS MS/MS tolerance search. Fixed modifications were set as carbamidomethyl (cysteine) and variable modifications set as oxidation (methionine) and GlyGly (lysine). Heavy arginine (Arg-10) and lysine (Lys-6) were selected for SILAC quantification. False discovery rate (FDR) were calculated to 0.01 by the decoy (reverse) database approach.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Trabid

### Affiliations
research assistant
Institute of Biological Chemistry

### Submitter
CHEN HAN-HSIUN

### Lab Head
Dr Ruey-Hwa Chen
Institute of Biological Chemistry


