### Accession
PXD002401

### Title
Multi-omics toxicity profiling of engineered nanomaterials

### Description
This study aims to implement methods for toxicological profiling of engineered nanomaterials using toxicogenomics, proteomics, and metabolomics along with computational analyses. For all three omics layers the human cell lines A549 (lung epithelial cells) and THP1 (monocytes) were separately exposed to the nanomaterials TiO2 NM104, MWNCT NM401, and Ag NM300k. Proteomics and metabolomics samples have been performed as biological triplicates and were taken after 0, 6, 12, 24, and 48 hours. To assess ecotoxic effects C. elegans worms were grown in soil treated with NM300k. Ecotox samples were taken only at 0 and 24 hours. Integrating all three omics layers will enable the identification of (novel) ENM specific modes of action (MoA).

### Sample Protocol
Firstly, the protein pellet was dissolved in 100 µL 1-fold PBS (phosphate buffered saline, prepared in-house) buffer, which also contained 1-fold protease inhibitor. The protease inhibitor is available as a pill “complete mini” from Roche (Penzberg, Germany) and was dissolved in 2 mL of ultrapure water to obtain a 25-fold solution. 100 µL TFE (trifluorethanol; Sigma – Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) were added to the sample to improve the solubility and the denaturation of the proteins. This process was carried out on a thermo mixer at 60°C and 750 rpm for 1 hour. The disulfide bonds were reduced by adding 4.55 mM TCEP - HCl (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride solution; Sigma Aldrich) (20 µL of a 50 mM solution in ultrapure water), followed by an incubation step at 60°C and 750 rpm for 1 hour. Thereafter, the samples were cooled for a short time. The samples were alkylated by adding 8.70 mM IAA (iodoacetamide; Sigma - Aldrich) (10 µL of a 200 mM solution in water). This process was done at 24°C and 750 rpm for 30 minutes. For this step it was mandatory to cover the sample with aluminium foil, because of the light sensitivity of IAA. Protein precipitation was achieved by pipetting 1.7 mL of ice-cold acetone (Sigma – Aldrich) to each sample. The precipitation solution was kept overnight at -20°C.  On the next day the precipitated proteins were centrifuged at 14.000 rpm for one minute. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet was dried for some minutes. Afterwards, 200 µL of a 0.1 M TEAB (triethylammonium bicarbonate, Fluka Analytical, Buchs, Schweiz) solution were added to dissolve the proteins. To improve the solubility, the samples were mixed on a thermo mixer at 60°C and 750 rpm for approximately 30 minutes. The exact protein concentration was determined employing a Bradford assay. For this approach, a 2 mg/mL BSA (bovine serum albumin, Sigma - Aldrich) solution was prepared and diluted 1:2 with 0.1 M TEAB seven times. By creating a regression line, each protein concentration was determined. The digest was performed by using trypsin (Promega; Madision, WI, USA) at a ratio of 1:50 to 1:100 with respect to the protein concentration. The tryptic digest was carried out overnight on a thermo mixer at 37°C and 550 rpm.  The next day the samples were adjusted to a concentration of 1 µg/µL by drying them in a SpeedVac and dissolving them in 0.1 M TEAB.  With the TMT labeling system it was possible to analyze six different samples in one experiment. Channels 126 – 131, 50 % hydroxylamine and 0.1 M TEAB were taken from the TMT Labeling Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 44 µL ethanol was added to each reagent (126 – 131). Afterwards the channels were mixed very well by vortexing and centrifuged. 20 µL of the reagent were added to 20 µL sample, mixed, centrifuged and incubated on a thermo mixer at 24°C and 750 rpm for one hour. The labeling reaction was stopped by the addition of 4 µL of a 5 % hydroxylamine (diluted in ultrapure water) solution. 6 samples were merged and adjusted to a concentration of 2.5 µg/µL by drying them in a SpeedVac and dissolving them in mobile phase A, containing ultrapure water with 0.050 % TFA (trifluoroacetic acid; Fluka Analytical).  The HPLC instrument was a U3000 nano HPLC Unit from Dionex (Germering, Germany) and the mass spectrometer was an LTQ Orbitrap XL from Thermo Fisher Scientific equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source. The spray was generated with 10 µm id and 360 µm o.d. fused silica tips obtained from New Objective (Woburn, USA). The samples constituents were separated by nano-ion-pair reversed-phase (IP-RP) - HPLC at pH 2 and detected by LTQ-Orbitrap-MS. The flow rate was set to 1 µL/min and a monolithic 150 × 0.2 mm I.D. column (produced in-house, commercially available as ProSwiftTM columns from Dionex, Part of Thermo Fisher) was used for the separation. A 5 hour gradient of 0-40% acetonitrile (Sigma – Aldrich) in 0.050 % TFA was applied. To quantify peptides, which were labeled with TMT, three data-dependent CID scans were executed. Subsequently three HCD scans of the same precursor ions were carried out to give information about the reporter ions, which were created by fragmentation. Each sample was measured three times with the use of exclusion lists.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification a consensus approach was used, i.e., the data was analyzed by applying multiple identification engines and the independent results were combined using the ConsensusID approach.  For quantification the OpenMS tool IsobaricAnalyzer was used to extract the quantitative information and correct for isotopic impurities using a non-negative least squares approach. The resulting quantitative information is subsequently mapped back to the previously acquired identification data for protein quantification. The protein quantification is based on the R package isobar.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Toxicology, Ecotoxicology, Enm, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
University of Tübingen
University of Salzburg

### Submitter
Marc Rurik

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Huber
University of Salzburg


