### Accession
PXD028269

### Title
Chemical derivatization of histones for LC-MS/MS analysis

### Description
Histone lysine methylation is an important post-translational modifications (PTMs) that plays critical roles in numerous biological processes with abnormal histone lysine methylation having been associated with developmental defects and human diseases. The primary amine of all lysine residues can be mono-, di-, or trimethylated and the extent of methylation at a single site is shown to inspire unique protein function.  Moreover, histone lysine methylation can activate or repress transcription depending on which sites are modified and to what degree. Therefore, a comprehensive stoichiometric analysis of histone lysine methylation is necessary to fully elucidate its function. As histones are lysine-rich and highly-hydrophilic proteins (Figure S1), trypsin digestion of histones results in small, hydrophilic peptides which often suffer from substantial losses during sample preparation, and are difficult to detect in conventional reversed phase LC-MS. Additionally, trypsin fails to cleave histone proteins when lysine residues are methylated, resulting in inaccurate estimations of site occupancy and methylation extent. Previously, lysine propionylation labeling has been developed to overcome this drawback and facilitate quantitative analysis of PTMs that frequently occur on the lysine residue of histones. However, propionylation labeling of unmodified and monomethylated lysine residues causes a mismatch in hydrophobicity and charge state between labeled and unlabeled di-/trimethylated peptides. This mismatch forces retention time and signal intensity differences that inspire inaccurate quantitation and miscalculation of site occupancy.  In this work, we developed a method that facilitates blocking of free lysine groups and discrimination of native lysine methylation, enables accurate calculation of the histone lysine methylation stoichiometry.

### Sample Protocol
Take 25 μg of purified histone samples and dissolve them in 100μL 100mM TEAB buffer (pH 8.0). Add 4μL 4% 13CD2O (w/v) and 4μL 600 mM NaBD3CN to the samples and vortex them at room temperature for 1h to label the free and mono-methylated lysine with heavy isotopic methyl. Terminate the reaction by acidifying the sample with TFA. Transfer the samples to 10K MWCO ultracentrifuge tube (Millipore) and centrifuge the samples for 15 min at 14,000 g at 4℃ to remove the reaction reagents. Continually add 200μL 100mM TEAB buffer in the ultracentrifuge tube and centrifuge the samples for 15 min at 14,000 g at 4℃ to wash histone sample for 3 times. Add 100μL 100mM TEAB buffer and 1μg trypsin in the ultracentrifuge tube and put the samples at 37℃ incubator for 16 h. Collect the digested sample by centrifuging the samples for 15 min at 14,000 g at 4℃. Wash the ultracentrifuge tube two times with 100μL 100mM TEAB buffer and combine the follow-through with digested sample and dry down. Resolve the dry down sample with 100μL 50mM TEAB buffer and add 15μL 25% propionic anhydride buffer (v/v in ACN) in the sample, add 10-15 μL 28% NH4OH to keep the pH of the sample reaction to be around 8.0. Put the sample tube on vortex for 20 min to label the N-terminal of digested histone peptides with propionyl. After propionylation, the sample was desalted with Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters) and lyophilized. LC-MS/MS for histone modification  Lyophilized histone peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and analyzed on a Dionex U3000 ultra performance liquid chromatography system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide sample was injected (2 μl). A Waters BEH 300Å C18 reversed phase capillary column (150 mm x 75 µm, 1.7 µm) was used for separation. Water with 0.1% FA and acetonitrile with 0.1% FA were used as mobile phases A and B, respectively. The flow rate was set to 0.300 µL/min. 2 µL of sample was injected onto the column and separated over a 120-minute gradient as follows: 0-1 min 3-10% B; 1-90 min 10-35% B; 90-92 min 35-95% B; 92-102 min 95% B; 102-105 min 95-3% B; 105-120 min 3% B. The data was acquired under data dependent acquisition mode (DDA, top 20). Mass spectrometric conditions were as follows: spray voltage of 2.8 kV, no sheath and auxiliary gas ﬂow; heated capillary temperature of 275°C, normalized high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) collision energy of 33%, resolution of 120, 000 for full scan, resolution of 60, 000 for MS/MS scan, automatic gain control of 2e5, maximum ion injection time of 100 ms, isolation window of 1.6, and fixed first mass of 110 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Due to histones possess multiple post-translational modifications and after heavy isotopic dimethylation and propionylation they are even highly modified and may contain several isoforms for same peptide sequence with different modifications. It is challenging to identify all different forms of histone modification peptides. Here in this work, the most frequently observed modifications that is the mono-methylation, di-methylation, tri-methylation, and acetylation on lysine residue of histone H3 were analyzed. The same histone peptide possess different modifications can firstly be identified according to their difference in mass over charge (m/z). Then the peptide can be additionally distinguished according to their retention time difference on the RP-HPLC column (trimethylated peptide ≈ unmodified (possesses two heavy isotopic methyl), mono (possesses one heavy isotopic methyl), and dimethylated peptide < acetylated peptides. To relatively quantify the abundance of histone PTMs, we used the area of each identified peptide peak in the MS chromatogram for comparison. Normally same peptide may have different charge state ions in LC-MS analysis and we only choose the highest intensity ions to measure their peak area. The total peak area of a histone peptide with all different PTM forms is regarded as 100%, and the percentage of each PTM the peptide is calculated by dividing the area of the PTM peak area by the total peak area. To distinguish histone peptide isoform, we also investigate the MS/MS spectrum to calculate the ratios of b and/or y ions that were different between the two or more peptide isoforms and the ratio is used to continually calculate the relative quantity of the peptide isoforms.

### Publication Abstract
CTR9 is the scaffold subunit in polymerase-associated factor complex (PAFc), a multifunctional complex employed in multiple steps of RNA Polymerase II (RNAPII)-mediated transcription. CTR9/PAFc is well known as an evolutionarily conserved elongation factor that regulates gene activation via coupling with histone modifications enzymes. However, little is known about its function to restrain repressive histone markers. Using inducible and stable CTR9 knockdown breast cancer cell lines, we discovered that the H3K27me3 levels are strictly controlled by CTR9. Quantitative profiling of histone modifications revealed a striking increase of H3K27me3 levels upon loss of CTR9. Moreover, loss of CTR9 leads to genome-wide expansion of H3K27me3, as well as increased recruitment of PRC2 on chromatin, which can be reversed by CTR9 restoration. Further, CTR9 depletion triggers a PRC2 subtype switch from the less active PRC2.2, to the more active PRC2.1 with higher methyltransferase activity. As a consequence, CTR9 depletion generates vulnerability that renders breast cancer cells hypersensitive to PRC2 inhibitors. Our findings that CTR9 demarcates PRC2-mediated H3K27me3 levels and genomic distribution provide a unique mechanism that explains the transition from transcriptionally active chromatin states to repressive chromatin states and sheds light on the biological functions of CTR9 in development and cancer.

### Keywords
Histione methylation, Propionylation, Histone, Dimethyl labeling

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin-Madison
School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Junfeng Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison


