### Accession
PXD013824

### Title
Proteomics reveals the inhibitory mechanism of Levodopa against esophageal squamous cell carcinoma

### Description
The high recurrence rate and poor survival prospects of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) patients after treatment make the ongoing research on chemoprevention drugs for ESCC particularly important. In helping to solve this problem, we screened a large number of FDA-approved drugs and found that levodopa, a drug used to treat Parkinson’s disease, has an inhibitory effect on the growth of ESCC cells. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms, we applied mass spectrometry to investigate the anti-tumor activity of levodopa on ESCC. The results suggest that levodopa can down-regulate oxidative phosphorylation, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and parkinson disease pathways. SDHD, NDUFS4 and MT-CO3, major respiratory compounds in the mitochondria, were involved in these pathways. Down-regulation of these proteins is associated with mitochondrial dysfunction. Western blotting and immunofluorescence results confirmed the authenticity of proteomics data. Cell viability assay revealed that mitochondrial activity had been suppressed after levodopa treatment. Mitochondrial membrane potential reduction was detected by JC-1 and TMRE assays. And transmission electron microscope (TEM) analysis indicated that mitochondrial morphology changed. Taken together, levodopa inhibits the growth of ESCC through restraining the mitochondria.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture - Human ESCC cell lines, KYSE150 and KYSE450 were purchased from Chinese Academy of Sciences Cell Bank (Shanghai, China). KYSE150 and KYSE450 cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 and DMEM (Biological Industries) medium respectively, supplemented with 10% FBS and 1‰ (v/v) Penicillin/Streptomycin solution, at 37℃ in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2. Sample preparation of proteomics - The samples were sonicated 3 times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 3 µM TSA, 50 mM NAM and 2 mM EDTA). The lysate was centrifuged at 12,000 g at 4˚C for 10 min, and then the supernatant was collected. The protein concentration was determined by BCA kit. Dithiothreitol was added to the protein solution to a final concentration of 5 mM, reduced at 56˚C for 30 min. Iodoacetamide was used to alkylate the protein to 11 mM for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The urea concentration of the sample was diluted to less than 2 M by adding 100 mM NH4HCO3. Trypsin was added at a mass ratio of 1:50 trypsin-to-protein for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein for a second 4 h-digestion. HPLC Fractionation - The tryptic peptides were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm inner diameter, 250 mm length). The peptides were separated into 60 fractions in a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min. The peptides were then combined into 6 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation. LC-MS/MS analysis - The peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile aqueous solution), and separated using an Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 22% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) over 40 min, 22% to 35% in 12 min, 35% to 80% in 4 min, and climbing to 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flow rate of 700 nl/min. The separated peptides were subjected to an NSI ion source for ionization and then analyzed by Orbitrap FusionTM (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometry. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV, and both peptide parent ions and their secondary fragments were detected and analyzed using high resolution Orbitrap. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1550 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000. The secondary mass spectrometer scan range was fixed at a starting point of 100 m/z and the resolution was set at 15,000. After the full scan, the first 20 peptides with the highest signal intensity were selected to enter the HCD collision pool and fragment using 35% of the fragmentation energy. Secondary mass spectrometry was also performed. In order to improve the effective utilization of mass spectrometry, automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4, the signal threshold was set to 5000 ions/s, the maximum injection time was set to 200 ms and the dynamic exclusion time for tandem mass spectrometry scans was set to 30 s to avoid repeated scans of the parent ions.

### Data Protocol
Database Search - The MS/MS data were indexed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissProt Human database concatenated with reverse decoy database and common pollution database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The minimum length of the peptide was set to 7 amino acid residues and the maximum number of peptide modifications was set to 5. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Alkylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification, oxidation on Met and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The FDR was adjusted to < 1%. Statistical analysis - SPSS 17.0 was used for statistical analysis. All quantitative data are expressed as mean values ± SD. Significant differences were compared using the Student's t-test or one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). P < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
High recurrence rates and poor survival of patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) after treatment make ongoing research on chemoprevention drugs for ESCC particularly important. In this study, we screened a large number of FDA-approved drugs and found levodopa, a drug used to treat Parkinson's disease, had an inhibitory effect on the growth of ESCC cells. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms involved, we applied quantitative proteomics to investigate the anti-tumor activity of levodopa on ESCC. The results suggest that levodopa could down-regulate oxidative phosphorylation, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, and Parkinson's disease pathways. Major mitochondrial respiratory compounds were involved in the pathways, including succinate dehydrogenase subunit D, NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase Fe-S protein 4, and mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit 3. Down-regulation of these proteins was associated with mitochondrial dysfunction. Western blotting and immunofluorescence results confirmed the proteomics findings. Cell viability assays indicated mitochondrial activity was suppressed after levodopa treatment. Reduced mitochondrial membrane potential was detected using JC-1 staining and TMRE assays. Transmission electron microscopy revealed changes in the morphology of mitochondria. Taken together, these results indicate that levodopa inhibited the growth of ESCC through restraining mitochondria function.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Chemoprevention, Levodopa, Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (escc)

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs lnc.
Department of Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China

### Submitter
xiaomei li

### Lab Head
Dr Kangdong Liu
Department of Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China


