### Accession
PXD028694

### Title
Proteome-wide screening for mitogen-activated protein kinase docking motifs and interactors

### Description
Essential functions of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) depend on their capacity to selectively phosphorylate a limited repertoire of substrates. MAPKs harbor a conserved groove located outside of the catalytic cleft that binds to short linear sequence motifs found in substrates and regulators. However, the weak and transient nature of these “docking” interactions poses a challenge to defining MAPK interactomes and associated sequence motifs.  Here, we describe a yeast-based genetic screening pipeline to evaluate large collections of MAPK docking sequences in parallel. Using this platform we analyzed a combinatorial library based on the docking sequences from the MAPK kinases MKK6 and MKK7, defining features critical for binding to the stress-activated MAPKs JNK1 and p38α. We subsequently screened a library consisting of ~12,000 sequences from the human proteome, revealing a large number of MAPK-selective interactors, including many not conforming to previously defined docking motifs. Analysis of p38α/JNK1 exchange mutants identified specific docking groove residues mediating selective binding. Finally, we verified that docking sequences identified in the screen could function in substrate recruitment in vitro and in cultured cells. Collectively, these studies establish an approach for characterization of MAPK docking sequences and provide a resource for future investigation of signaling downstream of p38 and JNK MAP kinases.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells in 10 cm dishes were transiently transfected with an expression plasmid for FLAG-tagged mouse SYDE2. After 48 h, cells were treated with either 5 M JNK-IN-8 or vehicle (0.1% DMSO) for 1 hour followed by either 10 g/mL anisomycin or vehicle (0.1% DMSO) for an additional hour at 37ºC. Cells were extracted into lysis buffer containing 1% Triton X100, and FLAG-SYDE2 was isolated by M2 affinity purification and subjected to SDS-PAGE. Protein bands were excised were in-gel digested with trypsin (MS grade Promega; incubation at 37ºC overnight); and peptides were extracted utilizing an 80% acetonitrile solution containing 0.1% formic acid.   Macro-spin desalt of the digests was performed using C18 spin columns (Nest Group, Inc), and eluted peptides were dried in a SpeedVac.  Peptide pellet was dissolved in a TiO2 loading/conditioning buffer solution containing 70 mM L-glutamic acid, 65% ACN, and 2% TFA in water.  Samples were then subjected to titanium dioxide (TiO2) phospho-peptide enrichment using TopTip (Glygen Corp). Phospho-peptide enrichment was carried out according to manufacturing specification with the exception of the initial loading / conditioning buffer indicated above. Flow Through peptide eluate (FT, non-bound) was collected and stored at -80°C for mass spectrometry analysis of total proteins. Enriched phospho-peptides (EN, bound) were eluted from each TopTip with 30 µL 28% high purity ammonium hydroxide. The eluted fraction was dried and re-dried with 2 × 30 µL water by SpeedVac. Enriched fractions were dissolved in 10 µL of 70% formic acid and 30 µL of 50 mM sodium phosphate.  0.3 µg / 5 µL of each sample was injected on column for analysis and LC-MS/MS conducted using a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with a Waters nanoACQUITY Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) System (Waters Corporation).   The UPLC was equipped with a Waters Symmetry® C18 (180µm x 20mm) trap column and a 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm nanoAcquity™ UPLC™ column (35ºC).  Trapping was done using 99% Buffer A (100% water, 0.1% formic acid) and peptide separation was undertaken using a linear gradient of solvents A (0.1% Formic Acid in Water) and B (0.075% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 90 minutes, at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.

### Data Protocol
The raw LC MS/MS data files were processed with Progenesis QI Software (Waters, Inc.) with exported .mgf files searched against a custom databased for the target protein of interest on MASCOT Search Engine (version 2.7; Matrix Science).  The data was searched utilizing the following search parameters: Enzyme: Trypsin; Variable modifications: Carbamidomethyl (Cys), Oxidation (Met) and phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, and Tyr; Mass values: Monoisotopic; Protein mass: Unrestricted; Peptide mass tolerance: ± 10 ppm; Fragment mass tolerance: ± 0.02 Da; Charge: +7 or less; Max missed cleavages: 3; Decoy: Yes; Instrument type: ESI-TRAP.   Site of phosphorylation were validated manually.  Resulting search results in .xml format was exported from MASCOT and imported into Progenesis QI where they are matched with the spectral features.  Separated and normalized EN and FT data analyses were carried out and then merged using the “Fractionation” analysis feature of Progenesis QI.  Resulting proteins and peptides list and their corresponding normalized abundances were exported and further curated using Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
C-jun n-terminal kinase, Map kinases

### Affiliations
Yale University
Yale University (Yale School of Medicine)

### Submitter
TuKiet Lam

### Lab Head
Dr TuKiet Lam
Yale University (Yale School of Medicine)


