### Accession
PXD022333

### Title
A novel class of CLK kinases inhibitors that target SRSF10 and promote p53mediated cytotoxicity on human colorectal cancer cells

### Description
The elevated expression of the splicing regulator SRSF10 in metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) stimulates the production of the pro-tumorigenic Bclaf1-L splice variant. We discovered a group of small molecules with an aminothiazole carboxamide core (GPS167, GPS192 and others) that decrease production of Bclaf1-L. While additional alternative splicing events regulated by SRSF10 are affected by GPS167/192 in HCT116 cells (e.g., in MDM4, WTAP, SLK1 and CLK1), other events are shifted in a SRSF10-independent manner (e.g., in MDM2, NAB2 and TRA2A). GPS167/192 increased the interaction of SRSF10 with the CLK1 and CLK4 kinases, leading us to show that GPS167/192 are CLK kinase inhibitors preferentially impacting the activity of SRSF10. Notably, GPS167 impairs the growth of CRC cell lines and organoids, inhibits anchorage-independent colony formation, cell migration, and promotes cytoxicity that requires SRSF10 and p53. In contrast, GPS167 only minimally affects normal colonocytes and normal colorectal organoids. Thus, GPS167 reprograms the tumorigenic activity of SRSF10 in CRC cells to elicit p53-dependent apoptosis.

### Sample Protocol
HCT116 cells were transfected with the plasmid expressing Flag-SRSF10 and treated or not with GPS167 or GPS192. Collected cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and lysed on ice for 30 minutes in NET-2 buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.05 % (vol/vol) Nonidet P-40 supplemented with EDTA-free protease and phosphatase inhibitors cocktail (Roche Diagnostics GmbH). The lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 13,000 × g for 15 min. RNase A (0.1 mg/mL cellular lysate) was added. SureBeads™ protein G magnetic beads (BioRad) coupled with monoclonal anti-FLAG M2 antibody (F3165, Sigma Aldrich) were added to pre-cleared FlagSRSF10-containing cell lysates. After overnight incubation at 4°C, beads were magnetized and washed 3x with NET2 buffer and 3x with 20 mM NH4HCO3. Beads were resuspended in 50 µL of 20 mM NH4HCO3 containing 1 µg of Trypsin Gold (Promega) and incubated overnight at 37°C. The reaction was stopped by adding formic acid to 1% final concentration. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube, while beads were resuspended in 50 µl of a solution containing 60% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and incubated for 5 min at room temperature. Both supernatants were pooled and lyophilized. Peptides were resuspended in 30 µL of 0.1% of trifluoroacetic acid and desalted using ZipTip C18 (Millipore). Eluted peptides were lyophilized and resuspended in 25 µL of 1% formic acid. Trypsin digested peptides loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column (0.3 mm id x 5 mm, Dionex Corporation) were separated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system. The HPLC system was coupled to an OrbiTrap QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc) via an EasySpray source.

### Data Protocol
Data acquired using the Xcalibur software were processed, searched and quantified using the MaxQuant software package version 1.4.1.2

### Publication Abstract
The elevated expression of the splicing regulator SRSF10 in metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) stimulates the production of the pro-tumorigenic <i>BCLAF1-L</i> splice variant. We discovered a group of small molecules with an aminothiazole carboxamide core (GPS167, GPS192 and others) that decrease production of <i>BCLAF1-L</i>. While additional alternative splicing events regulated by SRSF10 are affected by GPS167/192 in HCT116 cells (e.g.&#xa0;in <i>MDM4, WTAP, SLK1</i> and <i>CLK1</i>), other events are shifted in a SRSF10-independent manner (e.g.&#xa0;in <i>MDM2, NAB2</i> and <i>TRA2A</i>). GPS167/192 increased the interaction of SRSF10 with the CLK1 and CLK4 kinases, leading us to show that GPS167/192 can inhibit CLK kinases preferentially impacting the activity of SRSF10. Notably, GPS167 impairs the growth of CRC cell lines and organoids, inhibits anchorage-independent colony formation, cell migration, and promotes cytoxicity in a manner that requires SRSF10 and p53. In contrast, GPS167 only minimally affects normal colonocytes and normal colorectal organoids. Thus, GPS167 reprograms the tumorigenic activity of SRSF10 in CRC cells to elicit p53-dependent apoptosis.

### Keywords
Human colorectal cancer cells, Clk kinases inhibitor, Srsf10

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases.Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada
Universite de Sherbrooke

### Submitter
Lulzim Shkreta

### Lab Head
Dr Benoit Chabot
Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases.Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada


