### Accession
PXD009124

### Title
Label-free quantitative proteomic approach to investigate the effect of heat stress on Panax ginseng leaves

### Description
Ginseng is one of the well-known medicinal plants, exhibiting diverse medicinal effects. Its roots possess anticancer and anti-aging properties and are being used in the medical systems of East Asian countries. Ginseng is grown in low-light and low-temperature conditions and its growth is strongly inhibited at temperatures above 25 ℃. However, the molecular responses of ginseng to heat stress are currently poorly understood, especially at protein level. Therefore, here we utilized a shotgun proteomics approach to investigate the effect of heat stress on ginseng leaves. Total proteins were isolated from control (25 ℃) and ginseng plants exposed to 35 ℃ for 1 and 3 days and subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion. A total of 3,359 ginseng proteins were identified when searched in an in-house developed RNA-seq (PAC-BIO) database.

### Sample Protocol
Five-week-old ginseng seedlings were transferred to a growth chamber and subjected to a high temperature (35℃) with 75% humidity and 5,000 lux light intensity. Leaves were obtained from the plants at 1, 3, and 5 days after treatment. Ginseng seedlings which grown at 25℃ were used as the control. Total proteins of leaves were isolated from each samples. These samples were subjected in-solution digestion. Obtained peptides after FASP were dissolved in solvent-A (water/ACN, 98:2 v/v; 0.1% formic acid) and separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a UHPLC Dionex UltiMate ® 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) instrument. For trapping the sample, the UHPLC was equipped with Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper C18, 5 μm, 100 Å) and subsequently washed with 98% solvent A for 6 min at a flow rate of 6 μL/min. The sample was continuously separated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 capillary column (75 μm × 15 cm, nanoViper C18, 3 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The LC analytical gradient was run at 2% to 35% solvent B over 90 min, then 35% to 95% over 10 min, followed by 90% solvent B for 5 min, and finally 5% solvent B for 15 min. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was coupled with an electrospray ionization source to the quadrupole-based mass spectrometer QExactive™ Orbitrap High-Resolution Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Resulting peptides were electro-sprayed through a coated silica emitted tip (PicoTip emitter, New Objective, USA) at an ion spray voltage of 2000 eV. The MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (200 m/z) in a mass range of 350-1800 m/z. A maximum injection time was set to 100 ms for ion accumulation. Eluted samples were used for MS/MS events, measured in a data-dependent mode for the 10 most abundant peaks (Top10 method), in the high ass accuracy Orbitrap after ion activation/dissociation with Higher Energy C-trap Dissociation (HCD) at 27 collision energy in a 100-1650 m/z mass range.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitative (LFQ) proteomic analysis was performed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) as described previously. All three biological replicates were cross-referenced against the in-house developed RNA-seq (PAC-BIO) database. LFQ data processing was performed using default precursor mass tolerances set by Andromeda, which is set to 20 ppm of the first search and 4.5 ppm of them in search. Furthermore, LFQ data were searched based on 0.5 Da of a product mass tolerance. A maximum of two missed tryptic digestion was allowed. The fixed modifications specified were carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues. Additional modifications used in protein quantification were specified for acetylation of lysine residues and oxidation of methionine residues. A reverse nonsense version of the original database was generated and used to determine the FDR which was set to 1% for peptide identifications. Protein identifications with at least 2 unique peptides were considered as significant hits and used for further analysis.  Label-free quantification was conducted within MaxQuant using MaxLFQ followed by data analysis using Perseus software (ver. 1.5.8.5). Normalization of all the identified proteins was carried out by dividing the LFQ intensity of a particular peptide to the total LFQ intensity of a sample to compensate the differences between LFQ intensities due to different total protein loads. Missing values imputation of protein intensities were performed from a normal distribution (width: 0.3, down shift: 1.8) using Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Molecular breeding, High temperature injuries, Photosynthetic efficiency, Panax ginseng

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and Industry Convergence Research Institute, Pusan National University, Miryang, 627-706, South Korea
Pusan National University

### Submitter
Sun Tae Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Tae Kim
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and Industry Convergence Research Institute, Pusan National University, Miryang, 627-706, South Korea


