### Accession
PXD011257

### Title
Pre-fractionation extends, but creates a bias in the detectable HLA class Ι ligandome

### Description
HLA class Ι molecules on the cell surface enable CD8+ T lymphocytes to recognize cellular alterations in the form of antigens, including mutations, protein copy number alterations, aberrant post-translational modifications or pathogen proteins. At any given moment, tens of thousands of different self and foreign HLA class Ι peptide ligands may be presented on the cell surface by MHC class Ι complexes. Analysis of the HLA ligandome thrusts therefore unique challenges due to their enormous biochemical diversity and inherently wide range of abundances. Despite advances in enrichment, separation, MS instrumentation and fragmentation, it is still not achievable to cover the HLA class Ι ligandome in sufficient depth to support routine identification of e.g. viral pathogens or immuno-therapeutically important tumor neo-antigens. In this study, we evaluate two pre-fractionation techniques, high pH reversed phase and strong cation exchange for complementary analysis of HLA class Ι peptide ligands, benchmarking them against analyses circumventing pre-fractionation. We observe that pre-fractionation substantially extends the detectable HLA class Ι ligandome, but also creates an identification bias. We advocate a rational choice between no-fractionation, high pH reversed phase or strong cation exchange pre-fractionation for deeper HLA class Ι ligandome analysis depending on the targeted HLA locus, allele or peptide ligand modification

### Sample Protocol
Immuno-affinity purification  Per immuno-affinity purification (IP), 5*108 cells were harvested by centrifugation and washed three times with cold PBS. Cells were lysed for 1,5h at 4ºC in 10ml lysis buffer per gram cell pellet. The lysis buffer consisted of Pierce IP lysis buffer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) supplemented with 1x complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostics), 50µg/ml DNase Ι (Sigma-Aldrich) and 50µg/ml RNase A (Sigma-Aldrich). Subsequently, the lysate was cleared by centrifugation for 1 hour at maximum speed at 4ºC. Protein concentration was determined with the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). HLA class Ι complexes and peptide ligands were immunoprecipitated using 0,5mg W6/32 antibody [15] coupled to 125µl Protein A/G beads (Santa Cruz) from 25mg whole cell lysate. Antibodies were crosslinked to protein A/G beads to prevent co-elution. Incubation took place at 4ºC for approximately 16 hours. After immunoprecipitation, the beads were washed with 40ml cold PBS. HLA class Ι complexes and peptide ligands were subsequently eluted with 10% acetic acid. Peptide ligands were separated from HLA class Ι complexes using 10kD molecular weight cutoff filters (Millipore). The flowthrough containing the HLA class Ι peptide ligands was dried by vacuum centrifugation.  Peptide fractionation  HLA class Ι peptide ligands from six IPs were mixed and divided into two equal samples for either C18 reversed-phase fractionation at high pH or strong cation exchange. In high pH reversed phase fractionation, peptides were loaded on C18 STAGE-tips in 200mM ammonium formate pH 10, and eluted into 12 fractions with 11-100% acetonitrile. For strong cation exchange, peptides were loaded on SCX SPE cartridges (1mg, Supelco) in 20% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, and eluted into 12 fractions with 50-500mM ammonium acetate. All samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 10% formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS analyses.  LC-MS/MS The data was acquired with an UHPLC 1290 system (Agilent) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptides were trapped (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18, 3µM, 2cm x 100µM) for 10 min in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) before being separated on an analytical column (Agilent Poroshell, EC-C18, 2.7µm, 50cm x 75µm). Solvent B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. For high pH reversed phase samples (fraction 1 and 2), the gradient was as follows: first 5 minutes trapping, followed by 85 minutes gradient from 12-30% solvent B and subsequently 10 minutes wash with 100% solvent B and 10 minutes re-equilibration with 100% solvent A. For fraction 3 and 4 the gradient was from 15-32% solvent B. For fraction 5 and 6 the gradient was from 18-36% solvent B. For fraction 7 to 10 the gradient was from 20-38% solvent B and for fraction 11 and 12 from 22-44% solvent B. For the SCX fractions, the gradient was as follows: first 5 minutes trapping, followed by 85 minutes gradient from 7-35% solvent B and subsequently 10 minutes wash with 100% solvent B and 10 minutes re-equilibration with 100% solvent A. The mass spectrometer operated in data-dependent mode. Full scan MS spectra from m/z 400-650 were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 after accumulation to a target value or 4*105 or a maximum injection time of 50ms. Up to 3 most intense precursors with a charge state of 2+ or 3+ starting at m/z 100 were chosen for fragmentation. EThcD fragmentation was performed at 35% normalized collision energy on selected precursors with 18s dynamic exclusion after accumulation of 5*104 ions or a maximum injection time of 250ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15,000.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Raw files were searched using Sequest HT in Proteome Discoverer 2.2, against the Swissprot human database (20258 entries, downloaded on 02-02-2018) appended with the 20 most abundant FBS contaminants [16]. The search was set to unspecific with a minimum precursor mass of 797 Da to a maximum precursor mass of 1950 Da corresponding tot peptides between 8 and 12 amino acids long. Identified peptides were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the percolator algorithm, 5% peptide FDR and Xcorr > 1. Cysteine cysteinylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Serine phosphorylation and arginine citrullination were set as variable modifications in separate workflows. From the identified peptides, FBS contaminants were removed. Binding affinity of HLA class Ι peptide ligands was predicted using the NetMHC 4.0 algorithm [17] with a stringent binder cutoff of IC50 <500nM. The data was visualized with Graphpad PRISM 7.

### Publication Abstract
HLA class &#x399; molecules can communicate a range of cellular alterations (mutations, changes in protein copy number, aberrant post-translational modifications, or pathogen proteins) to CD8+ T lymphocytes in the form of HLA peptide ligands. At any given moment, tens of thousands of different self and foreign HLA class &#x399; peptides may be presented on the cell surface by HLA class &#x399; complexes. Due to the enormous biochemical diversity and low abundance of each of these peptides, HLA ligandome analysis presents unique challenges. Even with advances in enrichment strategies and MS instrumentation and fragmentation, sufficient ligandome depth for identification of viral pathogens and immuno therapeutically important tumor neo-antigens is still not routinely achievable. In this study, we evaluated two pre-fractionation techniques, high-pH reversed-phase and strong cation exchange, for the complementary analyses of HLA class &#x399; peptide ligands. We observe that pre-fractionation substantially extends the detectable HLA class &#x399; ligandome but also creates an identification bias. We thus advocate a rational choice between high-pH reversed-phase or strong cation exchange pre-fractionation for deeper HLA class &#x399; ligandome analysis, depending on the HLA locus, allele, or peptide ligand modification in question.

### Keywords
Hla class ι ligandome; hla class ι peptide ligands; high ph reversed phase; strong cation exchange; pre-fractionation

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Laura Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr W. Wu
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics


