### Accession
PXD018880

### Title
A PEROXO-Tag enables rapid isolation of peroxisomes from human cells

### Description
Peroxisomes are metabolic organelles that perform a diverse array of critical functions in human physiology. Traditional isolation methods for peroxisomes can take more than one hour to complete and can be laborious to implement. To address this, we have now extended our prior work on rapid organellar isolation to peroxisomes via the development of a peroxisomally-localized 3XHA epitope tag (“PEROXO-Tag”) and associated immunoprecipitation (“PEROXO-IP”) workflow. Our PEROXO-IP workflow has excellent reproducibility, is easy to implement, and achieves highly rapid (~10 minutes post-homogenization) and specific isolation of human peroxisomes, which we characterize here via proteomic profiling. By offering speed, specificity, reproducibility, and ease of use, the PEROXO-IP workflow should facilitate studies on the biology of peroxisomes.

### Sample Protocol
Four plates of HEK-293T cells (~140 million cells total) were used for each replicate for proteomics. The PEROXO-IP workflow is as follows. Cells were rinsed twice with pre-chilled PBS and then scraped in 1 ml of KPBS and pelleted at 1000 x g for 2 min at 4°C. Cells were then resuspended in 1000 μl of KPBS, and 5 μl (equivalent to 0.5% of the total number of cells) was added to 50 μl of NP40 lysis buffer for whole-cell protein samples. NP40 lysis buffer contained 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP40 and one complete mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor per 10 ml. The remaining cells were gently homogenized with 25 strokes of a 2 ml homogenizer. The homogenate was then centrifuged at 1000 x g for 2 min at 4°C to pellet nuclei and cells while cellular organelles including peroxisomes remained in the supernatant which was incubated with 200 μl of anti-HA magnetic beads prewashed with KPBS three times. Immunoprecipitates were then incubated rocking at 4°C for 3.5 min before being gently washed three times with KPBS using a DynaMag Spin Magnet, changing tubes after the first and last wash. Beads with bound peroxisomes were resuspended in 50 μl ice-chilled NP40 lysis buffer to extract proteins. Protein fractions were incubated at 4°C for 10 min, and then beads were removed with the magnet. Samples were then clarified by centrifugation in a microcentrifuge at 21,130 x g at 4°C for 10 min. Protein digestion was performed on an S-Trap Micro Spin Column (Protifi) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, samples were mixed with 5% SDS, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 7.55, 5 mM TCEP (final concentrations), heated for 10 min at 55°C, cooled to room temperature, and alkylated with 15 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) for 10 min at room temperature. Afterward, phosphoric acid was added to 1.2% final concentration, and an additional 6X volume of S-Trap binding buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.1) was added. Samples were applied to an S-Trap Micro Spin Column and centrifuged for 1 min at 4000 x g. The column was washed four times with S-Trap binding buffer. Sequencing-grade trypsin (0.75 μg for IP samples or 1 μg trypsin for 25 μg of whole cell sample) in 50 mM TEAB, pH 8 was added to the column and digested for 16 h at 37°C. Peptides were eluted with 40 μl each of 50 mM TEAB and then 0.2% aqueous formic acid, followed by a final elution with 35 μl 50% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid. The three step-wise elutions were pooled and lyophilized. Mass spectrometry was performed as follows. Samples were analyzed by HPLC using Thermo EASY-nLC 1200 pumps and autosampler and a Thermo Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer in a nano-flow configuration. Samples were loaded on a 6 cm x 100 µm column packed with 10 µm ODS-A C18 material (YMC) and washed with 12 µl total volume to trap and wash peptides. These were then eluted onto the analytical column, which was 14 cm x 75 µm PicoFrit Emitter with 15 µm tip (New Objective) self-packed with 1.7 µm Aeris C18 material (Phenomenex). For whole cell samples, the gradient was isocratic 1% A buffer (1% formic acid in water) for 1 min 300 nl min-1 with increasing B buffer (1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) concentrations to 25% B at 105 min, 40% B at 125 min, and 100% B at 126 min. For IP samples, the gradient was isocratic 6% A Buffer for 1 min 300 nl min-1 with increasing B buffer concentrations to 21% B at 19.5 min, 36% B at 31 min, 50% B at 36 min, and 100% B at 48.5 min.  For data-independent acquisition (DIA), the mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent acquisition mode, with an isolation window from 400-900 m/z with width of 20 m/z for a total of 26 bins; placement of m/z bins was determined using Skyline (MacLean et al., 2010). Each DIA cycle consisted of two MS full scans per completion of the MS2 fragmentation of the isolation window. Ions were detected at resolution of 30,000. The column was washed with 100% percent B and re-equilibrated between analytical runs.

### Data Protocol
Raw files of the DIA-analyzed samples were loaded into ScaffoldDIA 2.0 (Proteome Software) and searched against the spectral library assembled from DDA off-line fractionated pooled whole cell and IP samples and the human genome database (Human_Uniprot_Sprt_Trembl_Isoforms_Release2019_01_Contams_20190205), allowing up to two missed tryptic cleavages. Tolerances were set to 10 ppm for precursors and 0.02 Da for fragment tolerance and library fragment tolerance. Data acquisition type was set for non-overlapping windows with precursor window size of 20 Da. Only peptides with charges of +2 and +3 and length in the range 6–30 were considered. Peptides identified in each sample were filtered by Percolator (Kall et al., 2007) to achieve a maximum FDR of 0.01. Individual search results were combined and peptide identifications were assigned posterior error probabilities and filtered to an FDR threshold of 0.01 by Percolator. Peptide quantification was performed by Encyclopedia (0.9.2). For each peptide, the five highest quality fragment ions were selected for quantification. Proteins with a minimum of one identified peptide were thresholded to achieve a protein FDR threshold of 1%. See Table S1 for further details about the reported proteomic data.

### Publication Abstract
Peroxisomes are metabolic organelles that perform a diverse array of critical functions in human physiology. Traditional isolation methods for peroxisomes can take more than 1&#xa0;h to complete and can be laborious to implement. To address this, we have now extended our prior work on rapid organellar isolation to peroxisomes via the development of a peroxisomally localized 3XHA epitope tag ("PEROXO-Tag") and associated immunoprecipitation ("PEROXO-IP") workflow. Our PEROXO-IP workflow has excellent reproducibility, is easy to implement, and achieves highly rapid (~10&#xa0;min post homogenization) and specific isolation of human peroxisomes, which we characterize here via proteomic profiling. By offering speed, specificity, reproducibility, and ease of use, the PEROXO-IP workflow should facilitate studies on the biology of peroxisomes.

### Keywords
Human hek-293t, Peroxisome, Peroxo-ip

### Affiliations
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA

### Submitter
Elizabeth Boydston

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Lourido
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA


