### Accession
PXD024517

### Title
R-loop proximity proteomics identifies a role of DDX41 in transcription-associated genomic instabilityR-loop proximity proteomics identifies a role of DDX41 in transcription-associated genomic instability

### Description
Transcription can pose a threat to genomic stability through the formation of R-loops that obstruct the progression of replication forks. R-loops are three-stranded nucleic acid structures formed by an RNA-DNA hybrid with a displaced non-template DNA strand. We developed RDProx to identify proteins that regulate R-loops in human cells. RDProx relies on the expression of the hybrid-binding domain (HBD) of Ribonuclease H1 (RNaseH1) fused to the ascorbate peroxidase (APEX2), which permits mapping of the R-loop proximal proteome using quantitative mass spectrometry. We associated R-loop regulation with different cellular proteins and identified a role of the tumor suppressor DEAD box protein 41 (DDX41) in opposing R-loop-dependent genomic instability. Depletion of DDX41 resulted in replication stress, double strand breaks and increased inflammatory signaling. Furthermore, DDX41 opposes accumulation of R-loops at gene promoters and its loss leads to upregulated expression of TGFβ and NOTCH signaling genes. Germline loss-of-function mutations in DDX41 lead to predisposition to acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in adulthood. We propose that accumulation of co-transcriptional R-loops, associated gene expression changes and inflammatory response contribute to the development of familial AML with mutated DDX41.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC-labeled cells were transiently transfected with a construct expressing APEX2-tagged HBD and WKK. After 48 hours, cells were pre-treated with 500 µM biotin phenol (Iris Biochem) for 2 hours at 37°C, followed by a 2 minute incubation with 1 mM H2O2 (Sigma-Aldrich) at RT. Cells were washed twice with quenching solution (10 mM sodium azide, 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 5 mM Trolox (all from Sigma-Aldrich)) and twice with PBS. Cells were lysed on ice using RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 0.5%sodium deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100). To release chromatin-bound proteins, cell lysates were sonicated using Bioruptor (Diagenode).  For affinity purification of biotinylated proteins, equal amounts of differentially SILAC-labeled cell extracts, originating from either the HBD or the WKK condition, were combined prior to the pull down and incubated with pre-equilibrated NeutrAvidin agarose beads (Thermo Scientific) for 2 hours at 4°C on a rotation wheel. Beads were washed once with RIPA buffer, twice with 8 M Urea (Sigma) in 1% SDS and once with 1% SDS in PBS. Bound proteins were eluted in NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (Life Technologies) supplemented with 1 mM DTT and boiled at 95°C for 15 min. The eluates, after cooling down to RT, were alkylated by incubating with 5.5 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min in the dark and then loaded onto 4-12% gradient SDS-PAGE gels. Proteins were stained using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Life Technologies) and digested in-gel using trypsin. Peptides were extracted from the gel and desalted on reversed phase C18 StageTips. Peptide fractions were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive or Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific) as described55,56. Peptide samples were loaded onto C18 reversed phase columns (15 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter, 1.9 µm bead size) and eluted with a linear gradient from 8 to 40% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid in 2-hours. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300 – 1700) were acquired in the Orbitrap. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD)57. An ion selection threshold of 5,000 was used. Peptides with unassigned charge states, as well as with charge states less than +2 were excluded from fragmentation. Fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant (development version 1.5.2.8)58. Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a database containing 98,566 human protein sequences obtained from the UniProtKB released in 04/2018 using Andromeda search engine59. Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm in MS mode, 20 ppm in HCD MS2 mode, strict trypsin specificity and allowing up to 3 miscleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were searched as variable modifications. The dataset was filtered based on posterior error probability (PEP) to arrive at a false discovery rate of below 1% estimated using a target-decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
Transcription poses a threat to genomic stability through the formation of R-loops that can obstruct progression of replication forks. R-loops are three-stranded nucleic acid structures formed by an RNA-DNA hybrid with a displaced non-template DNA strand. We developed RNA-DNA Proximity Proteomics to map the R-loop proximal proteome of human cells using quantitative mass spectrometry. We implicate different cellular proteins in R-loop regulation and identify a role of the tumor suppressor DDX41&#xa0;in opposing R-loop and double strand&#xa0;DNA break accumulation in promoters. DDX41 is enriched in promoter regions in vivo, and can unwind RNA-DNA hybrids in vitro. R-loop accumulation upon loss of DDX41 is accompanied with replication stress, an increase in the formation of double strand&#xa0;DNA breaks and transcriptome changes associated with the inflammatory response. Germline loss-of-function mutations in DDX41 lead to predisposition to acute myeloid leukemia in adulthood. We propose that R-loop accumulation and genomic instability-associated inflammatory response may contribute to the development of familial AML with mutated DDX41.

### Keywords
R-loop ddx41

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany


