### Accession
PXD004922

### Title
Matrisome remodelling during Intervertebral Disc development and ageing

### Description
Intervertebral disc (IVD) is often the cause of low back pain. Degeneration occurs with age and is accompanied by extracellular matrix (ECM) depletion, culminating in nucleus pulpous (NP) extrusion and IVD destruction.  Although the changes that occur with ageing in the IVD have been under study, not much attention has been given to ECM remodelling during normal development. Therefore, a thorough study of ECM composition and a comprehensive view on how this microenvironment is affected in normal ageing conditions is needed, to better understand the processes involved in IVD development and in age-associated degeneration.  We have compared the NP matrisome of bovine IVDs from foetus, young and old animals by quantitative iTRAQ LC-MS/MS. Protein expression levels of the most interesting candidates were validated by Western Blot analysis. In total, 161 bovine proteins were identified. Of these, 77 molecules were common to the three different age groups, of which 36 defined the NP matrisome. Differential expression levels obtained for Collagen Type XI, XII, XIV, Fibronectin and Prolargin were independently confirmed.  Herein, we demonstrate a shift in NP matrisome signatures that occurs in healthy bovine IVDs with development and ageing. Thus, this study provides insight into factors that may explain age-associated IVD degeneration, and which are putative targets for therapy. It also highlights key molecules, characteristic of early developmental stages, which constitute potential effectors in IVD regeneration.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted for 24 h at 4 ºC in a buffer containing guanidine hydrochloride 4M, Ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA) 10mM (Sigma), sodium acetate 50 mM (Merck), dithiothreitol (DTT) 10mg/mL (Sigma), phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) 1mM (Sigma) and cOmplete, Mini, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail inhibitor 20μL/mL (Sigma). After centrifugation, supernatants were precipitated in 9 volumes of ethanol for 2h at -20 ºC.  Precipitated proteins were centrifuged at 20,000xg for 20 min and ressuspended in 0.5 M of Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (Sigma) pH 8.5, vortexed and sonicated. Protein content was quantified using 2D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare). The volume corresponding to 100 μg of protein from each sample was concentrated (Concentrator Plus, Eppendorf) at 60C and resuspended in TEAB 0.5M to a final volume of 45 μL. A pool of all samples was performed in order to reach a total of 200 μg and two other pools (one of foetus and other of old samples), were constituted with 100 μg of protein in each. Pooled samples were also concentrated and adjusted to 45 μL with TEAB 0.5 M and 8 μL of the reducing agent tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) 50 mM (Sigma) were added. Samples were sonicated (Vibra Cell 750 watt, Sonics) in a cuphorn for 1 min at 20% amplitude. 4 μL of 200 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) (Sigma) were added for 10 min at room temperature. Following addition of TEAB 0.5M to a final volume of 95 µL, protein digestion was performed by adding 5 μL of trypsin (Roche) at 0.5 μg/μL. Next, samples were incubated for 16h at 37 C. After digestion, 2 μL of formic acid (FA) 100% were added and they were dried for 1 h at 60C. Samples were solubilized in 75 μL of 70% isopropanol and 30% TEAB 1M and sonicated in a cuphorn for 10 min at 20 % amplitude, with pulses of 1 sec on and 1 second off. The digested peptides were then labelled with the iTRAQ (8-plex) tags according to manufacturer´s instructions (Sciex). Two iTRAQ 8-plex batches were used where the pool of all samples was repeated in both iTRAQ batches to serve as normalization channel. The labelled samples of each batch were combined into one sample mixture.  About 650 µg of sample were solubilized in 2% ACN in 72 mM TEAB and analyzed by 2D LC-MS/MS, with a high pH reverse phase chromatography as first dimension and then analysed by LC-MS. The first dimension chromatography was performed in UltimateTM3000 LC (LC Packings, Dionex) with two online Aeris 3.6 µm XB-C18 columns (15 cm x 2.10 mm) (Phenomenex), using 72 mM TEAB pH 8.5 as mobile phase A and 72 mM TEAB in ACN pH 8.5 as mobile phase B (10 minutes with 2% mobile phase B followed by a linear gradient until 45% mobile phase B during 60 minutes, then followed by column wash and reequilibration).  Throughout the chromatographic separation, 75 fractions were collected and then joined into 18 samples, evaporated and prepared for LC-MS/MS as described above.  For the LC-MS analysis the peptides were resolved by liquid chromatography (nanoLC Ultra 2D, Eksigent) on a ChromXP™ C18AR reverse phase column (300 μm ID × 15 cm length, 3 μm particles, 120 Å pore size, Eksigent) at 5 μL/min. Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer with an ACN gradient in 0.1% FA (2% to 30% ACN, in a linear gradient for 40 min, followed by a column wash and equilibration step), using an electrospray ionization source (DuoSpray™  Source, AB Sciex).  The mass spectrometer (Triple TOF™ 5600 System; AB Sciex) was programmed for scanning full spectra (350-1250 m/z) for 250 ms, followed by up to 30 MS/MS scans (100–1500 m/z for 100 ms each). Candidate ions with a charge state between +2 and +5 and a minimum threshold of 70 counts per second were isolated for fragmentation and two MS/MS spectra were collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list for 15 seconds (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst TF 1.6, AB Sciex). Specific iTRAQ rolling collision energy was used. For the preliminary test aiming to understand if the use of chondroitinase in sample processing was advantageous, the procedure adopted was very similar to the one described above, varying only in the usage of chondroitinase and also the analysis of a fraction (“<100”) filtered with a 100kDa cut-off. The LC-MS/MS startegy for protein identification was as described above with sight modifications (for iTRAQ was not used). The chromatographic run consisted on a linear gradient from 2% to 30% ACN in 0.1% FA for 80 minutes followed by a column wash and equilibration step. The mass spectrometer was programmed for scanning full spectra (350-1250 m/z) for 250 ms, followed by up to 20 MS/MS scans (100–1500 m/z for 75 ms each). Candidate ions with a charge state between +2 and +5 and a minimum threshold of 70 counts per second were isolated for fragmentation and one MS/MS spectra were collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list for 15 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Following LC-MS analysis, the peptide and protein identification and protein relative quantification was performed with ProteinPilot™ software (v4.5, AB Sciex). The search parameters used were the following: SwissProt database (release 2012_06), against Bos Taurus or all species, using MMTS alkylated cysteines and iTRAQ labelled peptides as fixed modifications. An independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis using the target-decoy approach provided with ProteinPilot software was used to assess the quality of the identifications and positive identifications were considered when identified proteins reached a 5% local FDR with at least one peptide that reached a 5% local FDR. Preliminary tests - Following LC-MS analysis, the peptide and protein identification and protein relative quantification was performed with ProteinPilot™ software (v4.5, AB Sciex). The search parameters used were the following: SwissProt database (release 2012_06), against Bos Taurus, using MMTS alkylated cysteines as fixed modifications. An independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis using the target-decoy approach provided with ProteinPilot software was used to assess the quality of the identifications and positive identifications were considered when identified proteins reached a 1% global FDR with at least one peptide that reached a 5% local FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Intervertebral disc (IVD) degeneration is often the cause of low back pain. Degeneration occurs with age and is accompanied by extracellular matrix (ECM) depletion, culminating in nucleus pulpous (NP) extrusion and IVD destruction. The changes that occur in the disc with age have been under investigation. However, a thorough study of ECM profiling is needed, to better understand IVD development and age-associated degeneration. As so, iTRAQ LC-MS/MS analysis of foetus, young and old bovine NPs, was performed to define the NP matrisome. The enrichment of Collagen XII and XIV in foetus, Fibronectin and Prolargin in elder NPs and Collagen XI in young ones was independently validated. This study provides the first matrisome database of healthy discs during development and ageing, which is key to determine the pathways and processes that maintain disc homeostasis. The factors identified may help to explain age-associated IVD degeneration or constitute putative effectors for disc regeneration.

### Keywords
Intervertebral disc (ivd); extracellular matrix (ecm); nucleus pulpous (np); itraq

### Affiliations
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology

### Submitter
Cátia Santa

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Manadas
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology


