### Accession
PXD009549

### Title
Comprehensive biochemical characterization of Mycobacterium tuberculosis clonal strains after isoniazid resistance

### Description
This project describes the isoniazid (INH) resistance acquisition event in Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) from the proteomics perspective. In this way, an exploration of the protein differences, comparing clonal INH susceptible (INHs) and INHr pairs of Mtb were evaluated. One clonal clinical and one clonal laboratory-derived Mtb pair with different susceptibility profiles to INH were studied. The laboratory INHr strain had one katG mutation (V1A), while the clinical INHr strain had two (V1A and E3V). Large-scale bacterial cultures were grown in triplicate to obtain secreted proteins as well as proteins from cell fractions. The resulting peptide solutions from all fractions were analyzed using liquid-chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). LC-MS/MS spectra were compared against an Mtb database to determine the protein abundance. Protein abundance differences were tested by Student’s t test. Looking at the same cellular fractions, there were 25 commonly altered Mtb proteins after acquiring INH resistance. These proteins were involved in ATP synthase machinery, lipid metabolism, regulatory events, virulence, detoxification and adaptation processes.

### Sample Protocol
Mtb strains were cultured in triplicate in a final volume of 1L of Glycerol Alanine Salts (GAS) media and incubated at 37oC in constant agitation. The preparation of Culture Filtrate Proteins (CFP) and cellular fractions were performed as previously described by Lucas et al, using differential ultracentrifugation cycles. Before the digestion of proteins, the cell wall fraction was delipidated following the protocol described by Bisson et al. This protocol uses lysozyme, incubation with the organic solvents chloroform/methanol (2:1, v/v), chloroform/methanol/water (10:10:3) and a final protein precipitation with acetone at -20oC. All the resulting proteins were resuspended in 10mM ammonium bicarbonate. Total protein concentration of all cellular fractions and CFPs was measured using the bicinchoninic acid method (Thermo Scientific™Pierce™BCA Protein Assay BCA). 30 µg of total protein were used for in-solution digestion of proteins, following the sequential steps of acetone precipitation, denaturation (with urea), reduction (with dithiothreitol), alkylation (with idoacetamide), trypsin digestion (using a mix of trypsin and ProteaseMaxTM Surfactant) and a final desalting step. One microliter (0.5 µg) of digested peptides from cellular fractions and CFPs were purified and concentrated using an on-line enrichment column (EASY-Column, 100 µm ID × 2 cm ReproSil-Pur C18). Subsequent chromatographic separation was performed on a reverse phase nanospray column (EASY-Column, 3 µm, 75 µm ID × 100mm ReproSil-Pur C18) using a 90 minute linear gradient from 5%-45% buffer B (100% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 400 nanoliters/min. Peptides were eluted directly into the mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Velos). The instrument was operated in Orbitrap-LTQ mode where precursor measurements were acquired in the Orbitrap (60,000 resolution) and the tandem MS/MS spectra (top 20) were acquired in the LTQ ion trap with a normalized collision energy of 35%.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra raw data were converted to mzXML files using ProteoWizard. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version 1.0). Sequest was set up to search the MtbReverse041712 database (7992 entries) assuming trypsin as the digestion enzyme with up to two missed cleavage sites. Sequest was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.00 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 20 PPM. Oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethyl of cysteine were specified in Sequest as variable modifications. CRITERIA FOR PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION- Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.5.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins were annotated with GO terms from NCBI (downloaded Feb 18, 2016).

### Publication Abstract
Tuberculosis (TB) continues to be an important public health threat worldwide, due in part to drug resistant <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> (<i>Mtb</i>) strains. The United States recently reported a shortage of isoniazid (INH), which could drive higher INH resistance rates. Changes in the <i>Mtb</i> proteome before and after acquisition of INH resistance in a clean genetic background remain understudied and may elucidate alternate drug targets. Here, we focused on <i>Mtb</i> clonal strains to characterize the consequences of INH resistance on mycobacterial metabolism. Proteomic analysis was conducted by liquid-chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) of cellular and secreted fractions, followed by a normalized spectral counting (NSAF) analysis (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009549). Two different <i>Mtb</i> clonal pairs representing a specific genetic lineage (one clinical and one generated in the laboratory) but sharing a <i>katG</i> mutation associated with INH resistance, were used in our analysis. Overall, we found 26 <i>Mtb</i> proteins with altered abundances after acquisition of INH resistance across both <i>Mtb</i> genetic lineages studied. These proteins were involved in ATP synthesis, lipid metabolism, regulatory events, and virulence, detoxification, and adaptation processes. Proteomic findings were validated by Western blotting analyses whenever possible. Mycolic acid (MA) analysis through LC/MS in the clonal <i>Mtb</i> pairs did not reveal a common trend in the alteration of these fatty acids across both INHr strains but revealed a significant reduction in levels of the two more abundant &#x3b1;-MA features in the clinical INHr strain. Interestingly, the clinical clonal pair demonstrated more variation in the abundance of the proteins involved in the FAS II pathway. Together, the proteomic and lipidomic data highlight the identification of potential drug targets such as alternative lipid biosynthetic pathways that may be exploited to combat clinically relevant <i>Mtb</i> INHr strains.

### Keywords
Isoniazid resistance, Mycobacterium tuberculosis

### Affiliations
Director, Research Integrity and Compliance Review Office (http://ricro.colostate.edu/) Associate Professor, Mycobacteria Research Laboratories Dept of Microbiology, Immunology,& Pathology (http://www.cvmbs.colostate.edu/DirectorySearch/Search/MemberProfile/CVMBS/3607) Colorado State University Ft. Collins, CO 80523, USA
Colorado State University

### Submitter
Carolina Mehaffy

### Lab Head
Dr Karen M Dobos
Director, Research Integrity and Compliance Review Office (http://ricro.colostate.edu/) Associate Professor, Mycobacteria Research Laboratories Dept of Microbiology, Immunology,& Pathology (http://www.cvmbs.colostate.edu/DirectorySearch/Search/MemberProfile/CVMBS/3607) Colorado State University Ft. Collins, CO 80523, USA


