### Accession
PXD001099

### Title
Piezo1 integration of vascular architecture with physiological force LC-MSMS

### Description
The mechanisms by which physical forces regulate cells to determine complexities of vascular structure and function are enigmatic. Here we show the role the ion channel subunit Piezo1 (FAM38A). Disruption of mouse Piezo1 gene disturbed vascular development and was embryonic lethal within days of the heart beating to cause blood flow. Importance of Piezo channels as sensors of blood flow was indicated by Piezo1 dependence of shear stress-evoked ionic current and calcium influx in endothelial cells and the ability of exogenous Piezo1 to confer shear stress sensitivity on cells that otherwise lacked. Downstream of this calcium influx was proteoase activity and spatial organization of endothelial cells to the polarity of the applied force. Without Piezo1, normal endothelial cell organization was lacking. The data suggest Piezo1 channels as pivotal integrators of vascular architacture with physiological mechanical force.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed by a modified Filter-Aided Sample Preparation method. Peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoflow LC system coupled to a linear ion trap Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer via a nanoelectrospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed using Progenesis LC-MS software

### Publication Abstract
The mechanisms by which physical forces regulate endothelial cells to determine the complexities of vascular structure and function are enigmatic. Studies of sensory neurons have suggested Piezo proteins as subunits of Ca(2+)-permeable non-selective cationic channels for detection of noxious mechanical impact. Here we show Piezo1 (Fam38a) channels as sensors of frictional force (shear stress) and determinants of vascular structure in both development and adult physiology. Global or endothelial-specific disruption of mouse Piezo1 profoundly disturbed the developing vasculature and was embryonic lethal within days of the heart beating. Haploinsufficiency was not lethal but endothelial abnormality was detected in mature vessels. The importance of Piezo1 channels as sensors of blood flow was shown by Piezo1 dependence of shear-stress-evoked ionic current and calcium influx in endothelial cells and the ability of exogenous Piezo1 to confer sensitivity to shear stress on otherwise resistant cells. Downstream of this calcium influx there was protease activation and spatial reorganization of endothelial cells to the polarity of the applied force. The data suggest that Piezo1 channels function as pivotal integrators in vascular biology.

### Keywords
Human, Mouse, Phosphoproteomics, Shear stress, Vascular architecture, Huvec, Piezo1, Label-free

### Affiliations
University of Leeds
School of Medicine and Multidisciplinary Cardiovascular Research Centre University of Leeds United Kingdom

### Submitter
David Beech

### Lab Head
Dr David J. Beech
School of Medicine and Multidisciplinary Cardiovascular Research Centre University of Leeds United Kingdom


