### Accession
PXD021138

### Title
Cdk5 and GSK3β inhibit fast endophilin-mediated endocytosis

### Description
Endocytosis mediates the cellular uptake of micronutrients and cell surface proteins. Parallel to Clathrin-mediated endocytosis, additional Clathrin-independent endocytic routes exist, including fast Endophilin-mediated endocytosis (FEME). The latter is not constitutively active but requires the activation of selected receptors. In cell culture, however, the high levels of growth factors in the regular culture media induce spontaneous FEME, which can be suppressed upon serum starvation. Thus, we predicted a role for protein kinases in this growth factor receptor-mediated regulation of the pathway. Using chemical and genetic inhibition, we found that Cdk5 and GSK3β are negative regulators of FEME. Their inhibition was sufficient to activate FEME promptly in resting cells and boosted the production of endocytic carriers containing β 1-adrenergic receptor, following dobutamine addition. We established that the kinases suppress FEME at several levels. They control Dynamin-1 and Dynein recruitment and sorting of cargo receptors such as Plexin A1 and ROBO1 into FEME carriers. They do so by antagonizing the binding of Endophilin to Dynamin-1 as well as to Collapsin response mediator protein 4 (CRMP4), a Plexin A1 adaptor. Cdk5 and GSK3β also hamper the binding and recruitment of Dynein onto FEME carriers by Bin1. Interestingly, we found that GSK3β binds to Endophilin, thus imposing a local regulation of FEME. Collectively, these findings place the two kinases as key regulators of FEME, licensing cells for rapid uptake by the pathway only upon when Cdk5 and GSK3β activity is low.

### Sample Protocol
Endophilin A2 immunoprecipitates from Stimulated or Non-stimulated extracts were boiled in SDS sample buffer and prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using in-gel digestion (10 fractions/sample). Peptides were separated by LC-MS (60min gradient) and analysed by nanoESI-HDMSE using a Waters Synapt G2-Si instrument.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analysed using Progenesis v4.0 (Waters, UK) using a Human UniProt FASTA database to match ions to peptides and proteins. Samples were normalised to Endophilin peptide abundance and fractions were combined in-silico in Progenesis to obtain absolute protein abundances for differential expression analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Endocytosis mediates the cellular uptake of micronutrients and cell surface proteins. Fast Endophilin-mediated endocytosis, FEME, is not constitutively active but triggered upon receptor activation. High levels of growth factors induce spontaneous FEME, which can be suppressed upon serum starvation. This suggested a role for protein kinases in this growth factor receptor-mediated regulation. Using chemical and genetic inhibition, we find that Cdk5 and GSK3&#x3b2; are negative regulators of FEME. They antagonize the binding of Endophilin to Dynamin-1 and to CRMP4, a Plexin A1 adaptor. This control is required for proper axon elongation, branching and growth cone formation in hippocampal neurons. The kinases also block the recruitment of Dynein onto FEME carriers by Bin1. As GSK3&#x3b2; binds to Endophilin, it imposes a local regulation of FEME. Thus, Cdk5 and GSK3&#x3b2; are key regulators of FEME, licensing cells for rapid uptake by the pathway only when their activity is low.

### Keywords
Lc-ms

### Affiliations
University College London ISMB
UCL

### Submitter
Juliette James

### Lab Head
Dr Emmanuel Boucrot
University College London ISMB


