### Accession
PXD029480

### Title
Site-specific protein modification by 3-n-butylphthalide in primary hepatocytes: covalent protein adducts diminished by glutathione and N-acetylcysteine

### Description
The toxicity of NBP and its four major metabolites were compared in both PHHs and PRHs, and 3-OH-NBP was found to be the most toxic metabolite. 3-OH-NBP induced remarkable cell death and oxidative stresses in hepatocytes, which correlated well with the levels of glutathione and N-acetylcysteine adducts (3-GSH-NBP and 3-NAC-NBP) in cell supernatants. Additionally, 3-OH-NBP covalently conjugated with intracellular Cys, Lys and Ser, with preferable binding to Cys sites at Myh9 Cys1380, Prdx4 Cys53, Vdac2 Cys48 and Vdac3 Cys36. Furthermore, we found that CYP3A4 induction by rifampicin augmented NBP-induced cell toxicity and supplementing with GSH or NAC alleviated the oxidative stresses and reactive metabolites caused by 3-OH-NBP.

### Sample Protocol
Hepatocytes cultured in 24-well plates were detached by 500 µL TRIzol reagent (Life Technology, 9 CA, USA) for the collection of total RNA. The collected RNA was purified by EZ-10 spin columns and 10 collection tubes (Sangon Biotech, Shanghai, China). Then, the RNA was diluted with DEPC water and reverse transcribed into cDNA with 5× PrimeScriptTM RT Master Mix (Takara, Shiga, Japan). Quantitative real-time PCR was performed by mixing template cDNA, forward and reverse primers, and Hieff® qPCR SYBR Green Master Mix (Low Rox Plus) (Yeasen Biotech, Shanghai, China). Primers for the target genes and the internal reference gene (GAPDH) are shown in Table S1.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw data were processed using Mascot 2.3 the identification of the proteins was performed using reviewed rat database (UniProt release 2020_09, 8,106 entries), The search was set at the following criteria: trypsin/P was chosen as the digestive enzyme, and 2 maximum missing cleavages were allowed for each peptide. The compound conjugation on Cys, Lys and Ser (+188.0837 Da) was designated as a variable modification. FDR thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were set as 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
3-n-butylphthalide; hepatotoxicity; oxidative stresses; covalent protein modification; drug-drug interaction

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica

### Submitter
He Huang

### Lab Head
Dr He Huang
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica


