### Accession
PXD001471

### Title
Proteomic analysis of cellular soluble proteins from human bronchial smooth muscle cells by combining nondenaturing micro 2DE and quantitative LC-MS/MS: Preparation of more than 4000 native protein maps

### Description
Soluble proteins of human bronchial smooth muscle cells (HBSMC) were separated by nondenaturing micro 2DE and a 30 mm X 40 mm area of the CBB-stained slab gel (1.0 mm thick) was cut into 1.1 mm X 1.1 mm squares, then the proteins in the 972 gel pieces (squares) were applied to quantitative LC-MS/MS.  Grid-cutting of the gel was employed to; (i) ensure the total analysis of the proteins in the area, (ii) standardize the conditions of analysis by LC-MS/MS, (iii) reconstruct the protein distribution patterns from the quantity data [Jin, et al. Electrophoresis 2014, 35, 2055-2064, PRIDE Project PXD000852].  Totally 4323 proteins were identified in successfully analyzed 967 squares and the quantity distribution of each was reconstructed as a color density pattern (a native protein map).  The quantity of the proteins distributed from 3.6 % to 1 X 10-5 % of the total protein quantity in the grid area.  Each protein map was characterized by many features, such as the position of quantity peak square, number of detected squares, degree of concentration (focused or dispersed), etc.  About 4 percent of the proteins were detected in 100 or more squares, suggesting that they might be ubiquitous and interacting with other proteins.  In contrast, many proteins showed more concentrated quantity distribution and the quantity peak positions of 565 proteins with defined degree of concentration were summarized into a quantity peak map.  These results for the first time visualized the distribution patterns of cellular proteins on a nondenaturing 2DE gel, which would further provide information on their interactions.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and protein sample preparation: Human bronchial smooth muscle cells (HBSMC) (Cat. No. 3400, ScienCell Research Laboratories, Carlsbad, CA) were cultured in the SMCM medium (P1-P4) and then in a DMEM F-12 medium supplemented with 10% v/v FBS, 100 units/mL penicillin and 100 µg/mL streptomycin (P5-P7) and maintained at 37ºC in humidified air containing 5% v/v CO2.  Subculturing was conducted when the confluence reached to about 80-90% (about two days), with a split ratio of 1:3 (P1-P4) and 1:5 (P5-P7).  Protein extraction was performed as follows.  The P7 cells (grown to about 90% confluence) were washed with DPBS once and detached by trypsinization.  Centrifugation at 156 X g for 5 min, the cell pellet was washed with ice-cold DPBS for three times and ice-cold GTE buffer (50 mM glucose, 25 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM EDTA, pH 7.4) for twice, and then added with a solution of 4 mM EDTA-2 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)-24% w/v glycerol (approximately equal volume of the cell pellet).  The cells were resuspended by gentle stirring with a thin glass rod and immediately subjected to sonication using a cell disruption sonicator equipped with a 3-mm diameter titanium tip (VCX-130 Sonics & Materials, Inc., Newtown, CT, USA).  Keeping the sample tube soaked in ice-water, the cells were sonicated for totally 60 sec: 10 sec each with 20 sec intervals for cooling (totally 6 rounds).  Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 4C for 10 min at 15,000 X g.  The supernatant was collected and stored at -80C in small aliquots.  The protein concentration of the supernatant was estimated to be 15.4 ug/uL using a UV-2600 UV-VIS spectrophotometer (PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA, USA).      Nondenaturing micro 2DE:  An aliquot of the sample solution (HBSMC supernatant fraction) was centrifuged just before 2DE at 4C for 10 min at 15,000 X g.  Nondenaturing micro 2DE was run as previously described [Manabe, et al. Electrophoresis, 2010, 31, 2740-2748], with a loading quantity of two hundred micrograms per gel.  The estimation of apparent pI and apparent masses of HBSMC proteins on the nondenaturing 2DE gel was done using the results of co-electrophoresis of HBSMC soluble proteins, human plasma proteins, and calibration protein markers.       Grid gel-cutting: A 30 mm X 40 mm area of a CBB-stained micro 2DE gel (1.0 mm thick) was cut into 1.1 mm X 1.1 mm squares providing 27 X 36 gel pieces (972 squares) as shown in the gel pattern.  The grid gel-cutting was performed using a laboratory-made device.  The gel squares were stored in 7% v/v acetic acid at 4C until further treatment (within 2.5 months).   In-gel digestion: The gel pieces were subjected to the procedures of destaining, reduction, alkylation and in-gel trypsin digestion, as described in detail in [Manabe, et al. Electrophoresis, 2007, 28, 843-863].  The extracted peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted with a 10 uL-aliquot of 1% v/v formic acid-2% v/v acetonitrile.    Nano-UPLC:  Prior to nano-UPLC-HDMSE analysis, each tryptic peptide sample (10 µL) was added a 2 µL-aliquot of the Enolase Digest Standard (240 fmol/µL) prepared in 1% v/v formic acid-2% v/v acetonitrile.  Nano-LC separation of the peptides was performed with a nanoACQUITY system (Waters) equipped with a Symmetry 5 µm C18, 180 µm X 20 mm trap column and a UPLC 1.7 µm BEH130 C18, 75 µm X 100 mm analytical reverse phase column (both Waters).  Mobile phase A was 0.1% v/v formic acid in water whilst mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile.  Each sample, 5 µL full loop injection, was initially transferred with 0.5% mobile phase B (99.5% mobile phase A), i.e. 0.1% v/v formic acid in 0.5% v/v acetonitrile, to the trap column at a flow rate of 5 µL/min for 3 min.  The peptides were then eluted from the trap column to the analytical column and separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a gradient as follows: 2% B for 2 min, ramp to 50% B over 18 min, ramp to 85% B over 1 min, hold at 85% B for 5 min, then ramp to 2% B over 1 min.  The column temperature was maintained at 35 ºC.  The lock mass compound, leucine enkephalin (m/z 556.2771) (2 ng/uL) or [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B (m/z 785.8427) (100 fmol/uL), was delivered at 0.05 µL/min to the reference sprayer of the NanoLockSpray source of MS via the sample pump of the MS apparatus.    Mass spectrometry: On-line MS measurement of the nano-UPLC-separated tryptic peptides was performed using a hybrid mass spectrometer coupling ion mobility separation (IMS) with Q-TOF analyzer (Synapt G2-S HDMS, Waters) and equipped with a nano-ESI source.  LC-MS/MS data were collected in resolution, positive and HDMSE mode, i.e. ion mobility separation-enhanced MS/MS in data-independent acquisition mode, using settings which have been optimized based on the manufacturer recommendations.  Data were recorded alternating 0.8 s scans at low and elevated energy over a m/z 50-2000 range.  The lock mass channel was sampled every 60 sec.

### Data Protocol
Data processing, protein identification and quantitation: The nano-LC-HDMSE data were processed with ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS) ver. 2.5.2 (Waters).  Data were lock mass calibrated post acquisition.  Peak processing parameters were the low energy threshold 20 counts, high energy threshold 10 counts and intensity threshold 500 counts.  Database searching were performed using the following parameters: database, UniProtKB homo sapiens complete proteome dataset (canonical sequences only, 20251 entries, 2013-05-29); peptide and fragment tolerance, both automatic (typically <10 ppm and <20 ppm, respectively [Li, et al. Proteomics, 2009, 9, 1696-1719]); maximum of missed trypsin cleavage, 1; maximum protein mass, 600 kDa; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation at Cys; variable modifications, oxidation at Met; false positive rate (protein level), 4%.  The criteria of protein identification were set as; at least two peptide matches per protein, at least three fragment ion matches per peptide, at least seven fragment ion matches per protein, and protein score above 100.  Protein quantities were calculated by PLGS referring to the quantity of the internal standard (tryptic peptides of ENO1_YEAST).  Calculated masses of the proteins assigned by nano-LC-HDMSE were calculated using a laboratory-made Visual Basic program after searching the information of each protein in Protein Knowledgebase (UniProtKB) and getting the protein chain sequence (without signal peptide and propeptide).

### Publication Abstract
Human bronchial smooth muscle cell soluble proteins were analyzed by a combined method of nondenaturing micro 2DE, grid gel-cutting, and quantitative LC-MS/MS and a native protein map was prepared for each of the identified 4323 proteins [1]. A method to evaluate the degree of similarity between the protein maps was developed since we expected the proteins comprising a protein complex would be separated together under nondenaturing conditions. The following procedure was employed using Excel macros; (i) maps that have three or more squares with protein quantity data were selected (2328 maps), (ii) within each map, the quantity values of the squares were normalized setting the highest value to be 1.0, (iii) in comparing a map with another map, the smaller normalized quantity in two corresponding squares was taken and summed throughout the map to give an "overlap score," (iv) each map was compared against all the 2328 maps and the largest overlap score, obtained when a map was compared with itself, was set to be 1.0 thus providing 2328 "overlap factors," (v) step (iv) was repeated for all maps providing 2328 &#xd7; 2328 matrix of overlap factors. From the matrix, protein pairs that showed overlap factors above 0.65 from both protein sides were selected (431 protein pairs). Each protein pair was searched in a database (UniProtKB) on complex formation and 301 protein pairs, which comprise 35 protein complexes, were found to be documented. These results demonstrated that native protein maps and their similarity search would enable simultaneous analysis of multiple protein complexes in cells.

### Keywords
Cellular proteins, Lc-ms/ms, Native protein map, Nondenaturing micro 2de, Quantitative protein-protein interaction

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guangdong University of Technology
School of Bioscience and Bioengineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510006, P. R. China

### Submitter
Ya Jin

### Lab Head
Dr Ya Jin
School of Bioscience and Bioengineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510006, P. R. China


