### Accession
PXD021564

### Title
Protein and Signaling Pathway Responses to rhIL-6 Intervention before Lobaplatin Treatment in Osteosarcoma Cells using LC-MS/MS

### Description
Lobaplatin is a third-generation platinum-based antineoplastic agent and is widely used for osteosarcoma treatment before and after tumor removal. However, treatment failure often results from lobaplatin drug resistance. In our study, we found that SaOS-2 and SOSP-9607 osteosarcoma cells became less sensitive to lobaplatin after treatment with exogenous interleukin (IL)-6. Quantitative proteomic analysis was performed to elucidate the underlying mechanism in SaOS-2 osteosarcoma cells. Cells were divided into a control group (CG), a lobaplatin treatment group (LG) and a recombinant human IL-6 (rhIL-6) and lobaplatin group (rhILG). We performed three biological replicates in each group to compare the differential protein expression between groups using tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling technology based on liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). A total of 1,313 proteins with significantly differential expression were identified and quantified. The general characterizations of significantly enriched proteins were identified by Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analyses, and protein-protein interaction (PPI) analysis was conducted using IntAct and STRING. In total, 31 proteins were further verified by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM), in which Ras GTPase-activating protein-binding protein 1 (G3BP1), fragile X mental retardation syndrome-related protein 1 (hFXR1p) and far upstream element-binding protein 1 (FUBP1) were significantly differentially expressed. Immunohistochemistry results showed that these three proteins are highly expressed in specimens of platinum-resistant osteosarcoma patients, while the proteins are negatively or weakly expressed in specimens of platinum-sensitive osteosarcoma patients. The results of immunofluorescence staining were in accordance with those of immunohistochemistry staining. This is the first proteomic study on rhIL-6 intervention before lobaplatin treatment in osteosarcoma cells.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation SDT buffer was added to the sample. The lysate was sonicated (this step can be skipped for protein solution) and then boiled for 15 min. After centrifuged at 14000g for 40 min, the supernatant was quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (P0012, Beyotime). The sample was stored at -80 °C. SDS-PAGE Separation 20 µg of proteins for each sample were mixed with 5X loading buffer respectively and boiled for 5 min. The proteins were separated on 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel. Protein bands were visualized by Coomassie Blue R-250 staining. Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP Digestion)[3] 200 μg of proteins for each sample were incorporated into 30 μl SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0). The detergent, DTT and other low-molecular-weight components were removed using UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) by repeated ultrafiltration (Sartorius, 30 kD). Then 100 μl iodoacetamide (100 mM IAA in UA buffer) was added to block reduced cysteine residues and the samples were incubated for 30 min in darkness. The filters were washed with 100 μl UA buffer three times and then 100 μl 0.1M TEAB buffer twice. Finally, the protein suspensions were digested with 4 μg trypsin (Promega) in 40 μl 0.1M TEAB buffer overnight at 37 °C, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. The peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm using an extinctions coefficient of 1.1 of 0.1% (g/l) solution that was calculated on the basis of the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins. TMT Labeling 100 μg peptide mixture of each sample was labeled using TMT reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide Fractionation with reversed phase (RP) Chromatography TMT labeled peptides were fractionated by RP chromatography using the Agilent 1260 infinity II HPLC. The peptide mixture was diluted with buffer A (10mM HCOONH4, 5% ACN, pH 10.0) and loaded onto a XBridge Peptide BEH C18 Column, 130Å, 5 µm, 4.6 mm X 100 mm column. The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 ml/min with a gradient of 0%–7% buffer B (10mM HCOONH4, 85% ACN, pH 10.0) for 5 min, 7–40% buffer B during 5-40 min, 40%–100% buffer B during 45-50 min, 100% buffer B during 50-65 min. The elution was monitored by absorbance at 214 nm, and fractions were collected every 1 min during 5-50min. The collected fractions were dried down via vacuum centrifugation at 45 °C. Mass Spectrometry analysis Easy nLC Each fraction was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture was loaded onto the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific，Acclaim PepMap RSLC 50um X 15cm, nano viper,P/N164943) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The linear gradient was determined by the project proposal: 1.5 hours gradient：6% buffer B for 5 min, 6-28% buffer B for 63 min, 28-38% buffer B for 10 min,38-100% buffer B for 7 min , hold in 100% buffer B for 5 min. LC-MS/MS Analysis LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 90/120 min (determined by project proposal). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (350–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 45 ms. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis 1. MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 2.1. The following parameters were set. Proteins which Fold change>1.2 and p value (Student’s t test) were considered to be a differentially expressed proteins. Item Value  Protein Database  See the project report  Enzyme  Trypsin  Max Missed Cleavages  2  Instrument  ESI-TRAP  Precursor Mass Tolerance  ±20 ppm  Fragment Mass Tolerance  0.1Da  Use Average Precursor Mass  False  Modification Groups From Quan  Method  TMT 6plex  Dynamic modifications  Oxidation(M),Acetyl(Protein N-term),  Deamidated(NQ)  Static  modifications  Carbamidomethyl (C),  Database pattern  decoy  Peptide FDR  ≤0.01 2. Gene Ontology (GO) Annotation At first, all protein sequences were aligned to Homo sapiens(see project report) database downloaded from NCBI (ncbi-blast-2.2.28+-win32.exe), only the sequences in top 10 and E-value<=1e-3 were kept. Secondly, select the GO term (database version: go_201504.obo) of the sequence with top Bit-Score by Blast2GO. Then, completed the annotation from GO terms to proteins by Blast2GO Command Line. After the elementary annotation, InterProScan were used to search EBI database by motif and then add the functional information of motif to proteins to improve annotation. Then further improvement of annotation and connection between GO terms were carried out by ANNEX. Fisher’s Exact Test were used to enrich GO terms by comparing the number of differentialy expressed proteins and total proteins correlated to GO terms 3. KEGG Pathway Annotation Pathway analysis was performed using KEGG database. Fisher’s Exact Test were used to indentify the significantly enriched pathways by comparing the number of differentialy expressed proteins and total proteins correlated to pathways.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lobaplatin, Osteosarcoma, Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, Rhil-6

### Affiliations
Orthopedic Oncology Institute, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University
Orthoped OncoloOrthopedic Oncology Institute, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical UniversityInstitute, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Tangdu HospitalOrthopec

### Submitter
Qiong Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Qiong Ma
Orthoped OncoloOrthopedic Oncology Institute, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical UniversityInstitute, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Tangdu HospitalOrthopec


