### Accession
PXD021268

### Title
CSF levels of Elongation Factor Tu is associated with increased mortality in human Streptococcus pneumoniae meningitis

### Description
Background Mortality from bacterial meningitis, predominately caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae, exceeds 50% in low and middle income countries in sub-Saharan Africa with high HIV prevalence. Underlying causes of high mortality are poorly understood.  We examined the host and pathogen proteome in adults with proven pneumococcal meningitis (PM), testing if differentially expressed proteins in CSF were implicated in outcome. Materials/methods CSF proteomes were analysed by quantitative Mass-Spectrometry. Spectra were identified using the Swissprot human and TIGR4 pneumococcal protein libraries. Proteins were quantitated and analysed against clinical outcome. Unique proteins in PM were identified against published normal CSF proteome. Random-Forest models were used to test for protein signatures discriminating outcome. Proteins of interest were tested for their effects on growth and opsonophagocytic killing of S. pneumoniae.  Results CSF proteomes were available for 57 Adults with PM (median age 32 years, 60% male, 70% HIV-1 co-infected, mortality 63%). 360 individual human and 23 pneumococcal proteins were identified. Of the human protein hits, 30% were not expressed in normal CSF, and these were strongly associated with inflammation and primarily related to neutrophil activity. No human protein signature predicted outcome. However, expression of the essential S. pneumoniae protein Elongation Factor Tu (EF-Tu) was significantly increased in CSF of non-survivors (False Discovery Rate (q) <0.001). Expression of EF-Tu was negatively co-correlated against expression of Neutrophil defensin (r 0.4 p p<0.002), but not against complement proteins C3 or Factor H. In vitro, addition of EF-Tu protein impaired S. pneumoniae neutrophil killing when osponised with CSF. Conclusions  Excessive CSF levels of S. pneumoniae EF-Tu protein was associated with reduced survival in human meningitis. Preliminary studies show EF-Tu inhibits neutrophil mediated killing of S. pneumoniae in CSF. Further functional studies are required to better understand the mechanistic role of EF-Tu during PM.

### Sample Protocol
Patients CSF was obtained for proteomics from adults and adolescents on admission to hospital with suspected bacterial meningitis at Queen Elizabeth Central Hospital in Blantyre, Malawi between 2011-20137. All CSF samples were collected prior to administration of parenteral ceftriaxone 2g BD for 108,9. Clinical data were recorded on admission to hospital, clinical outcome data reported at six weeks post-discharge7.  Procedures Routine CSF microscopy, cell count, and CSF culture was done at the Malawi-Liverpool-Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Programme laboratory in Blantyre, Malawi as previously described7. Culture negatives samples were screened using the multiplex real-time polymerase chain reaction for S. pneumoniae, N. meningitidis and Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) kit from Fast-Track Diagnostics (FTD Luxemburg) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, bacterial loads were estimated from Ct values. We collected 2.0 ml of CSF for proteomics, stored within 4 hours of LP at -80 degrees Celsius. In-hospital HIV testing was done on all patients by the clinical teams using point-of care Genie™ HIV1&2 test kits (BioRad, USA).   CSF protein extraction and Mass-Spectrometry  Protein concentration in all CSF samples was measured by nanodrop (Thermo Scientific, UK) and normalised to 200 ug/ml. Samples were centrifuged at 13000g and the pellet stored at -80 °C until peptide extraction.  Proteins were treated with the surfactant 0.1% (v/v) RapiGest™ (Waters) at 80 °C for 10 minutes followed by reduction with diothiothreitol (DTT) at a final concentration of 3 mM (60°C for 10 min) and alkylation with iodoacetamide (IAA) at a final concentration of 50 mM (room temp, in the dark, 1 h). The enzyme trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) was added at an enzyme: substrate ratio of 1:50 and incubated overnight with agitation at 37 °C.  The surfactant was inactivated the following day by treatment with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (37 °C for 1 h) and peptides were recovered following centrifugation at 13,0000 g.     Resultant CSF peptides were separated by RPLC using a DIONEX UltiMate™ 3000LC chromatography system and MSMS analysis performed on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos using Xcalibur software v2.1 (both Thermo Scientific, UK).  Peptides (10 µl = ~500 ng) were injected onto the analytical column (Dionex Acclaim® PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm i.d. x 15 cm, nanoViper.), which was maintained at 35°C and at a nanoflow rate of 0.3 µlmin-1.  Peptides were separated over linear chromatographic gradients composed of buffer A (2.5 % ACN: 0.1% FA) and buffer B (90% ACN: 0.1 % FA).  Two gradients, 60 (3-50 % buffer B in 40 min) and 180 minutes (3-60 % buffer B in 140 min), were employed for analysis.  Full scan MS spectra were acquired over the m/z range of 350-2000 in positive polarity mode by the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000.  A data-dependent Top20 collision induced dissociation (CID) data acquisition method was used.  The ion-trap operated with CID MSMS on the 20 most intense ions (above the minimum MS signal threshold of 500 counts).

### Data Protocol
All MSMS data generated were searched against a SWISSPROT database with S. pneumoniae taxonomy TIGR4 strain, using the search engine MASCOT (Matrix Science) and Proteome Discoverer (v1.2) software.  Search parameters included a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance 0.8 Da with one tryptic missed cleavage permitted.  Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a static modification with oxidation of methionine (M) and deamidation (N,Q) set as dynamic modifications.    A decoy database was searched and relaxed peptide confidence filters applied to the dataset (ion scores p < 0.05 / FDR 5%).  MASCOT results data were manually validated. Single peptides were considered hits when more than 3 consecutive product ions were observed. Systemic biases detected in the data were corrected using XX. Peptide abundance was estimated from the peptide peak volume using Progenesis software version 2 (Waters, USA), reported in arbitrary units. Peptide and protein abundance were analysed against outcome using principal component analysis and Random Forest learning model to test for a protein signature associated with outcome. A false discovery rate(FDR) q<0.05 determined statistical significance for individual peptide/protein associations with outcome. Pathways analysis of proteins was done using Innate DB.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hiv, Mortality, Proteomics, Cerebrospinal fluid, Streptococcus pneumoniae

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
University College London | UCL · Division of Infection and Immunity

### Submitter
Philip Brownridge

### Lab Head
Dr Emma Wall
University College London | UCL · Division of Infection and Immunity


