### Accession
PXD006895

### Title
SubCellBarcode: Scalable proteome-wide mapping of protein localization and relocalization

### Description
We have devised a simple and robust LC-MS/MS compatible protocol for subcellular protein localization studies. Here, we combine it with in depth proteome profiling and utilize the resulting dataset to predict the subcellular localization of more than 12000 proteins in 5 human cancer cell lines. The data allows for exploration of both cell line specific and perturbation related protein localization changes as well as domain and splice variant effects and protein complex formation. The data is made accessible through the online resource www.subcellbarcode.org.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture All cell lines were cultivated at 37°C in a 5% CO2 humidified environment in the following growth media: Roswell Park Memorial Institute-1640 medium (NCI-H322 and HCC827; Sigma-Aldrich); Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (A431 and MCF7; Sigma-Aldrich); Eagle’s Minimal Essential Medium (U251; Sigma-Aldrich); All media were supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Sigma-Aldrich) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich). All cell lines were tested and found mycoplasma-free using MycoAlert mycoplasma detection kit (Lonza, Walkersville, MD, USA). For Gefitinib treatment cells were incubated with 2.5 µM Gefitinib (Selleckchem, Houston, TX, USA) for 2h before subcellular fractionation, controls were left untreated.  Subcellular fractionation Cells were seeded the day before fractionation and grown to 70-80% confluency in two (biological duplicate) 150 mm diameter plates in parallel, except A431 which was seeded in six (three plates per biological duplicate) 100 mm diameter plates. Briefly, cells were washed with ice-cold PBS and incubated with gentle rocking at 4°C with a solution containing: 42 µg/ml digitonin (Sigma-Aldrich), 2 mM dithiothretiol (DTT), 2 mM MgCl2, 150 mM NaCl, 200 µM EDTA and 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.6. After 7 minutes of incubation the solution was collected and stored as fraction FS1. Cells were washed twice in ice cold PBS and scraped down in a hypotonic solution containing: 20 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 200 µM EDTA and 1xHalt protease inhibitor cocktail. The cell solution was homogenized on ice with 50 strokes in a dounce homogenizer (Dounce tissue grinder pestle, small clearance, Sigma-Aldrich, P1110-1EA) followed by addition of an equal volume of 300 mM NaCl, 200 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 200 µM EDTA, 1 mM DTT and 1xHalt protease inhibitor cocktail and an additional 50 strokes in order to break up cellular organelles. The resulting suspension was centrifuged 600xg for 10 minutes at 4°C. Pellets were stored as fraction FP1. Supernatants were transferred to new tubes and centrifuged at 3500xg for 10 minutes at 4°C. Pellets were stored as fraction FP2 and supernatants were transferred to ultracentrifuge tubes and centrifuged at 100,000xg, 4°C for 1 h. The resulting supernatants were stored as fraction FS2 and the pellets as fraction FP3.         Sample preparation for mass spectrometry The pellet fractions obtained from the subcellular fractionation steps were lysed by addition of lysis buffer: 4% SDS, 1 mm DTT and 25 mm HEPES pH 7.6, followed by heating to 95°C for 5 minutes and 1 min sonication of the lysate. The supernatants were untreated. Protein concentration was determined by Bio-Rad DCC protein assay. For each cell line, the resulting 10 fractions (5 fractions in duplicates) were digested by a modified FASP-protocol (Branca et al.). 250 µg of each fractions was mixed with 1 mM DTT, 8 M urea, 25 mM HEPES, pH 7.6 and transferred to a 10-kDa cut-off centrifugation filtering unit (Pall, Nanosep®), and centrifuged at 14,000g for 15 min. Proteins were alkylated by 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 8 M urea, 25 mM HEPES for 10 min. The proteins were then centrifuged at 14,000g for 15 min followed by 2 more additions and centrifugations with 8 M urea, 25 mM HEPES. Proteins were digested at 37°C with gentle shaking overnight by addition of Lys-C (enzyme:protein = 1:50, Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd.) in 500 mM Urea, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.6 followed by an additional overnight digestion with trypsin (enzyme:protein = 1:50, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.6. The filter units were centrifuged at 14,000g for 15 min followed by another centrifugation with MQ and the flow-through was collected. Peptide concentration was determined by the Bio-Rad DCC assay and 100 µg of peptides from each digested fraction was labelled with TMT10plex reagent according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Scientific). Labelled samples were pooled, cleaned by strata-X-C-cartridges (Phenomenex) and dried in a Speed-Vac.  Peptide level sample fractionation through IPG-IEF  The TMT labelled peptides, 300 µg, were separated by immobilized pH gradient - isoelectric focusing (IPG-IEF) on pH 3.7-4.9 and 3-10 strips as described by Branca et al (Branca et al., 2014). Peptides were extracted from the strips by a prototype liquid handling robot, supplied by GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB. A plastic device with 72 wells was put onto each strip and 50 µl of MQ was added to each well. After 30 minutes incubation, the liquid was transferred to a 96 well plate and the extraction was repeated 2 more times with 35% acetonitrile (ACN) and 35% ACN, 0.1% formic acid in MQ, respectively. The extracted peptides were dried in Speed-Vac and dissolved in 3% ACN, 0.1 % formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry based quantitative proteomics Extracted peptide fractions were separated using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q Exactive or Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fischer Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Samples were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap nanotrap column (C18, 3 µm, 100Å, 75 µm x 20 mm), and separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (C18, 2 µm, 100Å, 75 µm x 50 cm), (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using a gradient of A (5% DMSO, 0.1% FA) and B (90% ACN, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA), ranging from 6 % to 37 % B in 30-90 min (depending on IPG-IEF fraction complexity) with a flow of 0.25 µl/min. The Q Exactive was operated in a data dependent manner, selecting top 10 precursors for fragmentation by HCD. The survey scan was performed at 70,000 resolution from 400-1600 m/z, with a max injection time of 100 ms and target of 1 x 106 ions. For generation of HCD fragmentation spectra, a max ion injection time of 140 ms and AGC of 1 x 105 were used before fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy, 35,000 resolution. Precursors were isolated with a width of 2 m/z and put on the exclusion list for 70 s. Single and unassigned charge states were rejected from precursor selection.  Peptide and protein identification Orbitrap raw MS/MS files were converted to mzML format using msConvert from the ProteoWizard tool suite (Holman et al., 2014). Spectra were then searched using MSGF+ (v10072) and Percolator (v2.08), where search results from 8 subsequent fractions were grouped for Percolator target/decoy analysis. All searches were done against the human protein subset of Ensembl 75 in the Galaxy platform. MSGF+ settings included precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fully-tryptic peptides, maximum peptide length of 50 amino acids and a maximum charge of 6. Fixed modifications were TMT-10plex on lysines and peptide N-termini, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues, a variable modification was used for oxidation on methionine residues. Quantification of TMT-10plex reporter ions was done using OpenMS project's IsobaricAnalyzer (v2.0). PSMs found at 1% FDR (false discovery rate) were used to infer gene identities.  Protein quantification by TMT10plex reporter ions was calculated using TMT PSM ratios to the entire sample set (all 10 TMT-channels) and normalized to the sample median. The median PSM TMT reporter ratio from peptides unique to a gene symbol was used for quantification. Protein false discovery rates were calculated using the picked-FDR method using gene symbols as protein groups and limited to 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Subcellular localization is a main determinant of protein function; however, a global view of cellular proteome organization remains relatively unexplored. We have developed a robust mass spectrometry-based analysis pipeline to generate a proteome-wide view of subcellular localization for proteins mapping to 12,418 individual genes across five cell lines. Based on more than 83,000 unique classifications and correlation profiling, we investigate the effect of alternative splicing and protein domains on localization, complex member co-localization, cell-type-specific localization, as well as protein relocalization after growth factor inhibition. Our analysis provides information about the cellular architecture and complexity of the spatial organization of the proteome; we show that the majority of proteins have a single main subcellular location, that alternative splicing rarely affects subcellular location, and that cell types are best distinguished by expression of proteins exposed to the surrounding environment. The resource is freely accessible via www.subcellbarcode.org.

### Keywords
Human, Subcellular protein localization, Hirief, Mcf7, Hcc827, Lc-ms., Subcellular, U251, A431, Cancer, Nci-h322

### Affiliations
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, and Scilifelab, Stockholm, Sweden
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Mattias Vesterlund

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, and Scilifelab, Stockholm, Sweden


