### Accession
PXD036908

### Title
Systematic identification and characterization of novel genes in the regulation and biogenesis of photosynthetic machinery

### Description
Photosynthesis is central to food production and the Earth’s biogeochemistry, yet the molecular basis for its regulation remains poorly understood. Here, using high-throughput genetics in the model eukaryotic alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, we identify 115 genes required for photosynthesis, 70 of which were previously uncharacterized. We initiate functional characterization of the novel genes by determining the proteomes of mutant strains lacking these genes. The data allow assignment of 34 of the novel genes to the biogenesis or regulation of one or more specific photosynthetic complexes. Additional analysis uncovers at least seven novel critical regulatory proteins, including five Photosystem I mRNA maturation factors and two master regulators: MTF1, which impacts chloroplast gene expression directly; and PMR1, which impacts expression via nuclear-expressed factors. Our work provides a rich resource identifying novel regulatory and functional genes and placing them into pathways, thereby opening the door to a system-level understanding of photosynthesis.

### Sample Protocol
TMT-labeled (11plex) peptides were prepared mostly as previously described (Gupta et al., 2018).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data was analyzed using GFY software licensed from Harvard (Nusinow et al., 2020) to quantified proteins relative abundance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Retrograde regulation, Photosystem i maturation factors, Methionyl-trna formyltransferase, Protein profiling, Genetics, Protein localization., Rna-sequencing, Photosynthesis

### Affiliations
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA.
Post-doc

### Submitter
Moshe Kafri

### Lab Head
Dr Martin C. Jonikas
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA.


