### Accession
PXD038245

### Title
Ultrasensitive Capillary Electrophoresis Trapped Ion Mobility Time-of-Flight Mass spectrometry Reveals Proteome Transition in the Brain’s Developing Circadian Pacemaker

### Description
This project employed ultrasensitive proteomics in the discovery setting utilizing microanalytical capillary electrophoresis electrospray ionization (CE-ESI) and trapped ion mobility high-resolution mass spectrometry (TimsTOF HRMS) to quantify proteomic changes during development in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), before and after the onset of photoreceptor-dependent visual function. Results from this work highlight the maturation of oligodendrocyte myelination as well as extracellular matrix proteins with implications for critical-period plasticity. This work marks the first integration of ultrasensitive proteomics by CE-ESI TimsTOF HRMS with super-resolution STORM microscopy provide, expanding analytical resources to help better understand the brain and vision.

### Sample Protocol
The SCN tissue was biopsied by following standard protocols. The tissue was processed for shot-gun MS analysis. Proteins were denatured and trypsin-digested. The resulting peptides were desalted. The final peptide mixtures were reconstituted in 50% or 75% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.05% formic acid. The peptides were separated and ionized on a custom-built CE-ESI platform. Peptide ions were detected on a trapped-ion mobility spectrometry time-of-flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA) employing parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF).

### Data Protocol
All primary HRMS data were analyzed with MaxQuant 1.6.7.0 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry) executing the Andromeda 1.6.7.0 search engine against the Mus musculus proteome (downloaded from UniProt on October 15th, 2019). Static and dynamic modifications were enabled for analyzing data. Protein identifications were filtered to <1% false discovery rate (FDR) against a reversed-sequence decoy database.

### Publication Abstract
During brain development, neuronal proteomes are regulated in part by changes in spontaneous and sensory-driven activity in immature neural circuits. A longstanding model for studying activity-dependent circuit refinement is the developing mouse visual system where the formation of axonal projections from the eyes to the brain is influenced by spontaneous retinal activity prior to the onset of vision and by visual experience after eye-opening. The precise proteomic changes in retinorecipient targets that occur during this developmental transition are unknown. Here, we developed a microanalytical proteomics pipeline using capillary electrophoresis (CE) electrospray ionization (ESI) mass spectrometry (MS) in the discovery setting to quantify developmental changes in the chief circadian pacemaker, the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), before and after the onset of photoreceptor-dependent visual function. Nesting CE-ESI with trapped ion mobility spectrometry time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrometry (TimsTOF PRO) doubled the number of identified and quantified proteins compared to the TOF-only control on the same analytical platform. From 10 ng of peptide input, corresponding to &lt;&#x223c;0.5% of the total local tissue proteome, technical triplicate analyses identified 1894 proteins and quantified 1066 proteins, including many with important canonical functions in axon guidance, synapse function, glial cell maturation, and extracellular matrix refinement. Label-free quantification revealed differential regulation for 166 proteins over development, with enrichment of axon guidance-associated proteins prior to eye-opening and synapse-associated protein enrichment after eye-opening. Super-resolution imaging of select proteins using STochastic Optical Reconstruction Microscopy (STORM) corroborated the MS results and showed that increased presynaptic protein abundance pre/post eye-opening in the SCN reflects a developmental increase in synapse number, but not presynaptic size or extrasynaptic protein expression. This work marks the first development and systematic application of TimsTOF PRO for CE-ESI-based microproteomics and the first integration of microanalytical CE-ESI TimsTOF PRO with volumetric super-resolution STORM imaging to expand the repertoire of technologies supporting analytical neuroscience.

### Keywords
Suprachiasmatic nucleus, Neuron, Mouse, Capillary electrophoresis, Proteomics, Visual system development., Mass spectrometry, Neural development, Retinal ganglion cell

### Affiliations
University of Maryland, College Park
Associate Professor, University of Maryland College Park, MD 20742

### Submitter
Peter Nemes

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Nemes
Associate Professor, University of Maryland College Park, MD 20742


