### Accession
PXD014502

### Title
TMT characterisation: iPSC vs hESC

### Description
Detailed comparison of human pluripotent stem cells, to determine how hESC and iPSC differ in their protein expression profiles. The data was acquired in a TMT 10-plex SPS-MS3. 4 replicates of hESC compared to 4 replicates of HipSci human iPSCs.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation For protein extraction, iPSC cell pellets, washed with ice cold PBS and redissolved immediately in 200 μL of lysis buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and mixed at room temperature for 15 minutes. The DNA content of the cells is sheared using ultrasonication (6 X 20 s on ice). The proteins were reduced using tris-carboxyethylphosphine TCEP (25 mM) for 30 minutes at room temperature, then alkylated in the dark for 30 minutes using iodoacetamide (50 mM). Total protein was quantified using the EZQ assay (Life Technologies). The lysates were diluted with 100 mM TEAB 4-fold for the first digestion with mass spectrometry grade lysyl endopeptidase, Lys-C(Wako, Japan), then further diluted 2.5-fold before a second digestion with trypsin. Lys-C and trypsin were used at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w). The digestions were carried out overnight at 37ºC, then stopped by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1% (v:v). Peptides were desalted using C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters) following manufacturer’s instructions. For tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantification, the dried peptides were re-dissolved in 100 mM TEAB (50 μl) and their concentration was measured using a fluorescent assay (CBQCA, Life Technologies). 100 μg of peptides from each cell line to be compared, in 100 μl of TEAB, were labelled with a different TMT tag (20 μg ml−1 in 40 μl acetonitrile) (Thermo Scientific), for 2 h at room temperature. After incubation, the labelling reaction was quenched using 8 μl of 5% hydroxylamine (Pierce) for 30 min and the different cell lines/tags were mixed and dried in vacuo. The TMT samples were fractionated using off-line high-pH reverse-phase (RP) chromatography: samples were loaded onto a 4.6 × 250 mm Xbridge BEH130 C18 column with 3.5-μm particles (Waters). Using a Dionex bioRS system, the samples were separated using a 25-min multistep gradient of solvents A (10 mM formate at pH 9) and B (10 mM ammonium formate pH 9 in 80% acetonitrile), at a flow rate of 1 ml min−1. Peptides were separated into 48 fractions, which were consolidated into 24 fractions. The fractions were subsequently dried and the peptides re-dissolved in 5% formic acid and analysed by LC–MS/MS. LC–MS/MS TMT-based analysis. 5% of the material was analysed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), equipped with a Dionex ultra-high-pressure liquid-chromatography system (RSLCnano). RPLC was performed using a Dionex RSLCnano HPLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were injected onto a 75 µm × 2 cm PepMap-C18 pre-column and resolved on a 75 µm × 50 cm RP- C18 EASY-Spray temperature-controlled integrated column-emitter (Thermo Scientific), using a four-hour multistep gradient from 5% B to 35% B with a constant flow of 200 nl min−1. The mobile phases were: 2% ACN incorporating 0.1% FA (solvent A) and 80% ACN incorporating 0.1% FA (solvent B). The spray was initiated by applying 2.5 kV to the EASY-Spray emitter and the data were acquired under the control of Xcalibur software in a data-dependent mode using top speed and 4 s duration per cycle. The survey scan is acquired in the orbitrap covering the m/z range from 400 to 1,400 Thomson with a mass resolution of 120,000 and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 2.0 × 105 ions. The most intense ions were selected for fragmentation using CID in the ion trap with 30% CID collision energy and an isolation window of 1.6 Th. The AGC target was set to 1.0 × 104 with a maximum injection time of 70 ms and a dynamic exclusion of 80 s. During the MS3 analysis for more accurate TMT quantifications, 5 fragment ions were co-isolated using synchronous precursor selection using a window of 2 Th and further fragmented using HCD collision energy of 55%. The fragments were then analysed in the orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000. The AGC target was set to 1.0 × 105 and the maximum injection time was set to 105 ms.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.3.3 with a 1%FDR threshold at both the protein and PSM levels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ipsc, Stem cells, Tmt, Pluripotency, Hesc

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Laboratory for Quantitative Proteomics, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee

### Submitter
Alejandro Brenes

### Lab Head
Dr Angus I Lamond
Laboratory for Quantitative Proteomics, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee


