### Accession
PXD000740

### Title
Synovial fluid proteome in rheumatoid arthritis

### Description
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic autoinflammatory disorder that affects small joints. Despite intense efforts, there isno definitive marker yet for early diagnosis RA and for monitoring the progression of this disease.  We sought to catalog the proteins present in the synovial fluid of patients with rheumatoid arthritis. To identify lower abundance proteins, we undertook two approaches – we depleted the abundant proteins using a multiple affinity removal system (MARS14) column and we enriched glycoproteins using a lectin affinity column. The peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a high resolution Fourier transform mass spectrometer.

### Sample Protocol
Equal amounts of protein obtained from 20 synovial fluid samples from RA patients were pooled together. Pooled samples were then subjected parallely to glycoprotein enrichment using multiple lectins and depletion of abundant proteins by using MARS14. The glycoenriched and depleted protein were fractionated at the protein and peptide level by SDS-PAGE and strong cation exchange chromatography respectively. All the fractions were then analyzed on LTQ-Orbitrap XL ETD mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was carried out using Mascot and Sequest search algorithms through the Proteome Discoverer software suite 1.3. Searches were carried against Human RefSeq 50 protein database. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a static modification and N-terminal Acetylation, Oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) were set as dynamic modifications. Mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm while MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.8 Da. Subsequently, the identified peptides were filtered-based on FDR cut-off of 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Synovial fluid, Rheumatoid arthritis

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA


