### Accession
PXD016573

### Title
Single Cell Proteomics and the Carrier Proteome Effect

### Description
Single cell proteomics by mass spectrometry (SCoPE-MS) is a recently introduced method that utilizes isobaric labels to quantify multiplexed single cell proteomes. While this technique has generated great excitement, the technologies underlying SCoPE-MS - isobaric labels and mass spectrometry - comprise technical limitations with the potential to unfavorably impact data quality and biological interpretation. These limitations are due to the carrier proteome, a sample added at 25-500x single cell proteomes to enable peptide identifications. Here, we perform SCoPE-MS experiments with increasing amounts of carrier proteome and evaluate quantitative accuracy as it relates to mass analyzer dynamic range, multiplexing level, and number of ions sampled. We demonstrate that an increase in carrier proteome level requires a concomitant increase in the number of ions sampled to maintain quantitative accuracy – we term this the carrier proteome effect. Based on our findings, we provide guidance on experimental design, data collection, and data analysis to limit the impact of the carrier proteome effect within SCoPE-MS measurements.

### Sample Protocol
Syntheic peptides (Pierce Retention Time Calibration peptides) or whole proteome digests (HeLa and K562) were labeled with TMT and mixed in ratios that mimic SCoPE-MS experiments. The goal of these experiments was to demonstrate the impact of the "carrier proteome" a channel spiked into a multiplexed sample at a high level.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative data were extracted with either TomahaqCompanion or SCPCompaion. Identifications were determiend by the Mascot search algorithm followed by FDR determination by a linear discriminant analysis algorith (in house software). Data were analyzed further in R.

### Publication Abstract
Single-cell proteomics by mass spectrometry (SCoPE-MS) is a recently introduced method to quantify multiplexed single-cell proteomes. While this technique has generated great excitement, the underlying technologies (isobaric labeling and mass spectrometry (MS)) have technical limitations with the potential to affect data quality and biological interpretation. These limitations are particularly relevant when a carrier proteome, a sample added at 25-500&#xd7; the amount of a single-cell proteome, is used to enable peptide identifications. Here we perform controlled experiments with increasing carrier proteome amounts and evaluate quantitative accuracy, as it relates to mass analyzer dynamic range, multiplexing level and number of ions sampled. We demonstrate that an increase in carrier proteome level requires a concomitant increase in the number of ions sampled to maintain quantitative accuracy. Lastly, we introduce Single-Cell Proteomics Companion (SCPCompanion), a software tool that enables rapid evaluation of single-cell proteomic data and recommends instrument and data analysis parameters for improved data quality.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Single cell proteomics

### Affiliations
Genentech, Inc.
Genentech

### Submitter
Christopher Rose

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher M. Rose
Genentech, Inc.


