### Accession
PXD025581

### Title
Screening for Ku70 phosphoS155-dependent proximal proteins

### Description
To identify Ku70 phosphoS155-specific proximal protein interactors, we used the proximity-dependent biotin identification (BioID2) technique with wild-type Ku70, Ku70 S155A, and Ku70 S155D in the doxycycline-inducible T-REx 293 cell line and compared the different datasets.

### Sample Protocol
Using the established T-REx 293 stable cell lines, biotin incubation occurred for 24 hours prior to harvesting and lysing cells. Protein extracts were bound to streptavidin-conjugated beads and washed before conducting a sequential on-bead digest (Lys-C, Trypsin/Lys-C mix, Trypsin) to release peptides. Peptides were desalted and concentrated using C18 ZipTips and samples were submitted for liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Data was acquired using an FT/IT/CID Top 20 scheme with lock mass. Data was processed using PEAKS Studio version 8.5 using the Human Uniprot database and set to 3 missed cleavages and semi-specific cleavage. Parent mass error tolerance was set to 20 ppm, fragment mass error tolerance was set to 0.8 Da. Protein and peptide False Discovery Rate (FDR) was set to 1%. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification while oxidation (M) and N-terminal deamidation (NQ) were set as variable modifications (maximum number of modifications per peptide = 5).

### Publication Abstract
The Ku heterodimer, composed of subunits Ku70 and Ku80, is known for its essential role in repairing double-stranded DNA breaks via non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). We previously identified Ku70 S155 as a novel phosphorylation site within the von Willebrand A-like (vWA) domain of Ku70 and documented an altered DNA damage response in cells expressing a Ku70 S155D phosphomimetic mutant. Here, we conducted proximity-dependent biotin identification (BioID2) screening using wild-type Ku70, Ku70 S155D mutant, and Ku70 with a phosphoablative substitution (S155A) to identify Ku70 S155D-specific candidate proteins that may rely on this phosphorylation event. Using the BioID2 screen with multiple filtering approaches, we compared the protein interactor candidate lists for Ku70 S155D and S155A. TRIP12 was exclusive to the Ku70 S155D list, considered a high confidence interactor based on SAINTexpress analysis, and appeared in all three biological replicates of the Ku70 S155D-BioID2 mass spectrometry results. Using proximity ligation assays (PLA), we demonstrated a significantly increased association between Ku70 S155D-HA and TRIP12 compared to wild-type Ku70-HA cells. In addition, we were able to demonstrate a robust PLA signal between endogenous Ku70 and TRIP12 in the presence of double-stranded DNA breaks. Finally, co-immunoprecipitation analyses showed an enhanced interaction between TRIP12 and Ku70 upon treatment with ionizing radiation, suggesting a direct or indirect association in response to DNA damage. Altogether, these results suggest an association between Ku70 phospho-S155 and TRIP12.

### Keywords
Ku70, Bioid2, S155, T-rex 293, Lc-esi-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Western Ontario
Department of Biochemistry, Robarts Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, Canada

### Submitter
Sanna Abbasi

### Lab Head
Dr Caroline Schild-Poulter
Department of Biochemistry, Robarts Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, Canada


