### Accession
PXD024799

### Title
Histone post-translational modification analysis from low-abundance clinical samples

### Description
We streamlined the protein extraction procedure from low-amount clinical samples and tested and implemented different in-gel digestion strategies, obtaining a protocol that allows the analysis of the most common histone PTMs from laser microdissected tissue areas containing as low as 1000 cells. We then applied this protocol to breast cancer patient tissue sections in two proof-of-concept experiments, identifying differences in histone marks in heterogeneous regions selected by either morphological evaluation or MALDI-imaging profiling. These results demonstrate that analyzing histone PTMs from very small tissue areas and detecting differences from adjacent tumor regions is technically feasible, opening the way for the investigation of epigenetic features in the context of tissue and tumor heterogeneity.

### Sample Protocol
Laser microdissection. 4 um-thick FFPE sections or 10 um-thick snap frozen OCT-embedded cryosections of mouse adult pancreas were mounted on polyethylene naphthalate membrane (PEN) slides previously UV-photoactivated. FFPE sections were de-paraffinized, while OCT-embedded sections were fixed before proceeding to partial rehydration in graded alcohols up to 50%. Sections were then counterstained for 30 seconds with cresyl-violet (0.8% Cresyl violet in 60% EtOH and 4mM Tris-HCl, pH8.0). Area of pancreatic tissues corresponding to ~20000, 10000, 5000, 2500 and 1000 acinar cells were microdissected using a UV-based LMD7 laser microdissection system (Leica Microsystems), collected into the caps of 0.5 mL PCR tubes and stored at 4˚C until further processing. 10 um-thick sections from fresh-frozen or FFPE breast cancer sample were mounted on PEN slides and stained with hematoxylin or cresyl-violet. Areas corresponding to normal epithelial cells, infiltrating carcinoma, TILs or lymphocytes outside the tumor region were collected by laser microdissection as described above.   Histone enrichment. OCT and FFPE whole sections (10 um-thick) were collected in 1.7 ml tubes and processed as described. Tissue pieces obtained by LMD were transferred at the bottom of the tubes through a 3 minutes centrifugation at maximum speed and histones were enriched by adapting previously developed methods to low sample amounts. FFPE microdissected tissue pieces were deparaffinized in hystolemon (Carlo Erba) and rehydrated. The same rehydration steps were also performed for the OCT microdissected samples. Then, all the samples were resuspended in 35-40 ul 20 mM Tris pH 7.4 containing 2% SDS and  homogenized by sonication in a Bioruptor device. For FFPE samples, proteins were extracted and de-crosslinked at 95°C for 45 min and 65°C for 4 hours.   Histone digestion. Prior to digestion, the samples were mixed with a heavy-labelled histone super-SILAC mix.  When enough material was available, about 5 μg of histones per run per sample were mixed with an approximately equal amount of super-SILAC mix and separated on a 17% SDS-PAGE gel. The samples obtained from laser microdissected mouse pancreas were entirely loaded on a gel and mixed with 1 μg of super-SILAC mix. For in-gel digestions, a band corresponding to the histone octamer (H3, H4, H2A, H2B) was excised, chemically alkylated with propyonic and in-gel digested with trypsin. The digestion was performed as previously described. In addition, after elution the samples were concentrated to a volume below 3 l, diluted to 9 l with water and derivatized with PIC. The samples were buffered to pH 8.5 by adding 1 μl of 1 M Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer, 3 μl of a freshly prepared 3% v/v PIC solution in acetonitrile were added and the mixture was incubated for 1.5 hours at 37 °C. Finally, the samples were acidified by addition 8 μl of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The samples acidified with TFA. All samples were desalted on handmade StageTips as previously described (23).  LC-MS/MS analysis of histone PTMs. Peptide mixtures were separated by reversed-phase chromatography on an EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientic), 25-cm long (inner diameter 75 µm, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles), which was connected online to a Q Exactive HF or a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) instrument through an EASY-Spray™ Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA) in ddH2O and solvent B was 80% ACN plus 0.1% FA. Peptides were injected in an aqueous 1% TFA solution at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and were separated with a 50-min linear gradient of 10–45% solvent B, at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The Q Exactive instruments were operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1350) were analyzed in the Orbitrap detector with a resolution of 60,000-70,000 at m/z 200. The 10-12 most intense peptide ions with charge states comprised between 2 and 4 were sequentially isolated to a target value for MS1 of 3×106 and fragmented by HCD with a normalized collision energy setting of 28%. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 20 msec for full scans and 80 msec for MS/MS, and the target value for MS/MS was set to 1×105. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 10 sec, and the standard mass spectrometric conditions for all experiments were as follows: spray voltage of 1.8 kV, no sheath and auxiliary gas flow.

### Data Protocol
The acquired RAW data were analyzed using Epiprofile 2.0, selecting the SILAC option, followed by manual validation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Laser microdissection, Breast cancer, Histone post-translational modification

### Affiliations
European Institute of Oncology
Istituto Europeo di Oncologia

### Submitter
Roberta Noberini

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Bonaldi
European Institute of Oncology


