### Accession
PXD001635

### Title
SETMAR methyl-lysine (3xMBT) pull-down

### Description
SILAC labeled HT-1080 cell lysate (K0R0 and K8R10) were treated with active or catalytic inactive SETMAR methyltransferase enzyme. Samples were combined and proteins modified by methyl-lysine enriched by 3xMBT. Quantitative comparison identified candidate proteins with increase methylation following incubation with SETMAR.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and cut into four fractions by molecular weight. Each section was processed by in-gel digest with trypsin and desalted using a C18 Stage tip. Peptides were identified using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer running high resolution MS1 followed by top 10 CID fragmentation for MS2 with dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 including mono-, di- and tri-methylation of lysine as variable modifications. The human proteome database was Uniprot data 2012-10-17.

### Publication Abstract
The lysine methyltransferase (KMT) SETMAR is implicated in the response to and repair of DNA damage, but its molecular function is not clear. SETMAR has been associated with dimethylation of histone H3 lysine 36 (H3K36) at sites of DNA damage. However, SETMAR does not methylate H3K36 in vitro. This and the observation that SETMAR is not active on nucleosomes suggest that H3K36 methylation is not a physiologically relevant activity. To identify potential non-histone substrates, we utilized a strategy on the basis of quantitative proteomic analysis of methylated lysine. Our approach identified lysine 130 of the mRNA splicing factor snRNP70 as a SETMAR substrate in vitro, and we show that the enzyme primarily generates monomethylation at this position. Furthermore, we show that SETMAR methylates snRNP70 Lys-130 in cells. Because snRNP70 is a key early regulator of 5' splice site selection, our results suggest a model in which methylation of snRNP70 by SETMAR regulates constitutive and/or alternative splicing. In addition, the proteomic strategy described here is broadly applicable and is a promising route for large-scale mapping of KMT substrates.

### Keywords
Setmar, Methylation

### Affiliations
Biology
Stanford University, Department of Biology

### Submitter
Scott Carlson

### Lab Head
Dr Or Gozani
Stanford University, Department of Biology


