### Accession
PXD008361

### Title
Preservation methods and PBS washing affect the AML proteome

### Description
In the current study, we have studied the effect of three storage and preparation protocols on two AML-derived cell lines: 1) cryopreservation of viable cells for storage in liquid nitrogen, 2) cell pellet storage in liquid nitrogen and 3) freshly SDS lysed cell lysate stored at -°80. We further studied the effect cell pellet wash with cold PBS had on the AML patient cell lysate, aiming to remove remaining contaminants from FBS and blood.

### Sample Protocol
PBS wash: For this study we used viable cells from six AML patients frozen in 10% DMSO/20% FBS. Each patient samples was split into two or three aliquots, where one aliquot was used as control (0xPBS wash), one aliquot washed once with 500 ul PBS (1xPBS) and one aliquote washed twice with 500 ul PBS (2xPBS) during AML Cell lysis. The samples were further lysed in 4% SDS/ 0.1 M Tris-HCl and prepared according to the Filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol.The samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer, during a 4 hour gradient. A pool containing equal amounts of all the samples was used as a quality control (QC) and analyzed three times during the LC-MS sequence.   Storage condition: Two AML cell lines, THP-1 and Molm-13, were selected for the study of different sample conservation methodologies. Cells were cultured in in-house medium. Cells were split into three identical aliquots and spun at 140 x g at RT for 5 minutes. One aliquot was lysed with 4% SDS/0.1 M Tris·HCl pH 7.6 buffer, denatured at 95°C and stored at -80°C. The next aliquot was resuspended media containing 10% DMSO/ 20% FBS and conserved in liquid nitrogen. The remaining aliquot was frozen as a dried pellet and conserved in liquid nitrogen. Cell samples stored in DMSO-containing media and as dried pellets were thawed on ice. After media removal from the DMSO-conserved samples by spinning at 170 x g at 4 ° C for 5 minutes, both sets of samples were lysed with 4% SDS in 0.1 M Tris·HCl pH 7.6 buffer. The samples were prepared according to the FASP protocol and analyzed on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer, during a 4 hours gradient. A pool containing equal amounts of all the samples was used as a quality control (QC) and analyzed three times during the LC-MS sequence.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were searched with MaxQuant version 1.5.5.1, against a concatenated reverse-decoy Swiss-Prot Homo sapiens database version 2017 02 (20172 entries) using the Andromeda search engine. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Trypsin was set as protease, and two missed cleavages were allowed. The FDR was set to 1% for proteins and peptides, and the minimum peptide length was 6. We used the label-free quantification (LFQ) with minimal ratio count set to 1. “Match between runs” was enabled for the “Storage Condition” study only.

### Publication Abstract
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) primary cells can be isolated from peripheral blood, suspended with media containing bovine serum and cryoprotectant, and stored in liquid nitrogen before being processed for proteomic analysis by mass spectrometry (MS). The presence of bovine serum and human blood proteins in AML samples can hamper the identifications of proteins, and thereby reduce the proteome coverage of the study. Herein, we have established the effect of phosphate buffered saline (PBS) washing on AML patient samples stored in media. Although PBS washes effectively removed serum and blood contaminants, the saline wash resulted in cell burst and remarkable protein material loss. We also compared different methods to preserve the AML proteome from THP-1 and Molm-13 cell lines before MS analysis: (1) stored in media containing bovine serum and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO); (2) stored as dried cell pellets; and (3) stored as cell lysates in 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). MS analysis of differently preserved AML cell samples shows that preservation with DMSO produce a high number of fragile cells that will burst during freezing and thawing. Our studies encourage the use of alternative preservation methods for future MS analysis of the AML proteome.

### Keywords
Pbs, Aml, Dmso, Storage conditions

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit, Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Norway
PROBE

### Submitter
Elise Aasebo

### Lab Head
Dr Frode Selheim
Proteomics Unit, Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Norway


