### Accession
PXD026833

### Title
A role for PchHI as an ABC transporter in iron acquisition by the siderophore pyochelin in Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Description
Iron is an essential nutrient for bacterial growth but poorly bioavailable. To scavenge ferric iron present in their environment, bacteria synthesize and secrete siderophores, small compounds with a high affinity for iron. Pyochelin (PCH) is one of the two siderophores produced by the opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Once having captured a ferric iron, PCH-Fe is imported back into bacteria first by the outer membrane transporter FptA and afterwards by the inner membrane permease FptX. Here using molecular biology, 55Fe uptake assays and LC-MS/MS quantification of PCH in the different bacterial cell fractions, we show that (i) PCH (probably under its PCH-Fe form) is able to rich bacterial periplasm and cytoplasm when both FptA and FptX are expressed, and (ii) that PchHI (a heterodimeric ABC transporter) plays a role in the translocation of siderophore-free iron siderophore-free iron across the inner membrane into the cytoplasm. Consequently, probably the first fraction of PCH-Fe internalized by FptA may be transported further by FptX in the bacterial cytoplasm to activate the transcriptional regulator PchR, regulating the transcription of all genes of the PCH pathway. The further fractions of PCH-Fe transported by FptA may dissociate in the bacterial periplasm by an unknown mechanism, with the siderophore-free iron being transported into the cytoplasm by PchHI.

### Sample Protocol
PAO1 strain and its corresponding mutants were grown as described in the “PCH production” section. A sample of 5 × 108 cells from each culture were used for proteomic analysis. Each sample was prepared in biological triplicate. Protein extracts were precipitated overnight with 5 volumes of cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100 % methanol. Proteins were then digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, MA, USA) as described previously (Normant et al., 2020). Each sample was further analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a QExactive+ mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nanoLC-1000 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA).

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the Pseudomonas aeruginosa UniprotKB sub-database with a decoy strategy (UniprotKB release 2016_12, taxon 208964, Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain PAO1, 5564 forward protein sequences). Peptides and proteins were identified with Mascot algorithm (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) and data were further imported into Proline v1.4 software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/). Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, and 1 % FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM score) and protein sets (Protein Set score). The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to relatively quantify each protein (Spectral Count relative quantification). Proline was further used to align the Spectral Count values across all samples. The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to quantify each protein from at least three independent biological replicates. After a column-wise normalization of the data matrix, the spectral count values were submitted to a negative-binomial test using an edgeR GLM regression through R (R v3.2.5). For each identified protein, an adjusted P-value (adjp) corrected by Benjamini–Hochberg was calculated, as well as a protein fold-change (FC).

### Publication Abstract
Iron is an essential nutrient for bacterial growth but poorly bioavailable. Bacteria scavenge ferric iron by synthesizing and secreting siderophores, small compounds with a high affinity for iron. Pyochelin (PCH) is one of the two siderophores produced by the opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa. After capturing a ferric iron molecule, PCH-Fe is imported back into bacteria first by the outer membrane transporter FptA and then by the inner membrane permease FptX. Here, using molecular biology, <sup>55</sup> Fe uptake assays, and LC-MS/MS quantification, we first find a role for PchHI as the heterodimeric ABC transporter involved in the siderophore-free iron uptake into the bacterial cytoplasm. We also provide the first evidence that PCH is able to reach the bacterial periplasm and cytoplasm when both FptA and FptX are expressed. Finally, we detected an interaction between PchH and FptX, linking the ABC transporter PchHI with the inner permease FptX in the PCH-Fe uptake pathway. These results pave the way for a better understanding of the PCH siderophore pathway, giving future directions to tackle P. aeruginosa infections.

### Keywords
Pchhi, Siderophore, Iron, Pyochelin, Pseudomonas

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
CNRS, UMR7242, ESBS, Bld Sébastien Brant, F-67412 Illkirch, France. Université de Strasbourg, UMR7242, ESBS, Bld Sébastien Brant, F-67412 Illkirch, France.

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Isabelle Schalk
CNRS, UMR7242, ESBS, Bld Sébastien Brant, F-67412 Illkirch, France. Université de Strasbourg, UMR7242, ESBS, Bld Sébastien Brant, F-67412 Illkirch, France.


