### Accession
PXD042200

### Title
Deep Proteome of the Developing Chick Midbrain

### Description
The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and migration of cranial neural crest cells are critical processes that occur in the early embryo that permit proper craniofacial patterning. Disruptions in these processes not only impair development but also lead to various diseases, underscoring the need for their detailed understanding at the molecular level. The chick embryo has served historically as an excellent model for human embryonic development. While chick cranial neural crest cell EMT and migration have been characterized at the transcript level, studies at the protein level—to allow direct measurement of the active players—have not been undertaken to date. In this study, we applied mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics to establish a deep proteomics profile of the midbrain region during early embryonic development. We developed a proteomics method combining optimal lysis conditions and offline fractionation with nanoflow liquid chromatography coupled to high-resolution MS to analyze the tissue from this region, which identified >5,900 proteins involved in key pathways related to neural crest cell EMT and migration such as signaling, proteolysis/extracellular matrix (ECM), and transcriptional regulation. This study offers valuable insight into important developmental processes occurring in the midbrain region and demonstrates the utility of proteomics for characterization of various tissues during chick embryogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed using a typical bottom-up proteomics workflow. Samples were lysed, reduced with DTT, alkylated with IAA, and protein was precipitated in acetone overnight. Protein pellet was resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with trypsin at 37 °C for 12 h. Resulting peptides were dried and desalted prior to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. For some samples, peptides were fractionated using a high pH reversed-phase spin column-based fractionation kit prior to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were separated on a micropillar array column (µPAC) over a 240 min gradient. Full MS spectra were collected in the positive ion mode in the Orbitrap analyzer (m/z 350–1,500, 120,000 resolution) and DDA-MS/MS spectra were collected in the ion trap using HCD (30% normalized collision energy) over a 3 s cycle time with a 60 s dynamic exclusion. Alternatively, DIA measurements were collected using the same nanoLC and full MS scan parameters, with MS/MS spectra collected in DIA mode in the Orbitrap using HCD (30% normalized collision energy, 30,000 resolution, 12 m/z windows, 1 m/z window overlap).

### Data Protocol
The primary DDA MS-MS/MS files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.2). For fractionated samples, all fractions and technical replicates were combined to produce one single result file. Each file was searched against the UniProt Gallus gallus reviewed and unreviewed proteome (27,535 sequences, downloaded on 3/25/2022), as well as a database of common contaminants, using SEQUEST-HT. Dynamic modifications included in the search were oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of the protein N-termini. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was included as a fixed modification. The search allowed two trypsin missed cleavages and used mass tolerances of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. Only peptides and proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) of ≤ 1%, calculated against a reversed-sequence decoy database, were included in the final report. Common contaminant proteins were manually curated and excluded from proteins identified in this study. Proteins were required to have ≥ 1 unique peptide for identification and quantification. Proteins were quantified using label-free quantification (LFQ). Precursor LFQ intensities were normalized to the total peptide amount.  DIA data files were analyzed using DIA-NN (version 1.8.1)18 with a library-free search against the same UniProt database. The same modifications were included in the search with the addition of N-terminal methionine excision and a maximum of three variable modifications. Two trypsin miscleavages were allowed. Peptide length range was set to 6–144 amino acids (same as the DDA search). Precursor and fragment ions were detected between m/z 350–1,500. Technical replicates were searched together using the match-between-runs algorithm. Protein inference was set to “Protein Names (from FASTA).” Quantification mode was set to “Robust LC (high precision).” Precursors were filtered to FDR ≤ 1%. All other parameters were set to the default settings. Protein identifications with multiple protein IDs in the protein group name were filtered out to produce the final list of unique identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and migration of cranial neural crest cells within the midbrain are critical processes that permit proper craniofacial patterning in the early embryo. Disruptions in these processes not only impair development but also lead to various diseases, underscoring the need for their detailed understanding at the molecular level. The chick embryo has served historically as an excellent model for human embryonic development, including cranial neural crest cell EMT and migration. While these developmental events have been characterized transcriptionally, studies at the protein level have not been undertaken to date. Here, we applied mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics to establish a deep proteomics profile of the chick midbrain region during early embryonic development. Our proteomics method combines optimal lysis conditions, offline fractionation, separation on a nanopatterned stationary phase (&#x3bc;PAC) using nanoflow liquid chromatography, and detection using quadrupole-ion trap-Orbitrap tribrid high-resolution tandem MS. Identification of &gt;5900 proteins and &gt;450 phosphoproteins in this study marks the deepest coverage of the chick midbrain proteome to date. These proteins have known roles in pathways related to neural crest cell EMT and migration such as signaling, proteolysis/extracellular matrix remodeling, and transcriptional regulation. This study offers valuable insight into important developmental processes occurring in the midbrain region and demonstrates the utility of proteomics for characterization of tissue microenvironments during chick embryogenesis.

### Keywords
Cranial neural crest, Chick embryo, Lc-ms/ms, Midbrain, Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Maryland, College Park
Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742

### Submitter
Peter Nemes

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Nemes
Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742


