### Accession
PXD046155

### Title
A semi-synthesis platform for efficient production and exploration of didemnin-based drugs

### Description
In this study, we report the screening of the yield of didemnin B from 18 Tistrella strains we collected from different regions worldwide. Among them, one T. mobilis strain was further investigated due to its capability to produce the highest yield of didemnin B in a fermentation medium. To improve the productivity of the chosen strain, we performed 11 rounds of random mutagenesis/screening and optimised culture conditions. The resultant mutated strain produced over 500 mg/L of didemnin B in a 50-L fermentation tank. We further tested the strain in an industrial-scale fermentation tank (4,000-L), resulting in the production of didemnin B approximately 480 mg/L. Furthermore, we developed two simple and efficient chemical strategies for converting didemnin B to plitidepsin. One of the strategies involves a one-step synthetic route with over 90% overall yield. The modifications in the hydroxyl group of iso-statine (iso-Sta–OH) in didemnin B can greatly impact on its bioactivity. Therefore, we further synthesised 13 new didemnin B derivatives with modifications in iso-Sta–OH for studying the structure–activity relationships. In addition, 3 photo-affinity-based didemnin probes, bearing diazirine and alkyne groups, were prepared and employed in proteomic profiling studies, which allowed the deduction of binding proteins in the THP-1 cell line. Overall, our platform not only provides a practical and sustainable solution for producing the drug molecule plitidepsin, but also offers the opportunities to utilise the functions of didemnin derivatives. We envision that our platform can expedite the development of didemnin-based drugs.

### Sample Protocol
The THP-1 cell lysates were centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 min at 4°C to remove debris, and the concentration of protein solutions were adjusted to 4 mg/mL using BCA protein assay kit. The lysates (750 µL per aliquot) were incubated with probe B (20 µM) or with equal concentration of diazirine as negative controls for 30 min at room temperature. Then the samples were irradiated with UV light (λ = 365 nm) for 15 min on ice. The click chemistry was performed to conjugate biotin tags to proteins using 10 µL of 10 mM biotin–PEG4–azide, 10 µL of 20 mM CuSO4, 10 µL of 40 mM BTTAA, 25 µL of 100 mM sodium ascorbate and 195 µL of PBS for 2 h at room temperature. The resultant products were precipitated with chloroform–methanol–H2O, resuspended in 200 µL of PBS containing 2% SDS and diluted to 0.2% SDS using 1.8 mL of PBS. Then, the protein samples were incubated overnight at room temperature with 300 µL of streptavidin agarose beads (Thermo, 20349). The beads were washed three times with 2 M urea in PBS, 0.2% SDS in PBS and Milli-Q H2O sequentially. Subsequently, the beads were resuspended in 500 µL of 6 M urea in PBS, followed by treatment with 10 mM TCEP (Sigma, C4706) and 20 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma, I6125) at 37°C for 30 min under dark conditions. the beads were washed twice with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and resuspended in 200 µL of water with 50 mM TEAB (Sigma, T7408), digested with 3 µg of trypsin (Promega, V5111) for 16 h at 37°C. The reacted samples were centrifuged at 2,000 × g for 3 min to collect the digested peptides, which were concentrated to dryness via vacuum centrifugation. For dimethyl labelling, the digested peptides were reconstituted in 200 µL of water with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate. 8 µL of 0.6 M NaBH3CN (Sigma, 156159) and 8 µL of 4% (vol/vol) formaldehyde-d2 (Sigma, 492620 vol/vol) were added to UV irradiated samples. 8 µL of 0.6 M NaBH3CN and 8 µL of 4% (vol/vol) formaldehyde (Sigma, 252549) were added to the negative controls. After 45 min, the reaction was quenched with 32 µL of 1% (vol/vol) ammonia solution and 16 µL of FA. The pair of light and heavy samples were combined, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Finally, peptide samples were reconstituted in 20 µL of water with 0.1% FA for LC−MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data for each sample were combined and searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) for identification and quantitation analysis. MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt/SwissProt Homo sapiens protein database (16 November 2022) and contaminant proteins. Peptide search was performed with variable modification on the oxidation of methionine (15.9949 Da), static modification of cysteine (57.0215 Da) and de-methylation of lysine residue and N-terminal of peptide (28.0313 and 34.0631 Da for light and heavy labelling, respectively). The minimal peptide length was set to six amino acids, with a maximum of two missed cleavages. The signal-to-noise ratio of the spectra was set to >1.5, with a mass error tolerance of 10 ppm in precursor ions and mass error of 0.2 Da in fragment ions. Data were filtered using a peptide-to-spectrum match of 1% FDR using Percolator. For the obtained proteome, further filters were set up: protein FDR confidence is high, number of unique peptides is >2, master protein only and no contaminant proteins. Only proteins that were quantified in all three replicates with an averaged abundance ratio (heavy/light) of >4.0 were selected for further GO analysis. We used ‘Wu Kong’ platform (https://www.omicsolution.com/wkomics/main/) for relative P-value and fold change analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Plitidepsin (or dehydrodidemnin B), an approved anticancer drug, belongs to the didemnin family of cyclic depsipeptides, which are found in limited quantities in marine tunicate extracts. Herein, we introduce a new approach that integrates microbial and chemical synthesis to generate plitidepsin and its analogues. We screened a Tistrella strain library to identify a potent didemnin B producer, and then introduced a second copy of the didemnin biosynthetic gene cluster into its genome, resulting in a didemnin B titer of approximately 75&#x2005;mg/L. Next, we developed two straightforward chemical strategies to convert didemnin B into plitidepsin, one of which involved a one-step synthetic route giving over 90&#x2009;% overall yield. Furthermore, we synthesized 13 new didemnin derivatives and three didemnin probes, enabling research into structure-activity relationships and interactions between didemnin and proteins. Our study highlights the synergistic potential of biosynthesis and chemical synthesis in overcoming the challenge of producing complex natural products sustainably and at scale.

### Keywords
Didemin, Photo-affinity labeling

### Affiliations
Institute of Chemical Biology, Shenzhen Bay Laboratory
1. Institute of Chemical Biology, Shenzhen Bay Laboratory, 518107 Shenzhen, China; 2. School of Chemical Biology and Biotechnology, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen 518055, China

### Submitter
Yun Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Yun Ge
1. Institute of Chemical Biology, Shenzhen Bay Laboratory, 518107 Shenzhen, China; 2. School of Chemical Biology and Biotechnology, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen 518055, China


