### Accession
PXD035780

### Title
Analysis of human and microbial salivary proteomes in children offers insights on the molecular pathogenesis of molar-incisor hypomineralization

### Description
The current study aims to characterize the salivary proteome (host proteome and microbiome) in children with MIH, to discover salivary markers indicative of the pathology.

### Sample Protocol
Samples (3 mL) were in 5 mL of 10% SDS. Samples were incubated at 56C o/n. TCA precipitation was performed with 10% w/v TCA o/n at -20 o C. Samples were centrifuged at 10000 rcf, 4C for 10 min. The protein pellet was washed with ice-cold acetone (10000 rcf, 4C, 10 min). The supernatant was discarded, and the protein pellet was air-dried for 10 min. The protein pellet of each sample was resuspended in 300 μL lysis buffer (7M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 1% DTE, 3.6% Protease Inhibitors). Water bath sonication was performed for 10 min to enhance the solubilization process. Samples were subjected to buffer exchange with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by concentration with 3kDa MWCO Amicon filters. The final volume of the concentrated samples was 30 μL. Protein concentration was defined by the Bradford Assay. Samples were prepared with the FASP (Filter Aided Sample Preparation) method. Two hundred μg of each sample were loaded into the filter. For the samples with protein content lower than 200 μg, the entire protein  6 amount was loaded into the filter. Alkylation was performed with 0.05M iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 20 min, RT in the dark. Samples were centrifuged (14000 rcf, 10 min, RT) and washed twice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate by centrifugation at 14000 rcf, 10 min, RT. Trypsinization was performed o/n in the dark with a trypsin/protein ratio: 1/100. Tryptic peptides were eluted by centrifugation (14000 rcf, 10 min, RT). Peptides were dried in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator and stored at -20C until LC-MS/MS analysis. The dried samples were solubilized in a mobile phase A, sonicated, and peptides were further cleaned up using the SP3 protocol. Finally, the peptide concentration was determined through absorbance at 280 nm measurement on a nanodrop instrument. Nano-liquid chromatography of 500 ng tryptic peptide mixture was carried out using a Ultimate3000 RSLC system configured with a 25 cm-long pepsep nano column (pepsep.com). The buffer system used was 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid in water (mobile phase A) and 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid in acetonitrile (ACN) (mobile phase B). The flow rate was set to 400 nL/min in the first 10 minutes of the gradient and lowered to 250 nL/min in the main gradient. The gradient was linear starting from 7% to 35% phase B in 40 min, up to 45% B in 5 min, 45% to 99%B in 0.5min staying isocratic for 5min and then equilibrating at 7% for 10min at 400 nL/min. The data acquisition was performed in positive mode using a Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy selecting up to the top 12 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (m/z 350–1500). The resolution of the survey scan was 120,000 (at m/z 200) with a target value of 3 × 10E6 ions and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 1x10E5 and resolution of 15,000 (at m/z 200) using an Normalized Collision Energy of 28%. The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 22 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition. The isolation window for  7 MS/MS fragmentation was set to 1.2 m/z. Two technical replicas were acquired per biological sample.

### Data Protocol
Host Proteome Analysis Using the Proteome Discoverer 2.4, the raw files were searched against the Homo sapiens reference proteome FASTA database downloaded from Uniprot on 19/09/19 (containing protein sequences) using the multiple peptide search (MPS) option activated and SequestHT node. The protein dynamic modifications assessed were oxidation +15.995 Da (M), deamidation +0.984 Da (N, Q) and the N-terminal variable modifications of acetylation +42.011 Da, Met-loss -131.040 Da (M) and Met- loss+Acetyl -89.030 Da (M). Carbamidomethyl / +57.021 Da (C) was set as a static modification. The results were filtered for high confidence peptide identifications, with enhanced peptide and protein annotations. Only master proteins were evaluated. The quantified abundances were based on intensity values and were normalized to the total peptide amount. The statistical evaluation between the control and MIH patient groups was performed using the Proteome Discoverer software pairwise background-based t-test, Principal Component Analysis (PCA), and clustering (heat map) functions. The minimum percentage of replicate features was set to 60 %.  Metaproteomic Analysis Database search was performed using the MetaLab software (version 1.0), with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30 involved in the workflow. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modifications, and Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Oxidation (M) modifications were included as variable modifications in the database search space. Saliva- specific database was used. All identified peptide sequences were subjected to taxonomic analysis using the lowest common ancestor (LCA) algorithm implemented in MetaLab. The calculation of LCA was performed according to the principles implemented in Unipept with modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Molar incisor hypomineralization is a complex developmental enamel defect that affects the permanent dentition of children with significant functional and aesthetic implications. Saliva is an ideal diagnostic tool and ensures patients' compliance by diminishing the discomfort especially in pediatric population. Lately, salivary proteome analysis has progressively evolved in various biomedical disciplines. As changes in saliva composition are associated with oral diseases, it is reasonable to assume that the saliva proteome of MIH-affected children might be altered compared to healthy children. This study analyzed the human and microbial salivary proteome in children with MIH in order to identify salivary markers indicative of the pathology. The conducted proteomic analysis generated a comprehensive dataset comprising a total of 1515 high confidence identifications and revealed a clear discrimination between the two groups. Statistical comparison identified 142 differentially expressed proteins, while the pathway analysis indicated deregulation of inflammation, immune response mechanisms, and defense response to bacteria in MIH patients. Bacterial proteome analysis showed a lower diversity for the microbial species, which highlights the dysbiotic environment established in the MIH pathology.

### Keywords
Biomarker discovery, Proteomics, Saliva, Molar incisor hypomineralization (mih), Microbiome

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
Institute for Bioinnovation BSRC "A. Fleming" Vari, Greece

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Martina Samiotaki
Institute for Bioinnovation BSRC "A. Fleming" Vari, Greece


