### Accession
PXD029295

### Title
hepatocyte grwoth factor receptor (MET) LC-MSMS

### Description
MET, the receptor for hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), is involved in wide variety of biological events and its aberrant activation is implicated in the pathogenesis of cancer. Especially, MET signaling is associated with resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), key drugs in therapy of non-small cell lung cancer. MET has 11 potential N-glycosylation sites, however, the site-specific roles of N-glycans have not been elucidated. Here, we report that N-glycans regulate proteolytic processing of MET and HGF induced MET signaling, site specifically. N-glycosylation inhibitors suppressed processing and trafficking of endogenous MET in H1975 and EBC-1 lung cancer cells and exogenous MET in CHO cells. We purified the recombinant extracellular domain of human MET and determined the site-specific N-glycan structures and occupancy using nanoflow liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization mass spectrometry. The results indicated that most sites were fully glycosylated and the dominant population were complex-type which were rich in sialic acids and core fucoses. To examine the effects of N-glycan deletion of MET, we prepared endogenous-MET-knockout Flp-In CHO cells and transfected with series of N-glycan deletion mutants of MET. It was found that several N-glycans are implicated in processing of MET. It was also suggested that the N-glycans of -subunit of MET positively regulate HGF signaling, and the N-glycans of β-subunit negatively regulate HGF signaling. In all-N-glycan deletion mutant, processing and signaling were significantly suppressed. It was observed that the cell proliferation rate was suppressed in all-N-glycan deletion mutant, although the cell surface expression levels of MET were not completely diminished. We examined the HGF biding affinity for the recombinant extracellular domain of MET and found that peptide N-glycosidase F treatment did not affect the ligand binding affinity. It was suggested that N-glycans of MET affect the status and the function of the receptor site-specifically.

### Sample Protocol
For soluble form MET(sMET) expression vector, myc-His tag was introduced at the end of the extracellular domain (residue T932) of human MET and subcloned into a pcDNA5/FRT expression vector. To generate sMET stable expression cells, the Flp-In system (Invitrogen) was used. Recombinant human sMET was purified according to the method described previously with small modification [22]. sMET stable expression cells were cultured and the medium was collected. After filtration through a 0.45-mm membrane filter (TPP, Switzerland), the expressed myc-His tagged sMET was purified by a series of column chromatographies on HisTrap HP5 (GE Healthcare), Mono Q (GE healthcare), and HiLoad Superdex 200 pg (GE Healthcare) using the AKTA purifier system (GE Healthcare). In detail, the filtrated medium was applied onto a HisTrap HP5 column equilibrated with 100 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 0.5 M NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, and the protein was eluted by a gradient of imidazole up to 500 mM. Fractions containing sMET were then applied onto a Mono Q column equilibrated with 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, and the protein was eluted by the gradient of NaCl up to 500 mM. Finally, fractions containing sMET were applied onto a HiLoad Superdex 200-pg column equilibrated in a phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and purified to homogeneity. Purity of proteins was confirmed by SDS-PAGE. Aliquots containing 5 μg of the purified sMET were reductively alkylated with 10 mM dithiothreitol (40 min at 56 ℃) followed by 20 mM iodoacetamide (40 min at room temperature in the dark). Excess iodoacetamide was neutralized with 20 mM DTT (10 min at room temperature in the dark). After the reductive alkylation, the proteins were digested with 0.25 μg of MS grade trypsin or chymotrypsin (Promega) for 16 h at 37°C. The resultant peptides were desalted with a styrene divinylbenzene polymer tip column (GL Science, Tokyo, Japan), and flow through fractions containing highly hydrophilic peptides were desalted again with a graphitized carbon tip column (GL Science). Finally, eluents were combined and evaporated completely with centrifugal evaporator. Obtained peptides were redissolved with ultrapure water containing 0.1% formic acid and subjected to nLC-ESI-MS/MS (Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific) through an EASY-nLC system equipped with an C18 column (0.075 mm x 125 mm, Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan). The sample was eluted with acetonitrile gradient from 0 to 35% in 135 min at the flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectrometer was operated under the data-dependent mode with the scan range of 200-2000 m/z.

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed using software MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.3) for peptide searching [41, 42]. Peptide searches were performed referred MET proteomic data obtained from UniProtKB/SwissProt (https://www.uniprot.org/) allowing a maximum of two miss cleavages in trypsin or chymotrypsin digests. As a fixed modification, carbamidomethylation for cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) was applied. The oxidation of methionine (+15.9949 Da) and acetylation of protein N-terminal (+42.0106 Da) were set as variable modification. To determine the N-glycan structures, MS/MS spectra were assigned manually. Finally, the precursor intensities from the glycopeptide were integrated for the intensity-based comparison with software MaxQuant and Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
MET, the receptor for the hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), is strongly associated with resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors, key drugs that are used in the therapy of non-small cell lung cancer. MET contains 11 potential N-glycosylation sites, but the site-specific roles of these N-glycans have not been elucidated. We report herein that these N-glycans regulate the proteolytic processing of MET and HGF-induced MET signaling, and that this regulation is site specific. Inhibitors of N-glycosylation were found to suppress the processing and trafficking of endogenous MET in H1975 and EBC-1 lung cancer cells and exogenous MET in CHO-K1 cells. We purified the recombinant extracellular domain of human MET and determined the site-specific N-glycan structures and occupancy using mass spectrometry. The results indicated that most sites were fully glycosylated and that the dominant population was the complex type. To examine the effects of the deletion of N-glycans of MET, we prepared endogenous MET knockout Flp-In CHO cells and transfected them with a series of N-glycan-deletion mutants of MET. The results showed that several N-glycans are implicated in the processing of MET. The findings also suggested that the N-glycans of the SEMA domain of MET positively regulate HGF signaling, and the N-glycans of the region other than the SEMA domain negatively regulate HGF signaling. Processing, cell surface expression, and signaling were significantly suppressed in the case of the all-N-glycan-deletion mutant. The overall findings suggest that N-glycans of MET affect the status and the function of the receptor in a site-specific manner.

### Keywords
Glycosylation, Hepatocyte grwoth factor receptor (met)

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine
Sapporo Medical University

### Submitter
Naoki Fujitani

### Lab Head
Dr Motoko Takahashi
Department of Biochemistry, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine


