### Accession
PXD043071

### Title
ROS-induced ribosome stalling and collision underlies ZAKalpha-mediated metabolic decline in obesity and aging

### Description
The ribotoxic stress response (RSR) denotes a signaling pathway in which the p38 and JNK-activating MAP3 kinase ZAKalpha senses stalling and/or collision of ribosomes with unknown physiological implications. Here, we show that reactive oxygen species (ROS)-generating agents robustly trigger translational impairment and ZAKalpha activation. Underscoring the physiological importance of this signaling pathway, zebrafish larvae deficient for the ZAKalpha kinase are protected from ROS-induced pathology and death. Furthermore, livers of mice fed a ROS-generating and obesogenic diet exhibit ZAKalpha-activating changes in ribosomal elongation dynamics. Highlighting a role for the RSR in metabolic regulation, ZAK knockout (KO) mice are protected from developing high-fat diet-induced blood glucose intolerance and liver steatosis under these conditions. Finally, ZAK ablation slows animals from developing hallmarks of metabolic aging. In sum, our work highlights ROS-induced translational impairment as a physiological activation signal for ZAKalpha that underlies metabolic adaptation in obesity and aging.

### Sample Protocol
Mice livers were immediately snap-frozen after dissection in liquid nitrogen into tissue extraction bag (tissueTUBE TT1, Covaris Inc) and stored at -80 °C. Samples were placed into liquid nitrogen immediately before extraction. Then, the extraction bag was placed in a Covaris CP02 Automated Pulverizer set to impact level 2 to pulverize the frozen sample. This operation was repeated three times. The pulverized samples were poured into a 5 ml Eppendorf tube and solubilized with 3000 μL of boiling lysis buffer (5% SDS, 100 mM Tris, 5 mM TCEP, and 10 mM CAA). The samples were mixed at 1000 rpm for 10 minutes at 95 ˚C. Samples were clear for insoluble debris by centrifugation for 1 minute at 800 g.  Afterwards, protein extracts were sonicated on ice for 1 min (1 sec ON, 1 sec OFF, 50 % amplitude). This was followed by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 5 min. Clarified extracts were quantified by BCA, and 2 mg of each sample was digested using PAC method in the KingFisher robot. Digested peptides were desalted with SepPaks and quantified with Nanodrorp (A280). 200 µg of resulting peptide was used for subsequence phospho-proteomics enrichment with Zr-IMAC HP beads in the KingFisher robot. Full proteome and phosphor-proteomes were analysed on the Evosep One system using EV-1137 column (PepSep, 15 cm × 150 µm, beads 1.5 um) and EV-1086 emitter (30 µm). The column temperature was maintained at 40 °C using a butterfly heater (PST-ES-BPH-20, Phoenix S&T) and interfaced online using an EASY-Spray™ source with the Orbitrap Exploris 480 MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Data was acquired in DIA mode using 30SPD gradient. Full MS resolution were set to 120,000 at m/z 200 and full MS AGC target was 300% with an IT of 45 ms. Mass range was set to 350–1400. AGC target value for DIA scans was set at 1000%. MS2 scans was acquired using 15,000 resolution and 2 seconds cycle time, scanning from 361 to 1033 m/z in full proteome and 472 to 1142 m/z in phosphoproteome.

### Data Protocol
MS files were searched using Spectronaut with a library-free approach (directDIA+) using a mouse database (Uniprot reference proteome 2022 release, 21,984 entries). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-termini and, in the case of phosphoproteomics, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as possible variable modifications. Maximum number of modification per peptide was limited to 3, and cross-run normalization was unchecked.

### Publication Abstract
The ribotoxic stress response (RSR) is a signaling pathway in which the p38- and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)-activating mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase (MAP3K) ZAK&#x3b1; senses stalling and/or collision of ribosomes. Here, we show that reactive oxygen species (ROS)-generating agents trigger ribosomal impairment and ZAK&#x3b1; activation. Conversely, zebrafish larvae deficient for ZAK&#x3b1; are protected from ROS-induced pathology. Livers of mice fed a ROS-generating diet exhibit ZAK&#x3b1;-activating changes in ribosomal elongation dynamics. Highlighting a role for the RSR in metabolic regulation, ZAK-knockout mice are protected from developing high-fat high-sugar (HFHS) diet-induced blood glucose intolerance and liver steatosis. Finally, ZAK ablation slows animals from developing the hallmarks of metabolic aging. Our work highlights ROS-induced ribosomal impairment as a physiological activation signal for ZAK&#x3b1; that underlies metabolic adaptation in obesity and aging.

### Keywords
Obesity, Mouse, Liver, Zakalpha

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research
Vice Director, Professor  Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Proteomics Program  University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences Blegdamsvej 3b DK-2200 Copenhagen Denmark

### Submitter
Ana Martinez-Val

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper V. Olsen
Vice Director, Professor  Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Proteomics Program  University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences Blegdamsvej 3b DK-2200 Copenhagen Denmark


