### Accession
PXD015887

### Title
Subcellular quantitative proteomic analysis of herpes simplex virus type 1 infected HEK 293T cells

### Description
Herpes simplex virus type-1 (HSV-1) is wide-spread dsDNA virus that establishes life-long latency and causes diverse severity of symptoms. In this study, HEK 293T cells with low Toll-like receptor (TLR) and Stimulator of interferon genes protein (STING) expression was infected with HSV-1 and subjected to quantitative proteomic analysis. By using a subcellular fractionation strategy and high-performance mass spectrometry, a total of 5,982 host proteins were quantified, of which 484 proteins were differentially regulated. Bioinformatics analysis indicated that multiple signaling pathways were involved in HSV-1 infection.

### Sample Protocol
Extracted proteins were collected, and protein concentration was measured with BCA assay. Extracted proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56 ℃ for 30 min, alkylated with 40 mM IAA in the dark for 30 min, and left at room temperature for 1 hour. The proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega) at a ratio of 1:50 (trypsin/protein w/w) at 37℃ overnight. Digested peptides were desalted with SepPak C18 cartridge (Waters) and dried by SpeedVac (Thermo). Then digested peptides were fractionated with SCX, and fractionated peptides were desalted with Ziptip (Millipore) and stored at -80℃ before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were submitted to ProteinPilot version 5.0.1 (AB SCIEX) to perform peptide identification and quantification. The UniProt_Human database was used. Search parameters were as follows: Sample Type: SILAC (Lys+4D, Arg+6; Lys+8, Arg+10); Cysteine Alkylation: Iodoacetamide; Digestion: Trypsin; Instrument: TripleTOF 5600; Miss cleavages tolerance: 2; Fixed modification: carbamidomethyl Cys; Variable modification: none; MS1 initial mass error tolerance value: 0.05 Dalton; MS2 initial mass error tolerance value: 0.1 Dalton. The false discovery rates (FDR) analysis in ProteinPilot uses “decoy database searching” strategy, and FDR of ProteinPilot search results were all set as lower than 1% at the protein level here.

### Publication Abstract
Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) is widespread double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) virus that establishes life-long latency and causes diverse severe symptoms. The mechanisms of HSV-1 infection and HSV-1's interactions with various host cells have been studied and reviewed extensively. Type I interferons were secreted by host cells upon HSV infection and play a vital role in controlling virus proliferation. A few studies, however, have focused on HSV-1 infection without the presence of interferon (IFN) signaling. In this study, HEK 293T cells with low toll-like receptor (TLR) and stimulator of interferon genes protein (STING) expression were infected with HSV-1 and subjected to a quantitative proteomic analysis. By using a subcellular fractionation strategy and high-performance mass spectrometry, a total of 6607 host proteins were quantified, of which 498 proteins were differentially regulated. A bioinformatics analysis indicated that multiple signaling pathways might be involved in HSV-1 infection. A further functional study indicated the role of Interferon-induced transmembrane protein 3 (IFITM3), Coiled-coil-helix-coiled-coil-helix domain-containing protein 2 (CHCHD2), and Tripartite motif-containing protein 27 (TRIM27) in inhibiting viral DNA replication and proliferation. Our data provide a global view of host responses to HSV-1 infection in HEK 293T cells and identify the proteins involved in the HSV-1 infection process.

### Keywords
Herpes simplex virus type 1, Quantitative proteomics, Chchd2, Trim27, Virus-host interaction, Ifitm3

### Affiliations
IOV
Hubei Key Laboratory of Puriﬁcation and Application of Plant Anti-Cancer Active Ingredients, School of Chemistry and Life Sciences, Hubei University of Education, Wuhan, P. R. China

### Submitter
Leike Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Liangjie Wang
Hubei Key Laboratory of Puriﬁcation and Application of Plant Anti-Cancer Active Ingredients, School of Chemistry and Life Sciences, Hubei University of Education, Wuhan, P. R. China


