### Accession
PXD003229

### Title
Comprehensive Proteomic Analysis of Nitrogen Starved Mycobacterium smegmatis Δpup Reveals the Impact of Pupylation on Nitrogen Stress Response

### Description
Mycobacterium smegmatis is a soil bacterium exposed to continuously environmental changes of nitrogen availability. As member of Actinobacteria, it possesses an ubiquitin-like post-translational modification pathway called pupylation. The pathway starts when a small protein called Pup is attached to a lysine of a specific cellular target. Then the Pup-modified protein is degraded by the proteasome, as it was shown that Pup acts as degradation signal. Recent studies showed the role of pupylation in Mycobacterium smegmatis for survival under nitrogen starvation by supplying recycled amino acids. The present study is an investigation of the influence of Mycobacterium smegmatis Pup protein on the whole proteome in absence of nitrogen sources. Therefore a pup deletion mutant was generated. Applying stable isotope dimethyl labelling, low impact of the pupylation on proteome was revealed immediately after exposure to growth medium lacking nitrogen. In contrast, post 24 h of nitrogen starvation, Msm pup deletion strain showed several proteins with significant changes in abundance. Noteworthy, key proteins involved in nitrogen assimilation were significantly affected in Msm Δpup. Furthermore, we label-free quantified pupylated proteins of nitrogen starved Msm for a more extensive understanding of pupylation role in surviving and overcoming the lack of nitrogen.

### Sample Protocol
For the stable isotope dimethyl labelling: lysates of M. smegmatis SMR5 and Δpup were generated by resuspending bacterial pellets with resuspension buffer (100mM TRIS-HCl pH 8 and 300mM NaCl) and lysed by French press. Proteins were precipitated and subjected to trypsin digestion. Reducted cysteines were alkylatated prior labelling with either formaldehyde light [d012 C], or heavy [d213 C]. During the reaction, 20mM of sodium cyanoborohydride was used as a Schiff base reducing agent. Excess of formaldehyde was quenched by glycine. Peptides samples were combined 1:1 ratio and desalted using a reversed phase C18 column. Samples were prefractionated by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using a strong cation exchange (SC; PolyLC,Columbia, MD, USA). Buffer A (5 mM KH2PO4, 25% acetonitrile (pH 2.7)) and buffer B (5 mM KH2PO, 1M KCl, 25% acetonitrile (pH2.7)) were used for HPLC. Peptides were eluted in a linear gradient with increasing concentration of buffer B. Fractions were collected, desalted using self-packed C18 STAGE tips (Empore, St. Paul, MN, USA). Fractions were analysed on an Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate3000 micro pump (Thermo Scientific) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min each, using Buffer A (0.5 % acetic acid) and buffer B (0.5 % acetic acid in 80 % acetonitrile). A gradient of increasing organic proportion was used for peptide separation. Column-tips with 75 µm inner diameter and a length of 11 cm were self-packed with Reprosil-Pur 120 ODS-3 (Dr. Maisch GmbH). The MS operated in data dependent mode. Each MS scan was followed by a maximum of five MS/MS scans. For the label free quantification: lysates of Msm Δpup-StrepII-pup was generated. The lysate of each strain was separated into two parts: one part was used for enrichment of pupylated proteins via single step Strep purification and the other part was used for the analysis of the whole proteome. 7 mg of total protein were used to enrich pupylated proteins by Strep purification, respectively. Prior to purification, all lysates were spiked with 10 pmol of purified StrepII-tagged E. coli maltose binding protein (MBP) serving as the standard for subsequent quantification analyses. Lysates were loaded onto spin columns (Biorad) containing Strep tactin resin (IBA). After 3 washing steps, proteins were eluted with resuspension buffer supplemented with 2.5 mM desthiobiotin (Sigma-Aldrich). Proteins were concentrated using Vivaspin spin columns (3’000 Da exclusion size) prior to adding TCEP (5 mM final concentration) and iodoacetamide (10 mM final concentration). Samples were then trypsin-digested (37°C, o/n) (Promega). A cleaning step using C18 columns (Harvard Apparatus) was performed and trypsinated peptides were finally resuspended in 0.1% formic acid 5% ACN. For the preparation of the whole proteome: 50 g total proteins were initially solubilized in 4% SDS buffer, supplemented with 0.1 mM DTT, and then were subjected to FASP in solution digestion according standard protocol. Peptides were finally resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and 5% ACN. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Eksigent-Nano-HPLC system (AB Sciex). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. For each sample, 4μL of peptides were loaded on a self-made column (75 μm × 150 mm) packed with reverse-phase C18 material (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by a gradient from 2 to 25% B in 60 min, 35% B in 10 min and 97% B in 5 min. Samples were measured in a randomized order. The mass spectrometer (Tune page v1.1) was configured to fragment peptide precursor ions in data-dependent mode, allowing a maximum of 3 s between the full-scan spectra (top speed mode). Full-scan MS spectra (300–1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to an automated gain control (AGC) target value of 400000. Wide Quadrupole Isolation window was used, and an injection time of 50 ms was set. Precursors with an intensity above 5000 were selected for MS/MS. Ions were isolated using a quadrupole mass filter with 1.6 m/z isolation window and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using a normalized collision energy of 30. Fragments were detected in the linear ion trap using adapted “Universal Method” settings: the scan rate was set to Rapid, the automatic gain control was set to 100 ions and the maximum injection time was 250 milliseconds. Charge state screening was enabled and singly and unassigned charge states were excluded. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were also excluded from further selection for 25 seconds, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1010 Th and 445.1200 Th.

### Data Protocol
For the stable isotope dimethyl labelling: LC-MS/MS data was obtained in raw format and converted to the mzXML format, using msconvert with centroiding of MS1 and MS2 data, and deisotoping of MS2 data. For spectrum to sequence assignment X! Tandem (version 2013.09.01) was used. The proteome database consisted of Mycobacterium smegmatis reviewed canonical uniprot sequences (6,601 protein entries) downloaded from UniProt on August 20th 2014, appended with an equal number of shuffled decoy entries derived from the original human protein sequences (DB toolkit). Static modification for X! Tandem parameters included: precursor mass error of 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.3 Da, tryptic cleavage specificity with no missed cleavage sites, residue modifications: cysteine carboxyamidomethylation (+57.02 Da), lysine and N-terminal dimethylation (light formaldehyde 28.03 Da; heavy formaldehyde 34.06 Da); no variable modifications. X! Tandem results were further validated by PeptideProphet at a confidence level of > 95 %. Peptides were assembled to proteins using ProteinProphet with a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1.0 %. For relative peptide and protein quantification XPRESS was used. Mass tolerance used for quantification was 0.02 Da. Files obtained by TPP were further processed using processed with an in-house developed script and analyzed by R Studio v.0.99.446 as an IDE for R. Overlap of identified proteins was determined using R and BioVenn 2007. Ratios were log2 transformed, normalized by centering and a linear model was fitted using the limma package followed by a moderated-t-test. Proteins with an altered abundance were considered by having a log2 fold change of > 0.58 or < -0.58 and a p-value < 0.05. For the label-free quantification: the acquired raw MS files were loaded into the commercial software package Progenesis LCMS v.4.0.4265.42984 (Nonlinear Dynamics). Two separate analyses were carried out for the (i) whole proteome and the (ii) pupylation-enriched data sets. Data were loaded using the option High Mass Accuracy Instrument. Before the automatic aligning the loading and the wash phase of the gradient were cut, the aligning reference was chosen as such where the most features could visually be seen. In the aligning step, three to five vectors along the retention time gradient were manually seeded to give the automatic alignment a good starting point. From each Progenesis Feature (default sensitivity in peak picking) a maximum of the top three tandem mass spectra were exported using charge deconvolution and deisotoping option and a maximum number of 200 peaks per MS/MS. The Mascot generic file (.mgf) were searched using the Mascot Server 2.4.3 (Matrix Science) against a forward and reversed database of M. smegmatis and Homo sapiens (both downloaded on 16/01/2013 from Uniprot), containing 260 known mass spectrometry contaminants. Parameters for precursor tolerance and fragment ion tolerance were set to ±10 ppm and ±0.6 Da, respectively. Trypsin was used as the protein-cleaving enzyme and one missed cleavage was allowed. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as fixed modification, and oxidation of Met was set as variable. Pupylation of lysine was set as variable modification when the samples enriched for pupylation were searched. The Mascot results were loaded into Scaffold version 4.1.1 (Proteome Software) using 1% peptide and 5% protein false discovery rate (FDR). The Scaffold Spectrum Report was exported and imported back into Progenesis LCMS. The experimental design consisted of the following study groups: Strep t0h (n=3), Strep t24h (n=3). Normalization was performed using the features of the 55 peptides of the Strep-tagged purified E. coli maltose binding protein (gi|129278846|) spiked into the samples. For quantification, all proteins identified with at least two peptide ions were assessed. Proteins were grouped with Progenesis and only the non-conflicting features were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Pupylation is a bacterial ubiquitin-like protein modification pathway, which results in the attachment of the small protein Pup to specific lysine residues of cellular targets. Pup was shown to serve as a degradation signal, directing proteins toward the bacterial proteasome for turnover. Recently, it was hypothesized that pupylation and proteasomal protein degradation support the survival of Mycobacterium smegmatis (Msm) during nitrogen starvation by supplying recycled amino acids. In the present study we generated a Pup deletion strain to investigate the influence of pupylation on Msm proteome in the absence of nitrogen sources. Quantitative proteomic analyses revealed a relatively low impact of Pup on Msm&#x394;pup proteome immediately after exposure to growth medium lacking nitrogen. Less than 5.4% of the proteins displayed altered cellular levels when compared to Msm wild type. In contrast, post 24 h of nitrogen starvation 501 proteins (41% of the total quantified proteome) of Msm pup deletion strain showed significant changes in abundance. Noteworthy, important players involved in nitrogen assimilation were significantly affected in Msm&#x394;pup. Furthermore, we quantified pupylated proteins of nitrogen-starved Msm to gain more detailed insights in the role of pupylation in surviving and overcoming the lack of nitrogen.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Mycobacterium smegmatis, Nitrogen starvation, Pupylation

### Affiliations
University of Zurich, Institute of Medical Microbiology, Zurich, Switzerland
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Giuseppina Fascellaro

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Imkamp
University of Zurich, Institute of Medical Microbiology, Zurich, Switzerland


