### Accession
PXD027571

### Title
The analysis of the α2,6-sialylated proteins in endometrium from porcine gestational day 15 by LC-MS/MS

### Description
Implantation is the attachment of embryo in the endometrium. Failure in implantation is a major cause of early pregnancy loss. During implantation, the temporal uterine lumen closure can help embryo attach to the uterus. In pigs, extending of endometrial folds to form interlocking finger-like projections is a main cause leads to uterine lumen closure during attachment time, but the underlying mechanisms are largely unknown. Our data reveal that pig uterine luminal epithelium (LE) migrate in coordinated groups during extending of endometrial folds. Moreover, the MALDI-TOF MS based N-glycomic characterization of porcine endometrium revealed α2,6-linked sialic acid are highly expressed in pig uterine LE during extending of endometrial folds. To investigated the mechanisms by which α2,6-sialylated proteins in formation of the endometrial folding during implantation in pigs, the α2,6-sialylated proteins in pig uterine LE were characterized by proteomic analysis and those proteins that are involved in cell adhesion, such as E-cadherin, were detected. Finally, our in vivo and in vitro data show that α2,6-sialylation of E-cadherin occurs in accompany with collective epithelial migration. The results provide new insight into the mechanism of pig implantation by identifying that α2,6-sialylation of cell adhesion molecules may participate in formation of extending of endometrial folds through promoting of collective migration of uterine LE.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins immunoprecipitated from porcine endometrium of gestational day 15 (n=3 gilts) were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis in PTM-BIO Company (Wuhan, China). Briefly, a total of 500 mg pig endometrium from gestational day 15 were lysed in 500 µL RIPA lysis buffer (P0013D, Beyotime, Shanghai, China) containing 0.1% protease inhibitor PMSF (100mM, ST506, Beyotime, Shanghai, China) and centrifuged at 12000 rpm for 30 min at 4 ℃ to obtain supernatant. Then, 350 µL of supernatant were incubated with SNA-conjugated agarose beads (200 µL, AL-1303, Vector Labs, San Diego, CA, USA) at 4℃ overnight to obtain the immunoprecipitated proteins. After washing three times with RIPA lysis buffer, the immunoprecipitated proteins were were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained by coomassie blue. After cutting, the gel was treated with DTT, IAA, and trypsin to obtain peptides. The peptides were desalted by C18 tip and detected by Easy-nLC 1000-LTQ Obitrap ETD MS/MS (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany) analysis.

### Data Protocol
The resulting mass spectrometer data were searched against the UniProt Sus Scrofa database (https://www.uniprot.org/) using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Α2, 6-sialylated proteins, Porcine pregnancy, Lc-ms/ms, Endometrium

### Affiliations
Key Lab of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of Ministry of Education, College of Animal Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China.
Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
Kun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Mei Yu
Key Lab of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of Ministry of Education, College of Animal Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China.


