### Accession
PXD033690

### Title
Detoxified synthetic bacterial membrane vesicles as a platform of vaccines against bacteria and SARS-CoV-2

### Description
The development of vaccines based on outer membrane vesicles (OMV) that naturally bud off from bacteria is an evolving field in infectious diseases. However, the inherent inflammatory nature of OMV limits their use as human vaccines. This study employed an engineered vesicle technology to develop synthetic bacterial vesicles (SyBV or aOMV) that activate the immune system without the severe immunotoxicity of OMV. SyBV were generated from bacterial membranes through treatment with detergent and ionic stress. SyBV induced less inflammatory responses in macrophages and in mice compared to natural OMV. Immunization with SyBV or OMV induced comparable antigen-specific adaptive immunity. Specifically, immunization with Pseudomonas aeruginosa-derived SyBV protected mice against bacterial challenge, and this was accompanied by significant reduction in lung cell infiltration and inflammatory cytokines. Further, immunization with Escherichia coli-derived SyBV protected mice against E. coli sepsis, comparable to OMV-immunized group. The protective activity of SyBV was driven by the stimulation of B-cell and T-cell immunity. Also, SyBV had the ability to confer cross-protection against different bacterial strain. Next, SyBV were engineered to display the SARS-CoV-2 S1 protein on their surface, and these vesicles induced specific S1 protein antibody and T-cell responses. Collectively, these results demonstrate that SyBV may be a safe and efficient vaccine platform for the prevention of bacterial and viral infections

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and nLC-MS/MS analysis Two biological replicates of OMV and SyBV (30 µg of both) were subjected to trypsin cleavage using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method ((Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May;6(5):359-62)). Of each sample 30 µg protein was reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol at 60°C for 30 min, transferred to 30 kDa MWCO Pall Nanosep centrifugation filters (Sigma-Aldrich), washed several times with 8 M urea and once with digestion buffer (DB, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate in 50 mM TEAB) prior to alkylation with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate in DB for 20 min in room temperature. After additional two washes with digestion buffer, protein cleavage was performed by addition of 0.3 µg Pierce MS grade Trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in DB at 37°C and incubated overnight. An additional portion of 0.3 µg trypsin was added and incubated for another three hours. Peptides were collected by centrifugation, sodium deoxycholate was precipitated by acidification with 10% TFA, and peptides were purified using HiPPR Detergent Removal Resin (Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The samples were dried and reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid prior to analysis on an QExactive HF mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy-nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Aliquots of each sample were injected three times to gain technical replicates for label-free quantification. Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm x 30 cm, particle size 3 μm, Reprosil-Pur C18, Dr. Maisch) using a gradient from 5.6% to 80% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid over 90 min at a flow of 300 nL/min. The instrument operated in data-dependent mode where the precursor ion mass spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120 000, m/z range 400-1600. The 7 most intense ions with charge states 2 to 5 were selected for fragmentation using HCD at collision energy settings of 28. The isolation window was set to 1.2 Da and dynamic exclusion to 20 s and 10 ppm. MS2 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 30 000 with maximum injection time set to 110 ms.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant was used for identification and label-free quantification based on the three merged raw files originating from the LC-MS/MS analyses. This was performed by user of the Proteomics Core Facility. Check detailed settings of the search engine in method section of the manuscript. In short, data was matched with the uniprot of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, selecting trypsin/P as digestion enzyme and applying the FAST LFQ option for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
The development of vaccines based on outer membrane vesicles (OMV) that naturally bud off from bacteria is an evolving field in infectious diseases. However, the inherent inflammatory nature of OMV limits their use as human vaccines. This study employed an engineered vesicle technology to develop synthetic bacterial vesicles (SyBV) that activate the immune system without the severe immunotoxicity of OMV. SyBV were generated from bacterial membranes through treatment with detergent and ionic stress. SyBV induced less inflammatory responses in macrophages and in mice compared to natural OMV. Immunization with SyBV or OMV induced comparable antigen-specific adaptive immunity. Specifically, immunization with Pseudomonas aeruginosa-derived SyBV protected mice against bacterial challenge, and this was accompanied by significant reduction in lung cell infiltration and inflammatory cytokines. Further, immunization with Escherichia coli-derived SyBV protected mice against E. coli sepsis, comparable to OMV-immunized group. The protective activity of SyBV was driven by the stimulation of B-cell and T-cell immunity. Also, SyBV were engineered to display the SARS-CoV-2 S1 protein on their surface, and these vesicles induced specific S1 protein antibody and T-cell responses. Collectively, these results demonstrate that SyBV may be a safe and efficient vaccine platform for the prevention of bacterial and viral infections.

### Keywords
Synthetic bacterial vesicles, Vaccine delivery, Outer membrane vesicles (omv), Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Akademy, University of Gothenburg, Sweden
University of Gothenburg

### Submitter
Evelin Berger

### Lab Head
Dr Carina Sihlbom
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Akademy, University of Gothenburg, Sweden


