### Accession
PXD015742

### Title
Molecular basis of senescence transmitting in the population of human endometrial stromal cells

### Description
Hormone-regulated proliferation and differentiation of endometrial stromal cells (ESCs) determine overall endometrial plasticity and receptivity to embryos. Previously we revealed that ESCs may undergo premature senescence, accompanied by proliferation loss and various intracellular alterations. Here we focused on whether and how senescence may be transmitted within the ESCs population. We revealed that senescent ESCs may induce paracrine senescence in young counterparts via cell contacts, secreted factors and extracellular vesicles. According to secretome-wide profiling we identified plasminogen activator inhibitor -1 (PAI-1) to be the most prominent protein secreted by senescent ESCs. By applying CRISPR/Cas9 techniques we disclosed that PAI-1 secreted by senescent ESCs may serve as the master-regulator of paracrine senescence progression within the ESCs population. Unraveled molecular basis of senescence transduction in the ESCs population may be further considered in terms of altered endometrial plasticity and sensitivity to invading embryo, thus contributing to the female infertility curing.

### Sample Protocol
CM-ctr and CM-sen (100 mL) were clarified by centrifugation, lyophilized and resuspended in 5.6 mL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.0. The proteins were then precipitated with 20 % trichloroacetic acid for 45 min on ice and centrifuged for 15 min at 17500 x g. Pellets washed with diethyl ether and acetone were air dried at room temperature, resuspended in 25 µL Laemmli buffer, mixed, pooled and heated at 95 ˚C for 2 min. Then proteins were separated onto a NuPAGE™ 4-12 % Bis-Tris Protein SDS-PAGE Gel (Invitrogen, CA, USA), and gel lanes were subsequently excised and chopped. Proteins were reduced in-gel with 2.5 mM dithiothreitol (final concentration) at 60 ˚C for 30 min and carbamidomethylated with 7.5 mM iodoacetamide (final concentration) at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Enzymatic digestion was performed by the addition of 100 µL of Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega, WI, USA) to each gel lane. Digestion was performed by incubation at 37 ˚C for 15 h. Extraction of tryptic peptides was firstly performed in 25 μL of 1 % TFA, and then in 25 μL of 0.1% TFA/50 %, at room temperature. Extracts were reduced to 5-10 μL, diluted twice with 35 μL of 0.1% TFA, and then dried under vacuum in a SpeedVac Concentrator (Savant Instruments, NY, USA). Samples were resuspended in H2O/CH3CN/formic acid (FA) 95 %/5 %/0,1 %, centrifuged at 17 500 x g for 10 min. Aliquots of the supernatant (6 µL) were analyzed in triplicate by LC-MS/MS. Electrospray ionization (ESI) linear ion trap quadrupole (LTQ)-Orbitrap MS was performed on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos from Thermo Electron (San Jose, CA, USA) equipped with a NanoAcquity system from Waters (Waters Corporation, Manchester, UK). Peptides were trapped on a home-made 5 µm 200 Å Magic C18 AQ (Michrom, Auburn, CA, USA) 0.1 × 20 mm pre-column and separated on a home-made 5 µm 100 Å Magic C18 AQ (Michrom) 0.75 × 150 mm column with a gravity-pulled emitter. The analytical separation was run for 65 min, using a gradient of H2O/FA 99.9 %/0.1 % (solvent A) and CH3CN/FA 99.9 %/0.1 % (solvent B), at a flow rate of 220 nL/min as follows: 5 % solvent B for 1 min, from 5 to 35 % solvent B in 5 min and from 35 to 80 % solvent B in 10 min.

### Data Protocol
The monoisotopic masses of the selected precursor ions were corrected using an in-house written Perl script [48]. The corrected mgf ﬁles, combined from the 8 analyzed gel lanes from each condition, were searched against the Uniprot_sprot database (release 2014_10) by using Mascot software (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2.07). Homo Sapiens taxonomy (20 194 entries) was specified for database searching. The fragment and parent ion tolerance were set to 0.60 Da and 10 ppm, respectively. Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme, with one potential missed cleavage. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine were selected as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. Scaffold software (version Scaffold_4.4.1.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) was used to analyze MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0 % probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction [49]. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0 % probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm [50]. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Hormone-regulated proliferation and differentiation of endometrial stromal cells (ESCs) determine overall endometrial plasticity and receptivity to embryos. Previously we revealed that ESCs may undergo premature senescence, accompanied by proliferation loss and various intracellular alterations. Here we focused on whether and how senescence may be transmitted within the ESCs population. We revealed that senescent ESCs may induce paracrine senescence in young counterparts via cell contacts, secreted factors and extracellular vesicles. According to secretome-wide profiling we identified plasminogen activator inhibitor -1 (PAI-1) to be the most prominent protein secreted by senescent ESCs (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD015742). By applying CRISPR/Cas9 techniques we disclosed that PAI-1 secreted by senescent ESCs may serve as the master-regulator of paracrine senescence progression within the ESCs population. Unraveled molecular basis of senescence transduction in the ESCs population may be further considered in terms of altered endometrial plasticity and sensitivity to invading embryo, thus contributing to the female infertility curing.

### Keywords
Senescence, Pai-1, Sasp, Endometrial stromal cells

### Affiliations
University of Geneva
Department of Medicine - University of Geneva

### Submitter
Annarita Farina

### Lab Head
Dr Annarita Farina
Department of Medicine - University of Geneva


