### Accession
PXD017657

### Title
Inactivation of the nuclear interacting SET domain protein 1 (NSD1) impairs GATA1-regulated erythroid differentiation and causes erythroleukemia

### Description
Nuclear receptor binding SET domain protein 1 (NSD1) is recurrently mutated in human cancers including acute leukemia. We found that NSD1 knockdown altered erythroid clonogenic growth of human CD34+ hematopoietic cells. Ablation of Nsd1 in the hematopoietic system induced a transplantable erythroleukemia in mice. Despite abundant expression of the transcriptional master regulator GATA1, in vitro differentiation of Nsd1-/- erythroblasts was majorly impaired associated with reduced activation of GATA1-induced targets, while GATA1-repressed target genes were less affected. Retroviral expression of wildtype Nsd1, but not a catalytically-inactive Nsd1N1918Q SET-domain mutant induced terminal maturation of Nsd1-/- erythroblasts. Despite similar GATA1 levels, exogenous Nsd1 but not Nsd1N1918Q significantly increased GATA1 chromatin occupancy and target gene activation. Notably, Nsd1 expression reduced the association of GATA1 with the co-repressor SKI, and knockdown of SKI induced differentiation of Nsd1-/- erythroblasts. Collectively, we identified the NSD1 methyltransferase as a novel regulator of GATA1-controlled erythroid differentiation and leukemogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples from were subjected to LC–MS analysis using a dual pressure LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as recently described (Glatter et al. 2012). Peptide separation was carried out on an EASY nLC-1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a RP-HPLC column (75 μm × 30 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH). A step-wise gradient from 95% solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 50% solvent B over 60 min at a flow rate of 0.2 μl/min was used. Data acquisition mode was set to obtain one high resolution MS scan in the FT part of the mass spectrometer at a resolution of 240,000 full width at half-maximum (at m/z 400) followed by 20 MS/MS scans (TOP20) in the linear ion trap of the most intense ions using rapid scan speed. Unassigned and singly charged ions were excluded from analysis. Dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MS1-based label-free quantification of MS data was performed using Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics (Waters), version 2.0). After MS raw file import the data was analyzed using default parameter settings. MS/MS-data were exported from Progenesis QI (MGF format) and searched with a target/decoy-based strategy against a database containing forward and reverse sequences of the proteome from Mus musculus (UniProt, 33984 entries) using MASCOT (version 2.4.1). Search criteria required strict trypsin allowing for three missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetyl of the n-terminus were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. The peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. Results from the database search were imported into Progenesis QI and the resulting peptide measurement list containing peak area values of identified peptides was further used in quantitative analysis. Processing and statistical evaluation of peptide and protein quantities between samples was performed using SafeQuant (PMID: 23017020). Normalized peptide and protein intensities from SafeQuant analysis were used to calculate intensity ratios between experimental conditions for identified proteins. Functional analysis was performed on the corresponding gene annotation, with a one-sided Fishers’ exact test for enrichment of signatures in the up- and down- regulated proteins, respectively, using adjustment for multiple hypothesis testing with Benjamini-Hochberg method (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
The nuclear receptor binding SET domain protein 1 (NSD1) is recurrently mutated in human cancers including acute leukemia. We show that NSD1 knockdown alters erythroid clonogenic growth of human CD34<sup>+</sup> hematopoietic cells. Ablation of Nsd1 in the hematopoietic system of mice induces a transplantable erythroleukemia. In vitro differentiation of Nsd1<sup>-/-</sup> erythroblasts is majorly impaired despite abundant expression of GATA1, the transcriptional master regulator of erythropoiesis, and associated with an impaired activation of GATA1-induced targets. Retroviral expression of wildtype NSD1, but not a catalytically-inactive NSD1<sup>N1918Q</sup> SET-domain mutant induces terminal maturation of Nsd1<sup>-/-</sup> erythroblasts. Despite similar GATA1 protein levels, exogenous NSD1 but not NSD<sup>N1918Q</sup> significantly increases the occupancy of GATA1 at target genes and their expression. Notably, exogenous NSD1 reduces the association of GATA1 with the co-repressor SKI, and knockdown of SKI induces differentiation of Nsd1<sup>-/-</sup> erythroblasts. Collectively, we identify the NSD1 methyltransferase as a regulator of GATA1-controlled erythroid differentiation and leukemogenesis.

### Keywords
Nsd1-erythroid differentiation-leukemia-gata1-ski

### Affiliations
University of Basel, Biozentrum, Klingelbergstrasse 50/70, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Thomas Bock

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
University of Basel, Biozentrum, Klingelbergstrasse 50/70, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland


