### Accession
PXD002776

### Title
Phosphoproteome of airway epithelial cell in response to infection with Staphylococcus aureus

### Description
Here we used an unbiased proteomic and phosphoproteomic approach to characterize the response of 16HBE14o- airway epithelial cells following infection with S. aureus.

### Sample Protocol
Infected and corresponding uninfected control cells were scraped in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8, 8 M urea, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM beta-glycerol phosphate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 10 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM EDTA and 1 mM TCEP) following infection periods of 15 min, 120 min and 240 min. Samples were sonicated 3 times for 30 s and subsequently alkylated for 20 min at room temperature using 5 mM iodoacetamide. Samples were clarified by centrifugation and peptides were obtained by digestion with trypsin (Worthington) with a protease to protein ratio of 1:20. Peptides were subsequently purified with C18 Sep-Pack cartridges (Waters). General phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using TiO2 (described in more detail in Richter et al. 2015 PLoS ONE 10(3): e0122089. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0122089). For that purpose, peptides were dissolved in buffer A (5 mM KH2PO4, 30% (v/v) acetonitrile, pH 2.7) and separated into 15 fractions by strong ion exchange chromatography (SCX) with a ResourceS SCX column (1 ml column volume, GE) connected to an Äkta Avant chromatography system (GE) using a binary linear gradient with buffer B (5 mM KH2PO4, 350 mM KCl, 30% (v/v) acetonitrile, pH 2.7) at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. Following freeze-drying, peptides were dissolved in TiO2 binding buffer (73% (v/v) acetonitrile, 10% (v/v) lactic acid, 2% (v/v) TFA) and 100 μl from a TiO2-stock solution (30 mg / ml Titansphere TiO2 bulk material (GL sciences) in 100% acetonitrile) was added. Following an incubation of 20 min, samples were centrifuged to collect TiO2 material, supernatant was removed, and TiO2 was transferred to C8 Stage-Tips (Thermo Scientific). TiO2 material was washed 4 times with 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 2% (v/v) TFA and sequentially elution was performed using 5% (v/v) NH4OH and 30% (v/v) acetonitrile. Eluted peptides were vacuum-dried and stored at -80°C. Tyrosine phosphorylated peptides were enriched by immuno-precipitation using a monoclonal mouse anti-phosphotyrosine antibody (P-Tyr-100, Cell Signaling Technology) coupled to rec-Protein G-Sepharose 4B beads (Life Technologies). Peptides were dissolved in in IP buffer (50 mM MOPS, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 130 mM NaCl, 0.5% (v/v) NP40, pH 7.5) and incubated overnight at 4°C with antibody-sepharose bead conjugates. Supernatants were discarded and beads were washed three with IP buffer and twice with water. Peptides were eluted twice with 50 μl 0.1% (v/v) TFA and once with 15% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) TFA and subsequently vacuum-dried. Proteome profiling samples were fractionated by one-dimensional SDS-PAGE and peptides were obtained by in-gel digestion using trypsin (Promega). All samples were cleaned-up by C18 Stage-Tip (Thermo Scientific) purification prior MS-analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.5.1.0) and searched against a merged database composed of the reviewed human proteome (UniProt, derived on 2014-05-22; 20,264 sequences), the proteome of S. aureus NCTC 8325 (derived on 2014-11-06; 2,892 sequences), the green fluorescent protein (GFP) from N. gonorrhoeae (UniProt accession B6UPG7) and the sigma factor RsbU from S. aureus Newman (UniProt accession A6QIR3). Arg10 and Lys8 were defined as heavy labels. Trypsin was specified as enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. . Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Amino-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. The ‘match between runs’ and ‘requantify’ options were enabled. A false discovery rate cut-off of 0.01 was applied for protein, peptide and site-specific identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Internalization of Staphylococcus aureus by nonprofessional phagocytic cells is a major suspected cause of persistent and difficult-to-treat infections, including pneumonia. In this study, we established an infection model with 16HBE14o- human bronchial epithelial cells and demonstrated internalization, escape from phagosomal clearance, and intracellular replication of S. aureus HG001 within the first 4 h postinfection. We used quantitative phosphoproteomics to identify characteristic signaling networks in the host at different infection stages. Although we found only minor changes in protein abundance, the infection was accompanied by highly dynamic alterations in phosphorylation events primarily in proteins that are associated with pathways of cytoskeleton dynamics, cell-cell and cell-matrix contacts, vesicle trafficking, autophagy, and GTPase signaling. Analyses of host protein kinases by kinase-substrate mapping, active regulatory site immunoblotting, and prediction algorithms highlighted known and novel host kinases with putative critical roles in S. aureus infection-accompanied signaling including FAK, PKA, PKC, and CDK. Targeted pharmacological inhibition of these kinases resulted in a significant reduction of intracellular S. aureus cells. The current study constitutes a valuable resource for better understanding the infection-relevant molecular pathomechanisms of airway cells and for developing novel host-centric anti-infective strategies for treating S. aureus infections.

### Keywords
Infection, Airway epithelium, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Competence Center Functional Genomics, Junior Research Group Pathoproteomics, University of Greifswald, 17489 Greifswald, Germany
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Erik Richter

### Lab Head
Dr Falko Hochgräfe
Competence Center Functional Genomics, Junior Research Group Pathoproteomics, University of Greifswald, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


