### Accession
PXD040279

### Title
Transient drought during flowering initiation modifies the grain proteome of bread winter wheat

### Description
Drought is among the most limiting factors for sustainable agricultural production. Water shortage at the onset of flowering severely affects the quality and quantity of grain yield of bread wheat (Triticum aestivum). Herein, we measured oxidative stress and photosynthesis-related parameters upon applying transient drought on contrasting wheat cultivars at the flowering initiation stage of ontogenesis. The sensitive cultivar showed ineffective water management and a more severe decline of photosynthesis. Apparently, the tolerant genotype used photorespiration to dissipate excessive light energy. The tolerant cultivar sooner induced superoxide dismutase and showed less inhibited photosynthesis. Such protective effect resulted in less affected yield and spectrum of seed proteome. The tolerant cultivar had a more stable gluten profile, which defines bread-making quality, upon drought. Drought caused the accumulation of medically relevant proteins: (i) components of gluten in the sensitive cultivar and (ii) metabolic proteins in the tolerant cultivar. We propose specific proteins as markers of drought tolerance for guiding efficient breeding: thaumatin-like protein, 14-3-3 protein, peroxiredoxins, peroxidase, FBD domain protein, and Ap2/ERF plus B3 domain protein.

### Sample Protocol
All reagents and solvents of the highest available analytical grade were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich or Merck Millipore, respectively, unless stated otherwise. Grain proteins were extracted according to the developed protocol. Following the grinding of 1 g of seeds to fine flour with liquid nitrogen in a mortar, 10 mL of extraction buffer (2% SDS, 10% glycerol, 50 mM dithiothreitol, and 50 mM Tris pH 6.8) was added. The mixture was incubated with vigorous shaking for 1 h, followed by centrifugation at 10,000 × g for 15 min. Proteins were precipitated from the supernatant with four volumes of cold acetone and kept overnight at –20 °C. The precipitate was collected by centrifugation at 4000 × g, 4 °C for 15 min, followed by a single acetone wash. The protein precipitate was dried under a vacuum and stored at –80 °C. Before running one-dimensional gel, protein aliquots of 20 µg each were mixed with loading buffer (60 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 2% SDS, 10% glycerol, 5% β-mercaptoethanol, 0.01% bromophenol blue), and denatured at 100 °C, 5 min. For protein separation, 18 cm denaturing polyacrylamide gel was prepared with 4% stacking and 13% running parts. Protein fractionation was performed in Protean II xi Cell (Bio-Rad) with running buffer (25 mM Tris, 192 mM glycine and 0.1% SDS) at 10 mA per gel for 1 h and 30 mA per gel until tracking dye disappeared, approximately 5 h. Gels were stained by sensitive colloidal Coomassie G-250. Images were digitalised with a resolution of 300 dpi and 16-bit grayscale pixel depth on Umax ImageScanner (GE Healthcare). Each gel lane was manually divided into nine equal fractions, washed with 300 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile, and dehydrated with 300 µL of acetonitrile. Proteins were reduced with 100 µL of 10 mM dithiothreitol in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 50 °C for 30 min. Alkylation was performed with 100 µL of 50 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in the dark for 30 min. Gel bands were digested with 100 µL of 4 ng/µL of chymotrypsin (Promega) in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 10% acetonitrile at 25 °C. Peptides were extracted twice with 100 µL of 70% acetonitrile and 1% trifluoroacetic acid. Subsequently, the concentration of the peptides was measured by NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer at 280 nm (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were analysed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), using nanoAcquity UHPLC (Waters) and Q-TOF Premier (Waters). Samples were separated on BEH130 C18 analytical column (200 mm length, 75 µm diameter, 1.7 µm particle size), using a 60 min gradient of 5%–40% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate 300 nL/min. The data were recorded in the MSE mode (parallel high and low energy traces without precursor ion selection). Ions with 50–2000 m/z were detected in both channels, with a 1 s spectral acquisition scan rate.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was done in Progenesis QI 4.0 (Waters). The following thresholds were applied for peak picking: Low energy 320 counts and high energy 40 counts. Precursors and fragment ions were coupled using correlations of chromatographic elution profiles in low/high energy traces. Then, peak retention times were aligned across all chromatograms. Peak intensities were normalised to the median distribution of all ions, assuming the majority of signals are unaffected by experimental conditions. The label-free quantification relied on measured peak areas of the three most intense precursor peptides. Before statistical analysis, data were transformed using the inverse hyperbolic sine function. The Ion Accounting 4.0 (Waters) search algorithm was applied for protein identification. Spectra were searched against wheat proteome sequences downloaded from UniProt in April 2018 (136,892 entries, uniprot.org). Workflow parameters for the protein identification searches were: Maximum two possible chymotrypsin miscleavages, a fixed carbamidomethyl cysteine, variable oxidised methionine, and deamidated glutamine. The software automatically determined the precursor and peptide fragment mass tolerances. Peptide matching was limited to less than 4% false discovery rate against the randomised database. Identities were accepted if two or more different peptides with a score higher than 95% reliability threshold were matched. Reliability scores were adjusted based on the distribution of target/decoy queries. The biological functions and technological quality features of polypeptides were taken primarily from UniProt. Obsolete accessions were replaced with analogous sequences actual for December 2022. Statistical analysis of was done in in Perseus 1.6.15 (maxquant.net/perseus/) using ANOVA followed by Tukey’s posthoc test. Additionally, a principal component analysis was done. Next, we performed hierarchical clustering on Z-score normalised means with Euclidean distance and k-means preprocessing.

### Publication Abstract
Drought is among the most limiting factors for sustainable agricultural production. Water shortage at the onset of flowering severely affects the quality and quantity of grain yield of bread wheat (<i>Triticum aestivum</i>). Herein, we measured oxidative stress and photosynthesis-related parameters upon applying transient drought on contrasting wheat cultivars at the flowering stage of ontogenesis. The sensitive cultivar (Darunok Podillia) showed ineffective water management and a more severe decline in photosynthesis. Apparently, the tolerant genotype (Odeska 267) used photorespiration to dissipate excessive light energy. The tolerant cultivar sooner induced superoxide dismutase and showed less inhibited photosynthesis. Such a protective effect resulted in less affected yield and spectrum of seed proteome. The tolerant cultivar had a more stable gluten profile, which defines bread-making quality, upon drought. Water deficit caused the accumulation of medically relevant proteins: (i) components of gluten in the sensitive cultivar and (ii) metabolic proteins in the tolerant cultivar. We propose specific proteins for further exploration as potential markers of drought tolerance for guiding efficient breeding: thaumatin-like protein, 14-3-3 protein, peroxiredoxins, peroxidase, FBD domain protein, and Ap2/ERF plus B3 domain protein.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Water shortage, Tolerance markers, Photosynthesis, Contrasting cultivars, Yield quality, Triticum aestivum

### Affiliations
Plant Science and Biodiversity Center SAS
Institute of Plant Genetics and Biotechnology, Plant Science and Biodiversity Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Maksym Danchenko

### Lab Head
Dr Olha Lakhneko
Institute of Plant Genetics and Biotechnology, Plant Science and Biodiversity Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences


### SDRF
- organism: triticum aestivum
- organism part: grain
- cell type: not applicable
- disease: not applicable
- label: label free sample
- instrument: q-tof premier

