### Accession
PXD010665

### Title
BRAF/MAPK and GSK3b signalling signaling converge to control MITF nuclear export

### Description
The close integration of the MAPK, PI3K and WNT signaling pathways underpins much of development and is deregulated in cancer. In principle, combinatorial post-translational modification of key lineage–specific transcription factors would be an effective means to integrate critical signaling events. Understanding how this might be achieved is central to deciphering the impact of microenvironmental cues in development and disease. The microphthalmia associated transcription factor, MITF, plays a crucial role in the development of melanocytes, the retinal pigment epithelium, osteoclasts and mast cells, and acts as a lineage survival oncogene in melanoma. MITF coordinates survival, differentiation, cell cycle progression, cell migration, metabolism and lysosome biogenesis. Yet how the activity of this key transcription factor is controlled remains poorly understood. Here we show that GSK3b, downstream from both the PI3K and Wnt pathways, and BRAF/MAPK signaling converge to control MITF nuclear export. Phosphorylation of the melanocyte MITF-M isoform in response to BRAF/MAPK signaling primes for phosphorylation by GSK3b, a kinase inhibited by both PI3K and Wnt signaling. Dual phosphorylation, but not monophosphorylation, then promotes MITF nuclear export by activating a previously unrecognized hydrophobic export signal. Nonmelanocyte MITF isoforms exhibit poor regulation by MAPK signaling, but instead their export is controlled by mTOR. We uncover here an unanticipated mode of MITF regulation that integrates the output of key developmental and cancer-associated signaling pathways to gate MITF flux through the import-export cycle. The results have significant implications for our understanding of melanoma progression and stem cell renewal

### Sample Protocol
Proteins phosphorylated in vitro were subjected to SMART digest (Thermo Fisher) treatment according to the manufacturer’s instructions, desalted using SepPak reversed phase columns, and injected into an LCMS/MS platform (Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC and Orbitrap Fusion Lumos). Sample separation was undertaken using a 50 cm long EasySpray column (ES803, Thermo Fisher) with a 75 µm inner diameter and a gradient of 2- 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO with a 250 nl/min flow rate for 60 min. MS1 spectra with a resolution of 120.000 and an ion target of 400.000 were acquired, followed by a top speed duty cycle of up to 3 seconds for MS/MS acquisition. Precursor ions isolated in the quadrupole with a mass window of 1.6 Th were fragmented with HCD@28% normalized collision energy. MS/MS data were acquired in the ion trap in rapid scan mode and an ion target of 4000.

### Data Protocol
PEAKS Server V.7 (Bioinformatics Solutions) and a Uniprot/Trembl database were used to analyze the LC-MS/MS data set to identify Phosphorylation (S, T, Y), as well as Oxidation (M) and Deamidation (N, Q). Mass tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor and 0.5 Da for fragment mass with a peptide level false discovery rate set to 1%. Freestyle 1.3 (Thermo Fisher) was used to generate extracted ion chromatograms of relevant peptides that were quantified after Gaussian smoothing (3 data points).

### Publication Abstract
The close integration of the MAPK, PI3K, and WNT signaling pathways underpins much of development and is deregulated in cancer. In principle, combinatorial posttranslational modification of key lineage-specific transcription factors would be an effective means to integrate critical signaling events. Understanding how this might be achieved is central to deciphering the impact of microenvironmental cues in development and disease. The microphthalmia-associated transcription factor MITF plays a crucial role in the development of melanocytes, the retinal pigment epithelium, osteoclasts, and mast cells and acts as a lineage survival oncogene in melanoma. MITF coordinates survival, differentiation, cell-cycle progression, cell migration, metabolism, and lysosome biogenesis. However, how the activity of this key transcription factor is controlled remains poorly understood. Here, we show that GSK3, downstream from both the PI3K and Wnt pathways, and BRAF/MAPK signaling converges to control MITF nuclear export. Phosphorylation of the melanocyte MITF-M isoform in response to BRAF/MAPK signaling primes for phosphorylation by GSK3, a kinase inhibited by both PI3K and Wnt signaling. Dual phosphorylation, but not monophosphorylation, then promotes MITF nuclear export by activating a previously unrecognized hydrophobic export signal. Nonmelanocyte MITF isoforms exhibit poor regulation by MAPK signaling, but instead their export is controlled by mTOR. We uncover here an unanticipated mode of MITF regulation that integrates the output of key developmental and cancer-associated signaling pathways to gate MITF flux through the import-export cycle. The results have significant implications for our understanding of melanoma progression and stem cell renewal.

### Keywords
Mitf | melanoma | mapk | nuclear export | gsk3b

### Affiliations
Target discovery Institute
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Georgina Berridge

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Target discovery Institute


