### Accession
PXD028506

### Title
Evaluation of Bacillus velezensis Kos for the control of  Lecanicillium fungicola

### Description
Lecanicillium fungicola, the causative agent of dry bubble disease on Agaricus bisporus results in significant crop losses for mushroom growers worldwide. Dry bubble disease is treated through strict hygiene control methods and the application of chemical fungicides but an increase in fungicide resistant L. fungicola strains has resulted in a need to develop alternative biocontrol treatment methods. The aim of the work presented here was to evaluate the response of L. fungicola to a Bacillus velezensis isolate to assess its potential as a novel biocontrol agent. The bacterial species in Serenade, a commercially available biocontrol treatment was also included in this analysis. Exposure of 48 hr L. fungicola cultures to 25% v/v 96h B. velezensis culture filtrate resulted in a 45% reduction in biomass (P < 0.0002) and a disruption in hyphal structure and morphology. Characterisation of the proteomic response of L. fungicola following exposure to B. velezensis culture filtrate revealed an increase in the abundance of a variety of proteins associated with stress response (Norsolorinic acid reductase (+8 fold), isocitrate lyase (+7 fold) and MMS19 nucleotide excision repair protein (+4 fold).  There was also a decrease in the abundance of proteins associated with transcription (40S ribosomal protein S30 (-33 fold), 60S ribosomal protein L5 (-45 foldThe results presented here indicate that B. velezensis culture filtrate is capable of inhibiting the growth of L. fungicola and inducing a stress response, thus indicating its potential to control this important pathogen of mushrooms.

### Sample Protocol
L. fungicola hypahe treated with either 96 hr Serenade CF, 96 hr B. velezensis CF or NB (control) were crushed in liquid nitrogen using a pestle and mortar.Lysis buffer (8 m urea, 2 m thiourea, and 0.1 m Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) dissolved in 25ml ddH2O) was then applied to the tissue. Lysis buffer was supplemented with protease inhibitors (Pepstatin A, Leupeptin and Phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)) to prevent protein degradation.The cell lysate was collected and sonicated using a probe at X40 power for 20 seconds three times. Samples were then centrifuged for 8 min at 13,000 × g. The Bradford method was used to determine the volume needed to get 100 ng of protein and this was  acetone (sigma) precipitated overnight. The samples were centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 10 mins to pellet the protein sample from the acetone. Once the acetone had been removed, the samples were resuspended in 25 μl resuspension buffer (8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) dissolved in 25 ml  ddH2O). QubitTM quantification system (Invitrogen) was then used to quantify the protein sample. Ammonium bicarbonate (125 μl) was added to 20 μl of the sample which were then reduced using dithiothreitol (DTT) (1 μl). This was followed by a 20 min incubation at 56 °C. 0.55 m iodoacetamide (IAA) (2.7 μl) was applied to alkylate the samples which were then incubated in the dark, at room temperature for 15 min. Protease Max Surfactant Trypsin Enhancer (Promega) (1 μl) and Sequence Grade Trypsin (Promega) (1 μl) were applied to digest the proteins within the sample. Samples were left to incubate at 37 °C for 18 hr. TFA (1 μl) was applied to each sample which were then left to incubate at room temp for 5 min to halt protein digestion. Samples were centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 5 mins and 65 μl  of the supernatant was purified with C18 Spin Columns (Pierce), following the manufacturer's instructions. A SpeedyVac concentrator (Thermo Scientific Savant DNA 120) dried the eluted proteins which were then resuspended in 2% v/v acetonitrile and 0.05% v/v TFA to give a final peptide concentration of 1 μg/μl Samples were placed in a sonication bath for 5 min and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 5 min. Samples were run on a QExactive (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) high resolution accurate mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. 0.75 μg of peptide mix was applied to the QExactive. Peptides were separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient from 2%–40% on a Biobasic C18 Picofrit column (100 mm length, 75 mm ID), using a 120-min reverse phase gradient at a low rate of 250nl/min. A full MS scan of range 200–2000 was followed to select the 15 most intense ions prior to MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Max-Quant (version 1.6.17 https://www.maxquant.org/) was employed to identify the proteins present within the sample from the data generated by the QE mass spectrometer. Max-Quant cross referenced the protein against a T. reesei proteome fasta file downloaded from Uniprot (Strain: JB137-S8, Proteome ID: UP000008493, Genome accession: AEOL010000). The resulting Max-Quant data was then uploaded to Perseus (version 1.6.14.0) for further statistical data analysis. The LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and filtered to remove any proteins within the sample with non-existent values which suggest absence or low abundance within the sample. A principal component analysis (PCA) was generated to compare the four sets of samples based on their similarities. A Blast 2 Go tool (https://www.blast2go.com/) was used to generate gene ontology (GO) and to provide terms for gene ontology biological process (BP), gene ontology cellular component (CC), gene ontology molecular function (MF) and UniProt name for each protein identified. Multiple sample t-tests and ANOVA significance tests identified the statistically significant and differentially abundant (SSDA) proteins. SSDA proteins with a relative fold change greater than +/- 0.58 were retained for further analysis and were used  to make volcano plots. The log2 fold change for SSDA were plotted on the x axis and the log p values on the y axis for each pairwise comparison. SSDA proteins were Z- score normalised to generate a heatmap and hierarchical clustering.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Agaricus bisporus, Lecanicillium fungicola, Proteomics, Bacillus velezensis

### Affiliations
Maynooth University
Lab PI

### Submitter
Joy Clarke

### Lab Head
Dr Kevin Kavanagh
Lab PI


