### Accession
PXD025571

### Title
Proteometabolomics for unsupervised identification of protein–metabolite interactions

### Description
Protein–metabolite interactions play an important role in the cell’s metabolism and many methods have been developed to screen them in vitro. However, few methods can be applied at a large scale and not alter biological state. Here we describe a proteometabolomic approach, using chromatography to generate cell fractions which are then analyzed with mass spectrometry for both protein and metabolite identification. Integrating the proteomic and metabolomic analyses makes it possible to identify protein-bound metabolites. Applying the concept to the thermophilic fungus Chaetomium thermophilum, we predict many likely protein-metabolite interactions, most of them novel. As a proof of principle, we experimentally validate a predicted interaction between the ribosome and isopentenyl adenine.

### Sample Protocol
40 µl of each fraction were subjected to a tryptic in-solution digest as previously described[24,25]. 2 µl of 20% SDS were added to avoid precipitation of proteins during the reduction and alkylation of proteins. Proteins were reduced by the addition of 1 µl of 200 mM DTT in 200 mM Hepes/NaOH pH 8.5 following incubation for 30 min at 56°C. Subsequently, 2 µl of 400 mM chloroacetamide in 200 mM Hepes/NaOH, pH 8.5 were added and samples were incubated for 30 min at 25 °C before excess chloroacetamide was quenched by the addition of 2 µl of 200 mM DTT in Hepes/NaOH, pH 8.5. For the in-solution digest, the reduced and alkylated samples were subjected to the Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) protocol[24,25]. To this end, 2 µl of Sera-Mag Beads, and 5 µl of 10% formic acid (v/v) were added. Acetonitrile (ACN) was added to achieve a final ACN percentage of 50%. Samples were incubated for 8 min before beads were captured on a magnetic rack. Beads were washed twice with 200 µl 70% ethanol and once with 200 µl ACN. Beads were resuspended in 10 µl of 0.8 µg of sequencing grade modified trypsin in 10 µl 100 mM Hepes/NaOH, pH 8.5 following overnight incubation at 37°C. Peptides were subjected to a reverse phase clean-up step and analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive Plus. Samples were analyzed with liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry. Peptides were separated using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano-LC system equipped with a trapping cartridge and an analytical column. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade acetonitrile. After loading the peptides onto the trapping cartridge (30 µl/min of solvent A for 3 min), elution was performed with a constant flow of 0.3 µL/min using 90 min analysis time (with a 2–28% B elution, followed by an increase to 40% B,80% B washing step and re-equilibration to initial conditions). The LC system was directly coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer using a Nanospray-Flex ion source and a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a spray voltage of 2.3 kV and a capillary temperature of 275 °C. Full scan MS spectra with a mass range of 350–1400 m/z were acquired in profile mode using a resolution of 70,000 [maximum fill time of 100 ms or a maximum of 3e6 ions (automatic gain control, AGC)]. Fragmentation was triggered for the top 20 peaks with charge 2 to 4 on the MS scan (data-dependent acquisition) with a 20 s dynamic exclusion window (normalized collision energy was 26). Precursors were isolated with 1.7 m/z and MS/MS spectra were acquired in profile mode with a resolution of 17,500 (maximum fill time of 50 ms or an AGC target of 1e5 ions).

### Data Protocol
For the data analysis, the MS raw data were analyzed by MaxQuant 1.6.1

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Protein–metabolite interactions

### Affiliations
EMBL

### Submitter
Yuanyue Li

### Lab Head
Dr Peer Bork
EMBL


