### Accession
PXD008156

### Title
Human myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury model to study cardiac stem cells activation and regeneration mechanisms

### Description
The importance of regenerative potential of cardiac stem/progenitor cells (CSCs) after acute myocardial infarction (AMI) has been emphasized in the last decade. Several studies have demonstrated that this cell population has a relevant role in myocardial repair, supported by the establishment of a paracrine cross-talk between CSCs and the injured tissue. However, the majority of current in vitro strategies to study these cells fails to include important modulators of CSC activity, such as the paracrine effect of cardiomyocytes (CMs) and the physicochemical changes occurring in tissue during Ischemia/Reperfusion (I/R) injury. In this work, we established the first human in vitro heterotypic model of myocardial I/R injury with human CSCs (hCSCs) and human induced pluripotent cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs) using transwell inserts. hCSCs response to I/R was characterized using advanced whole proteomic mass spectrometry-based tools that allowed us to propose new pathways in hCSCs regenerative process, including: cell cycle regulation inhibition, proliferation through EGF signaling, gluthathione-mediated reactive oxygen species detoxification, and signaling through several paracrine growth factors. The model established in this work contributes with new insights regarding hCSC biology in response to AMI and provides an important tool to study and modulate molecular mechanisms involved in the regenerative potential of CSCs.

### Sample Protocol
In each time point of injury (BI: before injury; PostI: Post Ischemia; 1h/16h: 1h/16h Post Reperfusion), hCSCs were harvested, washed twice with DPBS and frozen at -80 ºC until further analysis. Cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (0.1% v/v Triton X-100) and lysed with 30 passes through the 301/2 Gauge needle at 4 ºC. Total protein was clarified by centrifugation (15,000 × g, 15 min at 4 °C) and quantified using BCA™ Protein Assay Kit (Pierce). After reduction (DTT, 10 mM, 40 min, 56 °C) and alquilation (IAA, 20 mM, 30 min in the dark, room temperature, 18–20 °C), overnight digestion with trypsin (trypsin:sample = 1:50) was performed plus a second in-solution trypsin digestion in 80% (v/v) acetonitrile (trypsin:sample = 1:100). Sample tryptic peptides were analyzed by NanoLC–MS/MS using TripleTOF 6600 (ABSciex). External calibration was performed using beta-galactosidase digest (ABSciex). The 40 most intense precursor ions from the MS spectra were selected for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired with the Analyst software TF 1.7 (ABSciex). The raw MS and MS/MS data were analyzed using Protein Pilot Software v.5.0 (ABSciex) for protein identification. The search was performed against SwissProt protein database with taxonomic restriction to Homo sapiens (version 2015_05). Trypsin was selected as digestion type, Iodoacetamide was selected as source of Cys alkylation and the TripleTOF 6600 as the Instrument. The ID focus was on biological modifications and Amino acid substitutions. The search effort was set as thorough. The results quality was based on an FDR analysis and a detected protein threshold of 0.1 (Unused protein score) and 20% (Confidence). Protein identification was considered with an unused score greater than 1.3 (95% confidence). Analysis of the proteome sample list was performed using Venny 2.1 (http://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/) and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cardiac stem/progenitor cells; acute myocardial infarction; ischemia/reperfusion injury

### Affiliations
ITQB-NOVA, Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Av. Da República, 2780-157 Oeiras, Portugal;iBET, Instituto de Biologia Experimental e Tecnológica, Apartado 12, 2780-901, Oeiras , Portugal
iBET/ ITQB-NOVA

### Submitter
Maria Sebastião

### Lab Head
Dr Paula Marques Alves
ITQB-NOVA, Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Av. Da República, 2780-157 Oeiras, Portugal;iBET, Instituto de Biologia Experimental e Tecnológica, Apartado 12, 2780-901, Oeiras , Portugal


