### Accession
PXD021271

### Title
Cyclin Y is expressed in platelets and modulates integrin outside-in signaling

### Description
Diabetes is associated with platelet hyperactivation and enhanced risk of thrombosis development. We have previously shown that calpain inhibition stabilizes the platelet proteome in diabetic patients. However, a global proteome analysis comparing platelets from healthy donors and from diabetic patients is missing. Therefore, we performed comparative proteomic studies to identify differentially expressed proteins and their possible function in platelet activation.  Mass spectrometry analysis identified cyclin Y in platelets and levels were found to be reduced in platelets from diabetic patients. In the latter, cyclin Y was degraded by the protease calpain. In order to assess the function of cylcin Y in platelets, mice globally lacking cyclin Y were generated using CRISPR/Cas9 technology by inserting a premature Stop codon in exon 1 of Ccny gene. Cyclin Y deletion resulted in a reduction in the circulating platelet number but the agonist-induced platelet aggregation was comparable in platelets from wild-type and Ccny-/- mice, as was agonist-induced α and dense granule secretion. However, cyclin Y-deficient platelets demonstrated enhanced adhesion to fibronectin and collagen as well as an attenuated spreading and clot retraction, indicating an alteration in “outside in” integrin signalling. The phenotype was accompanied by a significant reduction in the agonist-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of the β3 integrin in Ccny-/- platelets. Stimulation of human platelets or platelets from wildtype mice with thrombin led to the membrane translocation of cyclin Y where it associates with the tyrosine kinase Fyn suggesting that cyclin Y might play a role as an adaptor protein for the tyrosine kinase to phosphorylate the cytoplasmic tail of the β3 integrin. Thus, cyclin Y is present in anucleated platelets where it is involved in the regulation of integrin-mediated outside in signalling.

### Sample Protocol
Well purified platelet from healthy donors and donors with diabetes were lysed with lysis buffer containing, 50mM Tris HCL, 150mM NaCL, 1% SDS with complete mini EDTA and PhosStop. Protein concentration was determined using a bicinchoninic acid assay. Afterwards, cysteines were reduced by 30 min incubation at 56 °C with 10 mM dithiothrietol and free sulfhydryl groups were alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature. Samples were processed using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) with a 30 kDa molecular weight cutoff spin filter. and the digestion was performed in 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate, 0.2 M GuHCl, 2 Mm CaCl2, using a trypsin to protein ratio of 1:20 (w/w) for 14 h at 37 °C.  After incubation, generated peptides were eluted by centrifugation. Finally, digestion wasstopped by acidification with 10% TFA to a final concentration of 1%.  Peptides samples were used for a label-free proteome analysis. Thus, each sample was individually analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, using a U3000 nano-RSLC system online-coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were loaded on Progenesis QI for proteomics software from Nonlinear Dynamics. In the software, runs were aligned and the generated peak list was exported. The exported peak list was searched against a concatenated target/decoy version of the human Uniprot database on Searchgui 2.2.2, using X! TANDEM Sledgehammer (2013.09.01.1) and OMSSA as search engines with the following search parameters: (i) trypsin as protease with a maximum of two missed cleavages, (ii) carbamidomethylation of Cys (+57.0214 Da) as fixed, and (iii) oxidation of Met (+15.9949 Da) as variable modification. MS and MS/MS tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da.  Search results were combined in PeptideShaker version 1.2.0, filtered at an FDR of 1% and reimported into the Progenesis software. Peptide sequences containing oxidized Met and pyro-Glu obtained from the second pass X!Tandem search were omitted from further data analysis, and only proteins quantified with at least two unique peptides were considered for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Diabetes, Platelets

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für
Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V.

### Submitter
Fiorella Andrea Solari

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Sickmann
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V.


