### Accession
PXD018192

### Title
Proteomic dataset for clematis in respose to heat stress

### Description
This project presents the raw data about pretomic of two clematis seedings in response to heat stress at 38 oC for 3 h

### Sample Protocol
Two clematis lines with contrasting thermotolerance ability (Polish Spirit and Stolwijk Gold) were grown in pots. 3 year old plants were treated with a heat stress treatment of 38 oC for 3 h, and subsequently the leave were sampled for proteomic experiments.

### Data Protocol
Total protein was extracted from heat treated leaves by using a SDS lysis buffer (2 M thiourea, and 1% SDS) with a protease inhibitor. Protein concentrations were detected with a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce, Thermo, USA). Protein digestion and peptide labeling were performed by Duplex TMT. 50 μg of acetone lyophilized protein pellet of each sample was resuspended with 50 μL of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). After the pellet was sufficiently suspended, 1.25 μL trypsin per 50 μg protein was supplied, and the sample was kept at 37 °C overnight. A TMT-double-stranded isotope labeling reagent set (90063) containing TMT 6-126 and TMT 6-127 labeling reagent vials was used, with 41 μL anhydrous acetonitrile. The reagent was dissolved for 5 min with occasionally gentle shaking. Tubes containing samples were slightly centrifuged (1000 g, 1 min). After tagging for 2h at room temperature, hydroxylamine was added to react for 15min at room temperature. Subsequently, we added 4 μL 5% hydroxylamine to each sample and incubated them for 15 min to stop the reactions. The samples were combined in equal amounts and then used for LC-MS/MS analysis as described in the following section. The pooled samples were fractionated into fractions by ACQUITY Ultra Performance liquid chromatography (Waters, USA) with ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Column (1.7 μm, 2.1mm × 150 mm, Waters, USA) to increase proteomic depth. Labeled peptides were analyzed by online nano flow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry performed on an 9RKFSG2_NCS-3500R system (Thermo, USA) connected to a Q Exactive Plus quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo, USA) through a nanoelectrospray ion source. The Q Exactive Plus was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA) to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. The survey of full scan MS spectra (m/z 350-1300) was acquired in the Orbitrap with 70000 resolution. The automatic gain control (AGC) target at 3e6 and the maximum fill time was 20 ms. Then the top 20 most intense precursor ions were selected into collision cell for fragmentation by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD). The MS/MS resolution was set at 35000 (at m/z 100), the automatic gain control (AGC) target at 1e5, the maximum fill time at 50 ms, and dynamic exclusion was 18 seconds. The RAW data files were analyzed using ProteomeDiscoverer (Thermo Scientific, Version 2.2) against Clematis chinensis database (http://asia.ensembl.org/Mus_musculus/Info/Index). For both peptides and the MS/MS fragments, the threshold was specified to be ± 0.05 Dalton. Proteins are identified based on criteria for at least two peptides should match.

### Publication Abstract
Clematis florida Thun (CfT) is an ornamental and medicinal plant. It is a cold resistant but heat sensitive species and deserves to be further investigated to improve its adaptability to heat stress. Exploring the molecular mechanism potential via an omic-analysis constitutes a promising approach towards improving heat tolerance of CfT. Two CfT lines, heat resistance (HR) and heat sensitive (HS), with differential thermotolerance capacities were used for the integrative analyses of proteomics and transcriptomes. Transcriptomes analysis showed that various pathways were significantly enriched including plant hormone signal transduction and carbon fixation pathways in prokaryotes. Proteomics study revealed the enrichment of some other pathways comprising antioxidant activity and carbohydrates metabolism. Based on combined transcriptomes and proteomics analyses and following heat stress treatment, a total of 1724 annotated genes were overlapped between both CfT lines. Particularly, 84 differential expressed genes (DEGs) were overlapped in both CfT lines. Fifteen out of these 84 genes were up-regulated solely for HR line (PS) but not for HS one (SG). This strongly suggests a potential prominent role for these genes in the thermotolerance process in PS line. We corroborate that two Hsps (Hsp18 and Hsp70) out of 20 detected proteins with higher expression levels in PS than in SG based on either global transcripts or proteins levels. According to the transcriptomes and proteomics analyses, 6 proteins and their corresponding genes were found to be significantly abundant in HR line (PS). Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD018192. The expressions levels of these 6 genes were checked also for both CfT lines to evaluate their potential contributions in the heat tolerance process. Thus, their expression levels were approximately 2~4 times higher in HR than in HS line. We provided as well a representative schematic model to highlight the key genes involved in ROS scavenging and photorespiratory pathway in CfT. This model could be helpful also in understanding the mechanism of heat tolerance in CfT.

### Keywords
Proteomic, Ros, Clematis, Heat stress

### Affiliations
CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, Chinese academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 200032, China;
CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Mingnan Qu

### Lab Head
Dr Mingnan Qu
CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, Chinese academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 200032, China;


