### Accession
PXD002956

### Title
Comparative Proteomic Profiling of cranial  (superior) cervical ganglia (CCG) from horses with the multiple system neuropathy – equine grass sickness (EGS)

### Description
Equine grass sickness (EGS) is an acute, predominantly fatal, multiple system neuropathy of grazing horses with reported incidence rates of approximately 2%. An apparently identical disease occurs in multiple species including but not limited to cats, dogs, and rabbits. Although the precise aetiology remains unclear, ultrastructural findings have suggested that the primary lesion lies in the glycoprotein biosynthetic pathway of specific neuronal populations. The goal of this study was therefore to identify the molecular processes underpinning neurodegeneration in EGS. Here we use a bottom up approach beginning with the application of modern proteomic tools to the analysis of cranial (superior) cervical ganglion (CCG – a consistently affected tissue) from EGS affected patients and appropriate control cases postmortem. In what appears to be the first proteomic application of modern proteomic tools to equine neuronal tissues and/or to an inherent neurodegenerative disease of large animals (not a model of human disease), we identified 2311 proteins in CCG extracts, with 320 proteins increased and 186 decreased by greater than 20% relative to controls. Further examination of selected proteomic candidates by quantitative fluorescent western blotting (QFWB) and sub-cellular expression profiling by immunohistochemistry, highlighted a previously unreported dysregulation in proteins commonly associated with protein  misfolding/aggregation responses seen in a myriad of human neurodegenerative conditions,  including but not limited to amyloid precursor protein (APP), microtubule associated protein  (Tau) and multiple components of the ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS). Differentially expressed proteins eligible for in silico pathway analysis clustered predominantly into the following biofunctions: 1. Diseases & disorders including; neurological disease, skeletal & muscular disorders; 2. Molecular and cellular functions: including cellular assembly &  organisation, cell-to-cell signalling and interaction (including epinephrine, dopamine & adrenergic signalling and receptor function) and small molecule biochemistry. Interestingly, whilst the biofunctions identified in this study may represent pathways underpinning EGS induced neurodegeneration, this is also the first demonstration of potential molecular  conservation (including previously unreported dysregulation of the UPS and APP) spanning  the degenerative cascades from an apparently unrelated condition of large animals, to small  animal models with altered neuronal vulnerability, and human neurological conditions.  Importantly, this study highlights the feasibility and benefits of applying modern proteomic  techniques to veterinary investigations of neurodegenerative processes in diseases of large  animals.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction: Ganglia were partially thawed, the outer fascia removed by dissection, and a portion macerated with a scalpel before partial homogenisation in either RIPA buffer with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) for QFWB (see below), or iTRAQ extraction buffer containing 6M Urea, 2M thiourea, 2% CHAPS, 0.5% SDS and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) for proteomic processing (see below). Samples were pooled by condition and manually homogenised in a dounce glass homogeniser. Homogenised samples were sonicated in a cup style sonicator 6 times for 15 sec at power level 7.5 with vortexing for 30 sec between each round of sonication. Samples were left on ice for 10 min before being re-vortexed then centrifuged at 20000g for 30 min at 4oC. The resulting pellet containing proteins insoluble when processed in this manner was stored at -80oC and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh 1.5 ml tube to be processed for iTRAQ labelling as previously described (17-20).   iTRAQ proteomic analysis: Protein was extracted in iTRAQ extraction buffer (6M Urea, 2M thiourea, 2% CHAPS, 0.5% SDS and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) pH 7.4) before acetone precipitation and labelling for iTRAQ analysis.   Protein extracts (N=6 ganglia per group, see figure 2) were precipitated with -20oC chilled acetone (1:4, vol/vol) and stored at -20oC overnight. The precipitates were spun at 4oC for 10 min then washed with an acetone:water mixture (4:1, vol/vol) twice prior to air drying. The pellets were then resuspended in iTRAQ sample buffer (25µl 500mM TEAB, 1μl denaturant (2% SDS) and 2µl of reducing agent (TCEP)). The samples were allowed to incubate for 1 h at 60oC prior to protein estimation in triplicate (3 x 1µl) by microBCA assay (Pierce). Samples were run in duplicate to utilise all four tags from the 4plex kit and increase peptide identification yield as previously described (17-20).  Each sample equivalent to 100μg was processed separately using the FASP method as reported by Liebler et al (Proteomics, 5, 1742-1745, 2005) and later by Wiśniewski et al (Nature Methods 6, 359-362, 2009) prior to digestion with trypsin (Sequencing grade, Roche). After digestion, the samples were dried using a SpeedVac concentrator and then re-suspended in 25μl of dissolution buffer as provided in the iTRAQ Reagents Multiplex kit (AB Sciex). The samples were then labelled respectively according to the protocol provided by the manufacturer (AB Sciex). The four labelled samples (Control-114&116, EGS-115&117) were then pooled together in equal proportions and subsequently dried using a SpeedVac concentrator. The pooled iTRAQ 4plex sample was then desalted using a homemade porous R2 ZipTip column and then fractionated by Strong Cation eXchange (SCX) using a PolySULFOETHYL A column (2.1 x 200mm, 5μm, PolyLC) on a Ultimate U3000 (Dionex) hplc system. The following buffer system was used Buffer A: 5mM KH2PO4 in 20% CH3CN (pH2.7) and buffer B: 500mM NaCl in 5mM KH2PO4 in 20% CH3CN (pH2.7).The flow rate was set to 0.2 ml per minute with a linear gradient from 0 to 50% B over 25 min, then a linear gradient from 50 to 100% B over 9 min.   Each fraction from the SCX fractionation was then dried using a SpeedVac concentrator and stored at -80oC. Stored SCX fractions of the pooled iTRAQ 4plex sample were then re-suspended in 10µl of 5% formic acid, diluted to 1% formic acid and then 15µl aliquots injected onto an Ultimate RSLC nano UHPLC system coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific). The iTRAQ labelled peptides were injected onto a trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 100μm x 2 cm, C18, 5μm, nanoViper) and then separated using a 2 h linear gradient from 2-40% B (80% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) on a separation column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75μm x 15cm, C18, 2μm, nanoViper) at a flow rate of 300nl/min. The mass spectrometry parameters were set as follows: FT-MS (survey scan) resolution was set at 60,000, the 15 most intense precursor ions were chosen for fragmentation by High energy Collisional induced Dissociation (HCD), the precursor isolation window was set at 1.2 Da and the ms/ms scan resolution was set to 7500. AGC values for FT-MS and FT-MS/MS were set at 1e6 and 5e4 ions respectively. The maximum fill times for FT-MS and FT-MS/MS were set at 500 and 200 msec respectively.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were extracted using Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4, Thermo Scientific) for both quantitation, and for identification by searching against the NCBI mammalia and NCBI bacteria databases using the Mascot Search Engine (Version 2.4.1, Matrix Science). Search parameters included the following: Enzyme: Trypsin/P; Fixed modifications (Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ4plex (N-term); Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Dioxidation (M), Acetyl (N-term), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), iTRAQ4plex (K), iTRAQ4plex (Y); peptide mass tolerance ± 10ppm; fragment mass tolerance ± 0.06 Da; Maximum of 2 miss-cleavages.

### Publication Abstract
Equine grass sickness (EGS) is an acute, predominantly fatal, multiple system neuropathy of grazing horses with reported incidence rates of &#x223c;2%. An apparently identical disease occurs in multiple species, including but not limited to cats, dogs, and rabbits. Although the precise etiology remains unclear, ultrastructural findings have suggested that the primary lesion lies in the glycoprotein biosynthetic pathway of specific neuronal populations. The goal of this study was therefore to identify the molecular processes underpinning neurodegeneration in EGS. Here, we use a bottom-up approach beginning with the application of modern proteomic tools to the analysis of cranial (superior) cervical ganglion (CCG, a consistently affected tissue) from EGS-affected patients and appropriate control cases postmortem. In what appears to be the proteomic application of modern proteomic tools to equine neuronal tissues and/or to an inherent neurodegenerative disease of large animals (not a model of human disease), we identified 2,311 proteins in CCG extracts, with 320 proteins increased and 186 decreased by greater than 20% relative to controls. Further examination of selected proteomic candidates by quantitative fluorescent Western blotting (QFWB) and subcellular expression profiling by immunohistochemistry highlighted a previously unreported dysregulation in proteins commonly associated with protein misfolding/aggregation responses seen in a myriad of human neurodegenerative conditions, including but not limited to amyloid precursor protein (APP), microtubule associated protein (Tau), and multiple components of the ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS). Differentially expressed proteins eligible for in silico pathway analysis clustered predominantly into the following biofunctions: (1) diseases and disorders, including; neurological disease and skeletal and muscular disorders and (2) molecular and cellular functions, including cellular assembly and organization, cell-to-cell signaling and interaction (including epinephrine, dopamine, and adrenergic signaling and receptor function), and small molecule biochemistry. Interestingly, while the biofunctions identified in this study may represent pathways underpinning EGS-induced neurodegeneration, this is also the first demonstration of potential molecular conservation (including previously unreported dysregulation of the UPS and APP) spanning the degenerative cascades from an apparently unrelated condition of large animals, to small animal models with altered neuronal vulnerability, and human neurological conditions. Importantly, this study highlights the feasibility and benefits of applying modern proteomic techniques to veterinary investigations of neurodegenerative processes in diseases of large animals.

### Keywords
Ltq orbitrap velos pro, Equine grass sickness, Nlc-ms/ms, Fasp, Equine, Neuropathy, Itraq

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences
Division of Neurobiology The Roslin Institute Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies College of Medicine and Veterinary Medicine University of Edinburgh Easter Bush Midlothian EH25 9RG SCOTLAND, UK  t: 44 (0)131 651 9119 e: T.M.Wishart@Roslin.ed.ac.uk website: http://www.roslin.ed.ac.uk/tom-wishart http://www.euanmacdonaldcentre.com/research.html

### Submitter
Douglas Lamont

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas M. Wishart
Division of Neurobiology The Roslin Institute Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies College of Medicine and Veterinary Medicine University of Edinburgh Easter Bush Midlothian EH25 9RG SCOTLAND, UK  t: 44 (0)131 651 9119 e: T.M.Wishart@Roslin.ed.ac.uk website: http://www.roslin.ed.ac.uk/tom-wishart http://www.euanmacdonaldcentre.com/research.html


