### Accession
PXD005575

### Title
Structure of the Homodimeric Androgen Receptor Ligand-Binding Domain

### Description
The androgen receptor (AR) plays a crucial role in normal physiology, development and metabolism as well as in the etiology and treatment of diverse pathologies such as androgen insensitivity syndromes (AIS), male infertility, and prostate cancer (PCa). Here, we show that dimerization of AR ligand-binding domain (LBD) is induced by receptor agonists but not by antagonists. The 2.15-Å crystal structure of homodimeric, agonist- and coactivator peptide bound AR-LBD unveils a 1,000-Å2 large dimerization surface, which harbors over 40 previously unexplained AIS- and PCa-associated point mutations. An AIS mutation in the self-association interface (P767A) disrupts dimer formation in vivo, and has a detrimental effect on the transactivating properties of full-length AR, despite retained hormone-binding capacity. The conservation of essential residues suggests that the newly unveiled dimerization mechanism might be shared by other nuclear receptors. Our work defines AR-LBD homodimerization as an essential step in the proper functioning of this important transcription factor.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were in-gel digested following standard protocols. Resulting peptides were dried in the speed vac and resuspended in 40 uL of 1% FA. The nano-LC-MS/MS set up was as follows. Digested peptides were diluted in 1% FA. Samples were loaded to a 180 µm × 2 cm C18 Symmetry trap column (Waters) at a flow rate of 15 µl/min using a nanoAcquity Ultra Performance LCTM chromatographic system (Waters Corp., Milford, MA). Peptides were separated using a C18 analytical column (BEH130™ C18 75 m × 25 cm, 1.7 µm, Waters Corp.) with a 120 min run, comprising three consecutive steps with linear gradients from 1 to 35% B in 180 min, from 35 to 50% B in 10 min (A= 0.1% FA in water, B= 0.1% FA in CH3CN). The column outlet was directly connected to an Advion TriVersa NanoMate (Advion) fitted on an LTQ-FT Ultra mass spectrometer (Thermo). The mass spectrometer was operated using the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Survey MS scans were acquired in the FT with the resolution (defined at 400 m/z) set to 100,000. Up to six of the most intense ions per scan were fragmented and detected in the linear ion trap. The ion count target value was 1,000,000 for the survey scan and 50,000 for the MS/MS scan. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 s. Spray voltage in the NanoMate source was set to 1.70 kV. Capillary voltage and tube lens on the LTQ-FT were tuned to 40 V and 120 V. Minimal signal required to trigger MS to MS/MS switch was set to 1000 and activation Q was 0.250. The spectrometer was working in positive polarity mode and singly charge state precursors were rejected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Searches were run using StavroX v3.6 against a fasta database, which contained AR BD protein. Search parameters included chymotrypsin enzyme specificity, allowing for two missed cleavage sites. Searches were run three times using three different cross link possibilities: BMOE, BMOE + H2O, BMOE + 2H2O. Peptide mass tolerance was 10 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was 0.6 Da. Cross linked peptide identifications were manually validated

### Publication Abstract
The androgen receptor (AR) plays a crucial role in normal physiology, development and metabolism as well as in the aetiology and treatment of diverse pathologies such as androgen insensitivity syndromes (AIS), male infertility and prostate cancer (PCa). Here we show that dimerization of AR ligand-binding domain (LBD) is induced by receptor agonists but not by antagonists. The 2.15-&#xc5; crystal structure of homodimeric, agonist- and coactivator peptide-bound AR-LBD unveils a 1,000-&#xc5;<sup>2</sup> large dimerization surface, which harbours over 40 previously unexplained AIS- and PCa-associated point mutations. An AIS mutation in the self-association interface (P767A) disrupts dimer formation in vivo, and has a detrimental effect on the transactivating properties of full-length AR, despite retained hormone-binding capacity. The conservation of essential residues suggests that the unveiled dimerization mechanism might be shared by other nuclear receptors. Our work defines AR-LBD homodimerization as an essential step in the proper functioning of this important transcription factor.

### Keywords
Ar, Cross-linking

### Affiliations
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona),  The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Baldiri Reixac, 10, 08028 Barcelona, Spain
Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Core Facility, Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona),  The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Baldiri Reixac, 10, 08028 Barcelona, Spain

### Submitter
Marta Vilaseca

### Lab Head
Dr Marta Vilaseca Casas
Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Core Facility, Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona),  The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Baldiri Reixac, 10, 08028 Barcelona, Spain


