### Accession
PXD029609

### Title
The Human Disease Gene LYSET is Essential for Lysosomal Enzyme Transport and Viral Infection

### Description
Lysosomes are key degradative compartments of the cell. Transport to lysosomes is
mediated by tagging soluble enzymes with mannose 6-phosphate (M6P) by GlcNAc-1-
phosphotransferase whose deficiency leads to the severe lysosomal storage disorder mucolipidosis
II (MLII). Several viruses require lysosomal cathepsins to cleave structural proteins and thus
depend on functional GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase. Using genome-scale CRISPR screens, we
identify LYSET as essential for infection by cathepsin-dependent viruses including SARS-CoV-
2. We show that LYSET deficiency results in global loss of M6P tagging and mislocalization of
GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase to lysosomes. Lyset knockout mice exhibit MLII-like phenotypes
and human pathogenic LYSET alleles fail to restore lysosomal sorting defects. Thus, we uncover
LYSET as an indispensable component of the M6P trafficking machinery and reveal the
biochemical basis of an inherited disease caused by mutations in LYSET.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were resuspended in 500 µl of 1X lysis buffer (2% SDS, 100 mM HEPES pH 7.5) and concentrated cell culture supernatants (500 µl each) were combined with 500 µl of 2X lysis buffer. Samples were incubated at 95 °C for 10 minutes, followed by five cycles of sonication using a Bioruptor Plus with setting “high” and a duration of 30 seconds each, followed by another incubation of the samples at 95 °C for 5 minutes. This procedure was performed twice for each sample. Subsequently, lysates were centrifuged at 20,000 × g and RT for 30 minutes, and the clear supernatants were transferred to new microtubes. The preparation of samples for mass spectrometric analysis was performed as described elsewhere (Mosen et al., 2021) with minor modifications. Briefly, the protein content of samples was determined using the DC protein assay, 200 µg of protein were precipitated with chloroform/methanol, and the pellets air-dried. Proteins were re-solubilized in 0.1% RapiGest, 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.8 by incubation at 95 °C for 10 minutes followed by two cycles of sonication using a Bioruptor Plus with setting “high” and a duration of 30 seconds each. Subsequently, proteins were reduced and alkylated by dithiothreitol and acrylamide, respectively, and the reaction was quenched by further addition of dithiothreitol (Müller and Winter, 2017). Samples were adjusted to a concentration of ~1 µg/µl, and tryptic digestion was performed overnight at a trypsin to sample ratio of 1 to 100. The following day, RapiGest was hydrolyzed, precipitated by centrifugation, and the clear supernatants were desalted using 10 mg Oasis HLB cartridges. Eluate fractions were dried, resuspended in 5% acetonitrile and the peptide concentration was determined with a fluorometric peptide assay. Samples were analyzed with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-UHPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Analytical columns were produced in-house. Spray tips were generated with a P-2000 laser puller (Sutter Instrument), from 100 µm ID x 360 µm OD fused silica capillaries and packed with 3 µm ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ particles to a length of 40 cm. Dried peptides were reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid, and loaded together with 500 fmol internal retention time standards (iRTs) at a flow rate of 600 nl/min 99% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) 1% solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to the analytical column. For determination of peptides to be included in the existing PRM assay (Mosen et al., 2021) 2 µg of peptides were injected per run, while 1 µg was used for all other analyses. Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min with linear gradients from 1% to 35% solvent B of either 120 minutes (DIA and PRM) or 240 minutes (DDA). In DDA runs, MS1 spectra were recorded from m/z 300-1500 in the orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 60,000, an AGC target setting of 4 x 10e5, and with automatic adjustment of the maximum injection time. Precursor ions with a charge state of 2-7 were isolated in the quadrupole (m/z 1.4), fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 27% in the top speed mode (cycle time 5 s), and excluded for 60 seconds from fragmentation. MS2 spectra were acquired in the orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 30,000, an AGC target setting of 5 x 10e4, and with automatic adjustment of the maximum injection time. For DIA analyses, one MS1 scan was acquired at a mass range of m/z 350-1200 and a resolution of 120,000 in the orbitrap mass analyzer with an AGC target setting of 5 x 10e5 and a maximum injection time of 20 ms. This scan was followed by a series of 36 static MS2 for a m/z 24.1 mass window (m/z 0.5 overlap), sequentially covering the full MS1 scan range (total cycle time of 3.44 s). Peptides were fragmented by HCD with 27% collision energy and MS2 spectra acquired in the orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 30,000, an AGC target setting of 1 x 10e6, and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. For PRM measurements, a previously developed assay (Mosen et al., 2021) was extended by peptides representing Gnptg, Ctsl, Creg1, and Cln3. In these analyses, one MS1 spectrum was recorded from m/z 300-1500 in the orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 60,000, an AGC target setting of 4 x 10e5, and a maximum injection time of 118 ms. Targeted precursor ions were isolated in the quadrupole (isolation width: m/z 1.2), fragmented by HCD (27% collision energy), and MS2 spectra were recorded from m/z 200-2,000 in the orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 30,000. The AGC target was set to 5 x 10e4 and the maximum ion injection time to 54 ms.

### Data Protocol
DDA and DIA data were analyzed by Spectronaut 15 (version 15.1.210713.50606, Biognosys) making use of its integrated search engine Pulsar. Initially, a hybrid spectral library was built utilizing both DDA and DIA raw files generated in this study, and DDA data obtained from Ponnaiyan et al., 2020. Data were matched against Uniprot Mus musculus (63,755 entries, release date 03-2021), the MaxQuant contaminants database (245 entries, release 04-2019), and a list containing the 11 iRT peptides. The following search parameters were used: enzyme specificity: trypsin/P with up to two missed cleavage sites; fixed modification: propionamide (cysteine); variable modifications: acetylation (protein N-termini) and oxidation (methionine). For library generation, the most abundant 3 to 6 b/y ions per peptide were considered and the iRT concept (deep learning assisted iRT regression) was applied for retention time alignment. Subsequently, DIA data were matched to this library with dynamic assignment of precursor/fragment ion mass tolerances and peak extraction windows. For identification of peptides and proteins, default cutoffs (precursor PEP 0.2, precursor Qvalue 0.01, protein Qvalue 0.01 (experiment), protein Qvalue: 0.05 (run)) were applied. Peptide quantification was based on the mean area of the three most intense fragment ions and interference correction was enabled. Only peptides with valid values in ≥50% of all runs were accepted for quantification (q-value percentile). For cross run normalization, global median-based normalization was performed. To determine normalization factors for PRM analyses, DIA data analysis was performed without cross normalization and run-specific normalization factors were calculated based on peptide abundances. For protein quantification, the average intensity of the top three peptides was utilized. Differential abundance testing (unpaired t-test) and multiple testing correction was performed in Spectronaut using default settings. The PANTHER db classification system (version 17.0, GO database released 2020-11-01, was used for gene ontology enrichment analysis (Fisher’s Exact test, FDR correction). The total number of identified proteins of each individual experiment was used as background. PRM data were analyzed with Skyline (version 21.1.0.146) using a merged spectral library consisting of a previously published assay and eight peptides from Gnptg, Ctsl, Creg1, Cln3 selected in the course of this study. Only precursor ions with charge states of 2+/3+/4+ and fragment ions with charge states of +1/+2 were considered. MS1 and MS2 ion trace filtering were both performed in the centroid mode and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm was applied. The four most abundant fragment ions per peptide were selected automatically for quantification. After initial inspection of iRT peptide integration boundaries, automated quantification for the peptides contained in the assay was performed. Peptides were manually inspected in case a peak truncation was reported by Skyline, or if the coefficient of variation (CV) for the dotp value was either = 0 or ≥ 10%. If possible, integration boundaries were readjusted, if not, truncated peaks were excluded from further analysis. Peptide-centric reports were exported from Skyline and further processed in Perseus (version 1.6.15.0). For peptide quantification, summed areas under the curve (AUCs) of fragment ions were used. To compensate for different loading amounts, values were adjusted by corrections factors determined in the respective DIA datasets. Only peptide quantifications with dotp values ≥ 0.8 and ≥ 2 valid values in at least 1 condition were considered. For these peptides, a missing value imputation was performed (normal distribution-based) and protein fold-change ratios were calculated based on the mean of the respective peptide ratios. Figures were generated by R (version 4.1.0, R Core Team, 2013) and Prism (Version 6.01). The main R packages used for plotting were ggplot2 (3.3.5), RColorBrewer (1.1-2), EnhancedVolcano (1.10.0), and psych (2.1.9). Replicates constitute cell lysates from separate 15 cm cell culture plates (cell pellets) or the combined supernatant of two 15 cm cell culture plates (cell supernatant) for each replicate.

### Publication Abstract
Lysosomes are key degradative compartments of the cell. Transport to lysosomes relies on GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase-mediated tagging of soluble enzymes with mannose 6-phosphate (M6P). GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase deficiency leads to the severe lysosomal storage disorder mucolipidosis II (MLII). Several viruses require lysosomal cathepsins to cleave structural proteins and thus depend on functional GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase. We used genome-scale CRISPR screens to identify lysosomal enzyme trafficking factor (LYSET, also named TMEM251) as essential for infection by cathepsin-dependent viruses including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). LYSET deficiency resulted in global loss of M6P tagging and mislocalization of GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase from the Golgi complex to lysosomes. <i>Lyset</i> knockout mice exhibited MLII-like phenotypes, and human pathogenic LYSET alleles failed to restore lysosomal sorting defects. Thus, LYSET is required for correct functioning of the M6P trafficking machinery and mutations in LYSET can explain the phenotype of the associated disorder.

### Keywords
Targeted ms, Label free quantification, Parallel reaction monitoring (prm), Data independent acquisition (dia), Tmem 251, Mouse embryonic fibroblasts

### Affiliations
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Bonn

### Submitter
Peter Robert Mosen

### Lab Head
Dr Dominic Winter
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany


