### Accession
PXD043212

### Title
Identification of GRAF1 interactome mediated by GRAF1 phosphorylation in response to Mitophagy

### Description
Defects in the clearance of dysfunctional mitochondria contribute to the development of heart failure and several neurological disorders including Parkinson’s disease (PD). The mitophagic signaling pathways that control the rapid recognition, ubiquitin-tagging and encasement of dysfunctional mitochondria into protective autophagosomes have been well characterized and a major mechanism involves coordinated control of the serine/threonine kinase PINK1 and the E3 ubiquitin ligase, Parkin. What is less known is how such clearance processes are spatially controlled. Indeed, while recent studies indicate that actin remodeling can facilitate Parkin-dependent mitochondrial clearance, the underlying players that coordinate localized cytoskeletal remodeling to facilitate the trafficking and clearance of damaged mitochondria remain largely unclear. Herein, we demonstrate that the RhoGAP, GRAF1 (Arhgap26), is a PINK1 substrate that controls mitophagy. Cardiomyocyte-restricted GRAF1 depletion led to accumulation of dysfunctional mitochondria and attenuated stress-induced metabolic adaptation in adult hearts.  GRAF1 was required for mitochondria release from F-actin anchors, facilitated mitochondria capture by autophagosomes by enhancing Parkin-LC3 interactions, and promoted mitochondria-associated Arp2/3-dependent actin remodeling. This study employs mass spectrometry-based proteomics to elucidate the interactome of GRAF1, focusing on the protein-protein interactions facilitated by GRAF1 phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
Flag-Empty Vector(control) or Flag-GRAF1 WT (wildtype) or S668T670S671 non-phosphorylatable variant(mutant) was transiently expressed in GRAF1 KO Hela/YFP-Parkin cells for 20-24 hours followed by OA (2.5μM Oligomycin A and 250nM Antimycin A) 6 hours. Flag-GRAF1 was immunoprecipitated by M2 Flag antibody. Next, protein samples were subjected to on-bead trypsin digestion. After the last wash buffer step, 50 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8) containing 1 µg trypsin (Promega) was added to beads overnight at 37ºC with shaking. The next day, 500 ng of trypsin was added then incubated for an additional 3 h at 37ºC with shaking. Supernatants from pelleted beads were transferred, then beads were washed twice with 50 ul LC/MS grade water. These rinses were combined with original supernatants, then acidified with 2% formic acid. Peptides were desalted with peptide desalting spin columns (Thermo) and dried via vacuum centrifugation. Peptide samples were stored at -80˚C until further analysis.  The peptide samples were analyzed in duplicate by LC-MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1200 system coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size) (Thermo Scientific) and separated over a 120 min period. The gradient for separation consisted of a stepwise gradient from 5 to 48% mobile phase B, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Flow rate was set to 250nl/min. The QExactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode where the 15 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent fragmentation. Resolution for the precursor scan (m/z 350–1700) was set to 60,000 with a target value of 3 × 106 ions. MS/MS scan resolution was set to 15,000 with a target value of 1 × 105 ions, 75-ms maximum injection time. The normalized collision energy was set to 27% for higher-energy collisional dissociation(HCD). Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s, peptide match was set to preferred, and precursors with unknown charge or a charge state of 1 and ≥ 7 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.6.12.0) for identification and label-free quantitation (LFQ). Data were searched against a Uniprot Human reviewed database (containing 20,396 sequences, downloaded March 2021) using the integrated Andromeda search engine. A maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages were allowed. The variable modification specified was phosphorylation of serine/threonine/tyrosine, oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation. LFQ was enabled. Results were filtered to 1% FDR at the unique peptide level and grouped into proteins within MaxQuant. Match between runs was enabled.  Protein and phosphopeptide datasets were both imported into Perseus further processing. Only proteins with >1 unique+razor peptide were used for LFQ analysis. Proteins with >50% missing values were removed and missing values were replaced from normal distribution. Log2 fold change ratios (wildtype vs control and mutant vs control) were calculated using the averaged log2 LFQ intensities of the technical replicates for each sample group. Student’s t-test was performed for the pairwise comparisons, and p-values were calculated. Proteins were considered GRAF1 interactors if the log2 fold change ratio compared to control was >1.   Key: Sample 1 – FLAG AB Sample 2 - FLAG-GRAF1 wt Sample 3- FLAG-GRAF1 SA

### Publication Abstract
The serine/threonine kinase, PINK1, and the E3 ubiquitin ligase, Parkin, are known to facilitate LC3-dependent autophagosomal encasement and lysosomal clearance of dysfunctional mitochondria, and defects in this process contribute to a variety of cardiometabolic and neurological diseases. Although recent evidence indicates that dynamic actin remodeling plays an important role in PINK1/Parkin-mediated mitochondrial autophagy (mitophagy), the underlying signaling mechanisms remain unknown. Here, we identify the RhoGAP GRAF1 (Arhgap26) as a PINK1 substrate that regulates mitophagy. GRAF1 promotes the release of damaged mitochondria from F-actin anchors, regulates mitochondrial-associated Arp2/3-mediated actin remodeling and facilitates Parkin-LC3 interactions to enhance mitochondria capture by autophagosomes. Graf1 phosphorylation on PINK1-dependent sites is dysregulated in human heart failure, and cardiomyocyte-restricted Graf1 depletion in mice blunts mitochondrial clearance and attenuates compensatory metabolic adaptations to stress. Overall, we identify GRAF1 as an enzyme that coordinates cytoskeletal and metabolic remodeling to promote cardioprotection.

### Keywords
Heart, Pink1-parkin pathway, Graf1, Mitophagy

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Christine Mills

### Lab Head
Dr Joan Taylor
Department of Pathology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill


