### Accession
PXD015215

### Title
Stable Isotope Probing Deuterium LC-MS/MS

### Description
Competition between commensal and pathogenic microbes for monosaccharides derived from mucus layer O-glycans as nutrient sources has been proposed as a mechanism by which the gut microbiota counteracts pathogen colonization. However, our understanding of the microbial interactions that determine competition for these sugars in complex microbial communities, and how to exploit such information to develop therapies, is limited. Here, we employed heavy water (D2O)-based activity labeling followed by automated Raman-Activated Cell Sorting of active (D-labeled) cells and metagenomics to identify mouse gut commensals that forage on O-glycan monosaccharides. Sequencing of cell-sorted fractions revealed members of the underexplored family Muribaculaceae as major mucin monosaccharide foragers, followed by members of Lachnospiraceae, Rikenellaceae and Bacteroidaceae families. We further show that the ability of these organisms to forage on mucosal sugars is well-supported by the presence of partial or complete catabolism pathways for O-glycan utilization in their genomes. Remarkably, administration of a 5-member bacterial consortium based on identified sialic acid and N-acetylglucosamine utilizers results in limited access of the gut pathogen Clostridioides difficile to mucosal sugars and in impaired pathogen colonization of antibiotic-treated mice. Our findings underscore the value of using targeted approaches to identify organisms performing key functions in the gut and to rationally design effective probiotic mixtures.

### Sample Protocol
Glycerol-preserved biomass (150 μL) from microcosm incubations was pelleted and suspended in 50 μL of lysis buffer (1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 10 mM TRIS base, pH 7.5). Protein lysates were subjected to SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis followed by in-gel tryptic digestion. Proteins were stained with colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 (Roth, Kassel, Germany) and detained with Aqua dest. Whole protein bands were cut into gel pieces and in-gel-digestion with trypsin 30 µL (0.005 µg/µL) was performed overnight. Extracted peptides where dried and resolved in 0.1% formic acid and purified by ZipTip® treatment (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). In total, 5 µg of peptides were injected into nanoHPLC (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific), followed by separation on a C18-reverse phase trapping column (C18 PepMap100, 300 µm x 5 mm, particle size 5 µm, nano viper, Thermo Fischer Scientific), followed by separation on a C18-reverse phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap® 100, 75 µm x 25 cm, particle size 3 µm, nanoViper, Thermo Fischer Scientific). Mass spectrometric analysis of eluted peptides where performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled with a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, Ltd., Harlow, UK) source in LC chip coupling mode. LC Gradient, ionization mode and mass spectrometry mode were performed as described (Haange and Jehmlich, 2019).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted into mzML files and searched with MS-GF+ against a database obtained from microcosm metagenomes composed of 276,284 predicted protein-encoding sequences. The following parameters were used for peptide identification: enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with one missed cleavage allowed using 10 ppm peptide ion tolerance and 0.05 Da MS/MS tolerance. Oxidation (methionine) and carbamidomethylation (cysteine) were selected as modifications. False discovery rates (FDR) were determined with the node Percolator (Käll et al., 2007). Proteins were considered as identified when at least one unique peptide passed a FDR of 5%. The MetaProSIP toolshed (Sachsenberg et al. 2015) embedded in the Galaxy framework (v2.3.2, http://galaxyproject.org/; Afgan et al, 2018) was used to identify the incorporation of stable isotopes into peptides. MetaProSIP calculates the relative isotope abundance (RIA) on detected isotopic mass traces (m/z tolerance of ±10 ppm, intensity threshold of 1,000, and an isotopic trace correlation threshold of 0.7).

### Publication Abstract
Many intestinal pathogens, including Clostridioides difficile, use mucus-derived sugars as crucial nutrients in the gut. Commensals that compete with pathogens for such nutrients are therefore ecological gatekeepers in healthy guts, and are attractive candidates for therapeutic interventions. Nevertheless, there is a poor understanding of which commensals use mucin-derived sugars in situ as well as their potential to impede pathogen colonization. Here, we identify mouse gut commensals that utilize mucus-derived monosaccharides within complex communities using single-cell stable isotope probing, Raman-activated cell sorting and mini-metagenomics. Sequencing of cell-sorted fractions reveals members of the underexplored family Muribaculaceae as major mucin monosaccharide foragers, followed by members of Lachnospiraceae, Rikenellaceae, and Bacteroidaceae families. Using this information, we assembled a five-member consortium of sialic acid and N-acetylglucosamine utilizers that impedes C. difficile's access to these mucosal sugars and impairs pathogen colonization in antibiotic-treated mice. Our findings underscore the value of targeted approaches to identify organisms utilizing key nutrients and to rationally design effective probiotic mixtures.

### Keywords
Colonization resistance, Stable isotope probing, Metaproteomics, Mucosal sugars, Nutrient competition

### Affiliations
Department Molekulare Systembiologie Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Permoserstraße 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Department Molekulare Systembiologie Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Permoserstraße 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany


