### Accession
PXD002626

### Title
Peroxiredoxin 1 protects telomeres from oxidative damage preserving chromosome ends for extension by telomerase

### Description
With the increase of atmospheric oxygen 2.3 billion years ago, mechanisms evolved to mitigate the toxic effects of oxygen radicals. Telomeres appear particularly susceptible to oxidative damage, which leads to cellular and organismal aging, cancer, cardiac failure and other diseases. Specific mechanisms of telomere protection from oxidative damage and the molecular consequences of the damage have not been described. Here, we identify the antioxidant enzyme peroxiredoxin 1 (PRDX1) enriched in telomeric chromatin in S and G2 phases of the cell cycle during which telomeres become replicated. PRDX1 depletion leads to oxidative damage of telomeric DNA without affecting the bulk of genomic DNA. The oxidized nucleotide 8-oxo-2’deoxyguanosine-5’-triphosphate (8oxodGTP) can be incorporated by telomerase into telomeric repeats but it mediates premature chain termination when incorporated as first G in the telomeric 5’-TTAGGG-3’ sequence. In dependency of the alignment position within the telomerase RNA template, terminus 8oxoG containing DNA substrates also completely block extension by telomerase. We propose two major mechanisms by which PRDX1 counteracts telomere damage and aging. In safeguarding telomeres from oxygen radicals, PRDX1 prevents DNA damage, telomere replication defects and mutations that will perturb recognition of telomeric DNA by shelterin components. In preventing modification of the telomeric DNA substrate and the dNTP pool, PRDX1 preserves telomeres for elongation by telomerase.

### Sample Protocol
Lysates and QTIP eluates  were separated on a 10% SDS-PAGE and Comassie stained using Simply Blue Safe Stain (invitrogen). Entire lanes of SDS–PAGE gels were sliced into pieces and proteins were reduced and alkylated before overnight digestion using Trypsin. Peptides were separated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) on line connected with an Orbitrap Elite Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were analyzed in data-dependent acquisition mode. The 20 most intense parent ions from each MS survey scan were selected and fragmented by collision-induced dissociation into the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.4.1.2. Mass spectra were searched with an initial mass tolerance of 7 ppm in MS mode and 0.5 Da in MS/MS mode. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), acetylation (Protein N-term), EGScleaved (K) and Phospho (STY)  were considered as variable modifications.  Minimum required peptide length was set to seven amino acids and at least two (unique + razor) peptides were required for protein identification. A cut-off was fixed at 1% FDR at the peptide and protein level. Reverse and contaminants sequences were removed and proteins with a Posterior Error Probability (PEP) lower than 0.1 were accepted for further data treatment. Protein quantification was performed with razor and unique peptides, using only unmodified, oxidated (M) and acetylated (Protein N-term) peptides. A minimum of two ratio counts was required to quantify proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Oxidative damage of telomeres can promote cancer, cardiac failure, and muscular dystrophy. Specific mechanisms protecting telomeres from oxidative damage have not been described. We analyzed telomeric chromatin composition during the cell cycle and show that the antioxidant enzyme peroxiredoxin 1 (PRDX1) is enriched at telomeres during S phase. Deletion of the PRDX1 gene leads to damage of telomeric DNA upon oxidative stress, revealing a protective function of PRDX1 against oxidative damage at&#xa0;telomeres. We also show that the oxidized nucleotide 8-oxo-2'deoxyguanosine-5'-triphosphate (8oxodGTP) causes premature chain termination when incorporated by telomerase and that some DNA substrates terminating in 8oxoG prevent extension by telomerase. Thus, PRDX1 safeguards telomeres from oxygen radicals to counteract telomere damage and preserve telomeric DNA for elongation by telomerase.

### Keywords
Peroxiredoxin 1;  telomeres;  oxidative damage; telomerase

### Affiliations
PCF
EPFL SV SSV-GE AI 0149 (Bâtiment AI) Station 19 CH-1015 Lausanne

### Submitter
Romain Hamelin

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Moniatte
EPFL SV SSV-GE AI 0149 (Bâtiment AI) Station 19 CH-1015 Lausanne


