### Accession
PXD002127

### Title
Phosphoproteome of PINK1 in HEK293 cells

### Description
triple SILAC phosphoproteomics experiment of Flp-In T-Rex HEK293 cells stably expressing either FLAG empty, PINK1-FLAG Kinase  dead or PINK1-FLAG wild type were grown in ‘light’ (K0R0), ‘medium’ (K4R6) and ‘heavy’ (K8,R10) SILAC media, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC experiment and phosphopeptide enrichment Flp-In T-Rex HEK293 cells stably expressing either FLAG empty, PINK1-FLAG Kinase dead or PINK1-FLAG wild type were grown in ‘light’ (K0R0), ‘medium’ (K4R6) and ‘heavy’ (K8,R10) SILAC media, respectively, for at least 5 passages. Cells in each condition were stimulated with 10 μM CCCP for 3 hr and were scraped in appropriate amount of homogenization buffer (8.55 % w/v Sucrose in 3 mM Imidazole pH 7.4, supplemented with protease inhibitor and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail from Roche and Benzonase from Roche). The cells were lysed by mechanical disruption using a stainless steel homogenizer, unbroken cells and nuclei were removed by centrifugation at 1000g for 10 min at 4 °C. The membrane fraction in the remaining post-nuclear supernatant was enriched by ultra-centrifugation at 100,000g for 30 min (4 °C). Four biological replicates of 3 mg of these membrane fractions enriched in mitochondria were solubilised in 1 % sodium 3-[(2-methyl-2-undecyl-1,3-dioxolan-4-yl)methoxy]-1-propanesulfonate (commercially available as RapiGest, Waters, UK), 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 1 mM TCEP + phosphatase inhibitors and heated for 5 min at 70°C. After alkylation with 5 mM iodoacetamide and subsequent quenching with 10 mM DTT, solutions were diluted to 0.1% RapiGest using 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and proteins were digested by Trypsin (1:50) over night at 37°C. Rapigest was cleaved by addition of 1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and removed by solid-phase extraction. Samples were then resolubilised in 80% Acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% Formic acid and subjected to HILIC (Hydrophilic interaction chromatography) (McNulty & Annan, 2008)using a TSK gel Amide-80 (4.6 mm x 25 cm) column (Tosoh, Japan). Thirteen of the later fractions, which contain the phosphopeptides, were collected in 2 min intervals and subsequently enriched for phosphopeptides using self-made TiO2 spin columns (Trost et al, 2009).   LC-MS/MS protein identification and quantitation Mass spectrometric analyses were conducted similarly as previously described (Dill et al, 2015; Ritorto et al, 2013). Mass spectrometric analyses were conducted on an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer  coupled to an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system  with a 50 cm Acclaim PepMap 100 analytical column (75 μm ID, 3 μm C18) in conjunction with a Pepmap trapping column (100 μm x 2 cm, 5 μm C18) (all Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Acquisition settings were: lockmass of 445.120024, MS1 with 60,000 resolution, top 20 CID MS/MS using Rapid Scan, monoisotopic precursor selection, unassigned charge states and z=1 rejected, dynamic exclusion of 60s with repeat count 1. Normalised collision energy was set to 35, activation time was 10 ms. Four hour linear gradients were performed from 5% solvent B to 35% solvent B (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid, solvent B: 80% acetonitrile 0.08% formic acid) at 300 nl/min in 217 min with a 23 min washing and re-equilibration step.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were made using MaxQuant (Cox & Mann, 2008) Version 1.3.0.5 with the following parameters: FT mass tolerance 20 ppm; MS/MS ion trap tolerance 0.5 Da; Trypsin/P set as enzyme; stable modification carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Phospho (STY); maximum 5 modifications per peptide, and 2 missed cleavages. Searches were conducted using a combined Uniprot-Trembl Homo sapiens database with isoforms downloaded February 19, 2014 plus common contaminants (88,664 sequences). Identifications were filtered at a 1% FDR at the peptide level, accepting a minimum peptide length of 7. Quantification required a minimum ratio count of 2. Re-quantify was enabled, and match between runs was allowed within a 5 min window. Normalized ratios for peptides showed a median variability of 25-28% (ratio variation for 95% of the ratios was below 75%).  Downstream analyses were performed in Perseus 1.4.0.20 (Cox & Mann, 2012) where statistical tests (one-sample t-test, p<0.05) for each ratio (H/L, H/M, M/L) were performed.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in the PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) are causative of autosomal recessive Parkinson's disease (PD). We have previously reported that PINK1 is activated by mitochondrial depolarisation and phosphorylates serine 65 (Ser(65)) of the ubiquitin ligase Parkin and ubiquitin to stimulate Parkin E3 ligase activity. Here, we have employed quantitative phosphoproteomics to search for novel PINK1-dependent phosphorylation targets in HEK (human embryonic kidney) 293 cells stimulated by mitochondrial depolarisation. This led to the identification of 14,213 phosphosites from 4,499 gene products. Whilst most phosphosites were unaffected, we strikingly observed three members of a sub-family of Rab GTPases namely Rab8A, 8B and 13 that are all phosphorylated at the highly conserved residue of serine 111 (Ser(111)) in response to PINK1 activation. Using phospho-specific antibodies raised against Ser(111) of each of the Rabs, we demonstrate that Rab Ser(111) phosphorylation occurs specifically in response to PINK1 activation and is abolished in HeLa PINK1 knockout cells and mutant PINK1 PD patient-derived fibroblasts stimulated by mitochondrial depolarisation. We provide evidence that Rab8A GTPase Ser(111) phosphorylation is not directly regulated by PINK1 in&#xa0;vitro and demonstrate in cells the time course of Ser(111) phosphorylation of Rab8A, 8B and 13 is markedly delayed compared to phosphorylation of Parkin at Ser(65). We further show mechanistically that phosphorylation at Ser(111) significantly impairs Rab8A activation by its cognate guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF), Rabin8 (by using the Ser111Glu phosphorylation mimic). These findings provide the first evidence that PINK1 is able to regulate the phosphorylation of Rab GTPases and indicate that monitoring phosphorylation of Rab8A/8B/13 at Ser(111) may represent novel biomarkers of PINK1 activity in&#xa0;vivo. Our findings also suggest that disruption of Rab GTPase-mediated signalling may represent a major mechanism in the neurodegenerative cascade of Parkinson's disease.

### Keywords
Human, Phosphorylation, Pink1, Parkinson's disease, Hek293, Phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland (UK)
Newcastle University

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland (UK)


