### Accession
PXD024918

### Title
Helicobacter pylori outer membrane vesicle proteome

### Description
Gram negative bacteria release outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) as part of their natural growth. These OMVs take part in a biological functions including bacterial communication, exchange of genetic material and bacterial pathogenesis. However, the relationship between bacterial growth stage and OMV protein composition has not been explored before nor how their proteome is different to their parent bacterium. In this study, we examined the proteome of Helicobacter pylori and its OMVs from early log, late log or stationary phase of growth and found that globally, the protein content of OMVs over time is vastly different to one another as well as to their parent bacterium. OMVs purified from early log phase of growth contained the greatest number of unique proteins and a significant upregulation of virulence and pathogenic proteins. However, when compared back to their parent bacterium, OMVs from later stages of growth contained more unique proteins than those from earlier stages of growth. We show for the first time the regulation of OMV protein composition by H. pylori that is dependent on bacterial growth stage. Our results have expanded our understanding of the fundamental production of OMVs and the selective packaging of cargo in OMVs that result in specific functions.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria or purified OMVs (20 g) from each time point were lysed in 8M urea /50 mM Tris in 0.1% Rapigest (Waters, Milford, MA). Samples were reduced with 2 mM tri(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich, C4706) at 28oC for 4 hr on gentle rotation, alkylated by treatment with 25 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min in dark, and digested with 1 g bovine sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, V5111) at 37 °C for 18 hrs. Subsequently, peptides were purified and extracted using reverse-phase C18 StageTips (Sep-Park cartridges, Waters, MA) in 85% (v/v) ACN in 0.5% (v/v) formic acid (FA). Peptides were lyophilised and acidified in 0.1% FA, 5% ACN. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode where the top 7 most abundant precursor ions in the survey scan (350–1500 Th) were selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000, with MS/MS resolution of 15,000. Unassigned precursor ion charge states and singly charged species were rejected, and peptide match disabled. The isolation window was set to 1.4 Th and selected precursors fragmented by HCD with normalised collision energies of 25 with a maximum ion injection time of 110 msec. Ion target values were set to 3e6 and 1e5 for survey and MS/MS scans, respectively. Dynamic exclusion was activated for 30 sec. Data was acquired using Xcalibur software v4.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were pre-processed as previously described and processed using MaxQuant (v1.6.0.16) with Andromeda (v1.5.6), using a Helicobacter pylori (UniProt, UP000000429, Jan 2018) reference sequence database. Data was searched with a parent tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment tolerance of 0.5 Da and minimum peptide length 5, with false discovery rate 1% at the peptide and protein levels, tryptic digestion with up to two missed cleavages, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications and data analysed with label-free quantitation (LFQ)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Helicobacter pylori, Bacteria, Proteome, Outer membrane vesicle

### Affiliations
Baker Heart and Diabetes Inst.

### Submitter
david greening

### Lab Head
Dr David Greening
Baker Heart and Diabetes Inst.


