### Accession
PXD045892

### Title
Discovery of molecular glue degraders via isogenic morphological profiling

### Description
Molecular glue degraders (MGDs) are small molecules that degrade proteins-of-interest via the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Historically, MGDs were discovered serendipitously. Current approaches for MGD discovery include cell-viability based drug screens or data mining of public transcriptomics and drug response datasets. The explored target space is consequently re-stricted to the essential proteins. Here we develop a high-throughput workflow for MGD discovery that also reaches the non-essential proteome. This workflow begins with the rapid synthesis of a compound library by Sulfur(VI) Fluoride Exchange chemistry coupled to a morphological profiling assay in isogenic cell lines that vary in levels of the E3 ligase CRBN. By com-paring the morphological changes induced by compound treatment across the isogenic cell lines, we were able to identify FL2-14 as a CRBN-dependent MGD targeting the non-essential protein GSPT2. We envision that this workflow would con-tribute to the discovery and characterization of MGDs targeting a wider range of proteins.

### Sample Protocol
40 million RKO cells per condition were treated with selected SuFEx IMiDs for 16 hours in biological duplicates. Cells were harvested via centrifugation, washed three times in ice-cold PBS and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Each washed cell pellet was lysed separately in 500 µl of freshly prepared lysis buffer containing 50 mM HEPES, 2% SDS, 1 mM PMSF and protease inhibitor cocktail. Samples rested at RT for 20 minutes before heating to 99°C for 5 min. After cooling down to RT, DNA was sheared by sonication using a Covaris S2 high performance ultrasonicator. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 16,000×g for 15 min at 20°C. Supernatant was transferred to fresh tubes and protein concentration determined using the BCA protein assay kit. FASP was performed using a 30 kDa molecular weight cutoff centrifugal filters. In brief, 100 µg of total protein per sample was reduced by the addition of DTT to a final concentration of 83.3 mM, followed by incubation at 99°C for 5 minutes. After cooling to room temperature, samples were mixed with 200 μL of freshly prepared 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl (UA-solution) in the filter unit and centrifuged at 14.000xg for 15 min at 20°C to remove SDS. Residual SDS was washed out by a second wash step with 200 μL UA solution. Proteins were alkylated with 100 µl of 50 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min at RT. Thereafter, three washes were performed with 100 μl of UA solution, followed by three washes with 100 μl of 50 mM TEAB buffer. Proteolytic digestion is performed using the protease trypsin in a 1:50 ratio overnight at 37°C. Peptides were recovered using 40 μL of 50 mM TEAB buffer followed by 50 μL of 0.5 M NaCl. Peptides were desalted using desalting columns. TMTpro 18plex Label Reagent Set was used for labeling according to the manufacturer. After the labeling reaction was quenched, the samples were pooled, the organic solvent removed in the vacuum concentrator, and the labeled peptides purified by C18 solid phase extraction. Tryptic peptides were re-buffered in 10 mM ammonium formate buffer pH 10, shortly before separation by reversed phase liquid chromatography at pH 10. Peptides were separated into 96 time-based fractions on a C18 RP column (150 × 2.0 mm, 3 µm) using Dionex Ultimate 3000 series HPLC fitted with a binary pump delivering solvent at 50 µL/min. Acidified fractions were consolidated into 36 fractions via a concatenated strategy. After removal of solvent in a vacuum concentrator, samples were reconstituted in 0.1% TFA prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system via a Nanospray Flex Ion Source interface. Peptides were loaded onto a PepMap 100 C18, 5 μm, 5×0.3 mm trap column at a flow rate of 10 μL/min using 0.1% TFA as loading buffer. After loading, the trap column was switched in-line with an Acclaim PepMap nanoHPLC C18 analytical column with 2.0 µm particle size and a dimension of 75 µm IDx 500 mm. The column temperature was maintained at 50°C. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.4% formic acid in water, and mobile phase B consisted of 0.4% formic acid in a mixture of 90% acetonitrile and 10% water. Separation was achieved using a multistep gradient over 150 min at a flow rate of 230 nL/min. In the liquid junction setup, electrospray ionization was enabled by applying a voltage of 1.8 kV directly to the liquid being sprayed, and non-coated silica emitter was used. The mass spectrometer was operated in a DDA mode and used a SPS approach. For both MS2 and MS3 levels, we collected a 400–1600 m/z survey scan in the Orbitrap at 120k resolution, the AGC target was set to 'standard' and a maximum injection time (IT) of 50 ms was applied. Precursor ions were filtered by charge state (2-5), dynamic exclusion, and monoisotopic precursor selection. Precursor ions for data-dependent MSn (ddMS2) analysis were selected using 10 dependent scans. A charge-state filter was used to select precursors for data-dependent scanning. In ddMS2 analysis, spectra were obtained using one charge state per branch (from z=2 to z=5) in a dual-pressure linear ion trap (ITMS2). The quadrupole isolation window was set to 0.7 Da and the collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation technique was used at a normalized collision energy of 35%. The normalized AGC target was set to 200% with a maximum IT of 35 ms. During the ddMS3 analyses, precursors were isolated using SPS waveform and different MS1 isolation windows (1.3 m/z for z=2, 1.2 m/z for z=3, 0.8 m/z for z= 4 and 0.7 m/z for z = 5). Target MS2 fragment ions were further fragmented by high-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) followed by Orbitrap analysis (FTMS3). The normalized HCD collision energy was set to 45% and the normalized AGC target was set to 300% with a maximum IT of 100 ms. The resolution was set to 50 000 with a defined scanning range of 100 to 500 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Following data acquisition, the acquired raw data files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer v.2.4.1.15 platform, with a TMT18plex quantification method selected. In the processing step, we used the Sequest HT database search engine and the Percolator validation software node to remove false positives with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% at the peptide and protein level under stringent conditions. All MSn spectra were searched against the human proteome (Canonical, reviewed, 20 304 sequences) and appended known contaminants and streptavidin, with a maximum of two allowable miscleavage sites. The search was performed with full tryptic digestion. Methionine oxidation (+15.994 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.011 Da), as well as methionine loss (-131.040 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation with methionine loss (-89.030 Da) were set as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) of cysteine residues and tandem mass tag (TMT) 18-plex labeling of peptide N termini and lysine residues (+304.207 Da) were set as fixed modifications. Data were searched with mass tolerances of ±10 ppm and ±0.6 Da for the precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Results were filtered to include peptide spectrum matches with Sequest HT cross-correlation factor (Xcorr) scores of ≥1 and high peptide confidence assigned by Percolator. MS2 signal-to-noise (S/N) values of TMTpro reporter ions were used to calculate peptide/protein abundance values. Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) with precursor isolation interference values of > 70, average TMTpro reporter ion S/N < 10 and SPS Mass Matches < 65 % were excluded from quantification. Both unique and razor peptides were used for TMT quantification. Correction of isotopic impurities was applied. Data were normalized to total peptide abundance to correct for experimental bias and scaled “to all average”. Protein ratios are directly calculated from the grouped protein abundances using an ANOVA hypothesis test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cereblon, Targeted protein degradation, Molecular glue degrader, E3 ubiquitin ligase, Neo-substrate

### Affiliations
The CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences
CeMM, Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences; Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Andrea Rukavina

### Lab Head
Dr Georg E. Winter
CeMM, Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences; Vienna, Austria


