### Accession
PXD006701

### Title
The role of HIF1 in enhancing radio resistance of mouse MSCs

### Description
Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) are multipotent progenitors supporting bone marrow hematopoiesis. MSC have an efficient DNA damage response (DDR) and are consequently reatively radio-resistant cells. Therefore, MSCs are key to hematopoietic reconstitution following total body irradiation (TBI) and bone marrow transplantation (BMT). The bone marrow niche is hypoxic and via the heterodimeric transcription factor Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (Hif-1), hypoxia enhances the DDR. Using gene knock-down, we have previously shown that the Hif-1α subunit of Hif is involved in MSC radio-resistance, however its exact mechanism of action remains unknown. In order to dissect the involvement of Hif-1α in the DDR, we have generated using CRISPR/Cas9 technology, a stable MS5 mouse MSC cell line lacking Hif-1 expression. Herein, we show that it is the whole Hif-1 transcription factor, and not only the Hif-1α subunit, that modulates the DDR of mouse MSCs, and that this effect is dependent upon the integrity of the DNA binding domain. We have also characterized the Hif-1α-dependent proteomic changes undergone by hypoxic MS5 cells. These findings have important implications for the modulation of MSC radio-resistance in the context of BMT and cancer.

### Sample Protocol
WT and HIF1A-/- MS5 cells were cultured for 7 days prior before harvesting for protein extraction. Cells were washed in ice cold PBS and lysed in 8M urea, sonicated and centrifuged at 14,000g for 2 min at 4C. Protein was isolated with the addition of trichloroacetic acid (20%). After centrifugation at 14,000rpm for 10mins and aspiration, cell pellets were twice washed in ice-cold acetone with centrifugation repeated. Protein pellets were resuspended in buffer of 4M Urea in 50mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (NH4HCO3). Cysteine residues were reduced by dithiotheritol and alkylated using iodoacetamide. Digestion was carried out overnight using trypsin singles TM proteomic grade (Sigma) at 37°C. After digestion, peptides were acidified by trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted with c18 STAGE tips and resuspended in 0.1% TFA. The samples were run on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 320 °C, and with a potential of 2300V applied to the frit. All data was acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data dependent switching mode. A high resolution (70,000) MS scan (300-1600 m/z) was performed using the Q Exactive to select the 12 most intense ions prior to MS/MS analysis using HCD.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from the Q-Exactive was processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.5.1 incorporating the Andromeda search engine. To identify peptides and proteins, MS/MS spectra were  searched against a mouse database containing 16,818 entries (Uniprot 2016_09) using the default settings of MaxQuant, namely trypsin as the digestion enzyme allowing two missed cleavages, carbomidomethylation as fixed modification and acetylation (protein N terminal) and oxidation (C) as variable modifications. Label free Quantitative (LFQ) ion intensities were generated for each protein using the MaxLFQ feature of MaxQuant and signals of corresponding peptides were matched from different LC-MS/MS runs using the match between runs feature of MaxQuant. Log transformations, Pearson correlations, t-test sample comparisons and volcano plot and heatmap representations of data were achieved using Perseus 1.5.3.0

### Publication Abstract
Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) are multipotent progenitors supporting bone marrow hematopoiesis. MSCs have an efficient DNA damage response (DDR) and are consequently relatively radio-resistant cells. Therefore, MSCs are key to hematopoietic reconstitution following total body irradiation (TBI) and bone marrow transplantation (BMT). The bone marrow niche is hypoxic and via the heterodimeric transcription factor Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (Hif-1), hypoxia enhances the DDR. Using gene knock-down, we have previously shown that the Hif-1&#x3b1; subunit of Hif-1 is involved in mouse MSC radio-resistance, however its exact mechanism of action remains unknown. In order to dissect the involvement of Hif-1&#x3b1; in the DDR, we used CRISPR/Cas9 technology to generate a stable mutant of the mouse MSC cell line MS5 lacking Hif-1&#x3b1; expression. Herein, we show that it is the whole Hif-1 transcription factor, and not only the Hif-1&#x3b1; subunit, that modulates the DDR of mouse MSCs. This effect is dependent upon the presence of a Hif-1&#x3b1; protein capable of binding to both DNA and its heterodimeric partner Arnt (Hif-1&#x3b2;). Detailed transcriptomic and proteomic analysis of <i>Hif1a</i> KO MS5 cells leads us to conclude that Hif-1&#x3b1; may be acting indirectly on the DNA repair process. These findings have important implications for the modulation of MSC radio-resistance in the context of BMT and cancer.

### Keywords
Ionizing radiation, Mesenchymal stromal cells, Hypoxia, Dna damage response, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
UCD
Rhodri Ceredig, Professor of Immunology, Discipline of Physiology, College of Medicine & Nursing Health Science, Room 217 Orbsen Building National University of Ireland, Galway H91 DK59

### Submitter
Eugene Dillon

### Lab Head
Dr Rhodri Ceredig
Rhodri Ceredig, Professor of Immunology, Discipline of Physiology, College of Medicine & Nursing Health Science, Room 217 Orbsen Building National University of Ireland, Galway H91 DK59


