### Accession
PXD032083

### Title
Identification of arginine phosphorylation in Mycolicibacterium smegmatis by shotgun proteomics

### Description
	Tuberculosis is a leading cause of worldwide infectious mortality. The prevalence of multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) infections drives an urgent need to exploit new drug targets. One such target is the ATP-dependent protease ClpC1P1P2, which is strictly essential for viability. However, few proteolytic substrates of mycobacterial ClpC1P1P2 have been identified to date. Recent studies in Bacillus subtilis have shown that the orthologous ClpCP protease recognizes proteolytic substrates bearing post-translational arginine phosphorylation. While several lines of evidence suggest that ClpC1P1P2 is similarly capable of recognizing phosphoarginine-bearing proteins, the existence of phosphoarginine modifications in mycobacteria has remained in question. Here, we confirm the presence of post-translational phosphoarginine modifications in Mycolicibacterium smegmatis (Msm), a nonpathogenic surrogate of Mtb. Using a phosphopeptide enrichment workflow coupled with shotgun phosphoproteomics, we identify arginine phosphosites on several functionally diverse targets within the Msm proteome. Interestingly, phosphoarginine modifications are not upregulated by heat stress, suggesting divergent roles in mycobacteria and Bacillus. Our findings provide new evidence supporting the existence of phosphoarginine-mediated proteolysis by ClpC1P1P2 in mycobacteria and other actinobacterial species.

### Sample Protocol
Filter-Aided Sample Preparation for Mass Spectrometry — Replicate samples of clarified cell lysates (approximately 10 mg) were prepared for mass spectrometry using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) (Wiśniewski et al., 2009; Schmidt et al., 2014). Reduction of disulfide bonds was achieved by the addition of 200 mM dithiotreitol (DTT; Fisher), followed by incubation at 56 oC for 50 min.  Afterwards, samples were diluted in about 7 mL 0.1 M Tris (Gold Biotechnology), pH 7.5, containing 8 M urea and 25 mM 2-iodoacetamide (both from Acros Organics) in 15 mL tube and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 45 min to carbamidomethylate free cysteines. After alkylation, samples were transferred to an Amicon filter (10,000 MWCO, MilliporeSigma), washed twice with 5 mL 0.1 M Tris, pH 7.5, containing 8 M urea (by centrifugation at 4,000 × g), then washed twice with 5 mL 0.1 M Tris, pH 7.5, containing 4 M urea, and finally twice with 5 mL 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Honeywell). After the last wash step, retentate was reduced to less than 1 mL by spin concentration.  In-Solution Trypsin Proteolytic Cleavage — MS Grade Trypsin Protease (Pierce) was dissolved to obtain a 20 µg/mL stock in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin digestion of processed M. smegmatis lysates was performed in an Amicon filter unit at an approximately 1500:1 protein:trypsin ratio overnight at 37 oC. Upon digestion, peptides were recovered by centrifugation at 4,000 × g for 10 minutes, followed by the addition of 0.5 M NaCl. Eluted samples were dried under vacuum in a SpeedVac centrifuge (Thermo Fisher).   TiO2 Enrichment of Phosphopeptides — Phosphopeptides were enriched from tryptic peptide samples were using Titansphere TiO2 beads (5 µm; GL Sciences) in buffer conditions that limit acid hydrolysis of phosphoarginine (Schmidt et al., 2014; Trentini et al., 2016). 5 mg TiO2 resin was resuspended in 1 mL Binding Buffer (300 mg/mL lactic acid, 12.5% acetic acid, 60% acetonitrile, 0.2% heptafluorobutyric acid, pH 4 with NH4OH). Lyophilized peptide samples were re-dissolved in the TiO2 suspension, incubated for 35 min at 20 oC with gentle agitation, then transferred to graphite spin columns (Thermo Fisher). Unbound peptides were removed by a first wash step with 150 µL Binding Buffer and spun at 2000 × g for 1 min, followed by three wash steps using 400 µL of Wash Solution A (200 mg/ml lactic acid, 75% acetonitrile, 2% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% heptafluorobutyric acid), Wash Solution B (200 mg/mL lactic acid, 75% acetonitrile, 10% acetic acid, 0.1% heptafluorobutyric acid, pH 4 with NH4OH), Wash Solution C (80% acetonitrile, 10% acetic acid), respectively. The resin was then incubated with 100 µL Elution Solution 1 (1% NH4OH, 30 mM ammonium phosphate) and Elution Solution 2 (1.25% NH4OH in 50% acetonitrile) for 15 minutes each time. The eluate containing phosphopeptides was collected by centrifugation after each incubation. To remove salts, samples were desalted using a HyperSep C18 column (Thermo Scientific). Samples were  lyophilized and stored at -80 oC prior to mass spectrometry.   Liquid chromatography - tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) — Lyophilized and desalted tryptic digests were resuspended in 20 µL 0.5% acetic acid (pH 4.5). Orbitrap Eclipse MS (Thermo Scientific) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system and a FAIMS Pro Interface (Thermo Scientific) was used for the LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide samples were first loaded onto a trap column (PepMap C18; 2 cm x 100 μm I.D.) and afterwards separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min on an analytical column (PepMap C18, 3.0 μm; 10 cm x 75 mm I.D.; Thermo Scientific). A binary buffer system (buffer A, 0.1% formic acid in water; buffer B, 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) with a 165-min gradient (1% to 25% buffer B over 125 min; 25% to 32% buffer B in 10 min, then to 95% buffer B over 3 min; back to 1% B in 5 min, and stay equilibration at 1% B for 20 min) was utilized. To achieve FAIMS separation, multiple CVs (-45, -60 and -80) were applied. For all experiments, the survey scans (MS1) were acquired over a mass range of 375-1500 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap. Isolation of precursors was done with a width of 1.6 m/z for MS/MS acquisition. They were subsequently fragmented with HCD using 30% collision energy with a maximum injection time of 100 ms, and collected in Orbitrap at 15,000 resolution. The dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s, and can be shared across different FAIMS experiments. LS-MS/MS data was collected in independent biological triplicates.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry Data Analysis — Proteomic analysis was performed in the Proteome Discoverer software suite (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher). Raw data was searched against the M. smegmatis (strain ATCC 700084 / MC2 155) UniProt Reference Proteome (Proteome ID UP000000757; 6,602 entries in total) using Sequest HT (University of Washington and Thermo Fisher) (Eng et al., 1994). Iodoacetamide-mediated cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a static modification, while methionine oxidation and phosphorylation of arginine, serine, threonine, tyrosine and histidine residues were entered as  dynamic modifications. Complete trypsinization - with maximum of two missed cleavages - was allowed. Precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, while allowing fragment ions to have a mass deviation of 0.02 Da for the HCD data. Validation of peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) based on q-value was done using Percolator - with target false discovery rates (FDR) of 1% and 5% for stringent and relaxed validation, respectively. Localization probability of phosphopeptide hits were re-analyzed using the PhosphoRS (ptmRS) node of the Proteome Discoverer software. Only modifications with a PhosphoRS (ptmRS) score ≥75% were selected

### Publication Abstract
Tuberculosis is a leading cause of worldwide infectious mortality. The prevalence of multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis infections drives an urgent need to exploit new drug targets. One such target is the ATP-dependent protease ClpC1P1P2, which is strictly essential for viability. However, few proteolytic substrates of mycobacterial ClpC1P1P2 have been identified to date. Recent studies in Bacillus subtilis have shown that the orthologous ClpCP protease recognizes proteolytic substrates bearing posttranslational arginine phosphorylation. While several lines of evidence suggest that ClpC1P1P2 is similarly capable of recognizing phosphoarginine-bearing proteins, the existence of phosphoarginine modifications in mycobacteria has remained in question. Here, we confirm the presence of posttranslational phosphoarginine modifications in Mycolicibacterium smegmatis, a nonpathogenic surrogate of M. tuberculosis. Using a phosphopeptide enrichment workflow coupled with shotgun phosphoproteomics, we identified arginine phosphosites on several functionally diverse targets within the M. smegmatis proteome. Interestingly, phosphoarginine modifications are not upregulated by heat stress, suggesting divergent roles in mycobacteria and <i>Bacillus</i>. Our findings provide new evidence supporting the existence of phosphoarginine-mediated proteolysis by ClpC1P1P2 in mycobacteria and other actinobacterial species. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Mycobacteria that cause tuberculosis infections employ proteolytic pathways that modulate cellular behavior by destroying specific proteins in a highly regulated manner. Some proteolytic enzymes have emerged as novel antibacterial targets against drug-resistant tuberculosis infections. However, we have only a limited understanding of how these enzymes function in the cell and how they select proteins for destruction. Some proteolytic enzymes are capable of recognizing proteins that carry an unusual chemical modification, arginine phosphorylation. Here, we confirm the existence of arginine phosphorylation in mycobacterial proteins. Our work expands our understanding of a promising drug target in an important global pathogen.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Mycolicibacterium smegmatis, Arginine phosphorylation, Lc-ms/ms, Shotgun proteomics, Posttranslation modification

### Affiliations
University of Delaware
Department of Biological Sciences Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry University of Delaware Newark DE, 19716

### Submitter
Emmanuel Ogbonna

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Schmitz
Department of Biological Sciences Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry University of Delaware Newark DE, 19716


