### Accession
PXD038862

### Title
A library of novel Cancer Testis specific T cell receptors for T cell receptor gene therapy

### Description
Background Clinical success of T cell receptor (TCR) gene therapy has previously been demonstrated for NY-ESO-1 TCR gene therapy. To increase numbers of cancer patients that can be treated with TCR gene therapy we aimed to identify a novel set of high-affinity cancer specific TCRs targeting different cancer testis (CT) antigens in prevalent HLA class I alleles.  Methods In this study, we selected based on publicly available gene expression databases the most promising CT genes to target. From these selected genes we identified by HLA peptidomics the naturally processed and presented HLA class I peptides. With these peptide-HLA tetramers were generated, and by single cell sorting CT specific CD8+ T cells were selected, and expanded from the allo-HLA repertoire of healthy donors. By several functional assays high avidity CT-specific T cell clones with safe recognition pattern were selected. To evaluate the potential for clinical application in TCR gene therapy, TCRs were sequenced and transferred into peripheral blood derived CD8+ T cells.  Results In total we identified, 7 novel CT-specific TCRs that effectively target MAGE-A1, MAGE-A3, MAGE-A6 and MAGE-A9 in the context of human leukocyte antigen(HLA) -A1, -A2, -A3, -B7, -B35 and -C7. TCR gene transfer into CD8⁺ T cells resulted in efficient cytokine production and cytotoxicity of variety of different tumor types without detectable cross-reactivity. In addition, major in vivo antitumor effects of MAGE-A1 specific TCR engineered CD8⁺ T cells was observed in an orthotopic xenograft model for established multiple myeloma, in which bone marrow located tumor cells were completely eradicated after T cell injection.  Conclusion The identification of 7 novel CT-specific TCRs, reactive against CT antigens presented in a variety of different HLA class I alleles, allows selection of therapeutic TCRs for an increased number of cancer patients, and will improve development of personalized TCR gene therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were identified from resected ovarian carcinomas (OvaL1, OvaL10 and OvaL11), multiple myeloma cell lines (U266,UM9 and RPMI8226) and a prostate cell line (C4-2B4). The resected ovarium carcinomas consisted of residual material and were collected anonymously. The carcinoma samples were sliced into small pieces and dead, clotted or non-tumor material was removed. Subsequently, the sliced tumor pieces were added to a C-tube (Miltenyi Biotec) with ice cold buffer without detergent and cOmplete Protease Inhibitor (Sigma-Aldrich), to prevent tumor degradation. The tumor pieces were dissociated until an almost homogenous cell solution by using a gentleMACS (Miltenyi Biotec) procedure and benzonase (Merck)(125IU/ml) was added to remove DNA/RNA complexes during lysis. To identify peptides from the resected ovarian carcinomas, multiple myeloma cell lines and prostate cell line elution experiments were performed followed by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) fractionation and mass spectrometry analysis as previously described [18]. In short,  peptide-HLA complexes were purified by immunoaffinity using the anti-HLA-I W6/32 antibody. Peptides were separated from the HLA allele and peptide containing fractions were obtained by size filtration. Subsequently, fractions were separated by strong cation exchange chromatography and freeze dried. Peptide fractions were lyophilized, dissolved in 95/3/0.1 water/acetonitrile/formic acid v/v/v, and subsequently analysed with nanoHPLC-MS/MS. Peptide and protein identification from tandem mass spectra was performed by proteome discoverer version 2.1 (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using the mascot node and the UniProt Homo Sapiens database. Synthetic peptides were ordered for the potential target peptides when meeting the following criteria: 1) peptides derived from the selected candidate genes; 2) binding in HLA-A1,-A2,-A3,-A11,-A24,-B7,-B35 or -C7 according to NETMHC version 3.4; 3) minimal Mascot Ion score ≥30; 4) were ranked 1 peptides; 5) did not containing cysteine; 6) peptide sequence unique for the candidate gene. Synthetic peptides were generated in house using standard Fmoc chemistry. Peptide sequences were validated by matching the tandem mass spectra of the eluted peptides with the tandem mass spectra of the synthetic peptides. To generate monomers recombinant HLA-A1, -A2, -A3, -B7, -B35, and -C7 heavy chains (HCs) and human beta-2 microglobulin (B2M) were produced in house in Escherichia coli. PE-labelled pHLA tetramers were generated from the monomers as previously described [19].

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification from tandem mass spectra was performed by proteome discoverer version 2.1 (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using the mascot node and the UniProt Homo Sapiens database. Synthetic peptides were ordered for the potential target peptides when meeting the following criteria: 1) peptides derived from the selected candidate genes; 2) binding in HLA-A1,-A2,-A3,-A11,-A24,-B7,-B35 or -C7 according to NETMHC version 3.4; 3) minimal Mascot Ion score ≥30; 4) were ranked 1 peptides; 5) did not containing cysteine; 6) peptide sequence unique for the candidate gene. Synthetic peptides were generated in house using standard Fmoc chemistry. Peptide sequences were validated by matching the tandem mass spectra of the eluted peptides with the tandem mass spectra of the synthetic peptides. To generate monomers recombinant HLA-A1, -A2, -A3, -B7, -B35, and -C7 heavy chains (HCs) and human beta-2 microglobulin (B2M) were produced in house in Escherichia coli. PE-labelled pHLA tetramers were generated from the monomers as previously described [19].

### Publication Abstract
[This corrects the article DOI: 10.1016/j.omto.2022.11.007.].

### Keywords
Cd8+ t cells, T cell receptor, Mage, Tcr gene therapy, Cancer testis genes

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medical Center, Proteomics group
Head Proteomics Group  Leiden University Medical Center |Center for Proteomic and Metabolomics | PO Box 9600 | Postal zone P1-Q | 2300 RC  Leiden | The Netherlands

### Submitter
Rayman Tjokrodirijo

### Lab Head
Dr Peter A. van Veelen
Head Proteomics Group  Leiden University Medical Center |Center for Proteomic and Metabolomics | PO Box 9600 | Postal zone P1-Q | 2300 RC  Leiden | The Netherlands


