### Accession
PXD005403

### Title
B. abortus 104M LC-MS/MS -  A comprehensive proteogenomic study of the human Brucella vaccine strain 104 M

### Description
In the present study, we performed subcellular fractionation prior to protein extraction to reduce interference. Whole cell protein and membrane protein extracts were prepared for strain 104M. Peptide fractionation prior to analysis is an alternative method that achieves higher proteome coverage. Complexity reduction was achieved by SDS-PAGE and strong cation exchange (SCX) HPLC separation.

### Sample Protocol
The 104M strain was grown in tryptic soy broth (TSB) and harvested in the early exponential phase. Whole cell protein samples were prepared as described previously with some modifications. Briefly, cells harvested by centrifugation (7,000 ×g, 15 min at 4°C) were washed followed by resuspension in lysis buffer and disruption by ultra-sonication (25% amplitude, 15 min at 0°C). The resultant suspension was centrifuged (40,000 ×g, 30 minutes at 18°C) and the protein concentrations in the collected supernatants were measured using a BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, USA).  Total membrane protein samples were also prepared using Triton X-114 phase-separation as described previously. In brief, harvested cells were lysed by bead beating and then centrifuged (7,000 ×g, 15 minutes at 4°C) to remove insoluble material. Triton X-114 (2% v/v concentration) was added to the supernatant and then stirred (10 minutes at 4°C) to obtain the protein extract in a single phase. This mixture was then centrifuged (15,000 ×g, 10 min at 4°C) to remove residual insoluble matter and incubated at 37°C for 10 min. Subsequently, the solution was separated into upper (aqueous) and lower (detergent) phases. The detergent phase was collected and proteins were precipitated by acetone. Protein samples were stored at −80°C for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
The protein database used for MS/MS searches was constructed from the UniProt entries for B. abortus 104M and comprised of 3,072 proteins. A six reading frame (6F) database was constructed based on all six possible open reading frames (ORFs) in the 104M genome using the “getorf” program in EMBOSS, with all sequences between two stop codons regarded as a protein in this database. The 6F database comprised 115,420 candidate coding sequences for all of the possible proteins (longer than 20 amino acids) encoded by the genome. Peak lists obtained from MS/MS spectra were identified using X! Tandem, MS-GF+, Comet and PeptideShaker. The identification was conducted using SearchGUI. The decoy sequences were created by reversing the 104M UniProt database. The Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. The initial maximal was set to 20.0 ppm as MS1 and 0.5 Da as MS2 tolerances. The fixed modifications carbamidomethylation of C, variable modifications oxidation of M and acetylation of protein N-term were used. Peptides and proteins validated at a 1.0% FDR were allowed using the decoy hit distribution. All of the raw mass spectra files along with the identification results have been deposited into the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository and are now available.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, B. abortus 104m

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Vaccine and Antibody Engineering, Beijing Institute of Biotechnology, Beijing, China
Beijing Institute of Biotechnology

### Submitter
Xiaodong Zai

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaodong Zai
Laboratory of Vaccine and Antibody Engineering, Beijing Institute of Biotechnology, Beijing, China


