### Accession
PXD022762

### Title
Proteomics of broad deubiquitylase inhibition unmasks redundant enzyme function to reveal substrates and assess enzyme specificity

### Description
Deubiquitylating enzymes (DUBs) counteract ubiquitylation to control stability or activity of substrates. Identification of DUB substrates is challenging because multiple DUBs can act on the same substrate, thwarting genetic approaches. Here, we circumvent redundancy by chemically inhibiting multiple DUBs simultaneously in Xenopus egg extract. We discovered a set of proteins that depends on DUBs for their stability and we confirmed their DUB-dependent regulation with human orthologs, demonstrating evolutionary conservation. We next extended this approach, developing a new method to profile DUB specificity. By adding recombinant DUBs to extract where DUB activity was broadly inhibited, but ubiquitylation and degradation were active at physiological rates, we profiled the ability of DUBs to rescue degradation of these new substrates. We found that USP7 has a unique ability to broadly antagonize their degradation. Together, we identify novel DUB substrates and present an approach to characterize DUB specificity that overcomes challenges posed by DUB redundancy.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a column packed with 35 cm of Accucore C18 resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column had a 100 μm inner diameter microcapillary. For each experiment, 2 μg of peptides were loaded onto this column. Peptides were separated, using a flow rate of 450 nL/min., with a 150-minute gradient of 3 to 25% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid. Each analysis used an MS3-based TMT method, which it is known to reduce ion interference if compared to MS2 quantification. The scan sequence starts with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis, resolution 120,000, 400−1400 Th, automatic gain control (AGC) target 5E5, maximum injection time 100 ms). For subsequent MS2/MS3 analysis, only the top 10 precursors were selected. MS2 analysis included: collision-induced dissociation (CID), quadrupole ion trap analysis, automatic gain control (AGC) 2E4, NCE (normalized collision energy) 35, q-value 0.25, maximum injection time 120 ms), and isolation window at 0.7. After we acquire each MS2 spectrum, we collected an MS3 spectrum in which multiple MS2 fragment ions were captured in the MS3 precursor population with isolation waveforms using multiple frequency notches. MS3 precursors were fragmented by HCD and analyzed using the Orbitrap (NCE 65, AGC 1.5E5, maximum injection time 150 ms, resolution was 50,000 at 400 Th). For MS3 analysis, we used charge state-dependent isolation windows: For charge state z=2, the isolation window was set at 1.3 Th, for z=3 at 1 Th, for z=4 at 0.8 Th, and for z=5 at 0.7 Th.

### Data Protocol
Collected Spectra were processed using a Sequest-based software pipeline.  Spectra were converted to mzXML using MS Convert (Adusumilli and Mallick, 2017). Database searching included all the entries from the PHROG database. This database includes many lower abundant proteins and multiple splice isoforms (not present in other databases). This database was concatenated with one composed of the sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 Th precursor ion tolerance and the product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. Oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) and, where indicated. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously and assembled to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs(McAlister et al., 2012). Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications. The peptides signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements assigned to each protein were summed and normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent, thereby accounting for equal protein loading. Lastly, each protein was scaled such that the summed signal-to-noise for that protein across all channels was 100, thereby generating a relative abundance (RA) measurement.

### Publication Abstract
Deubiquitylating enzymes (DUBs) counteract ubiquitylation to control stability or activity of substrates. Identification of DUB substrates is challenging because multiple DUBs can act on the same substrate, thwarting genetic approaches. Here, we circumvent redundancy by chemically inhibiting multiple DUBs simultaneously in Xenopus egg extract. We used quantitative mass spectrometry to identify proteins whose ubiquitylation or stability is altered by broad DUB inhibition, and confirmed their DUB-dependent regulation with human orthologs, demonstrating evolutionary conservation. We next extended this method to profile DUB specificity. By adding recombinant DUBs to extract where DUB activity was broadly inhibited, but ubiquitylation and degradation were active at physiological rates, we profiled the ability of DUBs to rescue degradation of these substrates. We found that USP7 has a unique ability to broadly antagonize degradation. Together, we present an approach to identify DUB substrates and characterize DUB specificity that overcomes challenges posed by DUB redundancy.

### Keywords
Xenopus, Dub, Ubiquitin, Sps-ms3

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Harvard Medical School


