### Accession
PXD020220

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the dpp3 knockout mutant, the reconstituted strain and the wild-type strain of Candida lusitaniae

### Description
Candida lusitaniae is an emerging human opportunistic yeast, which can switch from yeast to pseudohyphae, and one of the rare Candida species capable of sexual reproduction. Its haploid genome and the genetic tools available make it a model of interest to study gene function. This study describes the consequences of DPP3 inactivation on cell morphology and mating, both altered in the dpp3Δ knock-out. Interestingly, reintroducing a wild-type copy of the DPP3 gene in the dpp3Δ mutant failed to restore the wild-type phenotypes.  Proteomic analyses showed that about 150 proteins were statistically deregulated in the dpp3Δ mutant, and that most of them did not return to their wild-type level in the reconstituted DPP3 strain. The analysis of the segregation of the dpp3Δ mutation and the phenotypes in the progeny of a cross (between the dpp3Δ knock-out and a wild-type strain) showed that the phenotypes are not linked to dpp3Δ, but to a secondary mutation. Genome sequencing of the dpp3Δ mutant allowed us to identify this secondary mutation.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel. Migration was stopped when samples were entered the resolving gel and proteins were visualized by Colloidal Blue staining. Each SDS-PAGE band was cut and protein were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. Online nanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Q-Exactive hybrid quadruplole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). Ten microliters of each peptide extract were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After 5 min desalting, peptides were online separated on a 75 µm ID x 25 cm C18 Acclaim PepMap® RSLC column (Thermo Scientific, USA) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 108 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8 kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 3.1 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 350-1600) were recorded at a resolution of R = 70000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 3 x 106 ions collected within 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and top 12 ions were selected from fragmentation in HCD mode. MS/MS scans with a target value of 1 x 105 ions were collected with a maximum fill time of 100 ms and a resolution of R = 17500. Additionally, only +2 and +3 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Others settings were as follows: no sheath and no auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 200°C; normalized HCD collision energy of 27% and an isolation width of 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) were done in Proteome Discoverer 2.3. MS Amanda 2.0, Sequest HT and Mascot 2.4 algorithms were used for protein identification in batch mode by searching against a Clavispora lusitaniae, strain CBS6936 database from NCBI (5 537 entries, release June 08, 2017). Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. Oxidation (M), acetylation (K) and deamidation (N, Q) were searched as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) as static modification. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% false discovery rate at peptide level. Minora feature detector node (LFQ) was used along with the feature mapper and precursor ions quantifier. The normalization parameters were selected as follows : (1) Unique peptides (2) Precursor abundance based on intensity (3) Normalization mode : total peptide amount (4) Protein abundance calculation : summed abundances (5) Protein ratio calculation : pairwise ratio based and (6) Hypothesis test : t-test (background based). Quantitative data were considered for master proteins, quantified by a minimum of 2 unique peptides, a fold changes above 2 and a statistical p-value lower than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Candida lusitaniae</i> is an emerging opportunistic pathogenic yeast capable of shifting from yeast to pseudohyphae form, and it is one of the few <i>Candida</i> species with the ability to reproduce sexually. In this study, we showed that a <i>dpp3</i>&#x394; mutant, inactivated for a putative pyrophosphatase, is impaired in cell separation, pseudohyphal growth and mating. The defective phenotypes were not restored after the reconstruction of a wild-type <i>DPP3</i> locus, reinforcing the hypothesis of the presence of an additional mutation that we suspected in our previous study. Genetic crosses and genome sequencing identified an additional mutation in <i>MED15</i>, encoding a subunit of the mediator complex that functions as a general transcriptional co-activator in Eukaryotes. We confirmed that inactivation of <i>MED15</i> was responsible for the defective phenotypes by rescuing the <i>dpp3</i>&#x394; mutant with a wild-type copy of <i>MED15</i> and constructing a <i>med15</i>&#x394; knockout mutant that mimics the phenotypes of <i>dpp3</i>&#x394; in vitro. Proteomic analyses revealed the biological processes under the control of Med15 and involved in hyphal growth, cell separation and mating. This is the first description of the functions of <i>MED15</i> in the regulation of hyphal growth, cell separation and mating, and the pathways involved in <i>C. lusitaniae</i>.

### Keywords
Mating, Quantitative proteome, Pseudo-hyphal growth, Candida, Secondary mutation, Cell separation

### Affiliations
Microbiologie Fondamentale et Pathogénicité, UMR 5234 (Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS), Bordeaux, France.
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Karine Dementhon
Microbiologie Fondamentale et Pathogénicité, UMR 5234 (Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS), Bordeaux, France.


