### Accession
PXD039330

### Title
Nanoproteomics analysis reveals single C. elegans heterogeneity  during aging

### Description
Aging was long assumed to be a passive and stochastic process caused by random damage accumulation, however，such theories fail to explain the program-like features of the aging process. Measuring the aging process in C. elegans at individual level provides an opportunity to analyze both the programmed (age-related changes at population level) and stochastic (inter-individual differences in isogenic population) components during the aging process. Here, we performed quantitative proteomic analyses on more than 150 worm individuals of different ages and aged individuals with different mobility. The analysis of inter-individual variations helps dissect the programmed and stochastic components during the aging process, and key proteins underlying the lifespan plasticity among the genetically identical worm individuals. Using a high temporal resolution single worm proteomic landscape, we found that the aging process was non-linearly progressed, with each stage marked by distinct age-related changes. The fast-aging individuals are depleted with such secreted proteins and over-activation of lysosome degradation processes, providing a first molecular link for the programmed enhanced offspring growth and death of the parent individual. This mechanistic link indicates that programmed events at least in part explain the heterogeneity of adult aging.

### Sample Protocol
For protein extraction, a single worm was picked and placed immediately into microfuge tubes containing 5 μL of lysis buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM TEAB pH 8.5, 15mM TCEP) and flash frozen using liquid nitrogen. They were then thawed, centrifuged briefly, ultrasonicated using a Qsonica, then alkylated in the dark for 15 min using iodoacetamide (30 mM). The lysates were diluted with 100 mM TEAB to 2 M urea for digestion with trypsin. Trypsin was used at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:25 (w/w). The digestions were carried out overnight at 37ºC, then stopped by acidification with FA to a final concentration of 5% (v:v). Peptides were desalted using Empore C18 following the manufacturer's instructions, dried and redissolved in 0.1% FA.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed in the MaxQuant (Version: 2.0.3.0) software environment(Cox and Mann, 2008) and Proteins and peptides were identified using the UniProt C. elegans reference proteome database (2020). The minimal required peptide length was set to seven amino acids and both protein and peptide identifications were accepted at a false discovery rate of 1%. Database searches were performed according to standard settings with Trypsin/P being used, allowing 2 missed cleavages. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were allowed as variable modifications with a maximum number of 5. Carbamidomethyl (C) was allowed as a fixed modification. Label-Free Quantification was enabled, allowing Fast LFQ.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
C. elegans, Lc-msms, Aging

### Affiliations
Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory for Cancer Molecular Cell Biology, Life Sciences Institute, Zhejiang University, China
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Tianyi Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Bing Yang
Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory for Cancer Molecular Cell Biology, Life Sciences Institute, Zhejiang University, China


