### Accession
PXD026630

### Title
Mapping proteome changes in recurrent colon cancer reveals a significant immune system signature

### Description
Background The molecular mechanisms underlying colon cancer development are multifactorial. There is a clinical need for better markers than current TNM stages for stratifying risk of recurrent disease and to guide clinicians in choice of adjuvant treatment. The objective of this study is to evaluate the level of differences between recurrent and non-recurrent colon cancer in five year follow-up by proteomics. We identified 4,805 proteins quantified across all ten groups with at least one unique peptide sequence and 1% FDR. For the cluster analysis, 2919 proteins (61%) appear in two clusters  differentiating the tumor and control samples. 54 proteins (1 %) appear in a cluster  seemingly differentiating recurrent and non-recurrent cancer. A cut-off strategy with pathway analysis identify 255 proteins (5%) different between recurrent and non-recurrent cancer for the combined  TNM2 and TNM3 group. Likewise, we identified 727 proteins (15%) for the TNM2 r+/r- group and 343 proteins (7%) for TNM3 r+/r-, partly with overlapping predicted gene findings.  We demonstrate the degree of dissimilarity between recurrent and nonrecurrent cancer in a proteomics dataset. We believe these findings are usable for setting up larger scale experiments in recurrent cancer although the study is underpowered for diagnostic purposes.

### Sample Protocol
Per-operative biopsies from tumour tissue and control tissue were obtained from 25 patients with sufficient fresh-frozen material available. Biopsies (n=50, 25 tumour and 25 normal colon tissue samples) were cut and homogenized in 0,5 mL DPBS and TissueLyzer. Samples were sonicated three times for 30 sec at 30% power, followed by centriguration at 14 000 xg for 3 min. The supernatant were transferred to a new tube, and the protein concentration was measured using Bradford assay. From each sample 20 μg total protein were stored at -80ºC before further processing. Five samples of 20 μg was pooled (Table 1) to make 100 μg samples. The same was done for the respective normal tissue samples. Ten pooled samples of 100 μg protein were processed for proteomics.  The entire amount of protein (100 μg) in each sample was reduced, alkylated and digested into peptides with trypsin. The peptide samples were TMT-labelled (10-plex) (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA) and fractionated.  TMT reagents were re-suspended in acetonitrile (ACN). Desalted peptides were re-suspended in 100 μL of 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 30 μL of ACN, and 10 μL of the TMT reagents were added to the respective peptide samples, gently vortexed, and incubated for 1.5 h at RT. To prevent unwanted labelling, the reaction was quenched by adding 10 μL of 5% hydroxylamine and incubated for 15 min at RT. Equal amounts of the TMT-labelled samples were combined and concentrated to near dryness, followed by desalting via C18 solid phase extraction. The combined labelled peptide samples were pre-fractionated by basic pH reversed phase HPLC as described previously, using an Agilent (P/N 770995-902) 300Extend-C18, 5 μm, 250 mm x 4.6 mm id column, connected to an Agilent Technology off-line LC-system. Solvent A was 5% ACN, 10 mM NH4HCO3 pH8, and solvent B was 90% ACN, NH4HCO3 pH 8. The samples were re-suspended in 500 μL solvent A and loaded onto the column. Column flow was set to 0.8 mL/min and the gradient length was 70 min, as follows: from 0-35 min solvent 50% A/ 50% B, and from 35-50 min 100% B, and from 50-70 min 100% A. The labelled peptides were fractionated into 96 fractions, and further combined into a total of 12 fractions. Each fraction was acidified with 1% formic acid, concentrated by vacuum centrifugation to near dryness, and desalted by StageTip. Each fraction was dissolved in 5% ACN/ 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based in-house software pipeline, and spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all entries from the human uniprot database (March 11, 2014). This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Sequest searches and linear discriminant analysis[28, 29]. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the summed signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion. The search space for each reporter ion was limited to a range of 0.003 Th to prevent overlap between the isobaric reporter ions. For protein-level comparisons, PSMs were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Moreover, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs using in-house software, as described previously. PSMs with poor quality, MS3 spectra with more than eight TMT reporter ion channels missing, MS3 spectra with TMT reporter summed signal-to-noise ratio that is less than 100, or no MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation. Protein quantitation values were exported for further analysis in Microsoft Excel or SAS JMP. Each reporter ion channel was summed across all quantified proteins and normalized assuming equal protein loading of all 10 samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Recurrent disease, Colon cancer, Proteomics, Immune activation

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Tian Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Joao Paulo
Harvard Medical School


