### Accession
PXD013628

### Title
Identification of proteins synthesized from long-lived mRNAs during seed germination in rice

### Description
To identify the proteins synthesized from long-lived mRNAs at early phase of germination, proteome of embryos at 0 DAI (dry embryos), 1 DAI with α-amanitin and 1 DAI without α-amanitin were analyzed by using LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Ten embryos in triplicates at 0 and 1 DAI were frozen in liquid nitrogen and then disrupted with a Tissue Lyser LT (QIAGEN). The disrupted samples were suspended with 1 ml extraction buffer [10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 9.0) and 8 M urea] and incubated for 30 min at room temperature. The homogenate was then centrifuged at 1,5000 × g for 10 min, and the protein amount in the supernatant was measured with a bicinchoninic acid protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Protein samples (100 μg) were digested by trypsin after reduction with dithiothreitol and alkylation with iodoacetamide, followed by desalting with C18 StageTips, as described previously (Nakagami et al. 2010).

### Data Protocol
For database searching, Mascot version 2.4.1 (Matrix Science) was set up to search The Institute for Genome Research rice genome annotation project database (all.pep, ftp://ftp.plantbiology.msu.edu/pub/data/Eukaryotic_Projects/o_sativa/annotation_dbs/pseudomol ecules/version_5.0/all.chrs/;chrC.pep,ftp://ftp.plantbiology.msu.edu/pub/data/Eukaryotic_Project s/o_sativa/annotation_dbs/pseudomolecules/chloroplast.dir/;chrM.pep,ftp://ftp.plantbiology.msu. edu/pub/data/Eukaryotic_Projects/o_sativa/annotation_dbs/pseudomolecules/mitochondrion.dir/) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.04 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 3 ppm, and strict trypsin specificity (Olsen et al. 2004), allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine was specified in Mascot as a variable modification. Scaffold version 4.4.1 (Proteome Software Inc) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptides were considered identified if the Mascot score was over the 99% confidence limit based on the “identity” score of each peptide. Protein identifications were accepted if they contained at least 2 identified peptides. The abundance of identified proteins was then estimated by emPAI method (Ishihama et al. 2005) with normalization minimum value is 0.

### Publication Abstract
During seed germination, proteins are translated not only from mRNAs newly transcribed upon imbibition but also from long-lived mRNAs that are synthesized during seed maturation and stored in the mature dry seeds. To clarify the distinct roles of proteins translated from long-lived mRNAs and de novo transcribed mRNAs in germinating rice embryos, proteome analysis based on liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) combining the use of a transcriptional inhibitor was performed. We observed that &#x3b1;-amanitin significantly represses transcription in germinating embryos; nevertheless, the embryos could germinate, albeit slowly. The proteomic analysis revealed that a total of 109 proteins were translated from long-lived mRNAs associated with germination as well as 222 proteins whose expression were dependent on de novo transcription upon imbibition. Transcriptomic datasets available in public databases demonstrated that mRNAs of the 222 proteins notably increased during germination while those of the 109 proteins highly accumulated in dry embryos and constitutively expressed upon imbibition. Gene Ontology enrichment and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis indicated that many of the 109 proteins from long-lived mRNAs are implicated in energy production such as glycolysis or annotated as nucleotide binding proteins, while the 222 proteins are involved in pathways such as pyruvate metabolism and TCA cycle following glycolysis, and momilactones biosynthesis. We propose that long-lived mRNAs support initial energy production and activation of translational machinery upon imbibition whereas de novo transcription accelerates the energy production after glycolysis, which enables rice seeds to germinate vigorously.

### Keywords
Embryo, Α-amanitin, Imbibition, Rice

### Affiliations
Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research

### Submitter
Hirofumi Nakagami

### Lab Head
Dr Hirofumi Nakagami
Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research


