### Accession
PXD017077

### Title
INTEGRATED MULTI-OMICS ANALYSES OF MAIZE REVEAL ROLES FOR AUTOPHAGIC DURING FIXED CARBON STARVATION

### Description
The turnover of cytoplasmic material via autophagic encapsulation and delivery to vacuoles is essential for recycling cellular constituents, especially under nutrient-limiting conditions.  To determine how cells/tissues rely on autophagy, we applied in-depth multi-omic analyses to study maize (Zea mays) autophagy mutants grown after fixed carbon starvation.  Surprisingly, broad alterations in the leaf metabolome were evident in plants missing the core autophagy component ATG12 even without stress, particularly affecting products of lipid turnover and secondary metabolites, which were underpinned by substantial changes in the transcriptome and/or proteome.  Cross-comparison of mRNA and protein abundances allowed for the identification of organelles, protein complexes, and individual proteins targeted for selective autophagic clearance, and revealed several processes controlled by this catabolism.  Fixed carbon starvation induced the proteins involved in alternative respiration together with the upregulation of various alternative catabolic processes. Collectively, we describe a facile proteomic strategy to survey autophagic substrates, and show that autophagy has a greater than expected influence in sculpting plant proteomes and membranes both before and during nitrogen stress.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted at 4 °C from pulverized leaves into 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 5 mM Na2EDTA, 2 mM dithiotreitol, and 1X plant protease inhibitor cocktail (P9599; Sigma-Aldrich).  After clarification by centrifugation at 16,000 Xg, 60 µg of protein in a total volume of 150 µl was precipitated in 4:1:3 (v/v) methanol/chloroform/water and collected by centrifugation.  The resulting pellet was washed once with the same mix, lyophilized to dryness, resuspended into 100 µl of 8 M urea, and reduced for 1 hr at 22 °C with 10 mM dithiothreitol, followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hr.  The reaction was quenched with 20 mM dithiotreitol and diluted with with 900 µl of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reduce the urea concentration below 1.5 M, and digested overnight at 37 °C with 0.5 µg of sequencing-grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega).  The resulting peptides were lyophilized to a final volume of ~250 µl, acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid until the pH was below 3.0, and then desalted and concentrated with a 100 µl Bond Elut OMIX C18 pipette tip (Agilent Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  The peptides were eluted in 50 µl of 75% acetonitrile and 0.1% acetic acid, lyophilized, and resuspended in 20 µl 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid.  Nano-scale LC separation of the tryptic peptides was performed using a Dionex Ultimate™ 3000 Rapid Separation system equipped with a 75 µm x 25 cm Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), in combination with a 2-hr linear 4% to 36% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid and a flow rate of 250 nl/min.  Eluted peptides were analyzed online by a Q Exactive Plus spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in the positive ESI mode.  Data-dependent acquisition of full MS scans (mass range of 380-1500 m/z) at a resolution of 70,000 was collected, with the automatic gain control (AGC) target set to 3 x 106, and the maximum fill time set to 200 msec.  High-energy collision-induced dissociation fragmentation of the 15 strongest peaks was performed with an intensity threshold of 4 x 104 counts and an isolation window of 3.0 m/z, and excluded precursors that had unassigned, +1, +7, +8, or >+8 charge states.  MS/MS scans were conducted at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target of 2 x 105 and a maximum fill time of 100 msec.  Dynamic exclusion was performed with a repeat count of 2 and an exclusion duration of 30 sec, while the minimum MS ion count for triggering MS/MS was set to 4 x 103 counts.  Each sample was analyzed in quadruplicate to enable broad coverage; the first two runs were performed without an exclusion list, while the third and fourth runs were performed with an exclusion list, containing the 5,000 most abundant peptides that were detected in the first two run, to increase sample coverage and maximize suppression of abundant peptides.  Raw MS2 files from all four runs were merged, resulting in two technical replicates per sample.  A digest of cytochrome C (Thermo Scientific) was analyzed every 18th run to monitor sensitivity and retention time drift.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS datasets were queried by Proteome Discoverer (version 2.0.0.802; Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the Z. mays proteome database (Zea-mays.AGPv3.21.pep.all from www.maizegdb.org) and a list of common protein contaminants.  Peptides were assigned by SEQUEST HT 72, allowing a maximum of 2 missed tryptic cleavages, a minimum peptide length of 6, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerances of 0.02 Da.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteines and oxidation of methionine were specified as static and dynamic modifications, respectively.  A FDR of 0.01 (high confidence) and 0.05 (medium confidence) validated peptide spectral matches.  Label-free quantification based on MS1 precursor ion intensity was performed in Proteome Discoverer with a minimum Quan value threshold set to 0.0001 for unique peptides; the “3 Top N” peptides were used for area calculation 73.  Protein abundances were normalized based on the values obtained from 150 proteins considered least variable among the samples (stdev/average) (Supplemental Dataset 9), which was validated by comparing the abundances of 18 amply-detected histones.  Values were log2-transformed and missing values were imputed assuming a normal distribution in Perseus 64.  Consistent differences in both atg12 alleles versus wild-type were calculated by ANOVA contrasts (p ≤ 0.05).  To further reduce the number of false positives, proteins with a FDR >0.05 in either or both atg12-1 or atg12-2 were also excluded.   GO enrichments were identified by the AgriGO analysis toolkit in combination with the Z. mays AGPv3.30 database 74,75.  The analyses were conducted independently for the 2nd and 4th leaves, using the list of identified proteins per leaf as the reference.  After p-values and FDR <0.05 were determined for each GO-annotation category, a more precise gene identification overview list was constructed that included the most significant GO-annotation terms to increase accuracy and curtail redundancy.  GO-annotation categories shown here were selected based on their uniqueness, p-value significance, and degree of completeness.

### Publication Abstract
Autophagic recycling of proteins, lipids, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, and organelles is essential for cellular homeostasis and optimal health, especially under nutrient-limiting conditions. To better understand how this turnover affects plant growth, development, and survival upon nutrient stress, we applied an integrated multiomics approach to study maize (<i>Zea mays</i>) autophagy mutants subjected to fixed-carbon starvation induced by darkness. Broad metabolic alterations were evident in leaves missing the core autophagy component ATG12 under normal growth conditions (e.g., lipids and secondary metabolism), while changes in amino acid-, carbohydrate-, and nucleotide-related metabolites selectively emerged during fixed-carbon starvation. Through combined proteomic and transcriptomic analyses, we identified numerous autophagy-responsive proteins, which revealed processes underpinning the various metabolic changes seen during carbon stress as well as potential autophagic cargo. Strikingly, a strong upregulation of various catabolic processes was observed in the absence of autophagy, including increases in simple carbohydrate levels with a commensurate drop in starch levels, elevated free amino acid levels with a corresponding reduction in intact protein levels, and a strong increase in the abundance of several nitrogen-rich nucleotide catabolites. Altogether, this analysis showed that fixed-carbon starvation in the absence of autophagy adjusts the choice of respiratory substrates, promotes the transition of peroxisomes to glyoxysomes, and enhances the retention of assimilated nitrogen.

### Keywords
Lcms, Maize, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Washington University in Saint Louis
Biology department, Washington Univeristy in St. Louis

### Submitter
Fionn McLoughlin

### Lab Head
Dr Richard D Vierstra
Biology department, Washington Univeristy in St. Louis


