### Accession
PXD014320

### Title
Prolonged fasting and refeeding modifies the proteome of slow-twitch skeletal muscle fibres in Piaractus mesopotamicus

### Description
 In fish, the slow-twitch skeletal muscle fibres have an oxidative metabolism, present peripherical location in the red muscle, and are used for sustained movements. They may respond to alterations in food availability differently than the fast-twitch muscle. The aim of this manuscript was to study the slow-twitch muscle fibres of Piaractus Mesopotamicus, a neotropical fish, submitted to 30 days of fasting (D30) followed by one day (D31) or 30 days of refeeding (D60). The treated animals were compared with regularly fed fish. To verify the presence of atrophy and hypertrophy, we performed histological analysis of muscle fibre diameter in D30 and D60, and RT-qPCR gene expression analysis of catabolic (murfa, murfb, mafbx) and anabolic genes (igf-1, mTOR) in D30, D31 and D60. The gene expression of the allergen and Ca2+-carrier parvalbumin (pvalb) was also measured in D30, D31 and D60. The proteome of slow-twitch fibres at D30 and D60 was obtained by shotgun proteomics (digestion of proteins with trypsin followed by LC-MS/MS identification), and the proteins differentially expressed were used to construct protein interaction networks. The histological analysis showed no difference between treated fish in relation to the control. The expression of catabolic and anabolic genes was not changed, except for the negative regulation of igf-1 in D30 and of mtor in D31. The expression of pvalb was not changed in D30 and D60, but it was decreased in D31. The proteomic analysis identified 169 proteins in D30 (24 upregulated and 18 downregulated) and 170 proteins in D60 (17 upregulated and 21 downregulated). Many of them were related to energetic metabolism, including lipid metabolism, as shown by the protein network analysis. These results enlarge our understanding of the acclimation of slow-twitch fibres to changes in nutrient availability and set a path for future research.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction  Approximately 5g of muscle sample were homogenized with Tris-HCl buffer (10 mmol∙L-1, pH 7.2), phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF, 5 mmol∙L-1), urea (8 mmol∙L-1) and dithiothreitol (DTT, 65 mmol∙L-1). The suspension was vortexed for 2-3 min and centrifuged at 9690g for 15 min at 4ºC. The supernatant was collected and the protein content was measured with Bradford assay using BSA standard.  Pools containing proteins from three different animals were made. As a result, there were two pools (n = 3 for each pool) for each group at D30 and D60.   Digestion of proteins  The sarcoplasmic proteins (50µg) were digested in solution of 8 M urea (1:1) followed by 25 minutes of incubation with 10 mM DTT at 56°C. Alkylation was performed with 14 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) during 30 minutes at room temperature, avoiding light exposure. To quench free IAA, samples were incubated for 15 minutes with 5 mM DTT and subsequently 1 mM calcium chloride was added to the samples. The hydrolysis occurred in the presence of trypsin enzyme (Promega, USA) (1:50 enzyme/substrate) for 18 hours at 37°C. Trypsin was inactivated with 0.4% formic acid solution. The samples were desalinated using Sep-Pak Vac C18 cartridges (Waters, USA). The peptide fragments were reduced with vacuum centrifuge and kept at -20°C until analysis by mass spectrometry.  Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)  Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed in a Q-Tof PREMIER API mass spectrometer (MicroMass/Waters, Mildford, MA) at the Brazilian Biosciences National Laboratory (LNBio), Campinas, Brazil. An aliquot of 4.5 μL containing 5µg of peptides was separated by C18 (100 um x 100 mm) RP-nanoUPLC (nanoAcquity, Waters) coupled with a Q-Tof Premier mass spectrometer (Waters) with nanoelectrospray source at a flow rate of 0.600 µl/min. The gradient was 2–90% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 60 minutes. The nanoelectrospray voltage was set to 3.5 kV, a cone voltage of 30 V and the source temperature was 80ºC. The instrument was operated in the ‘top three’ mode, in which one MS spectrum is acquired followed by MS/MS of the top three most-intense peaks detected. After MS/MS fragmentation, the ion was placed on the exclusion list for 60 s and a real- time exclusion was used. All the protein pools (2 pools with n = 3) were run in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
The spectra were acquired using software MassLynx v.4.1 and the raw data files were converted to a peak list format (mgf) without summing the scans by the software Mascot Distiller v.2.3.2.0, 2009 (Matrix Science Ltd.) and searched against Actinopterygii taxonomy NCBI database (June, 2017) using Mascot engine v.2.3.01 (Matrix Science Ltd.), with carbamidomethylation as fixed modifications, oxidation of methionine as variable modification, one trypsin missed cleavage and a tolerance of 0.1 Da for both precursor and fragment ions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics., Refeeding, Slow-twitch fibres, Red muscle, Fish, Food restriction

### Affiliations
Department of Morphology, Institute of Biosciences of Botucatu, São Paulo State University (UNESP), Botucatu, São Paulo, Brazil
IBB-UNESP

### Submitter
Maria Laura Gabriel Kuniyoshi

### Lab Head
Dr Maeli Dal-Pai-Silva
Department of Morphology, Institute of Biosciences of Botucatu, São Paulo State University (UNESP), Botucatu, São Paulo, Brazil


