### Accession
PXD010962

### Title
Naja annulifera Snake: New Insights into the Venom Components and Pathogenesis of Envenomation

### Description
Naja annulifera is a dangerous snake that belongs to the Elapidae family. It is found in some of the countries in Sub-Saharan Africa and has caused several accidents in humans and dogs. In this study, we characterized some of the biochemical, toxic and immunogenic properties of N. annulifera venom. We showed that the venom is composed of several proteins, some of which display enzymatic activities, such as phospholipase A2, hyaluronidase, metalloproteinases and serine proteinases. The venom promoted disturbances in the human coagulation system and was cytotoxic to human epidermal cells. Using a mouse model, we showed that the venom promotes local reactions that were reduced with anti-inflammatory drugs. The venom caused systemic inflammation, lung hemorrhage and death. Further, the venom stimulated production of high antibody titers when injected into mice and the antiserum produced was able to inhibit venom-induced death. We therefore conclude that N. annulifera venom contains toxins that play a role in the toxic and inflammatory effects that contribute to the clinical manifestations and death. Moreover, the venom is immunogenic, an important aspect for the production an efficient N. annulifera antivenom.

### Sample Protocol
N. annulifera venom (200 µg) was submitted to denaturation with 6 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, and reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) 10 mM for 1 h at room temperature. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was performed by incubation with iodoacetamide 40 mM for 1 h at room temperature, followed by addition of DTT 40 mM to consume excess of alkylating agent. Protein samples were diluted with water until the concentration of urea decreased to about 0.7 M and trypsin was added using an enzyme: substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w) at 37 ºC for 18 h. The reaction was stopped with 20% TFA until pH 3 and desalting was carried out by loading individual samples to p-1000 StageTip SDB-XC. After drying using a vacuum centrifuge, peptide mixtures were dissolved in 100 µL of 0.1% formic acid (solution A) and peptide concentration was estimated at 214 nm using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific) and a molecular extinction coeficient of 0.3 mL mg-1cm-1. For each analysis 5 µL was automatically injected using an EASY Nano LCII system (Thermo Scientific) into a 5 cm of 10 µm Jupiter® C-18 trap column (100 μm I.D. × 360 µm O.D.) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic separation of tryptic peptides was performed on a 15-cm long column (75 µm I.D. x 360 µm O.D.) packed in-house with 3 µm ReproSil-Pur® C-18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Germany). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (solution B) at 200 nL/min: the linear step used for the elution was 5-35% in 75 min. Spray voltage was set at 2.2 kV and the mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode, in which one full MS scan was acquired in the m/z range of 300-1,600 followed by MS/MS acquisition using collision induced dissociation of the ten most intense ions from the MS scan. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer at 30,000 resolution (at 400 m/z) whereas the MS/MS scans were acquired in the linear ion trap. The minimum signal threshold to trigger fragmentation event, isolation window, activation time and normalized collision energy were set to, respectively, 1,000 cps, 2 m/z, 10 ms and 35%. A dynamic peak exclusion (list size of 500) was applied to avoid the same m/z of being selected for the next 20 seconds. Two independent LC-MS/MS runs were performed for each sample.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using the MaxQuant software suite (v 1.5.3.12) using the theoretical trypsin fragments produced from the database restricted to the taxonomy “Serpentes” (Uniprot release July 30, 2018; 145,464 sequences). The database search considered the precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, in the first search, and the nonlinear mass recalibration was made in the masses of first pass identifications. The second search considered the mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm and tolerance for fragments was set to 0.5 Da. The following search parameters were used: iodoacetamide derivatives of cysteine were considered as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine was specified as variable modification, and up to two missed cleavages by trypsin were accepted. Assignments for peptides and proteins were accepted at a false discovery rate < 1%. For the identification, only proteins identified in at least two experimental replicates, with at least 1 unique peptide and posterior error probability ≤ 0.01 were accepted. “Match between runs” feature was enabled. Protein absolute quantification was performed by a peak intensity-based absolute quantification method integrated in the MaxQuant. To estimate the contribution of each protein within the venom, the % of iBAQ values was calculated from the average value of iBAQ intensities of the three biological replicates. We report on the abundance of each protein as percentage of the total identified proteome, obtained by normalizing the iBAQ intensities to the sum of all intensities.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Antivenom, Lc-ms/ms, Inflammation, Toxins, Ibaq, Naja annulifera snake venom

### Affiliations
Butantan Institute
Special Laboratory of Applied Toxinology, Butantan Institute, São Paulo, Brazil

### Submitter
Eduardo Kitano

### Lab Head
Dr Solange M. T. Serrano
Special Laboratory of Applied Toxinology, Butantan Institute, São Paulo, Brazil


