### Accession
PXD033358

### Title
Epigenetic-focused CRISPR-Cas9 screen identifies ASH2L as a regulator of Glioblastoma cell survival

### Description
Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) is the most common and aggressive primary brain tumor. Despite recent developments in surgery, chemo- and radiotherapy, a currently poor prognosis of GBM patients highlights an urgent need for novel treatment strategies. Our awareness on importance of epigenetic mechanisms for tumor initiation, progression and apoptotic response lead us to investigate epigenetic regulators of GBM survival through a genetic ablation screen. Screen with our custom library EPIDOKOL targeting functional domains of critical chromatin modifier genes, revealed multiple GBM essentiality gene candidates, most importantly ASH2L. Upon ASH2L ablation, we observed induction of apoptosis and cell cycle arrest concomitant with a set of downregulated signature genes. Massive reduction in tumor forming capacity of ASH2L depleted GBM cells as well as high ASH2L expression in GBM patients in comparison to low grade gliomas (LGG) proved essentiality of the gene for glioma cell fitness. Detection of epigenetic factors modulating tumor survival via high throughput, robust and affordable screens such as EPIDOKOL holds great promise to ultimately enable rapid discovery of novel cancer biomarkers and production of effective therapies which will increase life span and dignity of cancer patients.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were seeded in 15-cm dishes (Greiner Cellstar) and grown to 70-80% confluence prior to induction with 1µg/ml doxycycline for 22 h. GFP-protein expression was verified using ZOE fluorescence microscopy (Biorad). Next, induced cells were harvested and nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts were obtained using a modified version of the Dignam procedure. Protein concentrations were determined by Bradford assay (BioRad). 1 mg of nuclear extract was used for GFP-affinity purification as described. In short, protein lysates were incubated in binding buffer (20 mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.9, 300 mM NaCl, 20% glycerol, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP-40, 0.5 mM DTT and 1x Roche protease inhibitor cocktail) on a rotating wheel for 1 h at 4oC in triplicates with GBP-coated agarose beads (Chromotek) or control agarose beads (Chromotek). The beads were washed two times with binding buffer containing 0.5% NP-40, two times with PBS containing 0.5% NP-40, and two times with PBS. On-bead digestion of bound proteins was performed overnight in elution buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 2 M urea, 10 mM DTT) with 0.1 µg/ml of trypsin at RT and eluted tryptic peptides were bound to C18 stagetips (ThermoFischer, USA) prior to mass spectrometry analysis. Tryptic peptides were eluted from the C18 stage tips in H2O:acetonitril (35:65) and dried prior to resuspension in 10% formic acid. A third of this elution was analyzed by nanoflow-LC-MS/MS with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy nano-LC 1200 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The flow rate was 300 nl/min, buffer A was 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid and buffer B was 0.1 % formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile. A gradient of increasing organic proportion was used in combination with a reversed phase C18 separating column (2 µm particle size, 100 angstron pore size, 25 cm length, 50 µm i.d., Thermo Fisher Scienitific). Each MS can was followed by a maximum of 10 MS/MS scans in the data dependent mode with 90 min total analysis time. Blank samples consisting of 10% formic acid were run for 45 min between GFP and non-GFP samples, to avoid carry-over between runs.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were analyzed with MaxQuant software using Uniprot human FASTA database. Label-free quantification values (LFQ) and match between run options were selected. Intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) algorithm was also activated for subsequent relative protein abundance estimation. The obtained protein files were analyzed by Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Crisper-cas9, Glioblastoma, Ash2l

### Affiliations
Koç University School of Medicine
Koç University, Turkey

### Submitter
Tugba  Bagci Onder

### Lab Head
Dr Tugba Bagci Onder
Koç University, Turkey


