### Accession
PXD018334

### Title
Single-cell transcriptomics and cell-specific proteomics reveals new molecular regulators of sleep

### Description
Every day, we sleep for a third of the day. Sleep is important for cognition, brain waste clearance, metabolism, and immune responses. Homeostatic regulation of sleep is maintained by progressively rising sleep need during wakefulness, which then dissipates during sleep. The molecular mechanisms governing sleep are largely unknown. Here, we used a combination of single-cell RNA sequencing and cell-type specific proteomics to interrogate the molecular and functional underpinnings of sleep. Different cell-types in the brain regions show similar transcriptional response to sleep need whereas sleep deprivation changes overall expression indicative of altered antigen processing, synaptic transmission and cellular metabolism in brainstem, cortex and hypothalamus, respectively. Increased sleep need enhances expression of transcription factor Sox2, Mafb, and Zic1 in brainstem; Hlf, Cebpb and Sox9 in cortex, and Atf3, Fosb and Mef2c in hypothalamus. Results from cell-type proteome analysis suggest that sleep deprivation changes abundance of proteins in cortical neurons indicative of altered synaptic vesicle cycles and glucose metabolism whereas in astrocytes it alters the abundance of proteins associated with fatty acid degradation. Similarly, phosphoproteomics of each cell type demonstrates large shifts in site-specific protein phosphorylation in neurons and astrocytes of sleep deprived mice. Our results indicate that sleep deprivation regulates transcriptional, translational and post-translational responses in a cell-specific manner and advances our understanding of the cellular and molecular mechanisms that govern sleep-wake homeostasis in mammals.

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentration in each sample was determined by Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat # 23225) following the manufacturer’s instructions. 50µg protein per condition was transferred into new microcentrifuge tubes and 5 µL of the 200 mM TCEP was added to reduce the cysteine residues and the samples were incubated at 55°C for 1 hr. Subsequently, the reduced proteins were alkylated with 375 mM iodoacetamide (freshly prepared in 100 mM TEAB) for 30 min under dark condition at room temperature. Then, trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade; Promega, Cat # V5280) was added at a 1:40 (trypsin: protein) ratio and samples were incubated at 37°C for 12 h for proteolytic digestion. After in-solution digestion, peptide samples were labelled with 10-plex TMT Isobaric Label Reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat # 90113) following the manufacturer's instructions. The reactions were quenched using 5µL of 5% hydroxylamine for 30 minutes. In order to perform phosphoproteome analysis, TMT labelled peptides were subjected to TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment according to the manufacturer’s instructions (High-Select™ TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat # A32993). The flow through and washes from the TiO2 enrichment step were combined, evaporated to dryness and subjected to Fe-NTA-based phosphopeptide enrichment according to the manufacturer’s instructions (High-Select™ Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat # A32992). Phosphopeptides enriched using TiO2- and Fe-NTA-based methods were combined, evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MS/MS. TMT labelled peptides were fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7  gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1 min., 6-15% B over 58 min., 15-32%B over 58 min., 32-40%B over 5 min., 40-90%B over 1 min., held at 90%B for 6min and then reduced to 1%B over 1min.) with a flow rate of 300nL min−1. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Each sample was injected three times to improve proteome/phosphoproteome coverage. Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 275°C. All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 4.1 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow. FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120,000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200,000 and a max injection time of 50 ms. Precursors were filtered with an intensity threshold of 5000, according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic peak determination set to Peptide. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (60s ±10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 10 000, max injection time of 70 ms and CID collision energy of 35%. For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 50,000 resolution with an AGC target of 50,000 and a max injection time of 105 ms.  Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 60% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield.  Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) was enabled to include up to 5 MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics raw data files were analysed using the MaxQuant computational platform (version 1.5.2.8) with the Andromeda search engine. MS2/MS3 spectra were searched against UniProt database specifying Mus musculus (Mouse) taxonomy (Proteome ID: UP000000589; Organism ID: 10090; Protein count: 52026). All searches were performed using “Reporter ion MS2/MS3” with “10-plex TMT” as isobaric labels with a static modification for cysteine alkylation (carbamidomethylation), and oxidation of methionine (M) and protein N-terminal acetylation as the variable modifications. Phospho (STY) was included as an additional variable modification for the phosphopeptide enrichment analyses. Trypsin digestion with maximum two missed cleavages, minimum peptide length as seven amino acids, precursor ion mass tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da were specified in all analyses. The false discovery rate (FDR) was specified at 0.05 for peptide spectrum match (PSM), protein and site decoy fraction. TMT signals were corrected for isotope impurities based on the manufacturer’s instructions. Subsequent processing and statistical analysis of quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics datasets were performed using the Perseus workstation (version 1.5.5.3). During data processing, reverse and contaminant database hits and candidates identified only by site were filtered out. For differential quantitative proteomics analyses, categorical annotation (NS/SD/RS) was applied to group reporter ion intensities, values were Log2 transformed, and were normalized by “subtract mean (column-wise)” in each TMT reporter ion channel. Proteins groups were filtered for valid values (at least 80% in each group), and p-values obtained from a t-test were used to determine significance of differences in protein or phosphosite abundances between the experimental groups (NS, SD, and RS).

### Publication Abstract
Every day, we sleep for a third of the day. Sleep is important for cognition, brain waste clearance, metabolism, and immune responses. The molecular mechanisms governing sleep are largely unknown. Here, we used a combination of single-cell RNA sequencing and cell-type-specific proteomics to interrogate the molecular underpinnings of sleep. Different cell types in three important brain regions for sleep (brainstem, cortex, and hypothalamus) exhibited diverse transcriptional responses to sleep need. Sleep restriction modulates astrocyte-neuron crosstalk and sleep need enhances expression of specific sets of transcription factors in different brain regions. In cortex, we also interrogated the proteome of two major cell types: astrocytes and neurons. Sleep deprivation differentially alters the expression of proteins in astrocytes and neurons. Similarly, phosphoproteomics revealed large shifts in cell-type-specific protein phosphorylation. Our results indicate that sleep need regulates transcriptional, translational, and post-translational responses in a cell-specific manner.

### Keywords
Strocyte, Neuron, Phosphoproteomics, Single-cell rna sequencing, Tandem mass tag, Brainstem, Cortex, Hypothalamus, Differential proteomics, Sleep deprivation

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Systems Pharmacology & Translational Therapeutics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA

### Submitter
Sandipan Ray

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh B. Reddy
Department of Systems Pharmacology & Translational Therapeutics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA


