### Accession
PXD024584

### Title
Pipelines and Systems for Threshold Avoiding Quantification of LC-MS/MS data

### Description
The accurate processing of complex LC-MS/MS data from biological samples is a major challenge for metabolomics, proteomics and related approaches. Here we present the Pipelines and Systems for Threshold Avoiding Quantification (PASTAQ) LC-MS/MS pre-processing toolset, which allows highly accurate quantification of data-dependent acquisition (DDA) LC-MS/MS datasets. PASTAQ performs compound quantification using single-stage (MS1) data and implements novel algorithms for high-performance and accurate quantification, retention time alignment, feature detection, and linking annotations frommultiple identification engines. PASTAQ offers straightforward parametrization and automatic generation of quality control plots for data and pre-processing assessment. This design results in smaller variance when analyzing replicates of proteomes mixed with known ratios, and allows the detection of peptides with a larger dynamic concentration range compared to widely used proteomics preprocessing tools. The performance of the pipeline is also demonstrated in a biological human serum dataset for the identification of gender related proteins.

### Sample Protocol
HYE dataset To generate complex proteome samples with known composition a tryptic HeLa protein digest (Pierce™ HeLa Protein Digest Standard, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany), a tryptic yeast protein digest (Mass Spec-Compatible Yeast Extract, Promega, Walldorf, Germany) and an E. coli tryptic protein digest (Waters, Manchester, UK) were used. For differential proteomics, three proteome mixtures (A, B, C) were prepared, composed of the HeLa proteome, yeast proteome, and Escherichia coli (E. coli) proteome. A) 20 μg of HeLa digest (dissolved in 0.1% FA) was combined with 10 μg yeast digest (dissolved in 0.1% FA) and 2 μg E. coli digest (dissolved in 0.1% FA). B) 10 μg of HeLa digest (dissolved in 0.1% FA) was combined with 20 μg yeast digest (dissolved in 0.1% FA) and 2 μg E. coli digest (dissolved in 0.1% FA). C) 2 μg of HeLa digest (dissolved in 0.1% FA) was combined with 10 μg yeast digest (dissolved in 0.1% FA) and 20 μg E. coli digest (dissolved in 0.1% FA). The sample mixtures A, B and C had a final concentration of 2 μg μL^(-1) (dissolved in 0.1% FA).  QconCAT dataset To generate the complex proteome samples with the spiked isotopically-labelled standards covering the three orders ofmagnitude in dynamic range, MS compatible Human Protein Extract (V694A, whole-cell protein extract prepared from human H562 cells, Promega) was digested with an in-gel digestion protocol as described previously [18]. Digests were resuspended in 0.1% FA at a final concentration of 1 μg μL^(-1) and mixed 1:1 with isotopically-labeled standard peptides. The isotopically-labeled peptides were digested from the three concatamers targeting a specific set of mitochondrial proteins as described previously [18]. The standard peptides were added at the concentrations listed in Table 2.  LC-MS/MS analysis For LC-MS/MS analysis, 1 μL were injected on a nano-ultra pressure liquid chromatography system (Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano pro flow, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled via nano electrospray-ionization (ESI) to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Chromatographic separation of the peptides was performed using a nano-LC column (Acclaim PepMapC100 C18, 75 μm x 50 cm, 2 μm, 100Å, Dionex, buffer A: 0.1% v/v formic acid (FA), dissolved in H2O, buffer b: 0.1% v/v FA, dissolved in acetonitrile (ACN)). The peptides were loaded onto a trap column (μPrecolumn cartridge, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100Å, 300 μm x 5mm, Dionex) with a flow-rate of 20 μLmin􀀀1 and 3% buffer B. Peptides were separated on the nano-LC column with a flow-rate of 300 nLmin􀀀1 using a linear gradient from 3–30% buffer B in 85 min, followed by 30–50% buffer B in 5 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA) using a top-10 method. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70, 000 at m/z 200 over a scan range of 350 to 1300 m/z with a AGC target of 106 ions and a maximum injection time of 50ms. Peptide fragmentation was performed with higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) using a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28. The intensity threshold for ions selection was set at 2.0*10^4 with a charge exclusion of >=1 and <=7. 691 The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17, 500 at 200 m/z, a AGC target of 10^5 ions and a maximum injection time of 50 ms and the quadrupole isolation window set to 1.6 m/z. The same instrument was used for the QconCAT dataset with the following alterations compared to the HYE dataset: a total of 3 μL was injected and the mass spectrometer was operated with a top-15 method, with a charge exclusion of <=1 and >=5.

### Data Protocol
Format conversion The raw Orbitrap data files were processed directly inMaxQuant, but PASTAQ requires files in mzXML [36] or mzML [37] format and SearchGUI [38] only works properly with centroided mgf [39] files. File conversion was performed with ProteoWizard’s msConvert [40] (Version 3.0.18342-01b48c0f0), with a binary encoding precision of 64 bits, and without zlib compression (Support for compressed files is currently being developed). The mzXML conversion was performed without additional processing. For the mgf conversion, centroiding was performed using the vendor’s peak picking algorithm included in msConvert.  Peptide and protein identification For protein identification UP000005640 (Homo sapiens, updated on August 21, 2019), UP000002311 (Baker’s yeast, updated on July 25, 2019), and UP000000625 (Escherichia coli, strain K12, updated on August 21, 2019) Swissprot [41] protein sequences were used. The canonical sequence of each proteome was downloaded in FASTA format from the UniProt Knowledgebase (UniProtKB) website on October 31, 2019. Prior to identification, the FASTA files of the three proteomes were concatenated. This FASTA file was used directly in MaxQuant [7] and MSFragger [42]. When using SearchGUI [38], this FASTA file was modified with the addition of reverse decoy sequences using the built in tools. Fixed modification of cysteine by carbamidomethylation (C) and the variable modification of methionine through oxidation to the sulfoxide (M) were used for all datasets. The QconCAT dataset was searched with the additional variablemodifications of 13C+6 on lysine (K) and arginine (R) due to the presence of stable isotope shift present in these amino acids in this artificial protein. SearchGUI (Version 3.3.17) was used to perform peptide and protein identification with the aforementioned FASTA file and PSM settings. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance to 0.02Da. The search engines selected for identification were (1) X!Tandem [43], (2) MS Amanda [44] and (3) MSGF+ [45]. The SearchGUI results were unified into a consensus mzIdentML [13] identification file for each sample using PeptideShakerCLI (Version 1.16.42) [14] and less than 1% FDR at PSM, peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
The accurate processing of complex liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) data from biological samples is a major challenge for metabolomics, proteomics, and related approaches. Here, we present the pipelines and systems for threshold-avoiding quantification (PASTAQ) LC-MS/MS preprocessing toolset, which allows highly accurate quantification of data-dependent acquisition LC-MS/MS datasets. PASTAQ performs compound quantification using single-stage (MS1) data and implements novel algorithms for high-performance and accurate quantification, retention time alignment, feature detection, and linking annotations from multiple identification engines. PASTAQ offers straightforward parameterization and automatic generation of quality control plots for data and preprocessing assessment. This design results in smaller variance when analyzing replicates of proteomes mixed with known ratios and allows the detection of peptides over a larger dynamic concentration range compared to widely used proteomics preprocessing tools. The performance of the pipeline is also demonstrated in a biological human serum dataset for the identification of gender-related proteins.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Isotope quantification, Label-free, Lc-ms/ms pre-processing

### Affiliations
Faculty of Science and Engineering, Groningen Research Institute of Pharmacy, Analytical Biochemistry, University of Groningen, 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands
University of Groningen, Department of Analytical Biochemistry, Groningen Research Institute of Pharmacy, Antonius Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV, Groningen, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Horvatovich Péter

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Horvatovich
University of Groningen, Department of Analytical Biochemistry, Groningen Research Institute of Pharmacy, Antonius Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV, Groningen, The Netherlands.


