### Accession
PXD003520

### Title
Rat spleen proteomics profiling

### Description
Sample preparation optimisation for extracting in a quantitative manner proteins from rat spleen

### Sample Protocol
Spleen homogeneisation, protein lysate, SDS-PAGE gel, ingel digestion, LC-MS analysis

### Data Protocol
data conversion using MS Converter, Data quantified using Maxquant and Progenesis.

### Publication Abstract
The dataset presented in this work has been obtained using a label-free quantitative proteomic analysis of rat spleen. A robust method for extraction of proteins from rat spleen tissue and LC-MS-MS analysis was developed using a urea and SDS-based buffer. Different fractionation methods were compared. A total of 3484 different proteins were identified from the pool of all experiments run in this study (a total of 2460 proteins with at least two peptides). A total of 1822 proteins were identified from nine non-fractionated pulse gels, 2288 proteins and 2864 proteins were identified by SDS-PAGE fractionation into three and five fractions respectively. The proteomics data are deposited in ProteomeXchange Consortium via PRIDE PXD003520, Progenesis and Maxquant output are presented in the supported information. The generated list of proteins under different regimes of fractionation allow assessing the nature of the identified proteins; variability in the quantitative analysis associated with the different sampling strategy and allow defining a proper number of replicates for future quantitative analysis.

### Keywords
Spleen, Quantitative proteomics, Rat

### Affiliations
SynthSys – Synthetic and Systems Biology
Dr Thierry Le Bihan SynthSys – Synthetic and Systems Biology School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh Room  3.06, C.H Waddington  Building, Max Born Crescent Edinburgh, EH9 3BF Phone +44 (0)131 651 9073  thierry.lebihan@ed.ac.uk

### Submitter
Thierry Le Bihan

### Lab Head
Dr Thierry Le Bihan
Dr Thierry Le Bihan SynthSys – Synthetic and Systems Biology School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh Room  3.06, C.H Waddington  Building, Max Born Crescent Edinburgh, EH9 3BF Phone +44 (0)131 651 9073  thierry.lebihan@ed.ac.uk


