### Accession
PXD027524

### Title
Ubiquitination in treated T. cruzi parasites

### Description
T. cruzi epimastigotes in the logarithmic growth phase (3×106 cells mL-1) were incubated for 12h with bortezomib (1.8 µM), GNF6702 (2.9 µM) or compound 1 (24 µM), equivalent to 8× the EC50 values of each compound. Controls were incubated in the presence of diluent (DMSO). Cells were harvested by centrifugation (1912g, 15 min, 4 °C) and washed with ice-cold PBS (1912g, 5 min, 4 °C), and finally, the cell pellets were resuspended in 1.5 mL of ice-cold lysis buffer (1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 100 μM TLCK, and 1× Roche EDTA-free cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail in 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.4). Cell suspensions were submitted to 3 freeze–thaw cycles in a dry ice/ethanol bath to biologically inactivate the parasites and then lysed using the One ShotTM Cell disruptor (Constant Systems, UK) at 30 kpsi.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates were centrifuged (100,000g, 20 min, 4°C), supernatants were collected, and the protein concentrations were determined using a standard Bio-Rad protein assay. Aliquots (1.1 mg) were reduced by incubating with 25 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) for 10 min at 37 °C and alkylated by incubating with 25 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 1 h at RT in the dark. Samples were then precipitated by incubating with 10% (v/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA) for 3h at -20 ºC then washed ×3 with ice-cold acetone. Protein pellets were resuspended in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and digested with 40 µg Lys-C for 6h followed by 40 µg trypsin overnight (25:1 protein:enzyme ratio). Protein digests were dried via evaporation and the digestion efficiency was checked by mass spectrometry. Small aliquots of each sample (9% of the total sample) were kept for total proteome analysis, with the remainder submitted to enrichment.  Ubiquitinated peptides were enriched using the PTMScan HS Ubiquitin/SUMO Remnant Motif (K-ε- GG) Kit (Cell Signalling Technologies) following the manufacturer’s recommendations. This kit contains antibodies conjugated to magnetic beads that specifically recognise the remnant of ubiquitinated lysines following digestion with trypsin and/or LysC. This remnant consists of a Gly-Gly (diGly) motif bound to the ε-amine of lysine through an isopeptide bond. Lysine ubiquitination results in a miscleaveage, as tryptic enzymes are not able cut after ubiquitinated lysines. Briefly, dried digests were resuspended in HS IAP Bind Buffer and incubated with magnetic beads conjugated to antibodies recognising the anti-K-ε- GG motif for 2h at 2 °C. Then, the beads were washed with HS IAP Wash buffer and water to remove unbound peptides. Bound peptides were eluted by incubating in agitation with IAP elution buffer (0.15 % trifluoroacetic acid, TFA) for 10 min. Eluates were then dried under vacuum and labelled with TMTs using the TMT 10plex isobaric tagging kit (Thermo Scientific) as follows: (126, 127N, 127C and 128N), were used to label control, GNF6702, bortezomib and compound 1 samples, respectively), in parallel with their respective (total) proteome samples. After 1h, the reaction was quenched by the addition of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min and then the four samples were pooled and vacuum-dried. The two pooled samples (total proteome and enriched fraction) were desalted using the Pierce™ Peptide Desalting Spin Columns (Thermo) and the eluates vacuum-dried. Analysis of peptides was performed on a Q-Exactive-HF (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS (Thermo Scientific). LC buffers used were as follows: Buffer A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and Buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)). Aliquots of each sample (1 μL) were loaded at 5 µL/min onto a trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in 5% buffer B. The trap column was washed for 5 min at the same flow rate and then switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific, resolving C18 column (75 μm x 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 µm, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min with a linear gradient from 5% buffer B (for fractions 1-10, 7% for fractions 11-20) to 35% buffer B in 130 min, and then to 98% Buffer B at 132 min. The column was then washed with 98% buffer B for 20 min and re-equilibrated in 5% buffer B for 17 min. Q-Exactive HF was used in data-dependent mode. A scan cycle comprised MS1 scan (m/z range from 335-1800, with a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms, a resolution of 120,000 and automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3 × 106) followed by 15 sequential dependant MS2 scans (with an isolation window set to 0.7 Da, resolution at 60,000, maximum ion injection time at 200 ms and AGC 1 × 105). To ensure mass accuracy, the mass spectrometer was calibrated on the first day that the runs are performed.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analysed using the software MaxQuant (http:// https://maxquant.net/maxquant/, version 2.0.1.0). For the enriched fractions, Reporter ion MS2 mode  was selected using N-terminus TMT10plex and Carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modifications while oxidation (M), acetyl (Protein N-term), Lysine TMT10plex, DiGly and a set of DiGly-Lysine TMT10plex modifications were set as a variable modifications. Proteins were identified by searching the MS and MS/MS data for the peptides against Trypanosoma cruzi Dm28c proteome (TriTrypDB version 50, tritrypdb.org). Trypsin/P and LysC/P were selected as the digestive enzyme. For the total proteome samples, Reporter ion MS2 mode was selected using the TMT-10plex labels on N-terminus and lysine;  Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification while oxidation (M), acetyl (Protein N-term) were set as variable modifications. Protein abundance was calculated according to the normalized reporter ion intensities, which for the enriched fractions were calculated using only DiGly-modified peptides. The FDR threshold for peptides and proteins was 0.01. Two missed tryptic cleavages were allowed in the global proteome samples while three in the enriched fractions, FTMS MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and ITMS MS/MS mass tolerance was 0.06 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Phenotypic screening identified an arylsulfonamide compound with activity against Trypanosoma cruzi, the causative agent of Chagas' disease. Comprehensive mode of action studies revealed that this compound primarily targets the T. cruzi proteasome, binding at the interface between &#x3b2;4 and &#x3b2;5 subunits that catalyze chymotrypsin-like activity. A mutation in the &#x3b2;5 subunit of the proteasome was associated with resistance to compound 1, while overexpression of this mutated subunit also reduced susceptibility to compound 1. Further genetically engineered and <i>in vitro</i>-selected clones resistant to proteasome inhibitors known to bind at the &#x3b2;4/&#x3b2;5 interface were cross-resistant to compound 1. Ubiquitinated proteins were additionally found to accumulate in compound 1-treated epimastigotes. Finally, thermal proteome profiling identified malic enzyme as a secondary target of compound 1, although malic enzyme inhibition was not found to drive potency. These studies identify a novel pharmacophore capable of inhibiting the T. cruzi proteasome that may be exploitable for anti-chagasic drug discovery.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Trypanosoma cruzi, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Mode of Action Group, BCDD, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Victoriano Corpas-Lopez

### Lab Head
Dr Susan Wyllie
Mode of Action Group, BCDD, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee


