### Accession
PXD038792

### Title
Amino acid availability acts as a metabolic rheostat to determine the magnitude of ILC2 responses - WT ILC2

### Description
Group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2) are functionally poised, tissue-resident lymphocytes that respond rapidly to damage and infection at mucosal barrier sites. ILC2 reside within complex microenvironments where they are subject to cues from both the diet and invading pathogens – including helminths. Emerging evidence suggests ILC2 are acutely sensitive not only to canonical activating signals, but also perturbations in nutrient availability. In the context of helminth infection, we identify amino acid availability as a nutritional cue in regulating ILC2 responses. ILC2 were found to be uniquely pre-primed to import amino acids via the large neutral amino acid transporters Slc7a5 and Slc7a8. Cell-intrinsic deletion of these transporters individually impaired ILC2 expansion, while concurrent loss of both transporters markedly impaired the proliferative and cytokine producing capacity of ILC2. Moreover, amino acid determined the magnitude of ILC2 responses in part via tuning of mTOR. These findings implicate essential amino acids as a metabolic requisite for optimal ILC2 responses within mucosal barrier tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were washed extensively with PBS to remove residual FCS and snap frozen. Samples were prepared for mass spectrometry by adding 100 µl of lysis buffer (5 % sodium dodecyl sulphate, 50 mM TEAB pH 8.5, 10 mM TCEP) to each cell pellet and shaking at 1000 rpm at room temperature for 5 minutes. Lysates were boiled for 5 minutes at 95 °C, sonicated for 15 cycles of 30 seconds each and treated with 1 µl benzonase for 15 minutes at 37 °C. Protein yield was determined using the EZQ protein quantitation kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Lysates were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Protein lysates were loaded on to S-Trap micro columns (ProtiFi) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Proteins were digested with 20:1 protein:trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 3 hours at 47 °C before adding an additional 1 µg of trypsin and digesting for a further 1 hour at 47 °C. Peptides were eluted from columns and dried by SpeedVac and resuspended in 1 % formic acid at a peptide concentration of 0.1 µg/µl.   For LC-MS analysis of wild type ILC2 1.5 µg of peptide for each sample was analysed on a Q-Exactive-HF-X (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS (Thermo Scientific). The following LC buffers were used:  buffer A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)). 1.5 μg aliquot of each sample was loaded at 15 μL/min onto a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The trap column was washed for 3 min at the same flow rate with 0.1% TFA then switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific, resolving C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 3% buffer B to 6% buffer B in 5 min, then from 6% buffer B to 35% buffer B in 115 min, and finally to 80% buffer B within 7 min. The column was then washed with 80% buffer B for 4 min and re-equilibrated in 3% buffer B for 15 min. Two blanks were run between each sample to reduce carry-over. The column was kept at a constant temperature of 50oC at all times. Data was acquired using an easy spray source operated in positive mode with spray voltage at 1.9 kV, the capillary temperature at 250 °C and the funnel RF at 60 °C.  The MS was operated in DIA mode using parameters previously described (Muntel et al., 2019), with some modifications. A scan cycle comprised a full MS scan (m/z range from 350-1650, with a maximum ion injection time of 20 ms, a resolution of 120 000 and automatic gain control (AGC) value of 5 × 106).  MS survey scan was followed by MS/MS DIA scan events using the following parameters: default charge state of 3, resolution 30.000, maximum ion injection time 55 ms, AGC 3 x 106, stepped normalized collision energy 25.5, 27 and 30, fixed first mass 200 m/z. Data for both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data was processed using Spectronaut (Biognosys; version 14.5.200813.47784 for wild type ILC2). For all searches the DirectDIA option was selected. The following parameters were chosen; cleavage rules were set to Trypsin/P, maximum peptide length 52 amino acids, minimum peptide length 7 amino acids, maximum missed cleavages 2 and calibration mode automatic. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification while the following variable modifications were selected: oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus. The FDR threshold for both precursor and protein was set at 1 %. DirectDIA data were searched against a mouse database from Uniprot release 2020 06. This database consisted of all manually annotated mouse SwissProt entries along with mouse TrEMBL entries with protein level evidence and a manually annotated homologue within the human SwissProt database. Estimates of protein copy number per cell were calculated using the histone ruler method (Wisniewski et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ilc2, Immunology

### Affiliations
Lydia Becker Institute of Immunology and Inflammation | Branch Lead for Immune Tolerance Division of Infection, Immunity & Respiratory Medicine| School of Biological Sciences I Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health| The University of Manchester
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Andrew Howden

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Matthew Hepworth
Lydia Becker Institute of Immunology and Inflammation | Branch Lead for Immune Tolerance Division of Infection, Immunity & Respiratory Medicine| School of Biological Sciences I Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health| The University of Manchester


