### Accession
PXD024768

### Title
The Conserved Tpk1 Regulates Non-Homologous End Joining Double-Strand Break Repair by Phosphorylation of Nej1, a Homolog of the Human XLF

### Description
The yeast cyclic-AMP dependent protein kinase A (PKA) is a ubiquitous serine-threonine kinase, encompassing three catalytic (Tpk1-3) and one regulatory (Bcy1) subunits. Evidence suggests PKA involvement in DNA damage checkpoint response, but how DNA repair pathways are regulated by PKA subunits remains inconclusive. Here, we report that deleting the catalytic subunit, tpk1, reduces non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) efficiency, whereas tpk2-3 and bcy1 deletion does not. Epistatic analyses revealed that tpk1, as well as the DNA damage checkpoint kinase (dun1) and NHEJ regulator (nej1), co-function in the same pathway. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and resection data suggest that the recruitment of repair proteins and DNA resection is influenced by tpk1 deletion. Further, we show that Tpk1 phosphorylation of Nej1 at S298 (a Dun1 phosphosite) is indispensable for NHEJ repair, in addition to nuclear targeting of Nej1 and its binding partner Lif1.  In mammalian cells, loss of PRKACB (the human homolog of Tpk1) also reduced NHEJ efficiency, and similarly, PRKACB was found to phosphorylate XLF (a Nej1 human homolog) at S263, a corresponding residue of the yeast Nej1 S298. Together, our results uncover a new and conserved mechanism for Tpk1 and PRKACB in phosphorylating Nej1 (or XLF), which is critically required for NHEJ repair.

### Sample Protocol
The C-terminal FLAG-tagged Tpk1 or Nej1 fusion strains created with a KanMX selectable marker integrated by homologous recombination in the yeast chromosome were grown, in sextuplicate, to mid-log phase in 1 L of YPEG media (to keep the growth condition consistent with rest of the experimental procedures). After the lysis of harvested cells by freezer mill, the extracts were purified using anti-FLAG magnetic microbeads, and subjected to μMACS columns (Miltenyi) following manufacturer’s instructions. Sample preparation for digestion, and chromatographic separation of peptides on Easy nLC and orbitrap mass spectrometer are described in detail in our earlier publications.

### Data Protocol
The MS spectra from each tagged protein was subsequently mapped to reference yeast protein sequences (downloaded from Uniprot database) using a MaxQuant (ver. 1.6.1.0) search engine for peptide identifications. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm, while allowing partial tryptic enzyme and 2 site missed cleavages. Interacting proteins were considered as high confidence as long as they: (1) pass through a FDR cut-off of q ≤ 0.05, (2) are not present in the untagged control strain, and (3) have been identified in at least 3 of the 6 replicates from each tagged protein purification.

### Publication Abstract
The yeast cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA) is a ubiquitous serine-threonine kinase, encompassing three catalytic (Tpk1-3) and one regulatory (Bcy1) subunits. Evidence suggests PKA involvement in DNA damage checkpoint response, but how DNA repair pathways are regulated by PKA subunits remains inconclusive. Here, we report that deleting the tpk1 catalytic subunit reduces non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) efficiency, whereas tpk2-3 and bcy1 deletion does not. Epistatic analyses revealed that tpk1, as well as the DNA damage checkpoint kinase (dun1) and NHEJ factor (nej1), co-function in the same pathway, and parallel to the NHEJ factor yku80. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and resection data suggest that tpk1 deletion influences repair protein recruitments and DNA resection. Further, we show that Tpk1 phosphorylation of Nej1 at S298 (a Dun1 phosphosite) is indispensable for NHEJ repair and nuclear targeting of Nej1 and its binding partner Lif1. In mammalian cells, loss of PRKACB (human homolog of Tpk1) also reduced NHEJ efficiency, and similarly, PRKACB was found to phosphorylate XLF (a Nej1 human homolog) at S263, a corresponding residue of the yeast Nej1 S298. Together, our results uncover a new and conserved mechanism for Tpk1 and PRKACB in phosphorylating Nej1 (or XLF), which is critically required for NHEJ repair.

### Keywords
Tpk1, Kinase, Nhej, Nej1, Prkacb, Dsb repair, Genomic instability

### Affiliations
University of Toronto;
University of Regina
Department of Biochemistry, University of Regina, Regina, Saskatchewan S4S 0A2, Canada.

### Submitter
Sadhna Phanse

### Lab Head
Dr Mohan Babu
Department of Biochemistry, University of Regina, Regina, Saskatchewan S4S 0A2, Canada.


