### Accession
PXD002870

### Title
Protein Turnover Rates in Normal and Hypertrophy Mouse Hearts

### Description
This dataset contains the in vivo turnover rate information of ~3,000 proteins from the mouse heart. Data from six common laboratory mouse strains with differential responses to isoproterenol are included

### Sample Protocol
To initiate heavy water labeling C57/BL6J, CE/J, A/J, DBA/2J, FVB/NJ and BALB/cJ mice (male, 9–12 weeks of age; Jackson Laboratories) were given two intraperitoneal injections of 500-µL 99.9% (molar ratio) heavy water-saline 4 hours apart. Mice were then given free access to 8% (v/v; 7.25% molar ratio) 2H2O in the drinking water supply. Groups of 3 mice each were euthanized at 0, 1, 3, 5, 7, 10, 14 days following the first 2H2O injection at 12:00 noon for sample collection. Cardiac hypertrophy was initiated by surgical implantation, at labeling initiation, subcutaneous micro-osmotic pumps (Alzet) calibrated to deliver 15 mg·kg-1·d-1 isoproterenol over 14 days.  Cardiac tissues were excised and homogenized in an extraction buffer: 250 mM sucrose, 10 mM HEPES, 10 mM Tris, 1 mM EGTA, 10 mM dithiothreitol, protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Pierce Halt), pH 7.4. The homogenate was centrifuged (800 g, 4 °C, 7 min). The pellet was collected as the nuclear and extracellular fraction. The supernatant was centrifuged (4,000 g, 4 °C, 30 min) and collected as the organelle-depleted intracellular fraction. The pellet was washed and centrifuged again to collect as the mitochondrial and microsomal fraction. Protein concentrations were measured by bicinchoninic acid assays (Thermo Pierce). Extracted protein fractions were solubilized with RIPA then digested on-filter using 10,000 Da polyethersulfone filters (Nanosep; Pall Life Sciences). Sample buffer was exchanged on-filter with ammonium bicarbonate (100 mM, 100 µL). The samples were reduced (70 °C, 5 min) with dithiothreitol (3 mM) and alkylated in the dark (ambient temperature, 30 min) with iodoacetamide (9 mM). Proteins were digested on-filter (16 h, 37 °C) with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (50:1, Promega).   First-dimension (high-pH) separation was conducted on a Phenomenex C18 column (Jupiter Proteo C12, 4 µm particle, 90 Å pore, 100 mm × 1 mm dimension) at high pH using a Finnigan Surveyor liquid chromatography system. The solvent gradient was as follows: 0-2 min, 0-5% B; 3-32 min, 5-35% B; 32-37min, 80% B; 50 µL·min-1; A: 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10; B: 20 mM ammonium formate, 90% acetonitrile, pH 10. Fifty µg of proteolytic peptides were injected with a syringe into a manual 6-port/2-position switch valve. Twelve fractions from 16–40 min were collected, lyophilized and re-dissolved in 20 µL 0.5% formic acid with 2% acetonitrile prior to low-pH reversed-phase separation. On-line second-dimension (low-pH) reversed-phase chromatography was performed on all samples using an Easy-nLC 1000 nano-UPLC system (Thermo Scientific) on an EasySpray C18 column (PepMap, 3-µm particle, 100-Å pore; 75 µm × 150 mm dimension; Thermo Scientific) held at 50 °C. The solvent gradient was 0–110 min: 0–40% B; 110–117 min: 40–80% B; 117–120 min: 80% B; 300 nL·min-1; A: 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile; B: 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile. Each high-pH fraction was injected (10 µL) by the autosampler to the Easy-nLC 1000 nano-UPLC system.   Protein analysis with Fourier-transform mass spectrometry: High-resolution Fourier-transform tandem mass spectrometry was performed on an LTQ Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo Scientific), coupled on-line to an Easy-nLC 1000 nano-UPLC system (Thermo Scientific) through a Thermo EasySpray interface. Signals were acquired in FT/IT mode: each FT MS1 survey scan was analyzed at 60,000 resolving power in profile mode, followed by IT MS2 scans on the top 15 ions. MS1 and MS2 target ion accumulation targets were 1.0E4 and 1.0E6, respectively. MS1 lock mass (m/z 425.120025) and dynamic exclusion (90 s) were used.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed using the database search algorithm ProLuCID against a reverse-decoyed protein sequence database (Uniprot Reference Proteome, reviewed, accessed April-08-2014, 16,672 forward entries). Static cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.02146 Da) modification and ≤3 of the variable modifications were allowed: methionine oxidation (15.9949 Da), lysine acetylation (42.0106 Da), serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation (79.9663 Da), lysine ubiquitylation (114.0403 Da), and asparagine deamidation (0.9840 Da). Tryptic, semi-tryptic, and non-tryptic peptides within a 20-ppm mass window surrounding the candidate precursor mass were searched. Protein inference was performed by DTASelect v.2.0 (3), requiring ≤1% global peptide false discovery rate and 2 unique peptides per protein. Modified or non-tryptic peptides were subjected to separate statistical filters to limit false discovery.

### Publication Abstract
Protein stability is a major regulatory principle of protein function and cellular homeostasis. Despite limited understanding on mechanisms, disruption of protein turnover is widely implicated in diverse pathologies from heart failure to neurodegenerations. Information on global protein dynamics therefore has the potential to expand the depth and scope of disease phenotyping and therapeutic strategies. Using an integrated platform of metabolic labeling, high-resolution mass spectrometry and computational analysis, we report here a comprehensive dataset of the in vivo half-life of 3,228 and the expression of 8,064 cardiac proteins, quantified under healthy and hypertrophic conditions across six mouse genetic strains commonly employed in biomedical research. We anticipate these data will aid in understanding key mitochondrial and metabolic pathways in heart diseases, and further serve as a reference for methodology development in dynamics studies in multiple organ systems.

### Keywords
Heart, Mouse, Turnover, Lc-ms/ms, Isoproterenol

### Affiliations
The NIH BD2K Center of Excellence in Biomedical Computing at UCLA The NHLBI Proteomics Center at UCLA University of California at Los Angeles
UCLA

### Submitter
Edward Lau

### Lab Head
Dr Peipei Ping
The NIH BD2K Center of Excellence in Biomedical Computing at UCLA The NHLBI Proteomics Center at UCLA University of California at Los Angeles


### SDRF
- organism: Mus musculus
- organism part: Heart
- cell type: cardiac
- disease: normal
- label: NT=metabolic label;AC=PRIDE:0000597
- instrument: AC=MS:1001910;NT=LTQ Orbitrap Elite
- modification parameters: NT=Carbamidomethyl;TA=C;MT=fixed;AC=UNIMOD:4
- modification parameters.1: NT=Oxidation;MT=variable;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35
- modification parameters.2: NT=Acetyl;AC=UNIMOD:1;TA=K;MT=variable
- modification parameters.3: NT=Phospho;MT=variable;TA=S,T,Y;AC=UNIMOD:21
- modification parameters.4: NT=Deamidated;MT=variable;TA=N;AC=UNIMOD:7

