### Accession
PXD018592

### Title
IL-22 promotes postnatal formation of MUC17 glycocalyx barrier that protects host enterocytes

### Description
The apical aspects of absorptive epithelial cells form a highly organized brush border membrane (BBM), shaped by densely packed microvilli that are coated with a glycocalyx. Here, we present evidence showing that the glycocalyx forms an epithelial barrier that prevents exogenous molecules from gaining access to the BBM. We used a multiomics approach to investigate function and regulation of membrane mucins exposed on the enterocytic BBM during postnatal development of the small intestine. Muc17 was identified as a major membrane mucinin the glycocalyx that was specifically upregulated by IL-22 as part of an epithelial defense repertoire during suckling-weaning transition. High levels of IL-22 at the time of weaning primed progenitor enterocyte to express Muc17 as they migrate out of intestinal crypts to replace neonatal enterocytes. Our findings propose a role for membrane mucin Muc17 in epithelial barrier function in the small intestine.

### Sample Protocol
Isolated epithelial cells were lysed by addition of 400 µL lysis buffer (100 mM DTT, 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris pH 7,5) and heated for 5 min at 95°C. Cell lysates were treated with ultrasonic probe homogenizer for 10 seconds, centrifuged at 16,000 x g in a tabletop centrifuge at room temperature and the supernatant added onto 10 kDa cutoff filters (PALL, Port Washington, NY). Proteins were digested using the filter-aided sample preparation with trypsin at 37°C overnight. Thereafter, peptide concentration was estimated by measuring at 280 nm using microvolume spectrophotometer (NanoDrop, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and peptides were cleaned with StageTip C18 columns prior to mass-spectrometry analysis. Nano LC-MS/MS was performed on a Q-Exactive HF mass-spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) connected with an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were loaded on a reverse-phase column (150 mm3 0.075 mm inner diameter, New Objective, New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 mm particles (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). Peptides were separated with a 230-minute gradient: from 3 to 25% B in 175 min, 25 to 45% B in 30 min, 45 to 100% B in 5 min, followed 20 min wash with 100% of B (A: 0.1% formic acid, B: 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile) using a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Q-Exactive HF was operated at 250°C capillary temperature and 2.0 kV spray voltage. Full mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over a mass range from m/z 350 to 1600 with resolution of 60 000 (m/z 200) after accumulation of ions to a 3e6 target value based on predictive AGC from the previous full scan. Twelve most intense peaks with a charge state ≥ 2 were fragmented in the HCD collision cell with normalized collision energy of 27%, and tandem mass spectrum was acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with resolution of 15 000 after accumulation of ions to a 1e5 target value. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 20 ms for full MS scans and 50 ms for tandem mass spectrum.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed with MaxQuant software version 1.5.7.4 (Cox and Mann, 2008), peak lists were identified by searching against the mouse UniProt protein database (downloaded 2018.07.11) supplemented with an in-house database containing all the mouse mucin sequences (http://www.medkem.gu.se/mucinbiology/databases/). Searches were performed using trypsin as an enzyme, maximum 2 missed cleavages, precursor tolerance of 20 ppm in the first search used for recalibration, followed by 7 ppm for the main search and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The required false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% both for peptide and protein levels and the minimum required peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Label free quantification (LFQ) based on at least one peptide was used.

### Publication Abstract
The intestine is under constant exposure to chemicals, antigens, and microorganisms from the external environment. Apical aspects of transporting epithelial cells (enterocytes) form a brush-border membrane (BBM), shaped by packed microvilli coated with a dense glycocalyx. We present evidence showing that the glycocalyx forms an epithelial barrier that prevents exogenous molecules and live bacteria from gaining access to BBM. We use a multi-omics approach to investigate the function and regulation of membrane mucins exposed on the BBM during postnatal development of the mouse small intestine. Muc17 is identified as a major membrane mucin in the glycocalyx that is specifically upregulated by IL-22 as part of an epithelial defense repertoire during weaning. High levels of IL-22 at time of weaning reprogram neonatal postmitotic progenitor enterocytes to differentiate into Muc17-expressing enterocytes, as found in the adult intestine during homeostasis. Our findings propose a role for Muc17 in epithelial barrier function in the small intestine.

### Keywords
Microbiota, Muc17, Glycocalyx, Mucin, Intestine, Innate immunity, Enterocyte, Muc13, Microvilli

### Affiliations
Mucin Biology Group, Proteomics Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University of Gothenburg
PhD

### Submitter
Liisa Arike

### Lab Head
Dr Liisa Arike
Mucin Biology Group, Proteomics Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University of Gothenburg


