### Accession
PXD030174

### Title
Co-IP of v-ATPase subcomplexes from MEFs under amino acid starvation and restimulation

### Description
v-ATPase Vo and V1 domains were isolated via Co-IP from MEFs expressing HA-Atp6V1B2 and FLAG-Atp6VoaA3 using HA- and FLAG-tag antibodies. Treatment groups were full medium (control), amino acid starvation (60 min) and restimulation (30 min). Cells were grown in SILAC medium for 3 passages.

### Sample Protocol
Lysates were pooled prior to Co-IP according to SILAC labels. Proteins were run for 0.5 cm into an SDS-PAGE gel. After Coomassie staining, the total sample was cut out and used for subsequent digestion using trypsin according to Shevchenko et al. (A. Shevchenko et al., In-gel digestion for mass spectrometric characterization of proteins and proteomes. Nature protocols 1, 2856-2860, 2006), adapted to a DigestPro MSi robotic system (INTAVIS Bioanalytical Instruments AG). Peptides were re-suspended in loading buffer containing 2.5 % hexafluoro-2-propanol, 0.1 % TFA in water. Analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) directly connected to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer. Analysis time and method was chosen to accompany expected sample complexity and set to 120 min. Prior to the analytical separation, peptides were online desalted on a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap300 C18, 5 µm, 300 Å wide pore; Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 3 min using 30 µl/min flow of 0.05 % TFA in water. The analytical multistep gradient was carried out on a nanoEase MZ Peptide analytical column (300 Å, 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 200 mm, Waters) using solvent A (0.1 % formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile). The concentration of B was linearly ramped up from 2 % to 38 % with respect to the total analysis procedure (102 min), followed by a quick ramp up to 95 % B. After 2 min, the concentration of B was lowered back to 2 % and a 10 min equilibration step appended. Eluting peptides were analyzed in the mass spectrometer using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. A full scan at 60k resolution, 380-1400 m/z, 300 % AGC target, 45 ms maxIT, was followed by 2 s MS/MS scans. Peptide features were isolated with a window of 1.4 m/z and fragmented using 26 % NCE. Fragment spectra were recorded at 15k resolution, 100 % AGC target, 54 ms maxIT. Unassigned and singly charged eluting features were excluded from fragmentation. 

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was carried out by MaxQuant (version 1.6.14.0, S. Tyanova et al., The MaxQuant computational platform for mass spectrometry-based shotgun proteomics. Nature protocols 11, 2301-2319, 2016) using an organism specific database extracted from Uniprot.org under default settings (download 2020-02-26; number of entries 55435). Identification FDR cutoffs were 0.01 on peptide level and 0.01 on protein level. The match between runs option was enabled to transfer peptide identifications across RAW files based on accurate retention time and m/z. SILAC quantification was done using triplex approach with medium channel Arg6, Lys4 and heavy channel Arg10, Lys9 and unlabeled amino acid as light channel. A minimum of 2 quantified peptides per protein was required for protein quantification, Re-quantify option was enabled to stabilize very large or small ratios (J. Cox et al., A practical guide to the MaxQuant computational platform for SILAC-based quantitative proteomics. Nature protocols 4, 698-705, 2009).

### Publication Abstract
Bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase (T7 RNAP) is widely used for synthesizing RNA molecules with synthetic modifications and unnatural base pairs (UBPs) for a variety of biotechnical and therapeutic applications. However, the molecular basis of transcription recognition of UBPs by T7 RNAP remains poorly understood. Here we focused on a representative UBP, 7-(2-thienyl)-imidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (Ds) and pyrrole 2-carbaldehyde (Pa), and investigated how the hydrophobic Ds-Pa pair is recognized by T7 RNAP. Our kinetic assays revealed that T7 RNAP selectively recognizes the Ds or Pa base in the templates and preferentially incorporates their cognate unnatural base nucleotide substrate (PaTP or DsTP) over natural NTPs. Our structural studies reveal that T7 RNAP recognizes the unnatural substrates at the pre-insertion state in a distinct manner compared to natural substrates. These results provide mechanistic insights into transcription recognition of UBP by T7 RNAP and provide valuable information for designing the next generation of UBPs.

### Keywords
Mefs, Amino acid starvation, Vatpase, Silac, Co-ip

### Affiliations
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Cell Signaling and Metabolism Group

### Submitter
Wilhelm Palm

### Lab Head
Dr Wilhelm Palm
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Cell Signaling and Metabolism Group


