### Accession
PXD003075

### Title
Human CSF peptidomics of gamma secretase inhibition

### Description
Fifteen human healthy volunteers, divided into three groups, received a single dose of placebo or either 140 mg or 280 mg of the γ-secretase inhibitor semagacestat (LY450139). Endogenous peptides in CSF, sampled prior to administration of the drug and at six subsequent time points, were analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry, using isobaric labeling based on the tandem mass tag approach for relative quantification.

### Sample Protocol
Aliquots of neat CSF from each participant and time point was subjected to reduction and carbamidomethylation of cysteines followed by isobaric labelling using TMT 6-plex amino-reactive reagents (Thermo Scientific). The CSF sample corresponding to time point zero from each patient was labeled with TMT-126, the next time point from the same patient with TMT-127, and so on. The six samples from each participant were then combined into one TMT 6-plex set. The CSF samples from one patient were then combined into one TMT6-plex set. The TMT6-plex sets were subjected to ultrafiltration using 30 kDa molecular weight cut-off filters (Vivacon 2 HY, Sartorius Stedim). The flow-through, containing the endogenous peptide fraction, was desalted on C18 cartridges (SEP-PAK, Waters), lyophilized and stored at -80 °C pending analysis. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer, using data-dependent acquisition.

### Data Protocol
The CSF samples were analyzed by LC-MS in two technical replicates, and the data from the two runs were used in a MudPIT search using the software Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific). Protein identification was performed using Mascot (Matrix Sciences, UK), searching the human subset of the SwissProt database. The endogenous peptides were searched with the following settings: fixed modifications: TMT 6-plex modification of peptide N-termini and lysines, and carbamidomethylation of cysteines; variable modification: oxidation of methionine. The mass error tolerance was set to 10 ppm in MS mode and 20 milli-mass units in MS/MS mode. A target false discovery rate value of 5% was used as identification criterion. The quantification was done on the MS/MS level were reporter ions from the TMT 6-plex reagents were used for relative quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Gamma secretase, Cerebrospinal fluid, Peptidomics

### Affiliations
Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology
Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology Section of psychiatry and neurochemistry University of Gothenburg

### Submitter
Johan Gobom

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Gobom
Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology Section of psychiatry and neurochemistry University of Gothenburg


