### Accession
PXD002100

### Title
iTRAQ-Based Quantitative Proteomic Analysis of the Initiation of Head Regeneration in Planarians

### Description
The planarian Dugesia japonica has amazing ability to regenerate a head from the anterior ends of the amputated stump with maintenance of the original anterior-posterior polarity. Although planarians present an attractive system for molecular investigation of regeneration and research has focused on clarifying the molecular mechanism of regeneration initiation in planarians, but proteomic studies are still in the early stages. Here, a global proteomics analysis of regenerating head fragments in planarians at 0h, 2h and 6h after amputation was performed using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ)-based quantitative proteomics coupled with LC-MS/MS strategy. Then the significantly changed proteins were identified. The correlation betwwen protein expression profiles and signaling pathways/biological processes was analyzed by bioinformatics and systems biology.

### Sample Protocol
The planarians were amputated transversely anterior to the pharynx, and the tail end was allowed to undergo head regeneration. The regenerating planarians were collected at 0 h, 2 h and 6h after amputation, and were respectively served as control group and experimental groups. Then protein extraction and trypsin digest were performed. Subsequently, tryptic peptides from control group were labeled with 117 tags, and tryptic peptides from experimental groups were labeled with 118 and 119 tags, respectively. Then, reverse phase separation of the labeled peptide mixture was performed in a Nano HPLC System using a Thermo scientific EASY column. Subsequently, the fractionated samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS based on Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
For peptide data analysis, raw mass data were processed using Proteome Discover 1.4 software and searched against the SwissProt database (March 2013) from Uniprot website (http://www.uniprot.org) using Mascot 2.2 (Matrix Science, London, UK). The analysis and search parameters were set as: trypsin as the digestion enzyme with allowance for a maximum of two missed cleavage, Carbamidomethyl (C) and iTRAQplex modification( K and N-terminus) as a fixed modification, Oxidation (M) as a variable modifications, peptide mass tolerance of 20ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.1 Da. In order to measure the false discovery rate (FDR), the peptide mass spectra data sets were used to search a decoy peptide database. The following filter was used in this study, peptide FDR≤0.01 and each protein with at least 2 unique peptides. Expression changes of the identified peptides in the regenerating head fragments were calculated in comparison with corresponding control based on the iTRAQ reporter ion intensities.

### Publication Abstract
The planarian Dugesia japonica has amazing ability to regenerate a head from the anterior ends of the amputated stump with maintenance of the original anterior-posterior polarity. Although planarians present an attractive system for molecular investigation of regeneration and research has focused on clarifying the molecular mechanism of regeneration initiation in planarians at transcriptional level, but the initiation mechanism of planarian head regeneration (PHR) remains unclear at the protein level. Here, a global analysis of proteome dynamics during the early stage of PHR was performed using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ)-based quantitative proteomics strategy, and our data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002100. The results showed that 162 proteins were differentially expressed at 2 h and 6 h following amputation. Furthermore, the analysis of expression patterns and functional enrichment of the differentially expressed proteins showed that proteins involved in muscle contraction, oxidation reduction and protein synthesis were up-regulated in the initiation of PHR. Moreover, ingenuity pathway analysis showed that predominant signaling pathways such as ILK, calcium, EIF2 and mTOR signaling which were associated with cell migration, cell proliferation and protein synthesis were likely to be involved in the initiation of PHR. The results for the first time demonstrated that muscle contraction and ILK signaling might played important roles in the initiation of PHR at the global protein level. The findings of this research provide a molecular basis for further unraveling the mechanism of head regeneration initiation in planarians.

### Keywords
Planarian, Lc-ms/ms, Itraq, Regenerating head fragments

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory Cultivation Base for Cell Differentiation Regulation, Henan Normal University, Xinxiang, Henan Province, China
henan normal university

### Submitter
cunshuan xu

### Lab Head
Dr Cunshuan Xu
State Key Laboratory Cultivation Base for Cell Differentiation Regulation, Henan Normal University, Xinxiang, Henan Province, China


