### Accession
PXD030869

### Title
A Proteome-Wide Map of Chaperone-Assisted Protein Refolding in a Cytosol-like Milieu

### Description
The journey by which proteins navigate their energy landscapes to their native structures is complex, involving (and sometimes requiring) many cellular factors and processes operating in partnership with a given polypeptide chain’s intrinsic energy landscape.  The cytosolic environment and its complement of chaperones play critical roles in granting proteins safe passage to their native states; however, the complexity of this medium has generally precluded biophysical techniques from interrogating protein folding under cellular-like conditions for single proteins, let alone entire proteomes.  Here, we develop a limited-proteolysis mass spectrometry approach paired within an isotope-labeling strategy to globally monitor the structures of refolding E. coli proteins in the cytosolic medium and with the chaperones, GroEL/ES (Hsp60) and DnaK/DnaJ/GrpE (Hsp70/40).  GroEL can refold the majority (85%) of the E. coli proteins for which we have data, and is particularly important for restoring acidic proteins and proteins with high molecular weight, trends that come to light because our assay measures the structural outcome of the refolding process itself, rather than indirect measures like binding or aggregation.  For the most part, DnaK and GroEL refold a similar set of proteins, supporting the view that despite their vastly different structures, these two chaperones both unfold misfolded states, as one mechanism in common.  Finally, we identify a cohort of proteins that are intransigent to being refolded with either chaperone.  The data support a model in which chaperone-nonrefolders have evolved to fold efficiently once and only once, co-translationally, and remain kinetically trapped in their native conformations.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli, strain K12, were grown in 2 sets of in-house prepared MOPS EZ rich media(-Arginine/-Lysine) from saturated overnight cultures. One set was supplemented with 0.5 mM [13C6]L-Arginine  and 0.4 mM [13C6]L-Lysine and the other with 0.5 mM L-Arginine and 0.4 mM L-Lysine. Cells were cultured at 37˚C with agitation (220 rpm) to exponential phase. Each heavy/light pair was pooled together collected by centrifugation. Pelleted cells were then resuspended in a lysis buffer consisting of either Tris pH 8.2 lysis buffer (20 mM Tris pH 8.2, 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2 and supplemented with DNase I to a final concentration (f.c.) of 0.1 mg mL-1) or cyto-serum lysis buffer (1× cyto-serum, supplemented with DNase I to a f.c of 0.1 mg mL-1), flash frozen, cryogenically pulverized with a freezer miller (SPEX Sample Prep), thawed at room temperature, and clarified. To deplete ribosomal proteins, clarified lysates were ultracentrifuged without any sucrose cushion.   Bicinchoninic acid assay (Rapid Gold BCA Assay, Pierce) was used to determine protein concentration and the clarified cellular lysates were normalized to a protein concentration of 3.3 mg mL-1. To determine protein concentrations in lysates prepared in cyto-serum, the protein concentration in the Tris-lysed lysate is used as a surrogate to ascertain protein concentrations in cyto-serum due to the reducing nature of cyto-serum.   The native samples with or without molecule chaperones were prepared by diluting lysates with cyto-serum native dilution buffer (1x cyto-serum, 0.1036 mM DTT, 62.17 mM GdmCl) or cyto-serum chaperone native dilution buffer (1x cyto-serum, 0.1036 mM DTT and 62.17 mM GdmCl supplemented with either 5.19 µM DnaK, 1.04 µM DnaJ and 1.04 µM GrpE; or 4.15 µM GroEL and 8.3 µM GroES) to a protein concentration of 0.115 mg mL-1 and incubated for 90 minutes before being subjected to limited proteolysis. The unfolded samples were prepared by adding protein lysate, solid GdmCl and DTT to a fresh 1.5 mL microfuge tube and then removing the solvent using a Vacufuge plus (Eppendorf) such that the final concentrations of all components were: 11.6 mg mL-1 protein, 6M GdmCl, 3.5 x cytosol and 10 mM DTT. Denatured samples were left to unfold at room temperature O/N prior to refolding. To refold unfolded lysates with or without the addition of molecular chaperones, the unfolded lysates were rapidly diluted 100× with refolding dilution buffer (0.975x cyto-serum) or refolding chaperone dilution buffer (0.975x cyto-serum supplemented with either 5.05 µM DnaK, 1.01 µM DnaJ and 1.01 µM GrpE; or 4.04 µM GroEL and 8.08 µM GroES) to a final protein concentration of 0.115 mg mL-1. Refolded samples were incubated at room temperature for different durations (1 m, 5 m, or 120 m) to allow for proteins to refold before limited proteolysis.   Limited proteolysis was performed by incubating native or refolded lysates with PK (enzyme : substrate ratio is 1:100 w/w ratio for exactly 1 minute at 25 ˚C  before transferring to a mineral oil bath preequilibrated at 100˚C to quench PK activity. Samples were then prepared for mass spectrometry by incubating with DTT and IAA before digesting with lys-C (enzyme : substrate ratio 1:100) for 2 h at 37˚C and trypsin (enzyme : substrate ratio 1:50) overnight at 25 ˚C.   Peptides were then desalted with Sep-Pak C18 1 cc Vac Cartridges (Waters) over a vacuum manifold and dried using a vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf Vacufuge). Dried peptides were stored at -80°C until analysis. For analysis, samples were vigorously resuspended in 0.1% FA in Optima water (ThermoFisher) to a final concentration of 0.5 mg mL-1. Chromatographic separation of digests were carried out on a Thermo UltiMate3000 UHPLC system with an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC, C18, 75 μm Å~ 25 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å column. The column was then cleaned with a saw-tooth gradient to purge residual peptides between runs in a sequence. A Thermo Q-Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer was used to analyze protein digests.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer Software Suite (v2.4, Thermo Fisher) and the Minora Algorithm were used to analyze mass spectra and perform Label Free Quantification (LFQ) of detected peptides. The data were searched against Escherichia coli (UP000000625, Uniprot) reference proteome database. For peptide identification, either the PD Sequest HT node (for non-pseudo-SILAC samples) or PD MSFragger node (pseudo-SILAC) were used, each using a semi-tryptic search allowing up to 2 missed cleavages.

### Publication Abstract
The journey by which proteins navigate their energy landscapes to their native structures is complex, involving (and sometimes requiring) many cellular factors and processes operating in partnership with a given polypeptide chain's intrinsic energy landscape. The cytosolic environment and its complement of chaperones play critical roles in granting many proteins safe passage to their native states; however, it is challenging to interrogate the folding process for large numbers of proteins in a complex background with most biophysical techniques. Hence, most chaperone-assisted protein refolding studies are conducted in defined buffers on single purified clients. Here, we develop a limited proteolysis-mass spectrometry approach paired with an isotope-labeling strategy to globally monitor the structures of refolding&#xa0;<i>Escherichia&#xa0;coli</i> proteins in the cytosolic medium and with the chaperones, GroEL/ES (Hsp60) and DnaK/DnaJ/GrpE (Hsp70/40). GroEL can refold the majority (85%) of the <i>E. coli</i> proteins for which we have data and is particularly important for restoring acidic proteins and proteins with high molecular weight, trends that come to light because our assay measures the structural outcome of the refolding process itself, rather than binding or aggregation. For the most part, DnaK and GroEL refold a similar set of proteins, supporting the view that despite their vastly different structures, these two chaperones unfold misfolded states, as one mechanism in common. Finally, we identify a cohort of proteins that are intransigent to being refolded with either chaperone. We suggest that these proteins may fold most efficiently cotranslationally, and then remain kinetically trapped in their native conformations.

### Keywords
Chaperone refolding, Protein refolding, Proteomics, Groel/es folding

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Johns Hopkins University, Chemistry Department, Fried Lab, USA

### Submitter
Stephen Fried

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen Fried
Johns Hopkins University, Chemistry Department, Fried Lab, USA


