### Accession
PXD006181

### Title
Touch-induced phosphoproteome in Arabidopsis thaliana (Q Exactive)

### Description
Touch-induced change in protein phosphorylation was studied using Arabidopsis seedlings.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis seedlings were touched to examine protein phosphorylation in mechanosignaling. Phosphopeptides were then purified and analyzed by mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were identifided using Mascot software and quantified using Silique-N.

### Publication Abstract
Environmental mechanical forces, such as wind and touch, trigger gene-expression regulation and developmental changes, called "thigmomorphogenesis," in plants, demonstrating the ability of plants to perceive such stimuli. In <i>Arabidopsis</i>, a major thigmomorphogenetic response is delayed bolting, i.e., emergence of the flowering stem. The signaling components responsible for mechanotransduction of the touch response are largely unknown. Here, we performed a high-throughput SILIA (stable isotope labeling in <i>Arabidopsis</i>)-based quantitative phosphoproteomics analysis to profile changes in protein phosphorylation resulting from 40 seconds of force stimulation in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> Of the 24 touch-responsive phosphopeptides identified, many were derived from kinases, phosphatases, cytoskeleton proteins, membrane proteins, and ion transporters. In addition, the previously uncharacterized protein TOUCH-REGULATED PHOSPHOPROTEIN1 (TREPH1) became rapidly phosphorylated in touch-stimulated plants, as confirmed by immunoblots. TREPH1 fractionates as a soluble protein and is shown to be required for the touch-induced delay of bolting and gene-expression changes. Furthermore, a nonphosphorylatable site-specific isoform of TREPH1 (S625A) failed to restore touch-induced flowering delay of <i>treph1-1</i>, indicating the necessity of S625 for TREPH1 function and providing evidence consistent with the possible functional relevance of the touch-regulated TREPH1 phosphorylation. Taken together, these findings identify a phosphoprotein player in <i>Arabidopsis</i> thigmomorphogenesis regulation and provide evidence that TREPH1 and its touch-induced phosphorylation may play a role in touch-induced bolting delay, a major component of thigmomorphogenesis.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Lc-ms/ms, Touch, Protein phosphorylation

### Affiliations
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Zhu Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Ning Li
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology


