### Accession
PXD016323

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of human long ribosomal RNA

### Description
The field of epitranscriptomics is growing in importance, with chemical modification of RNA being associated with a wide variety of biological phenomena. Mass spectrometry (MS) enables the identification of modified RNA residues within their sequence contexts, by using analogous approaches to shotgun proteomics. We have developed a free and open-source database search engine for RNA MS data, called NucleicAcidSearchEngine (NASE), as part of the OpenMS software framework. NASE allows the reliable identification of (modified) RNA sequences from LC-MS/MS data in a high-throughput fashion. For this validation dataset, we generated samples of human long ribosomal RNA from a cellular extract. The samples were RNase-treated prior to nanoflow LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Total RNA was extracted from HAP1 tissue culture by using Qiazol reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were generated by size-exclusion chromatography of total RNA as described by Cai et al. (Methods Enzymol. 2015). Two fractions containing long ribosomal (18S and 28S) RNA were digested with RNase T1. Subsequently 250 ng of oligonucleotides were analyzed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS in technical triplicate as follows: The RNA samples were separated by reversed-phase ion-pair liquid chromatography (using 200 mM HFIP + 8.5 mM TEA in H2O as eluent A, and 100 mM HFIP + 4.25 mM TEA in methanol as eluent B) and characterised by negative ion MS/MS in a hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher). A gradient of 2.5 to 25% eluent B eluted oligonucleotides over 50 min from nanoflow Acclaim PepMap C18 solid phase (Thermo Fisher) at 200 nL/min. Precursor ion spectra were collected at a scan range of 600 to 3500 m/z at 120k resolution in data-dependent mode, with the top five MS1 species selected for fragmentation (NCE: 20) and MS2 at 60k resolution.

### Data Protocol
The proprietary raw file was converted to mzML format without compression and with vendor peak-picking using MSConvert (https://github.com/ProteoWizard). In the analysis with NASE, the full list of fragment ion types (a-B, a, b, c, d, w, x, y, z) was considered for peak matching. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were both set to 3 ppm. For precursor mass correction, offsets of -1 to 3 neutron masses were considered. Na+, K+ and NaK2+ were specified as potential adducts. The FASTA file contained sequences of 18S and 28S rRNA from TK6 cells (plus reversed decoys), to allow direct comparison to published results. A set of seven variable modifications was defined based on known ribosomal PTMs; in NASE parameter notation: mA?, mC?, mG?, mU?, m6,6A, m1acp3Y, ac4C. Up to three modifications per oligonucleotide were allowed. The digestion parameters were set to RNase T1 with up to two missed cleavages. Results were filtered to 10% FDR at spectrum-match level using the target-decoy strategy. NASE produced two output files containing the search results: An mzTab-like text file suitable for further analysis, and an idXML file suitable for visualisation in OpenMS’ TOPPView.

### Publication Abstract
The field of epitranscriptomics continues to reveal how post-transcriptional modification of RNA affects a wide variety of biological phenomena. A pivotal challenge in this area is the identification of modified RNA residues within their sequence contexts. Mass spectrometry (MS) offers a comprehensive solution by using analogous approaches to shotgun proteomics. However, software support for the analysis of RNA MS data is inadequate at present and does not allow high-throughput processing. Existing software solutions lack the raw performance and statistical grounding to efficiently handle the numerous modifications found on RNA. We present a free and open-source database search engine for RNA MS data, called NucleicAcidSearchEngine (NASE), that addresses these shortcomings. We demonstrate the capability of NASE to reliably identify a wide range of modified RNA sequences in four original datasets of varying complexity. In human tRNA, we characterize over 20 different modification types simultaneously and find many cases of incomplete modification.

### Keywords
Epitranscriptomics, Rna, Rrna, 18s, 28s

### Affiliations
STORM Therapeutics Limited, Cambridge, United Kingdom
STORM Therapeutics Limited

### Submitter
Hendrik Weisser

### Lab Head
Dr Byron Andrews
STORM Therapeutics Limited, Cambridge, United Kingdom


