### Accession
PXD037104

### Title
Hypoxia stabilizes SETDB1 to maintain genome stability

### Description
Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) is a tumor suppressor that functions as the substrate recognition subunit of the CRL2VHL E3 complex. While substrates of VHL have been identified, its tumor suppressive role remains to be fully understood. For further determination of VHL substrates, we analyzed the physical interactome of VHL and identified the histone H3K9 methyltransferase SETBD1 as a novel target. SETDB1 undergoes oxygen-dependent hydroxylation by prolyl hydroxylase domain proteins (PHD) and the CRL2VHL complex recognizes hydroxylated SETDB1 for ubiquitin-mediated degradation. Under hypoxic conditions, SETDB1 accumulates by escaping CRL2VHL activity. Loss of SETDB1 in hypoxia compared with that in normoxia escalates the production of transposable element (TE)-derived double-stranded RNAs (dsRNAs), thereby hyperactivating the immune-inflammatory response. In addition, strong derepression of TEs in hypoxic cells lacking SETDB1 triggers DNA damage-induced death. Our collective results support a molecular mechanism of oxygen-dependent SETDB1 degradation by the CRL2VHL E3 complex and reveal a role of SETDB1 in genome stability under hypoxia.

### Sample Protocol
For analysis of the interactome, eluted proteins from immunoprecipitation experiments were digested using Strap micro (C02-micro-80, Protifi, Melville, New York, USA) following the manufacturer’s protocol (v4.7). Briefly, 1 μg trypsin/lysC (V5073, Promega) was added to each sample and incubated overnight at 37℃. Cleaved peptides were desalted with a C18 spin tip (84850, Thermo Fisher) and dried under a speed vac. The RSLCnano u3000/Orbitrap Exploris 240 system (Thermo Fisher) was used for analysis. Each sample was dissolved in 0.1% FA/2% acetonitrile and peptides from 0.5-1 μg protein loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 μm x 2cm, C18, 3 μm, PN 164535). Peptides were separated using an analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18, 75 μm x 25 cm, 2 μm, 100Å, PN ES802) at a temperature of 50°C. The mobile phases comprised 0.1% formic acid in water (buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (buffer B). The following gradient was used at a flow rate of 300 nl/min: 2% B to 20% B in 100 min and 20% B to 32% B in 20 min. The survey scan settings were as follows: resolution = 120,000, Max IT = 100ms, AGC 300%, mass range 375–1200 Th. The selected precursor was fragmented via HCD and analyzed using Orbitrap. Other parameters for the MS/MS scan were as follows: Top15 double play, Resolution=15,000, max IT= 22 ms, AGC standard, Threshold 5E3, normalized collision energy = 30%, isolation width = 1.4, dynamic exclusion parameter exclusion after n times = 1, exclusion duration time = 10 sec, mass tolerance low/high = 10 ppm. For post-translational modification (PTM) analysis of SETDB1, Flag-tagged SETDB1 was overexpressed in HEK293T cells, followed by immunoprecipitation and protein separation via SDS-PAGE. Immunoprecipitated SETDB1 was digested using S-Trap micro columns (C02-micro-80; Protifi, Melville, New York, USA) following the manufacturer’s protocol (v4.7). Briefly, 1 μg trypsin/lysC (V5073, Promega) was added to each sample with overnight incubation at 37℃. Cleaved peptides were desalted with a C18 spin tip (84850, Thermo Fisher) and dried under a speed vacuum. The RSLCnano u3000/Orbitrap Exploris 240 system (Thermo Fisher) with FAIMS was used for analysis. Each sample was dissolved in 0.1% FA/2% acetonitrile and peptides from 0.5-1 μg protein loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 μm x 2 cm, C18, 3 μm, PN 164535). Peptides were separated using an analytical column (BEH300 C18, 75 μm x 25 cm, 1.7 μm, PN 186007484) at a temperature of 50°C. The mobile phases were 0.1% formic acid in water (buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (buffer B). The following gradient was used at a flow rate of 300 nl/min: 5%B to 7%B in 3 min, 7%B to 20%B in 73 min, 20%B to 28%B in 36 min, 28% B to 60% B in 8 min.  The survey scan settings were as follows: resolution = 60,000, Max IT = 100 ms, AGC 300%, mass range 350–1200 Th. The selected precursor was fragmented via HCD and analyzed using Orbitrap. FAIMS CV -45, -60 was used for analysis with cycle times of 1.7 and 1.3 sec, respectively. Other parameters for the MS/MS scan were as follows: resolution= 30,000, max IT=200ms, AGC standard, threshold 1E5, normalized collision energy = 30%, isolation width = 2.0, dynamic exclusion parameter (exclude after n times = 1), exclusion duration time = 20 sec, mass tolerance low/high = 10ppm

### Data Protocol
Raw data from LC-MS were analyzed with MaxQuant v1.6.10.43 and Perseus v1.5.8. MaxQuant parameters were as follows: database = UniProt homo sapiens, enzyme = trypsin/P, variable modification = Oxidation (M), Acetyl(protein N-term), fixed modification = methylthio(C), LFQ and match between runs. The ProteinGroup.txt file was filtered for 'razor+unique peptide≥Perseus' and 'LFQ intensity' of each sample compared. Raw data from LC-MS were analyzed with MaxQuant v2.1.0.0 using the following parameters: database = UniProt Homo sapiens, enzyme = trypsin/P, variable modification = Oxidation(M), Oxidation(P), Acetyl(protein N-term), fixed modification = methylthio (C), and match between runs. Intensity values of proteins and peptides from MaxQuant results were used for calculation of the modification rate.

### Publication Abstract
Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) is a tumor suppressor that functions as the substrate recognition subunit of the CRL2VHL E3 complex. While substrates of VHL have been identified, its tumor suppressive role remains to be fully understood. For further determination of VHL substrates, we analyzed the physical interactome of VHL and identified the histone H3K9 methyltransferase SETBD1 as a novel target. SETDB1 undergoes oxygen-dependent hydroxylation by prolyl hydroxylase domain proteins and the CRL2VHL complex recognizes hydroxylated SETDB1 for ubiquitin-mediated degradation. Under hypoxic conditions, SETDB1 accumulates by escaping CRL2VHL activity. Loss of SETDB1 in hypoxia compared with that in normoxia escalates the production of transposable element-derived double-stranded RNAs, thereby hyperactivating the immune-inflammatory response. In addition, strong derepression of TEs in hypoxic cells lacking SETDB1 triggers DNA damage-induced death. Our collective results support a molecular mechanism of oxygen-dependent SETDB1 degradation by the CRL2VHL E3 complex and reveal a role of SETDB1 in genome stability under hypoxia.

### Keywords
Setdb1, Proline hydroxylation, Genome instability, Hypoxia, Inflammation, Transposable element, Vhl, Innate immune response

### Affiliations
Korea Research Institute of Bioscience & Biotechnology (KRIBB)
1Disease Target Structure Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Ga Seul Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Jeong-Hoon Kim
1Disease Target Structure Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea


