### Accession
PXD027236

### Title
Proteomic response of Deinococcus radiodurans to short-term real microgravity during parabolic flight

### Description
As plans for future space exploration are becoming more ambitious, a better understanding of all factors affecting humans, plants, and microorganisms in space is necessary. Microgravity is an important variable in outer space and understanding the short- and long- term effects of microgravity on cellular processes will be important to minimize its negative effects on the physiology of any organism. Gravitational force has had an important role in the development of life on Earth, and short- and long-term changes in perceived gravitational force can induce notable changes within cells. Deinococcus radiodurans is the gram-positive bacterium that is best known for its extreme resistance to UV-C and gamma radiation, oxidation stress and desiccation, which has led to increased interest in this species in the context of astrobiology. The present study aimed to elucidate the short-term proteomic response of this species to real microgravity during parabolic flight. Overnight cultures were subjected to microgravity during a single parabola, and metabolic activity quenched using methanol. Proteins were extracted and subsequently measured using HPLC ESI MS/MS. Results indicated multiple affected processes in the cell envelope of D. radiodurans, such as increased peptidoglycan synthesis and altered S-layer activities. Energy metabolism upregulation and increased activity of DNA repair pathways could indicate increased endogenous ROS production that contributes to the stress response. The present study shows that the D. radiodurans proteome reacts to real microgravity within seconds. Differential expression patterns in response to microgravity show similarities to previously reported stress responses, thus the present results could be used as basis for future research aiming to better understand the complex regulatory processes underpinning stress management in D. radiodurans.

### Sample Protocol
D. radiodurans was cultivated 15 h in TGB medium (1%(w/v) tryptone, 0.6%(w/v) beef extract, 0.2%(w/v) glucose) at 30°C in an incubator with agitation speed of 150 rpm until it reached the mid-exponential phase. On the day of the parabolic flight, overnight cultures were transferred into 12 syringes (2 mL of culture per syringe) belonging to the top part of the custom injection device. Falcon tubes, where cultures were to be injected, were filled with 10 mL of 100% methanol (MeOH).   The parabolic flight was performed from Stockerau, Austria (https://www.blufly.at/parabelflüge-1/). The custom injection device (Supplementary figure S1) filled with the cultures of D. radiodurans was placed on board of MDM-1 Fox glider. After 10 seconds of 0 gravity (0g), bacterial cultures were injected into the Falcon tubes and quenched with methanol followed by storage on dry ice. In parallel, Ground Control cultures (GC) were quenched in methanol prior to the flights, and kept at static 1 g control on the ground in dry ice. Flight Control (FC) cultures were quenched with methanol during parabolic flight before entering the zero gravity stage. 4 biological replicates of the cultures of D. radiodurans for each of the conditions were used.  cultures were homogenized in 1 mL of ice-cold MCW (methanol:chloroform:water; 2.5:1:0.5), then incubated for 15 min on ice and centrifuged (21000 g, 4 min, 4°C). The pellet was washed with 1mL methanol, centrifuged (21000 g, 4 min, 4°C), and air-dried. TRIzol was added to the pellet and further homogenized in a bead beater (30s, 6.5 m/s), then incubated for 15 in RT.  After extraction, protein pellets were centrifuged (21000 g, 15 min, 4°C) and washed twice with 1.8 mL ice-cold methanol and once with 1.8 mL ice-cold acetone. At each wash, the pellets were ultrasonicated for 5 min, centrifuged (21000 g, 15 min, 4°C), discarding the supernatant. After the acetone wash, the pellets were air-dried. 60 μg of protein from each sample were used for digestion. For the reduction step, samples were adjusted to 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubated for 45 min at 37°C at 700 rpm. Samples were then alkylated by adjusting the iodoacetamide (IAA) concentration to 10 mM, then incubated for 60 min in darkness at RT at 700 rpm. Alkylation was stopped by adjusting the DTT concentration to 10 mM DTT. Samples were incubated for 15 min at RT. Three microliters of trypsin beads (Promega) were added to digest proteins, and samples were incubated at 37°C at 10 rpm for 16 h. Digestion was halted by placing samples on ice, followed by desalting and protein quantification procedure as described in Ott et al. (2019). Frontiers in microbiology.

### Data Protocol
5 µL of each sample were injected into an nHPLC-Orbitrap QExactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with the following measurement settings: full scan range 350–1800 m/z resolution 120000, max. 10 MS2 scans (activation type CID), repeat count 1, repeat duration 30 sec, exclusion list size 500, exclusion duration 30 sec, charge state screening enabled with rejection of unassigned and +1 charge states, minimum signal threshold 500. Raw output analysis was performed with Maxquant with the following settings: 20 ppm first search peptide tolerance, 4.5 ppm main search peptide tolerance, maximum of 2 missed cleavages, maximum number of 5 modifications per peptide (variable: oxidation (M) and acetylation of protein N-term, fixed: carbamidomethylation (C)), label free quantification of samples.

### Publication Abstract
Rapidly evolving space exploration makes understanding the short- and long- term effects of microgravity on humans, plants, and microorganisms an important task. The ubiquitous presence of the gravitational force has had an influence on the development of all living entities on Earth, and short- and long-term changes in perceived gravitational force can induce notable changes within cells. <i>Deinococcus radiodurans</i> is the Gram-positive bacterium that is best known for its extreme resistance to UV-C and gamma radiation, oxidation stress, and desiccation. Thus increased interest has been placed on this species in the context of space research. The present study aims to elucidate the short-term proteomic response of this species to real microgravity during parabolic flight. Overnight cultures of <i>D. radiodurans</i> were subjected to microgravity during a single parabola, and metabolic activity was quenched using methanol. Proteins were extracted and subsequently measured using HPLC nESI MS/MS. The results, such as the enrichment of the peptidoglycan biosynthesis pathway with differentially abundant proteins and altered S-layer protein abundance, suggested molecular rearrangements in the cell envelope of <i>D. radiodurans</i>. Altered abundance of proteins involved in energy metabolism and DNA repair could be linked with increased endogenous ROS production that contributes to the stress response. Moreover, changes in protein abundance in response to microgravity show similarities with previously reported stress responses. Thus, the present results could be used to further investigate the complex regulation of the remarkable stress management of this bacterium.

### Keywords
Parabolic flight, Outer space, Proteomics, Bacteria, Microgravity

### Affiliations
Vienna University
Space Biochemistry Group, Department of Biophysical Chemistry, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Karlis  Moors

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Tetyana Milojevic
Space Biochemistry Group, Department of Biophysical Chemistry, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria


