### Accession
PXD003352

### Title
Tandem affinity purification and Mass spectrometry (TAP-MS) analysis of PCH1’s associated proteins in various Arabidopsis genetic backgrounds.

### Description
Here we describe a series TAP-MS analyses in various mutant backgrounds of Arabidopsis thaliana to co-purify any PCH1’s associated proteins, using tagged PCH1 as bait (PCH1-His6-Flag3, either overexpressed or under the control of its own promoter). By combining TAP-MS with genetics, we investigate the in-vivo dependence of several proteins for maintaining the association of PCH1 with its interacting proteins. Our results refine the protein-protein interaction network of an existing interactome containing phytochromes, the COP1-SPAs complex and the ELF3-ELF4-LUX complex.

### Sample Protocol
10-day-old seedlings of wild type (Col), elf4-2, elf3-2 and phyB-9 mutants carrying the [35S::PCH1-His6-FLAG3] construct and the [CCA1:LUC] reporter, as well as the pch1 complementation line (pch1 [PCH1pro:PCH1-His6-FLAG3][CCA1:LUC]) were surface sterilized, stratified and grown on sterilized qualitative filter paper, under the 12L:12D conditions (light vs dark= 12:12 hours). 5 gram of whole seedlings were harvested at ZT12 by immediately frozen in liquid N2 and were stored at -80˚C. Frozen samples were transferred into a liquid N2 chilled 35ml ball mill and disrupted by a reciprocal mixer mill (35Hz for 30s, 4 times)(Retsch USA). Ground tissue was resuspended in SII buffer (100 mM sodium phosphate, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 5 mM EGTA, 0.1% Triton X-100, 1 mM PMSF, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 1x Phosphatase Inhibitors II & III (Sigma), and 10 µM Mg-132 (Peptides International)) and was further disrupted by sonication. Resuspended extracts were first clarified by centrifugation twice at 4 ˚C for 10 min at ≥20,000xg, then by 0.45 µm filtration. 50 µg of anti-FLAG antibody (F1804, Sigma Aldrich) coupled to magnetic beads (Dynabeads® Protein G, Life Technologies) was incubated with the extract for 60 min at 4˚C with rotation. The beads were then washed twice with 10 ml of SII buffer, then transferred to low protein binding 1.5 ml centrifuge tubes, and washed more times with 900µl of FTH buffer (100 mM sodium phosphate, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100). Captured proteins were eluted twice at 4˚C and 30˚C using 400µl of 500µg/ml 3xFLAG peptide (Sigma Aldrich) diluted in FTH buffer. Eluates were combined and depleted using 70µl Talon magnetic beads (Invitrogen) at 4˚C for 15 min. Talon resin was washed three times 900µl in FTH buffer, then three times in 900µl of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate before all liquid was withdrawn and the samples were stored at -80˚C. The proteins binding to the magnetic beads were digested with trypsin and used for LC-MS/MS analysis, which was carried out on an LTQ-Orbitrap  Velos Pro (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).

### Data Protocol
MS data were extracted by Proteome Discoverer (ThermoFisher Scientific; v.1.4) and converted into mgf. Database searches were done using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; v.2.5.0) using the TAIR10 database (20101214, 35,386 entries) and the cRAP database (http://www.thegpm.org/cRAP/) and assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin and 2 missed cleavages. Scaffold (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR;v.4.4.3) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. The Scaffold Local FDR was used and only peptides probabilities with FDR<1% were used for further analysis. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability as assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Only the proteins identified with ≥ 2 unique peptides were further used in the analysis, except when proteins with only one peptide were identified in more than one replicate.

### Publication Abstract
Plants react to seasonal change in day length through altering physiology and development. Factors that function to harmonize growth with photoperiod are poorly understood. Here we characterize a new protein that associates with both circadian clock and photoreceptor components, named PHOTOPERIODIC CONTROL OF HYPOCOTYL1 (PCH1). pch1 seedlings have overly elongated hypocotyls specifically under short days while constitutive expression of PCH1 shortens hypocotyls independent of day length. PCH1 peaks at dusk, binds phytochrome B (phyB) in a red light-dependent manner, and co-localizes with phyB into photobodies. PCH1 is necessary and sufficient to promote the biogenesis of large photobodies to maintain an active phyB pool after light exposure, potentiating red-light signaling and prolonging memory of prior illumination. Manipulating PCH1 alters PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING FACTOR 4 levels and regulates light-responsive gene expression. Thus, PCH1 is a new factor that regulates photoperiod-responsive growth by integrating the clock with light perception pathways through modulating daily phyB-signaling.

### Keywords
Tandem ap-ms, Circadian clock, Arabidopsis

### Affiliations
Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
University of Nebraska - Lincoln

### Submitter
Sophe Alvarez

### Lab Head
Dr Meter Nusinow
Donald Danforth Plant Science Center


