### Accession
PXD036164

### Title
proteomic analysis of the formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) renal tissue between steroid-sensitive and steroid-resistant (SR) children FSGS patients

### Description
In children, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) is the main cause of steroid resistant nephroticsyndrome (SRNS). To identify specific candidates and the mechanism of steroid resistance, we examined the formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) renal tissue protein profiles via liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Renal biopsies from seven steroid-sensitive (SS) and eleven steroid-resistant (SR) children FSGS patients were obtained. We examined the formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) renal tissue protein profiles via liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment and Gene Ontology (GO) analysis, as well as the construction of protein-protein interaction (PPI) network were performed. Two proteins were further valiadated by immunohistochemistry staining in FSGS patients and mice models. In total, we quantified 4794 proteins, of which 325 were found to be differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between the SS and SR group (foldchange ≥ 2, P＜0.05). The results of GO revealed that the most significant up-regulated proteins were primarily related to protein transportation, regulation of the complement activation process and cytolysis. Moreover, clustering analysis showed differences in the pathways (lysosome, terminal pathway of complement) between the two groups. Among these potential candidates, validation analyses for LAMP1 and ACSL4 were conducted. LAMP1 was observed to have a higher expression in glomerulus, while ACSL4 was expressed more in tubular epithelial cells.

### Sample Protocol
FFPE biobank specimens (10 μm thick) were first deparaffinized by two washes in xylene (5 min at 37°C each), followed by washes in absolute ethanol, 90% ethanol, 85% ethanol and 75% ethanol. The sections were air-dried and were incubated in lysis buffer (20 mM TCEP, 10 mM iodoacetamide), heated at 99°C for 30 minutes and cooled to room temperature. After that, trypsin (Promega) was used to digest samples overnight at 37 °C. Then elution buffer (0.1% FA (Sigma) in 50% acetonitrile (J.T. Baker) was applied to collect the supernatants, before being dried with a vacuum concentrator (Thermo Scientific). We loaded the dried peptides into a homemade Reverse Phase C18 column, then we eluted using the elution buffer. In addition, peptide samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator before being analysed by LC-MS/MS as previously described.Samples were suspended in an appropriate buffer and analysed on a Q Exactive HF-X mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) coupled with a high-performance liquid chromatography system (EASY nLC 1200, Thermo Fisher). Redissolved dried peptide samples were loaded onto the 150 µm by 2 cm ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ column (3 μm; Dr Maisch) in Solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water), with a maximum pressure of 280 bar using Solvent A. Separation was then performed on a home-made 100 μm by 15 cm silica microcolumn using mobile phase B with a gradient of 4-100 percent (0.1% Formic acid in 80% ACN) at a flow rate of 600 nl/min for 75 min. Mass spectrometry was conducted under a data-dependent acquisition mode after the elution of peptides. The orbitrap instrument was used to conduct the MS1 full scan by scanning 300-1,400 m/z at120,000 resolution. The maximal ion injection time was 80 ms with an automatic gain control (AGC) of 3e6. A top-speed MS2 acquisition was performed and selected precursor ions were subjected to higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) with 27% normalized collision energy. AGC at 5e4 was applied to analyze fragment ions. A maximum ion injection time was achieved by MS2 of 20 ms, while and the dynamic exclusion was 12 s.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant (version 1.5.3.30) was used to search raw files against the human Refseq protein database (updated on 04-07-2013, 32,015 entries) of National Center for Biotechnology Information. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Carbamidomethyl (C) was considered as a fixed modification. In the proteome profiling data, variable modifications included acetylation (Protein N-term) and oxidation (M). For protein quantifications, an intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) approach was used, as previously described [15]. All proteins that were identified by the linear ion trap had at least two peptides (FDR<1%).The DAVID open-source program, version 6.7, was applied to perform gene ontology (cellular components, biological processes and molecular functions) and KEGG pathway enrichment analyses (http://david. abcc.ncifcrf.gov/home.jsp). The STRING database was used to conduct protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analyses. Cyto-Hubba was applied to discover the hub genes in the PPI network of differential proteins [16]. In this study, we mined the top 10 hub genes by that method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kidney tissue, Human, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Children's Hospital of Fudan University, National Pediatric Medical Center of China, Shanghai, China.
Department of Nephrology, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, National Pediatric Medical Center of China, Shanghai, China.

### Submitter
Jiajia Ni

### Lab Head
Dr Hong Xu
Department of Nephrology, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, National Pediatric Medical Center of China, Shanghai, China.


