### Accession
PXD010297

### Title
Proteomes and Histone Crotonylation Analysis Reveals the Importance of Crotonylation Low Temperature in Chrysanthemum

### Description
Chrysanthemum is a garden plant with good economic benefit and high ornamental value. Chrysanthemum in the key period of flowering in autumn and winter, vulnerable to cold damage, affecting the normal growth of the chrysanthemum plant and even death. little is known regarding the study of histone crotonylation in plant cold response. In this study, we first obtained reference chrysanthemum transcriptome data via RNA sequencing. Next, we quantitatively investigated the chrysanthemum proteome, crotonylation, and the association between them in chrysanthemum following low temperature. In total, 365669 unigenes, 6693 proteins and 2017 crotonylation sites were quantified under low temperature stress. There were 24631 up-regulated and 22648 down-regulated unigenes (absolute log2-fold change > 1 and P value<0.05), 393 up-regulated and 500 down-regulated proteins using a 1.2-fold threshold (P<0.05). The lysine crotonylation mainly influenced in photosynthesis, ribosome, antioxidant enzyme and ROS system. In the process of low temperature, 61 lysine crotonylation sites in 89 proteins were up-regulated and 87 lysine crotonylation sites in 72 proteins are down-regulated (1.2-fold threshold, P<0.05).

### Sample Protocol
Plant growth conditions and cold stress treatments Chrysanthemum (Dendranthema grandiflorum var.” jinba”) were growth on MS medium (200 μmol m-2 s-1, 16h photoperiod, 25°C/22 °C day/night temperature and 70% relative humidity) for thirty days. Then thirty-day old chrysanthemum seedlings were transferred to pots filled with a 1:1 mixture of peat and perlite, and acclimated for three days at normal condition. The seedlings were treated at 4°C for 24h,followed by -4°C for 4h. Some leaves were frozen in liquid nitrogen and then stored at -80°C for protein extraction. Extraction of RNA, Library Preparation for Transcriptome Sequencing To ensure the qualified samples were obtained for transcriptome sequencing, total RNA was extracted with Trizol kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Then, 1% sepharose gel was used for the detection of RNA degradation and contamination; the NanoPhotometer® spectrophotometer (IMPLEN, CA, USA) was used for monitoring of RNA purity; Qubit® RNA Assay Kit was used for assessing of RNA concentration; and the RNA Nano 6000 Assay Kit of the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 system (Agilent Technologies, CA, USA) was used for measurement of RNA integrity. After that, mRNA was enriched with magnetic beads with Oligo(dT) and the final library was obtained by PCR amplification and purification of PCR products by AMPure XP beads[ ]. Then, using Qubit2.0 to perform preliminary quantification, dilute the library to 1.5ng/ul, and using the Agilent 2100 to test the insert size of the library. After the insert size meets expectations, the Q-PCR method was used to accurately quantify the effective concentration of the libraries (effective library concentration > 2 nM) to ensure library quality. The raw sequencing data have been submitted to the NCBI Sequence Read Archive database with accession number xxxxxxxx.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Dendranthema Grandiflorum database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and oxidation on Met and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. For quantification method, TMT-6plex was selected. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. Annotation Methods Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Firstly, converting identified protein ID to UniProt ID and then mapping to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Then proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotationbased on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)database was used to annotate protein pathway. Firstly, using KEGG online service tools KAAS to annotated protein’s KEGG database description. Then mapping the annotation result on the KEGG pathway database using KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper. There, we used wolfpsort a subcellular localization predication soft to predict subcellular localization. Wolfpsort an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteome;chrysanthemum; crotonylation

### Affiliations
PTM
Department of Ornamental Horticulture, Sichuan Agricultural University, 211 Huimin Road, Wenjiang District, Chengdu, Sichuan, 611130, P.R. China

### Submitter
suzhen huang

### Lab Head
Dr Qing-lin Liu
Department of Ornamental Horticulture, Sichuan Agricultural University, 211 Huimin Road, Wenjiang District, Chengdu, Sichuan, 611130, P.R. China


