### Accession
PXD005165

### Title
PLC-γ1 Can Regulate T-Cell Activation by Positive and Negative Feedback via Lck

### Description
Phospholipase C gamma 1 (PLC-γ1) occupies a critically important position in the T cell signaling pathway. While its functions as a regulator of both Ca2+ signaling and PKC-family kinases are well characterized, PLC-γ1’s role in the regulation of early T cell receptor signaling events is incomplete. Activation of the T cell receptor leads to the formation of a signalosome complex between SLP-76, LAT, PLC-γ1, Itk, and Vav1.  Recent studies have revealed the existence of both positive and negative feedback pathways from components of the signalosome complex to the apical kinase in the pathway, Lck.  To determine the role, if any, of PLC-γ1 in these feedback networks, we performed a quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of the PLC-γ1-deficient T cells. These data revealed a previously unappreciated role for PLC-γ1 in the positive regulation of Zap-70 and T cell receptor tyrosine phosphorylation. Conversely, PLC-γ1 negatively regulated the phosphorylation of signalosome associated proteins including previously established Lck substrate phosphorylation sites within this complex. While the positive and negative regulatory phosphorylation sites on Lck were largely unchanged, Tyr192 phosphorylation was elevated in Jgamma1. The data supports a model wherein Lck’s targeting, but not its kinase activity is altered by PLC-γ1, possibly through Lck Tyr192 phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
The Jgamma1 and Jgamma1.WT cell lines were maintained in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS, 2mM L-glutamine, 100U/ml penicillin G, and 100μg/ml streptomycin in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2 at 37°C. OKT3/OKT4 stimulation of the TCR was performed for 0, 1, 2, 3, 5, and 10 minutes, and cells were subsequently lysed in urea buffer. Reduction, alkylation, and trypsin digestion were performed. After desalt, phosphotyrosine peptide enrichment was performed using p-Tyr-100 phosphotyrosine antibody beads (Cell Signaling Technology). Prior to immunoprecipitation, a 5 pmol fraction of synthetic phosphopeptide LIEDAEpYTAK was added to each replicate and time point sample as an exogenous quantitation standard. Samples were then desalted using ZipTip pipette tips according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Tyrosine phosphopeptides were analyzed by a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted through a PicoFrit analytical column (360 μm outer diameter 75 μm inner diameter-fused silica with 15 cm of 3-μm Monitor C18 particles; New Objective) with a reversed-phase gradient (0–70% 0.1M acetic acid in acetonitrile in 90 minutes). An electrospray voltage of 1.8 kV was applied in a split flow configuration. Spectra were collected using a top 9 data-dependent method (a single MS scan followed by up to 9 MS/MS scans). MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 with a target value of 3E6 ions or a maximum integration time of 200ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 with a target value of 2E4 ions or a maximum integration time of 200 ms. The ion selection abundance threshold was set at 1E3 with charge state exclusion of unassigned and z =1, or 6-8 ions and dynamic exclusion time of 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the non-redundant human UNIPROT complete proteome set database (UNIPROT database released 2013.02.01) containing 87,613 forward and an equivalent number of reversed decoy entries using the Mascot algorithm version 2.4.0 from Matrix Science. Peak lists were generated using msconvert from ProteoWizard (3.0.4888) using default parameters with the MS2Deisotope filter. The Mascot database search was performed with the following parameters: trypsin enzyme specificity, 2 possible missed cleavages, 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions, and 50 mmu mass tolerance for fragment ions. Search parameters specified a differential modification of phosphorylation (+79.9663 Da) on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues and methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) as well as a static modification of carbamidomethylation (+57.0215 Da) on cysteine. Mascot results were filtered by Mowse score (>20) and precursor mass error (<2ppm). Peptide assignments from the database search was filtered down to 1% FDR by a logistic spectral score. The Ascore algorithm was implemented to validate phosphorylation site position and the top-ranked Ascore predicted phosphorylation site position is reported.

### Publication Abstract
Phospholipase C gamma 1 (PLC-&#x3b3;1) occupies a critically important position in the T-cell signaling pathway. While its functions as a regulator of both Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling and PKC-family kinases are well characterized, PLC-&#x3b3;1's role in the regulation of early T-cell receptor signaling events is incompletely understood. Activation of the T-cell receptor leads to the formation of a signalosome complex between SLP-76, LAT, PLC-&#x3b3;1, Itk, and Vav1. Recent studies have revealed the existence of both positive and negative feedback pathways from SLP-76 to the apical kinase in the pathway, Lck. To determine if PLC-&#x3b3;1 contributes to the regulation of these feedback networks, we performed a quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of PLC-&#x3b3;1-deficient T cells. These data revealed a previously unappreciated role for PLC-&#x3b3;1 in the positive regulation of Zap-70 and T-cell receptor tyrosine phosphorylation. Conversely, PLC-&#x3b3;1 negatively regulated the phosphorylation of SLP-76-associated proteins, including previously established Lck substrate phosphorylation sites within this complex. While the positive and negative regulatory phosphorylation sites on Lck were largely unchanged, Tyr<sup>192</sup> phosphorylation was elevated in Jgamma1. The data supports a model wherein Lck's targeting, but not its kinase activity, is altered by PLC-&#x3b3;1, possibly through Lck Tyr<sup>192</sup> phosphorylation and increased association of the kinase with protein scaffolds SLP-76 and TSAd.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Lc-msms, Plc-γ1, Tcr signaling, Phospholipase c

### Affiliations
Brown University
PI

### Submitter
Judson Belmont

### Lab Head
Dr Art Salomon
PI


