### Accession
PXD002970

### Title
The N-myristoylome of Trypanosoma cruzi.

### Description
Identification of N-myristoylated proteins in Trypanosoma cruzi using a chemically tractable myristic acid analogue, azidomyristate. Enrichment of labelled proteins was carried out prior to identification by LC-MSMS

### Sample Protocol
Epimastigotes either isotopically labelled with [U-13C6]-L-Arginine.HCl and [4,4,5,5-2H]-L-Lysine.2HCl or [U-13C, U15N4]-L-Arginine and [U13-C5 U-15N2]-L-Lysine or their naturally abundant isotopes were labelled with 12-azidododecanoic acid (AzMyr). Whole cell lysates were made and labelled proteins enriched using the Click-iT protein enrichment kit (Invitrogen). Samples for label-free analysis were incubated in the presence of AzMyr or DMSO for 20 h and separate enrichments made.   SILAC samples were combined in a 1:1 or 1:1:1 ratio prior to enrichments being made.Enrichments were prepared exactly as described in the manufacturer’s protocol with the exception of incubating with hydroxylamine prior to iodoacetamide labelling.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.0.0 using a custom database comprising the "complete" T. cruzi proteome comprising sequences from Silvio X10/1, CL-Brener and the marinkelli strains. Search tolerances for MS of 4.5 ppm and MSMS of 0.6 Da were selected with digestion with trypsin with a maximum of two missed sites. Alternatively for polymyxin acylase digestion, a custom enzyme with the specificity of trypsin and to cut on the N-terminal side of a glycine if following a methionine. Peptides were required to be a minimum of 7 aa in length with carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues set as a fixed modification and the oxidation of methionine and N-acetylation as variable. Data were processed separately using label free and SILAC settings as appropriate. Protein and peptide FDR limits were set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Protein N-myristoylation is catalysed by N-myristoyltransferase (NMT), an essential and druggable target in Trypanosoma cruzi, the causative agent of Chagas' disease. Here we have employed whole cell labelling with azidomyristic acid and click chemistry to identify N-myristoylated proteins in different life cycle stages of the parasite. Only minor differences in fluorescent-labelling were observed between the dividing forms (the insect epimastigote and mammalian amastigote stages) and the non-dividing trypomastigote stage. Using a combination of label-free and stable isotope labelling of cells in culture (SILAC) based proteomic strategies in the presence and absence of the NMT inhibitor DDD85646, we identified 56 proteins enriched in at least two out of the three experimental approaches. Of these, 6 were likely to be false positives, with the remaining 50 commencing with amino acids MG at the N-terminus in one or more of the T. cruzi genomes. Most of these are proteins of unknown function (32), with the remainder (18) implicated in a diverse range of critical cellular and metabolic functions such as intracellular transport, cell signalling and protein turnover. In summary, we have established that 0.43-0.46% of the proteome is N-myristoylated in T. cruzi approaching that of other eukaryotic organisms (0.5-1.7%).

### Keywords
N-myristoylation, Click chemistry, N-myristoyltransferase, Trypanosoma cruzi

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Biological Chemistry and Drug Discovery University of Dundee

### Submitter
Adam Roberts

### Lab Head
Dr Alan Fairlamb
Biological Chemistry and Drug Discovery University of Dundee


