### Accession
PXD036355

### Title
The Arabidopsis TETRATRICOPEPTIDE-REPEAT THIOREDOXIN-LIKE (TTL) family members are involved in root system formation via their interaction with cytoskeleton and cell wall remodeling

### Description
Lateral roots are essential components of the plant edaphic interface; contributing to water and nutrient uptake, biotic and abiotic interactions, stress survival, and plant anchorage. We have identified the TETRATRICOPEPTIDE-REPEAT THIOREDOXIN-LIKE 3 (TTL3) gene as being related to lateral root emergence and later development. Loss of function of TTL3 leads to a reduced number of emerged lateral roots due to delayed development of lateral root primordia. This trait is further enhanced in the triple mutant ttl1ttl3ttl4. TTL3 interacts with microtubules and endomembranes and is known to participate in the brassinosteroid signaling pathway. Both ttl3 and ttl1ttl3ttl4 mutants are less sensitive to brassinosteroid treatment in terms of lateral root formation and primary root growth. The ability of TTL3 to modulate biophysical properties of the cell wall was established under restrictive conditions of hyperosmotic stress and loss of root growth recovery, which was enhanced in ttl1ttl3ttl4. Timing and spatial distribution of TTL3 expression is consistent with its role in development of lateral root primordia before their emergence and subsequent growth of lateral roots. TTL3 emerged as a novel component of the root system morphogenesis regulatory network.

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitation and Mass Spectrometry Analysis Total proteins were extracted from 2-week-old Arabidopsis seedlings expressing pTTL3::TTL3-GFP and 35S-GFP in lysis buffer, supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich 11836153001). Protein complexes with TTL3-GFP and free GFP as a control were isolated using the µMACS MicroBeads conjugated to an anti-GFP monoclonal antibody (Miltenyi Biotec, Germany). The immunoprecipitates were resolved by SDS-PAGE and labeled in immunoblots with anti-GFP and anti-tubulin antibodies, respectively. For mass spectrometry analysis, the sample on the column was washed by lysis buffer and then eluted by 100 µl of 100mM TEAB (Triethylammonium bicarbonate) containing 2% SDC (sodium deoxycholate). The cysteines were subsequently reduced by boiling at 95°C for 10 min in 100mM TEAB containing 2% SDC, 40mM chloroacetamide, 10mM TCEP (Tris 2-carboxyethyl phosphine). Then the samples were further processed using SP3 beads (Hughes et al., 2019). After digestion, samples were acidified with TFA to 1% final concentration and peptides were desalted using in-house-made stage tips packed with C18 disks (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Nano Reversed-phase column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) was used for LC/MS analysis (Hebert et al., 2014).

### Data Protocol
All data were analyzed and quantified with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.1) (Cox et al., 2014). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides, and we specified a minimum length of  peptide to seven amino acids. Data analysis was performed using Perseus 1.6.1.3 software and t-tests were subsequently calculated for each of the required comparisons (p<0,05). There are three replicates for each sample, and only those candidates which have at least two valid intensity values and are significantly different from respective control (free GFP) are considered.

### Publication Abstract
Lateral roots (LR) are essential components of the plant edaphic interface; contributing to water and nutrient uptake, biotic and abiotic interactions, stress survival, and plant anchorage. We have identified the TETRATRICOPEPTIDE-REPEAT THIOREDOXIN-LIKE 3 (TTL3) gene as being related to LR emergence and later development. Loss of function of TTL3 leads to a reduced number of emerged LR due to delayed development of lateral root primordia (LRP). This trait is further enhanced in the triple mutant ttl1ttl3ttl4. TTL3 interacts with microtubules and endomembranes, and is known to participate in the brassinosteroid (BR) signaling pathway. Both ttl3 and ttl1ttl3ttl4 mutants are less sensitive to BR treatment in terms of LR formation and primary root growth. The ability of TTL3 to modulate biophysical properties of the cell wall was established under restrictive conditions of hyperosmotic stress and loss of root growth recovery, which was enhanced in ttl1ttl3ttl4. Timing and spatial distribution of TTL3 expression is consistent with its role in development of LRP before their emergence and subsequent growth of LR. TTL3 emerged as a component of the root system morphogenesis regulatory network.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis

### Affiliations
Charles University
Department of Experimental Plant Biology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Vinicna 5, 128 44 Prague 2, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Aleš Soukup
Department of Experimental Plant Biology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Vinicna 5, 128 44 Prague 2, Czech Republic


