### Accession
PXD044082

### Title
ADAM17 targeting by human cytomegalovirus remodels the cell surface proteome to simultaneously regulate multiple immune pathways

### Description
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a major human pathogen whose life-long persistence is enabled by its remarkable capacity to systematically subvert host immune defences. In exploring the finding that HCMV infection upregulates tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 (TNFR2), a ligand for the proinflammatory anti-viral cytokine TNFa, we discovered the underlying mechanism was due to targeting of the protease, A Disintegrin And Metalloproteinase 17 (ADAM17). ADAM17 is the prototype ‘sheddase, a family of proteases that cleaves other membrane-bound proteins to release biologically active ectodomains into the supernatant. HCMV impaired ADAM17 surface expression through the action of two virally-encoded proteins in its UL/b’ region, UL148 and UL148D. Proteomic plasma membrane profiling of cells infected with a HCMV double deletion mutant for UL148 and UL148D with restored ADAM17 expression, combined with ADAM17 functional blockade, showed that HCMV stabilized the surface expression of 114 proteins (p<0.05) in an ADAM17-dependent fashion. These included known substrates of ADAM17 with established immunological functions such as TNFR2 and Jagged1, but also numerous novel host and viral targets, such as Nectin1, UL8 and UL144. Regulation of TNFa-induced cytokine responses and NK inhibition during HCMV infection were dependent on this impairment of ADAM17. We therefore identify a viral immunoregulatory mechanism in which targeting a single sheddase enables broad regulation of multiple critical surface receptors, revealing a paradigm for viral-encoded immunomodulation.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma membrane profiling was performed as described previously with minor modifications, to cells infected in biological duplicate (70, 77). After washing cells infected in duplicate, surface sialic acid residues were oxidized with sodium-meta-periodate and labelled with aminooxy-biotin, and after quenching the reaction, biotinylated cells were scraped into 1% (v/v) Triton X-100. Biotinylated glycoproteins were enriched with high-affinity streptavidin agarose beads and washed extensively. Captured protein was denatured with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA), and digested on bead with trypsin for 3 h in 100 mM HEPES pH 8.5. Tryptic peptides were collected and subjected to labelling with tandem mass tags. The following labels were applied: 126 wild-type #1, 127N wild type #2, 127C DUL148 #1, 128N DUL148 #2, 128C DUL148D #1, 129N DUL148D #2, 129C DUL148/DUL148D #1, 130N DUL148/DUL148D #2, 130C DUL148/DUL148D+D1(A12) #1, and 131N DUL148/DUL148D+D1(A12) #2. Labelled peptides were combined in a 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio, enriched, and then subjected to high-pH reversed-phase fractionation. Fractions were combined for analysis by recombining all wells from sets of two adjacent columns in the resulting 96-well plate (i.e., combining wells in columns A+B, C+D, E+F etc). This resulted in six fractions and an unfractionated ‘singleshot’ sample for analysis via mass spectrometry (MS).  Mass spectrometry data were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano UHPLC equipped with a 300 μm ID × 5 mm Acclaim PepMap μ-Precolumn (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a 75 μm ID × 50 cm 2.1 μm particle Acclaim PepMap RSLC Analytical Column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Loading solvent was 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), analytical solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA), and analytical solvent B was acetonitrile (MeCN) + 0.1% FA. All separations were carried out at 55°C. Samples were loaded at 10 μl/minute for 5 minutes in loading solvent before beginning the analytical gradient. All samples were run with a gradient of 3-34% B, followed by a 5 minute wash at 80% B, a 5 minute wash at 90% B and equilibration for 5 minutes at 3% B. Each analysis used a MultiNotch MS3-based TMT method (78). The following settings were used: MS1: 400–1400 Th, quadrupole isolation, 120,000 resolution, 2 x 105 automatic gain control (AGC) target, 50 ms maximum injection time, and ions injected for all parallizable time; MS2: quadrupole isolation at an isolation width of m/z 0.7, collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation with normalized collision energy (NCE) 30 and ion trap scanning out in rapid mode from m/z 120, 1x104 AGC target, 70 ms maximum injection time, and ions accumulated for all parallizable time in centroid mode; MS3: in synchronous precursor selection mode, the top 10 MS2 ions were selected for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (NCE 65) and scanned in the Orbitrap at 50,000 resolution with an AGC target of 5 × 104 and a maximum accumulation time of 150 ms, and ions were not accumulated for all parallelizable time. The entire MS/MS/MS cycle had a target time of 3 s. Dynamic exclusion was set to 10 ppm for 90 s. MS2 fragmentation was trigged on precursors at 5 x 103 counts and above.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based software pipeline for quantitative proteomics,“MassPike”, through a collaborative arrangement with Professor Steven Gygi’s laboratory at Harvard Medical School. Spectra were converted to mzXML using an extractor built upon Thermo Fisher Scientific’s RAW File Reader Library (version 4.0.26). In this extractor, the standard mzxml format has been augmented with additional custom fields that are specific to ion trap and Orbitrap MS data and essential for TMT quantitation. These additional fields include ion injection times for each scan, Fourier transform-derived baseline and noise values calculated for every Orbitrap scan, isolation widths for each scan type, scan event numbers, and elapsed scan times. This software is a component of the MassPike software platform licensed by Harvard Medical School. A combined database was constructed from (a) the human Uniprot database (26 January 2017), (b) the HCMV strain Merlin Uniprot database, (c) all additional non-canonical HCMV(79), (d) a six-frame translation of HCMV strain Merlin filtered to include all potential ORFs of ≥8 amino acids (delimited by stop-stop rather than requiring ATG-stop) and (e) common contaminants such as porcine trypsin and endoproteinase LysC. ORFs from the six-frame translation (6FT-ORFs) were named as follows: 6FT_Frame_ORFnumber_length, where Frame is numbered 1-6, and length is the length in amino acids. The combined database was concatenated with a reverse database composed of all protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance. Fragment ion tolerance was set to 1.0 Th. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (57.02146 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification. A target-decoy strategy was employed to control the fraction of erroneous protein identifications(80). Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered to an initial peptide-level false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with subsequent filtering to attain a final protein-level FDR of 1%. PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously (80). This distinguishes correct from incorrect peptide identifications (IDs) in a manner analogous to the widely used Percolator algorithm (https://noble.gs.washington.edu/proj/percolator/) by employing a distinct machine learning algorithm. The following parameters were considered: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. Protein assembly was guided by the principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides (algorithm described in (80)). Where all PSMs from a given HCMV protein could be explained either by a canonical gene or non-canonical ORF, the canonical gene was picked in preference. In a few cases, PSMs assigned to a non-canonical gene or 6FT-ORF were a mixture of peptides from the canonical protein and the ORF. In these cases, the peptides corresponding to the canonical protein were separated from those unique to the ORF, generating two separate entries. Proteins were quantified by summing TMT reporter ion counts across all matching peptide-spectral matches using ”MassPike”, as described previously (78). Briefly, a 0.003 Th window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion (126, 127n, 127c, 128n, 128c, 129n, 129c, 130n, 130c, and 131n) was scanned for ions, selecting the maximum intensity nearest to the theoretical m/z. The primary determinant of quantitation quality is the number of TMT reporter ions detected in each MS3 spectrum, which is directly proportional to the signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio observed for each ion. Conservatively, every individual peptide used for quantitation was required to contribute sufficient TMT reporter ions (minimum of ~1250 per spectrum), so that each on its own could be expected to provide a representative picture of relative protein abundance (78). An isolation specificity filter with a cutoff of 50% was additionally employed to minimise peptide co-isolation (78). Peptide-spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra (>9 TMT channels missing and/or a combined S:N ratio of <250 across all TMT reporter ions) or no MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation. Peptides meeting the stated criteria for reliable quantitation were then summed by parent protein, in effect weighting the contributions of individual peptides to the total protein signal based on their individual TMT reporter ion yields. Protein quantitation values were exported for further analysis in Excel. For protein quantitation, reverse and contaminant proteins were removed, and each reporter ion channel was summed across all quantified proteins and normalized on the assumption of equal protein loading across all channels.

### Publication Abstract
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a major human pathogen whose life-long persistence is enabled by its remarkable capacity to systematically subvert host immune defenses. In exploring the finding that HCMV infection up-regulates tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 (TNFR2), a ligand for the pro-inflammatory antiviral cytokine TNF&#x3b1;, we found that the underlying mechanism was due to targeting of the protease, A Disintegrin And Metalloproteinase 17 (ADAM17). ADAM17 is the prototype 'sheddase', a family of proteases that cleaves other membrane-bound proteins to release biologically active ectodomains into the supernatant. HCMV impaired ADAM17 surface expression through the action of two virally-encoded proteins in its U<sub>L</sub>/<i>b'</i> region, UL148 and UL148D. Proteomic plasma membrane profiling of cells infected with an HCMV double-deletion mutant for UL148 and UL148D with restored ADAM17 expression, combined with ADAM17 functional blockade, showed that HCMV stabilized the surface expression of 114 proteins (<i>P</i> &lt; 0.05) in an ADAM17-dependent fashion. These included reported substrates of ADAM17 with established immunological functions such as TNFR2 and jagged1, but also numerous unreported host and viral targets, such as nectin1, UL8, and UL144. Regulation of TNF&#x3b1;-induced cytokine responses and NK inhibition during HCMV infection were dependent on this impairment of ADAM17. We therefore identify a viral immunoregulatory mechanism in which targeting a single sheddase enables broad regulation of multiple critical surface receptors, revealing a paradigm for viral-encoded immunomodulation.

### Keywords
Natural killer cell, Ul148, Immune, Adam17, Tnfr2, Human cytomegalovirus

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Michael Weekes

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Weekes
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge


