### Accession
PXD008526

### Title
Comprehensive peptide analysis of mouse brain striatum identifies novel sORF-encoded polypeptides

### Description
Bio-active peptides are involved in the regulation of most if not all physiological processes in the body. Classical bio-active peptides (CBAPs) are mostly cleaved from a larger precursor protein and stored in secretion vesicles from which they are released in the extracellular space to exert there (signaling) activity. Only recently, another non-classical type of bio-active peptides (NCBAPs) is being discovered.  These typically are not secreted but instead appear to be translated from short open reading frames (sORF) and released directly into the cytoplasm.  In contrast to CBAPs, they appear to be involved in the regulation of intra-cellular processes such as transcriptional control, calcium handling and DNA repair. However, bio-chemical evidence for the translation of these sORFs remains elusive. Comprehensive analysis of these sORF-encoded polypeptides (SEPs) by peptidomic approach is hampered by a number of methodological and biological challenges: the low molecular mass of SEPs (many are in the range of 4-10 KDa), their low abundance, their transient expression and many complications in data analysis to confidently identify these peptides. In this study, we developed a strategy to address these issues as much as possible. Since translation of these predicted sORFs is still controversial, our data-analysis strategy is aimed not to maximize the number of identifications but rather to exclude as much as possible false positive identifications.  Applying this strategy to a mouse brain striatum sample, we identified 981 neuropeptides originated from 50 known (neuro)peptide precursors, demonstrating the sensitivity of the method applied. In addition, five SEPs were identified including NoBody, a SEP that was previously discovered in humans and four novel SEPS from 5’ untranslated transcript regions (UTRs).

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection. Mouse brain was dissected from an eight-week-old female C57Bl/6J mice (Janvier Elevage, Le Genest-St-Isle, France), which was housed under standard laboratory conditions with food and water available ad libitum. All experiments were approved by the Ethical Research Committee of KU Leuven and were in strict accordance with the European Communities Council Directive of 22 September 2010 (2010/63/EU). From the whole mouse brain, the striatum was carefully dissected under the light microscope. The striatum was added to 200 L of methanol: water: acetic acid (90:9:1) and the solution was manually stirred on a vortex mixer for 15 min. Afterwards, the sample was centrifuged at 16,000 g for 5 min to collect the supernatant containing the peptides. The pellet was discarded. Next, the sample was vacuum dried to remove the methanol (Chemie Brunschwig AG, biosolve X). 20 L of water (Chemie Brunschwig AG, biosolve: 232141B1) with 0.1% formic acid (Thermo, Pierce: 85178) was added to the dried sample and stirred on a vortex mixer thoroughly for another 5 min .  Pre-fractionation. 13 L of sample was injected into the UPLC reverse phase system (Acquity, waters vt ltd). Peptides were separated in C18 Column ( XBridge Peptide BEH, 130Å, 5 μm, 2.1 mm x 50 mm, waters: 186003574). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1.5 mL/min using a 14 min linear gradient as follows: 0−9.5 min, 60% MP B; 9.5−10 min, 98% MP B. mobile phase A (MP A) : 98% H2O, 2% acetonitrile (Chemie Brunschwig AG, biosolve 120410) and 0.1% formic acid, mobile phase B (MP B) : 98% acetonitrile, 2% H2O and 0.1% formic acid) but with pH adjusted to 2 by the addition of formic acid. Eluate was collected in 20 fractions. The collected fractions were vacuum dried and each fraction is resuspended in 25 L of 98% H2O : acetonitrile : formic acid (98:2:0.1) solution. Two biological replications were used.   LC-MS. All the fractions from the two replicates were analyzed on a hybrid quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive plus, ThermoFisher Scientific, Massachusetts, United States) combined with EASY-nLC 1200 system (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, United States). The sample (Approx. 1 µg) was separated using a Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 Analytical column (1.7 m C18 silica beads, 130 A pores, 15 cm length, 50 µm diameter, Thermo Scientific). The peptides were eluted using a segmented linear gradient of 60 min. Separation started with a linear gradient of 100% MP A, 0 % MP B. using a flow rate of 300 nl min-1. The gradient profile was: 0−45 min, 45% MP B; 45−50 min, 100 %MP B; 50−60 min, 100 % MP B. mobile phase A (MP A):100% of water, and 0.1 % formic acid and mobile phase B (MP B): 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, (all Biosolve, Nl). Before each run the precolumn and analytical column was equilibrated with 6 µL and 3 µL of buffer A at a maximum pressure of 780 bar and 400 bar.  During elution, the three most abundant peaks from the full FTMS scan at mass range of 350 -1850 m/z (resolution 70,000) were chosen for HCD fragmentation (resolution 35,000) via data dependent approach, highest abundant peaks. The mass spectrometric experimental parameters were as follows:  Minimum signal threshold for the first and third most intensive ions - 20000 counts, isolation width - 1.7 (m/z); maximum accumulation time - 200 ms, normalized collision energy - 30%, dynamic exclusion time of 20 s, maximum injection time is 200 ms. After every third LC−MS sample analysis, a blank run was performed to remove the remaining peptides and contaminants present in the column. After every sixth sample analysis, 25 fmoL of Bovine serum albumin (BSA) was injected as a quality control measure.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification. The peptide identification was carried out using proteome discoverer (version 2.1 platform, ThermoFisher scientific, Massachusetts, United states) and PEAKS Studio (version 7.0, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc). Prior to database searching, the 40 raw files were merged in two files (two replicates). Data analysis was performed using the three approaches described below. In a first approach, data analysis was performed in PEAKS studio. Here, prior to the database search, the input data was refined by peak centroiding, desiotoping, spectral merging and charge state deconvolution of fragment ions. Once refined, the data was searched against  a concatenated database containing i) all the predicted Mus Musculus SEP sequences from ribosome profiling data covering actively translated sORFs extracted from the www.sORFs.org mouse database, ii) Mus Musculus Uniprot reference proteome downloaded on 2017-03-01 and iii) the contaminant database [2017-03-01] with precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. No cleavage enzyme was specified. The instrument setting was set to ‘orbi-orbi’ (orbitrap was used for both precursor and fragment ion m/z detection).  A false discovery rate of 1% was used. Seven variable modifications were used in our database search (oxidation of methionine, C-terminal amidation of peptides, N-terminal acetylation of protein, pyro-glu formation from glutamine and glutamic acid at N terminus, acetylation of lysine, phosphorylation of tyrosine, threonine and serine.   A second approach was conducted using the proteome discoverer platform. In this approach, the precursor ions between mass range of 500 to 10000 Da were selected for the database search. This search was conducted on deconvoluted data, exported from PEAKS studio. The precursor ion mass and charge in PEAKS deconvoluted data was adjusted from m/z, z =n to MH+, z=1. The database search was performed with Mascot (Version 2.1, Matrix science Pvt Ltd) and Sequest HT (University of Washington, USA). The spectra were searched against the same concatenated database mentioned in the first approach. Database searches were conducted with a mass tolerance of precursor and fragment ions set at respectively 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. No enzyme was specified for cleavage. The instrument was defined as FT-ICR. Variable PTMs, including N-terminal acetylation of protein, N-terminal pyro-glutamic acid formation from glutamine, C-terminal amidation of peptide and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. A global false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 1%.  The third approach is similar to the second one but the original raw data was used for the database search, i.e. no charge deconvolution was applied. The same rationale (three approaches) as above were used to identify neuropeptides where the publicly available neuropeptide database for Mus Musculus was searched: Neuropep (database version 1.0, 2014-11-26, isyslab.info, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China).  Peptide validation and interpretation. After the searches, all the resulting identified peptides were verified based on their matching spectrum and presence of ion series. Only peptides with a decent sequence coverage (sufficient number of matched ions) were considered as confident identifications. In the case of SEPs, the peptides were subjected to an additional verification based on the BLASTp algorithm checking sequence uniqueness. Furthermore, the MS2PIP tool was used to predict fragment ion peak intensities. In MS2PIP, ion signal intensities are generated using a random forest regression learning algorithm. In this step, the fragmentation patterns of identified peptides were matched to MS2PIP predicted fragment ion signal intensities. The peptide is considered to be valid only if the intensity of the relatively high intense ions matched with MS2PIP generated fragmentation ion signal intensities.  The MS2PIP validated SEPs were additionally evaluated using the sORFs.org repository (www.sORFs.org) gathering several metrics to assess coding potential of sORF translation products (e.g. RIBO-seq derived scores, phylogenetic conservation).  Only identifications that pass all these parameters: (i) manual inspection, (ii) BLASTp analysis of sequence tags, (iii) MS2PIP validation, (iv) sORF analysis using www.sorfs.org are considered as confident.

### Publication Abstract
Bio-active peptides are involved in the regulation of most physiological processes in the body. Classical bio-active peptides (CBAPs) are cleaved from a larger precursor protein and stored in secretion vesicles from which they are released in the extracellular space. Recently, another non-classical type of bio-active peptides (NCBAPs) has gained interest. These typically are not secreted but instead appear to be translated from short open reading frames (sORF) and released directly into the cytoplasm. In contrast to CBAPs, these peptides are involved in the regulation of intra-cellular processes such as transcriptional control, calcium handling and DNA repair. However, bio-chemical evidence for the translation of sORFs remains elusive. Comprehensive analysis of sORF-encoded polypeptides (SEPs) is hampered by a number of methodological and biological challenges: the low molecular mass (many 4-10&#xa0;kDa), the low abundance, transient expression and complications in data analysis. We developed a strategy to address a number of these issues. Our strategy is to exclude false positive identifications. In total sample, we identified 926 peptides originated from 37 known (neuro)peptide precursors in mouse striatum. In addition, four SEPs were identified including NoBody, a SEP that was previously discovered in humans and three novel SEPS from 5' untranslated transcript regions (UTRs).

### Keywords
Seps, Sorf, Bio-active peptides, Neuropeptides, 5’utr, Peptidomic approach, Ribosome profiling

### Affiliations
University of Antwerp

### Submitter
Harshavardhan Budamgunta

### Lab Head
Dr Geert Baggerman
University of Antwerp


