### Accession
PXD018446

### Title
Isolation and Characterization of small EVs from CHO-K1 cell cultures

### Description
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells are widely used host cells for recombinant protein production and currently the most commonly utilized mammalian organism in large scale biopharmaceutical production. Since the discovery of exosomes as a new type of small extracellular vesicles (EVs) by Johnstone et al., interest in EV research greatly increased in recent years. However, they yet pose a blank space in CHO  research. Exosomes are 30 – 150 nm small vesicles, that derive from the endosomal network and can therefore be distinguished from plasma membrane-shed microvesicles (100 – 1000 nm in diameter) and apoptotic vesicles (50 – 5000 nm), which are secluded over the course of programmed cell death. It turned out exosomes are not only vehicles of cellular waste disposal, as was initially assumed, but also a conserved mechanism of cellular communication.  This work aims to outline possible separation techniques followed by a differential proteomic and transcriptomic characterization of CHO EVs over the course of a bioreactor batch cultivation. Therefore, a protocol yielding sEVs with a strong exosomal marker enrichment is compared with HCP, lEVs and whole cell lysate (WCL) from the same batch process. This may allow for further studies in this field to have reference data for evaluation of exosome isolation techniques, separation purity and CHO EV composition in general.

### Sample Protocol
Exosome isolation via ultracentrifugation, referred to as UC, was performed modified after Théry et al. 2006. Culture broth was centrifuged 5 min at 500 x g and 30 min at 2,000 x g thereafter, transferring the respective supernatant. After filtering the supernatant with 0.22 µm minisart filters (Sartorius; Göttingen, Germany), it was concentrated up to 50 X in Vivaspin 20, 100 kDa MWCO centrifugation tubes (Sartorius; Göttingen, Germany). The concentrate was inserted for a two-step ultracentrifugation at 100,000 x g for 70 min, washing the exosome-pellet with 1 ml PBS with 1 mM PMSF. The resulting pellet was taken up in pre-filtered PBS with 1 mM PMSF. For AFM application the exosomes were taken up in TE-buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA) with 1 mM PMSF instead.  For the growth phase experiment, microvesicles were sedimented at 20,000 x g for 30 min prior to 0.22 µm filtration and washed once. The pellet was taken up in 100 µl PBS with 1 mM PMSF. Host cell protein was concentrated from the 100 kDa MWCO flow through in 3 kDa MWCO centrifugation tubes (Sartorius; Göttingen, Germany) and precipitated twice with 90 % acetone. Cell samples for lysis and protein extraction were collected parallelly to the harvest for exosome isolation by taking off a volume that fits 107 cells and washing the cells twice for 5 min at 200 x g in cold PBS. The cell and EV pellets were stored at -80 °C until thawing. Cell pellets were resuspended in 200 µl ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.2, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, 0.1 % SDS, 1 % NP40 in MilliQ) by vortexing. EV pellets were added with 1 volume of 2 X lysis buffer instead. After 5 min on ice, the sample was treated 5 min with ultrasonic sound and stored on ice for 30 min, before being centrifuged at 16,200 x g and 4 °C for 30 min to remove debris. Prior to in-solution digestion, samples were desalted with 7 K MWCO Zeba™ Spin Desalting Columns (ThermoFisher Scientific; Waltham MA, USA). The desalted samples were reduced with 7 mM DTT 30 min at 60 °C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 30 min in the dark at RT. Reaction stop was induced by the incubation of 14 mM DTT for 45 min. Digestion of 20 µg protein took place overnight with 10 ng Trypsin Gold (Promega; Madison WI, USA) per 1.5 µg protein at pH 8.5. Samples were then purified with Sep-Pak® C18 Cartridges (Waters; Milford MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The peptide extract was dried out in the vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 2.5 % ACN/0.1 % TFA in LiChrosolv®. Samples were measured with a NanoDrop™ spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher Scientific; Waltham MA, USA) to determine peptide concentration and subsequently stored in screw vials at -20 °C until measurement. Liquid chromatography was conducted with 2 µg peptides on a Pepmap™ 100 C18 trap column (Thermo Scientific; Waltham MA, USA) and a Pepmap™ C18 separation column (2 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Thermo Scientific; Waltham MA, USA) at 300 nl min-1 flowrate. For elution, an increasing 60 min ACN gradient peaking at 76 % ACN (v/v) was applied. MS/MS measurements were performed with a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap MS (Thermo Scientific; Waltham MA, USA) in positive mode and a range between m/z 350 to 1,600 with data-dependent acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were matched against TrEMBL DB for Cricetulus griseus and Mus musculus via MaxQuant 1.6.10.43. Peptides with max. two missed cleavages, a length between 6 and 150 amino acids, 4.5 ppm precursor and 20 ppm fragment mass tolerance with max. three equal modifications. Oxidation (M, +15.995 Da) and acetylation (N-terminus, +42.011 Da), were specified as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation (C, +57.021 Da) was set as static modification. The GO enrichment analysis was performed with DAVID.43,44 Other statistical tests were calculated via Perseus 1.6.10.45,42 with log2-transformed LFQ-intensities. Two-sided students t-tests were done with a FDR-threshold of 0.05 and S0 of 0.1. For principal component analysis, only proteins with > 70 % valid values were considered.

### Publication Abstract
In biopharmaceutical production, Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells derived from Cricetulus griseus remain the most commonly used host cell for recombinant protein production, especially antibodies. Over the last decade, in-depth multi-omics characterization of these CHO cells provided data for extensive cell line engineering and corresponding increases in productivity. However, exosomes, extracellular vesicles containing proteins and nucleic acids, are barely researched at all in CHO cells. Exosomes have been proven to be a ubiquitous mediator of intercellular communication and are proposed as new biopharmaceutical format for drug delivery, indicator reflecting host cell condition and anti-apoptotic factor in spent media. Here we provide a brief overview of different separation techniques and subsequently perform a proteome and regulatory, non-coding RNA analysis of exosomes, derived from lab-scale bioreactor cultivations of a CHO-K1 cell line, to lay out reference data for further research in the field. Applying bottom-up orbitrap shotgun proteomics and next-generation small RNA sequencing, we detected 1395 proteins, 144 micro RNA (miRNA), and 914 PIWI-interacting RNA (piRNA) species differentially across the phases of a batch cultivation process. The exosomal proteome and RNA data are compared with other extracellular fractions and cell lysate, yielding several significantly exosome-enriched species. Graphical Abstract KEY POINTS: &#x2022; First-time comprehensive protein and miRNA characterization of CHO exosomes. &#x2022; Isolation protocol and time point of bioprocess strongly affect quality of extracellular vesicles. &#x2022; CHO-derived exosomes also contain numerous piRNA species of yet unknown function.

### Keywords
Cell culture, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Cho, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Bielefeld University
Cell Culture Technology, Technical Faculty, Bielefeld University, Germany

### Submitter
Louise Schelletter

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Noll
Cell Culture Technology, Technical Faculty, Bielefeld University, Germany


