### Accession
PXD039128

### Title
Proteomes of acrosomes and acrosome-reacted sperm of the house mouse

### Description
Using label-free nano-scale liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS2) proteomics, we provide proteomes of the acrosomes and acrosome-reacted sperm isolated from cauda epididymis of free-living house mice Mus musculus musculus. Among all proteins, 334 proteins were significantly enriched in the acrosome thus representing 27.3% of the whole proteome of the intact sperm. Importantly, we have detected a total of nine calycins while eight of them belong to the lipocalin protein family. Column names in resulting tables are tagged as S1-S10 (supernatants) and represent acrosomal content (A1-A10 in Table S1) while samples P1-P10 are pellets and represent arcosome reacted sperm (S1-S10 in Table S1).

### Sample Protocol
Samples were further processed using SP3 beads according to Hughes et al. Briefly, 5 µl of SP3 beads was added to 30 µg of protein in lysis buffer and filled to 50 µl with 100mM TEAB. Protein binding was induced by addition of ethanol to 60 % (vol./vol.) final concentration. Samples were mixed and incubated for 5 min at RT. After binding, the tubes were placed into magnetic rack and the unbound superntatant was discarded. Beads were subsequently washed two times with 180 µl of 80% ethanol. After washing, samples were digested with trypsine (trypsin/protein ration 1/30) reconstituted in 100mM TEAB at 37°C overnight. After digestion samples were acidified with TFA to 1% final concentration and peptides were desalted using in-house made stage tips packed with C18 disks (Empore) according to Rappsilber et al.

### Data Protocol
All data were analyzed and quantified with the MaxQuant software (version 2.0.2.0). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides and we specified a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against the Mus musculus database (downloaded from Uniprot on August 2020, containing 16 819 entries). Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification and N- terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The “match between runs” feature of MaxQuant was used to transfer identifications to other LC-MS/MS runs based on their masses and retention time (maximum deviation 0.7 min) and this was also used in quantification experiments. Quantifications were performed with the label-free algorithm in MaxQuant (Cox et al. 2014). Data analysis was performed using Perseus 1.6.15.0 software.

### Publication Abstract
The acrosome located within the mammalian sperm head is essential for successful fertilization, as it enables the sperm to penetrate the extracellular layers of the oocyte and fuse with oolemma. However, the mammalian acrosomal vesicle is no longer considered to contain only hydrolytic enzymes. Using label-free nano-scale liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) proteomics, we identified a total of 885 proteins in the acrosome isolated from spermatozoa obtained from cauda epididymis of free-living house mice Mus musculus musculus contains a total of 885 proteins. Among these, 334 proteins were significantly enriched in the acrosome thus representing 27.3% of the whole proteome of the intact sperm. Importantly, we have detected a total of nine calycins while eight of them belong to the lipocalin protein family. In mice, lipocalins are involved in multi-level chemical communication between individuals including pheromone transport and odor perception. Using an indirect immunofluorescence assay, we demonstrated that lipocalin 5 (LCN5) is expressed in the mouse germ cells, and after completing spermatogenesis, it remains localized in the sperm acrosome until the last step of the extratesticular maturation, the acrosome reaction. The presence of lipocalins in the acrosome and acrosome-reacted sperm suggests their original role as chelators of organic and potentially toxic compounds resulting from ongoing spermiogenesis. Along with this evidence, detected mitochondrial (e.g., a subunit of the cytochrome c oxidase MTCO1) and proteasomal proteins (subunits of both 20&#xa0;S core proteasome [PSMA2, PSMBs] and 19&#xa0;S regulatory particle [PSMDs]) in acrosomes provide further evidence that acrosomes could also function as `waste baskets` after testicular sperm maturation.

### Keywords
Mus musculus, Label free, Acrosome

### Affiliations
BIOCEV group, Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Charles University in Prague, Průmyslová 595, 252 42 Vestec
Department of Zoology, Charles University, Prague

### Submitter
Pavel Stopka

### Lab Head
Dr Pavel Stopka
BIOCEV group, Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Charles University in Prague, Průmyslová 595, 252 42 Vestec


