### Accession
PXD014483

### Title
ChromID reveals the proteome composition of key chromatin states in murine stem cells

### Description
Chromatin modifications instruct genome function through spatiotemporal recruitment of regulatory factors to the genome. However, how these modifications define the proteome composition at distinct chromatin states remains to be fully characterized. Here, we made use of natural protein domains as modular building blocks to develop engineered chromatin readers (eCRs) selective for histone and DNA modifications. By stably expressing eCRs in mouse embryonic stem cells and measuring their subnuclear localisation, genomicdistribution and histone-PTM-binding preference, we first demonstrate their applicability as selective chromatin binders in living cells. Finally, we exploit the binding specificity of eCRs to establish ChromID, a new method for chromatin-dependent proteome identification based on proximity biotinylation. We use ChromID to reveal the proteome at distinct chromatin states in mouse stem cells, and by using a synthetic dual-modification reader, we furthermore uncover the protein composition at bivalent promoters marked by H3K4me3 and H3K27me3. These results highlight the applicability of ChromID as novel method to obtaina detailed view of the protein interaction network determined by the chemical language on chromatin.

### Sample Protocol
High stringency washes and on-bead digestion for ChromID After incubation of nuclear lysates with beads rotating at 4°C overnight, beads were separated from the unbound fraction on a magnetic rack and washed twice with 2% SDS in TE (+ 1mM DTT, 1x PIC) for 10 minutes rotating overhead at room temperature (RT), once with high salt buffer (HSB; 50mM HEPES pH 7.5, 1mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 500mM NaCl, 1mM DTT, and 1x PIC) for 10 minutes at RT, once with DOC buffer (250mM LiCl, 10mM Tris pH 8.0, 0.5% NP40, 0.5% deoxycholate, 1mM EDTA, 1mM DTT, and 1x PIC) for 10 minutes at 4°C, and twice with TE buffer (+ 1mM DTT, 1x PIC) for 10 minutes at 4°C. After the washes, beads were isolated from the last TE wash on a magnetic rack and the proteins were pre-digested with 5μg/ml trypsin (Promega; V5111) in 40ul digestion buffer (1M Urea in 50mM Tris pH 8.0, 1mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphin (TCEP)) directly on beads, for 2.5 hours at 26°C and shaking at 600 rpm. The pre-digested protein-peptide mix was isolated from beads and reduced with 2mM TCEP for 45 minutes at RT, and then alkylated with 10mM Chloroacetamide (ClAA) for 30min at RT in the dark. Finally, proteins were fully digested with additional 0.5μg trypsin overnight at 37°C. The digestion was stopped the next day by acidifying the peptides with Trifluoracetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5%, and the Acetonitrile (ACN) concentration was adjusted to 3% prior loading on C18 StageTips.  Mass spectrometry We used an Easy-nLC 1000 HPLC system operating in trap / elute mode (trap column: Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 3um, 100A, 0.075x20mm; separation column: EASY-Spray C18, C18, 2um, 100A, 0.075x500mm, Temp: 50°C) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Trap and separation column were equilibrated with 12 ul and 6 ul solvent A (0.1 % FA in water), respectively. 2 µl of the resuspended sample solution was injected onto the trap column at constant pressure (500 bar) and peptides were eluted with a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min using the following gradient: 2 % - 25 % B (0.1 % FA in ACN) in 50 min, 25 % - 32 % B in 10 min an 32 % - 97 % B in 10 min. After 10 min of washing by 97 % B. High accuracy mass spectra were acquired with an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using the following parameter: scan range of 300-1500 m/z, AGC-target of 4e5, resolution of 120’000 (at m/z 200), and a maximum injection time of 50 ms . Data-dependent MS/MS spectra were recorded in top speed mode in the linear ion trap using quadrupole isolation (1.6 m/z window), AGC target of 1e4, 300 ms maximum injection time, HCD-fragmentation with 30 % collision energy, a maximum cycle time of 3 sec, and all available parallelizable time was enabled. Mono isotopic precursor signals were selected for MS/MS with charge states between 2 and 7 and a minimum signal intensity of 5e3. Dynamic exclusion was set to 25 sec and an exclusion window of 10 ppm. After data collection, the peak lists were generated using automated rule based converter control (Barkow-Oesterreicher, S., Turker, C. & Panse, C. FCC - An automated rule-based processing tool for life science data. Source code for biology and medicine 8, 3, doi:10.1186/1751-0473-8-3 (2013)) and Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label-free protein quantification  Protein identification and label-free quantification was done with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) and label-free quantification (LFQ) (Cox et al., 2014). The mouse reference proteome (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot and UniProtKB/TrEMBL) version 2018_12 combined with manually annotated contaminant proteins was searched with protein and peptide FDR values set to 0.01. All MaxQuant parameters can be found in the uploaded parameterfile: mqpar.xml (deposited in the PRIDE repository). Perseus (versions 1.6.1.1) was used for statistical analysis (Tyanova et al., 2016). Results were filtered to remove reverse hits and proteins only identified by site. Further, only proteins found in at least 3 replicates were kept. Missing values were imputed from a 1.8 standard deviations left-shifted Gaussian distribution with a width of 0.3 (relative to the standard deviation of measured values). Potential interactors were determined using a t-test and visualised by a volcano plot. Significance lines have been determined by a permutation-based method (Tusher et al., 2001) with an FDR value of 0.01 and S0 values (curve bend) of 0.1 to 1 (details shown in volcano plots). Obtained results were exported and further visualised using the statistical computer language R (version 3.5.2).

### Publication Abstract
Chromatin modifications regulate genome function by recruiting proteins to the genome. However, the protein composition at distinct chromatin modifications has yet to be fully characterized. In this study, we used natural protein domains as modular building blocks to develop engineered chromatin readers (eCRs) selective for DNA methylation and histone tri-methylation at H3K4, H3K9 and H3K27 residues. We first demonstrated their utility as selective chromatin binders in living cells by stably expressing eCRs in mouse embryonic stem cells and measuring their subnuclear localization, genomic distribution and histone-modification-binding preference. By fusing eCRs to the biotin ligase BASU, we established ChromID, a method for identifying the chromatin-dependent protein interactome on the basis of proximity biotinylation, and applied it to distinct chromatin modifications in mouse stem cells. Using a synthetic dual-modification reader, we also uncovered the protein composition at bivalently modified promoters marked by H3K4me3 and H3K27me3. These results highlight the ability of ChromID to obtain a detailed view of protein interaction networks on chromatin.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Systems biology, Epigenetics, Chromatin proteomics, Synthetic biology

### Affiliations
SNF Professor - Principal Investigator  Systems Biology of Gene Regulation University of Zurich  Campus Irchel  Winterthurerstrasse 190  CH-8057 Zurich  Switzerland
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Tuncay Baubec

### Lab Head
Dr Tuncay Baubec
SNF Professor - Principal Investigator  Systems Biology of Gene Regulation University of Zurich  Campus Irchel  Winterthurerstrasse 190  CH-8057 Zurich  Switzerland


