### Accession
PXD035281

### Title
Nuclear proteomics of induced granulocytic differentiation

### Description
The nuclear proteome harbors a sheer number of regulatory proteins, including transcription factors (TFs). Profiling of nuclear proteome during all-trans-retinoid acid(ATRA)-induced differentiation of HL60 cells allows to unveil molecular mechanisms of granulocytic maturation. It is especially important to have an understanding of molecular perturbations at the early stages of the differentiation process. Applying proteomic profiling using isobaric labeling coupled with alkaline fractionation (TMT/2D) we identified 1860 nuclear proteins with high confidence (FDR<0.01, at least 2 unique peptides per protein). Among them 136, 226, 280, 312 and 241 proteins were found to be altered at 3, 6, 9, 12, and 72 h in HL60 cell nuclear fraction under ATRA treatment.

### Sample Protocol
The HL-60 human promyelocytic leukemia cells (obtained from Collection of cell cultures of vertebrates ((SPBIC), Sankt-Peterburg, Russia) were grown in RPMI-1640 medium upplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 U/mL penicillin, 100 U/mL streptomycin and 2 mM L-glutamine (all Gibco™, Paisley, UK) in a CO2 incubator under standard conditions (37 C, 5% CO2, 80% humidity). HL60 cells were treated with 10 µmM of ATRA and control HL-60 cells were treated with an equal volume of the solvent (vehicle control).  For proteomic profiling HL60 cells have been harvested at 0, 3, 6, 9, 12, and 72 h after ATRA treatment. Nuclear fraction proteins were isolated by chemical extraction. The sample protein concentration was measured using a Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). Tryptic digestion of proteins was carried out according to FASP Protocol (Filter-Aided Sample Preparation) using concentration filters with a cut-off of 30 kDa (Merck Millipore Limited, Tullagree, Ireland). “Trypsin to total protein” ratio of 1:70 was applied for tryptic digestion. The peptide concentration was determined by the colorimetric method using a Pierce. Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. The peptides were dried and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid to a final concentration of 3 µg/µL. To check sample loading prior TMT-labeling the resultant samples were analyzed by high mass spectrometry. For TMT-labeling, 15 μg peptides of each sample (pre-dried in vacuum concentrator) were reconstituted in 100 mM TEAB (pH 8.5) to a concentration of 0.2 μg/μL. TMT-10 reagent (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA, cat# 90406) were resuspended in anhydrous ACN to a concentration of 19.5 μg/μL. The appropriate TMT reagent was added to each sample at 1:35 reagent/peptide (wt/wt), and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. To quench the reaction, 5 % hydroxylamine was added and samples we incubate for 15 minutes at room temperature. Labeled samples that corresponded to time points (0, 3, 6, 9, 12, and 72 h) were combined within each biological replicate, resulting in 3 samples for MS/MS analysis. Pooled three samples was dried via vacuum centrifugation, and desalted using a C18 Stage-Tip method. The peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid to a final concentration of 3 µg/µL. The peptides fractionation was carried out on Agilent 1200 Series HPLC system, which consists of degasser, dual micro flow pump, autosampler, UV-detector, fraction collector, column compartment. One hundred µg of peptides in a volume of 20 µl were loaded onto the C18- XBridge, Waters (4.6 × 250 mm, 5 µm pore size, Waters, Ireland) at a flow rate of 0.75 ml/min for 3 min in an isocratic mode of Mobile Phase A (15 mM ammonia acetate in HPLC grade water, pH 9.0). Then the peptides were eluted with a gradient of Mobile Phase B (80% acetonitrile, 15 mM ammonia acetate in HPLC grade water, pH 9.0) at a flow rate of 0.75 ml/min. Fraction collection started at the 3rd minute and ended at the 23rd minute. One fraction volume was 1.5 ml, the fraction collector was running in time slices mode. It started to collect a new fraction every 2 minutes. Overall 10 fractions were collected in one duty cycle. The peptide samples obtained were analyzed using the UltiMate 3000 HPLC (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) connected to Q Exactive HF-X Quadrupole-Orbitrap, equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptide separations were carried out on a RP-HPLC Zorbax 300SBC18 column (C18 3.5 µm, 75 µm inner diameter and 150 mm length, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) using a linear gradient from 98% solvent A (water, 0.1% formic acid) and 2% solvent B (water, 0.1% formic acid, and 80% acetonitrile) to 30% solvent B over 78 min at a flow rate of 0.4 µL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in the positive ion mode using Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 120,000 (m/z = 400) for MS and 60,000 (m/z = 400) for MS/MS scans. The AGC target was set at 1  1E+06 and 1  1E+05 with maximum ion injection time 50 ms and 100 ms for MS and MS/MS, respectively. Survey MS scan was followed by MS/MS spectra for ten the most abundant precursors. The higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was used, and normalized collision energy was set to 32 eV. Signal threshold was set to 5 1E+05 for an isolation window of 2 m/z. The precursors fragmented were dynamically excluded from targeting with repeat count 1, repeat duration 10 s, and exclusion duration 40 s. Singly charged ions and those with not defined charge state were excluded from triggering the MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
For identification and TMT-based quantification, mass spectrometry data were loaded into the MaxQuant software (version 2.0.3.0, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). Proteins were identified using the built-in Andromeda algorithm. Identification was carried out using the FASTA file (UP000005640, UniProt Release 2022_02, 20,598 proteins, EMBL-EBI, Hinxton Cambridge, UK) and its inverted counterpart to calculate the frequency of false positive identifications (FDR), alongside a built-in database of potential contaminants. The carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were used for variable modification. Trypsin was selected as protease, and two missed cleavages were allowed. The tolerance for the precursor and fragment ions was 20 ppm. For proteins and peptides, the FDR threshold value was 0.01. Quantitative analysis was carried out on the basis of the reporter ion (MS2) intensity value performed using the algorithm built into MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.0, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). All working channels were assigned as reference and used for weighted median normalization. Matching between runs (MBR) function have been applied.  Summed signal for all proteins in each TMT channel was calculated, and TMT channel with the highest summed signal was determent. Normalization factors that represent the ratio of highest summed signal to summed signal of each TMT channel were calculated. Sample loading were corrected through multiplication of reporter ion intensity for each protein by TMT channel-specific normalization factor.

### Publication Abstract
Studies of induced granulocytic differentiation help to reveal molecular mechanisms of cell maturation. The nuclear proteome represents a rich source of regulatory molecules, including transcription factors (TFs). It is important to have an understanding of molecular perturbations at the early stages of the differentiation processes. By applying the proteomic quantitative profiling using isobaric labeling, we found that the contents of 214, 319, 376, 426, and 391 proteins were altered at 3, 6, 9, 12, and 72 h, respectively, compared to 0 h in the HL-60 cell nuclear fraction under all-<i>trans</i>-retinoid acid (ATRA) treatment. From 1860 identified nuclear proteins, 231 proteins were annotated as proteins with transcription factor (TF) activity. Six TFs (RREB1, SRCAP, CCDC124, TRIM24, BRD7, and BUD31) were downregulated and three TFs EWSR1, ENO1, and FUS were upregulated at early time points (3-12 h) after ATRA treatment. Bioinformatic annotation indicates involvement of the HL-60 nuclear proteome in DNA damage recognition in the RUNX1-triggered pathway, and in the p53-regulation pathway. By applying scheduled multiple reaction monitoring using stable isotopically labeled peptide standards (MRM/SIS), we found a persistent increase in the content of the following proteins: PRAM1, CEPBP, RBPJ, and HIC1 in the HL-60 cell nuclear fraction during ATRA-induced granulocytic differentiation. In the case of STAT1, CASP3, PARP1, and PRKDC proteins, a transient increase in their content was observed at early time points (3-12 h) after the ATRA treatment. Obtained data on nuclear proteome composition and dynamics during granulocytic differentiation could be beneficial for the development of new treatment approaches for leukemias with the mutated <i>p53</i> gene.

### Keywords
Proteome, Tmt, Hl60, Atra, Nuclei

### Affiliations
Laboratory of systems biology,Institute of biomedical chemistry (IBMC), Moscow, Russia
Institute of Biomedical Bhemistry (IBMC), Moscow

### Submitter
Svetlana Novikova

### Lab Head
Dr Victor Zgoda
Laboratory of systems biology,Institute of biomedical chemistry (IBMC), Moscow, Russia


