### Accession
PXD040491

### Title
HEK293 WT and TOM70 KD cell lines expressing HA-tagged Orf9b grown on glucose media

### Description
Comparison of whole cell proteome of HEK293 WT and TOM70 KD cell lines expressing HA-tagged Orf9b grown on glucose media.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were analyzed by the CECAD proteomics facility on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC (both Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm, 75 µm inner diameter, filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: 3-5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 5-30% solvent B within 121.0 min, 30-40% solvent B within 19.0 min, 40-95% solvent B within 1.0 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 55 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 25.0 s.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 2.0.3.0) using default parameters against the Uniprot canonical Human database (UP5640, downloaded 20.01.2022) with the match-between-runs option enabled between replicates. Follow-up analysis was done in Perseus 1.6.15 . Hits from the decoy database, the contaminant list and those only identified by modified peptides were removed. Afterwards, results were filtered for data completeness in replicates groups and LFQ values imputed using sigma downshift with standard settings. Finally, FDR-controlled T-tests between sample groups were performed with s0 = 0.2.

### Publication Abstract
The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) expresses high amounts of the protein Orf9b to target the mitochondrial outer membrane protein Tom70. Tom70 serves as an import receptor for mitochondrial precursors and, independently of this function, is critical for the cellular antiviral response. Previous studies suggested that Orf9b interferes with Tom70-mediated antiviral signaling, but its implication for mitochondrial biogenesis is unknown. In this study, we expressed Orf9b in human HEK293 cells and observed an Orf9b-mediated depletion of mitochondrial proteins, particularly in respiring cells. To exclude that the observed depletion was caused by the antiviral response, we generated a yeast system in which the function of human Tom70 could be recapitulated. Upon expression of Orf9b in these cells, we again observed a specific decline of a subset of mitochondrial proteins and a general reduction of mitochondrial volume. Thus, the SARS-CoV-2 virus is able to modulate the mitochondrial proteome by a direct effect of Orf9b on mitochondrial Tom70-dependent protein import.

### Keywords
Orf9b, Tom70, Glucose

### Affiliations
Institute for Biochemistry, University of Cologne
CECAD Research Center

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Riemer
Institute for Biochemistry, University of Cologne


