### Accession
PXD016315

### Title
The beta subunit of nascent polypeptide associated complex plays a role in flowers and siliques development of Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
The nascent polypeptide-associated (NAC) complex was described in yeast as a heterodimer composed of two subunits, α and β, and was shown to bind to the nascent polypeptides newly emerging from the ribosome. Although NAC function was widely described in yeast, less is known about its role in plants. The knock down of individual NAC subunit(s) led usually to a higher sensitivity to stress. In Arabidopsis thaliana genome, there are five genes coding for NACα subunit, and two genes coding for NACβ. Double homozygous mutant in both genes coding for NACβ was acquired, which showed a delayed development compared to the wild type, had abnormal number of flower organs, shorter siliques and greatly reduced seed set. Herein, both NACβ genes were characterized by complementation analysis, overexpression, subcellular localization, and promoter analysis. Since flowers were the most affected organs by nacβ mutation, the flower buds transcriptome was identified by RNA sequencing, and their proteome by gel-free approach. The differential expression analyses of transcriptomic and proteomic datasets suggest the involvement of NACβ subunits in stress responses and male gametophyte development.

### Sample Protocol
The total proteins were extracted from the harvested A. thaliana young flower buds (up to stage 12) of double NACβ homozygous mutant (nacβ1nacβ2) and control wild type Col-0 plants (genotype NACβ1NACβ2) by TRI-reagent (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions with slight modifications (Fíla, Čapková, Feciková & Honys, 2011). Briefly, 45 mg flower buds were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and then homogenized by a pestle in a mortar. To the grinded plant material, TRI reagent was added step-wise per 200 µl to achieve a final volume of 1 ml to extract the proteins. Then, 200 µl chloroform was added and the sample was let on ice for 15 min. After centrifugation (20,000×g, 20 min, 4°C), the lower phase was mixed with 300 µl ethanol. After another round of centrifugation (2,000×g, 5 min, 4°C), the supernatant was mixed with 1.5 volumes isopropanol and the proteins were let precipitate at room temperature for 1 h. The proteins were pelleted (20,000×g, 20 min, 15°C), washed 3 times with 1 ml cold ethanol and centrifuged again (20,000×g, 20 min, 4°C). The final protein pellet was vacuum dried and stored at -20°C until further use. Dried pellets were solubilized using SDT buffer (4% SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.6) and protein concentration measured by native tryptophan fluorescence. Fifty micrograms of proteins were used for filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method according to Wiśniewski, Ostasiewicz & Mann (2011) with some modifications. The samples were mixed with 8M UA buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5), loaded onto the Microcon device with MWCO 30 kDa (Merck Millipore) and centrifuged (7,000× g, 30 min, 20°C). The retained proteins were washed (all centrifugation steps after sample loading were performed at 14,000×g) with 200 μL UA buffer. The washed protein concentrates kept in the Microcon device were mixed with 100 μL of UA buffer containing 50 mM iodoacetamide and incubated in the dark for 20 min. After the next centrifugation step, the samples were washed three times with 100 μL UA buffer and three times with 100 μL of 50 mM NaHCO3. Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) was added onto the filter and the mixture was incubated for 18 h at 37°C (enzyme:protein ratio 1:50). The tryptic peptides were eluted by centrifugation followed by two additional elutions with 50 μL of 50mM NaHCO3. Peptides were extracted into LC-MS vials by 2.5% formic acid (FA) in 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and 100% ACN with addition of polyethylene glycol (20,000; final concentration 0.001%; Stejskal, Potěšil & Zdráhal, 2013) and concentrated in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific) prior LC-MS/MS analyses. LC-MS/MS analyses of all peptide mixtures were done using RSLCnano system (SRD-3400, NCS-3500RS CAP, WPS-3000 TPL RS) connected to Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted using trapping column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18, dimensions 300 μm × 5 mm, 5 μm particles; part number 160454). After washing of trapping column with 0.1% FA, the peptides were eluted in backflush mode (flow 300 nl.min-1) from the trapping column onto an analytical column (Acclaim Pepmap100 C18, 3 µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) by 100 min gradient program (2-35% of mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN). Equilibration of the trapping column and the column was done prior to sample injection to sample loop. The analytical column outlet was directly connected to the Digital PicoView 550 (New Objective) ion source with sheath gas option and SilicaTip emitter (New Objective; FS360-20-15-N-20-C12) utilization. ABIRD (Active Background Ion Reduction Device, ESI Source Solutions) was installed. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy selecting up to top 20 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (350-2000 m/z). The resolution of the survey scan was 120 000 (200 m/z) with a target value of 3×106 ions and maximum injection time of 50 ms. HCD MS/MS (28% relative fragmentation energy) spectra were acquired with a target value of 10 000 and resolution of 15 000 (200 m/z). The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 40 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 1.2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The analysis of the mass spectrometric RAW data files was carried out using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.10) using default settings unless otherwise noted. MS/MS ion searches were done against modified cRAP database (based on http://www.thegpm.org/crap) containing protein contaminants like keratin, trypsin etc., and UniProtKB protein database for Arabidopsis thaliana (ftp://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/current_release/knowledgebase/reference_proteomes/Eukaryota/UP000006548_3702.fasta.gz; downloaded 8.7.2019, version 2019/07, number of protein sequences 27,476). Oxidation of methionine and proline, deamidation (N, Q) and acetylation (protein N-terminus) as optional modification, carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification and trypsin/P enzyme with 2 allowed miss cleavages were set. Peptides and proteins with FDR threshold <0.01 and proteins having at least one unique or razor peptide were considered only. Match between runs was set among all analysed samples. Protein abundance was assessed using protein intensities calculated by MaxQuant. Protein intensities reported in proteinGroups.txt were further evaluated using the software container environment (https://github.com/OmicsWorkflows/KNIME_docker_vnc; version 3.7.2a). Processing workflow is available upon request and it covered decoy hits and contaminant protein groups removal, protein group intensities log2 transformation, normalization, missing values imputation (imp4p R package) and statistical analysis (LIMMA; p values adjustment using Benjamini and Hochberg approach). The final list of differently expressed proteins was made based on the following criteria: the fold change > 2, adjusted p value < 0.05; protein groups had to have at least 2 peptides and non-zero protein group intensity in at least 2 replicates of at least one sample.

### Publication Abstract
The nascent polypeptide-associated (NAC) complex was described in yeast as a heterodimer composed of two subunits, &#x3b1; and &#x3b2;, and was shown to bind to the nascent polypeptides newly emerging from the ribosomes. NAC function was widely described in yeast and several information are also available about its role in plants. The knock down of individual NAC subunit(s) led usually to a higher sensitivity to stress. In <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> genome, there are five genes encoding NAC&#x3b1; subunit, and two genes encoding NAC&#x3b2;. Double homozygous mutant in both genes coding for NAC&#x3b2; was acquired, which showed a delayed development compared to the wild type, had abnormal number of flower organs, shorter siliques and greatly reduced seed set. Both <i>NAC&#x3b2;</i> genes were characterized in more detail-the phenotype of the double homozygous mutant was complemented by a functional NAC&#x3b2; copy. Then, both <i>NAC&#x3b2;</i> genes were localized to nuclei and cytoplasm and their promoters were active in many organs (leaves, cauline leaves, flowers, pollen grains, and siliques together with seeds). Since flowers were the most affected organs by <i>nac&#x3b2;</i> mutation, the flower buds' transcriptome was identified by RNA sequencing, and their proteome by gel-free approach. The differential expression analyses of transcriptomic and proteomic datasets suggest the involvement of NAC&#x3b2; subunits in stress responses, male gametophyte development, and photosynthesis.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Flower bud transcriptome, Lc-msms, Flower bud proteome, Nascent polypeptide-associated complex, Male gametophyte, Small heat shock proteins, Stress response, Differential expression, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics
CEITEC-MU
Masaryk University
Brno, Czech Republic
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic

### Submitter
David Potesil

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic


