### Accession
PXD004747

### Title
Deubiquitinase activity is required for the degradation of misfolded cytosolic proteins upon heat-stress

### Description
Elimination of misfolded proteins is crucial for proteostasis and to prevent proteinopathies. Nedd4/Rsp5 emerged as a major E3 ligase involved in multiple quality control pathways that target misfolded plasma membrane proteins, aggregated polypeptides, and cytosolic heat-induced misfolded proteins for degradation. It remained unclear how in one case cytosolic heat-induced Rsp5 substrates are destined for proteasomal degradation, whereas other Rsp5 quality control substrates are otherwise directed to lysosomal degradation. Here we find that Ubp2 and Ubp3 deubiquitinases are required for the proteasomal degradation of cytosolic misfolded proteins targeted by Rsp5 after heat-shock. The two deubiquitinases associate more with Rsp5 upon heat stress to prevent the assembly of K63-linked ubiquitin on Rsp5 heat-induced substrates. This activity was required to promote the K48-mediated proteasomal degradation of Rsp5 heat-shock induced substrates. Our results indicate that ubiquitin chain editing is key to the cytosolic protein quality control under stress conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Samples for LC-MS/MS (Velos) analysis were GlyGly-peptide IP enriched ubiquitinated peptides from SILAC yeast lysates with or without heat-stress treatment, which were subjected to tryptic digestion in solution (standard protocol) prior to analysis using a LTQ-Obitrap Velos (ThermoFisher Scientific) on-line coupled to an Agilent 1100 Series nanoflow HPLC using a nanospray ionization source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Samples were run with a 120 or 180 min gradient. For SRM analysis, IMAC of His8-ubiquitin and HA-IP eluted samples were subjected to in-gel digestion. Gel bands, which were above 75kDa (poly-ubiquitination fraction) from each IMAC sample and were above the molecular weight of untagged substrate from each HA-IP sample, were cut out for further processing and trypsin digestion. Equally amount of ubiquitin AQUA peptides (2.5µl of 10pmol/µl 48GG, 63GG) were digested in 100mM Tris-HCl pH8.5 with 0.2µl of 0.2µg/µl trypsin at 37ºC overnight. Digested AQUA peptides were then mixed with in-gel digested samples prior to clean-up using C18 stage tips. SRM analysis was done using a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer G6460 (Agilent Technologies) on-line coupled to an Agilent 1200 Series HPLC using an Agilent ChipCube nanospray ionization source.  A large capacity protein chip (Agilent Technologies) 150mm 300 A C18 column with 160nl trap column (both with C18) was used. 34 min gradient method. The samples were loaded with an Agilent 1200 Cap Pump at 4μl/min and the analytes were eluted with a 1200 nano-pump at 300nl/min. The most abundant charge states of heavy and light versions of each peptide were determined empirically and used for SRM transition development as previously described and SRM transitions (fragmented ions) with the top 3 highest intensities were selected to monitor the parental ion. Peptides were monitored throughout the whole HPLC gradient.

### Data Protocol
Velos generated raw files were subjected to MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.0) for peptides ID searching against the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD-05Jan2012 with 6,147 protein sequences and 6,147 randomized sequences) and peptide quantification. For each data set, peptide ratios were normalized to the median protein ratios obtained from corresponding whole-cell lysate aliquots. Similar to previous studies, we removed peptides with a C-terminal diGly and considered peptides with log2 rations ≥ 1. For SRM data, peak integration was performed using MassHunter Quantitative Analysis software (Agilent Technologies, version B04.00, build 4.0.479.0), and area under the curve (AUC) was used to determine the abundance of each light peptide in the sample relative to its corresponding heavy internal standard.

### Publication Abstract
Elimination of misfolded proteins is crucial for proteostasis and to prevent proteinopathies. Nedd4/Rsp5 emerged as a major E3-ligase involved in multiple quality control pathways that target misfolded plasma membrane proteins, aggregated polypeptides and cytosolic heat-induced misfolded proteins for degradation. It remained unclear how in one case cytosolic heat-induced Rsp5 substrates are destined for proteasomal degradation, whereas other Rsp5 quality control substrates are otherwise directed to lysosomal degradation. Here we find that Ubp2 and Ubp3 deubiquitinases are required for the proteasomal degradation of cytosolic misfolded proteins targeted by Rsp5 after heat-shock (HS). The two deubiquitinases associate more with Rsp5 upon heat-stress to prevent the assembly of K63-linked ubiquitin on Rsp5 heat-induced substrates. This activity was required to promote the K48-mediated proteasomal degradation of Rsp5 HS-induced substrates. Our results indicate that ubiquitin chain editing is key to the cytosolic protein quality control under stress conditions.

### Keywords
Deubiquitinase, Cytosolic protein quality control, Heat stress

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Mayor Lab, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, 2125 East Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T1Z4, Canada
Centre for High Throughput Biology

### Submitter
Neng Fang

### Lab Head
Dr Thibault Mayor
Associate Professor, Mayor Lab, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, 2125 East Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T1Z4, Canada


