### Accession
PXD044471

### Title
HDAC8-mediated inhibition of EP300 drives a transcriptional state that increases melanoma brain metastasis

### Description
Melanomas are heterogeneous and adopt multiple transcriptional states that can confer an invasive phenotype and resistance to therapy. Little is known about the epigenetic drivers of these cell states, limiting our ability to regulate melanoma heterogeneity and tumor progression. Here we identify stress-induced HDAC8 activity as the driver of a transcriptional state that increased the formation of melanoma brain metastases (MBM). Exposure of melanocytes and melanoma cells to multiple different stresses led to HDAC8 activation, a switch to a gene expression signature associated with a neural crest-stem cell like state (NCSC) and the adoption of an amoeboid, invasive phenotype. This cell state enhanced the survival of melanoma cells under shear stress conditions and increased the formation of metastases in the brain. ATAC-Seq and ChIP-Seq analysis showed HDAC8 to alter chromatin structure by increasing H3K27ac and accessibility at c-Jun binding sites without changing global histone acetylation. The increased accessibility of Jun binding sites was paralleled by decreased H3K27ac and accessibility at MITF binding sites and loss of melanoma-lineage gene expression. Mass spectrometry-based acetylomics demonstrated that HDAC8 deacetylated the histone acetyltransferase (HAT) EP300 leading to its enzymatic inactivation. This, in turn, led to an increased binding of EP300 to Jun-transcriptional sites and decreased binding to MITF-transcriptional sites. Increased expression of EP300 decreased invasion and increased the sensitivity of melanoma cells to multiple stresses while inhibition of EP300 function increased invasion, resistance to stress and the development of MBM. We identified HDAC8 as a novel mediator of transcriptional co-factor inactivation and chromatin accessibility that increases MBM development.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in denaturing lysis buffer containing 8M urea, 20 mM HEPES (pH 8), 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate and 1 mM β-glycerophosphate. The proteins were reduced with 4.5 mM DTT and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. Trypsin digestion was carried out at room temperature overnight, and tryptic peptides were then acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted with C18 Sep-Pak cartridges according to the manufacturer’s procedure (WAT051910, Waters Corp, Milford, MA). The peptides were then frozen on dry ice before lyophilization. Following lyophilization, the dried peptide pellet was re-dissolved in IAP buffer containing 50 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate and 50 mM sodium chloride. Acetyl lysine-containing peptides were immunoprecipitated with immobilized anti-Acetyl-Lysine Motif (Ac-K) antibody (#13416, CST).  The acetyl-lysine peptides were eluted twice with 0.15% TFA. The eluted acetylated peptides were labeled with TMT10plex: HDAC triplicate were labeled in 127N, 127C and 128N channels.  EV triplicate were labeled in 129C, 130N and 130C channels. Mixed peptides were fractionated with high pH reversed phase cartridge (ThermoFisher 84868) and 9 fractions were collected according to manufacturer protocol. A nanoflow ultra-high performance liquid chromatograph (RSLC, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) interfaced with an electrospray bench top quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Exploris480 with FAIMS, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) peptide sequencing experiments. The sample was first loaded onto a pre-column (C18 PepMap100, 100 µm ID x 2 cm length packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) and washed for 8 minutes with aqueous 2% acetonitrile containing 0.04% trifluoroacetic acid. The trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column, (C18 PepMap100, 75 µm ID x 25 cm length, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific).  The 120-minute gradient was programmed as: 95% solvent A (aqueous 2% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for 8 minutes, solvent B (90% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 38.5% in 90 minutes, then solvent B from 50% to 90% B in 7 minutes and held at 90% for 5 minutes, followed by solvent B from 90% to 5% in 1 minute and re-equilibration for 10 minutes.  The flow rate on analytical column was 300 nl/min. Spray voltage was 2,100 v. Capillary temperature was set at 300 °C. 2 CV values were applied: -45 and -65. Data-dependent scans with 1.5 second cycle time were performed  following each survey scan using 15 second exclusion for previously sampled peptide peaks. MS and MS/MS resolutions were set at 120,000 and 45,000, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed with Mascot (Matrix Science, Boston, MA) and MaxQuant. Values were log(2) transformed and The raw data were normalized using iterative rank order normalization (IRON). Values were converted to log(2) form with significant Significant changes in acetylated proteins peptides were determined to be greater than +/- 2 standard deviations away from the average of the data set +/- 2 standard deviations .  Gene ontology of significantly deacetylated proteins were carried out using the STRING protein-protein interaction network.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain metastasis, Melanoma, Acetylation, Hdac8

### Affiliations
Cutaneous Oncology/Tumor Biology Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Keiran Smalley
Cutaneous Oncology/Tumor Biology Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


