### Accession
PXD014804

### Title
Substantial Influence of ERAP2 on the HLA-B*40:02 peptidome. Implications for HLA-B*27-negative ankylosing spondylitis.

### Description
HLA-B*40:02 is one of a few Major Histocompatibility Complex class I (MHC-I) molecules associated with ankylosing spondylitis (AS) independently of HLA-B*27. The endoplasmic reticulum aminopeptidase 2 (ERAP2), an enzyme that process MHC-I ligands and preferentially trims N-terminal basic residues, is also a risk factor for this disease. Like HLA-B*27 and other AS-associated MHC-I molecules, HLA-B*40:02 binds a relatively high percentage of peptides with ERAP2-susceptible residues. In this study the effects of ERAP2 depletion on the HLA-B*40:02 peptidome were analyzed. ERAP2 protein expression was knocked out by CRISPR in the transfectant cell line C1R-B*40:02 and the differences between the peptidomes from the wildtype and ERAP2-KO cells were determined by label-free quantitative comparisons. The qualitative changes dependent on ERAP2 affected about 5% of the peptidome, but quantitative changes in peptide amounts were much more substantial, reflecting a significant influence of this enzyme on the generation/destruction balance of HLA-B*40:02 ligands. As in HLA-B*27, a major effect was on the frequencies of N-terminal residues. In this position basic and small residues were increased in the absence of ERAP2 and aliphatic/aromatic residues were increased in the presence of the enzyme. Since most of the non-B*27 MHC-I molecules associated with AS risk also bind a relatively high percentage of peptides with N-terminal basic residues we hypothesize that the non-epistatic association of ERAP2 with AS might be related to the processing of peptides with these residues bound by AS-associated MHC-I molecules.

### Sample Protocol
HLA-B*40-bound peptides were isolated from three independent preparations of 1x109 cells of each cell line. Briefly, cells were lysed with 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5, 1% Igepal CA-630 (Sigma-Aldrich), and a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). After centrifugation, the supernatant was passed first through a pre-column with CNBr-activated Sepharose 4B (GE Healthcare) to remove unspecific interactions and then through a column containing W6/32 bound to CNBr-activated Sepharose. Next, the columns were successively washed with 20 column volumes each of 20 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.0, containing: 1) 150 mM NaCl, 2) 400 mM NaCl, 3) 150 mM NaCl, and 4) buffer without NaCl. The MHC-bound peptides were eluted with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich), filtered through a Vivaspin 2 filter (cutoff 5,000 Daltons) (Sartorius Stedim Biotech) and concentrated in a SpeedVac (Savant; DJB Labcare). Samples were analyzed in a Q-Exactive-Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Thepeptides were resolved with a 7-40% acetonitrile gradient with 0.1% formic acid for 180 min and 0.15 μL/min on a capillary column pressure-packed with Reprosil C18-Aqua (Dr. Maisch, GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The dynamic exclusion was set to 20 sec. The selected masses were fragmented from the survey scan of the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) 300-1,800 AMU at a resolution of 70,000. MS/MS spectra were acquired beginning at m/z 200 with a resolution of 17,500. The target value was set to 1x105 and the isolation window to 1.8 m/z. Peptide sequences were assigned from the MS/MS spectra as described below.

### Data Protocol
The peptide pools from each individual preparation were separately subjected to MS and thepeptides were assigned from the MS/MS spectra using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.8.3) with the Andromeda search engine and the human UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (release 27-07-18: 732101 entries) under the following parameters: precursor ion mass and fragment mass tolerance 20 ppm, false discovery rate (FDR) 0.01 and peptide-spectrum matching (PSM) FDR 0.05, oxidation (Met), acetylation (protein N-terminus) and Gln to Pyro-Glu conversion were included as variable modifications. No fixed modifications were included.

### Publication Abstract
HLA-B*40:02 is one of a few major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC-I) molecules associated with ankylosing spondylitis (AS) independently of HLA-B*27. The endoplasmic reticulum aminopeptidase 2 (ERAP2), an enzyme that process MHC-I ligands and preferentially trims N-terminal basic residues, is also a risk factor for this disease. Like HLA-B*27 and other AS-associated MHC-I molecules, HLA-B*40:02 binds a relatively high percentage of peptides with ERAP2-susceptible residues. In this study, the effects of ERAP2 depletion on the HLA-B*40:02 peptidome were analyzed. ERAP2 protein expression was knocked out by CRISPR in the transfectant cell line C1R-B*40:02, and the differences between the peptidomes from the wild-type and ERAP2-KO cells were determined by label-free quantitative comparisons. The qualitative changes dependent on ERAP2 affected about 5% of the peptidome, but quantitative changes in peptide amounts were much more substantial, reflecting a significant influence of this enzyme on the generation/destruction balance of HLA-B*40:02 ligands. As in HLA-B*27, a major effect was on the frequencies of N-terminal residues. In this position, basic and small residues were increased, and aliphatic/aromatic ones decreased in the ERAP2 knockout. Other peptide positions were also affected. Because most of the non-B*27 MHC-I molecules associated with AS risk bind a relatively high percentage of peptides with N-terminal basic residues, we hypothesize that the non-epistatic association of ERAP2 with AS might be related to the processing of peptides with these residues, thus affecting the peptidomes of AS-associated MHC-I molecules.

### Keywords
Hla-b*40:02 peptidome, Erap2, Hla-b*27, Ankylosing spondylitis

### Affiliations
Technion
Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Eilon Barnea

### Lab Head
Dr Arie Admon
Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology


