### Accession
PXD029460

### Title
Altered proteome in translationinitiation fidelity defective eIF5G31R mutant causes oxidative stress and DNA damage

### Description
The recognition of AUG start codon and selection of the open reading frame (ORF) is fundamental to protein biosynthesis. Defect in the start codon selection adversely affectproteome and have a pleiotropic effect on cellular function. Using proteomic techniques, we identified differential protein expression patterns in the translation initiation defectivehyper GTPaseeIF5G31R mutant cells. Consistently, we observed altered proteome involved in protein catabolism, nucleotide metabolism, fatty acid metabolism, glycolysis, and autophagy.The utilization of the upstream UUG codons by the eIF5G31R mutation caused downregulation of uridylate kinase expression and  DNA damage. The eIF5G31R mutant cells showed lower Glutathione levels, high ROS activity, and sensitivity to H2O2.

### Sample Protocol
2D-PAGE followed by MALDI-TOF/MS proteomics approach-Three biological replicates of wild type (WT) and eIF5G31R mutant cells were grown to OD600 ~ 1.0. The cells were suspended in 2D lysis buffer (7 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 65 mM DTT, 2% CHAPS, and a Complete protease inhibitor© tablet) and mechanically lysed by vortexingusing acid-washed glass beads (200 μm) at 4°C.The supernatant containing total cell extract was separated at 13,000×g for 30 min at 4°Cand the total proteins were quantitated by Bradford assay. The total proteins (400 micro gram) were resolved on 18 cm IPG strip pH 3-11 using EttanIPGphor 3 isoelectric focusing system (GE) under the following conditions; 12 hours(hr) at 50 V; 30 min at 250 V; 1 hr at 1000 V; 1 hr at 2500 V; 1 hr at 5000 V; 1 hr at 8000 V and held at 8000 V until total Vhr reached 50000 Vhr. After IEF, the IPG strips were equilibrated for 30 min in a reduction buffer containing 1% DTT in an equilibration buffer (75mM Tris pH8.8, 6M Urea, 30% v/v Glycerol, 2% SDS, 0.002% Bromophenol blue), and subsequently alkylated for 30 min in an alkylation buffer containing 2.5% Ioda-acetamide in equilibration buffer.After equilibrium, the strips were placed on 12% polyacrylamide gels and immobilized by overlaying 0.5% agarose on the strips. The second-dimensional separation was carried out in the Bio-Rad Protean II xi Cell and the electrophoresis was run at 80 V for 24 hours. The gel was stained with Coomassie brilliant blue, scanned with GS-800 Calibrated Densitometer (Bio-Rad Laboratories),and analyzed using GE Image Master 2D Platinum v7.0 software. The altered spots were excised, followed by anin-gel digestion using trypsin (1µg/µl trypsin in 1:10 enzyme to protein ratio;AbSciex#4352157) at 37°C for 16 hours.The resultant digested peptideswere subjected to MALDI-TOF/MS. First, it was mixed with α-Cyano-4 hydroxycinnamic acid (CHCA) matrix (1:1) and spotted on MALDI plate and acquired the data.

### Data Protocol
NanoLC-MALDI TOF/MS-All the fractions were reconstituted in 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid and chromatogram on reverse phase C18 column (Eksigent, 3 um, 120 Å pores, 0.075×150 mm) using ekspert™ nanoLC Ultra 2D plus system with 5-90% acetonitrile gradient (2 microL/min flow in 68 minutes).Eluant from each fraction was deposited with α-CHCA matrix at 15 s/spot and spotted onto the MALDI plate with the help of ekspot™ spotter (Sciex). The spotted LC-MALDI plates were subjected to 5800 MALDI TOF/TOF (Sciex).Refectron mode mass calibrations were performed externally with a calibration mixture (Cal mix TOF/TOF, Sciex# 4333604), whereas MS/MS mode mass calibration was executed using the fragments of the Glu-fibrinopeptide B precursor ion. MS and MS/MS data were acquired for all the fractions using defined LC-MALDI parameters.Abundant peptides with a precursor mass of 3568 Da with a mass window ±100 Da were sent for MS/MS with a 0.8ppm error. Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) was activated with automatic Collision Induced Dissociation (CID) and automatic MS/MS acquisition. The MS and MS/MS data of the peptides were used for protein identification and peak areas of the iTRAQ reporter ions suggest the relative abundance of the proteins in the respective samples.  Data processing andanalysis-Quantification and identification of protein was performed on ProteinPilot 4.0.8085 Software (AB Sciex) integrated with Mascot search engine version:2.3. The Paragon algorithm in the ProteinPilot software was used for the peptide identification. User-defined search parameters were as follows: : (i) Sample type, iTRAQ 4-plex (Peptide Labeled); (ii) Cysteine alkylation, MMTS; (iii) Digestion, Trypsin; (iv) Instrument, MALDI TOF/TOF ABSciex 5800 (iv) Mass tolerance 100ppm for precursor ion and 0.8ppm for daughter ions (v) Database,S. cerevisiae database from Uniprot, SC strain S288C-20160606 fasta and the corresponding reverse sequence (decoy: for false discovery rate (FDR = 2.0*decoy hit/total_hit) estimation) (vi) Keratin excluded. For quantification, the peptides were automatically selected by the Pro Group algorithm to calculate the reporter peak area, error factor (EF), and P-value. Post quantification dataset was auto bias-corrected to eliminate any variation due to unequal mixing while pooling different labeled peptides. The False Discovery Rate (FDR) was estimated using the Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline (PSPEP) algorithm integrated into the ProteinPilot, and the Global FDR of 5% was used for further analysis.  Quantified proteins from both sets were first normalized against the pooled internal control used in both experimental sets. Post normalization, the dataset was filtered based on unused score cut-off 1.3 or more for further analysis from both the set with at least one unique peptide identified. Proteins present in both sets were further tested for statistical significance by performing Student’s t-test, P-value ± 0.05. For differential protein abundance estimation, a cut off ≥1.5-fold and ≤0.66-fold were used for up-regulation and down-regulation, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
The recognition of the AUG start codon and selection of an open reading frame (ORF) is fundamental to protein biosynthesis. Defect in the fidelity of start codon selection adversely affect proteome and have a pleiotropic effect on cellular function. Using proteomic techniques, we identified differential protein abundance in the translation initiation fidelity defective eIF5<sup>G31R</sup> mutant that initiates translation using UUG codon in addition to the AUG start codon. Consistently, the eIF5<sup>G31R</sup> mutant altered proteome involved in protein catabolism, nucleotide biosynthesis, lipid biosynthesis, carbohydrate metabolism, oxidation-reduction pathway, autophagy and re-programs the cellular pathways. The utilization of the upstream UUG codons by the eIF5<sup>G31R</sup> mutation caused downregulation of uridylate kinase expression, sensitivity to hydroxyurea, and DNA damage. The eIF5<sup>G31R</sup> mutant cells showed lower glutathione levels, high ROS activity, and sensitivity to H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>.

### Keywords
Sui¯ phenotype, Eif5, Translation initiation, Proteomics, Itraq

### Affiliations
National Institute of Science Education and Research, Bhubaneswar 
NISER, Bhubaneswar, India

### Submitter
Pankaj Alone

### Lab Head
Dr Pankaj V Alone
NISER, Bhubaneswar, India


