### Accession
PXD020117

### Title
Identifying fecal host biomarkers for the presence and severity of Clostridioides difficile infection using top-down proteomics

### Description
Clostridioides difficile is a major cause of healthcare-associated diarrhea in adult patients. Laboratory diagnosis of C. difficile infection (CDI) is challenging as there is no single test combining high sensitivity and specificity, rapid turnaround time and cost efficiency. They also offer no or little correlation with the clinical outcome. Recently, host-based methods have shown satisfactory performance for the diagnosis of infectious diseases. The aim of this study was to discover CDI-specific host biomarkers that correlate with disease stage and severity.

### Sample Protocol
A top-down proteomics approach was developed to identify host-derived protein biomarkers from diagnostic stool samples of subjects with CDI. Biomarker candidates were subsequently confirmed in a mouse model and validated in a small human population using orthogonal detection.

### Data Protocol
By cohort-wise comparison of CDI-negative vs. CDI-colonized and mild vs. severe CDI, we discovered alpha-2-macroglobulin, matrix metalloproteinase-7 and alpha-1-antitrypsin are host fecal biomarkers that can discriminate samples that are CDI positive from non-CDI controls, and distinguish disease severity.

### Publication Abstract
Clostridioides difficile is a major cause of health care-associated diarrhea. Severity ranges from mild to life-threatening, but this variability remains poorly understood. Microbiologic diagnosis of C. difficile infection (CDI) is straightforward but offers little insight into the patient's prognosis or into pathophysiologic determinants of clinical trajectory. The aim of this study was to discover host-derived, CDI-specific fecal biomarkers involved in disease severity. Subjects without and with CDI diarrhea were recruited. CDI severity was based on Infectious Diseases Society of America/Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America criteria. We developed a liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry approach to identify host-derived protein biomarkers from stool and applied it to diagnostic samples for cohort-wise comparison (CDI-negative vs. nonsevere CDI vs. severe CDI). Selected biomarkers were orthogonally confirmed and subsequently verified in a CDI mouse model. We identified a protein signature from stool, consisting of alpha-2-macroglobulin (A2MG), matrix metalloproteinase-7 (MMP-7), and alpha-1-antitrypsin (A1AT), that not only discriminates CDI-positive samples from non-CDI ones but also is potentially associated with disease severity. In the mouse model, this signature with the murine homologs of the corresponding proteins was also identified. A2MG, MMP-7, and A1AT serve as biomarkers in patients with CDI and define novel components of the host response that may determine disease severity.

### Keywords
Human, Biomarker discovery, Stool, Clostridium difficile, Free immunoglobulin light chain, Alpha-1-antitrypsin, Matrix metalloproteinase-7, Immunoglobulin kappa constant, Proteomics, Alpha-2-macroglobulin, Clostridioides difficile, Mouse model, Feces, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
McGill University
Department of Medicine, McGill University

### Submitter
Momar Ndao

### Lab Head
Dr Momar Ndao
Department of Medicine, McGill University


