### Accession
PXD037131

### Title
TLK1 phosphorylates human RAD54

### Description
TLK1 phosphorylates RAD54 at novel residues -T41, T59, T700

### Sample Protocol
All mass spectra reported in this study were acquired by the University of Kentucky Proteomics Core Facility. The protein gel bands were excised and subjected to dithiothreitol reduction, iodoacetamide alkylation, and in-gel trypsin digestion using a standard protocol. The resulting tryptic peptides were extracted, concentrated and subjected to shot-gun proteomics analysis as previously described in Kamelgarn et al, (2018). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) coupled with an Eksigent Nanoflex cHiPLC™ system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) through a nano-electrospray ionization source. The peptide samples were separated with a reversed phase cHiPLC column (75 μm x 150 mm) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A was water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid while B was acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. A 50 min gradient condition was applied: initial 3% mobile phase B was increased linearly to 40% in 24 min and further to 85% and 95% for 5 min each before it was decreased to 3% and re-equilibrated.

### Data Protocol
The mass analysis method consisted of one segment with 11 scan events. The 1st scan event was an Orbitrap MS scan (300-1800 m/z) with 60,000 resolution for parent ions followed by data dependent MS/MS for fragmentation of the 10 most intense multiple charged ions with collision induced dissociation (CID) method.  The LC-MS/MS data were submitted to a local mascot server for MS/MS protein identification via Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) against a custom database containing Rad54 (Q92698 [RAD54_HUMAN], used for Rad54 samples) downloaded from Uniprot. Typical parameters used in the MASCOT MS/MS ion search were: trypsin digestion with a maximum of two miscleavages, cysteine carbamidomethylation, methionine oxidation, as well as serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylation. A maximum of 10 ppm MS error tolerance, and a maximum of 0.8 Da MS/MS error tolerance.  A decoy database was built and searched. Filter settings that determine false discovery rates (FDR) are used to distribute the confidence indicators for the peptide matches. Peptide matches that pass the filter associated with the FDR rate of 1% and 5% are assigned as high and medium confident peptides, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Environmental agents like ionizing radiation (IR) and chemotherapeutic drugs can cause severe damage to the DNA, often in the form of double-strand breaks (DSBs). Remaining unrepaired, DSBs can lead to chromosomal rearrangements, and cell death. One major error-free pathway to repair DSBs is homologous recombination repair (HRR). Tousled-like kinase 1 (TLK1), a Ser/Thr kinase that regulates the DNA damage checkpoint, has been found to interact with RAD54, a central DNA translocase in HRR. To determine how TLK1 regulates RAD54, we inhibited or depleted TLK1 and tested how this impacts HRR in human cells using a ISce-I-GR-DsRed fused reporter endonuclease. Our results show that TLK1 phosphorylates RAD54 at three threonines (T41, T59&#xa0;and T700), two of which are located within its N-terminal domain (NTD) and one is located within its C-terminal domain (CTD). Phosphorylation at both T41 and T59 supports HRR and protects cells from DNA DSB damage. In contrast, phosphorylation of T700 leads to impaired HRR and engenders no protection to cells from cytotoxicity and rather results in repair delay. Further, our work enlightens the effect of RAD54-T700 (RAD54-CTD) phosphorylation by TLK1 in mammalian system and reveals a new site of interaction with RAD51.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Rad54, Tlk1

### Affiliations
LSUHS-Shreveport

### Submitter
Arrigo DeBenedetti

### Lab Head
Dr Arrigo DeBenedetti
LSUHS-Shreveport


