### Accession
PXD019484

### Title
Mitochondrial protein interaction landscape of SS-31

### Description
SS-31 is a synthetic peptide that improves mitochondrial function and is currently undergoing clinical trials for treatments of heart failure, primary mitochondrial myopathy, and other mitochondrial diseases. SS-31 interacts with cardiolipin which is abundant in the inner mitochondrial membrane, but mechanistic details of its pharmacological effects are unknown. Here we apply a chemical cross-linking/mass spectrometry method to provide direct evidence for specific interactions between SS-31 and mitochondrial proteins. The identified SS-31 interactors are functional components in ATP production and 2-oxoglutarate metabolism and signaling, consistent with improved mitochondrial function resultant from SS-31 treatment. These results offer a glimpse of the protein interaction landscape of SS-31 and provide mechanistic insight relevant to SS-31 mitochondrial therapy

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria was isolated from five mouse hearts.  Four of the mitochondrial samples were treated with 10 micromolar biotinylated SS-31 (bSS-31) and one sample with vehicle control for 1 hour at room temperature.  Intact mitochondria were cross-linked with the protein interaction reporter (PIR) cross-linker amide-DP-NHP at a final concentration of 10 mM for 30 min.  Mitochondria were lysed with 8 M urea, proteins were extracted and disulfide bonds were reduced and alkylated prior to digestion with trypsin.  Peptide samples were acidified trifluoroacetic acid, desalted using Waters C18 SepPak columns and enriched for biotin containing molecules with immobilized monomeric avidin.  Samples were analyzed by LC-MS using an Easy nLC coupled with a Thermo QE+ spectrometer and also a Waters nanoAcquity UPLCcoupled with a Velos ion trap FT-ICR mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to mzXML format and searched against the mouse mitocarta 2 protein database with Comet.  addition of the sequence for bSS-31 (Biotin-D-Arg-dimethyl Tyr-LysPhe-NH2). Due to the presence of non-canonical amino acids the bSS-31 sequence was entered using the following single letter amino acid sequence BJKZ. Within the Comet parameters file the mass of B (Biotin-D-Arg) was set to 382.17926 Da, the mass of J (dimethyl Tyr) was set to 191.094629 Da and the mass of Z (amidated Phe) was set to 146.084399 Da. Additional Comet parameters used for searching ReACT data included; a peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm, allowance of -1/0/1/2/3 13C offsets, trypsin as the digesting enzyme considerin only fully tryptic sequences with up to 5 missed cleavage sites. Oxidation of Met (15.9949 Da) was included as a variable modification while the cross-linker stump mass modification on Lys (197.032422 Da) was included as a required modification at any position within the peptide sequence except forthe Cterminus, MS3 spectra were searched using a 1.0005 Da tolerance on the fragment ions with a bin offset of 0.4. Comet parameters used for Mango data were the same except that the Mango search parameter was set to 1, MS2 spectra were searched and a 0.02 Da tolerance with a 0.0 bin offset were used for fragment ions. SpectraST v 5.0 was used to search fragmentation spectra against a spectral library of the cross-linker modified bSS31. Fragmentation spectra assigned as bSS-31 cross-links were required to contain the accurate mass of the DP stump modified bSS-31 and have a SpectraST assigned p-value of less than 0.1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Mouse, Elamipretide, Ss-31, Cross-linking mass spectometry

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington

### Submitter
Juan Chavez

### Lab Head
Dr James E. Bruce
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington


