### Accession
PXD001386

### Title
Plant Natriuretic Peptides induce a specific set of proteins diagnostic for an adaptive response to abiotic stress

### Description
In plants, structural and physiological evidence has suggested the presence of biologically active natriuretic peptides (PNPs). PNPs are secreted into the apoplast, are systemically mobile and elicit a range of responses signaling via cGMP. The PNP-dependent responses include tissue specific modifications of cation transport and changes in stomatal conductance and the photosynthetic rate. PNP also has a critical role in host defense responses. Surprisingly, PNP-homologues are also produced by several plant pathogens during host colonization suppressing host defense responses. Here we show that a synthetic peptide representing the biologically active fragment of the Arabidopsis thaliana PNP (AtPNP-A) induces the production of reactive oxygen species in suspension-cultured A. thaliana (Col-0) cells.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion Proteins were extracted as described previously (Groen et al., 2013). Briefly, approximately 1 g of cells was homogenized for 4 sec twice in 10 volumes of ice-cold 10% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid in acetone using a PowerGen 125 grinder (Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA), vortexed for 2 min and incubated overnight at -20°C. Precipitated and pelleted proteins were washed four times with 80% (v/v) ice-cold acetone with vigorous vortexing and subjected to centrifugation at 3,901 × g using the Allegra® X-22R centrifuge (Beckman Coulter Corp., Brea, CA, USA) for 20 min at 4°C. Pellet was air-dried and proteins were re-suspended in two volumes of urea lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, phosphatase inhibitor cocktail set II (Calbiochem, Temecula, CA, USA)) with vigorous vortexing for 3 h at room temperature. The samples were cleared by centrifugation at 3,901 × g for 20 min at room temperature and total soluble protein concentration was estimated by Bradford assay (Bradford, 1976) using the Quick Start™ Bradford reagent (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) and bovine serum albumin as a standard.  Approximately 1 mg of total soluble protein extract was prepared for digestion as previously described (Groen et al., 2013). Protein digestion was stopped by acidification of the mixture to pH 2.0 with trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were then purified using Sep-Pak Vac tC18 100 mg cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA, USA), as described previously (Groen et al., 2013), and completely dried in a Speed Vac concentrator (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).   Peptide labelling using tandem mass tag (TMT) Dried desalted tryptic peptides obtained from the digestion of 1 mg protein were re-suspended in 20% (v/v) acetonitrile and half of the volume was subjected to labelling reaction using tandem mass tag (TMT) sixplexTM isobaric mass tagging kit (Thermo Scientific) performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Each of the labelling reaction mixtures contained the TMT reagents (0.8 mg) dissolved in 41 μl of anhydrous acetonitrile and ~ 0.5 mg of the tryptic peptides in 95 μL of 20% (v/v) acetonitrile. Aliquots of the negative control (samples collected at 0, 10 and 30 min after treating cells with water) tryptic digests were derivatized with sixplex chemical labels 126, 127, and 128, while labels 129 and 130 were added to the tryptic peptides obtained from samples collected at 10 and 30 min after treating cells with AtPNP-A peptide, respectively. After 1 h incubation, reactions were quenched by 15 min incubation with 8 μl of 5% hydroxylamine. Samples were subsequently combined at equal amounts of 0.5 mg peptides in a total reaction volume of 144 μL per sample and stored at -80°C until further use.  Peptide fractionation by OFFGEL fractionator Peptides were fractionated using the 3100 OFFGEL fractionator (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) with a 24-well high-resolution immobilized pH gradient strip. Peptide samples were diluted to a final volume of 1.8 mL with 1.25 × peptide OFFGEL stock solution [50% (v/v) glycerol solution, 10% (v/v) OFFGEL buffer pH range 3-10]. Strips were rehydrated, as recommended by the manufacturer, with 40 μL of 1 × immobilized pH gradient strip rehydration solution per well for 15 min and then 150 μL of sample was pipetted into each well. Electrofocusing was carried out to 64 kVh at 20°C, allowing a maximum of 4500 V and 50 μA per strip. After focusing, fractions were separately collected and the wells rinsed twice with 200 μL of a solution containing 50% (v/v) acetonitrile and 5% (v/v) formic acid for 15 min each time. Rinsing solution collected from each well was combined into the tube containing its corresponding fraction. Fractions were dried in a Speed Vac concentrator (Thermo Scientific), re-suspended in 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and purified with Sep-Pak Vac tC18 cartridge (Waters), as previously described (Groen et al., 2013). From each 1 mL fraction of elution per OFFGEL fraction, a volume of 100 μL was subjected to drying in Speed Vac concentrator, suspended in 10 μL of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and further purified using ZipTipC18 (P-10) pipette tips (EMD Millipore) according to manufacturer’s recommendations. Peptides eluted with solution containing 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid in 50% (v/v) acetonitrile were dried in Speed Vac concentrator in preparation for mass spectrometric analysis.  Protein identification by LTQ Orbitrap Dried peptides were re-suspended in 5% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and analyzed by an LTQ Orbitrap VelosTM mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated as described previously (Groen et al., 2013)

### Data Protocol
Protein identification by LTQ Orbitrap Data were recorded with the Xcalibur software version 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and converted from “.raw” to “.mgf” with Proteome Discover version 1.2.0.208 (Thermo Scientific). All spectra were submitted to a local MASCOT (Matrix Science, London, UK) and SEQUEST (Thermo Scientific) servers and searched against Arabidopsis thaliana in the TAIR database (release 10), with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, a fragment ion mass tolerance of ± 0.5 Da, and strict trypsin specificity allowing up to one missed cleavage, carbamidomethyl modification on cysteine residues as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine residues and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues as variable modifications. Proteins were considered positive identifications if they were identified with a minimum of 1 peptide (peptide threshold of 90% and MASCOT ion score >32) at the protein threshold of 95%.  Quantification of differentially expressed proteins Quantitative analysis of the protein expression levels, determined by tandem mass spectrometry of TMT-labelled peptides, was performed with Scaffold Q+ software, version 4.0.4 (Proteome Software, Portland, USA). The proteins were normalized on the basis of the assumption that total intensity remained the same for each of the tags used. Abundances of proteins that were considered positive identifications from AtPNP-A-treated cells (in at least one technical replicate) were compared with mock-treated cells collected at the same time-point. Differential expression of a protein was considered significant if the fold change of a quantity of the protein estimated upon combining data from technical replicates corresponding to the peptide-treated and mock-treated cells for a given biological replicate collected at the same time-point was greater or equal to |±1.5|, verified by Mann-Whitney test (p-value < 0.05), in at least two out of three biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Proteome changes in the Arabidopsis thaliana suspension cells in response to the A. thaliana plant natriuretic peptide (PNP), AtPNP-A (At2g18660) were assessed using quantitative proteomics employing tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling and tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). In this study, we characterized temporal responses of suspension-cultured cells to 1&#xa0;nM and 10&#xa0;pM AtPNP-A at 0, 10 and 30&#xa0;min post-treatment. Both concentrations we found to yield a distinct differential proteome signature. The data shown in this article are associated with the article "Plant natriuretic peptides induce a specific set of proteins diagnostic for an adaptive response to abiotic stress" by Turek et al. (Front. Plant Sci. 5 (2014) 661) and have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001386.

### Keywords
Membrane fusion, Reactive oxygen species, Salt stress, Plant homeostasis, Peptide hormone signaling, Molecular mimicry, Plant natriuretic peptide

### Affiliations
BioMolecular Lab, Biological and Environmental Sciences and Engineering, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Saudi Arabia
King Abdullah University fo Science and Technology

### Submitter
Claudius Marondedze

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph Gehring
BioMolecular Lab, Biological and Environmental Sciences and Engineering, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Saudi Arabia


