### Accession
PXD009062

### Title
Honeybee antennal proteome is shaped by caste and task more than by age

### Description
Olfaction and chemical communication are fundamental for coordination in insect societies, especially in species forming large colonies. Reproductive and task partitioning suggest that colony members belonging to different castes or subcastes or performing different tasks during their life (polyethism) may produce different semiochemicals and be differently sensitive to the variety of pheromones and/or environmental odours. The main peripheral olfactory organs are the antennal chemosensilla, where the early olfactory processes take place. At this stage, members of two different families of soluble chemosensory proteins (Odorant Binding Proteins -OBPs-, Chemosensory Proteins -CSPs-) show a remarkable affinity for different odorants and act as carriers while a further family, the Niemann Pick type C2 proteins (NPC2) may have a similar function, although this has not been fully demonstrated. Sensillar lymph also contains Odorant degrading enzymes (ODEs) which are involved in inactivation through degradation of the chemical signals, once the message is conveyed. Despite their importance in chemical communication, poor is known about how proteins involved in peripheral olfaction and, more generally antennal proteins, differ in honeybees of different caste, task and age. Here we investigate for the first time, using a shotgun proteomic approach, the antennal profile of honeybee of different castes (queens and workers) and of workers performing different tasks (nursers, guards and foragers) by controlling for the potential confounding effect of age. Regarding olfactory proteins, major differences were observed between queens and workers, some of which were found to be more abundant in queens (OBP3, OBP18, NPC2-1) and others to be more abundant in workers (OBP15, OBP21, CSP1, CSP3); while between workers performing different tasks, OBP14 was more abundant in nurses with respect to guards and foragers, and two ODEs were more abundant in guards with respect to workers of 2nd week. Apart from proteins involved in olfaction, we have found that the antennal proteomes are mainly characterized by castes and tasks, while age has a limited effect on antennal protein profile.

### Sample Protocol
Antennae were dissected immediately before protein extractions and the following samples were prepared: pools of antennae from 9 workers (3 from each hive) of different age or task (1 week-old, 2 week-old; 3 week-old, nurse, guards, foragers); from single queens (virgin queens, mated queens, old queens) and from single workers (nurse, foragers) to be considered as control samples for queens.Three biological replicates for each sample were prepared.The extracts from collected samples were prepared by crushing the tissue in a mortar under liquid nitrogen and the proteins extracted with 6M Urea/2M Thiourea in Tris-Cl 50mM pH 7.4. The protein extracts were centrifuged at 14.000 rpm for 40 minutes at 4°C and the supernatants were collected for the analysis. The total amount of protein in each sample was assessed by the Bradford colorimetric assay, with the “Bio-Rad Protein Assay” kit using serial dilutions of bovine serum albumin to generate a standard curve. Protein sample concentration was measured by Infinite PRO 200 reader (TECAN). Protein digestion was carried out on 15 μg protein extracts. Reduction of disulfide bridges was performed by treating samples with DTT(1 μg of DTT/50 μg of proteins for 30 min at RT), followed by alkylation(5 μg of iodoacetamide/50μg of proteins for 20 min at RT in the dark), as described by Foster and co-workers [29]. Protein samples were diluted 3 times with 500mMammonium bicarbonate, to increase pH and reduce the concentration of urea/thiourea. A first enzymatic digestion was performed by incubating the samples with LysC in a 1:50 ratio (w/w) for 3 h at 37 °C. The digestion products were then incubated with trypsin in a 1:50 ratio (w/w) overnight at 37 °C. The digested samples were then acidified by adding trifluoracetic acid and desalted on STop And Go Extraction (STAGE) tips [30]. The eluates were concentrated and reconstituted to 20 μL in 0.5% acetic acid, prior to HPLC–MS analyses. The peptide mixture of each sample series was submitted to a nanoLC–nanoESI–MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex, San Donato Milanese, Milano, Italy) coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Fractions containing 2.25 μg protein were injected directly on a self-made nanocolumn packed with an Aeris Peptide XB-C18 phase (75 μm i.d. × 15 cm, 3.6 μm, 100 Å,Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) and eluted with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The elution mobile phase composition was: H2O 0.1% formic acid/CH3CN 97/3 (phase A) and CH3CN 0.1% formic acid/H2O 80/20 (phase B). The elution program was: 0 min, 2% B; 40 min, 2% B; 68 min, 15% B; 168 min, 25% B; 228 min, 35% B; 273 min, 50% B; 274 min, 90% B; 288 min, 90% B; 289 min, 2% B; and 309 min, 2% B. Mass spectra were acquired in positive ion mode, setting the spray voltage at 1.8 kV, the capillary voltage and temperature respectively at 45 V and 200 °C, and the tube lens at 130 V. Data were acquired in data dependent mode with dynamic exclusion enabled (repeat count 2, repeat duration 15 s, and exclusion duration 30 s); survey MS scans were recorded in the Orbitrap analyzer in the mass range of 300–2000 m/z at a 15,000 nominal resolution at m/z = 400; then up to five of the most intense ions in each full MS scan were fragmented (isolation width 3 m/z, normalized collision energy 30) and analyzed in the IT analyzer. Monocharged ions did not trigger MS/MS experiments.

### Data Protocol
The identification of proteins was performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.6). The derived peak list was searched with Andromeda search engine. We used as database all the proteins of Apis mellifera from Uniprot merged with a set of commonly observed contaminants, such as human keratins, bovine serum proteins, and proteases. Additional variable modifications were set for sequences of antimicrobial peptides (sequences downloaded from Uniprot http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/?query=antimicrobial+peptides+apis+mellifera&sort=score) in ‘Group-specific parameters’. In the parameter section, we set as enzyme Trypsin and Lys-C, allowing up to two missed cleavages. The minimum required peptide length was seven amino acids. Carbamido-methylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. As no labeling was performed, multiplicity was set to 1. During the main search, parent masses were allowed an initial mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions were allowed a mass deviation of 0.5 Da. PSM (Peptide Spectrum Match) and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Relative, label-free quantification (LFQ) of proteins was done using the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant. The match between runs option was enabled with a match time window of 2 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. For protein quantification we used 1 as Minimum ratio count, “Unique+Razor” peptides (i.e. those exclusively shared by the proteins of the same group), peptides with variable modifications, and selected “discard unmodified counterpart peptide”.

### Publication Abstract
Reproductive and task partitioning in large colonies of social insects suggest that colony members belonging to different castes or performing different tasks during their life (polyethism) may produce specific semiochemicals and be differently sensitive to the variety of pheromones involved in intraspecific chemical communication. The main peripheral olfactory organs are the antennal chemosensilla, where the early olfactory processes take place. At this stage, members of two different families of soluble chemosensory proteins [odorant-binding proteins (OBPs) and chemosensory proteins (CSPs)] show a remarkable affinity for different odorants and act as carriers while a further family, the Niemann-Pick type C2 proteins (NPC2) may have a similar function, although this has not been fully demonstrated. Sensillar lymph also contains Odorant degrading enzymes (ODEs) which are involved in inactivation through degradation of the chemical signals, once the message is conveyed. Despite their importance in chemical communication, little is known about how proteins involved in peripheral olfaction and, more generally antennal proteins, differ in honeybees of different caste, task and age. Here, we investigate for the first time, using a shotgun proteomic approach, the antennal profile of honeybees of different castes (queens and workers) and workers performing different tasks (nurses, guards, and foragers) by controlling for the potential confounding effect of age. Regarding olfactory proteins, major differences were observed between queens and workers, some of which were found to be more abundant in queens (OBP3, OBP18, and NPC2-1) and others to be more abundant in workers (OBP15, OBP21, CSP1, and CSP3); while between workers performing different tasks, OBP14 was more abundant in nurses with respect to guards and foragers. Apart from proteins involved in olfaction, we have found that the antennal proteomes are mainly characterized by castes and tasks, while age has no effect on antennal protein profile. Among the main differences, the strong decrease in vitellogenins found in guards and foragers is not associated with age.

### Keywords
Apis mellifera, Foragers, Queen, Lc-ms/ms, Guards, Nurse

### Affiliations
University of Firenze
Department of Biology, Università degli studi di Firenze

### Submitter
Francesca Romana Dani

### Lab Head
Dr Francesca Romana Dani
Department of Biology, Università degli studi di Firenze


