### Accession
PXD021161

### Title
Identification of a sensor histidine kinase (BfcK) controlling biofilm formation in Clostridium acetobutylicum

### Description
Clostridium acetobutylicum has been extensively exploited to produce biofuels and solvents and its biofilm could dramatically improve its productivities. However, genetic control of C. acetobutylicum biofilm has not been dissected so far. Here, a total of 24 disruptants were finally obtained over several years of attempts. Biofilm formation and physiological phenotypes were characterized for these disruptants and most of them showed robust biofilm formation still, or showed both impaired biofilm formation and cell growth. Only a mutant with a disputed histidine kinase gene (CA_C2730, designated bfcK in this study) abolished biofilm formation without impaired cell growth or solvent production. Phosphoproteomic analysis revealed that bfcK could control C. acetobutylicum flagellar motility at both translational and post-translational (protein phosphorylation) levels. The bfcK also showed apparent regulation of a serine/threonine protein kinase (encoded by CA_C0404) which was involved in protein secretion. Based on these findings, possible bfcK-based mechanisms for biofilm formation in C. acetobutylicum were proposed.

### Sample Protocol
Clostridium acetobutylicum B3 strains were grown in P2 fermentation medium and samples were taken at 12 h (exponential growth phase) and 36 h (solventogenisis phase). Samples were sent to Jingjie PTM BioLab (Hangzhou, China) for analysis according to the protocol previously reported. Briefly, collected cells were grinded by liquid nitrogen and then sonicated in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 0.1% protease inhibitor Cocktail Set VI (Sigma), and 0.1% phosphatase inhibitor mixture (Roche, Mannheim, Germany). Protein solution was reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and then diluted. Finally, trypsin was added at a trypsin-to-protein mass ratio of 1:50 for the first overnight digestion and 1:100 for the second 4-h digestion. The resultant peptides were labeled with TMT kit (ThermoScientific) following the user’s guide. Samples were desalted, vacuum-dried, and then fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 × 250 mm). For phosphoproteomic analysis, additional phosphopeptide enrichment was carried out by incubating peptides in a 50 μl suspension of IMAC (immobilized titanium-ion affinity chromatography) microspheres (10 mg/ml) in 50% acetonitrile and 6% trifluoroacetic acid with shaking for 30 min. The IMAC microspheres were collected, washed, and then the enriched phosphopeptides were eluted in 100 μl of 10% (v/v) NH3.H2O. Phosphopeptides in the supernatant were collected and lyophilized for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Pepetides were separated in the EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system and analyzed by a quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive, Thermo Scientific). The resultant MS/MS data were processed with Maxquant (v1.5.2.8) for searching against the UniProt C. acetobutylicum proteome database containing 3847 entries. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Cysteine alkylation was set as fixed modification, protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation (for phosphopeptide search, phosphorylation on Ser, Thr and Tyr was also included) were set as variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Clostridium acetobutylicum； biofilm；histidine kinases； phosphoproteomics；flagellar motility

### Affiliations
Nanjing Tech University
College of Biotechnology and Pharmaceutical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing 211816, China.

### Submitter
Dong Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Dong Liu
College of Biotechnology and Pharmaceutical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing 211816, China.


