### Accession
PXD039584

### Title
Distinct modulation of cellular immunopeptidome by the allosteric regulatory site of ER aminopeptidase 1

### Description
ER aminopeptidase 1 (ERAP1) is an ER-resident aminopeptidase that excises N-terminal residues off peptides that then bind onto Major Histocompatibility Complex I molecules (MHC-I) and indirectly modulates adaptive immune responses. ERAP1 contains an allosteric regulatory site that accommodates the C-terminus of only some peptide substrates, raising questions about its exact influence on antigen presentation and the potential of allosteric inhibition for cancer immunotherapy. We used an inhibitor that targets this regulatory site to study its effect on the immunopeptidome of a human cancer cell line. The immunopeptidomes of allosterically inhibited and ERAP1 knockout cells contain high-affinity peptides with sequence motifs consistent with the cellular HLA class I haplotypes, but were strikingly different in peptide composition. Compared to knockout cells, allosteric inhibition did not affect the length distribution of peptides and skewed the peptide repertoire both in terms of sequence motifs and HLA allele utilization, indicating significant mechanistic differences between the two ways of disrupting ERAP1 function. These findings suggest that the regulatory site of ERAP1 plays distinct roles in antigenic peptide selection, which should be taken into consideration when designing therapeutic interventions targeting the cancer immunopeptidome.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of peptides bound onto MHC-I from cells   Briefly, about 5x108 cells were used per biological replicate. Cells were lysed with 20 ml buffer containing Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% IGEPAL CA-630, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8.0, and one complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail tablet for 1 hr at 4 °C. The cell lysate was cleared with ultracentrifugation at 100000 g and then loaded onto a W6/32 affinity column. The column was washed using 20 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl and then using 20 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, 400 mM NaCl. Elution of the MHC-I and bound peptides was achieved by 1% TFA. The peptides were further purified from the MHC-I using reversed-phase C18 disposable spin columns (Thermo Scientific).   LC-MS/MS Analysis  The peptidic samples were cleaned up even further through a Sp3 strategy using a 1:1 Sera-Mag Carboxylate SpeedBeads mixture (Cat. #45152105050250 and Cat. #65152105050250). In short, the beads and the peptides were incubated for 30 minutes in an acetonitrile solution of 98%. The peptides on beads were subjected to two washing steps with 100% acetonitrile and finally eluted from the paramagnetic beads using water with 0.1% formic acid. Equal amounts of peptide mixtures were analyzed through LC-MS/MS in three technical replicas. LC -MS/MS analysis was performed by injecting the peptidic eluate directly onto an analytical column (75 μm I.D × 25 cm, C18, pepsep), followed by gradient elution (Ultimate3000 RSLC system; 7%–45% B in 18 minutes; A = 0.1 % formic acid in water, B = 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) with a flowrate of 400 nl/min. The separated peptides were ionized and sprayed into the mass spectrometer (Q Exactive™ HF-X mass spectrometer, Thermo, Waltham, MA) through with a pepsep sprayer equipped with a liquid junction stainless steel emitter. The spectrometer was operated in data independent mode. in the scan range of 375-1100 m/z using 120K resolving power with an AGC (automated gain control) of 3x 106 and max IT of 60ms followed by data independent analysis using 8 Th windows (39 loop counts) with 15K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 105 and max IT of 22ms and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 26.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap raw data was analysed in DirectDIA mode using the Spectronaut software version 16 (Biognosys) through searching against the reviewed Human reviewed Uniprot database (retrieved 4/21, 49,852 Entries) in the library free mode of the software, in a unspecific digest search mode with a peptide size range 0f 7 to 20 aminoacids.

### Publication Abstract
ER aminopeptidase 1 (ERAP1) is an ER-resident aminopeptidase that excises N-terminal residues of peptides that then bind onto Major Histocompatibility Complex I molecules (MHC-I) and indirectly modulates adaptive immune responses. ERAP1 contains an allosteric regulatory site that accommodates the C-terminus of at least some peptide substrates, raising questions about its exact influence on antigen presentation and the potential of allosteric inhibition for cancer immunotherapy. We used an inhibitor that targets this regulatory site to study its effect on the immunopeptidome of a human cancer cell line. The immunopeptidomes of allosterically inhibited and ERAP1 KO cells contain high-affinity peptides with sequence motifs consistent with the cellular HLA class I haplotypes but are strikingly different in peptide composition. Compared to KO cells, allosteric inhibition did not affect the length distribution of peptides and skewed the peptide repertoire both in terms of sequence motifs and HLA allele utilization, indicating significant mechanistic differences between the two ways of disrupting ERAP1 function. These findings suggest that the regulatory site of ERAP1 plays distinct roles in antigenic peptide selection, which should be taken into consideration when designing therapeutic interventions targeting the cancer immunopeptidome.

### Keywords
Allosteric, Immunopeptidomics, Erap1, Aminopetidase, Inhibitor, Hla, Mhc class1

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
Department of Chemistry, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 15784 Zografou, Greece  National Centre for Scientific Research Demokritos, Agia Paraskevi, Greece

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Efstratios Stratikos
Department of Chemistry, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 15784 Zografou, Greece  National Centre for Scientific Research Demokritos, Agia Paraskevi, Greece


