### Accession
PXD020012

### Title
Anastrepha ludens antenna proteome in response to CeraTrap®

### Description
Anastrepha ludens (Loew) is one of the most important pestiferous fruit fly species infesting citrus and mangoes from Texas to Costa Rica.  Despite the latter, the mechanisms of odorant perception in this specie have been poorly studied.  In most of the cases, the detection of semiochemicals in insects is carried out in the antenna, where volatile molecules penetrate sensillum pores and they are linked to soluble proteins to cross the lymph until reaching specific odor receptor triggering the signal transduction which can lead to a behavioral response.  Scrutinizing the molecular foundation of odorant perception in A. ludens is of paramount importance to increase the efficiency of Integrated Management strategies against this pest. Therefore, we carried out a proteomic profiling of A. ludens’s antennas with three different maturity stages using comparative proteomic analysis with tandem mass tags (TMT) combined with synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-MS3 to gain insight into the proteome of the A. ludens antenna under CeraTrap exposure, a highly effective commercial attractant. Our study provides the first report where critical molecular players might form part of the odor perception mechanism in A. ludens.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction The pool of antennas in phosphate buffered saline from each treatment was grounded with a sterile pistil inside of the tube (1.5 mL) for three minutes on ice.  Thereafter, the mixture was sonicated for five minutes, boiled for five minutes and centrifuge at 10620 x g for five min.  Afterwards, the supernatant was recovered and stored at -80 °C for further analysis.  The protein assay was carried out using the BCA™ Kit Assay (Cat. No. 23225, Pierce; Rockford IL) using BSA as standard.  In addition, the quality of the protein extract was corroborated by fractionating 10 g of total protein on an any kDTM Tris-glycine SDS-PAGE gel (Cat. 4569033, TGX™ gels, BioRad; Hercules, CA, USA) and stained with SYPRO Ruby protein gel stain (Cat. S12001, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA).  Trypsin digestion, TMT labeling, simple fractionation and desalting Briefly, reduced and alkylated proteins from protein crude extracts (100 µg) were digested with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega, Madison WI) at a 1:30 w/w trypsin protein ratio overnight at 37 °C.  Thereafter, a 1:60 w/w freshly prepared trypsin solution was added during 4 h at 37 °C.  Peptide samples for comparative proteomics were labeled with TMT 6-plex reagents just after tryptic digestion, according to manufacturer's instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL).  The labels 126, 127 and 128 were used for control treatments consisting in water, while 129, 130, and 131 tags were used for the CeraTrap treatment.  Labeled samples were pooled for further processing.  Fractionation of labeled peptide mixture Pooled TMT-labeled samples were fractionated using strong cation exchange (SCX) cartridges (Thermo Scientific, Bellefonte, PA, USA) and following the instructions of manufacturer.  Five fractions were collected: fluently, 75, 250, and 500 mM KCl.  Each fraction was dried using a CentriVap vacuum concentrator (Labconco Kansas, Missouri) and desalted with C18 cartridges for MS analysis according to manufacturer´s guide.  Nano LC-MS/MS analysis Samples were analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS analysis using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribid (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer equipped with an “EASY spray” nano ion source (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA).  The samples were reconstituted with 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water (Solvent A) and 20 μL was injected into a nanoviper C18 trap column (3 µm, 75 µm X 2 cm, Dionex) at 3 μL/min flow rate in an UltiMate 3000 RSLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA).  After this procedure, it was separated on an EASY spray C-18 RSLC column (2 µm, 75 µm x 25 cm), using a 100 min gradient with a flow rate of 300 nL/min, and using Solvent A together with 0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile (Solvent B).  The gradient was as follows: 10 min Solvent A, 7-20% Solvent B within 25 min, 20% Solvent B for 15 min, 20-25% Solvent B for 15 min, 25-95 % solvent B for 20 min, and 8 min solvent A.  The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with nanospray voltage set at 3.5 kV and source temperature at 280 °C.  External calibrants included caffeine, Met-Arg-Phe-Ala (MRFA) and Ultramark® 1621 (88323, Thermo Fisher ScientificTM PierceTM). Synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-MS3 for TMT analysis Full MS scans were run in the Orbitrap analyzer with a 120,000 (FWHM) resolution, scan range 350-1500 m/z, AGC of 2.0e5, maximum injection time of 50 ms, intensity threshold of 5.0e3, dynamic exclusion one at 70s and 10 ppm mass tolerance.  For MS2 analysis the 20 most-abundant MS1s were isolated with charge states set to 2–7.  Fragmentation parameters included, CID with 35% of collision energy and activation Q of 0.25, AGC of 1.0e4 in maximum injection time of 50 ms, precursor selection mass range of 400-1200 m/z, precursor ion exclusion width low 18 m/z and high five m/z, isobaric tag loss TMT and detection run in the ion trap.  Afterwards, MS3 spectra were acquired as previously described (McAlister et al., 2014) using synchronous precursor selection (SPS) of 10 isolation notches.  MS3 precursors were fragmented by HCD with 65% of collision energy and analyzed using the Orbitrap with 60,000 resolution power at 120-500 m/z scan range, two m/z isolation window, 1.0e5 AGC and maximum injection time of 120 ms with one microscan.

### Data Protocol
Data analyses and interpretation The spectra were processed with Proteome DiscovererTM 2.1 software (PD, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) and searches conducted with Mascot 2.4.1 software (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA), SQUEST HT, and MS AMANDA database search algorithm engines.  The searches were directed against a translated unigene database generated with in-house transcriptomic data from A. ludens.  Parameters in the search included: full-tryptic protease specificity, two missed cleavages allowed.  In addition, static modifications covered carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) and TMT 6-plex N-terminal/lysine residues (+229.163 Da).  Dynamic modifications included methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) and deamidation in asparagine/glutamine (+0.984 Da).  For the synchronous precursor selection SPS-MS3 method, in which identification was performed at a lower resolution in the linear ion trap, tolerances of ± 10 ppm and ± 0.6 Da were applied.  Resulting peptide hits were filtered for maximum 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the Percolator algorithm.  The TMT 6-plex quantification method within PD software was used to calculate the reported ratios applying mass tolerances of ±10 ppm in the case of the most confident centroid and a precursor co-isolation filter of 45%.  For the SPS-MS3 method, the quantification was run at the MS3 level.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Anastrepha ludens</i> is a key pest of mangoes and citrus from Texas to Costa Rica but the mechanisms of odorant perception in this species are poorly understood. Detection of volatiles in insects occurs mainly in the antenna, where molecules penetrate sensillum pores and link to soluble proteins in the hemolymph until reaching specific odor receptors that trigger signal transduction and lead to behavioral responses. Scrutinizing the molecular foundation of odorant perception in <i>A. ludens</i> is necessary to improve biorational management strategies against this pest. After exposing adults of three maturity stages to a proteinaceous attractant, we studied antennal morphology and comparative proteomic profiles using nano-LC-MS/MS with tandem mass tags combined with synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-MS3. Antennas from newly emerged flies exhibited dense agglomerations of olfactory sensory neurons. We discovered 4618 unique proteins in the antennas of <i>A. ludens</i> and identified some associated with odor signaling, including odorant-binding and calcium signaling related proteins, the odorant receptor co-receptor (Orco), and putative odorant-degrading enzymes. Antennas of sexually immature flies exhibited the most upregulation of odor perception proteins compared to mature flies exposed to the attractant. This is the first report where critical molecular players are linked to the odor perception mechanism of <i>A. ludens</i>.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Odorant binging proteins, Fruit fly, Anastrepha ludens, Antenna proteome, Sps, Tmt

### Affiliations
Instituto de Ecología, A.C.
Instituto de ecologia, A.C.

### Submitter
Eliel Ruiz-May

### Lab Head
Dr Laboratorio de Proteomica
Instituto de ecologia, A.C.


