### Accession
PXD026816

### Title
Comparative Proteomic Analysis of retro-oil fluid and vitreous fluid from patients

### Description
There have been reports of unexplained visual loss following intra-ocular silicone oil (SiO) tamponade in retinal detachment patients, yet the underlying mechanism is unknown. In the present study, we identified differentially expressed proteins in the vitreous humor of four groups (each group, n=3): pars plana vitrectomy (PPV) for rhegmatogenous retinal detachment (RD group), SiO removal after successful retinal reattachment (SO group), cataract surgery after successful retinal reattachment with sterilized air tamponade (FA group), and PPV for epiretinal membrane (ERM group). DIA was combined with two-dimensional liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to find expression changes in the proteome of vitreous.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were digested, and the peptides were desalted and fractioned. Samples were mixed in 8M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, 5mM DTT and then 1M iodoacetamide (15 mM IAA in UA buffer) was added to block reduced cysteine residues and the samples were incubated for 40 min in darkness. Finally, add 0.5 µg Lys-C (1:100) was added and set for 4 hours and then add 0.5 µg trypsin and set for 16 hours at 37℃, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. The peptides of each sample were desalted and concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 10 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. 2 μg sample peptides were mixed with some standard iRT peptides for further data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and DIA quantification analysis.

### Data Protocol
For DDA library data, database was searched by using MaxQuant 1.5.3.17 software. The database was downloaded at website: http://www.uniprot.org. The iRT peptide sequence was added into the database (>Biognosys|iRTKit|Sequence_fusionLGGNEQVTRYILAGVENSKGTFIIDPGGVIRGTFIIDPAAVIRGAGSSEPVTGLDAKTPVISGGPYEYRVEATFGVDESNAKTPVITGAPYEYRDGLDAASYYAPVRADVTPADFSEWSKLFLQFGAQGSPFLK). The parameters were set as follows- enzyme: trypsin, max miss cleavage site: 2, fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C), dynamic modification: oxidation (M) and acetyl (Protein N-term). All reported data were based on 99% confidence for protein identification as determined by false discovery rate (FDR =N(decoy)*2/(N(decoy)+ N(target))) ≤ 1%. Spectral library was constructed by importing the original raw files and DDA searching results into Spectronaut Pulsar X_12.0.20491.4 (Biognosys).  DIA data was analyzed with Spectronaut Pulsar X_12.0.20491.4 searching the above constructed spectral library. Main software parameters were set as follows- retention time prediction type: dynamic iRT, interference on MS2 level correction: enabled, cross run normalization: enabled. All results were filtered based on Q value cutoff 0.01 (equivalent to FDR<1%).

### Publication Abstract
<b>Objectives:</b> There have been reports of unexplained visual loss following intra-ocular silicone oil (SiO) tamponade in retinal detachment patients, yet the underlying mechanism is unknown. The aim of this study was to investigate the mechanisms behind retinal toxicity following intra-ocular SiO tamponade in retinal detachment patients. <b>Methods and Results:</b> Vitreous fluid samples were acquired from 27 patients (27 eyes). Twelve eyes for data-independent acquisition (DIA) were divided into four groups: pars plana vitrectomy (PPV) for rhegmatogenous retinal detachment (RD group), SiO removal after successful retinal reattachment (SO group), cataract surgery after successful retinal reattachment with sterilized air tamponade (FA group), and PPV for epiretinal membrane (ERM group). The remaining 15 eyes were used for enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay analysis. DIA was combined with two-dimensional liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry to find expression changes in the proteome of vitreous. Mean number mass spectra, statistically differentially expressed proteins, gene ontology (GO), pathway representations, and protein interactions were analyzed. GO analysis showed that the protein categories of synapse organization, cell adhesion, and regulation of cell migration in the SO group were differentially expressed compared to the control or FA groups (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). Through Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis, lysosome and cell adhesion were found to be significantly enriched in the SO group compared to the FA and control groups (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). Cadherin 2, transferrin, and lysosome function may partially contribute to silicone oil-related vision loss. <b>Conclusion:</b> Vision loss-inducing novel molecular signatures and pathways that may be associated with SiO toxicity were identified. Transferrin may be a potential visual outcome biomarker for SiO tamponade.

### Keywords
Human；vitreous；dia

### Affiliations
1Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China,
Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Yiyang Shu

### Lab Head
Dr Haiyun Liu
1Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China,


