### Accession
PXD015268

### Title
Proteomic investigation uncovers potential targets and target sites of pneumococcal serine-threonine kinase StkP and phosphatase PhpP

### Description
Like eukaryotes, different bacterial species express one or more Ser/Thr kinases and phosphatases that operate in various signaling networks by catalyzing phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of proteins that can immediately regulate biochemical pathways by altering protein function. The human pathogen Streptococcus pneumoniae encodes a single Ser/Thr kinase-phosphatase couple known as StkP-PhpP, which has shown to be crucial in the regulation of cell wall synthesis and cell division. In this study, we applied proteomics to further understand the physiological role of pneumococcal PhpP and StkP with an emphasis on phosphorylation events on Ser and Thr residues. Therefore, the proteome of the non-encapsulated D39 strain (WT), a kinase (ΔstkP) and phosphatase mutant (ΔphpP) were compared in a mass spectrometry based label-free quantification experiment. Results show that a loss of function of PhpP causes an increased abundance of proteins in the phosphate uptake system Pst. Quantitative proteomic data demonstrated an effect of StkP and PhpP on the two-component systems ComDE, LiaRS, CiaRH and VicRK. To obtain further information on the function, targets and target sites of PhpP and StkP we combined the advantages of phosphopeptide enrichment using titan dioxide and spectral library based data evaluation for sensitive detection of changes in the phosphoproteome of the wild type and the mutant strains. According to the role of StkP in cell division we identified several proteins involved in cell wall synthesis and cell division that are apparently phosphorylated by StkP. Unlike StkP, the physiological function of the co-expressed PhpP is poorly understood. For the first time we were able to provide a list of previously unknown putative targets of PhpP. Under these new putative targets of PhpP are, among others, five proteins with direct involvement in cell division (DivIVA, GpsB) and peptidoglycan biosynthesis (MltG, MreC, MacP).

### Sample Protocol
For classical proteome analysis applying a label-free quantification strategy, pneumococci were harvested by centrifugation (4,500 x g, 10 min, 4°C) and washed three times with ice cold 1x PBS supplemented with 1% (w/v) choline chloride and 1x cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The bacterial sediments were suspended in 750 µl 50 mM tris-HCl buffer with 10 mM EDTA, pH 7.4. Bacterial cell disruption was performed by bead beating with a Precellys homogenizer (6,000 rpm, 9 x 30 sec, 4 °C). Glass beads and cell debris were removed by subsequent centrifugation steps (5,000 x g, 15 min, 4 °C; 10,000 x g, 45 min, 4 °C). Proteins were prefractionated by SDS-PAGE and resulting gel lanes were cut into 10 pieces per sample (Bonn et al., 2014). After removal of salt and non-proteinogenous contaminants by incubation in a buffer containing 0.2 M ammonium bicarbonate in 30% (v/v) acetonitrile, gel-pieces were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and rehydrated with an aqueous solution of trypsin (2 ng x µl-1). Proteins were then digested with trypsin overnight and the resulting peptides eluted in ultrapure water.   For phosphoproteome experiments, harvested bacteria were washed with 50 mM tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.4, supplemented with 5 mm C3H7O6PNa2, 5 mm Na4P2O7, 5 mm Na3VO4 and 10 mm NaF and disrupted as described for the GeLC-MS/MS proteome samples. Afterwards the suspension was treated with 1 × Nuclease Mix for 20 min at RT and with 1% (w/v) Octyl β-d-glucopyranoside (5 min, 4 °C) before cell debris and glass beads were removed by two centrifugation steps (5,000 x g, 15 min, 4 °C; 10,000 x g, 45 min, 4 °C). The protein concentration was determined to ensure the precipitation of 5 mg protein for each sample. Methanol/chloroform precipitation was followed by sample digestion with Lys-C and trypsin and bead based phosphopeptide enrichment by titanium dioxide (TiO2) as described elsewhere (Olsen and Macek, 2009). Briefly, precipitated samples were resolved in denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 10 mM tris-HCl, pH 8.0) and disulfide reduction as well as cysteine alkylation were performed. Samples were digested for eight hours with Lys-C, diluted and further digested for 12 hours with trypsin. After sample acidification to pH 2.7 with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and centrifugation, each sample was repetitively incubated with TiO2 beads to collect nine enrichment fractions. Therefore, beads were suspended in a required volume (50 µl per 5 mg beads) of loading solution (30 mg/ml 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB), 80% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) in ASTM type 1 water) and incubated for 10 minutes at room temperature in an orbital shaker in the dark. Afterwards, TiO2 beads were added to each sample. After incubation for 15 minutes in an orbital shaker (in the dark, RT), the samples were centrifuged (10,000 x g, 2 min, RT) and the supernatant was discarded. The beads were washed twice with each wash solution (wash solution 1: 30% (v/v) ACN, 3% TFA (v/v); wash solution 2: 80% (v/v) ACN, 0.1 % TFA (v/v)) and eluted three times (elution buffer: 40% (v/v) NH4OH, 60% (v/v) ACN, pH > 10.5) using C8-microcolumns packed with 3 - 4 × 1 mm2 pieces of 3 m Empore C8 material.  All proteomic samples were analyzed by reversed phase liquid chromatography (LC) electrospray ionization (ESI) MS/MS using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos. In-house self-packed nano-LC columns (100 µm x 20 cm) containing reverse-phase C18 material (3.6 µm, Aeris, phenomenex) were used to perform LC with an Easy-nLC1000 system. The peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% acetic acid (v/v)). Subsequently, the peptides were eluted by a non-linear binary gradient of 80 minutes from 5% to 99% solvent B (0.1% acetic acid (v/v), 99.9% ACN (v/v)) in solvent A at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min.  After injection of non-enriched proteomic samples into the mass spectrometer, a full scan was recorded in the Orbitrap (m/z 300 - 1,700) with a resolution of 30,000 at 400 m/z. The twenty most abundant precursor ions were consecutively isolated in the linear ion trap and fragmented via collision-induced dissociation (CID). Unassigned charge states as well as singly charged ions were rejected and the lock mass correction was enabled. Selected ions were fragmented with 35% normalized collision energy (NCE) and analyzed in data-dependent MS/MS in the linear trap quadrupole (LTQ). During the measurement of the phosphopeptide-enriched samples a full scan with a resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/z was recorded in the Orbitrap (m/z 300 - 2,000). The twenty most abundant precursor ions were fragmented via CID and recorded in the LTQ analyser. Lock mass correction, wideband activation and multistage activation at -97.98, -48.99, -32.70 and -24.49 Th were enabled.

### Data Protocol
For classical database search, spectra were searched separately for each strain with MaxQuant (1.6.1.0, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, (Cox and Mann, 2008)) and its implemented search engine Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) against the S. pneumoniae D39 database from UniProt (2017). Precursor mass deviation was set to 4.5 ppm and 0.5 Da for fragment mass tolerance. A FDR of 0.01 on protein, peptide and spectra level was applied as well as a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids and two unique peptides per protein. Full tryptic specificity with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites was applied. Variable modifications were oxidation on methionine (M) and N-terminal acetylation (Protein N-term). The label-free quantification option was activated (min. ratio count set to two) as well as the option “match between runs” for the bioreplicates of each strain. Furthermore, MaxQuant’s generic contamination list was included.  For shot gun proteomic data analyses the software Perseus 1.6.1.1 (Tyanova et al., 2016) was used. The data from MaxQuant output files were filtered for contaminations, reverse and only identified by site hits. The quantification of comparative proteome analysis of D39Δcps wild-type and mutants was based on MaxQuant’s LFQ intensities (Cox et al., 2014). Data were normalized over the median in Microsoft Excel. Statistical evaluation of quantified proteins was performed using RStudio (version 3.5.0) and the SAM (Significance analysis of microarrays (Tusher et al., 2001)) script by Michael Seo (https://github.com/MikeJSeo/SAM). Differentially expressed proteins with a minimum fold change of two and a q-value ≤ 0.01 were considered as significantly regulated.  For generation of the combined spectral library 908 raw files of S. pneumoniae samples available from a defined set of experiments were used. First, all samples were searched against the S. pneumoniae D39 database from UniProt (1,918 proteins, 2017) with Sorcerer - SEQUEST 4.0.4 (SageN). For the respective parameter files, precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 1.0005 Da (CID). Full tryptic specificity with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites was considered as well as variable modifications like oxidation on methionine, carbamidomethylation on cysteine and phosphorylation on serine (S), threonine (T) and tyrosine (Y). For SILAC samples an additional search with static modifications on lysine (Lys C13N15 (K), 8.014199 amu) and arginine (Arg C13N15 (R), 10.008269 amu) was done. For further processing of the MS/MS data in .mzXML and .pep.XML format from the Sorcerer output the Trans Proteomic Pipeline (TPP, 5.1.0-rc1 Sysygy, 2017) was applied. Spectral library creation was performed according to Schubert et al. (2015) with slight modifications. Briefly, spectra and their particular identifications retrieved from all files were linked together and entries from all datasets were combined to interact.pep.XML files (InteractParser). Afterwards the PeptideProphet algorithm was applied to calculate the FDR of the merged searches on peptide level. The following settings were used: minimum peptide sequence length: seven amino acids, use accurate mass binning, using: ppm, use decoy hits to pin down the negative distribution, ignore charge states: 1+ and higher than 4+. Then spectra containing no phosphorylated amino acids were imported to build a raw spectral library if they had a calculated probability of at least 0.99. In parallel a raw library containing spectra with S/T/Y phosphorylated amino acids and with a probability of at least 0.95 was built. Within this step, spectra assigned to the same peptide ion identification were merged and a single, representative “consensus” spectrum for a particular “peptide species” was generated. Consensus spectra of phosphorylated peptides were then subjected to manual validation. The whole procedure of data processing and validation was repeated to build two raw libraries with the spectra of the SILAC samples which contain the heavy labeled amino acids lysine and arginine. Afterwards all raw libraries were combined and filtered for contaminations and reverse hits. The final spectral library for phosphorylation-centered searches was then extended with the same number of spectra as decoy hits generated by a random mass shift of the precursor and shuffling the peptide sequence (Yen et al., 2011). Finally, phospho-enriched samples of D39Δcps, D39ΔcpsΔstkP and D39ΔcpsΔphpP were searched against the combined spectral library using SpectraST. Search results were combined to interact.pep.xml files and filtered for probability of at least 0.95.

### Publication Abstract
Like eukaryotes, different bacterial species express one or more Ser/Thr kinases and phosphatases that operate in various signaling networks by catalyzing phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of proteins that can immediately regulate biochemical pathways by altering protein function. The human pathogen <i>Streptococcus pneumoniae</i> encodes a single Ser/Thr kinase-phosphatase couple known as StkP-PhpP, which has shown to be crucial in the regulation of cell wall synthesis and cell division. In this study, we applied proteomics to further understand the physiological role of pneumococcal PhpP and StkP with an emphasis on phosphorylation events on Ser and Thr residues. Therefore, the proteome of the non-encapsulated D39 strain (WT), a kinase (&#x394;<i>stkP</i>), and phosphatase mutant (&#x394;<i>phpP</i>) were compared in a mass spectrometry based label-free quantification experiment. Results show that a loss of function of PhpP causes an increased abundance of proteins in the phosphate uptake system Pst. Quantitative proteomic data demonstrated an effect of StkP and PhpP on the two-component systems ComDE, LiaRS, CiaRH, and VicRK. To obtain further information on the function, targets and target sites of PhpP and StkP we combined the advantages of phosphopeptide enrichment using titanium dioxide and spectral library based data evaluation for sensitive detection of changes in the phosphoproteome of the wild type and the mutant strains. According to the role of StkP in cell division we identified several proteins involved in cell wall synthesis and cell division that are apparently phosphorylated by StkP. Unlike StkP, the physiological function of the co-expressed PhpP is poorly understood. For the first time we were able to provide a list of previously unknown putative targets of PhpP. Under these new putative targets of PhpP are, among others, five proteins with direct involvement in cell division (DivIVA, GpsB) and peptidoglycan biosynthesis (MltG, MreC, MacP).

### Keywords
Spectral library, Phosphatases, Phosphoproteomics, Ser/thr kinases, Mass spectrometry, Label-free quantification, Phosphopeptide enrichment, Streptococcus pneumoniae

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics
Department of Microbial Proteomics, Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Thomas Sura

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Department of Microbial Proteomics, Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany


