### Accession
PXD028849

### Title
Shotgun proteomic profiling of dormant, 'non-culturable' Mycobacterium tuberculosis

### Description
Dormant cells of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, in addition to low metabolic activity and a high level of drug resistance, are characterized by ‘non-culturability’ – a specific reversible state of the inability of the cells to grow on solid media. The biochemical characterization of this physiological state of the pathogen is only superficial, pending clarification of the metabolic processes that may exist in such cells. In this study, applying LC-MS proteomic profiling, we report the analysis of proteins accumulated in dormant, ‘non-culturable’ M. tuberculosis cells in an in vitro model of self-acidification of mycobacteria in the post-stationary phase, simulating the in vivo persistence conditions. This approach revealed the preservation of 1379 proteins in cells after 5 months of storage in dormancy; among them, 468 proteins were statistically different from those in the actively growing cells and bore a positive fold change (FC). Differential analysis revealed the proteins of the pH-dependent regulatory system PhoP and allowed the reconstruction of the reactions of central carbon/glycerol metabolism, as well as revealing the salvaged pathways of mycothiol and UMP biosynthesis, establishing the cohort of survival enzymes of dormancy. The annotated pathways mirror the adaptation of the mycobacterial metabolic machinery to life within lipid-rich macrophages: especially the involvement of the methyl citrate and glyoxylate pathways. Thus, the current in vitro model of M. tuberculosis self-acidification reflects the biochemical adaptation of these bacteria to persistence in vivo. Comparative analysis with published proteins displaying antigenic properties makes it possible to distinguish immunoreactive proteins among the proteins bearing a positive FC in dormancy, which may include specific antigens of latent tuberculosis. Additionally, the biotransformatory enzymes (oxidoreductases and hydrolases) capable of prodrug activation and stored up in the dormant state were annotated. These findings may potentially lead to the discovery of immunodiagnostic tests for early latent tuberculosis and trigger the discovery of efficient drugs/prodrugs with potency against non-replicating, dormant populations of mycobacteria.

### Sample Protocol
Active and dormant cells were prepared in three biological replicates. Bacteria were harvested by centrifugation and washed 10 times with a buffer (8 g NaCl, 0.2 g KCl and 0.24 g Na2HPO4 per litre, pH 7.4). The bacterial pellet was re-suspended in ice-cold 100 mM HEPES buffer (pH 8.0) containing complete protease inhibitor cocktail and PMSF then disrupted with zirconium beads on a bead beater homogenizer for 1 min, 5 times for active cells and 10 times for dormant cells. The bacterial lysate was centrifuged at 4 °C. To maximize protein isolation, SDS (2% w/v) extraction was carried out. The extracts were precipitated using a ReadyPrep 2D Cleanup kit to remove ionic contaminants such as detergents, lipids and phenolic compounds from protein samples. The protein extracts were dissolved in 20 μL of 6 M urea in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate. The protein concentration was measured using a BCA Protein Assay Kit. Proteins were reduced using TCEP, following alkylation with iodoacetamide (IAA). Excess IAA was quenched with 1,4-dithiothreitol, then 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to a total volume of 200 μL. Trypsin was added in a protein-to-trypsin ratio of 50 : 1, and tryptic digestion was done at 37 °C overnight. The reaction was stopped by adding formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 5%. The peptide mixtures obtained were pre-fractionated and purified using a C18 Empore™ disk. Prior to MS analysis, peptides were dissolved in 20 µL of 3% ACN/0.1% FA. The injection volume was 1 µL with a flow rate of 5 µL/min. Analysis of peptides was done on a Synapt G2-Si High Definition Mass Spectrometer employing T- wave ion mobility powered mass spectrometry coupled to an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class System (Waters) using data-independent acquisition. The UPLC system was equipped with a trapping column (nanoEase MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column, 180 µm × 20 mm, 5.0 µm particle diameter, 100 Å pore size, Waters) and an analytical column (nanoEase MZ HSS T3 Column, 75 µm × 100 mm, C18, 1.8 µm particle diameter, 100 Å pore size, Waters). The sample was loaded onto the trapping column for 2 min and transferred to the analytical column. The peptides were eluted from the analytical column with a flow rate of 0.4 μL/min with a linear gradient of increasing concentration of acetonitrile in mobile phase from 5% to 35% for 70 min. Within the nanoFlowTM ESI-source, a capillary voltage of 2.5 kV was used, the sampling cone voltage was 40 V and the source offset was 80 V. The source temperature was set to 80 °C. In the trapping, ion mobility and transfer chambers, the wave velocity of the TriWave was set to 1000, 650 and 175 m/s, respectively, and ramping wave heights of 40, 40 and 4.0 V were used, respectively. In the HDMSE mode, the collision energy was ramped to 22–45 eV. HDMSE mass data were acquired in low and high energy modes.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were noise-reduced using the Noise Compression Tool (Waters). The acquired data were submitted for processing and database searching using Progenesis software against the database prepared in-house containing protein sequences from Mycobacterium tuberculosis strain ATCC 25618/H37Rv downloaded from the UniProt database (version 20190304) supplemented with sequences of common contaminants (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). The low-energy and high-energy threshold values were set to 150 and 50 counts, respectively. The parameters used for the database search were: enzyme specificity: trypsin, allowed missed cleavages: 2, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (Cys), variable modifications: N- terminal protein acetylation, and oxidation (Met); the false discovery rate was 1%; minimum fragment ion matches per peptide, minimum fragment ion matches per protein and minimum peptides per protein were set to 1, 4 and 2, respectively. Proteins were considered as significant if they were identified in at least two independent biological replicates. Data analysis and visualization were carried out in R, applying original in-house developed scripts.

### Publication Abstract
Dormant cells of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, in addition to low metabolic activity and a high level of drug resistance, are characterized by 'non-culturability'-a specific reversible state of the inability of the cells to grow on solid media. The biochemical characterization of this physiological state of the pathogen is only superficial, pending clarification of the metabolic processes that may exist in such cells. In this study, applying LC-MS proteomic profiling, we report the analysis of proteins accumulated in dormant, 'non-culturable' M. tuberculosis cells in an in vitro model of self-acidification of mycobacteria in the post-stationary phase, simulating the in vivo persistence conditions-the raw data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD028849. This approach revealed the preservation of 1379 proteins in cells after 5 months of storage in dormancy; among them, 468 proteins were statistically different from those in the actively growing cells and bore a positive fold change (FC). Differential analysis revealed the proteins of the pH-dependent regulatory system PhoP and allowed the reconstruction of the reactions of central carbon/glycerol metabolism, as well as revealing the salvaged pathways of mycothiol and UMP biosynthesis, establishing the cohort of survival enzymes of dormancy. The annotated pathways mirror the adaptation of the mycobacterial metabolic machinery to life within lipid-rich macrophages: especially the involvement of the methyl citrate and glyoxylate pathways. Thus, the current in vitro model of M. tuberculosis self-acidification reflects the biochemical adaptation of these bacteria to persistence in vivo. Comparative analysis with published proteins displaying antigenic properties makes it possible to distinguish immunoreactive proteins among the proteins bearing a positive FC in dormancy, which may include specific antigens of latent tuberculosis. Additionally, the biotransformatory enzymes (oxidoreductases and hydrolases) capable of prodrug activation and stored up in the dormant state were annotated. These findings may potentially lead to the discovery of immunodiagnostic tests for early latent tuberculosis and trigger the discovery of efficient drugs/prodrugs with potency against non-replicating, dormant populations of mycobacteria.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Proteomics

### Affiliations
University of South Bohemia in Ceske Budejovice
Faculty of Science
Branisovska 1760
Ceske Budejovice
A.N. Bach Institute of Biochemistry, Federal Research Centre ‘Fundamentals of Biotechnology’ of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Leninsky pr., 33, 119071, Moscow, Russia

### Submitter
Filip Dyčka

### Lab Head
Dr Arseny S. Kaprelyants
A.N. Bach Institute of Biochemistry, Federal Research Centre ‘Fundamentals of Biotechnology’ of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Leninsky pr., 33, 119071, Moscow, Russia


