### Accession
PXD028172

### Title
Proteomics analysis of plasma-derived exosomes extracted by thrombin pre-treated ExoQuick isolation

### Description
Exosomes are very small nanosized, membrane-bound vesicles, ranging from 30 to 150 nm in size, are originated and released from a variety of cells from body fluids including blood plasma. The isolation of pure exosome from blood plasma is challenging since it is rich in various contaminants from diverse origins. We applied ExoQuick with thrombin for purification of plasma-derived exosome from healthy individual. Immunoassays confirmed the presence of proteins that are classically associated to exosomes (CD9, CD63 and CD81) but these proteins have not been detected by MS. We found several common proteins enriched in our data set compared with plasma-derived exosome markers from databases. Moreover, proteomics analysis and external database integration revealed an enrichment of those extracellular vesicles. The Gene Ontology data analyses determined the presence of proteins that are involved in catalytic, transporter functions and protein metabolism activities. These results allowed the detection of tetraspanin i.e. TSPAN14 in plasma where proteins were undetected by other studies. Furthermore, this study confirmed the detection of   CD5L and LGALS3BP proteins. Although the undouble presence of plasma contaminants hamper MS analysis, still proteins with biomarker potential (TSPAN14, CD5L and LGALS3BP) are accessible in a reasonable sample processing frame that outperforms high-purity focused extraction methods e.g. SEC. The study suggests the use of TSPAN14, CD5L and LGALS3BP as new exosomal markers of plasma-derived exosomes in quantitative proteomics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes were isolated from plasma samples using the ExoQuick exosome precipitation kit (System Biosciences, catalog # EXOQ5TM-1) followed the manufacturer's standard protocol. In brief, plasma samples were pre-treated with thrombin to a final concentration of 500U/ml and mixed until a homogenous solution has formed. The samples were incubated at room temperature for 5 min and then centrifuged at 10000 xg for 5 min. After that plasma sample supernatants (500µl) were then transferred to a clean tube and mixed with 125 µl of   ExoQuick exosome precipitation solution. These mixtures were incubated for 30 min at 4 °C and then centrifuged at 1500xg for 30 min. The supernatant was discarded. Precipitated exosomes were lysed in RIPA buffer by incubation at 4 °C and additional sonication treatment. Protein concentration was determined with BCA. For filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) on centrifugal filter unit (Sartorius Vivacon 500, 10K MWCO), the protein lysate was depleted from the detergent by adding urea buffer. Reduction and thiol-alkylation was carried out using 10 mM TCEP and 55 mM IAA in urea buffer, respectively. Subsequently, proteins were washed with urea buffer. All centrifugations steps were carried out at 14,000 x g for 30 min. Ultimately, proteins were subjected to proteolytic digestion in a digestion solution containing 1 µg Trypsin/Lys-C protease mix for 16 h at 37 °C. Digested peptides were collected by ultrafiltration and centrifugation for 14,000 x g for 60 min. The filtrate was acidified by adding formic acid to final concentration of 0.1 % (v/v). For the following mass spectrometric analysis, the filtrates were further desalted using Pierce™ Peptide Desalting Spin columns and eventually resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Generated raw spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.3) with the integrated search algorithm Andromeda. Experimental spectra were matched to Uniprot human reference protein database. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, whereas methionine oxidation was allowed as variable modification. Trypsin was set as protease in specfic mode with two allowed missed cleavages. Protein and peptide FDR was limited to 0.01. One unique peptide were neccessary for protein inferences.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Exoquick, Plasma-derived exosomes

### Affiliations
Department Preclinical Development and Validation, Unit Proteomics, Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and Immunology, Leipzig, Germany
Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and Immunology

### Submitter
Johannes Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Kalkhof
Department Preclinical Development and Validation, Unit Proteomics, Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and Immunology, Leipzig, Germany


