### Accession
PXD027627

### Title
Proteomics profiling based on TMT and PRM reveal crucial biological processes in the leaves of Sophora alopecuroides under salt stress

### Description
This project was based on Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) and Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) technologies to study the changes in protein expression of leaves in Sophora alopecuroides under 150 mM NaCl condition treated for 3 days and 7 days. It was worthy of attention that the expression of several transporters related to the second messenger signaling pathway, such as the phosphatidylinositol signaling system, cAMP signaling pathway, and calcium signaling pathway had changed when treated for 3 d. However, the expression of some transferase, oxidoreductase, dehydrogenase was involved in the biosynthesis of flavonoids, alkaloids, phenylpropanoids and certain amino acid metabolisms had changed when treated for 7 d. This study analyzed the proteomic profiling of Sophora alopecuroides in response to salt stress using high-throughput omics technology firstly. Many potential genes were discovered that might be involved in salt stress, which laid the foundation for further research on their functions. All the results are of great significance for the researchers who are focus on the molecular genetic machnisms of abiotic stresses in plants, especially under salt stress.

### Sample Protocol
The seeds of Sophora alopecuroides L. were collected from the teaching and experimental farm of Ningxia University, Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, China (106°24′ E, 38°24′ N). Seeds of uniform size, fullness, and free of insects were treated with concentrated sulfuric acid for 90 min and were rinsed with clean water several times. When the seeds grow to whiteness in a dark constant temperature (25°C) incubator, the seeds were transplanted into flower pots with a diameter of 40 cm and cultivated in a greenhouse for 50 days. Afterward, the plants were irrigated with 150 mM NaCl for 3 days and 7 days and sampled the leaves respectively. The three groups including control were marked as Z (control), F (3 d), and T (7 d). There are three replicates for each group, a total of 9 samples.Using liquid nitrogen to grind the leaves of Sophora alopecuroides L. into a fine powder and extracting the protein by SDT (4%(w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT) lysis method. Taking 20 µg of protein from each sample, and using the BCA method for protein quantification. Then, taking an appropriate amount of protein from each sample and using the filter aided proteome preparation (FASP) method for trypsin digestion.100 g of peptides were taken from each sample and labeled according to the instructions of Thermo company's TMT labeling kit. Each group of labeled peptides was mixed in equal amounts and graded by High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit. After each converted peptide sample was vacuum dried, the lyophilized sample was resolubilized with 12 μL 0.1% FA, and the peptide concentration was determined by OD280. Each fractionated sample was separated using the HPLC liquid system Easy nLC with a nanoliter flow rate. Besides, buffer A was 0.1% formic acid aqueous solution, and buffer B was 0.1% formic acid acetonitrile aqueous solution (84% acetonitrile). The chromatographic column was equilibrated with 95% of liquid A, and the samples were loaded by the autosampler onto the loading column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 m*2 cm, nano Viper C18), and passed through the analytical column (Thermo scientific EASY column，10 cm，ID75 m，3 m，C18-A2) separation and the flow rate was 300 nL/min.  The samples were separated by chromatography and finally analyzed by mass spectrometry using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. The detection method was positive ion, and the scan range of precursor ion was 300 – 1800 m/z. Resolution of the primary mass spectrometer was 70,000 at 200 m/z, and AGC (Automatic gain control) target was 1e6, and Maximum IT was 50 ms, and the Dynamic Exclusion Time was 60.0 s. The mass-to-charge ratio of peptides and peptide fragments were measured according to the following method collection: 20 fragmentation maps were collected after each full scan, and MS2 Activation Type was HCD, and Isolation Window was 2 m/z, and the resolution of the secondary mass spectrum was 17,500 at 200 m/z (TMT 6-plex) or 35,000 at 200 m/z (TMT 10-plex), and Normalized Collision Energy was 30 eV and Underfill was 0.1%. All the above were done by Shanghai Applied Protein Technology Co.ltd

### Data Protocol
Two software Mascot2.2 and Proteome Discoverer1.4 were applied to operate database identification and quantitative analysis on MS/MS data. Transcriptomics data from RNA-seq for leaves of S. alopecuroides in our laboratory was used for proteomics analysis. Trypsin was utilized as a random cleavage enzyme, and the Max Missed Cleavages was 2. The Fixed Modifications was Carbamidomethyl (C), TMT 6/10plex (N-term), TMT6/10 plex (K). The Variable Modifications was Oxidation (M) , TMT 6/10plex (Y). The Peptide Mass Tolerance was established as ± 20 ppm, and the Fragment Mass Tolerance was 0.1Da.  The database schema used to calculate FDR was Decoy. The screening criteria for credible peptides was FDR≤0.01. We performed protein quantification standards based on the median of the quantification value of unique peptides. Then, normalized all peptide ratios by the median protein ratio. The median protein ratio should be 1 after the normalization. Plant-mPLoc software was run to predict the subcellular location of the identified proteins. Differentially expressed proteins (DEP) were screened according to the expression fold change of 1.2 times or more (up-regulation greater than 1.2 times or down-regulation less than 0.83 times) and P value<0.05. After normalizing the target proteins, using the R package (R Version 3.4) to perform cluster analysis. Two software, Blast2Go (https://www.blast2go.com/) and KEGG Automatic Annotation Server (KAAS) were applied for GO annotation and KEGG pathway analysis on target protein sets, respectively. Using Fisher’s Exact Test to execute GO annotation and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis. The STRING (http://string-db.org/) database and CytoScape software (version number: 3.2.1) were used to analyze the protein interaction network.

### Publication Abstract
Salt stress is the major abiotic stress worldwide, adversely affecting crop yield and quality. Utilizing salt tolerance genes for the genetic breeding of crops is one of the most effective measures to withstand salinization. Sophora alopecuroides is a well-known saline-alkaline and drought-tolerant medicinal plant. Understanding the underlying molecular mechanism for Sophora alopecuroides salt tolerance is crucial to identifying the salt-tolerant genes. In this study, we performed tandem mass tag (TMT) based proteomic profiling of S. alopecuroides leaves under 150&#xa0;mM NaCl induced salt stress condition for 3 d and 7 d. Data are available on ProteomeXchange (PXD027627). Furthermore, the proteomic findings were validated through parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). We observed that the expression levels of several transporter proteins related to the secondary messenger signaling pathway were altered under salt stress conditions induced for 3 d. However, the expression of the certain transferase, oxidoreductase, dehydrogenase, which are involved in the biosynthesis of flavonoids, alkaloids, phenylpropanoids, and amino acid metabolism, were mainly alerted after 7 d post-salt-stress induction. Several potential genes that might be involved in salt stress conditions were identified; however, it demands further investigation. Although salt stress affects the level of secondary metabolites, their correlation needs to be investigated further. SIGNIFICANCE: Salinization is the most severe abiotic adversity, which has had a significant negative effect on world food security over the time. Excavating salt-tolerant genes from halophytes or medicinal plants is one of the important measures to cope with salt stress. S. alopecuroides is a well-known medicinal plant with anti-tumor, anti-inflammatory, and antibacterial effects, anti-saline properties, and resistance to drought stress. Currently, only a few studies have explored the S. alopecuroides' gene function, and regulation and these studies are mostly related to the unpublished genome sequence information of S. alopecuroides. Recently, transcriptomics and metabolomics studies have been carried on the abiotic stress in S. alopecuroides roots. Multiple studies have shown that altered gene expression at the transcript level and altered metabolite levels do not correspond to the altered protein levels. In this study, TMT and PRM based proteomic analyses of S. alopecuroides leaves under salt stress condition induced using 150&#xa0;mM NaCl for 3 d and 7 d was performed. These analyses elucidated the activation of different mechanisms in response to salt stress. A total of 434 differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) in salt stress conditions were identified and analyzed. For the first time, this study utilized proteomics technology to dig out plentiful underlying salt-tolerant genes from the medicinal plant, S. alopecuroides. We believe that this study will be of great significance to crop genetics and breeding.

### Keywords
Salt stress, Proteomics, Tmt, Prm, Sophora alopecuroides

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Modern Molecular Breeding of Advantageous Crops of Ningxia, School of Agriculture, Ningxia University, Yinchuan, Ningxia 750021, China

### Submitter
Tian-li Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Liu
Key Laboratory of Modern Molecular Breeding of Advantageous Crops of Ningxia, School of Agriculture, Ningxia University, Yinchuan, Ningxia 750021, China


