### Accession
PXD016759

### Title
Triple SILAC based quantitative MS approach to determine Withaferin A regulated proteins in prostate cancer

### Description
Withaferin A (WA) is a lactone extracted from Withania somnifera commonly known as Ashwagandha. WA has several therapeutic benefits. The current study was aimed to identify biomarkers that could be targeted by WA in prostate cancer (PCA) cells. We have used SILAC approach to identify WA-regulated proteins at 4 h and 24 time points in three PCA cell lines such as LNCaP, 22Rv1 and DU-145. Ontology prediction suggested that WA treatment can upregulate stress-responsive pathways and shutdown translation and cell metabolism to conserve energy. The cytoprotective stress granule (SG) protein G3BP1 showed upregulation in all the three tested cell lines in response to WA treatment, and subsequently, SGs formed at a higher rate in the WA treated cells. Knockdown (KD) of G3BP1 blocked WA-induced SG formation and reduced the cell survival. We speculate that the activation of G3BP1 and the formation of SGs might constitute a mechanism by which PCA cells induce cell protection after WA- treatment. Knock down of SG proteins such as G3BP1 could help to evade the cytoprotective effects of WA and to assist in the sensitization of cells.

### Sample Protocol
To evaluate differences in the protein profile of WA treated cells, we employed a SILAC quantitation strategy. For isotopic labeling, we chose three different prostate cancer cell lines such as LNCaP, DU-145, and 22Rv1. Each cell line was cultured in either “light” medium, which contain normal endogenous arginine and lysine (R0K0), or media containing isotopic arginine and lysine; K4R6 for “medium” and K8R10 for “heavy” growth media. Cells cultured in light growth media were left untreated while cells cultured in “medium” and “heavy” growth media were treated with WA for 4 h and 24 h, respectively. All experiments were conducted in triplicates. Following treatment, the cells were collected and cell lysates were mixed a 1:1:1 ratio and subjected to trypsin digestion, followed by LC–MS/MS. The MS/MS spectra were searched and validated using the proteome discoverer software.

### Data Protocol
All data files were processed with Protein Discoverer 2.2.0.388. Spectrum files were recalibrated and features extracted with Minora. Searches were carried out with Sequest HT withSwissProt TaxID=9606 (v2017-10-25) with precursor mass tolerance 10ppm and fragment mass tolerance 0.01Da, carbamidomethyl static modification and M,P dynamic modification.  Additional dynamic modifications for double SILAC label were 13C(6)15N(4) R; 13C(6)15N(2) K and with further addition of 13C(6) for and 2H(4) for triple label.  Decoy database Strict and relaxed FDR targets were 0.01 and 0.05 based on q value.  Precursor quantification was intensity based with unique and razor peptides used, normalizing on total peptide amount with scaling on all average. Ratio determination was pairwise based ANOVA and protein grouping based on strict parsimony.  MZid and MGF files were generated from the processed data using PD.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Triple silac, Withaferin a, Lncap, 22rv1, G3bp1, Du-145, Stress granule, Mass spectrometry, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Vancouver Prostate Centre, Vancouver, Canada
Vancouver Prostate Centre

### Submitter
Syam Prakash Somasekharan

### Lab Head
Dr Syam Prakash Somasekharan
Vancouver Prostate Centre, Vancouver, Canada


