### Accession
PXD009748

### Title
Proximity labeling and identification of the proteins that interact with Siglec-14 on THP-1 cells

### Description
Proteins that interact with Siglec-14 were identified by proximity labeling, followed by streptavidin affinity purification and proteomic analysis. MaxQuant software was used for the quantitative analysis of the proteins identified.

### Sample Protocol
Proximity biotin labeling and identification of the proteins interacting with mSiglec-14 was performed by applying the method previously described (Chang, L. et al., J Proteome Res 2017, 16:3929-3941).  FLAG-Siglec-14/THP-1 cells (5 × 10^6 cells) were incubated with 5 μg of ANTI-FLAG M2-Peroxidase antibody (Sigma A8592) on ice for 30 minutes and washed twice with PBS. Cells were suspended in PBS containing biotin-tyramide (10 μM) and hydrogen peroxide (10 mM), and incubated for 5 min at room temperature. Cells were washed 3 times with PBS, and lysed in 500 μl of cell lysis buffer containing protease inhibitor (Roche). Biotinylated proteins were purified with 200 μl of Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin C1 paramagnetic beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific), eluted with 50 μl of SDS-PAGE sample buffer, and subjected to brief SDS-PAGE. The area containing proteins was excised and subjected to in-gel reduction and trypsin digestion, followed by liquid chromatography-coupled tandem mass spectrometry for protein identification using TLQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Acquired data was analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.1 (Tyanova, S. et al., Nat Protoc 2016, 11:2301-2319).

### Publication Abstract
Human sialic acid-binding immunoglobulin-like lectin 14 (Siglec-14) is a glycan-recognition protein that is expressed on myeloid cells, recognizes bacterial pathogens, and elicits pro-inflammatory responses. Although Siglec-14 is a transmembrane protein, a soluble form of Siglec-14 is also present in human blood. However, the mechanism that generates soluble Siglec-14 and what role this protein form may play remain unknown. Here, investigating the generation and function of soluble Siglec-14, we found that soluble Siglec-14 is derived from an alternatively spliced mRNA that retains intron 5, containing a termination codon and thus preventing the translation of exon 6, which encodes Siglec-14's transmembrane domain. We also note that the translated segment in intron 5 encodes a unique C-terminal 7-amino acid extension, which allowed the specific antibody-mediated detection of this isoform in human blood. Moreover, soluble Siglec-14 dose-dependently suppressed pro-inflammatory responses of myeloid cells that expressed membrane-bound Siglec-14, likely by interfering with the interaction between membrane-bound Siglec-14 and Toll-like receptor 2 on the cell surface. We also found that intron 5 contains a G-rich segment that assumes an RNA tertiary structure called a G-quadruplex, which may regulate the efficiency of intron 5 splicing. Taken together, we propose that soluble Siglec-14 suppresses pro-inflammatory responses triggered by membrane-bound Siglec-14.

### Keywords
Cis-ligand, Thp-1, Siglec-14, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University and Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica
IBC, Academia Sinica. 

### Submitter
Jimmy Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Takashi Angata
Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University and Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica


