### Accession
PXD014138

### Title
Age-dependent dynamics of ribosomal proteins in mouse brain

### Description
To determine the dynamics of ribosomal proteins in brain tissues, we isolated monoribosomes and ribosomes engaged in polysomal fractions from three different brain tissues, cerebellum, hippocampus and cortex, and compared them to the liver of CD-1 IGS mouse. We provide a comprehensive unique study of the ribosomal composition among these different tissues along different life stages, from juvenile (three-weeks), young adult (four-months) to mature adults (seven- and twelve-months) of age. The protein composition of the ribosomes was quantified using LC-MS/MS approach.

### Sample Protocol
Ribosome enriched samples were run briefly into a 1D SDS gel to remove contaminates and in-gel digested with trypsin after previous reduction with dithiothreitol and alkylation with iodo acetamide. Data dependent and data independent acquisition (DDA/DIA) mass spectrometry was performed on a Thermo Fusion Trybrid mass spectrometer equipped with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC using a 500 x 75 µm C18 reversed phase column.

### Data Protocol
Acquired DDA LC-MS/MS data were searched with the Sequest algorithm integrated in the Proteome Discoverer software version 2.0. Only peptide with a high confidence (false discovery rate < 1% using a decoy data base approach) were accepted as identified. Proteome Discoverer search results were imported into Skyline software version 4.2 allowing only high confidence peptides with more than 4 fragment ions. A maximum of 5 fragment ions per peptide were used for information extraction from DIA files for peptides with a dot product of > 0.85.

### Publication Abstract
Across phyla, the ribosomes-the central molecular machines for translation of genetic information-exhibit an overall preserved architecture and a conserved functional core. The natural heterogeneity of the ribosome periodically phases a debate on their functional specialization and the tissue-specific variations of the ribosomal protein (RP) pool. Using sensitive differential proteomics, we performed a thorough quantitative inventory of the protein composition of ribosomes from 3 different mouse brain tissues, i.e., hippocampus, cortex, and cerebellum, across various ages, i.e., juvenile, adult, and middle-aged mouse groups. In all 3 brain tissues, in both monosomal and polysomal ribosome fractions, we detected an invariant set of 72 of 79 core RPs, RACK1 and 2 of the 8 RP paralogs, the stoichiometry of which remained constant across different ages. The amount of a few RPs punctually varied in either one tissue or one age group, but these fluctuations were within the tight bounds of the measurement noise. Further comparison with the ribosomes from a high-metabolic-rate organ, e.g., the liver, revealed protein composition identical to that of the ribosomes from the 3 brain tissues. Together, our data show an invariant protein composition of ribosomes from 4 tissues across different ages of mice and support the idea that functional heterogeneity may arise from factors other than simply ribosomal protein stoichiometry.

### Keywords
Ribosomal proteins; translation; age-dependent changes; mouse brain tissues; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine
Mass Spectrometric Proteomics
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology  Department of Chemistry  University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany

### Submitter
Christoph Krisp

### Lab Head
Dr Zoya Ignatova
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology  Department of Chemistry  University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany


