### Accession
PXD025238

### Title
Multi-omics data integration reveals correlated regulatory features of triple negative breast cancer

### Description
Triple negative breast cancer is an aggressive type of breast cancer with very little treatment options. TNBC is very heterogeneous with large alterations in the genomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic landscapes leading to various subtypes with differing responses to therapeutic treatments. We applied a multi-omics data integration method to evaluate the correlation of important regulatory features in TNBC BRCA1 wild-type MDA-MB-231 and TNBC BRCA1 5382insC mutated HCC1937 cells compared with normal epithelial breast MCF10A cells. The data includes DNA methylation, RNAseq, protein, phosphoproteomics, and histone post-translational modification. Data integration methods identified regulatory features from each omics method had greater than 80% positive correlation within each TNBC subtype. Key regulatory features at each omics level were identified distinguishing the three cell lines and were involved in important cancer related pathways such as TGFbeta signaling, PI3K/AKT/mTOR, and Wnt/beta-catenin signaling.

### Sample Protocol
A protein and phosphopeptide analysis was performed as previously described in Storey et al (ProteoViz manuscript). 100ug of protein from each cell line was reduced, alkylated, and purified by chloroform/methanol extraction prior to digestion with sequencing grade trypsin and LysC (Promega). The resulting peptides were labeled using a tandem mass tag 10-plex isobaric label reagent set (Thermo) and enriched using High-Select TiO2 and Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kits (Thermo) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Both enriched and un-enriched labeled peptides were separated into 46 fractions on a 100 x 1.0 mm Acquity BEH C18 column (Waters) using an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo) with a 50 min gradient from 99:1 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio under basic pH conditions, and then consolidated into 18 super-fractions. Each super-fraction was then further separated by reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 um resin (Waters) on an in-line 150 x 0.075 mm column using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo). Peptides were eluted using a 60 min gradient from 98:2 to 60:40 buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile) to B ((0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile) ratio. Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.2 kV) followed by mass spectrometric analysis on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) using multi-notch MS3 parameters. MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in top-speed profile mode at a resolution of 120,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z. Following CID activation with normalized collision energy of 31.0, MS/MS data were acquired using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range. Using synchronous precursor selection, up to 10 MS/MS precursors were selected for HCD activation with normalized collision energy of 55.0, followed by acquisition of MS3 reporter ion data using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 50,000 over a range of 100-500 m/z.  The cell lines were grown to approximately 5 million cells, washed with 1x PBS, and the pellet was resuspended in 5 times the volume of the pellet with Radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer (RIPA; 10 mM Tris-Cl, ph 8.0, 1 mM Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 0.5 mM Ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid (EGTA), 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate, and 140 mM NaCl). The samples were incubated on ice for 30 min, spun at 4°C for 10 min at max speed, and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube for the whole lysate total protein analysis. The pellet was washed with RIPA and incubated with 0.4N H2SO4 at 4°C overnight. The samples were spun at 4°C for 10 min at max speed, the supernatant transferred to a new tube, added 66 µl of 100% TCA, incubated on ice for 30 min, spun at 4°C for 10 min at max speed, washed the pellet in ice cold acetone, air dried the pellet, and resuspended the histones in 50 µl of H2O. Histones were resolved (20 µg of histones per lane) by SDS-PAGE using 4 –20% Novex Tris-glycine gradient gels (Life Technologies, Inc.) and stained with Thermo Fisher Scientific Pierce GelCode Blue stain reagent. The region of each gel lane containing the core histones was excised as one piece, diced into small pieces, destained, treated with d6-acetic anhydride to chemically block unmodified lysines and monomethylated lysines with an isotopically heavy acetyl, and digested in-gel with trypsin. Tryptic peptides were separated by reverse phase Jupiter Proteo resin (Phenomenex) on a 100 0.075-mm column using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters). Peptides were eluted using a 40-min gradient from 97:3 to 35:65 buffer A/B ratio. (Buffer A consists of 0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile; buffer B consists of 0.1% formic acid, 75% acetonitrile). Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (1.9 kV) followed by MS/MS analysis using collision induced dissociation on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS data were acquired using the Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 60,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Proteins and phosphosites were identified and reporter ions quantified by searching the UniprotKB Homo sapiens database (November 2018) using MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43; Max Planck Institute) with a parent ion tolerance of 3 ppm, a fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da, a reporter ion tolerance of 0.001 Da, trypsin enzyme with 2 missed cleavages, variable modifications including oxidation on M, Acetyl on Protein N-term, and phosphorylation on STY, and fixed modification of Carbamidomethyl on C.  Protein and peptide identifications are accepted if they could be established with less than 1.0% false discovery.  TMT MS3 reporter ion intensity values were analyzed for changes in total protein using the unenriched lysate sample.  Phospho(STY) modifications were identified using the samples enriched for phosphorylated peptides. The enriched and un-enriched samples are multiplexed using two TMT10-plex batches, one for the enriched and one for the un-enriched samples. Following data acquisition and database search, the results were normalized using cyclic loess normalization for both the protein and the phosphopeptide data sets.  The normalized protein and phosphorylated peptide data was analyzed for differential abundance using the limma package by applying “lmFit” and “eBayes” functions. Protein kinases and their substrates were identified using PHOXTRAX. A similar approach was used for differential analysis of the phosphopeptides, with the addition of a few steps. The phosphosites were filtered to retain only peptides with a localization probability > 75%, filter peptides with zero values, and log2 cyclic loess transformed. Limma was also used for differential analysis of single phosphosite peptides.   Proteins were identified by searching the UniProtKB Homo sapiens database (October 2019 database) using an in-house Mascot server (version 2.5.1; Matrix Science). Mascot search parameters were specified as follows: trypsin digestion with up to two missed cleavages; fixed carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine; variable modifications including methyl, dimethyl, trimethyl, acetyl, acetyl/2 H3, and methyl + acetyl/2 H3 modification of lysine; 2.0 ppm precursor ion tolerance; 0.50-Da fragment ion tolerance. A reverse sequence decoy search was also performed. Peptide and protein identifications were validated using Scaffold (version 4.8.7; Proteome Software). Peptide and protein identifications were accepted with a 1% FDR which was assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (ref). The spectrum report was then exported for further analysis by PTMViz (https://github.com/ByrumLab/PTMViz). PTMviz was utilized to identify writers, erasers, and readers for methylation and acetylation (WERAM) modifying proteins for significant histone post-translational modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive type of breast cancer with very little treatment options. TNBC is very heterogeneous with large alterations in the genomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic landscapes leading to various subtypes with differing responses to therapeutic treatments. We applied a multi-omics data integration method to evaluate the correlation of important regulatory features in TNBC BRCA1 wild-type MDA-MB-231 and TNBC BRCA1 5382insC mutated HCC1937 cells compared with non-tumorigenic epithelial breast MCF10A cells. The data includes DNA methylation, RNAseq, protein, phosphoproteomics, and histone post-translational modification. Data integration methods identified regulatory features from each omics method that had greater than 80% positive correlation within each TNBC subtype. Key regulatory features at each omics level were identified distinguishing the three cell lines and were involved in important cancer related pathways such as TGF&#x3b2; signaling, PI3K/AKT/mTOR, and Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. We observed overexpression of PTEN, which antagonizes the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway, and MYC, which downregulates the same pathway in the HCC1937 cells relative to the MDA-MB-231 cells. The PI3K/AKT/mTOR and Wnt/beta-catenin pathways are both downregulated in HCC1937 cells relative to MDA-MB-231 cells, which likely explains the divergent sensitivities of these cell lines to inhibitors of downstream signaling pathways. The DNA methylation and RNAseq data is freely available <i>via</i> GEO GSE171958 and the proteomics data is available <i>via</i> the ProteomeXchange PXD025238.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Multi-omics data integration, Rna-seq, Histone posttranslational modification, Triple negative breast cancer

### Affiliations
UAMS
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA  Arkansas Children’s Research Institute, 13 Children’s Way, Little Rock, AR 72202, USA

### Submitter
Stephanie Byrum

### Lab Head
Dr Stephanie D Byrum
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA  Arkansas Children’s Research Institute, 13 Children’s Way, Little Rock, AR 72202, USA


