### Accession
PXD003784

### Title
PRICKLE1

### Description
Identification of the protein associated to PRICKLE1. Components of the evolutionarily conserved developmental planar cell polarity (PCP) pathway were recently described to play a prominent role in cancer cell dissemination. However, the molecular mechanisms by which PCP molecules drive the spread of cancer cells remain largely unknown. PRICKLE1 encodes a PCP protein bound to the promigratory serine/threonine kinase MINK1. We identify RICTOR, a member of the mTORC2 complex, as a PRICKLE1-binding partner and show that the integrity of the PRICKLE1-MINK1-RICTOR complex is required for activation of AKT, regulation of focal adhesions and cancer cell migration. Disruption of the PRICKLE1-RICTOR interaction results in a strong impairment of breast cancer cell dissemination in xenograft assays. Finally, we show that up-regulation of PRICKLE1 in basal breast cancers, a subtype characterized by high metastatic potential, is associated with poor metastasis-free survival.

### Sample Protocol
5x1075x107 HEK293T cells expressing either FLAG-PRICKLE1 were used for affinity purification procedure. Briefly, cells were lysed and solubilized in TAP lysis buffer (0.1% Igepal CA 630, 10% glycerol, 50mM Hepes-NaOH; pH 8.0, 150mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 2mM DTT, 10mM NaF, 0.25mM NaOVO3, 50mM β-glycerophosphate, and protease inhibitor cocktail (Calbiochem). After 30 min centrifugation at 40,000xg (18,000 rpm in a Beckman JA20 rotor), the soluble fraction is incubated overnight at 4°C with anti-FLAG M2 beads (Sigma). Beads were washed with TAP lysis buffer followed by 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Finally, proteins were eluted twice from the beads using 200μl of 500mM ammonium hydroxide at pH 11.0. The eluted fraction was evaporated by speedvac and the remaining pellet was then washed with 100μl of milliQ water. The pellet was then resuspended in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 25mM DTT and alkylated with 100mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) and supplemented with 1mM CaCl2 (Bioshop) prior to digestion with 1μg of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega). HEK293T cells expressing either FLAG-PRICKLE1 were used for affinity purification procedure. Briefly, cells were lysed and solubilized in TAP lysis buffer (0.1% Igepal CA 630, 10% glycerol, 50mM Hepes-NaOH; pH 8.0, 150mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 2mM DTT, 10mM NaF, 0.25mM NaOVO3, 50mM β-glycerophosphate, and protease inhibitor cocktail (Calbiochem). After 30 min centrifugation at 40,000xg (18,000 rpm in a Beckman JA20 rotor), the soluble fraction is incubated overnight at 4°C with anti-FLAG M2 beads (Sigma). Beads were washed with TAP lysis buffer followed by 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Finally, proteins were eluted twice from the beads using 200μl of 500mM ammonium hydroxide at pH 11.0. The eluted fraction was evaporated by speedvac and the remaining pellet was then washed with 100μl of milliQ water. The pellet was then resuspended in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 25mM DTT and alkylated with 100mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) and supplemented with 1mM CaCl2 (Bioshop) prior to digestion with 1μg of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out by LC-MSMS using a LTQ-Velos-Orbitrap (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) online with a nanoLC Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). 5µl corresponding to 1/5th of whole sample were injected on the system. After pre-concentration and washing of the sample on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (2cm × 100μm i.d. 100 A, 5μm particle size), peptides were separated on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (15cm × 75μm i.d., 100 A, 2µm particle size) at a flow rate of 300nL/min a two steps linear gradient (4-20% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 90 min and 20-45-45% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 30 min. The separation of the peptides was monitored by a UV detector (absorption at 214 nm). For peptides ionization in the nanospray source, spray voltage was set at 1.4 kV and the capillary temperature at 275°C. All samples were measured in a data dependent acquisition mode. Each run was preceded by a blank MS run in order to monitor system background. Peptide masses are measured in a survey full scan (scan range 300-1700 m/z, with 30 K FWHM resolution at m/z=400, target AGC value of 1.00×106 and maximum injection time of 500 ms). In parallel to the high-resolution full scan in the Orbitrap, the data-dependent CID scans of the 10 most intense precursor ions were fragmented and measured in the linear ion trap (normalized collision energy of 35 %, activation time of 10 ms, target AGC value of 1.00×104, maximum injection time 100 ms, isolation window 2 Da). Parent masses obtained in orbitrap analyzer were automatically calibrated on 445.1200 locked mass. The fragment ion masses are measured in the linear ion trap to have a maximum sensitivity and the maximum amount of MS/MS data. Dynamic exclusion was implemented with a repeat count of 1 and exclusion duration of 30 s. Raw files generated from mass spectrometry analysis were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific). This software was used to search data via in-house Mascot server (version 2.4.1; Matrix Science Inc., London, UK) against the Human subset (20,194 sequences) of the SwissProt database (version 2014_10). Database search were performed using the following settings: a maximum of two trypsin miscleavage allowed, methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications, cysteine carbamido-methylation as fixed modification. A peptide mass tolerance of 6 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da were used for search analysis. Only peptides with high stringency Mascot score threshold (identity, FDR<1%) were used for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mink1, Rictor, Prickle1

### Affiliations
CRCM
CRCM, Cell Polarity, Cell signalling and Cancer “Equipe labellisée Ligue Contre le Cancer”, Inserm,U1068, Marseille, F-13009, France Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, F-13009, France Aix-Marseille Université, F-13284, Marseille, France CNRS, UMR7258

### Submitter
Avais Daulat

### Lab Head
Dr Avais M Daulat
CRCM, Cell Polarity, Cell signalling and Cancer “Equipe labellisée Ligue Contre le Cancer”, Inserm,U1068, Marseille, F-13009, France Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, F-13009, France Aix-Marseille Université, F-13284, Marseille, France CNRS, UMR7258


