### Accession
PXD040482

### Title
The anti-proliferative activty and moldecular mechanisms of action of gut microbial metabolites against human breast adenocarcinoma cell lines

### Description
Label free quantification proteomics of the cytotoxic and synergistic mechanisms of action against MCF7 cells for nisin, inosine, vitamin D, sodium butyrate and docetaxel.

### Sample Protocol
100 µg of protein samples were used for chemical and enzymatic sample processing using the EasyPep™ Mini MS Sample Prep Kit as per the manufacturer’s protocol (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA). The final volume was adjusted to 100 µL using lysis buffer in a microcentrifuge tube. The reduction and alkylation solutions (50 µL each) were added, gently mixed, and incubated at 95 °C using a heat block for 10 min. The samples are allowed to cool at RT, then 50 µL of the reconstituted trypsin/lys-C protease mixture was added to each sample and incubated with shaking at 37 °C for 3 h. After incubation, 50 µL of digestion stop solution was added and mixed gently. Peptides clean up columns were implemented to remove hydrophilic and hydrophobic contaminants. Clean peptide samples were dried using a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 100 µL 0.1% formic acid in water for LC-MS analysis and carefully placed in maximum recovery sample vials (Waters Corp, USA). Label-free bottom-up quantification via nano-ultra high-performance liquid chromatography coupled with quadruple time of flight mass spectrometry (nano-UPLC-qTOF-MS) LCMS data was acquired according to our previous studies (Alsherbiny, Bhuyan et al. 2021, Alsherbiny, Bhuyan et al. 2021).

### Data Protocol
Progenesis QI software (Waters Corporation, USA) was used to import and further process the MassLynx acquired data. Automatic selection of alignment reference among QC samples was set and peptides were identified against Uniprot human proteome database (May 2022 version) using ion accounting method with 250 kDa protein mass maximum. One fragment per peptide or one peptide per protein together with 3 fragments per protein were set as ion matching requirements using relative quantification implementing the Hi-N method (n = 3). Auto peptide and fragment tolerance and less than 4% FDR were set for search tolerance parameters. Peptides with absolute mass error > 20 ppm or single charged were further filtered out. Pairwise comparisons of the identified proteins in the treated groups were done against the control group for cytotoxic potential exploration, while the most synergistic combination samples were compared against mono treated samples for the elucidation of possible synergistic mechanisms. In each experimental design proteins with analysis of variance (ANOVA)-derived p-value at least ≤ 0.05 and q value ≤ 0.05 with fold change among ≥ 2 were considered significant and included for further pathway analyses. Differentially expressed proteins identified by the quantitative processing of the LC-MS/MS analysis of the proteome tryptic digestion were analysed by STRING(Szklarczyk, Morris et al. 2016), Reactome(Fabregat, Jupe et al. 2018), g;profiler (Reimand, Isserlin et al. 2019) and IMPaLA (Kamburov, Cavill et al. 2011) to identify the relevant pathways responsible for the synergistic effect against the MCF7 cells. The G:SCS algorithm was used for multiple testing corrections in g:profiler platform with an adjusted p-value of 0.05 threshold. The raw and processed data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRoteomics IDEntifications (PRIDE) repository  (Perez-Riverol, Csordas et al. 2019)

### Publication Abstract
The gut microbiota undergoes metabolic processes to produce by-products (gut metabolites), which play a vital role in the overall maintenance of health and prevention of disease within the body. However, the use of gut metabolites as anticancer agents and their molecular mechanisms of action are largely unknown. Therefore, this study evaluated the anti-proliferative effects of three key gut microbial metabolites-sodium butyrate, inosine, and nisin, against MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 breast adenocarcinoma cell lines. To determine the potential mechanistic action of these gut metabolites, flow cytometric assessments of apoptotic potential, reactive oxygen species (ROS) production measurements and proteomics analyses were performed. Sodium butyrate exhibited promising cytotoxicity, with IC<sub>50</sub> values of 5.23 mM and 5.06 mM against MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 cells, respectively. All three metabolites were found to induce apoptotic cell death and inhibit the production of ROS in both cell lines. Nisin and inosine indicated a potential activation of cell cycle processes. Sodium butyrate indicated the possible initiation of signal transduction processes and cellular responses to stimuli. Further investigations are necessary to ascertain the effective therapeutic dose of these metabolites, and future research on patient-derived tumour spheroids will provide insights into the potential use of these gut metabolites in cancer therapy.

### Keywords
Gut metabolites, Gut microbiota, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
University of New South Wales, Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, Western Sydney University, Cairo University
NICM Health Research Institute, Western Sydney University,Australia

### Submitter
Muhammad Alsherbiny

### Lab Head
Dr Deep Bhuyan
NICM Health Research Institute, Western Sydney University,Australia


