### Accession
PXD007093

### Title
Analysis of the mouse kidney cortex phosphoproteome of VPS34 knockout and control animals

### Description
We generated phosphoproteomics data of renal cortices of mice with and without tubule-specific vps34 knockout.

### Sample Protocol
We lysed renal cortex in 8M urea buffer, homogenized the tissue, reduced and alkylated proteins, and subjected it to tryptic digestion and phosphopeptide enrichment using IMAC columns.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using MaxQuant as indicated in the methods section of the accompanying paper.

### Publication Abstract
The lipid kinase VPS34 orchestrates autophagy, endocytosis, and metabolism and is implicated in cancer and metabolic disease. The proximal tubule in the kidney is a key metabolic organ that controls reabsorption of nutrients such as fatty acids, amino acids, sugars, and proteins. Here, by combining metabolomics, proteomics, and phosphoproteomics analyses with functional and superresolution imaging assays of mice with an inducible deficiency in proximal tubular cells, we revealed that VPS34 controlled the metabolome of the proximal tubule. In addition to inhibiting pinocytosis and autophagy, VPS34 depletion induced membrane exocytosis and reduced the abundance of the retromer complex necessary for proper membrane recycling and lipid retention, leading to a loss of fuel and biomass. Integration of omics data into a kidney cell metabolomic model demonstrated that VPS34 deficiency increased &#x3b2;-oxidation, reduced gluconeogenesis, and enhanced the use of glutamine for energy consumption. Furthermore, the omics datasets revealed that VPS34 depletion triggered an antiviral response that included a decrease in the abundance of apically localized virus receptors such as ACE2. VPS34 inhibition abrogated SARS-CoV-2 infection in human kidney organoids and cultured proximal tubule cells in a glutamine-dependent manner. Thus, our results demonstrate that VPS34 adjusts endocytosis, nutrient transport, autophagy, and antiviral responses in proximal tubule cells in the kidney.

### Keywords
Proximal tubule, Mouse, Autophagy, Kidney

### Affiliations
Kidney research center cologne
University Hospital Cologne

### Submitter
Markus Rinschen

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Rinschen
University Hospital Cologne


