### Accession
PXD038630

### Title
Circulating extracellular vesicles promote recovery in a preclinical model of intracerebral haemorrhage.

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) participate in cell-to-cell paracrine signaling and can be biomarkers of the pathophysiological processes underlying disease. In intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH), the study of the number and molecular content of circulating EVs may help elucidate the biological mechanisms involved in damage and repair, contributing valuable information to the identification of new therapeutic targets. The objective of this study was to describe the number and protein content of blood-derived EVs following an ICH in an animal model in rats treated with allogenic or xenogenic (human) EVs. The protein content of the EVs from the treated animals and control group was analyzed by mass spectrometric data-dependent acquisition; protein quantification was obtained by sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra data and compared at pre-defined time points.

### Sample Protocol
EVs were isolated from serum samples using the ExoQuick ULTRA EV isolation kit (System Biosciences, USA) following manufacturer instructions. Isolated EVs were stored at -80 °C until analysis.A mass spectrometric data-dependent acquisition (DDA) qualitative analysis and protein quantification by sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH) data independent acquisition (DIA) was performed to determine the specific protein content of EVs at the predefined study time points. Qualitative and quantitative protein identification was performed by processing a total amount of 100 µg protein. Four µg peptides were digested and separated using reverse phase chromatography. The gradient was created using the NanoLC 400 microflow chromatography system (SCIEX, USA) coupled to a high-speed Triple TOF 6600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX, USA) with a microflow source using a data-dependent acquisition method and 90-minute gradient for qualitative analysis and 40-minute gradient for library creation and grouping each EV type in a pool for SWATH quantification. For qualitative analysis or SWATH library validation, only those proteins with a false discovery rate of <1 % (99% protein confidence) were selected. Once the library was prepared, the SWATH DIA method was created and 4 µg of each sample and its technical replicates [four pooled samples (Allogenic EVs 28d, Xenogenic EVs 28d, control with good spontaneous recovery EVs 28d and control with poor spontaneous recovery EVs 28d], each run in triplicate) were analyzed in the TripleTOF 6600. The total ion chromatogram profile for each individual sample was then used in the qualitative DDA method and quantitative SWATH analysis.

### Data Protocol
The results from the proteomic studies were then analyzed using SWATH principal component analysis (PCA) and cluster analysis, R 3.5.3 (R Core Team, Austria) with “base,” “stats,” “gplots,” “Hmisc,” “dplyr,” and “car” packages. The PCA was applied considering the correlation matrix due to its pairwise two-sided p-values being 0 for the entire matrix, all of them therefore being statistically significant, which could account for the successful application of the PCA. The total variability of the data was 87.70% and is explained with the first two principal components. For the cluster analysis, a Student’s t-test for means comparison between samples and Euclidean distance suitable for quantitative variables and complete linkage as cluster criteria were applied. For differentially expressed protein selection, p-values were adjusted using a Benjamini-Hochberg correction, selecting proteins with a FC of >2 or <0.5 and an adjusted p-value of <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Circulating extracellular vesicles (EVs) are proposed to participate in enhancing pathways of recovery after stroke through paracrine signaling. To verify this hypothesis in a proof-of-concept study, blood-derived allogenic EVs from rats and xenogenic EVs from humans who experienced spontaneous good recovery after an intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) were administered intravenously to rats at 24&#xa0;h after a subcortical ICH. At 28&#xa0;days, both treatments improved the motor function assessment scales score, showed greater fiber preservation in the perilesional zone (diffusion tensor-fractional anisotropy MRI), increased immunofluorescence markers of myelin (MOG), and decreased astrocyte markers (GFAP) compared with controls. Comparison of the protein cargo of circulating EVs at 28&#xa0;days from animals with good vs. poor recovery showed down-expression of immune system activation pathways (CO4, KLKB1, PROC, FA9, and C1QA) and of restorative processes such as axon guidance (RAC1), myelination (MBP), and synaptic vesicle trafficking (SYN1), which is in line with better tissue preservation. Up-expression of PCSK9 (neuron differentiation) in xenogenic EVs-treated animals suggests enhancement of repair pathways. In conclusion, the administration of blood-derived EVs improved recovery after ICH. These findings open a new and promising opportunity for further development of restorative therapies to improve the outcomes after an ICH.

### Keywords
Rat, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Intracerebral hemorrhage, Blood

### Affiliations
FIDIS
Instituto de Investigaciones Sanitarias de Santiago de Compostela

### Submitter
Susana Bravo

### Lab Head
Dr Susana Bravo
Instituto de Investigaciones Sanitarias de Santiago de Compostela


