### Accession
PXD012465

### Title
Analysis of human fetuin peptides originating from the serum of individuals, part 2

### Description
Human fetuin, also known as α-2-HS glycoprotein, is an abundant glycoprotein circulating in human plasma. AHSG is the gene symbol responsible for coding the fetuin protein. A frequent polymorphism of AHSG results in two alleles, AHSG*1 and AHSG*2, which producing three genotypes (AHSG*1, AHSG*2, and heterozygous AHSG1/2). The backbone amino acid sequences of fetuin coded by AHSG*1 and AHSG*2 genes differ from each other in two amino acids including one O-glycosylation site (position 256). We aim to describe human’s individual fetuin proteoform profiles directly isolated from serum of healthy and septic people, focusing on potential glycoproteogenomics correlations, e.g. how gene polymorphisms may affect glycosylation.

### Sample Protocol
An Agilent 1290 Infinity HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn. Germany) consisting of a vacuum degasser, binary pump, refrigerated autosampler with 500-μL injector loop, two column compartment with thermostat, auto collection fraction module and multi-wavelength detector, was used in this study. The dual-column set-up, comprised of a tandem WAX-CAT (PolyWAX LP, 200 × 2.1 mm i.d., 5 μm, 1000 Å; PolyCAT A, 50 × 2.1 mm i.d., 5 μm, 1000 Å) two-stage column set- up. All columns were obtained from PolyLC Inc. (Columbia, USA. The column compartment was cooled to 17 °C while the other compartments were chilled to 4 °C to minimize sample degradation. Mobile phase Buffer A consisted of 100 mM AMAC in water, and mobile phase Buffer B consisted of 2.5 M AMAC in water. Typically, 50 μL of serum sample was injected per run (~3.5 mg total protein). Elution was achieved using a multi-step gradient, consisting of six transitions with increasing proportions of Buffer B: (step 1; equilibration) 0%B, 0–6 min; (step 2; salt gradient) 0–20%B, 6–11 min; (step 3; salt gradient) 20–36%B, 11–24 min; (step 4; high salt rinse) 36–100%B, 24–28 min; (step 5; high salt wash) 100%B, 28–32 min; (step 6; restoration) 100–0%B. The flow rate was set to 800 μL/min. The chromatograms were monitored by absorption at 280 nm and time-based fractions collected every 0.5 min from 19-23 min using an automated fraction collector. Around 2 µg of fetuin protein was taken from the protein fraction containing fetuin and added 50 mM ABC at a concentration of 1 mg/mL, then reduced with 4 mM DTT at 56 °C for 30 min and alkylated with 8 mM IAA at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Fetuin was digested for 3 h with Glu-C at an enzyme-to-protein-ratio of 1:75 (w/w) at 37 °C and the resulted peptide mixtures were further treated by using trypsin (1:100; w/w). All proteolytic digests containing modified glycopeptides were desalted by using Oasis HLB C18 cartridges, dried, and reconstituted in 20 µL of 0.1% FA prior to liquid chromatography (LC)-MS and MS/MS analysis. All peptides (300 fmol of fetuin peptides) were separated and analyzed using an Agilent 1290 Infinity HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany ) coupled on-line to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Reversed-phase separation was accomplished using a 100 µm inner diameter 2 cm trap column (in-house packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 µm) (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) coupled to a 50 µm inner diameter 50 cm analytical column (in-house packed with Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7 µm) (Agilent Technologies, Amstelveen, The Netherlands). Mobile-phase solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water, and mobile-phase solvent B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in ACN. The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min. A 45 min gradient was used as follows: 0-5 min, 100% solvent A; 13-44% solvent B within 20 min; 44-100% solvent B within 3 min; 100% solvent B for 1 min; 100% solvent A for 17 min. For the MS scan, the mass range was set from 375-1500 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 and the AGC target was to 4×105.  For the MS/MS measurements, electron-transfer combined with higher-energy collision dissociation (EThcD) was used and performed with a normalized collision energy of 35%.  For the MS/MS scan, the mass range was set from 125-2000 m/z; the AGC target was set to 5×104. The precursor isolation width was 1.6 Da, and the maximum injection time was set to 200 ms.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files containing MS/MS spectra of fetuin peptides were processed using Byonic software (ver 3.2.0) (Protein Metrics Inc.). The following parameters were used for data searches in Byonic: precursor ion mass tolerance, 10 ppm; product ion mass tolerance, 20 ppm; fixed modification, Cys carbamidomethyl; variable modification: Met oxidation, Ser, Thr and Tyr phosphorylation, and both N- and O- glycosylation from mammalian glycan databases; the allowed number of peptide miss-cleavages was set to 4. The fasta file used for the peptide search contained both the fetuin generated from AHSG*1 and AHSG*2 amino acid sequences (UniProtKB - P02765, FETUA_HUMAN, AHSG*1 has Thr-248/Thr-256; AHSG*2 has Met-248/Ser-256).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Phosphorylation, O-glycosylation, Fetuin, Gene polymorphism, N-glycosylation, Glycopeptides

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Science4Life, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
yuhsien lin

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J R Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Science4Life, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


