### Accession
PXD012041

### Title
Response of the Biomining Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans to high Cadmium Concentrations

### Description
Cadmium is one of several heavy metals present in contaminated soils. Apparently, it has no biological role but can produce DNA damage, overexpression of stress response proteins and misfolded proteins, amongst other deleterial effects. Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans is an acidophilic bacterium capable of resisting very high concentrations of heavy metals such as cadmium. This is important for industrial bioleaching processes where Cd+2 concentrations can be in the range of 5-100 mM. Cadmium resistance mechanisms in these microorganisms have not been fully characterized.  A. ferrooxidans ATCC 53993 contains genes coding for possible metal resistance determinants such as efflux systems belonging to three families: P-type ATPases, RND transporters and cation diffusion facilitators (CDF). In addition, it has some extra copies of these genes in its exclusive genomic island (GI). Several of these putative genes were characterized in the present report by determining their transcriptional expression profiles and functionality. Moreover, a global quantitative proteomic analysis was carried out to further explore new cadmium resistance determinants in this biomining acidophile. Changes in iron oxidation pathways, upregulation of transport proteins (P-type ATPases and CDFs) and changes in ribosomal protein levels were seen. Finally, increased concentrations of exclusive putative cadmium ATPases present in strain ATCC 53993 GI and other non-identified proteins such as Lferr_0210, which forms part of a possible operon, could explain its greater resistance to cadmium compared to other acidophiles such as A. ferrooxidans ATCC 23270.

### Sample Protocol
2.2 Total protein extracts preparation for iTRAQ analysis A. ferrooxidans cells grown in absence or presence of CdSO4 were harvested by centrifugation (10,000 x g for 2 min), washed three times with dilute sulfuric acid (pH 1.5) followed by three washes with 50 mM sodium citrate at pH 7.0. Cells were then resuspended in sonication buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 1 mM EDTA) containing 100 μg/mL PMSF as protease inhibitor and were disrupted by sonic oscillation during 60 min on ice by using successive 15 s pulses. Finally, the lysate was centrifuged at 10,000x g for 10 min to remove unbroken cells and cell debris. Total protein concentrations in cell-free extracts were determined as before [32]. 2.2.1 Protein digestion and tagging with iTRAQ-4-plex® reagent Total protein concentration was determined using microBCA protein assay kit (Pierce). For digestion, 50 µg of protein from each condition was precipitated by methanol/chloroform method. Protein pellets were resuspended and denatured in 20 µL 6 M guanidine hydrochloride/100 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, (SERVA Electrophoresis GmbH), reduced with 1 µL of 50 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP, AB SCIEX), pH 8.0, at 60°C for 30 min and followed by 2 µL of 200 mM cysteine-blocking reagent (methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, Pierce) for 10 min at room temperature. Samples were diluted up to 120 µL to reduce guanidine concentration with 50 mM TEAB. Digestions were initiated by adding 2 µg of sequence grade-modified trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) to each sample in a ratio 1/25 (w/w), which were then incubated at 37°C overnight on a shaker. Sample digestions were evaporated to dryness.  Each peptide solution was labelled at room temperature for 2 h with a half unit of iTRAQ Reagent Multi-plex kit (AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA, USA) previously reconstituted with 80 μL of 70% ethanol/50 mM TEAB. The iTRAQ labelling was performed according to the following scheme: iTRAQ 114 reagent = control A. ferrooxidans; iTRAQ 115 reagent: A. ferrooxidans adapted to 100 mM CdSO4; iTRAQ 116 reagent: A. ferrooxidans 60 min shock in 75 mM CdSO4. After labeling, samples were combined, and labelling reaction stopped by evaporation in a Speed Vac. 2.2.2 Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometer analysis A 2µg aliquot of each sample was subjected to 2D-nano LC ESI-MSMS analysis using a nano liquid chromatography system (Eksigent Technologies nanoLC Ultra 1D plus, AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA) coupled to high speed Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Foster City, CA) with a Nanospray III source. Injection volume was 5 µL and three independent technical replicas were analyzed. The analytical column used was a silica-based reversed phase column C18 ChromXP 75 µm × 15 cm, 3 µm particle size and 120 Å pore size (Eksigent Technologies, AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA). The trap column was a C18 ChromXP (Eksigent Technologies, AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA), 3 m particle diameter, 120 Å pore size, switched on-line with the analytical column. The loading pump delivered a solution of 0.1% formic acid in water at 2 µL/min. The nano-pump provided a flow-rate of 300 nL/min and was operated under gradient elution conditions, using 0.1% formic acid in water as mobile phase A, and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile as mobile phase B. Gradient elution was performed according to the following scheme: isocratic conditions of 96% A: 4% B for 5 min, a linear increase to 40% B in 205 min, then a linear increase to 90% B for 15 additional min, isocratic conditions of 90% B for 10 min and return to initial conditions in 2 min. Total gradient length was 250 min.  Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System. Ionization occurred under the following conditions: ionspray voltage floating (ISVF) 2800 V, curtain gas (CUR) 20, interface heater temperature (IHT) 150, ion source gas 1 (GS1) 20, declustering potential (DP) 85 V. All data was acquired using information-dependent acquisition (IDA) mode with Analyst TF 1.5 software (AB SCIEX, USA). For IDA parameters, 0.25 s MS survey scan in the mass range of 350–1250 Da were followed by 25 MS/MS scans of 150 ms in the mass range of 100–1500 (total cycle time: 4 s). Switching criteria were set to ions greater than mass to charge ratio (m/z) 350 and smaller than m/z 1250 with charge state of 2–5 and an abundance threshold of more than 90 counts (cps). Former target ions were excluded for 20 s. IDA rolling collision energy (CE) parameters script was used for automatically controlling the CE.

### Data Protocol
2.2.3 Data analysis and statistics MS and MS/MS data obtained from pooled samples were processed using Analyst TF 1.5.1 Software (SCIEX). Raw data file conversion tools-generated mgf files were independently searched against a A. ferrooxidans database (downloaded from UniprotKB, 20140604 version) containing 2748 protein entries and their corresponding reversed counterparts, using the Mascot Server v. 2.3.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK). Search parameters were set as follows: enzyme, trypsin; allowed missed cleavages, 2; fixed modifications, iTRAQ 4-plex (N-term and K) and beta-methylthiolation of cysteine; variable modifications, oxidation of methionine. Peptide mass tolerance was set to ±25 ppm for precursors and 0.05 Da for-fragment masses. The confidence interval for protein identification was set to ≥95% and only peptides with an individual ion score above the 1% false discovery rate (FDR) threshold were considered correctly identified. To obtain iTRAQ protein ratios, the median was calculated over all distinct peptides assigned to a protein subgroup in each replicate. Then, each iTRAQ channel was normalized by dividing each protein ratio by the median of ratio in each channel. This normalized median in each replicate was used to obtain the final geometric media of the corresponding protein. After calculating log2 of geometric media, frequency distribution histograms were obtained from Excel 2010. Log2 protein ratios were fitted a normal distribution using least squares regression. Mean and standard deviation values derived from the Gaussian fit were used to calculate P values and FDR (at quantitation level). The FDR for quantitation was then calculated as the FDR= (E value/protein rank), with E value=(P value * total number of quantified proteins) and the protein rank the individual position of the specific protein after ordered it by its P value. A 5% quantitation FDR threshold was estimated to consider the significant differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans; cadmium; quantitative proteomics; transcriptomics

### Affiliations
CNB-CSIC
Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology, Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile.

### Submitter
Alberto Paradela

### Lab Head
Dr Carlos Jerez
Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology, Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile.


