### Accession
PXD004518

### Title
Redirected nuclear glutamate dehydrogenase supplies Tet3 with a-ketoglutarate in neurons

### Description
Tet3 is an Fe2+-dependent enzyme that oxidizes genomic 5-methylcytosine to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine with the help of alpha-ketoglutarate and oxygen. It is the most abundant Tet enzyme in differentiated tissues including brain. Adult brain contains the highest 5-hydroxymethylcytosine levels. How alpha-ketoglutarate is made available for the oxidation of mC in brain cells and how the Tet activity is linked to neural activity are unsolved questions. Our experiments with full mouse brains show that Tet3 interacts in the nucleus directly with selected enzymes of the mitochondrial citric acid cycle. This leads to the formation of isocitrate. Tet3 also interacts with aspartate aminotransferase, which produces oxaloacetate. Although oxaloacetate and isocitrate are biosynthetic alpha-ketoglutarate precursors, they function as inhibitors of Tet3 and are needed to protect the reactive Fe2+ center from degrading DNA. The supply of Tet3 with alpha-ketoglutarate is established by a direct interaction of Tet3 with glutamate dehydrogenase (Glud1), which converts the neurotransmitter glutamate directly into alpha-ketoglutarate. This links Tet3 function to neural activity.

### Sample Protocol
20 µl anti-GFP beads (Chromotek) were washed three times with wash buffer (10 mM Tris/Cl pH 7.5; 150 mM NaCl; 0.5 mM EDTA) and then incubated for 15 min on ice with nuclear extract of GFP-Tet overexpressing HEK293T cells. To ensure the saturation of the beads with the GFP fusion construct, different amounts of lysate were tested and monitored using a Tecan Reader.  The GFP-Tet loaded beads were then washed twice with 150 mM NaCl solution containing 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.5. Another two wash steps with 1 M NaCl solution containing 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.5 and two wash steps with Lysis Buffer C (20 mM Hepes pH = 7.5, 420 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 20% (v/v) glycerol) followed. The saturated GFP-Tet beads were subsequently incubated with 200 µg nuclear brain extract for 15 min on ice. Following, they were washed twice with wash buffer. To elute the bound proteins, 50 µl of 200 mM glycine pH 2.5 were added and the solution was vortexed for 30 seconds. In order to gain more yield the elution step was repeated. Samples for the mass spectrometer were reduced by the addition of 100 mM TCEP and subsequent incubation for 1 h at 60°C on a shaker at 650 rpm. They were then alkylated by adding 200 mM iodoacetamide and incubating for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Following, the samples were digested with 0.5 µg trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 16 h. Afterwards, they were incubated for 5 min at 100°C and subsequently 1 mM phenylmethylsulphonylfluoride was added. StageTips were utilized to purify the samples for mass spectrometry.40 The samples were analyzed with an UltiMate 3000 nano liquid chromatography system (Dionex, Fisher Scientific) attached to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Fisher Scientific). They were desalted and concentrated on a µ-precolumn cartridge (PepMap100, C18, 5 µM, 100 Å, size 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm) and further processed on a custom made analytical column (ReproSil-Pur, C18, 3 µM, 120 Å, packed into a 75 µm i.d. x 150 mm and 8 µm picotip emitter).  The samples were processed via a 127 min multi-step analytical separation at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient with percentages of solvent B was programmed as follows: 1% for 1 minute; 1% - 4% over 1 minute; 4% - 24% over 100 minutes; 24% - 60% over 8 minutes; 60% - 85% over 2 minutes; 85% for 5 minutes; 85% - 1% over 2 minutes; 1% for 8 minutes. Mass spectrometric analysis was done with a full mass scan in the mass range between m/z 300 and 1700 at a resolution of 60 000. Following this survey scan five scans were performed using the ion trap mass analyzer at a normal resolution setting and wideband CID fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 35. Signals with an unrecognized charge state or a charge state of 1 weren't picked for fragmentation. To avoid supersampling of the peptides, an exclusion list was implemented with the following settings: after 2 measurements in 30 seconds, the peptide was excluded for 90 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software (version 1.5.0.25) was used for LFQ. Quantification was performed with four biological replicates. The Co-immunoprecipitation with GFP alone served as control. The Andromeda search engine was used in combination with uniprot databases (Mus musculus). A maximum of two missed cleavage sites was allowed. The main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as static modification. Variable modifications were Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Oxidation (M). The LFQ algorithm was applied with default settings. The option “match between runs” was also used. LFQ data was analyzed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.0.9). The LFQ intensities were log transformed and only proteins identified in at least three samples were retained. As one of the GFP control quadruplicates contained only 64 proteins instead of >400, this replicate was removed from the data set. Gene ontology analyses were performed with the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.7).

### Publication Abstract
Tet3 is the main &#x3b1;-ketoglutarate (&#x3b1;KG)-dependent dioxygenase in neurons that converts 5-methyl-dC into 5-hydroxymethyl-dC and further on to 5-formyl- and 5-carboxy-dC. Neurons possess high levels of 5-hydroxymethyl-dC that further increase during neural activity to establish transcriptional plasticity required for learning and memory functions. How &#x3b1;KG, which is mainly generated in mitochondria as an intermediate of the tricarboxylic acid cycle, is made available in the nucleus has remained an unresolved question in the connection between metabolism and epigenetics. We show that in neurons the mitochondrial enzyme glutamate dehydrogenase, which converts glutamate into &#x3b1;KG in an NAD<sup>+</sup>-dependent manner, is redirected to the nucleus by the &#x3b1;KG-consumer protein Tet3, suggesting on-site production of &#x3b1;KG. Further, glutamate dehydrogenase has a stimulatory effect on Tet3 demethylation activity in neurons, and neuronal activation increases the levels of &#x3b1;KG. Overall, the glutamate dehydrogenase-Tet3 interaction might have a role in epigenetic changes during neural plasticity.

### Keywords
Isocitrate, Tet3, Epigenetics, Citric acid cycle, Alpha-ketoglutarate, Oxaloacetate, Hmc

### Affiliations
Faculty of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Germany
LMU

### Submitter
Andrea Künzel

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Carell
Faculty of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Germany


