### Accession
PXD015431

### Title
ADAM17 cytoplasmic domain modulates Thioredoxin-1 conformation and activity

### Description
We have demonstrated that site-directed mutagenesis in ADAM17 (ADAM17cytoF730A) also disrupts the interacting interface with Trx-1, resulting in a decrease of Trx-1 reductive capacity and activity. One of the mechanisms that explain this effect might be that ADAM17cyto favors Trx-1 monomerization state - the active state - by forming a disulfide bond between Cys824 at the C-terminal of ADAM17cyto with the Cys73 of Trx-1, which is involved in the dimerization site. Moreover, we observed that ADAM17 overexpressing or knockdown cells favors or not the monomeric state of Trx-1, respectively. As a result, there is a decrease of oxidant levels and ADAM17 sheddase activity, and an increase in the reduced cysteine-containing peptides in intracellular proteins in ADAM17cyto overexpressing cells. In summary, we propose that ADAM17 is able to modulate Trx-1 conformation affecting its activity and intracellular redox state.

### Sample Protocol
To perform the relative semiquantitative analysis of recombinant Trx-1 protein in the monomer and dimer forms the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were obtained. For that, gel bands were analyzed from a non-reducing 15% SDS-PAGE gel and the bands of monomer and dimer forms in Trx-1 alone or incubated with ADAM17cytoWT were first alkylated (14 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min at room temperature in the dark), and then digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI). The samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 20 µl of 0.1% formic acid. Four and a half microliters of the resulting peptide mixture were analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Walthan, MA) coupled with LC-MS/MS by an EASY-nLC system (Proxeon Biosystem, Odense, DK) through a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists (msf) were generated from the raw data files using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Sequest search engine and searched against Human Uniprot database concatenated with the recombinant Trx-1 and ADAM17cytoWT protein sequences (95,544 sequences; 38,079,025 residues, released in May 2019). The search included carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) and oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da) as variable modifications; one trypsin missed cleavage and a tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor and 0.02 Da for fragment ions (Supplementary Table 1). False discovery rate (FDR) was calculated to 1%. A target–decoy search strategy approach was used to estimate the false-positive discovery rate (27). This experiment was performed twice, with two different protein preparations. The same samples were also analyzed regarding the presence of Trx-1/ADAM17 disulfide bond formation. For that, the raw data files generated by Xcalibur version 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Watlham, MA) were converted to a peak list format (mgf) by using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Watlham, MA). The mgf files were analyzed in MassMatrix version 3.10 and pLINK2 version 2.3.6 to automatically search disulfide bonds against databases containing the Trx-1WT and ADAM17cytoWT sequences, according to the software instructions.

### Publication Abstract
The activity of Thioredoxin-1 (Trx-1) is adjusted by the balance of its monomeric, active and its dimeric, inactive state. The regulation of this balance is not completely understood. We have previously shown that the cytoplasmic domain of the transmembrane protein A Disintegrin And Metalloprotease 17 (ADAM17cyto) binds to Thioredoxin-1 (Trx-1) and the destabilization of this interaction favors the dimeric state of Trx-1. Here, we investigate whether ADAM17 plays a role in the conformation and activation of Trx-1. We found that disrupting the interacting interface with Trx-1 by a site-directed mutagenesis in ADAM17 (ADAM17cyto<sup>F730A</sup>) caused a decrease of Trx-1 reductive capacity and activity. Moreover, we observed that ADAM17 overexpressing cells favor the monomeric state of Trx-1 while knockdown cells do not. As a result, there is a decrease of cell oxidant levels and ADAM17 sheddase activity and an increase in the reduced cysteine-containing peptides in intracellular proteins in ADAM17cyto overexpressing cells. A mechanistic explanation that ADAM17cyto favors the monomeric, active state of Trx-1 is the formation of a disulfide bond between Cys<sup>824</sup> at the C-terminal of ADAM17cyto with the Cys<sup>73</sup> of Trx-1, which is involved in the dimerization site of Trx-1. In summary, we propose that ADAM17 is able to modulate Trx-1 conformation affecting its activity and intracellular redox state, bringing up a novel possibility for positive regulation of thiol isomerase activity in the cell by mammalian metalloproteinases.

### Keywords
Adam17, Iodotmt, Thioredoxin-1, Mass spectrometry, Redox signaling., Dimerization

### Affiliations
National Laboratory of Biosciences (LNBio), CNPEM, Brazil.
CNPEM

### Submitter
Adriana Franco Paes Leme

### Lab Head
Dr Adriana Franco Paes Leme
National Laboratory of Biosciences (LNBio), CNPEM, Brazil.


