### Accession
PXD012626

### Title
Macrostomum bioadhesion -  A mechanism for temporary bioadhesion

### Description
The flatworm Macrostomum lignano features a duo-gland adhesive system that allows it to repeatedly attach to and release from substrates in seawater within a minute. However, little is known about the molecules involved in this temporary adhesion. In this study, we showed that the attachment of M. lignano relieds on the secretion of two large adhesive proteins, Macrostomum lignano adhesion protein 1 (Mlig-ap1) and Mlig-ap2. We revealed that both proteins are expressed in the adhesive gland cells and that their distribution within the adhesive footprints was spatially restricted. RNA interference knock-down experiments demonstrated the essential function of these two proteins in flatworm adhesion. Negatively-charged modified sugars in the surrounding water inhibited flatworm attachment, while positively-charged molecules impeded detachment. In addition, we found that M. lignano could not adhere to strongly hydrated surfaces. We propose an attachment-release model where Mlig-ap2 attaches to the substrate and Mlig-ap1 exhibits a cohesive function. A small negatively-charged molecule is secreted that interferes with Mlig-ap1, inducing detachment. These findings are of relevance for fundamental adhesion science and efforts to mitigate biofouling. Further, this first model of flatworm temporary adhesion may serve as the starting point for the development of synthetic reversible adhesion systems for medicinal and industrial applications.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from worm footprints or worm tissue or pull-down experiments were reduced with 50 µL 10 mM dithiothreitol at 56°C for 30 min and alkylated with 50 µL 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 20 min. Samples were digested either with trypsin, chymotrypsin, peptidase V8, lysine C, or lysine N at 37°C overnight. The tryptic peptides were purified by ZipTip C18 pipette tips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions prior to nanoLC-ESI-MS analysis. Samples were analysed using an UltiMate 3000 nano-HPLC system coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on a homemade fritless fused-silica microcapillary column (75 μm i.d. × 280 μm o.d. × 10 cm length) packed with 3 μm reversed-phase C18 material (Reprosil). Solvent for HPLC were 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in 85% acetonitrile (solvent B).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Scientific) with the search engine Squest against the translated MLRNA110815 and MLRNA131024 transcriptomes containing complete sequence of Mlig-ap1 and Mlig-ap2 while single transcripts belonging to the two proteins were manually deleted. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Peptide identifications were filtered at 1% or 5% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
The flatworm <i>Macrostomum lignano</i> features a duo-gland adhesive system that allows it to repeatedly attach to and release from substrates in seawater within a minute. However, little is known about the molecules involved in this temporary adhesion. In this study, we show that the attachment of <i>M. lignano</i> relies on the secretion of two large adhesive proteins, <i>M. lignano</i> adhesion protein 1 (Mlig-ap1) and Mlig-ap2. We revealed that both proteins are expressed in the adhesive gland cells and that their distribution within the adhesive footprints was spatially restricted. RNA interference knockdown experiments demonstrated the essential function of these two proteins in flatworm adhesion. Negatively charged modified sugars in the surrounding water inhibited flatworm attachment, while positively charged molecules impeded detachment. In addition, we found that <i>M. lignano</i> could not adhere to strongly hydrated surfaces. We propose an attachment-release model where Mlig-ap2 attaches to the substrate and Mlig-ap1 exhibits a cohesive function. A small negatively charged molecule is secreted that interferes with Mlig-ap1, inducing detachment. These findings are of relevance for fundamental adhesion science and efforts to mitigate biofouling. Further, this model of flatworm temporary adhesion may serve as the starting point for the development of synthetic reversible adhesion systems for medicinal and industrial applications.

### Keywords
Bioadhesion, Flatworms, Platyhelminthes, Detattchment, Bioadhesives

### Affiliations
Institute of Zoology and Center of Molecular Bioscience Innsbruck, University of Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria
University of Innsbruck

### Submitter
Peter Ladurner

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Ladurner
Institute of Zoology and Center of Molecular Bioscience Innsbruck, University of Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria


