### Accession
PXD010088

### Title
Transformation-induced stress at telomeres is counteracted through changes in the telomeric proteome including SAMHD1

### Description
Telomeres play crucial roles during tumorigenesis inducing cellular senescence upon telomere shortening and extensive chromosome instability during telomere crisis. However, it has not been investigated if and how cellular transformation and oncogenic stress alters telomeric chromatin composition and function. Here we transform human fibroblasts by consecutive transduction with vectors expressing hTERT, the SV40 early region and activated H-RasV12. Pairwise comparisons of the telomeric proteome during different stages of transformation reveals upregulation of proteins involved in chromatin remodeling, DNA repair and replication at chromosome ends. Depletion of several of these proteins induces telomere fragility indicating their roles in replication of telomeric DNA. Depletion of SAMHD1, which has reported roles in DNA resection and homology directed repair, leads to telomere breakage events in cells deprived of the shelterin component TRF1. Thus our analysis identifies factors, which accumulate at telomeres during cellular transformation to promote telomere replication and repair, resisting oncogene-borne telomere replication stress.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines. HLF: human lung fibroblasts (Ducrest et al, 2001); HLF-T: HLF cells stably infected with hTERT expressing retroviruses; HLF-TS: HLF-T cells stably infected with SV40 early region expressing retroviruses; HLF-TSR: HLF-TS cells stably infected with H-RasV12 expressing retroviruses. Cells were maintained in DMEM (Gibco) containing 10% FBS (Gibco), 100  U/ml penicillin and 100  μg/ml streptomycin at 37 °C in a humidified incubator containing 5% CO2. Conditions for SILAC labeling were reported previously(Grolimund et al, 2013; Majerska et al, 2017).  QTIP. QTIP experiments were carried out as described previously (Grolimund et al, 2013; Majerska et al, 2017) with the following modifications. 240-490 x 106 cells of each cell type were used per IP. Upon mixing the two cell types in a 1:1 ratio, cells in suspension were crosslinked for 10 min at 25 °C using a combination of 1% formaldehyde and 2 mM EGS. Chromatin-enriched pellets were resuspended at 25 x 106 cells /ml in LB3 buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA-NaOH pH 8.0, 0.5 mM EGTA-NaOH pH 8.0, 0.1% w/v sodium-deoxycholate, 0.25% w/v sodium lauroyl sarcosinate, EDTA-free protease inhibitor complex (Roche)) and sonicated for 12 min at 4 °C using the Focused-Ultrasonicator (Covaris E220; 12 × 12-mm glass tubes with AFA fiber; duty: 5.0, PIP: 140, cycles: 200, amplitude: 0, velocity: 0, dwell: 0). Immunoprecipitation was performed using beads covalently coupled with nonspecific IgGs (sc-2027, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) or beads coupled to affinity purified anti-TRF1 (rabbit #714) and anti-TRF2 antibodies (rabbit #40) according to the previously published protocol (Aeby et al, 2016).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis and data processing. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as described previously (Aeby et al, 2016). Raw MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software (Cox & Mann, 2008) with FDR < 0.01 at the level of both proteins and peptides. Peak lists were searched against the human Uniprot database, using Arg10 and Lys8 as heavy labels (multiplicity of 2). The mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm for precursor ions and MS/MS accuracy was set at 0.5 Da. Enzyme was set to trypsin with up to two missed cleavages. Proteins and peptides (minimum six amino acids) were identified using a target-decoy approach with a reversed database. At least two (unique+razor) peptides were required for protein identification. A cut-off was set to 0.1 for posterior error probability.  TRF/IgG enrichment was determined using MS/MS spectral counts, which were calculated from the evidences of protein groups. For each protein group, we summed up the MS/MS counts for each experiment. At least 3 MS/MS spectral counts were required per condition. The missing values were imputed with pseudo-counts of 0.5. The normalization of the spectral counts was performed following the normalization schema in Scaffold (http://www.proteomesoftware.com/products/scaffold/).

### Publication Abstract
Telomeres play crucial roles during tumorigenesis, inducing cellular senescence upon telomere shortening and extensive chromosome instability during telomere crisis. However, it has not been investigated if and how cellular transformation and oncogenic stress alter telomeric chromatin composition and function. Here, we transform human fibroblasts by consecutive transduction with vectors expressing hTERT, the SV40 early region, and activated H-RasV12. Pairwise comparisons of the telomeric proteome during different stages of transformation reveal up-regulation of proteins involved in chromatin remodeling, DNA repair, and replication at chromosome ends. Depletion of several of these proteins induces telomere fragility, indicating their roles in replication of telomeric DNA. Depletion of SAMHD1, which has reported roles in DNA resection and homology-directed repair, leads to telomere breakage events in cells deprived of the shelterin component TRF1. Thus, our analysis identifies factors, which accumulate at telomeres during cellular transformation to promote telomere replication and repair, resisting oncogene-borne telomere replication stress.

### Keywords
Telomeres, Transformation, Quantitative proteomics, Replication stress, Samhd1

### Affiliations
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), School of Life Sciences, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC) at EPFL, Station 19, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
PCF

### Submitter
Romain Hamelin

### Lab Head
Dr Joachim Lingner
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), School of Life Sciences, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC) at EPFL, Station 19, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland


