### Accession
PXD003562

### Title
Global analysis of protein degradation rates in wildtype, Atg5-/- and Atg7-/- primary human fibroblasts

### Description
In this project, we employed a dynamic mass spectrometry-based proteomic approach to obtain global maps of basal autophagic flux in human primary fibroblasts (HCA2-hTert). The data provide a comparison of protein degradation rates between wildtype and autophagy deficient (Atg5-/- and Atg7-/-) cells. The media utilized for isotopic labeling was Eagle’s Minimum Essential Medium (ATCC) supplemented with 15% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Thermo Scientific), 100U/mL penicillin, 100U/mL streptomycin. Prior to labeling, cells were gradually adapted to unlabeled media over the course of multiple passages.  Cells were then plated at a density of 500,000 cells per 10 cm plate. 8 days after plating, the confluent quiescent cultures were switched to MEM labeling media for SILAC (Thermo Scientific) supplemented with L-Arginine:HCl (13C6, 99%) and L-Lysine:2HCl (13C6, 99%)(Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) at concentrations of 0.1264 g/L and 0.087 g/L and 15% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Thermo scientific). Cells were collected after 0d, 2d, 4d, 6d of labeling, washed with PBS and cell pellets were frozen prior to further analysis. In order to assess the precision of our measurements, biological replicate experiments were conducted for WT+vector and Atg5-/- experiments and cells were collected after 4d for analysis

### Sample Protocol
Unfractionated samples:  Refer to the manuscript for complete sample processing protocol for the unfractionated samples.  Fractionated samples:  A buffer containing 8M urea, 75 mM sodium chloride, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.2 was used for cell lysis. 50 μL of lysis buffer was added to approximately 106 cells. The samples were sonicated using a sonicator (Qsonica) for 10 seconds followed by a 1 minute resting period, and this was done a total of 5 times. The samples were then centrifuged for 5 min at 15,000 g. The supernatant were transferred to a new Eppendorf tube, while the cell debris pellet at the bottom was avoided. Protein concentrations were measured by the bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) kit (Pierce Biotechnology), and 100 ug was removed and placed in a new Lobind tube (Eppendorf).  Samples were diluted with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate until the urea concentration was below 1.5M, and were then digested overnight with trypsin (Thermo Scientific) at an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:50 at 37 oC.  Reduction of protein disulfide bonds was performed with 2 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma) for 1 hour at 50 oC, and protein alkylation was performed with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) at room termperature for 30 min in darkness. Trypsin was then added again at an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:50 and digested at  37 oC for three hours. The digest was quenched by adding formic acid to 1%.  Offline fractionation was performed using the High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Pierce).  Briefly, the columns were conditioned with acetonitrile by centrifuging at 5,000 x g for 2 minutes (2X), followed by 0.1% TFA at 5,000 x g for 2 minutes (2X).  The sample was then added and centrifuged at 3,000 x g for 2 minutes, followed by a 3,000 x g spin with water for 2 minutes.  Eight fractions were collected by centrifuging at 3,000 x g for 2 minutes; 5%, 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, and 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% trimethylamine.  Samples were frozen at -80 oC and dried down in a CentriVap Concentrator (Labconco).  Fractions were re-constituted in 0.1% TFA, and placed into autosampler vials.  Tryptic peptides were analyzed using an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) system coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The mobile phases consisted of 0.1% FA for A and 0.1% FA in 100% ACN for B.  Samples were loaded directly onto an analytical column, after equilibration with 5 uL of mobile phase A, which was made in house using a laser puller (Sutter), packed to 25 cm with Sepax GP-C18, 1.8 um beads. The maximum pressure was set to 600 bar while loading the sample, which was done in 100% A.  The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min, and a 90 minute gradient was used to for peptide separation, with the following profile: 3% B for 2 min; 3% to 35 % B in 73 min; 35% to 70% B in 3 min; hold at 70% B for 3 min; 70% to 0% B in 2 min; and then the column was re-equilibrated for 8 minutes at 0% B. The Nanospray Flex source was connected to the Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. Data-dependent acquisition was selected for all analyses. One scan cycle consisted of one MS1 survey scan (m/z 400-1400) at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), followed by ten MS2 scans at a resolution of 17,500 (at 200 m/z) to fragment the 10 most abundance precursor ions in the survey scan via high energy collision dissociation (HCD) activation. For MS1 survey scans, the automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 1e6 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms.  Peptide precursors with charge states of 2-5 were sampled for MS2, with an AGC setting of 5e4, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with the following settings: repeat count = 1; exclusion duration = 25 s; mass tolerance = ± 10 ppm. The isolation window was set to 1.5 m/z, with an offset of 0.3 m/z, and peptide match was set to preferred.  The normalized collision energy was set to 27, with an underfill ratio of 1%, which gave an intensity threshold of 1e4.  Lock mass was used with the 445.12003 polysiloxane peak, with an 8 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from MS/MS spectra by searching against the homo sapiens Swiss-Prot database using the integrated Andromeda search engine with the software MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2011). SILAC peptides and protein quantification was performed with MaxQuant using the default parameters. For each peptide, the H/L ratio was determined by a regression model fitted to all isotopic peaks within all scans that the peptide eluted in. H/L ratio for each protein was determined as the median of all the peptides assigned to the protein (de Godoy et al., 2008). For a given protein, H/(H+L) ratio was calculated based on the H/L ratio from MaxQuant outputs. All H/(H+L) ratios at all time-points and all fractions (for fractionated samples) were combined to obtain an aggregated plot for the kinetics of labeling. The aggregated plots were fitted to a single exponential function by least-square fitting to obtain first order degradation rate constant (kdeg) for each protein. Additional details are provided in the manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
In eukaryotic cells, macroautophagy is a catabolic pathway implicated in the degradation of long-lived proteins and damaged organelles. Although it has been demonstrated that macroautophagy can selectively degrade specific targets, its contribution to the basal turnover of cellular proteins has not been quantified on proteome-wide scales. In this study, we created autophagy-deficient primary human fibroblasts and quantified the resulting changes in basal degradative flux by dynamic proteomics. Our results provide a global comparison of protein half-lives between wild-type and autophagy-deficient cells. The data indicate that in quiescent fibroblasts, macroautophagy contributes to the basal turnover of a substantial fraction of the proteome at varying levels. As contrasting examples, we demonstrate that the proteasome and CCT/TRiC chaperonin are robust substrates of basal autophagy, whereas the ribosome is largely protected under basal conditions. This selectivity may establish a proteostatic feedback mechanism that stabilizes the proteasome and CCT/TRiC when autophagy is inhibited.

### Keywords
Protein degradation rates, Human primary fibroblasts, Atg7, Autophagy, Atg5

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, University of Rochester, NY, USA
UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER

### Submitter
Tian Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Sina Ghaemmaghami
Department of Biology, University of Rochester, NY, USA


