### Accession
PXD006594

### Title
ChaFRAtip -  Simple, scalable and ultra-sensitive tip-based identification of protease substrates

### Description
Temporal profiling of proteolytic cleavage during apoptosis.

### Sample Protocol
SH-SY5Y cells were treated with 1 µM staurosporine in DMSO (Sigma Aldrich) for 1.5 h, 3.0 h and 6.0 h, or used as controls, each in biological duplicates. Cell pellets were lysed and carbamidomethylated. Amino acid analysis was used for protein concentration determination. After pooling, the sample was divided into 6 aliquots à 35 µg (amino acid analysis quantified). Then, in order to assess the robustness of the method three aliquots each were enriched for N-terminal peptides with ChaFRAtip by two different individuals. Fractions were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer, online-coupled to a U3000 HPLC system. Samples were loaded onto a self-packed column (C18, 100 μm x 2 cm, ACE, 5 µm particle size, Advanced Chromatography Technologies Ltd) at a flow rate of 20 μL/min 0.1 % TFA, and subsequently separated on a self-packed 25 cm main column (C18, 75 μm x 25 cm, ACE, 3 µm particle size) using a binary gradient as described above. Gradient increased linearly from 3-35 % B in 90 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched against an Uniprot human database (July 2015, 20,207 target sequences) using Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science) and the Proteome Discoverer software version 1.4 including the reporter ion quantifier and percolator nodes, employing a two-step strategy and semi-ArgC enzyme specificity with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. To enable the quantification of both classes of N-terminal peptides, those with N-terminal iTRAQ label and those with endogenous N-acetylation, we performed a two-step search strategy: First, data were searched with iTRAQ 8-plex (+304.2053 Da) at peptide N-termini and iTRAQ 8-plex at Lys as fixed modifications. Second, N-terminal acetylation (+ 42.0105 Da) and iTRAQ 8-plex at Lys were set as fixed modifications. In both cases, carbamidomethylation of Cys (+ 57.0214 Da) was selected as fixed and oxidation (+ 15.9949 Da) of methionine as variable modifications. As filters, high confidence corresponding to an FDR < 1%, and search engine rank 1 were used. Mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm for MS and 0.5 Da for MS/MS.

### Publication Abstract
Proteases are in the center of many diseases, and consequently, proteases and their substrates are important drug targets as represented by an estimated 5-10% of all drugs under development. Mass spectrometry has been an indispensable tool for the discovery of novel protease substrates, particularly through the proteome-scale enrichment of so-called N-terminal peptides representing endogenous protein N termini. Methods such as combined fractional diagonal chromatography (COFRADIC)<sup>1</sup> and, later, terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates (TAILS) have revealed numerous insights into protease substrates and consensus motifs. We present an alternative and simple protocol for N-terminal peptide enrichment, based on charge-based fractional diagonal chromatography (ChaFRADIC) and requiring only well-established protein chemistry and a pipette tip. Using iTRAQ-8-plex, we quantified on average 2,073 &#xb1; 52 unique N-terminal peptides from only 4.3 &#x3bc;g per sample/channel, allowing the identification of proteolytic targets and consensus motifs. This high sensitivity may even allow working with clinical samples such as needle biopsies in the future. We applied our method to study the dynamics of staurosporine-induced apoptosis. Our data demonstrate an orchestrated regulation of specific pathways after 1.5 h, 3 h, and 6 h of treatment, with many important players of homeostasis targeted already after 1.5 h. We additionally observed an early multilevel modulation of the splicing machinery both by proteolysis and phosphorylation. This may reflect the known role of alternative splicing variants for a variety of apoptotic genes, which seems to be a driving force of staurosporine-induced apoptosis.

### Keywords
N-terminomics

### Affiliations
Protein Dynamics ISAS Otto-Hahn-Str. 6b 44227 Dortmund Germany
Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre

### Submitter
René Zahedi

### Lab Head
Dr René Zahedi
Protein Dynamics ISAS Otto-Hahn-Str. 6b 44227 Dortmund Germany


