### Accession
PXD014787

### Title
Gene regulatory networks of kiwifruit response to Pseudomonas syringae pv. actinidiae

### Description
To study the responses of kiwifruit to Pseudomonas syringae pv. actinidiae, one-year-old potted seeding A. c. var. deliciosa cultivar ‘Jinkui’ and the pandemic Pseudomonas syringae pv. actinidiae bacterial strain JF8 (CCTCC AB2018305) were used for this study. This bacterial strain was originally isolated from A. c. var. chinensis cultivar ‘Jinfeng’ and further characterized . Plants were maintained in an aseptic room, with 95% of relative humidity, have natural light and no further fertilization after their receiving from the nursery. For inoculation, the P. s.pv. actinidiae strain was streaked on nutrient-sucrose agar (NSA) and incubated at 25 °C for 48-h. Ten microliters of a bacterial suspension (1-2×107cfu/mL) prepared in sterile 0.85 % w NaCl were inoculated in the plants chosen for investigation. The bacterial suspension was sprayed to entirety tree. In parallel, control plants were treated in the same way with sterile 0.85 % w NaCl solution. The inoculated and control plants were randomly distributed in the room at 15 ± 3 °C. 24-h after inoculation, ‘Jinkui’ leaves were sampled from the infected and control plants for further analyses. Each sample consisted of the leaves of one tree. Three biological replicates were used for each line.

### Sample Protocol
The sample was extracted by using ice-cold Lysis buffer containing 1 mM PMSF and 2 mM EDTA. After 5 min, 10 mM DTT was added to the samples. The suspension was sonicated at 200 W for 15 min and then centrifuged at 4 °C, 30 000g for 15 min. The supernatant was mixed well with 5 × volume of chilled acetone containing 10 % (v) TCA and incubated at -20 °C overnight. After centrifugation at 4 °C, 30 000g, the supernatant was discarded. The precipitate was washed with chilled acetone three times. The pellet was air-dried and dissolved in Lysis buffer. The suspension was sonicated at 200 W for 15 min and centrifuged at 4 °C, 30 000g for 15 min. The supernatant was transferred to another tube. To reduce disulfide bonds in proteins of the supernatant, 10 mM DTT (final concentration) was added and incubated at 56°C for 1-h. Subsequently, 55 mM IAM (final concentration) was added to block the cysteines, incubated for 1-h in the darkroom. The supernatant was mixed well with 5× volume of chilled acetone for 2-h at -20°C to precipitate proteins. After centrifugation at 4 °C, 30 000g, the supernatant was discarded. The pellet was air-dried for 5 min, and dissolved in 500 μL 0.5 M TEAB and sonicated at 200 W for 15 min. Finally, samples were centrifuged at 4 °C, 30 000g for 15 min. Protein solutions (100 μg) were diluted 4-times with 100 mM tetraethylammonium bromide, after which proteins were digested with Trypsin Gold at 37 °C for 16-h. After trypsin digestion, peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacture’s protocol for 8-plex iTRAQ reagent. Peptides were separated using a Shimadzu LC-20AB HPLC Pump system coupled with a high-pH RP column. The iTRAQ-labeled peptide mixtures were reconstituted with 4 mL Buffer A and loaded onto a 4.6 × 250 mm Ultremex SCX column containing 5-μm particles. The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 mL/min with a gradient of buffer A for 10 min, 5-60 % buffer B for 27 min, 60-100 % buffer B for 1 min. The system was then maintained at 100 % buffer B for 1 min before equilibrating with buffer A for 10 min prior to the next injection. Elution was monitored by measuring the absorbance at 214 nm, and fractions were collected every 1 min. The eluted peptides were pooled into 20 fractions, desalted with a Strata X C18 column and vacuum-dried.Each fraction was re-suspended in buffer A (5 % ACN, 0.1 %FA) and centrifuged at 20000g for 10 min, the final concentration of peptide was about 0.5 μg/μL on average. 10 μL supernatant was loaded on a LC-20AD nanoHPLC (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) by the autosampler onto a 2cm C18 trap column. Then, the peptides were eluted onto a 10cm analytical C18 column (inner diameter 75 μm) packed in-house. The samples were loaded at 8 μL/min for 4 min, then the 35 min gradient was run at 300 nL/min starting from 2 to 35 % B (95 %ACN, 0.1 % FA), followed by 5 min linear gradient to 60 %, then, followed by 2 min linear gradient to 80 %, and maintenance at 80 % B for 4 min, and finally return to 5 % in 1 min.Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) fitted with a Nanospray III source (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) and a pulled quartz tip as the emitter (New Objectives, Woburn, MA). Data was acquired using an ion spray voltage of 2.5 kV, curtain gas of 30 psi, nebulizer gas of 15 psi, and an interface heater temperature of 150 ℃.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files acquired from the Orbitrap were converted into MGF files using Proteome. Discoverer 1.2 (PD 1.2, Thermo) and the MGF file were searched.Proteins were identified and quantified using the Mascot 2.3.02 search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK) against kiwifruit genome database28. The identified peptide sequences were then assembled into a set of accurately identified proteins based on the “simple principle”. To quantify proteins, peptides were automatically selected by calculating the reporter peak area using the default parameters of the Mascot software package. The resulting data set was auto-bias corrected, and the variations resulting from the unequal mixing of samples with different labels were eliminated. TheDifferentially abundant proteins (DAPs)between the P. s.pv. actinidiae-infected and CK samples were defined as the proteins with a fold-change of > 1.2 (mean value of all compared groups) or <0.85 and a P value (t-test of all comparison groups) of < 0.05. To minimise the protein-level false-positive rates, a protein FDR of 1%, which was based on an established “picked” protein FDR strategy48, was estimated after proteins were tentatively identified (protein-level FDR ≤ 0.01).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Resistance, Kiwifruit bacterial canker, Transcriptome, Proteome, Kiwifruit

### Affiliations
Auhui Agricultural University

### Submitter
Liu Pu

### Lab Head
Dr Pu Liu
Auhui Agricultural University


