### Accession
PXD036713

### Title
9-oxo-ODAs suppresses the proliferation of human cervical cancer cells through the inhibition of CDKs and HPV oncoproteins

### Description
We evaluated the growth inhibitory effects of 9-oxo-ODAs in cervical cancer caused by HPV infection. We confirmed the antitumor effects of 9-oxo-ODAs in vitro, identified their mechanisms of action using omics analysis, and verified their effects ex vivo and in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa and SiHa cells were plated 105 cells per well and 9-oxo-ODAs were added to the culture media (final concentration: 0 mM, 25 mM, and 50 mM). After culturing for 72 hours, samples were prepared from these cells and the label free quantification of proteins were conducted according to our previous report.

### Data Protocol
Log-transformed and median-centered values were used and proteins without missing values in each dataset (HeLa or SiHa) were further analyzed. For heatmap depiction, venn diagram generation, and gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis, following softwares were used: R (V4.1.1), RStudio (2021.09.0), Prism 9 (V9.3.1), pheatmap package (V1.0.12)38, gplots package (V3.1.3), clusterProfiler package (V4.0.5).

### Publication Abstract
Mucosal human papillomavirus (HPV) subtypes 16 and 18 are causative agents of cervical cancer, a leading cause of cancer-related deaths among women worldwide. In Japan, eggplant calyx is a folk remedy used to treat common warts. 9-oxo-(10E,12E)-octadecadienoic acid, isolated from eggplant calyx, may have antitumor effects. This study investigated the antitumor effects of 9-oxo-(10E, 12Z)-octadecadienoic acid and 9-oxo-(10E,12E)-octadecadienoic acid (9-oxo-ODAs) on human cervical cancer cells. 9-oxo-ODAs suppressed the proliferation of human cervical cancer cell lines (HeLa, and SiHa) in a concentration-dependent manner (IC50&#x2009;=&#x2009;25-50&#xa0;&#xb5;M). FCM analysis revealed that 9-oxo-ODAs induced apoptosis. Transcriptome, proteomics, and enrichment analyses revealed that treatment with 9-oxo-ODAs significantly altered the cell cycle and p53 pathways and decreased cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) protein expression. Real-time PCR analysis demonstrated that 9-oxo-ODAs reduced CDK1 mRNA expression in a concentration-dependent manner. In vitro, 9-oxo-ODAs reduced the HPV oncoprotein expression. In ex vivo human cervical cancer tissues, 9-oxo-ODAs decreased CDK1 expression and increased cleaved caspase 3, an apoptosis marker. Further, 9-oxo-ODAs showed the potential to suppressed metastatic formation and growth of cervical cancer in vivo. These findings suggest that 9-oxo-ODAs induce cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in HPV-positive human cervical cancer cells, and this process involves CDK1. Consequently, 9-oxo-ODAs may be potential therapeutic agents for cervical cancer.

### Keywords
Human, 9-oxo-odas, Cervical cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nagoya University, Aichi, Japan
Nagoya University

### Submitter
Kazumasa Mogi

### Lab Head
Dr Kazumasa Mogi
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nagoya University, Aichi, Japan


