### Accession
PXD020516

### Title
Proteome variation with collagen yield in ancient bone

### Description
Isotope analyses are some of the most common analytical methods applied to ancient bone, aiding the interpretation of past diets and chronology. For this, the evaluation of “collagen” yield is a routine step that allows for the selection of the specimens that are adequate for subsequent analyses, and samples with below ~1% yield normally discarded. Additionally, during the “collagen extraction” procedure, several sample fractions are generated and subsequently discarded but could contain proteins of analytical interest. In this study we evaluated the proteome variability of different fractions generated during the “collagen extraction” process of 29 samples, and their correlation with the collagen yield. We found that these fractions contained a significant amount of both collagenous and non-collagenous protein (NCP) spectra and that these were not correlated with the collagen yield. The variety of the extracted NCPs was comparable with that normally obtained from ancient samples, and the information obtained can be used to conduct species identification, phylogenetic studies, isotopic analyses and may be used to perform radiocarbon dating on the specimens. Overall, these findings suggest that not only is there value in retaining the fractions typically discarded as waste, but that low collagen yield specimens can still yield useful information.

### Sample Protocol
In all 29 cases, the subsamples for proteomic analysis were collected from waste solution deriving from the radiocarbon dating pre-treatment protocol for bone collagen[35]. Bone samples were carefully drilled to collect fine bone powder. A sequential pretreatment with solvents (acetone, methanol, then chloroform [Sigma Aldrich, UK]) was applied to 10 samples, as is customary at ORAU for samples that may contain exogenous carbon derived from conservation treatment (Table 1). Subsequently, all 29 samples were demineralized with three slots of 23 mL 0.5 M hydrochloric acid (HCl) solution (Sigma Aldrich, UK), and rinsed with ultrapure water between each replenishment step: (1) 0.5 M HCl (2h, room temperature), (2) 0.5 M HCl (2h, room temperature), (3) 0.5 M HCl (overnight, room temperature). The overnight treatment (ca. 18h) is most comparable to the demineralization step normally applied for ZooMS-type proteomic analyses (e.g. at The University of Manchester). Therefore, for all samples, 1mL of solution was collected after the third HCl treatment. Additionally, 14 samples had also a 1mL fraction collected after the second treatment in order to allow for comparison of NCPs between different pre-treatment stages (Table 1). The resulting total of 44 subsamples were all split into two fractions, 0.5mL for freeze storage (backup), and 0.5mL for further treatment and analyses.   Samples were ultra-filtrated using 10 KDa molecular weight cut-off filters (Vivaspin, UK) and were buffer exchanged into 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC, Sigma-Aldrich, UK). Extracted proteins were reduced using 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma-Aldrich, UK) for 40 min at room temperature, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAM, Sigma-Aldrich, UK) for 45 min in the dark at room temperature and quenched with a further amount of 5 mM DTT as above. Proteins were then digested with 1 μg of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, UK) at 37 °C for five hours. Digestion was stopped by adding 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich, UK) (to a 0.1% TFA concentration), and then samples were desalted, purified and concentrated with OMIX C18 reversed-phase Zip-Tips (Agilent Technologies) following manufacturer's protocols. An elution buffer was prepared mixing acetonitrile (ACN, Sigma-Aldrich, UK) to water and TFA, to obtain 50% ACN/0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted from the Zip-Tips in 100 μL of 50% ACN/0.1% TFA, then samples were dried under the fume cupboard for one day and then they were resuspended in 20 μL of 5% ACN/0.1% TFA for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. A total of 44 LC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) mass spectrometer (120 k resolution, full scan, positive mode, normal mass range 350–1500). Peptides were separated on an Ethylene Bridged Hybrid (BEH) C18 analytical column (75mm×250 μm i.d., 1.7 μM; Waters) using a gradient from 92% A (0.1% FA in water) and 8% B (0.1% FA in ACN) to 33% B in 44 min at a flow rate of 300 nL min−1. Peptides were then automatically selected for fragmentation by data-dependent analysis; six MS/MS scans (Velos ion trap, product ion scans, rapid scan rate, centroid data; scan event: 500 count minimum signal threshold, top 6) were acquired per cycle, dynamic exclusion was employed, and one repeat scan (i.e., two MS/MS scans total) was acquired in a 30 s repeat duration with that precursor being excluded for the subsequent 30 s (activation: collision-induced dissociation (CID), 2+ default charge state, 2 m/z isolation width, 35 eV normalized collision energy, 0.25 activation Q, 10.0 ms activation time).

### Data Protocol
Peptide mass spectra were then searched against the Swiss-Prot database for matches to primary protein sequences using the Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1; Matrix Science, London, UK), without specific taxonomy filters. Each search included the fixed carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine (+57.02 Da) and the variable modifications for deamidation (asparagine to glutamine, +0.98 Da), and oxidation of lysine, proline, and methionine residues (all +15.99 Da) to account for post-translational modifications and diagenetic alterations; the oxidation of lysine and proline is equivalent to hydroxylation. Enzyme specificity was trypsin-P (first batch of analyses) and semiTrypsin (second batch of analyses) with up to two missed cleavages allowed; mass tolerances were set at 5 ppm for the precursor ions and 0.5 Da for the fragment ions. All spectra were considered as having either 2+ or 3+ precursors. Scaffold (v4.10.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they exceeded specific database search engine thresholds. Protein identifications were accepted if they contained at least 2 identified peptides. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. The display option chosen for this work was “total spectrum count” to allow a semiquantitative measurement of the proteins present in the sample. In order to count NCPs, all collagenous proteins obtained from the analyses were excluded as well as common contaminants and non-intrinsic bone proteins, such as keratins and trypsin. RStudio software (version 1.3.959) was used to create plots and to perform statistical analyses using the library tidyverse and the package ggpubr.

### Publication Abstract
Isotope analyses are some of the most common analytical methods applied to ancient bone, aiding the interpretation of past diets and chronology. For this, the evaluation of "collagen yield" (as defined in radiocarbon dating and stable isotope research) is a routine step that allows for the selection of specimens that are deemed adequate for subsequent analyses, with samples containing less than &#x223c;1% "collagen yield" normally being used for isotopic analysis but discounted for radiocarbon dating. The aims of this study were to use proteomic methods of MALDI-TOF (matrix assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-fligh mass spectrometry) and LC-ESI-MS/MS (liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry) to investigate the endogeneity of the dominant proteinaceous biomolecules within samples that are typically considered to contain poorly preserved protein. Taking 29 archaeological samples, we evaluated the proteome variability between different acid-soluble fractions removed prior to protein gelatinization and considered waste as part of the radiocarbon dating process. We then correlated these proteomes against the commonly used "collagen yield" proxy for preservation. We found that these waste fractions contained a significant amount of both collagenous and noncollagenous proteins (NCPs) but that the abundance of these was not correlated with the acquired "collagen yield". Rather than a depleted protein load as would be expected from a low "collagen yield", the variety of the extracted NCPs was comparable with that commonly obtained from ancient samples and included informative proteins useful for species identification, phylogenetic studies, and potentially even for isotopic analyses, given further method developments. Additionally, we did not observe any correlation between "collagen yield" and peptide mass fingerprint success or between the different fractions taken from the same sample but at different radiocarbon pretreatment stages. Overall, these findings highlight the value in retaining and analyzing sample fractions that are otherwise discarded as waste during the radiocarbon dating process but more importantly, that low "collagen yield" specimens that are often misinterpreted by archaeologists as being devoid of protein can still yield useful molecular sequence-based information.

### Keywords
Proteomics; ancient bone; collagen; ncps; radiocarbon dating; stable isotopes.

### Affiliations
Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, 131 Princess Street, The University of Manchester, Manchester, M1 7DN, UK
University of Central Lancashire 

### Submitter
Noemi Procopio

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Buckley
Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, 131 Princess Street, The University of Manchester, Manchester, M1 7DN, UK


