### Accession
PXD038906

### Title
Profiling of the human intestinal microbiome and bile acids under physiologic conditions using an ingestible sampling device

### Description
The spatiotemporal structure of the human microbiome, proteome, and metabolome reflects and determines regional intestinal physiology and may have implications for disease. Yet, we know little about the distribution of microbes, their environment, and their biochemical activity in the gut because of reliance on stool samples and limited access to only some regions of the gut using endoscopy in fasting or sedated individuals. To address these deficiencies, we developed and evaluated a safe, ingestible device that collects samples from multiple regions of the human intestinal tract during normal digestion and maintains the viability of microbes from these locations. The collection of 240 intestinal samples from 15 healthy individuals using the device and subsequent multi-omics analyses revealed significant differences between microbes, phages, host proteins, and metabolites present in the intestines versus stool. Certain microbial taxa and gene classes were differentially enriched, and prophage induction was more prevalent in the intestines than in stool. The host proteome and bile acid profiles varied along the intestines and were highly distinct from those of stool. Correlations between gradients in bile acid concentrations and microbial abundancepredicted species that altered the bile acid pool through deconjugation. Furthermore,microbially conjugated bile acids displayed amino acid-dependent trends in concentration that were not apparent in stool. Overall, non-invasive longitudinal profilingof microbes, proteins, and bile acids along the intestinal tract under physiological conditions can help elucidate the roles of the gut microbiome and metabolome in humanphysiology and disease.

### Sample Protocol
After thawing, 20 μL of MS-grade water (Pierce) were added to each sample, and the mixture was vortexed. Twenty microliters of this mixture were transferred to a 96-well plate. Twenty microliters of cell lysis buffer (TRIS, CAA, TCEP, 8% SDS) were added to each sample aliquot and boiled for 10 min in a PCR thermocycler (Eppendorf) to achieve reduction of disulfide bridges and alkylation of cysteines, and to boost protein denaturation. Following boiling, samples were placed in a -80 °C freezer to ensure microbial capsule dissociation. Freeze-thaw cycles were repeated twice. Subsequently, samples were processed using the APAC protocol (https://d24ci5y4j5ezt1.cloudfront.net/wp/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/M020141.pdf). In brief, we applied Adaptive Focused Acoustics (AFA, Covaris) sonication in the 96-well plate for a total duration of 300 s per column with an LE220-plus Focused ultrasonicator (Covaris). In preparation for protein aggregation capture (PAC), magnetic carboxylate modified particles (Sera-Mag, GE Healthcare/Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) were washed three times with 1 mL of MS-grade H 2 O. Since the protein concentrations of the samples varied over a large range, 500 μg of beads were added to each sample well to ensure sufficient beads regardless of protein concentration. Protein precipitation was induced by the addition of acetonitrile at a final volume of 70%. Proteins were subsequently extracted from the solution via precipitation of the magnetic particles and purification by three steps of washing in 2-isopropanol. Following each wash, the plate was placed at 50 °C and shaken at 1300 rpm for 10 min. To ensure complete precipitation, we incubated the suspension for a further 10 min at room temperature while shaking at 1300 rpm, and then allowed the beads to settle down for 10 min without agitation. To determine the concentration of enzymes needed during sample digestion, we measured the protein yield using a Nanodrop. Samples were then resuspended in digestion buffer, which contained 100 μL of 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, supplemented with 0.5 μg of trypsin and 0.5 μg of LysC to achieve a ratio of 1:20 enzyme:protein, and incubated overnight at 37 °C while shaking at 1300 rpm. Following digestion, supernatant was removed by placing the 96-well plate on a magnetic rack (DynaMag-96 Side Skirted Magnet, Cat. #12027, Invitrogen, ThermoFisher Scientific, Darmstadt, Germany), allowing the supernatant to be easily transferred to a 96-well PCR plate. The enzymatic reaction in the collected supernatant was quenched using TFA at a final concentration of 1% (v/v). Peptides were purified using two-layer SDB-RPS (Empore SPE Disks, CDS Analytical, Cat. #98-0604-0226-4) StageTips via three washing steps, twice in 2-isopropanol, 1% TFA and once in H2 O, 0.2% TFA. Following the washing steps, peptides were eluted from the StageTips using elution buffer (80% acetonitrile and 1% NH4+ ). Purified samples were vacuum-dried in a SpeedVac (Eppendorf) at 60 °C for 1.5 h and resuspended in A* injection buffer (2% acetonitrile (v/v), 0.1% TFA (v/v) in H2 O). Protein concentration was measured in injection buffer for each sample using a Nanodrop and stored at -20 °C until MS measurement.  Proteomics UHPLC and mass spectrometry Samples were analyzed using LC-MS instrumentation, comprising an EASY-nLC 1200 ultra high-pressure system coupled to an Exploris 480 30° with a nano-electrospray ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). For each sample, the equivalent of 360 ng of purified peptides were separated on a custom 50-cm C18 LC column. Peptides were eluted from the column using a linear gradient from 10% to 30% buffer B over 90 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nL min−1 , followed by a stepwise increase of buffer B to 60% for 5 min and to 95% buffer B over the following 5 min. Afterward, we applied a 5 min wash with 95% buffer B, followed by a decrease to 1% buffer B over 5 min and a 20 min wash. The column temperature was kept constant at 50 °C using a custom oven, and HPLC parameters were monitored in real-time using SprayQC software . MS data were acquired with a Top15 data-dependent MS/MS method. Target values for the full-scan MS spectra were 3×106 charges in the m/z range 300–1,650, with a maximum injection time of 20 ms and a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. Fragmentation of precursor ions was performed by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27 eV. MS/MS scans were performed at a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200 with a target value of 1×105 and a maximum injection time of 28 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 40 s to avoid repeated sequencing of identical peptides. A HeLa sample was run approximately every 70 samples to ensure that performance of the LC system and MS was maintained throughout the entire study. Technical replicates were collected for each plate in a random fashion to assess technical reproducibility.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant software v. 2.1.0.0 and peptide lists were searched against the UniProt human SwissProt and TREMBL FASTA database (version June 2022). A common contaminants database was also included. Our search parameters included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations as variable modifications. FDR for proteins and peptides was set to 0 at a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids. An in silico tryptic digest was used with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. Peptide identification was performed at a precursor mass accuracy of 7 ppm and a fragment mass accuracy of 20 ppm. A reversed decoy database was used to estimate the fraction of false positive hits. Label free quantification (LFQ) was performed at a minimum ratio count of 2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Intenstine, Sampling device, Gut, Spatiotemporal, Microbiome

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


