### Accession
PXD019605

### Title
Macrophage responses to persistent Borrelia burgdorferi stimulation modulates host inflammation and results in tissue-wide transcriptional and proteomic changes during Lyme carditis

### Description
Lyme carditis is an extracutaneous manifestation of Lyme disease characterized by episodes of atrioventricular block of varying degrees and other less reported cardiomyopathies. The molecular changes associated with the response to Borrelia burgdorferi over the course of infection are poorly understood. Here, we identify broad transcriptomic and proteomic changes in the heart during infection that reveal a profound downregulation of mitochondrial components. We also characterize the long-term functional modulation of macrophages exposed to live bacteria, characterized by an augmented glycolytic output, increased spirochetal binding and internalization, and reduced IRF-4-dependent inflammatory responses. In vitro, glycolysis inhibition reduces the production of TNF by memory macrophages whereas in vivo, it produces the reversion of the Irf4-induced memory phenotype, the recovery of tissue mitochondrial components, and decreased inflammation and spirochetal burdens. These results show that B. burgdorferi induces long-term, memory-like responses in macrophages with tissue-wide consequences that are amenable to be manipulated in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
The hearts of three week-infected mice and uninfected controls (4 each) were soaked in PEB buffer (PBS 1X, 2 mM EDTA, 0.5 % BSA) and transferred to 60 mm plates. The organs were washed to eliminate excess of blood and cleaned of conjunctive tissue and other impurities. The top third of each heart was cut and placed in 200 μl of CLB buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 4% CHAPS). The tissue was then dissociated using a pestle and motor mixer (VWR). and digested following the filter-aided FASP protocol described by Wisniewski et al (Wisniewski et al., 2009) with minor modifications. Trypsin was added to a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:10, and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37oC, dried out in a RVC2 25 speedvac concentrator (Christ), and resuspended in 0.1% FA. The equivalent of approximately 500 ng of each sample was submitted to LC-MS label-free analysis. Peptide separation was performed on a nanoACQUITY UPLC System (Waters) on-line connected to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron). An aliquot of each sample was loaded onto a Symmetry 300 C18 UPLC Trap column (180 µm x 20 mm, 5 µm (Waters)). The precolumn was connected to a BEH130 C18 column (75 μm x 200 mm, 1.7 μm (Waters), and equilibrated in 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% FA. Peptides were eluted directly into an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan) through a nanoelectrospray capillary source (Proxeon Biosystems), at 300 nl/min and using a 120 min linear gradient of 3–50% acetonitrile.  The mass spectrometer automatically switched between MS and MS/MS acquisition in DDA mode. Full MS scan survey spectra (m/z 400–2000) were acquired in the orbitrap with mass resolution of 30000 at m/z 400. After each survey scan, the six most intense ions above 1000 counts were sequentially subjected to collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the linear ion trap. Precursors with charge states of 2 and 3 were specifically selected for CID. Peptides were excluded from further analysis during 60 s using the dynamic exclusion feature.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis LC-MS (Waters) was used for the label-free differential protein expression analysis. One of the runs was used as the reference to which the precursor masses in all other samples were aligned to. Only features comprising charges of 2+ and 3+ were selected. The raw abundances of each feature were automatically normalized and logarithmized against the reference run. Samples were grouped in accordance to the comparison being performed, and an ANOVA analysis was performed. A peak list containing the information of all the features was generated and exported to the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science Ltd.). This file was searched against a Uniprot/Swissprot database consiting of Mus musculus and Borrelia entries, and the list of identified peptides was imported back to Progenesis LC-MS. Protein quantitation was performed based on the three most intense non-conflicting peptides (peptides occurring in only one protein), except for proteins with only two non-conflicting peptides. The significance of expression changes was tested at protein level, and proteins with an ANOVA p-value ≤ 0.05 were selected for further analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Lyme carditis is an extracutaneous manifestation of Lyme disease characterized by episodes of atrioventricular block of varying degrees and additional, less reported cardiomyopathies. The molecular changes associated with the response to Borrelia burgdorferi over the course of infection are poorly understood. Here, we identify broad transcriptomic and proteomic changes in the heart during infection that reveal a profound down-regulation of mitochondrial components. We also describe the long-term functional modulation of macrophages exposed to live bacteria, characterized by an augmented glycolytic output, increased spirochetal binding and internalization, and reduced inflammatory responses. In vitro, glycolysis inhibition reduces the production of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) by memory macrophages, whereas in vivo, it produces the reversion of the memory phenotype, the recovery of tissue mitochondrial components, and decreased inflammation and spirochetal burdens. These results show that B. burgdorferi induces long-term, memory-like responses in macrophages with tissue-wide consequences that are amenable to be manipulated in vivo.

### Keywords
Lyme carditis, Heart, Borrelia burgdorferi, Inflammation, Orbitrap, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE Derio 48160 Spain

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE Derio 48160 Spain


