### Accession
PXD036205

### Title
Expression profiles of kidney mitochondrial proteome during the progression of the unilateral ureteral obstruction: focus on energy metabolism adaptions.

### Description
Obstructive nephropathy (ON) is a common clinical entity caused by different etiologies such as urolithiasis, prostatic hyperplasia in males, tumors, congenital stenosis, and others. Unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO) in rodents is an experimental model widely used to explore the pathophysiology of ON, replicating vascular alterations, tubular atrophy, inflammation, and fibrosis development. On the other hand, mitochondria have been the subject of great attention, as morphological and functional alterations have been demonstrated in kidney diseases. Therefore, in this study, we explored the differences of the renal mitochondrial proteome during a time-course of 7, 14, and 21 days after the UUO in a rat model; and subsequently performed an overrepresentation analysis of biological processes to gain insight into the most relevant mitochondrial processes during UUO.  We first isolated mitochondria from each UUO group and the control (sham) group, then the mitochondria were lysed in lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 20 mM HEPES, 1mM EDTA, pH 8.0) and digested using iST Sample Preparation Kit®. Peptides were separated using a UHPLC ACQUITY M-Class. Spectral data were acquired in an MS with electrospray ionization and ion mobility separation Synapt G2-Si operated with data-independent acquisition and ion mobility spectrometry  in HDMSE mode. A total of 954 proteins were identified and quantified by label-free with Progenesis QI software and the database UP000002494  . Subsequently, after cross-checking with the MitoMiner database, we were left with 379 mitochondrial or mitochondrial transit proteins. Then, only proteins that had abundance values in at least 50% of the samples per study group and did not show atypical abundance values were selected, thus conserving 308 mitochondrial proteins for principal component analysis (PCA). PCA showed that 11 components can explain the total variation in protein abundance among samples and that the first two components can differentiate between the control group (sham) and the UUO groups. Considering the results obtained from the PCA analysis, a heat map was constructed with 243 proteins that strongly correlated (r ≤ -0.5 or r ≥ 0.5) with the first two principal components. The results show the abundance patterns for each UUO day and for the sham group and that these proteins are mainly involved in three metabolic pathways, oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA), and fatty acid (FA) metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondrial pellets were lysed in lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 20 mM HEPES, 1mM EDTA, pH 8.0) and sonicated for three cycles (10 sec at 4ºC per cycle) using a Sonic Dismembrator Model 100 (Fisher Scientific), then were clarified by centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 10 min, the protein content was quantified by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. Then, 100 µg of mitochondrial extract were precipitated using MeOH/Chloroform. The resulting pellets were enzymatically digested using iST Sample Preparation Kit® according to the protocol established by the manufacturer. Finally, peptides were resuspended with “LC-Load” reagent and stored at -80 °C until LC-MS analysis.  Afterward, peptides were injected into the mass spectrometer Synapt G2-Si (Waters, Milford, MA) in MSE mode to calculate the area under the curve (AUC) of the total ion chromatogram (TIC), to normalize the injection prior to LC-MS analysis and therefore, inject a comparable sample quantity for both conditions. Afterward, peptides in each sample were loaded and separated on an HSS T3 C18 column; 75 μm × 150 mm, 100 Å pore size, 1.8 μm particle size; using an UPLC ACQUITY M-Class with mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) and mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) under the following gradient: 0 min 7% B, 121.49 min 40% B, 123.15 to 126.46 min 85% B, 129 to 130 min 7% B, at a flow of 400 nL·min−1 and 45 °C. The spectra data were acquired in the mass spectrometer using nanoelectrospray ionization (nanoESI) and ion mobility separation (IMS) using the data-independent acquisition (DIA) approach through HDMSE mode. The tune page, for the ionization source, parameters were set with the following values: 2.75 kV on the capillary emitter, 30 V on the sampling cone, 30 V on the source offset, 70 °C for the source temperature, 0.5 bar for the nanoflow gas and 150 L·h−1 for the purge gas flow. Two chromatograms were acquired (low and high energy chromatograms) in positive mode in a range of m/z 50−2000 with a scan time of 500 ms. No collision energy was applied to obtain the low energy chromatogram, while for the high energy chromatograms, the precursor ions were fragmented in the “transfer” using a collision energy ramp from 19 to 55 eV.

### Data Protocol
The MS and MS/MS measurements contained in the generated *.raw files were analyzed and relatively quantified using Progenesis QI for Proteomics software v4.2 (Waters, Milford, MA) using a target decoy strategy against a Rattus norvegicus *.fasta database (obtained from UniProt, UP000002494, 29928 protein sequences, last modification on 30th May 2021), which was concatenated with the same *.fasta file in the reverse sense. Parameters used for the protein identification were trypsin as an enzyme and one missed cleavage allowed; carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification and oxidation (M), amidation (C-terminal), deamidation (Q, N) and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) as variable modifications; default peptide and fragment tolerance (maximum normal distribution of 10 and 20 ppm respectively) and false discovery rate ≤4%. Synapt G2-Si was calibrated with [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide fragments through the precursor ion [M+ 2H]2+ = 785.84261 fragmentation of 32 eV with a result less than 2 ppm across all MS/MS measurements. The results generated from Progenesis software were exported to *.csv files to verify the figures of merit (FOM) described by Souza et al. (2017) for label-free experiments. Proteins considered differentially expressed display at least a ratio of ±1 (expressed as a base 2 logarithm); it means that these proteins had at least ± 2 absolute fold change, p-value ≤ 0.05, and two peptides (at least one unique peptide). The ratio was calculated based on the average MS signal response of the three most intense tryptic peptides (Top3) of each characterized protein in all conditions by the Top3 of each protein in the SHAM sample.

### Publication Abstract
Kidney diseases encompass many pathologies, including obstructive nephropathy (ON), a common clinical condition caused by different etiologies such as urolithiasis, prostatic hyperplasia in males, tumors, congenital stenosis, and others. Unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO) in rodents is an experimental model widely used to explore the pathophysiology of ON, replicating vascular alterations, tubular atrophy, inflammation, and fibrosis development. In addition, due to the kidney's high energetic demand, mitochondrial function has gained great attention, as morphological and functional alterations have been demonstrated in kidney diseases. Here we explore the kidney mitochondrial proteome differences during a time course of 7, 14, and 21 days after the UUO in rats, revealing changes in proteins involved in three main metabolic pathways, oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA), and the fatty acid (FA) metabolism, all of them related to bioenergetics. Our results provide new insight into the mechanisms involved in metabolic adaptations triggered by the alterations in kidney mitochondrial proteome during the ON.

### Keywords
Mitochondria proteome, Energy metabolism., Kidney fibrosis, Unilateral ureteral obstruction (uuo)

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Faculty of Chemistry, National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM),
Cinvestav-IPN

### Submitter
Emmanuel Rios-Castro

### Lab Head
Dr José Pedraza Chaverri
Department of Biology, Faculty of Chemistry, National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM),


