### Accession
PXD021600

### Title
Anammox enrichment culture glycoproteomics

### Description
The physiology of the planctomycetal anammox bacteria makes them particularly special because they share features with all three domains of life. Anammox bacteria have been reported recently to produce surface-layer proteins, which represent the outermost layer and provide structure, shape and protection under extreme conditions. Furthermore, we report on the unique cell surface-layer glycosylation of the anammox bacterium Ca. Kuenenia stuttgartiensis as revealed by a newly established glycoproteomics approach. This approach enables untargeted exploration of prokaryotic protein glycosylation from (high-resolution) shotgun proteomics data directly.

### Sample Protocol
SAMPLE PREPARATION. Biomass from enrichment cultures and reference strains were transferred into a B-PER/TEAB buffer solution (50mM TEAB, 1% (w/w) NaDOC, adjusted to pH 8.0, incl. protease inhibitor) and lysed using bead-beating homogenization. In the following, the homogenate were centrifuged and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube before precipitating the protein content using TCA (trichloroacetic acid). The protein pellet was washed with acetone and dissolved in 200mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 6M Urea, reduced using DTT and alkylated using IAA. The solution was diluted to below 1M Urea using bicarbonate buffer and digested with sequencing grade Trypsin (Promega). Peptides were further desalted using an Oasis HLB 96 well plate (Waters), and dried using a speed vac concentrator. Additionally, ZIC-tip SPEs (di2chrom, Germany) were used to specifically enrich glycopeptides. The enrichment, SDS-PAGE analysis and in-gel digestion of the putative Ca. Brocadia sapporoensis surface layer protein was performed as described in Boleij et al., 2018. The vacuum dried peptide fractions were resuspended in H2O containing 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid under careful vortexing.  MASS SPECTROMETRIC ANALYSIS: Briefly, samples were injected to a nano-liquid-chromatography system consisting of an ESAY nano LC 1200, equipped with an Acclaim PepMap RSLC RPC18 separation column (50µm x 150mm, 2µm and 100Å), and connected online to a QE plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany). The flow rate was maintained at 300nL/min (or in specific cases 350nl/min) over a linear one dimensional gradient using H2O containing 0.1% formic acid as solvent A, and 80% acetonitrile in H2O and 0.1% formic acid as solvent B. For shotgun proteomics experiments, the Orbitrap was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode acquiring peptide signals at 70K resolution with an AGC target of 3e6. The top 10 signals were isolated for fragmentation, which were measured at 17K resolution. For high-resolution mass binning experiments, MS2 spectra were measured at 140K resolution. For in-source CID experiments the Orbitrap was operated in positive ionisation mode acquiring signals alternating between PRM and Full MS-SIM mode. The PRM mode was performed at an in-source CID of 75eV, isolating and fragmenting carbohydrate in-source fragment targets at a NCE of 25. Fragmentation spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70K. The Full MS – SIM mode was acquiring (full scan) mass spectra at 70K resolution with alternating in-source CID of 75eV.

### Data Protocol
Whole cell lysate shotgun proteomics raw data were analysed using PEAKS Studio X (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Canada). The anammox enrichment cultures were searched against a metagenomics constructed database (two-round search, to create a focused database in the initial search), where the pure reference strains were analysed using a Uniprot reference proteome database (of closely related substrains) obtained from https://www.uniprot.org/. The database search included the cRAP protein sequences, which database was downloaded from ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP. The reported database searches considered 2 missed cleavages, oxidation and deamination as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. The final peptide spectra matches were filtered against 1% false discovery rates. Protein identifications with more than ≥1 unique peptides were included in the reports, where only identifications with ≥2 unique peptides were considered as significant. Raw data from in-source CID experiments were analysed manually using Xcalibur™ 4.1 software tool. Identified carbohydrate fragments and protein glycan modifications (as established using the Matlab scripts ‘Sugar-miner’ and ‘Glyco-mod-pro’) for the anammox enrichment cultures and reference strains are described in Pabst et al., 2020.

### Publication Abstract
The enormous chemical diversity and strain variability of prokaryotic protein glycosylation makes their large-scale exploration exceptionally challenging. Therefore, despite the universal relevance of protein glycosylation across all domains of life, the understanding of their biological significance and the evolutionary forces shaping oligosaccharide structures remains highly limited. Here, we report on a newly established mass binning glycoproteomics approach that establishes the chemical identity of the carbohydrate components and performs untargeted exploration of prokaryotic oligosaccharides from large-scale proteomics data directly. We demonstrate our approach by exploring an enrichment culture of the globally relevant anaerobic ammonium-oxidizing bacterium Ca. Kuenenia stuttgartiensis. By doing so we resolve a remarkable array of oligosaccharides,&#xa0;which are produced by two seemingly unrelated biosynthetic routes, and&#xa0;which modify the same surface-layer protein simultaneously. More intriguingly, the investigated strain also accomplished modulation of highly specialized sugars, supposedly in response to its energy metabolism-the anaerobic oxidation of ammonium-which depends on the acquisition of substrates of opposite charges. Ultimately, we provide a systematic approach for the compositional exploration of prokaryotic protein glycosylation, and reveal a remarkable example for the evolution of complex oligosaccharides in bacteria.

### Keywords
Microbial glycoproteomics, Metaproteomics, Anammox bacteria, Mass binning

### Affiliations
TUD
Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Martin Pabst

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Martin Pabst
Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands.


