### Accession
PXD026654

### Title
Identification of formaldehyde-induced DNA-protein crosslinks by PxP-MS

### Description
Compromised enzymatic actions, reactive metabolites, and various chemotherapeutics cause toxic covalent DNA-protein crosslinks (DPCs). Failure to repair DPCs results in genomic instability, premature aging, and tumorigenesis. However, understanding the principles underlying DPC formation and repair has been hampered by a lack of methodologies to study DPCs in human cells. Here, we developed a technique for the Purification of x-linked Proteins (PxP), which allows identification and tracking of enzymatic and nonenzymatic DPCs. By combining PxP with quantitative proteomics, we investigated the nature of DPCs induced by formaldehyde.

### Sample Protocol
Agarose plugs containing DNA-protein crosslinks were fixed (40% ethanol/10% acetic acid) on a rotating wheel at 4°C for 1 h. Next, plugs were washed twice in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate prior to storage at 4°C. Agarose plugs were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin, the resulting peptides purified using StageTips and resuspended in 15 µl of 0.1% formic acid solution. For LC-MS/MS purposes, desalted peptides were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) and either separated in a 15-cm analytical column (75μm ID home-packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 2.4 μm from Dr. Maisch) with a 50-min gradient from 5 to 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer XL (Thermo) operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. MS and MS/MS acquisition. For LTQ-Orbitrap XL measurements parameters were as follows: survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 250 – 1600) were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 5x105). The three most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 4 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 10,000 and fragmented in the linear ion trap by collision induced dissociation (CID). All fragment ion spectra were recorded in the LTQ part of the instrument. For all measurements with the Orbitrap detector, 3 lock-mass ions from ambient air were used for internal calibration. Typical MS conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 200ºC; normalized CID energy 35%; activation q = 0.25; activation time = 30 ms.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.6.6.0 was used to identify proteins and quantify by iBAQ with the following parameters: Database, Uniprot_UP000005604_Hsapiens_20191107; MS tol, 10ppm; MS/MS tol, 20ppm Da; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 7; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2. To identify significantly enriched proteins, MaxQuant output data were further processes in R. LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed. Missing values were imputated based on a probabilistic dropout function using the proDA R-package setting the untreated benzonase condition as a reference level. Proteins that were not identified in at least 3 replicates of either non-benzonase treated condition were removed, if they were simultaneously not detected in more than 12 out of 24 samples. Differential abundance of proteins was calculated using a Wald-test with Benjamini Hochberg FDR correction. Identified proteins were considered significantly enriched if their log2 fold enrichment was greater than 2 and FDR adjusted p-value smaller than 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
DNA-protein crosslinks (DPCs) are pervasive DNA lesions that are induced by reactive metabolites and various chemotherapeutic agents. Here, we develop a technique for the Purification of x-linked Proteins (PxP), which allows identification and tracking of diverse DPCs in mammalian cells. Using PxP, we investigate DPC repair in cells genetically-engineered to express variants of the SPRTN protease that cause premature ageing and early-onset liver cancer in Ruijs-Aalfs syndrome patients. We find an unexpected role for SPRTN in global-genome DPC repair, that does not rely on replication-coupled detection of the lesion. Mechanistically, we demonstrate that replication-independent DPC cleavage by SPRTN requires SUMO-targeted ubiquitylation of the protein adduct and occurs in addition to proteasomal DPC degradation. Defective ubiquitin binding of SPRTN patient variants compromises global-genome DPC repair and causes synthetic lethality in combination with a reduction in proteasomal DPC repair capacity.

### Keywords
Pxp, Sprtn, Dna-protein crosslinks, Formaldehyde

### Affiliations
Gene Center and Department of Biochemistry Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Postal Address: Feodor-Lynen-Straße 25 Visiting Address: BioSysM, Butenandtstraße 1
Biomedical Center-LMU

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Julian Stingele
Gene Center and Department of Biochemistry Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Postal Address: Feodor-Lynen-Straße 25 Visiting Address: BioSysM, Butenandtstraße 1


