### Accession
PXD028991

### Title
New insights on the role of HCN in root hair elongation through single cell proteomics.

### Description
In order to identify the possible protein targets of cyanide in the regulation of root hair, we have carried out a single cell proteomic approach to characterize the protein atlas in wild type root hair cells compared to the cas-c1 mutant cells. Root hair specific cells were obtained from isolated protoplast from root tissues of Arabidopsis wt-pCOBL9:GFP and cas-c1-pCOBL9:GFP lines. To analyze the effect of the CAS-C1 mutation, we isolated 1 x 106 root hair cells by Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) from three independent replicate of wt-pCOBL9:GFP and cas-c1-pCOBL9:GFP roots. The extracted proteins from each sample were trypsin-digested and the digested peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography-high resolution mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) for protein identification. In wild type samples, we have identified 3829 unique proteins at a false discovery rate below 1% (FDR<1%), that represent almost 10% of the total Arabidopsis proteome. In protein extract of the cas-c1-pCOBL9:GFP roots samples, we have identified 3972 proteins of which 3515 were commons in both cell types, 310 were only identified y wild type and 457 only in cas-c1 mutant (Fig. 5).

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) wild type ecotype Col-0 and the cas-c1 T-DNA insertion mutant (cas-c1; SALK_103855; (Garcia et al., 2010)) were grown in soil or vertical positioned plates in a photoperiod of 16 h of white light (120 µmol m-2 s-1) at 20°C and 8 h of dark at 18°C. Seeds were surface sterilized using 50 % (vol/vol) bleach and 0.1% Tween 20 (Sigma) for 15 min and then rinsed five times with sterile water. All seeds were plated on standard MS media (1× Murashige and Skoog salt mixture, Caisson Laboratories), 0.5 g/L MES, 1% Sucrose, and 1% Agar (Difco) and adjusted to pH 5.7 with KOH. All plated seeds were stratified at 4 °C for 2 d before germination. The pCOBL9:GFP construct (Brady et al., 2007b; Petricka et al., 2012) was introduced into wild type (Col) and cas-c1 mutant plants.  For protoplast isolation, 500-1000 wild type and cas-c1 mutant seeds were grown for 6 days on Nitex nylon mesh MS vertical plates (100mm x 100mm x15mm). Roots were sliced and placed in a petri dish (Falcon 351008) holding one 70 µm strainer (Falcon 352350) with 7 ml buffer B (cellulase 15 g l-1, (Sigma #C1794) and pectolyase 1 g l-1, (Sigma #P3026) in buffer A). Roots were incubated for 1 h at room temperature and 85 rpm. The filtered liquid was transfered to 15 ml Falcon and centrifuged for 6 min at 22 °C, 200 x g. Supernatant was then removed and the pellet was resuspended in 300 µl of buffer A (mannitol 600 mM, MgCl2 2 mM, CaCl2 2 mM, MES 2 mM, KCl 10 mM and BSA 0,1% (p/v), pH 5.5). The mix was after filtered in a 70 and 40 µm (Falcon 352340) strainer, respectively, and the filtered cells were kept in a 5 ml polystyrene tube. Fluorescent activated cell sorting (FACS). Protoplasts from wild type pCOBL9:GFP and cas-c1 pCOBL9:GFP transgenic plants were selected in a sorter MoFlo Astrios EQ (Beckman-Coulter), with a 70 µm nozzle at a rate of 5,000 to 10,000 events per second and a fluid pressure of 60 psi. Protoplast of non-transgenic wild type and cas-c1 plants were used as negative control. GFP positive cells were based on the negative control. They were read using a bandpass filter of 526/52. Protoplast were then collected in PBS buffer (NaCl 80 g l-1, KCl 2 g l-1, Na2HPO4 14.4 g l-1 y KH2PO4 2.4 g l-1, pH 7.4), frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored for protein extraction. LC-MS/MS based root hair proteomics Protein extraction from sorted protoplast was done and protein amount was measured by Bradford assay (Bradford, 1976) and normalized with 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.0 to 0.1-1 μg μl-1. RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters) 0.2% (v/v) was added. Proteins were incubated 10 min at 40 °C, 100 rpm and reduced with DTT 10 mM. After, proteins were incubated again at 10 °C for 40 min and 100 rpm. Samples were cool down at room temperature and alkylated with iodoacetamide for 30 min at RT. Protein digestion was done with trypsin (Promega) at a 1:50 ratio and incubated for 4 h. Peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, samples were resusupended in TFA 1 % (v/v), acetonitrile 2 % (v/v). Samples were then incubated for 2h at 60 °C and 100 rpm and centrifugated at 15000 rpm for 5 min. Supernatant was stored for LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
1 μg of protein was analyzed in a LC-MS/MS elution gradient for 90 min in a mass spectrometer “Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap”, (Thermo Scientific). LCMS and MS/MS data was process by Proteome Discoverer 2.2 program (Thermo Scientific) and analyzed for identification in MASCOT (Matrix Science) against TAIR10. Search tolerances were 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for product ions using trypsin specificity with up to two missed cleavages. All searched spectra were imported into Scaffold (v4.3, Proteome Software) and scoring thresholds were set to achieve a peptide false discovery rate of 1% using the PeptideProphet algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
(1) Background: Root hairs are specialized structures involved in water and plant nutrient uptake. They elongate from epidermal cells following a complex developmental program. &#xdf;-cyanoalanine synthase (CAS), which is mainly involved in hydrogen cyanide (HCN) detoxification in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>, plays a role in root hair elongation, as evidenced by the fact that <i>cas-c1</i> mutants show a severe defect in root hair shape. In addition to root hairs, CAS C1 is expressed in the quiescent center and meristem. (2) Methods: To identify its role in root hair formation, we conducted single-cell proteomics analysis by isolating root hair cells using Fluorescence-activated Cell Sorting (FACS) from wild-type and <i>cas-c1</i> mutants. We also analyzed the presence of <i>S</i>-cyanylation, a protein post-translational modification (PTM) mediated by HCN and affecting cysteine residues and protein activity in proteins of wild type and <i>cas-c1</i> mutants. (3) Results and Conclusions: We have found that the <i>cas-c1</i> mutation has no visible effect on quiescent center or meristem root tissue, in both control and nutrient-deprivation conditions. We have identified more than 3900 proteins in root hairs and we have found that several proteins involved in root hair development, related to the receptor kinase FERONIA signaling and DNA methylation, are modified by <i>S</i>-cyanylation.

### Keywords
Cyanide, Plant, Cyanylation, Cyanoalanine

### Affiliations
Instituto Bioquimica Vegetal y Fotosintesis-CSIC
Instituto de Bioquímca Vegetal y Fotosíntesis-CSIC Avda. Américo Vespucio, 49 41092-Sevilla Spain

### Submitter
Luis C. Romero

### Lab Head
Dr Luis C. Romero
Instituto de Bioquímca Vegetal y Fotosíntesis-CSIC Avda. Américo Vespucio, 49 41092-Sevilla Spain


