### Accession
PXD014997

### Title
MS-based proteomic and phosphoproteomic characterization of the AML proteome

### Description
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a hematological cancer that affects mainly the elderly. Although complete remission (CR) is achieved for the majority of the patients after induction and consolidation therapies, nearly two-thirds relapse within a short interval. Therefore, understanding of the biological factors that determine relapse has become a major interest in clinical AML. In order to identify the proteins and their phosphorylated modifications involved in AML relapse, we performed a global proteome and phosphoproteome study by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) with primary cells from 41 AML patients at time of diagnosis that were defined as RELAPSE or REL_FREE according to their relapse status after a 5-year clinical follow-up post diagnosis. Our findings showed that the diagnostic sample of patients relapsing had increased levels of RNA processing and decreased expression of V-ATPases proteins along with CDKs and CSK2 activities. LC-MS/MS-based results were further validated with cell proliferation assays using V-ATPase inhibitor bafilomycin A1, CSK2 inhibitor CX-4945, CDK4/6 inhibitor abemaciclib and CDK2/7/9 inhibitor SNS-032. Our study presents molecules that could predict AML relapse and direct new therapeutic strategies that might circumvent more aggressive AML episodes.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, 20 µg patient lysate (n=41) was prepared both as 1) a label-free sample (LF) and 2) mixed with 10 µg of the super-SILAC mix for proteomic analysis, and processed according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. The super-SILAC spiked peptide samples were fractionated using styrenedivinylbenzene-reverse phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS) plugs (Empore, 3M), while the LF samples were not fractionated. For phosphoproteomic analysis, the super-SILAC mix was added to patient lysate (ranging from 64-1121 µg) at the same ratio, FASP processed, and enriched for phosphopeptides using the IMAC procedure. Dried peptides were dissolved in 2% ACN/0.5 % FA. Peptides (approximately 1 µg for proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis) were pre-concentrated on a 2 cm x 75 µm ID Acclaim PepMap 100 trapping column and separated on a 50 cm x 75 µm ID EASY-spray PepMap RSLC analytical column (Thermo Scientific). Samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with an Easy-Spray (Thermo Scientific) and coupled to an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation LC system (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were eluted during a 195 min binary gradient with solvent A (0.1% FA) and solvent B (0.1% FA / ACN).   For the proteomic samples, the gradient started at 5% B from 0-5 min and increased to 8% B from 5-5.5 min, then to 24% B from 5.5-115 min, to 35% B from 115-140 min, to 90% B from 150-155 min. Hold at 90% from 155-170 min, then ramped to 5% B from 170-195 min. The first fraction of the three SDB-RPS fractions was eluted with a similar, but slower gradient, with increase from 5-7% B from 5-5.5 min, and from 7-22% B from 5.5-115 min. The Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Full MS scans (scan range 375 – 1500 m/z) were acquired in profile mode with a resolution R = 120 000, a target value of 3 x 106 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. MS/MS scans were acquired in centroid mode for the top 12 precursors with intensity threshold > 5 x 104 (5.5% underfill ratio). The target ion was set to 1 x 105 with a maximum injection time of 110 ms and a resolution R = 30 000. The normalized collision energy was 28, the isolation window was 1.6 m/z with 0.3 m/z offset, and the dynamic exclusion lasted for 25 s. For the SILAC samples the lock mass at 445.12003 m/z was enabled.  The label-free and super-SILAC proteomic samples were analyzed as two separate experiments in a controlled randomized order (i.e. all samples from each patient group were distributed more or less equally over the analysis time) with LC-MS quality controls (LC-MS-QC) between approximately every ten patients. As LC-MS-QC for the label-free experiment, we included a pool of all samples included in the analysis, while HeLa was used as LC-MS-QC for the super-SILAC spiked experiment.  For the phosphoproteomic samples, the phosphopeptides were also eluted during a 195 min binary gradient with the solvents describe above. The gradient started at 5% B from 0-5 min and increased to 7% B from 5-6 min, then to 12% B from 6-60 min, to 38% B from 60-145 min, to 90% B from 145-150 min. Hold at 90% from 150-170 min, then ramped to 5% B from 170-175 min and hold at 5% until 195 min. The Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer was also operated in DDA mode with an adjusted acquisition method published by others (Kelstrup CD et al, J Proteome Res, 2014). Full MS scans (scan range 375 – 1500 m/z) were acquired in profile mode with a resolution R = 60 000, a target value of 3 x 106 and maximum injection time of 15 ms. MS/MS scans were acquired in profile mode for the top 10 precursors with intensity threshold 1 x 105 (11% underfill ratio). The target ion was set to 1 x 105 with a maximum injection time of 110 ms and a resolution R = 60 000. The normalized collision energy was 28, the isolation window was 1.2 m/z and the dynamic exclusion lasted for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files from the RELAPSE vs REL_FREE samples were processed with MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8. The spectra were searched against the concatenated reverse-decoy Swiss-Prot Homo sapiens database version 2018_02 using the Andromeda search engine. The raw files of the super-SILAC spiked samples (global proteomics and phosphoproteomics samples) were analyzed together in MaxQuant (using two parameter groups), and separately from the raw files of the label-free global proteomics samples. MaxQuant parameters for the super-SILAC spiked experiment were set up as follows: cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, Gln->pyro-Glu and serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation (only for phosphoproteomic analysis) as variable modifications. Trypsin was used as digestion protease. The false discovery rate was set at 0.01 for phosphosites, peptides and proteins. The minimum peptide length allowed was six amino acids. The match-between-runs and re-quantify options were enabled. MaxQuant parameters for searching the label-free samples were the same, except that the MaxLFQ algorithm, with LFQ count set to 1, was used for quantification, and pSTY was not used as variable modification as no phophoproteomics samples were included.

### Publication Abstract
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a hematological cancer that mainly affects the elderly. Although complete remission (CR) is achieved for the majority of the patients after induction and consolidation therapies, nearly two-thirds relapse within a short interval. Understanding biological factors that determine relapse has become of major clinical interest in AML. We utilized liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to identify the protein changes and protein phosphorylation events associated with AML relapse in primary cells from 41 AML patients at time of diagnosis. Patients were defined as relapse-free if they had not relapsed within a five-year clinical follow-up after AML diagnosis. Relapse was associated with increased expression of RNA processing proteins and decreased expression of V-ATPase proteins. We also observed an increase in phosphorylation events catalyzed by cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) and casein kinase 2 (CSK2). The biological relevance of the proteome findings was supported by cell proliferation assays using inhibitors of V-ATPase (bafilomycin), CSK2 (CX-4945), CDK4/6 (abemaciclib) and CDK2/7/9 (SNS-032). While bafilomycin preferentially inhibited the cells from relapse patients, the kinase inhibitors were less efficient in these cells. This suggests that therapy against the upregulated kinases could also target the factors inducing their upregulation rather than their activity. This study, therefore, presents markers that could help predict AML relapse and direct therapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Super-silac, Lc-msms, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Acute myeloid leukemia, Human aml primary cells

### Affiliations
The Proteomics Facility of the University of Bergen (PROBE), The Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
PROBE

### Submitter
Elise Aasebo

### Lab Head
Dr Frode Steingrimsen Berven
The Proteomics Facility of the University of Bergen (PROBE), The Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway


