### Accession
PXD017108

### Title
Protective effect of neuronal chaperone-mediated autophagy against brain aging and disease-driven neuroproteotoxicity

### Description
Components of the proteostasis network malfunction in the aging brain and this reduced neuronal protein quality control has been proposed to increase risk for neurodegeneration. Here, we have focused on chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA), a selective type of autophagy that contributes to turnover of neurodegeneration-related proteins. We generated mouse models with CMA blockage in dopaminergic or glutamatergic neurons to investigate the physiological role of CMA in neurons in vivo and the consequences of neuronal CMA loss in aging, We found that loss of neuronal CMA leads to behavioral impairments, altered neuronal function, selective changes in the neuronal proteome and proteotoxicity, all reminiscent of brain aging. Furthermore, imposing CMA loss on an experimental mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease, increased neuronal disease vulnerability and accelerated disease progression. We conclude that functional CMA is essential for neuronal proteostasis and that CMA activation could be an efficient disease-modifying therapy in neurodegenerative disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Alzheimer’s disease – CMA deficient mice. Protein was precipitated from lysates (cortex and hippocampus pooled) from three mice of each genotype (WT, L2A-/-, 3xTg, 3xTg-L2A-/-).  Precipitated protein was resolubilized in a solution of 8M urea, 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, cOmplete mini protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche).  Cysteine residues were reduced and alkylated with TCEP and iodoacetamide, followed by a 5-fold dilution with 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate.  Proteins were digested into peptides by the addition of trypsin over night at 37°C (1ug trypsin per 100ug lysate).  Samples were subsequently desalted on C18 cartridges (NEST), and the resulting eluant lyophilized.  The resulting sample was resuspened in 4% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile solution and approximately 1μg of digested peptides per sample were loaded onto a 75μm ID column packed with 25cm of Reprosil C18 1.9μm, 120Å particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH HPLC, Germany), and eluted into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) over the course of a 120 minute acquisition by gradient elution delivered by an Easy1200 nLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The composition of mobile phase A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile, respectively. All MS spectra were collected with orbitrap detection and the most abundant ions were fragmented by higher energy collision dissociation and detected in the ion trap, with a 3 second cycle time between MS1 spectra.

### Data Protocol
All data were searched against the Uniprot mouse database (downloaded 7/19/2016). Peptide and protein identification searches were performed using the MaxQuant data analysis algorithm, and all peptide and protein identifications were filtered to a 1% false-discovery rate.  Label-free quantification and statistical testing was performed using the MSstats statistical R-package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Neurons, Orbitrap lumos

### Affiliations
UCSF

### Submitter
Danielle Swaney

### Lab Head
Dr Danielle Swaney
UCSF


