### Accession
PXD013645

### Title
The O-GlcNAc transferase interaction network regulates the stress response

### Description
SILAC labeled mouse embryonic fibroblasts were treated with hydrogen peroxide to induce the stress reponse. OGT was immunoprecipitated and interactors identified via LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) were maintained in low glucose DMEM (1 g/L; Corning, Tewksbury, MA) with fetal bovine serum (5% v/v) and penicillin/streptomycin (1% v/v; Corning). As previously reported, for stable isotopic labeling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), cells were passaged ≥8 times in low glucose media supplemented with light ([12C4], [12C4]), medium ([13C6], [D4]) and heavy ([13C6, 15N4], [13C6,15N2]) isotopes of arginine and lysine (Cambridge Isotopes, Tewksbury, MA), respectively. Isotopic labels were rotated between WT, Null or peroxide stress conditions for each replicate. OGT was inducibly deleted as described previously (23). MEFs were treated with 2.5 mM hydrogen peroxide in complete media for 1.5 h at 40 h post-induction of OGT deletion (25).  Cell lysates were prepared as described above and pre-cleared with isotype control rabbit IgG antibody bound to protein G magnetic beads (2 h, 4°C). In order to enrich OGT and HCF1 to saturation, typically 2.4 µg Al24 and 6.7 µg HCF1 antibody were used per mg of lysate (16 h, 4°C). An equivalent amount of rabbit IgG antibody was used as an immunoprecipitation control. Prior to use, Protein G magnetic beads were blocked with 0.5% tween-20 (16 h, 4°C) and washed in TCL buffer. Magnetic beads were incubated with antibody-protein complexes (2 h, 4°C). Unbound proteins were collected and the magnetic beads washed with TCL buffer. Bound OGT-protein complexes were eluted from the beads in 4X laemmli sample buffer (5 min, 100oC). For SILAC samples, lysates were mixed at equal protein concentrations in a 1:1:1 ratio prior to the addition of antibody. SILAC immunoprecipitations for LC-MS/MS analysis were performed in n=4 biological replicates. All other immunoprecipitations were performed in n ≥ 3 biological replicates.  Trypsin digestion of lysates Bound OGT-protein complexes were further separated on large format   Tris-Glycine gels (18x16 cm, GE Healthcare, Pittsburgh, PA) and stained with coomassie to visualize bands. Approximately equal sections of the gel (16 total) were excised and cut into 1 mm pieces. Gel pieces were completely destained in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC) with 40% (v/v) acetonitrile, shaking. Samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM TEABC (1 h, 37°C) and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM TEABC (20 min, room temperature). Gel pieces were dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile and subsequently rehydrated in 10 ng/µL trypsin in 50 mM TEABC on ice (1 h). Excess trypsin was removed and replaced with 50 mM TEABC prior to overnight incubation (37°C). Peptides were extracted from the gel with increasing acetonitrile concentration until the gel pieces were fully dehydrated. Peptides were purified away from contaminants and salts by C18 reversed phase chromatography in STAGE tips and dried down by SpeedVac (ThermoFisher Scientific) and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS Analysis  Data-dependent LC-MS/MS analysis of peptides derived from the enrichment of OGT and its interaction partners (Biological replicates n=3) was performed with an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) interfaced with a nanoflow liquid chromatography system (Proxeon? Agilent?). For each LC-MS/MS run, 50% of reconstituted peptides were injected onto a nano-C18 reversed phase column and were fractionated across a 90 minute linear gradient on what against what. High-resolution precursor scans were acquired within the Orbitrap analyzer across a mass range of 350–1700 Da (with 60,000 resolution at 400 m/z). The ten most abundant precursor ions from each precursor scan were selected for high energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (isolation width of 1.90 m/z; 35% normalized collision energy and activation time of 0.1 ms). High-resolution MS/MS spectra were acquired (at 15,000 resolution at 400 m/z) on the Orbitrap analyzer following fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
To obtain protein identification and quantitation, all spectra were searched against a murine RefSeq database using the search algorithms SEQUEST and MASCOT incorporated into the Proteome Discoverer software package (v2.0, ThermoFisher Scientific). The following search parameters were used: 1 missed cleavage; carboxyamidomethylathion of cysteines (fixed); oxidation of methionine (variable); SILAC labels (variable): D4-lysine, 13C6,15N2-lysine, 13C6-arginine, 13C6,15N4-arginine; MS tolerance of ± 10 ppm; and MS/MS tolerance of ± 0.1 Da. The false discovery rate for peptides was set at 1%. Proteins were quantified as the median summed peptide spectral matches (PSM).  SILAC ratios for all proteins were log2 transformed. To account for any loading biases in the SILAC mixes, protein log2 ratios were normalized to the median. Interactors were considered valid if the log2 WT or H2O2/Null ratio ≥ 1 in 2 or more replicates. Interactors were considered to have changed with stress if log2 H2O2/Null ≥1.5 (increased) or ≤ -0.67 (decreased). Values (Table 1) are presented as the median values across 3 replicates. All network analysis was performed within the Cytoscape molecular interaction analysis platform (31). Interaction networks were generated with STRING database (32), where node size is indicative of either WT or H2O2/Null ratios within each graph (Figures 2 and 3), respectively. The organic layout of the network was generated using the yFiles algorithm application for undirected graphs (yWorks GmbH, Tübingen, Germany). Functional enrichment of processes performed by OGT interactors was analyzed via the STRING enrichment application.  PROSITE and UniProtKB bioinformatics tools were used to identify the domains, motifs and regions of similarity within proteins interacting basally and via stress with OGT. Proteins may contain more than one structural component and are thus listed for each component accordingly.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
O-glcnac transferase, Lc-ms/ms, Interactors, Stress

### Affiliations
jhmi
Department of Biological Chemistry The Johns Hopkins School of Medicine Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA

### Submitter
MARISSA MARTINEZ

### Lab Head
Dr Natasha Elizabeth Zachara
Department of Biological Chemistry The Johns Hopkins School of Medicine Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA


