### Accession
PXD000620

### Title
Cervico-Vaginal mucus proteins of buffalo

### Description
Cervico-vaginal fluid (CVF) plays significant roles in coitus, sperm transport and implantation. It is believed to be a good non-invasive biomarker for various diagnostic purposes. In this study, a comprehensive proteomic analysis of buffalo CVF was performed during the estrous cycle in order to document the protein expressions, utilizing SDS-PAGE, mass spectrometry, and immunoblot.Xcalibur software (version 2.0. SR1) was used for analyzing the mass spectrometry data. Product ion scans gathered from tandem mass spectrometry were involved in the database search software SEQUEST (TURBO) (http://sjsupport.thermofinnigan.com/project/product_support/xcal_layered_apps_turbosequest.htm). Peak lists were created from the products in the scan data (threshold set to 10,000) and these were searched against the mammalian protein sequence database from NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). Modification of cysteine by carboxymethylation and methionine by oxidation modifications was allowed. The mass tolerance for the precursor peptide ions was set to 3.5 and the fragment ion tolerance was set to 1. Singly charged, doubly charged and triply charged peptides have higher cross-correlation score viz., 1.9, 2.2 and 3.75, respectively, which give high confidence in terms of protein identification. More than two unique peptides for each protein were taken for confirmation of the protein present in the sample.

### Sample Protocol
LTQ-Orbitrap (Discovery) hybrid mass spectrometer with a nano-electrospray ionization source (ThermoElectron, San Jose, CA, USA) and coupled with nano-flow HPLC (Agilent Technologies 1200 series, Germany) was used for the analysis of all excised bands from the gels

### Data Protocol
Xcalibur software (version 2.0. SR1) was used for analyzing the mass spectrometry data. Product ion scans gathered from tandem mass spectrometry were involved in the database search software SEQUEST (TURBO) (http://sjsupport.thermofinnigan.com/project/product_support/xcal_layered_apps_turbosequest.htm). Peak lists were created from the products in the scan data (threshold set to 10,000) and these were searched against the mammalian protein sequence database from NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). Modification of cysteine by carboxymethylation and methionine by oxidation modifications was allowed. The mass tolerance for the precursor peptide ions was set to 3.5 and the fragment ion tolerance was set to 1. Singly charged, doubly charged and triply charged peptides have higher cross-correlation score viz., 1.9, 2.2 and 3.75, respectively, which give high confidence in terms of protein identification. More than two unique peptides for each protein were taken for confirmation of the protein present in the sample.

### Publication Abstract
Cervico-vaginal fluid (CVF) plays significant roles in coitus, sperm transport, and implantation. It is believed to be a good noninvasive biomarker for various diagnostic purposes. In this study, a comprehensive proteomic analysis of buffalo CVF was performed during the estrous cycle in order to document the protein expressions, utilizing SDS-PAGE, mass spectrometry, and immunoblot. The main objective was to screen the CVF of buffalo for one or more estrus-specific proteins. A total of 416 proteins were identified in the CVF of both estrus and diestrus phases. Out of these proteins, 68 estrus-specific proteins have been extensively reviewed in the protein database. The major physiological functions of estrus CVF proteins appeared to be stress response, immune response, and metabolic. Eventually, the expression level of heat shock protein-70 in the CVF during the estrus phase, as revealed in SDS-PAGE analysis, was higher than during diestrus. The identity of the protein was confirmed by immunoblot analysis as heat shock protein-70. The findings provide a potential lead for the evaluation of these proteins for estrus detection in buffalo because CVF biomarker detection is a noninvasive technique. The mass spectrometric data of identified proteins have been deposited at the ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD000620.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Sds-page, Estrous cycle, Buffalo, Cervico-vaginal mucus

### Affiliations
Department of Biotechnology, School of Chemical & Biotechnology, SASTRA University, Thanjavur
Deparment of Animal Science, Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli, Tamilnadu, India

### Submitter
Subramanian Muthukumar

### Lab Head
Dr G Archunan
Deparment of Animal Science, Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli, Tamilnadu, India


