### Accession
PXD042175

### Title
Food-associated Lactiplantibacillus plantarum C9O4 reverts inflammation and apoptosis in intestinal epithelial cells: a proteomic insight

### Description
Nowadays, Western diets and lifestyle lead to an increasing occurrence of chronic gut inflammation, that represents an emerging health concern with still a lack of successful therapies.  Fermented foods, and their associated Lactic Acid Bacteria, have recently regained popularity for their probiotic potential including the maintenance of gut homeostasis by modulating the immune and inflammatory response. Our study aims to investigate the cross-talk between the food-borne strain Lactiplantibacillus plantarum C9O4 and intestinal epithelial cells in an in vitro inflammation model. Cytokines profile shows the ability of C9O4 to significantly reduce levels of IL-2, IL-5, IL-6, and IFN-γ. Proteomic functional analysis reveals an active host-microbe interaction that highlights an immunoregulatory role of C9O4, able to revert both the detrimental effects of IFN-γ through the JAK/STAT pathway and the apoptosis process in inflamed cells. These results suggest a promising therapeutic role of fermented food-associated microbes for the management of gastrointestinal inflammatory diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strain  Lpb. plantarum strain C9O4 was isolated from table olives and belongs to our laboratory collection at the University of Teramo. The strain investigated in this study has been used in previous studies, characterized for several properties and selected for its anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory properties16. The strain was routinely grown under microaerophilic conditions at 37 °C in de Man, Rogosa and Sharp (MRS) broth (Liofilchem srl, Roseto degli Abruzzi, Italy), subcultured once and resuspended in sterile phosphate buffer (PBS) at 109 CFU/ml, before each experiment.   Intestinal inflammation model  NCM460 cells (INCELL Corporation, LLC, San Antonio, TX, United States) were grown in INCELL’s enriched M3Base medium supplemented with 1 % (v/v) Penicillin/Streptomycin 100X (Corning, NY, United States), 1 % (v/v) Non-Essential Amino Acids 100 X solution (Euroclone, Pero, Italy), and 10 % (v/v) heated inactivated Faetal Bovine Serum (FBS; Corning, NY, United States). Cells were grown in culture dishes at 37 °C in a 5 % CO2 atmosphere and seeded (1.5x105 cells/well in 24-well plate for cytokine detection and 3x106 cells/well in 6-well plate for proteomic analysis) 24 hours prior the co-incubation conditions, for letting them reach confluence. Once confluent monolayers were achieved, medium was removed, and cells were exposed to Lpb. plantarum strains as pre-treatment for 4 hours (100 bacteria/cell). After the incubation, unbound strains were removed with 2 washing steps with sterile PBS. Subsequently, inflammation was induced for 24 hours using an inflammatory cocktail consisting of 10 ng/ml TNF-α, 5 ng/ml IL-1β, and 10 ng/ml IFN- γ14. Supernatants were collected for cytokines analysis and cells were recovered to perform proteomic analysis.  Cytokines modulation  Evaluation of the cytokines’ modulation on inflamed cells with and without co-incubation with Lpb. plantarum C9O4 was performed through the high-throughput method for multiplex protein analysis (LUNARIS Technology, AYOXXA Biosystem GmbH), as previously described in Prete et al.

### Data Protocol
We investigated the proteome profile of NCM460 cells by comparing the protein expression of control cells (negative control) and cells pre-treated with Lpb. plantarum C9O4 with those exposed to an inflammatory stimulus (inflamed). In particular, at the end of treatment cell lysates were prepared for Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method in order to digest 50 µg of proteins for each treatment. For label free proteomics analyses, each cell treatments were analysed in triplicate by using the UltiMateTM 3000 UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) chromatographic system coupled to the Orbitrap FusionTM TribridTM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer, according to the LC-MS/MS parameters specifications reported in our previous works43,44. Proteomics raw file were processed using the MaxQuant version 1.6.10.50 (Max-Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) matching spectra against the UniProt database (released 2018_04, taxonomy Homo sapiens, 20,874 entries). LFQ Intensity values were used to quantify protein abundance in each sample whenever the protein was quantified in at least two analytical replicates. All processing parameters are described in Damiani et al. 45. Protein expression variability was evaluated by density plot with Pearson correlation (R2) values of mean LFQ intensities value-transformed to log2 scale and reported as density plot (Figures 5 and 6). PANTHER Classification System was used for Gene Ontology protein reclassifications (Panel B of Figures 5 and 6).  Finally, protein ratios (inflamed cells/negative control and pre-treated cells/inflamed cells) were used for “Core Analysis” performed through Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA software, Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), which is able to predict the activation (z-scores ≥ 2.0) or inhibition (z-scores ≤ −2.0) of transcriptional regulators or downstreams for the loaded protein dataset thanks to all published literature citations stored in the IPA system. “Comparison Analysis” was used to further compare the functional information related to upstream regulators and diseases and biofunctions.

### Publication Abstract
Nowadays, Western diets and lifestyle lead to an increasing occurrence of chronic gut inflammation that represents an emerging health concern with still a lack of successful therapies. Fermented foods, and their associated lactic acid bacteria, have recently regained popularity for their probiotic potential including the maintenance of gut homeostasis by modulating the immune and inflammatory response. Our study aims to investigate the crosstalk between the food-borne strain <i>Lactiplantibacillus plantarum</i> C9O4 and intestinal epithelial cells in an <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i> inflammation model. Cytokines profile shows the ability of C9O4 to significantly reduce levels of IL-2, IL-5, IL-6, and IFN-&#x3b3;. Proteomic functional analysis reveals an immunoregulatory role of C9O4, able to revert the detrimental effects of IFN-&#x3b3; through the JAK/STAT pathway in&#xa0;inflamed intestinal cells. These results suggest a promising therapeutic role of fermented food-associated microbes for the management of gastrointestinal inflammatory diseases. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD042175.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Inflammation pathway, Lpb. plantarum c9o4, Intestinal cells

### Affiliations
University "G. d'Annunzio" of Chieti
Department of Pharmacy, "G. d'Annunzio" University of Chieti-Pescara

### Submitter
Maria Concetta Cufaro

### Lab Head
Dr Piero Del Boccio
Department of Pharmacy, "G. d'Annunzio" University of Chieti-Pescara


