### Accession
PXD003930

### Title
Proteomic analysis of distinct regions of human carotid atherosclerotic plaques

### Description
Protein profiles were determined from different distinct regions of human atherosclerotic plaques, including: internal control, fatty streak, plaque shoulder, plaque centre, and fibrous cap. Protein extracts from all 5 regions, from 3 men and 3 women, were separated by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (in total 30 2-DE gels). Stained gels were matched by protein spot distribution, and a protein mapping was performed to identify as many protein spots as possible, by MALDI-TOF MS / peptide mass fingerprinting (Voyager DE Pro; Applied Biosystems). This resulted in the identification of 97 protein spots, corresponding to 52 unique protein by accession number.  To expand on this nLC-MS/MS (Easy-nLC / LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro; Thermo Fisher Scientific) experiments were run on additional carotid plaque samples from 10 men and 10 women, using three of the predefined regions; internal control, fatty streak, plaque core. MS/MS analysis resulted in the identification of over 1000 proteins. Human carotid atherosclerotic plaques (n = 26) were obtained from the Linköping Carotid Study, and all methods/protocols described herein have been approved by the local ethics committee (Linköping University Hospital, Linköping, Sweden). Written informed consent was also obtained from all patients.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide mass-fingerprinting (MALDI; Voyager DE Pro): Protein samples from lesion biopsies were separated using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis; first dimension isoelectric focussing on pH 3-10 non-linear IPG strips (GE Healthcare) and second dimension separated via SDS-PAGE gels, T = 14%, C = 1.5%). Gels were stained with SYPRO Ruby fluorescent dye (Life Technologies). Protein spots were excised and subjected to in-gel digestion with Porcine trypsin (Promega). Protein samples were mixed with 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid matrix (Sigma-Aldrich). Spectra was obtained using MALDI-TOF MS (Voyager DE Pro), instrument setting included: positive ionisation, acceleration voltage of 20,000 V, delay time 120 ns, range of 700-3600 Da.   Tandem-MS (LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro)   Protein samples were reduced and alkylated. via DTT (0.25M) and iodoacetamide (0.75M), and run through a 3kDa cut off filter (Amicon 3K device; Merck Millipore) to concentrate and remove interfering substances. Proteins were digested with Porcine trypsin (Promega), dried and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the nLC instrument at a concentration of 250 ng.   LC separation was performed using a C18 column (Agilent Technologies) using a 1.5 hour linear increase, before direct loading to the tandem-mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro).

### Data Protocol
MALDI-TOF MS spectra were processed and analysed using Data Explorer software (v4.0, Applied Biosystems). Peptide mass lists from the spectra were searched in the UniProt, Swiss-Prot and NCBI databases using the MS-Fit search engine (http://prospector.ucsf.edu). Search restrictions included the following: Homo sapiens taxonomy, mass tolerance <50 ppm, constant modification of carbamidomethylation on cysteine, variable modification of oxidation of methionine, maximum of 1 missed cleavage by trypsin.   nLC-MS/MS spectra were processed using MaxQuant (v1.5.12.; Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry) and searched against the UniProt human protein database (downloaded, 17th January 2015). Search parameters included: 6 ppm mass tolerance for MS, 0.5 Da for MS/MS, constant modification of carbamidomethylation on cysteine, variable modification of oxidation of methionine, maximum of 1 missed cleavage by trypsin, false-discovery rate of less than 1% and at least 2 unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The heterogeneity of atherosclerotic tissue has limited comprehension in proteomic and metabolomic analyses. To elucidate the functional implications, and differences between genders, of atherosclerotic lesion formation we investigated protein profiles from different regions of human carotid atherosclerotic arteries; internal control, fatty streak, plaque shoulder, plaque centre, and fibrous cap. Proteomic analysis was performed using 2-DE with MALDI-TOF, with validation using nLC-MS/MS. Protein mapping of 2-DE identified 52 unique proteins, including 15 previously unmapped proteins, of which 41 proteins were confirmed by nLC-MS/MS analysis. Expression levels of 18 proteins were significantly altered in plaque regions compared to the internal control region. Nine proteins showed site-specific alterations, irrespective of gender, with clear associations to extracellular matrix remodelling. Five proteins display gender-specific alterations with 2-DE, with two alterations validated by nLC-MS/MS. Gender differences in ferritin light chain and transthyretin were validated using both techniques. Validation of immunohistochemistry confirmed significantly higher levels of ferritin in plaques from male patients. Proteomic analysis of different plaque regions has reduced the effects of plaque heterogeneity, and significant differences in protein expression are determined in specific regions and between genders. These proteomes have functional implications in plaque progression and are of importance in understanding gender differences in atherosclerosis.

### Keywords
Human, Peptide mass fingerprinting, Atherosclerosis, Carotid artery, Ms/ms

### Affiliations
Division of Children's and Women's Health, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University.
Occupational and Environmental Medicine Center, and Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.

### Submitter
Liam Ward

### Lab Head
Dr Xi-Ming Yuan
Occupational and Environmental Medicine Center, and Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.


