### Accession
PXD011836

### Title
Proteomics profiling of the cell cycle provides novel insight in dynamics of protein turnover, phosphorylation and subcellular localization.

### Description
The goal is to provide a system-level understanding of the dynamics of the cell cycle using complementary approaches such as Proteomics, phosphoproteomics and functional genomics.

### Sample Protocol
For the unfractionated proteome and phosphoproteome analyses of each of the three FACS sorted phases (G1, S, G2/M), cell pellets were harvested and resuspended in lysis buffer (1% Sodium deoxycholate, 100 mM Hepes pH 8, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 tablet of Complete mini EDTA‐free mixture (Roche Applied Science) and one tablet of PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor mixture per 10 ml of lysis buffer (Roche Applied Science)). Cells were then lysed by 10 rapid passages through a 23-gauge hypodermic syringe needle and by sonication on ice. After centrifugation (20,000 × g 30 min at 4°C), the protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay (Pierce). The protein lysates of the three different phases (G1, S, G2/M) (total/soluble/insoluble fractions) were reduced by 2 mM DTT at room temperature for 1 h and alkylated by 4 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at room temperature at the dark. A first enzymatic digestion was performed using Lys-C (1:75 w/w) at 37°C overnight; a second enzymatic digestion was performed using Trypsin (1:75 w/w) at 37°C overnight. Fifty µg of each sample was labelled by TMT10plex (according to the manufacturer instructions): G1 replicate 1 (126), G1 replicate 2 (127N), G1 replicate 3 (127C), S replicate 1 (128N), S replicate 2 (128C), S replicate 3 (129N), G2/M replicate 1 (129C), G2/M replicate 2 (130N), G2/M replicate 3 (130C), Pool of all sample (131) (Fig. 1A). Two hundred μg of peptide mixture were fractionated using a Waters XBridge BEH300 C18 3.5 μm 2.1×250 mm column on a Agilent 1200 series operating at 200 μl/min. Buffer A consisted of 20 mM NH3, while buffer B of 80% ACN / 20 mM NH3. The fractionation gradient was: 3-88% B in 63 min; 88% B for 15 min; and ramped to 100% B in 2.5 min; 100% B for 13.5 min. Fractions were collected into a polypropylene V-96 well microtiterplates (Microplate, 96 well PP, V-Bottom; Grainer BIO-ONE). At 97 min, fraction collection was halted, and the gradient was held at 3% B for 20 min. The concatenated fractions were collected in a plate, dried at room temperature using a Speed Vac (SPD 111V, Thermo), and stored at -20°C till LC/MS/MS analyses.   Phosphoproteomics analysis For phosphoproteomics analyses, one hundred μg of tryptic digest of each cell sorted population and their respective replicates were labelled by TMT10plex as described above. Each sample underwent TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment step as previously described (PMID: 25068997); mixed 1:1; desalted by reverse phase using Waters Pak 1 cc (50 mg) cartridges (WAT054960; Waters, Milford, MA); and analysed by LC/MS/MS using either on orbitrap Q-Exactive or Fusion (Thermo Fisher, Germany). The orbitrap was connected to a Dionex UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany).   LC/MS/MS analyses Each sample was analyzed on a HF Q-Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher, Germany) or a Fusion Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher, Germany) using a data dependent acquisition mode and in both cases the instruments were connected to a Dionex UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). The UHPLC was equipped with a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 μm x 2 cm, nanoviper, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) and an analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 50 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). Mobile‐phase buffers for nLC separation consisted of 0.1% FA in water (solvent A) and 80% ACN/0.1% FA (solvent B). The peptides were eluted during a 2 h gradient and directly sprayed into the mass spectrometer. The flow rate was set at 250 nl/min, and the LC gradient was as follows: 3-6% solvent B within 3 min, 6-35% solvent B within 117 min, 35–47% solvent B within 5 min, 47-100% solvent B within 5 min and 100% B for 8 min and 1% solvent B for 5 min. Nano spray was achieved with an applied voltage of 1.8 kV. For the analyses on HF Q-Exactive Orbitrap the mass spectrometer was programmed in a data‐dependent acquisition mode (top 10 most intense peaks) and was configured to perform a Fourier transform survey scan from 370 to 1,600 m/z (resolution 60,000), AGC target 3 e6, maximum injection time 250 ms. MS2 scans were acquired on the 10 most-abundant MS1 ions of charge state 2–7 using a Quadrupole isolation window of 1 m/z for HCD fragmentation. Collision energy was set at 34%; resolution = 30 000; AGC target 2e5, maximum injection time 200 ms; dynamic exclusion 15 s. For the analyses on Fusion Orbitrap the mass spectrometer was programmed as follows: Fourier transform survey scan was set from 350 to 1,550 m/z (resolution 120,000), AGC target 2e5, maximum injection time 50 ms; MS2 scans were acquired in data-dependent mode. For the MS1 analysis ions of charge state 2-7 were isolated using a Quadrupole isolation window of 1.4 m/z for HCD fragmentation; collision energy was set at 35%; resolution = 30 000; AGC target 1e5, maximum injection time 100 ms; dynamic exclusion 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 and 1.6.2.3 {{371 Cox 2008;}} and Andromeda {{449 Cox 2011;}} was used to search the MS/MS data against the UniProt Homo sapiens database (containing canonical and isoforms_42145 entries downloaded on 15th September 2016) complemented with a list of common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed version of all sequences. TMT10plex was chosen as quantification platform. Trypsin/P was chosen as cleavage specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation (M) (and phosphorylation of STY in the case of the phosphoproteome analysis) were used as variable modification. The database search was performed with a mass deviation of the precursor ion of up to 4.5 ppm (main search). Data filtering was carried out using the following parameters: peptide and protein FDRs were set to 1%, minimum peptide length was set to 7 and Andromeda minimum score for modified peptides was set to 40, min reporter precursor ion fraction=0.75. The reverse and common contaminant hits were removed from the output

### Publication Abstract
The cell cycle is a highly conserved process involving the coordinated separation of a single cell into two daughter cells. To relate transcriptional regulation across the cell cycle with oscillatory changes in protein abundance and activity, we carried out a proteome- and phospho-proteome-wide mass spectrometry profiling. We compared protein dynamics with gene transcription, revealing many transcriptionally regulated G2 mRNAs that only produce a protein shift after mitosis. Integration of CRISPR/Cas9 survivability studies further highlighted proteins essential for cell viability. Analyzing the dynamics of phosphorylation events and protein solubility dynamics over the cell cycle, we characterize predicted phospho-peptide motif distributions and predict cell cycle-dependent translocating proteins, as exemplified by the S-adenosylmethionine synthase MAT2A. Our study implicates this enzyme in translocating to the nucleus after the G1/S-checkpoint, which enables epigenetic histone methylation maintenance during DNA replication. Taken together, this data set provides a unique integrated resource with novel insights on cell cycle dynamics.

### Keywords
Fractionation, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Cell cycle

### Affiliations
KTH

### Submitter
Gianluca Maddalo

### Lab Head
Dr Mathias Uhlen
KTH


