### Accession
PXD038100

### Title
Global assessment of protein-protein crosslinking in ex vivo eRIC samples

### Description
Male mice on a homogenous C57BL6/J genetic background were sacrificed at 11 to 13 weeks of age by cervical dislocation. Kidneys were immediately harvested, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until use. Animal handling was in accordance with guidelines approved by the European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL). Organ sections (thickness 30 µm) were prepared in a Cryostat (Leica Biosystems, Leica CM3050 S) set to -20 °C and deposited onto SuperFrost glass slides (Carl Roth, H880); the glass slides were pre-cooled to -20°C in the cryostat. ~10 sections were placed on a glass slide, and a total of around 150 sections were prepared for each sample per mouse. Tissue sections on glass slides were then transferred onto metal plates placed on dry ice. The tissue sections were exposed to 1 J/cm2 of 254 nm UV light in a XL 1500 UV Spectrolinker (Spectronics Corporation) and subjected to eRIC (PMID: 30352994). The proteins captured by eRIC were separated by gel electrophoresis, divided into 7 fractions of defined mass, and identified by MS to determine their distribution across the fractions. Crosslinking to other proteins should shift the signal to higher mass fractions. The analyses were conducted in triplicate.

### Sample Protocol
Capture of ribonucleoprotein complexes using eRIC: two kidneys per sample were employed. After UV exposure, organ sections were recovered by scraping into 15 mL ice-cold lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 500 mM LiCl, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT, 0.5% (w/v) LiDS). The lysates were homogenized using 25-Gauge and 27-Gauge needles, snap frozen and stored at −80 °C until use. Lysates were incubated for 15 min at 45 °C, cooled down, and clarified by centrifugation. The supernatant was incubated 1 h with rotation with 15 mg of magnetic beads (Perkin Elmer, M-PVA C11) coupled to LNA2.T probe (PMID: 30352994). Beads were washed at 37 °C once with lysis buffer and twice with each of the buffers 1 (20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 500 mM LiCl, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT, 0.1% (w/v) LiDS), 2 (20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 500 mM LiCl, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT, 0.02% (v/v) NP40), and 3 (20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 200 mM LiCl, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT, 0.02% (v/v) NP40). Each wash was performed with 5 mL of buffer for 5 min. Bead suspension was incubated in 220 µl of water for 10 min at 40 °C and 800 rpm (pre-elution). Proteins were eluted at 37 °C 800 rpm for 60 min with ∼200 U RNase T1 (Sigma-Aldrich, R1003–100KU) and ∼200 U RNase A (Sigma-Aldrich, R5503) in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 0.15 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT, 0.01% NP40. Separation of captured proteins: eluates were vacuum-concentrated, combined with 4x Laemmli Sample Buffer, incubated 5 min at 95ºC and loaded into 4-15%  acrylamide gels (Bio-Rad, 567-1083). Using as a reference the bands of a ladder (Bio-Rad, 1610374) loaded into the same gel, the lanes were cut using a scalpel at the following molecular weights (KDa): 20, 25, 37, 50, 75, 100, 150, and near the top of the gel. The isolated bands were subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin. Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by sonication for 15 minutes, followed by a quick spin and supernatant collection. A solution of 50:50 water: acetonitrile, 1 % formic acid (2 x the volume of the gel pieces) was added for a second extraction and the samples were again sonicated for 15 minutes, quickly spun down and the supernatant pooled with the first extract. The pooled supernatants were dried by vacuum centrifugation (SpeedVac). The samples were dissolved in 10 µL of reconstitution buffer (96:4 water: acetonitrile, 1% formic acid) and analysed by LC-MS/MS. Sample Preparation for Mass Spectrometry (MS) and TMT labeling: samples were concentrated using a SpeedVac, and treated with 10 mM DTT in HEPES buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5) for 30 min at 56 ºC to reduce disulphide bridges in proteins. Reduced cysteines were then alkylated for 30 min at room temperature with 20 mM 2-chloroacetamide in HEPES buffer (protected from light). Samples were prepared using the SP3 protocol and trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) was added at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50. Following an overnight incubation at 37 °C, the digested peptides were recovered in HEPES buffer applying two successive elution steps. The peptides were subsequently labelled with TMT10plex Isobaric Label Reagent (ThermoFisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The samples were combined and cleaned using an OASIS HLB µElution Plate (Waters). Offline high pH reverse phase fractionation was carried out on an Agilent 1200 Infinity high-performance liquid chromatography system, equipped with a Gemini C18 column (3 μm, 110 Å, 100 x 1.0 mm, Phenomenex). MS data acquisition: An UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system (Dionex) fitted with a trapping cartridge (µ-Precolumn C18 PepMap 100, 5µm, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, 100 Å) and an analytical column (nanoEase™ M/Z HSS T3 column 75 µm x 250 mm C18, 1.8 µm, 100 Å, Waters) was used. Trapping was carried out with a constant flow of trapping solvent (0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in water) at 30 µL/min onto the trapping column for 6 minutes. Subsequently, peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column using a gradient composed of Solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water, 3% DMSO) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, 3% DMSO) with a constant flow of 0.3 µL/min. The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using the nanoFlex source. The peptides were introduced into the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (CoAnn Technologies) and an applied spray voltage of 2.4 kV, instrument was operated in positive mode. The capillary temperature was set at 275°C. Full mass scans were acquired for a mass range 350-1500 m/z in profile mode in the orbitrap with resolution of 120000. The filling time was set to a maximum of 250 ms with a limitation of 4 x105 ions. The instrument was operated in data dependent acquisition mode and MSMS scans were acquired in the Iontrap using Rapid scan rate, with a fill time of up to 35 ms and AGC target was set to standard. A normalized collision energy of 30 was applied. MS2 data was acquired in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry data was processed with MaxQuant (v1.6.17.0)58 and searched against the Uniprot Mus musculus database (UP000000589). The data was searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (fixed modification), Acetyl (N-term) and Oxidation (M) (variable modifications). The mass error tolerance for the full scan MS spectra was set to 20 ppm and for the MS/MS spectra to 0.5 Da. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed. For protein identification a minimum of 1 unique peptide with a peptide length of at least seven amino acids was required. A false discovery rate below 0.01 was required on both the peptide and protein level. The raw output file of MaxQuant (proteinGroups.txt – file) was processed using the R programming language (ISBN 3-900051-07-0). Only proteins that were quantified with at least two unique peptides and in at least two out of three replicates in a specific gel fraction, were considered for the analysis. iBAQ values were cleaned for batch effects using the ‘removeBatchEffect’ function of the limma package. In order to calculate the proportion of observation for each protein and sample (replicate and gel fraction), the corresponding iBAQ value was divided by the sum of all valid iBAQ values over all samples for the specific protein. The density distribution of observed molecular weights was weighted by this calculated proportion.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna interactome capture., Rbp, Rbpome, Eric, Ric, Rna binding protein

### Affiliations
EMBL
European Molecular Biology Laboratory,  Meyerhofstrasse 1,  69117 Heidelberg,  Germany.

### Submitter
Frank Stein

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias W. Hentze
European Molecular Biology Laboratory,  Meyerhofstrasse 1,  69117 Heidelberg,  Germany.


