### Accession
PXD005424

### Title
On tissue Top down microproteomic bridged to MALDI MS Imaging reveal the molecular physiome of brain regions

### Description
Tissue Top-down microproteomic was performed on 3 brain regions. 156 references proteins from different cellular compartments were characterized. Moreover, 11 Alternative proteins issued from alternative open reading frames (AltORF) were identified and were relied to the brain regions and associated to the function of their reference proteins. Some proteins display specific post-translational modifications profiles or truncation linked the brain regions and their functions. Systemic biology performed on microproteome identified in each region allowed to associate sub-networks with functional physiology of each brain region. Back correlation of the local extracted and identified microproteome with tissue cellular localization was then performed by MALDI mass spectrometry imaging. 40 proteins including 4 Altproteins have been back correlated in MALDI MSI and are in line with their tissue extracted region and physiological function. Taken together, we established the molecular physiome of 3 rat brain regions through reference and hidden proteome characterization.

### Sample Protocol
Intact protein extraction buffer  To ensure little-to-no protein hydrolysis by endogenous proteases, every step from buffer preparation to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis were carried out within day with on-ice conservation in between sample processing steps. A solution of 1% temperature and acid cleavable commercial detergent ProteaseMAX was prepared in 50 µM DTT and was directly aliquoted and immediately stored at - 20 °C until use according to manufacturer’s recommendations. Aliquots were processed within day of sample extraction to ensure minimal degradation of the detergent over time. Aliquot of 1 % ProteaseMAX 50 µM DTT was diluted in ice-cold 50 µM DTT to obtain a final detergent concentration of 0.1 % and stored on-ice until use. Each aliquot was used within day without conservation of remaining solution. LMJ experiments To ensure optimal protein extraction, lipids were removed from the tissue section by immersing glass slide in consecutives solvent bath consisting in washes of 1 minute in 70 % EtOH, 1 minute in 95 % EtOH and 30 seconds in chloroform with complete solvent evaporation under reduced pressure at room temperature between each washing step. Slide was then scanned again as washing steps improve structure visibility. LMJ tissue slide was placed on a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, Ithaca, NY, USA). Proteins were then extracted from every ROI by completing six cycles of pipetting up 1.5 µL of detergent solution, dispensing 0.8 µL of the extraction buffer on the surface of the selected ROI with 10 iterations of up-and-down pipetting, aspiration of 2.5 µL by the device and 4 µL expulsion from the pipette tip into a clean tube to ensure complete retrieval of the initial 1.5 µL for each cycle. Per ROI, the final collected volume was 9 µL which was immediately stored on-ice until further processing. PAM experiments 10 µL of extraction buffer was transferred into a tube. Selected ROI(s) was manually dissected using a clean scalpel blade under microscope and transferred into the proteins extraction buffer and stored on-ice until further processing. nanoLC-MS/MS Every ROI-containing-tube, with either extracts obtained with the LMJ or PAM strategy into extraction buffer, were sonicated for 5 minutes into a sonication bath and denaturated at 55 °C for 15 minutes to ensure reduction of disulfide bonds. Tubes were then quickly centrifuged to rally condensation droplets at the bottom of the tube. Parafilm pieces were then carefully removed from tubes using a pipette tip without loss of liquid and tubes were then subjected to heat at 95°C for 10 minutes to ensure complete detergent dissociation. Tubes were then quickly centrifuged and stored on ice, 11 µL of 10 % ACN in 0.4 % FA in water were added to each tube to reach LC starting concentration of ACN and stored at 4 °C until nanoLC-MS/MS analysis on the same day. 5 µL of the sample was loaded onto a 2 cm * 150 µm internal diameter PLRP-S (Varian, Palo Alto, California, USA) IntegraFrit sample trap-column (New Objective, Woburn, Massachussetts, USA) at a maximum pressure 280 bar using a Proxeon EASY nLC-II (Proxeon, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and were separated on a 15 cm * 100 µm internal diameter PLRP-S column with a linear gradient from 5 to 100% and a flow rate of 300 nL/min. 10 µL of sample were injected and separated within a 3 hours gradient  Data were acquired on a Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoESI source (Proxeon, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) applying 1.6 kV on a PicoTip nanospray emitter (New Objective, Woburn, Massachussetts, USA). Data were acquired in a data dependent mode using a top 3 strategy. Full scans were acquired by averaging 4 microscans at 70 000 resolution within a mass range of 800 – 2000 m/z with an AGC target of 1 * 10 6 and a maximum accumulation time of 200 ms. The three most abundant ions with charge superior than 3 or unassigned were selected for fragmentation. Precursors were selected within a 15 m/z selection window by the quadrupole and fragmented by averaging two microscans at a resolution of 70 000 with a Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) of 25, the AGC target was set to 1 * 10 6 with a maximum accumulation time of 500 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were processed with ProSight PC 3.0 or 4.0 (Thermo, BREMEN GERMANY). Spectral data were deisotoped using the cRAWler algorithm and searched against the complex Rattus Norvegicus ProSightPC database version 2014_07 Similarly, a second search was performed to detect alternative protein products, by interrogating RAW files with a combined custom database containing every reference proteins and their isoforms from an in-silico  transcriptome-wide translated database that contain every possible reference and alternative protein product from the Ensembl Rnor 6.0 transcripts sequence database with at least 30 amino acids. For alternative protein identification, it was made sure that the Id was coming from a specific precursor that was not identified during reference proteins search.  Files were searched using a two step search tree containing an “Absolute” 1000 Da precursor tolerant then “Biomarker” identification strategies. Protein were considered identified when one of the two steps gave an expect (E-value) was inferior to E-4.   Subnetwork Enrichment Pathway Analyses and statistical Testing The Elsevier’s Pathway Studio version 10.0 (Ariadne Genomics/Elsevier) was used to deduce relationships among differentially expressed proteomics protein candidates using the Ariadne ResNet database "Subnetwork Enrichment Analysis" (SNEA) algorithm was selected to extract statistically significant altered biological and functional pathways pertaining to each identified set of protein hits among the different groups. SNEA utilizes Fisher's statistical test set to determine if there are nonrandom associations between two categorical variables organized by specific relationship.  Integrated Venn diagram analysis was performed using “the InteractiVenn”: a web-based tool for the analysis of comlex data set. See Supp. Data 2 & 3 as supplemenatry data for the listed differential pathways.

### Publication Abstract
Tissue spatially-resolved proteomics was performed on 3 brain regions, leading to the characterization of 123 reference proteins. Moreover, 8 alternative proteins from alternative open reading frames (AltORF) were identified. Some proteins display specific post-translational modification profiles or truncation linked to the brain regions and their functions. Systems biology analysis performed on the proteome identified in each region allowed to associate sub-networks with the functional physiology of each brain region. Back correlation of the proteins identified by spatially-resolved proteomics at a given tissue localization with the MALDI MS imaging data, was then performed. As an example, mapping of the distribution of the matrix metallopeptidase 3-cleaved C-terminal fragment of &#x3b1;-synuclein (aa 95-140) identified its specific distribution along the hippocampal dentate gyrus. Taken together, we established the molecular physiome of 3 rat brain regions through reference and hidden proteome characterization.

### Keywords
Alternative proteins, Maldi imaging, Top down micro-proteomics

### Affiliations
Laboratoire Protéomique, Réponse Inflammatoire et Spectrométrie de Masse (PRISM) - INSERM U1192 - Université Lille 1, Bât SN3, 1er étage, Cité Scientifique, F-59655 Villeneuve d’Ascq Cedex
PRISM-INSERM U1192

### Submitter
Julien Franck

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
Laboratoire Protéomique, Réponse Inflammatoire et Spectrométrie de Masse (PRISM) - INSERM U1192 - Université Lille 1, Bât SN3, 1er étage, Cité Scientifique, F-59655 Villeneuve d’Ascq Cedex


