### Accession
PXD001277

### Title
Mouse, Hippocampus, LC-MSMS -  Omega-3 fatty acid deficiency disrupts endocytosis, neuritogenesis, and mitochondrial protein pathways in the mouse hippocampus

### Description
Omega-3 fatty acid (n-3 FA) deficiency is an environmental risk factor for schizophrenia, yet characterisation of the consequences of deficiency at the protein level in the brain is limited.  We aimed to identify the protein pathways disrupted as a consequence of chronic n-3 deficiency in the hippocampus of mice.  Fatty acid analysis of the hippocampus following chronic dietary deficiency revealed a 3-fold decrease (p < 0.001) in n-3 FA levels.  Label free LC-MS/MS analysis identified and profiled 1008 proteins, of which 114 were observed to be differentially expressed between n-3 deficient and control groups (n=8 per group).  The cellular processes that were most implicated were neuritogenesis, endocytosis, and exocytosis, while specific protein pathways that were most significantly dysregulated were mitochondrial dysfunction and clathrin mediated endocytosis (CME).  In order to characterise whether these processes and pathways are ones influenced by antipsychotic medication, we used LC-MS/MS to test the differential expression of these 114 proteins in the hippocampus of mice chronically treated with the antipsychotic agent haloperidol.  We observed 23 of the 114 proteins to be differentially expressed, 17 of which were altered in the opposite direction to that observed following n-3 deficiency.  Overall, our findings point to disturbed synaptic function, neuritogenesis, and mitochondrial function as a consequence of dietary deficiency in n-3 FA.  This study greatly aids our understanding of the molecular mechanism by which n-3 deficiency impairs normal brain function, and provides clues as to how n-3 FA exert their therapeutic effect in early psychosis.

### Sample Protocol
For label free LC-MS/MS analysis, the hippocampus of 16 n-3 Def and 16 n-3 Adq samples per dietary group were assessed.   Prior to analysis, these 16 samples were sub-pooled according to gender (4 male and 4 female per dietary group) so that 8 x n-3 Def and 8 x n-3 Adq LC-MS/MS runs were performed.  Following solubilisation of samples by sonication in triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB; Sigma), 50 µg of protein from each of the 8 n-3 Adq and 8n-3 Def samples was denatured for 10 min at 80 ºC in the presence of 1% RapiGest (Waters).  Samples were reduced with TCEP (50 mM) for 60 min at 60 ºC, followed by alkylation with Iodoacetamide (200 mM) for 30 min in the dark.  Digestion with trypsin (Promega; 1µg/µl) was carried out overnight at 37 ºC, and Tryptic peptides were purified using ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were resuspended in Solution A (HPLC grade water, 2% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid) where by 1µg of protein digest (5µl) was injected per LC-MS/MS run.  Each of the 16 samples were run in triplicate, on a Thermo Scientific LTQ ORBITRAP XL mass spectrometer connected to an Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Each sample was loaded onto Biobasic Picotip Emitter (120 mm length, 75 μm ID)  packed in house with Reprocil Pur C18 (1.9 μm) reverse phase media column, and was separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient, using a 56 min reverse phase gradient  at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. From 0-7 minutes 5μl (1µg) of sample was injected and loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 1.5μl/min. At 7 minutes the mass spectrometer started to acquire data, the chromatography gradient continued, 7–44 minutes from 5 to 35% Solution B (acetonitrile containing 3% HPLC grade water and 0.5% acetic acid) at 250nl/min, 44-50 minutes from 35 to 90% Solution B at 250nl/min, 50-55 minutes at 90% Solution B at 250nl/min increasing to 900nl/min, 55 – 56 minutes at 90% Solution B to 2% Solution B at 900 nl/min decreasing to 250nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 200 °C, a capillary voltage of 45V, a tube lens voltage of 100V and with a potential of 1800V applied to the frit.   Survey full-scan MS spectra (300 – 2000 Da) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000, whereby the FTMS maximum injection time was 700ms, the Ion trap injection time was 100ms, and the 7 most intense ions from the preview scan were selected for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed with MaxQuant (V 1.1.1.36). Methionine oxidations and acetylation of protein N-termini were specified as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification, and 2 miscleavages were allowed.  Protein and peptide FDR’s were set to 0.01. Only proteins with at least two peptides (one uniquely assignable to the protein) were considered as reliably identified.  LFQ intensity values were used for protein quantification between groups.  Only unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification with a minimum ratio count of .  Statistical analyses was performed in Perseus (V 1.3.0.4), whereby the data was log 2 transformed, missing values were replaced by values form the normal distribution, and column normalisation was performed by subtracting the median.  Student’s t-test was applied to identify proteins differentially expressed between groups at a 5% threshold, and a permutation-based FDR was applied at a 5% threshold.  Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA; www.ingeunity.com) was performed on all statistically significant proteins.  The IPA p-value was calculated using the right-tailed Fisher’s Exact Test and multiple hypothesis correction was based on the Benjamini-Hochberg (B-H) approach at 1% FDR threshold.

### Publication Abstract
Omega-3 fatty acid (n-3 FA) deficiency is an environmental risk factor for schizophrenia, yet characterization of the consequences of deficiency at the protein level in the brain is limited. We aimed to identify the protein pathways disrupted as a consequence of chronic n-3 deficiency in the hippocampus of mice. Fatty acid analysis of the hippocampus following chronic dietary deficiency revealed a 3-fold decrease (p &lt; 0.001) in n-3 FA levels. Label free LC-MS/MS analysis identified and profiled 1008 proteins, of which 114 were observed to be differentially expressed between n-3 deficient and control groups (n = 8 per group). The cellular processes that were most implicated were neuritogenesis, endocytosis, and exocytosis, while specific protein pathways that were most significantly dysregulated were mitochondrial dysfunction and clathrin mediated endocytosis (CME). In order to characterize whether these processes and pathways are ones influenced by antipsychotic medication, we used LC-MS/MS to test the differential expression of these 114 proteins in the hippocampus of mice chronically treated with the antipsychotic agent haloperidol. We observed 23 of the 114 proteins to be differentially expressed, 17 of which were altered in the opposite direction to that observed following n-3 deficiency. Overall, our findings point to disturbed synaptic function, neuritogenesis, and mitochondrial function as a consequence of dietary deficiency in n-3 FA. This study greatly aids our understanding of the molecular mechanism by which n-3 deficiency impairs normal brain function, and provides clues as to how n-3 FA exert their therapeutic effect in early psychosis.

### Keywords
Neuritogenesis, Mitochondrial dysfunction, Proteomics, Schizophrenia, Clathrin mediated endocytosis, Omega-3

### Affiliations
Department of Psychiatry,  Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, ERC Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland
University College Dublin

### Submitter
Caitriona Scaife

### Lab Head
Dr David R. Cotter
Department of Psychiatry,  Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, ERC Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland


