### Accession
PXD007955

### Title
Identification of post-translational modifications on Odorant-Binding Protein isoforms from pig olfactory secretome by high-resolution mass spectrometry: O-beta-N-acetylglucosaminylation and phosphorylation

### Description
Odorant-Binding Proteins (OBP) are players of perireceptor events in olfaction. A molecular mechanism explaining their specificity for odors and pheromones has still to be proposed. A new track comes from the analysis of pig olfactory secretome, which is mainly composed of OBP isoforms, generated from 3 gene products by PTM, phosphorylation and O‐β‐N‐acetylglucosaminylation (O-GlcNAcylation), which are unusual for secreted proteins. These diverse isoforms could display different binding properties towards ligands. Before testing such a function, both post-translational modifications, although assessed by specific antibodies, have to be identified by mass spectrometry. We report here for the first time, the identification of phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation on peptides coming from trypsin digestion of OBP by ESI-HCD-MS/MS. PEAKS software analysis of raw MS data allowed selecting spectra that were analyzed manually to identify PTM. Four peptides corresponding to two different portions of OBP sequence were modified either by a phosphate group or by a hexNAc moiety. Due to the high energy used in HCD, the data did not allow precise localization of the modified sites. We suggest that these two PTM, by generating multiple isoforms, should extend the binding repertoire of secreted OBPs

### Sample Protocol
Animals Animals (Large White Sus scrofa) were bred at the Experimental Farm of INRA. Two adult males were used in this study.Respiratory mucosa (RM) was collected immediately after death from each animal and stored in tubes at -80°C for protein extraction. Extraction proteins Proteins were extracted from pig tissues by phase 93 partition using chloroform/methanol. Aliquots representing 1/250 and 1/500 of each tissue were tested by native-PAGE. Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2DE) Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2DE): 1 X corresponds to 1 μg. The first dimensional IEF was carried out on a PROTEAN IEF Cell (Bio-Rad). The second dimension was performed using 16.8% SDS-PAGE in Mini-PROTEAN 3 Dodeca Cell (Bio-Rad) with the Spectra Multicolor Low Range Protein Ladder (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as molecular weight marker. Staining and western-blot : After 2DE, gels were either stained with colloidal Coomassie blue R solution (12% trichloroacetic acid, 5% ethanolic solution of 0.035% Serva blue R-250), or transferred onto nitrocellulose membrane (Hybond C-Extra, GE Healthcare) for PTM characterization, or PVDF membranes (Immobilon P, Millipore) for primary sequence characterization. For immunodetection of O-GlcNAc modified proteins, we used the Thermo Scientific Pierce “O GlcNAc Western Blot Detection Kit”, following manufacturer’s instructions. For other immunodetections, we used Polyclonal antibodies (anti-OBP, anti-SAL and anti-VEG) or with anti-phosphoserine/threonine/tyrosine monoclonal antibodies (SPM101 Mab Fischer scientific). Secondary antibody are conjugated with horseradish peroxidase [Anti-mouse IgM-HRP for CTD110.6, 1:10,000; Anti-rabbit IgG-HRP for polyclonal antibodies, 1:30,000; Anti-mouse IgG-HRP for SPM101 (all secondary antibodies were from Fisher Scientific)]. Blots were developed using enhanced chemiluminescence Digestion of protein spots and mass spectrometry Spots of interest were excised from the Coomassie-stained gels, after the gel slices were rinced, reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin over night. Each digestion are analyzed by nanoflow HPLC coupled on-line to a Q-Exactive plus.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw files were analyzed with PEAKS 7 studio software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada) using a custom-made OBP database (Table 1).The peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.01 Da for MS/MS. Variable modifications included were as follows: Oxidation of M, Y, H, deamidation of N, Q, carbamidomethylation of C, phosphorylation of Y, S, T, pyro-G, and O-N acetylhexosaminylation of S, T. For high-confidence peptide identification a FDR (False Discover Rate) of 1% and a minimum of 2 ranked peptides were used for peptide filtering.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, O-glcnac, Odorant-binding protein, Esi-hcd-ms/ms, 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis

### Affiliations
MSAP3290
Glycobiology of olfaction, UMR8576 Unité de glycobiologie structurale et fonctionnelle, France.

### Submitter
Fabrice Bray

### Lab Head
Dr Patricia NAGNAN-LE MEILLOUR
Glycobiology of olfaction, UMR8576 Unité de glycobiologie structurale et fonctionnelle, France.


