### Accession
PXD004396

### Title
Identification of drought-cold-responsive proteins in bread wheat using iTRAQ

### Description
In the field, abiotic stresses are rarely applied individually. Crops are often subjected to a combination of stresses. To date, no study has been performed on the proteomic investigation of the response of common wheat to a combination of drought and cold stresses. In this study, wheat seedlings exposed to drought-cold stress for 24 h showed inhibited growth, increased lipid peroxidation, relative electrolyte leakage, and soluble sugar contents. To determine the wheat protein response to drought-cold stress, iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic and liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) methods were employed to determine the proteomic profiles of the roots and leaves of wheat seedlings exposed to drought-cold stress conditions. We identified 250 and 258 proteins with significantly altered abundance in the roots and leaves, respectively. These proteins were classified into several main groups, as follows: protein metabolism, stress/defense, carbohydrate metabolism, lipid metabolism, transcription-related processes, energy production, cell-wall and cytoskeleton metabolism, membrane and transportation, signal transduction, other metabolic processes, and unknown biological processes. Nine proteins were simultaneously presented in both roots and leaves exposed to drought-cold stress, and the majority of proteins identified differed from one another and displayed differently altered abundance. These findings uncovered organ-specific differences in adaptation to drought-cold stress. Exogenous abscisic acid (ABA) application conferred the plant with protection against drought-cold stress and significantly increased catalase and peroxidase enzyme activities, as well as the transcription of glutathione S-transferase and other 11 sample genes in the roots or leaves, respectively. These results suggested that ABA is a potentially vital factor that contributes to the drought-cold signaling pathway and a promising target for growth recovery. Furthermore, VIGS (virus-induced gene silencing)-treated plants generated for three candidate protein genes TaGRP2, CDCP and WCOR410c were subjected to drought-cold limitation, they showed more serious droop and wilt, increased rate of relative electrolyte leakage, and reduced relative water content (RWC) compared to viral control plants. These results may indicate that TaGRP2, CDCP and WCOR410c play important roles in conferring drought-cold tolerance in wheat. These findings can provide useful insights into the molecular mechanisms of drought-cold responses in higher plants.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Preparation and iTRAQ Labeling Proteins  from leaves and roots of stressed wheat seedlings and control were extracted using the trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone method, and three biological replicates were performed [24]. Protein digestion was conducted according to the  filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure previously described [25]. Briefly, 200 μg of protein for each sample was incorporated into 30 μL STD buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0). The detergent, DTT, and other low-molecular-weight components were removed using a UA buffer (8 M urea 150 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0) by repeated ultrafiltration (Microcon units, 10 kD). Then, 100 μL 0.1 M iodoacetamide (IAA) in UA buffer was added to block reduced cysteine residues and the samples were incubated for 30 min in darkness. The filters were washed with 100 μL UA buffer three times and then 100 μl DS buffer [50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.5] twice. Finally, the protein suspensions were digested with 4 μg trypsin (Promega) in 40 μL DS buffer overnight at 37 °C, and the resulting peptides were collected as filtrate. The peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma), concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm using an extinctions coefficient of 1.1 of 0.1% (g/L) solution that was calculated on the basis of the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins. 100 μg peptide mixture of each sample was labeled using 8-plex iTRAQ reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems). The samples were labeled as (L-0-1/R-0-1)-113, (L-0-2/R-0-2)-114, (L-0-3/R-0-3)-115, (L-1-1/R-1-1)-116, (L-1-2/R-1-2)-117, and (L-1-3/R-1-3)-118 and were multiplexed and vacuum dried (L-0/R-0 represents leaves/roots of control; L-1/R-1 denotes drought-cold-stressed leaves/roots).   Peptide Fractionation with Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) Chromatography The iTRAQ-labeled peptides were fractionated by SCX chromatography using an AKTA Purifier system (GE Healthcare). The dried peptide mixture was reconstituted and acidified with 2 mL buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% of ACN, pH 2.7) and loaded onto a PolySULFOETHYL4.6 × 100 mm column (5 µm, 200 Å, PolyLCInc, Maryland, USA). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 mL/min with a gradient of 0%–8% buffer B (500 mM KCl, 10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% of ACN, pH 3.0) for 22 min, 8–52% buffer B at 22–47 min, 52%–100% buffer B at 47–50 min, and 100% buffer B at 50–58 min. Then, buffer B was reset to 0% after 58 min. The elution was monitored by absorbance at 214 nm, and the fractions were collected every 1 min. The collected fractions were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 mL, Sigma). Each fraction was concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µL of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. All samples were stored at −80 °C until LC–MS/MS analysis.  LC–Electrospray Ionization (ESI) MS/MS Analysis by Q Exactive. Each fraction was injected for nanoLC–MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture was loaded onto a reverse-phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper C18) connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3 μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. LC–MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. The determination of the target value is based on predictive Automatic Gain Control (pAGC). The dynamic exclusion duration was 60 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200. The normalized collision energy was 30 eV, and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with the peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
Sequence Database Searching and Data Analysis MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA) run against the UniProt Poacese database (released at September 17, 2015, 1248700 sequences). For protein identification, the following options were used: peptide mass tolerance = 20 ppm; MS/MS tolerance = 0.1 Da; enzyme = trypsin; missed cleavage = 2; fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex(K), iTRAQ8plex(N-term); variable modification: oxidation (M), and database pattern: decoy, peptide false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 0.01. For protein quantification, the protein ratios are calculated as the median of only unique peptides of the protein. For the experimental bias, all peptide ratios are normalized by the median protein ratio. The median protein ratio should be 1 after the normalization. Differentially expressed proteins were analyzed for significant downregulation or upregulation. Ratio was used to assess the fold changes in the abundance of the proteins identified in drought-cold-stressed versus control plants. Moreover, one sample t-test was used to identify significant (p < 0.05) differences in means between drought-cold-stressed and control plants. Differentially expressed proteins were defined on the basis of thresholds of  >1.2- or < 0.83-fold change ratios of the roots and leaves of the stress-induced wheat seedlings compared with those of the control.  Bioinformatics  In this study, the identified proteins were annotated by searching against the UniProt database (www.uniprot.org). Considering the majority of differentially expressed proteins were uncharacterized proteins, thus before the gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) annotation, the comparison of the differentially expressed proteins with the protein sequences from the proper databases (including UniProt and NCBI databases) were carried out (Additional file 4). Then, the molecular functions of those differentially expressed proteins were classified according to their GO annotations (http://www.geneontology.org/) and their biological functions (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/pathway.html).

### Publication Abstract
Crops are often subjected to a combination of stresses in the field. To date, studies on the physiological and molecular responses of common wheat to a combination of osmotic and cold stresses, however, remain unknown. In this study, wheat seedlings exposed to osmotic-cold stress for 24 h showed inhibited growth, as well as increased lipid peroxidation, relative electrolyte leakage, and soluble sugar contents. iTRAQ-based quantitative proteome method was employed to determine the proteomic profiles of the roots and leaves of wheat seedlings exposed to osmotic-cold stress conditions. A total of 250 and 258 proteins with significantly altered abundance in the roots and leaves were identified, respectively, and the majority of these proteins displayed differential abundance, thereby revealing organ-specific differences in adaptation to osmotic-cold stress. Yeast two hybrid assay examined five pairs of stress/defense-related protein-protein interactions in the predicted protein interaction network. Furthermore, quantitative real-time PCR analysis indicated that abiotic stresses increased the expression of three candidate protein genes, i.e., TaGRP2, CDCP, and Wcor410c in wheat leaves. Virus-induced gene silencing indicated that three genes TaGRP2, CDCP, and Wcor410c were involved in modulating osmotic-cold stress in common wheat. Our study provides useful information for the elucidation of molecular and genetics bases of osmotic-cold combined stress in bread wheat.

### Keywords
Drought and cold responsive proteins, Bread wheat, Itraq

### Affiliations
Agronomy College/National Key Laboratory of Wheat and Corn Crop/Collaborative Innovation Center of Henan Grain Crops, Henan Agricultural University ,Zhengzhou China
 Henan Agricultural University

### Submitter
Ning Zhang 

### Lab Head
Dr Feng Chen
Agronomy College/National Key Laboratory of Wheat and Corn Crop/Collaborative Innovation Center of Henan Grain Crops, Henan Agricultural University ,Zhengzhou China


