### Accession
PXD015951

### Title
Canine pyometra - plasma proteomics

### Description
Canine pyometra is a common inflammatory disease of the uterus in sexually mature bitches, caused by a secondary bacterial infection which leads to change in the plasma protein associated with the innate immune system.  Proteomic offers a means to determine the profile of plasma in dogs with pyometra to provide important findings into general mechanisms operating during diverse inflammatory reactions. The plasma protein profile of healthy and pyometra affected bitches was determined by means of an isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT) label-based high-resolution quantitative proteomic approach. Six clinically healthy dogs (used as control group) and 6 dogs with pyometra were enrolled in the study. All dogs were admitted to the Small Animal Clinic, University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover and treated in accordance with the German Animal Welfare Law.  The experimental design was approved by the Animal Welfare officer of the University of Veterinary Medicine and by the Ethic Committee of the responsible authority (Lower Saxony State Office for Consumer Protection and Food Safety, reference number 17A 101). Healthy dogs for blood collection were recruited by launching a call in the University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover network for students and staff members for haemostasis study, providing a free clinical and laboratory health check of their animal in combination with the blood collection. Residual sample material was used in the present study.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma was obtained by centrifugation of blood collected in lithium-heparin tubes. Aliquoted samples were stored at −80 °C until analysed. All samples used for repetitive analysis were frozen in aliquots and only vials needed for each assay run were used, to avoid the repetitive thawing and freezing effect. Proteomic analysis of canine plasma samples was performed by TMT-based quantitative approach. In brief, after total protein concentration determination using a BCA assay (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA), 35 μg of total proteins from samples and internal standard (a pool of equal protein amount from all samples as a reference for normalization) were diluted to a volume of 50 μL using 0.1 M triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA), reduced by adding 2.5 μL of 200 mM dithiothreitol (60 min, 55 °C) (DTT, Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), alkylated by adding 2.5 μL of 375 mM iodoacetamide (30 min, room temperature in the dark) (IAA, Sigma Aldrich, St. Lois, MO, USA) and acetone-precipitated (300 μL, overnight, −20 °C). Protein pellets were collected subsequently by centrifugation (9000 g, 4 °C), dissolved in 50 μL of 0.1 M TEAB and digested using 1 μL of trypsin (1 mg/mL, Promega; trypsin-to-protein ratio 1:35, at 37 °C overnight). TMT sixplex reagents (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) were prepared according to the manufacturer's procedure and 19 μL of the appropriate TMT label was added to each sample for the labelling reaction (60 min, room temperature) which was quenched by 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Five TMT-modified peptide samples were combined with the internal standard (labelled with TMT m/z 126) into the new tube, aliquoted, dried and stored at −20 °C for further analysis.  High resolution LC-MS/MS analysis of TMT-labelled peptides was carried out using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were dissolved in loading solvent (1% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and desalted on the trap column (C18 PepMap100, 5 μm, 100A, 300 μm×5 mm) for 12 min at the flow rate of 15 μL/min and separated on the analytical column (PepMap™ RSLC C18, 50 cm×75 μm) using a linear gradient of 5–45% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) over 120 min at the flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water. Eluent was ionised using a 10 μm-inner diameter SilicaTip emitter (New Objective, USA) mounted within nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Data dependent acquisition in positive ion mode was performed using a DDA Top8 method. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in range from m/z 350.0 to m/z 1800.0 with a resolution of 70,000, 110 ms injection time, AGC target 1×106, a ± 2.0 Da isolation window and the dynamic exclusion 30 s. HCD fragmentation was performed at step collision energy (29% and 35% NCE) with a resolution of 17,500 and AGC target of 2×105. Precursor ions with unassigned charge state, as well as charge states of +1 and more than +7 were excluded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed for protein identification and quantification using the SEQUEST algorithm implemented into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.0., ThermoFisher Scientific). Database search against Canis lupus FASTA files (downloaded from NCBI database on 11/5/2016, 859 sequences) was performed according to the following parameters: two trypsin missed cleavage sites, precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; carbamidomethyl (C) fixed peptide modification, oxidation (M), deamidation (N,Q) and TMT sixplex (K, peptide N-terminus) dynamic modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was calculated using the Percolator algorithm in the Proteome Discoverer workflow. At least two unique peptides and 5% FDR were required for reporting confidently identified proteins.  Protein relative quantification was accomplished by correlating the relative intensities of reporter ions extracted from tandem mass spectra to that of the peptides selected for MS/MS fragmentation. The internal standard was used to combine the results for each protein within the TMT experiments (sixplexe).

### Publication Abstract
Canine pyometra is a common inflammatory disease of uterus in sexually mature bitches caused by secondary bacterial infection, leading to change in plasma proteins associated with the innate immune system. Proteomic investigation is increasingly being applied to canine diseases in order to identify and quantify significant changes in the plasma proteome. The aim of the study was to assess and quantify changes in plasma proteome profiles of healthy dogs and pyometra affected bitches using a TMT-based high-resolution quantitative proteomic approach. As a result, 22 proteins were significantly down-regulated including transthyretin, antithrombin, retinol-binding protein, vitamin D binding protein, paraoxonase 1, and kallikrein, while 16 were significantly up-regulated including haptoglobin light chain, alpha-1-acid glycoprotein, C-reactive protein precursor, and lipopolysaccharide-binding protein in dogs with pyometra. Pathway analysis indicated that acute inflammatory response, regulation of body fluid levels, protein activation cascade, the humoral immune response, and phagocytosis were affected in pyometra. Validation of biological relevance of the proteomic study was evident with significant increases in the concentrations of haptoglobin, C-reactive protein, alpha-1-acid glycoprotein, and ceruloplasmin by immunoassay. Pyometra in bitches was shown to stimulate an increase in host defence system proteins in response to inflammatory disease including the acute phase proteins. SIGNIFICANCE: The label-based high-resolution quantitative proteomics analysis and bioinformatic approach used in this study provide insight into the complex pathophysiology of inflammation associated with pyometra revealing proteins with biomarker potential. Early diagnosis and therapeutic intervention may prevent severe complications associated with advancing sepsis in dogs with pyometra. Therefore the identification of diagnostic biomarkers that, after clinical validation may be used in veterinary practice and protein relevant to pathways responding to disease are important findings of the study. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD015951.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Serum, Tmt, Pyometra, Dog

### Affiliations
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia    Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine

### Submitter
Anita Horvatic

### Lab Head
Dr Peter David Eckersall
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia    Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK


