### Accession
PXD016164

### Title
Unmasking functional redundancy of deubiquitylases enables specificity profiling and discovery of novel proteasome substrates

### Description
Deubiquitylating enzymes (DUBs) counteract ubiquitylation to control the stability or activity of their substrates. Identifying DUB substrates is challenging and genetic approaches can be thwarted by redundant action of DUBs. Here, we circumvented redundancy by broadly inhibiting DUBs in Xenopus egg extract and used quantitative mass spectrometry to identify over thirty proteins that undergo proteasomal degradation, the majority of which have not been reported as DUB substrates. These results were confirmed with recombinant human proteins, demonstrating the conservation of their DUB-dependent stability. We used these substrates to profile the ability of a panel of DUBs to rescue degradation. This approach revealed that USP7, uniquely among the 14 DUBs tested, has a broad ability to rescue degradation. USP21, which is used widely to nonspecifically deubiquitylate proteins in vitro, was unable to rescue degradation, highlighting the importance of profiling enzyme activity in a physiological system. Together, we identify new DUB substrates and present a system to characterize physiological DUB specificity, overcoming the challenges posed by DUB redundancy.

### Sample Protocol
The TMT labeling protocol and mass spectrometry analysis were based on the SL-TMT sample preparation strategy27. Xenopus extract was collected, resuspended in the appropriate buffer (1% SDS, 5mM DTT, 50mM Tris pH 8.8 and Pierce protease inhibitor tablet) and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen.  Methanol–chloroform precipitation was performed. Four volumes of methanol were added to each sample and briefly vortexed. One volume chloroform was added to the samples and vortexed again. Lastly, three volumes water was added and vortexed. The samples were centrifuged (5 minutes, 14000 RPM) and subsequently washed twice with cold methanol. Samples were resuspended in 200 mM EPPS, pH 8.5 and digested overnight at 24°C with Lys-C protease (Wako Chemicals). Later samples were incubated for 6 hours at 37°C for digestion by trypsin protease (Pierce Biotechnology).

### Data Protocol
All samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a column packed with 35 cm of Accucore C18 resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column had a 100 μm inner diameter microcapillary. For each experiment, 2 μg of peptides were loaded onto this column. Peptides were separated, using a flow rate of 450 nL/min., with a 150-minute gradient of 3 to 25% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid. Each analysis used an MS3-based TMT method, which it is known to reduce ion interference if compared to MS2 quantification. The scan sequence starts with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis, resolution 120,000, 400−1400 Th, automatic gain control (AGC) target 5E5, maximum injection time 100 ms). For subsequent MS2/MS3 analysis, only the top 10 precursors were selected. MS2 analysis included: collision-induced dissociation (CID), quadrupole ion trap analysis, automatic gain control (AGC) 2E4, NCE (normalized collision energy) 35, q-value 0.25, maximum injection time 120 ms), and isolation window at 0.7. After we acquire each MS2 spectrum, we collected an MS3 spectrum in which multiple MS2 fragment ions were captured in the MS3 precursor population with isolation waveforms using multiple frequency notches. MS3 precursors were fragmented by HCD and analyzed using the Orbitrap (NCE 65, AGC 1.5E5, maximum injection time 150 ms, resolution was 50,000 at 400 Th). For MS3 analysis, we used charge state-dependent isolation windows: For charge state z=2, the isolation window was set at 1.3 Th, for z=3 at 1 Th, for z=4 at 0.8 Th, and for z=5 at 0.7 Th. Collected Spectra were processed using a Sequest-based software pipeline.  Spectra were converted to mzXML using MS Convert 68. Database searching included all the entries from the PHROG databas. This database includes many lower abundant proteins and multiple splice isoforms (not present in other databases). In the original study, around 11,000 proteins were identified24. Thus, our study (with ~8000 proteins) represents an acceptable coverage of the Xenopus proteome. This database was concatenated with one composed of the sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 Th precursor ion tolerance and the product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. Oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) and, where indicated. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously and assembled to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs69. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications. The peptides signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements assigned to each protein were summed and normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent, thereby accounting for equal protein loading. Lastly, each protein was scaled such that the summed signal-to-noise for that protein across all channels was 100, thereby generating a relative abundance (RA) measurement.

### Publication Abstract
Deubiquitylating enzymes (DUBs) counteract ubiquitylation to control stability or activity of substrates. Identification of DUB substrates is challenging because multiple DUBs can act on the same substrate, thwarting genetic approaches. Here, we circumvent redundancy by chemically inhibiting multiple DUBs simultaneously in Xenopus egg extract. We used quantitative mass spectrometry to identify proteins whose ubiquitylation or stability is altered by broad DUB inhibition, and confirmed their DUB-dependent regulation with human orthologs, demonstrating evolutionary conservation. We next extended this method to profile DUB specificity. By adding recombinant DUBs to extract where DUB activity was broadly inhibited, but ubiquitylation and degradation were active at physiological rates, we profiled the ability of DUBs to rescue degradation of these substrates. We found that USP7 has a unique ability to broadly antagonize degradation. Together, we present an approach to identify DUB substrates and characterize DUB specificity that overcomes challenges posed by DUB redundancy.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Xenopus, Degradation, Dub, Tmt, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School Boston, MA 02115, USA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Harvard Medical School Boston, MA 02115, USA


