### Accession
PXD011725

### Title
Benchmarking accuracy and precision of intensity-based absolute quantification of protein abundances in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
Computing absolute protein abundances using mass spectrometry (MS) is a widely used technique in quantitative biology. An important and often overlooked aspect in this methodology is to assess technical reproducibility, i.e. how precise are predictions of abundance when we use the instrument on repeated occasions to measure the same sample. Here, we present a proteomics dataset of Saccharomyces cerevisiae with both biological and inter-run technical triplicates, which we use to analyze both accuracy and precision of the MS instrument. We also investigate how we can improve the quality of predictions by using 4 alternative methods for estimating absolute protein abundance starting from MS intensities. We show that using a simple normalization and rescaling approach performs equally accurate, but much more precise, than methods that rely on external standards. Furthermore, we show that technical reproducibility is significantly lower than biological reproducibility for all the evaluated methods. The results presented here serve as a benchmark for assessing the best way of interpreting MS results to compute protein abundances, and as a consideration of the limitations of the technique when interpreting results.

### Sample Protocol
Sampling was carried out as follows: the dead volume in the tubing was collected and discarded; biomass was collected from the reactor with a syringe and immediately injected into Eppendorf tubes already placed in a centrifuge pre-cooled to 4?C; samples were centrifuged for 22 seconds; supernatant was discarded and cell pellets were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. The whole procedure from sample collection to the final freezing step took less than 45 seconds. Samples were stored at -80oC until analysis. Cell pellets were suspended in 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris pH 7.5, 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), heated at 95?C 5 min and sonicated with Bioruptor (Diagenonde, Denville, NJ, United States) sonication (15 min, ‘‘High’’ setting). After protein concentration measurement with tryptophan, florescence samples spiked at a 1:1 ratio with the heavy lysine labelled standard. For absolute quantification, 6 mg of heavy standard was spiked separately with 1.1 mg of UPS2 protein mix (Sigma Aldrich). Overall, 50 mg of protein was precip- itated with a 2:1:3 methanol:chloroform:water extraction. The precipitates were mixed in 7:2Murea:thiourea and 100mMammonium bicarbonate. After a disulfide reduction with 2.5 mM DTT and alkylation with 5 mM iodoacetamide, the proteins were digested with 1:50 LysC overnight at room temperature. The peptides were desalted using C18 material (3M) tips and reconstituted in 0.5% TFA. Injected peptides (2 mg) were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, California, United States) using a C18 cartridge trap-column in a backflush configuration and an in-house packed (3 mm C18 particles, Dr Maisch) analytical 50cm x 75 mmemitter-column(New Objective). The peptides were eluted at 200 nL min?1 with an8%–40%B240 min gradient (buffer B: 80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid, buffer A: 0.1% formic acid) to a Q Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) tandem mass spec- trometer operating with a top-5 and top-10 strategy and a cycle time of 0.9 seconds. Briefly, one 350-1 400 m/z MS scan at a resolution of R = 70,000 was followed by higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation (normalized collision energy of 25) of the 5 or 10 most-intense ions (charge states +2 to +6) at R = 17,500. The MS and MS/MS ion target values were 3x 106 and 5x 104, respectively. Dynamic exclusion was limited to 80 seconds.

### Data Protocol
With the described data as reference, we evaluated 4 different methods for transforming the MS intensity output computed by MaxQuant, which corresponds to the sum of all the associated peptide intensities, into protein abundances of the internal standard. The first method, known as iBAQ [11], normalizes each protein MS intensity by the corresponding number of theoretically observable peptides, and then uses the MS intensities and known abundances of the external standard (in the log space) to obtain a standard curve, which in turn is used for computing the abundances of the internal standard. As this method yields abundances that do not always add up to the same injected amount (Figure S6), a second method was also assessed that rescales all abundances from iBAQ, so they add up to the total injected mass. The third method skips the need of an external standard entirely and instead assumes that all MS intensities multiplied by the corresponding molecular weights should add up to a value proportional to the total amount of injected protein; this is known as the total protein approach (TPA) [13,16]. Finally, the fourth method is a variation of the TPA method, normalizing first all MS intensities by the sequence length of each protein [12], as a proxy to the number of theoretically observable peptides, to compensate for the fact that the longer the protein, the more peptides it will be prone to have.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Yeast, Method comparison

### Affiliations
Institute of Technology, University of Tartu, Estonia
University of Tartu

### Submitter
Petri-Jaan Lahtvee

### Lab Head
Dr Petri-Jaan Lahtvee
Institute of Technology, University of Tartu, Estonia


