### Accession
PXD025616

### Title
Comparative mass spectrometry of extracellular vesicles

### Description
Comparison of proteomes for extracellular vesicles in human and mouse breast cancer, and human cell line samples by nano LC-MS/MS after IP pulldown.

### Sample Protocol
In gel digestion of the extracellular vesicles protein extracted from human and mouse breast cancer, and IP pulldown proteins interacting with ITGAV from human cell lines, followed by  nano LC-MS/MS data aquisition in Orbitrap Fusion instrument.

### Data Protocol
The raw data collected from Orbitrap fusion mass spectrometers were analysed using PD 2.3 software and bioinformatic analysis were done for annotation and protein protein interaction.

### Publication Abstract
Breast cancer cells release a large quantity of biocargo-bearing extracellular vesicles (EVs), which mediate intercellular communication within the tumour microenvironment and promote metastasis. To identify EV-bound proteins related to metastasis, we used mass spectrometry to profile EVs from highly and poorly metastatic breast cancer lines of human and mouse origins. Comparative mass spectrometry indicated that integrins, including &#x3b1;v and &#x3b2;1 subunits, are preferentially enriched in EVs of highly metastatic origin over those of poorly metastatic origin. These results are consistent with our histopathological findings, which show that integrin &#x3b1;v is associated with disease progression in breast cancer patients. Integrin &#x3b1;v colocalizes with the multivesicular-body marker CD63 at a higher frequency in the tumour and is enriched in circulating EVs of breast cancer patients at late stages when compared with circulating EVs from early-stage patients. With a magnetic bead-based flow cytometry assay, we confirmed that integrins &#x3b1;v and &#x3b2;1 are enriched in the CD63<sup>+</sup> subsets of EVs from both human and mouse highly metastatic cells. By analysing the level of integrin &#x3b1;v on circulating EVs, this assay could predict the metastatic potential of a xenografted mouse model. To explore the export mechanism of integrins into EVs, we performed immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry and identified members of the galectin family as potential shuttlers of integrin &#x3b1;v&#x3b2;1 into EVs. In particular, knockdown of galectin-3, but not galectin-1, causes a reduction in the levels of cell surface integrins &#x3b2;1 and &#x3b1;v, and decreases the colocalization of these integrins with CD63. Importantly, knockdown of galectin-3 leads to a decrease of integrin &#x3b1;v&#x3b2;1 export into the EVs concomitant with a decrease in the metastatic potential of breast cancer cells. Moreover, inhibition of the integrin &#x3b1;v&#x3b2;1 complex leads to a reduction in the binding of EVs to fibronectin, suggesting that integrin &#x3b1;v&#x3b2;1 is important for EV retention in the extracellular matrix. EVs retained in the extracellular matrix are taken up by fibroblasts, which differentiate into cancer associated fibroblasts. In summary, our data indicate an important link between EV-bound integrin &#x3b1;v&#x3b2;1 with breast cancer metastasis and provide additional insights into the export of integrin &#x3b1;v&#x3b2;1 into EVs in the context of metastasis.

### Keywords
Human, Mb231 cells, Mouse, Extracellular vesicles, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Department of  Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, USA; Institute for Digital Medicine and N.1 Institute for Health, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
Cornell University

### Submitter
Sheng Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Andrew Grimson; Dr. Minh Le
Department of  Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, USA; Institute for Digital Medicine and N.1 Institute for Health, National University of Singapore, Singapore.


