### Accession
PXD034000

### Title
Mechanisms associated with systemic effects of cancer

### Description
Cancer is considered as a disease of a specific organ, but its effects are felt throughout the body. The systemic effects of cancer can lead to weakness in muscles and heart, which hastens cancer-associated death. The majority of preclinical studies, including our own, on cancer-induced skeletal muscle defects utilized mouse models and C2C12 myoblast cell line of mouse origin (>7,700 publications). However, a recent study reported distinct metabolic pathways in mouse compared to human. For example, while higher fasting circulating levels of glucose in human is associated with shortened lifespan, it is associated with longer lifespan in mouse. Since the metabolic activity of the skeletal muscle primarily determines circulating glucose levels, skeletal muscle in mouse and human may function differently and not all skeletal muscle defects noted in tumor-bearing mice may not translate into human. Therefore, we developed a robust human model system using human muscle stem cells to understand cancer-induced skeletal muscle defects in human. We found conditioned media from breast cancer cell lines affected cell molecular biomarkers (e.g. PAX7 annd MyOD) and cell surface markers (e.g. CD82, CD54 and CD90) which were associated with dynamic changes of  mRNAs, proteins and peptides in human muscle stem cells or human myotubes differentiated from human muscle stem cells. This study will help in cost-effective discovery of drugs that are effective irrespective genetic ancestry and reveal utility of two class of drugs to overcome cancer-induced skeletal muscle defects

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, approximately 0.5 g human skeletal muscle from anterior tibialis was used to isolated human stem cells following manufacture procedures (MASC#130-098-305; 130-104-268), then human stem cells were cultured 6 passages in a 60 mm petri dish with primary cell media composed of F12-DMEM (low glucose) at 3:1 ratio, 5% FBS, 1% penicillin-streptomycin, 0.4 µg/ml hydrocortisone, 5 µg/ml insulin, 20 ng/ml EGF, 24 µg/ml adenine, 5 µM Rock inhibitor (Y-27632), 1 µM BMP inhibitor DMH-1, 1 µM TGFβ pathway inhibitor A-83-01, and p38 kinase inhibitor losmapimod 2 µM/ml. Plates used were pre-coated with laminin-rich conditioned media from 804G cell line overnight. Next, human muscle stem cells were cultured in a differentiation assay media (5% FBS in primary cell culture medium was replaced by 2% horse serum) for myogenesis. At day 7 in differentiation media, long elongated myotube-like fibers were observed. After washing with PBS, these differentiated myotubes were treated with conditioned media (CM) from three human breast cancer cell lines representing TNBC (MD-468) for 36 hrs. Non-conditioned medium was used as vehicle control. Following PBS washing, cell detachment, cell collection and centrifuge, the top supernatant was discarded, the myofiber pellets were saved for the analysis of global proteins and post translational modifications. Proteins were denatured in 8 M urea (CHEBI: 16199), 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 (CHEBI: 975446756, Sigma-Aldrich Cat No:  10812846001) with sonication using a Bioruptor® sonication system (Diagenode Inc. USA, North America cat number B01020001) with 30 sec/30 sec on/off cycles for 15 minutes in a water bath at 4 ºC. After subsequent centrifugation at 14,000 rcf for 20 min, protein concentrations were determined by Bradford protein assay (BioRad Cat No:  5000006). ~850 µg equivalent of protein from each sample were then reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP, Sigma-Aldrich Cat No:  C4706) for 30 minutes at room temperature and alkylated with 10 mM chloroacetamide (CAA, Sigma Aldrich Cat No:  C0267) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark.  Samples were diluted with 50 mM Tris.HCl, pH 8.5 to a final urea concentration of 2 M for Trypsin/Lys-C based overnight protein digestion at 37 ºC (1:70 protease:substrate ratio, Mass Spectrometry grade, Promega Corporation, Cat No: V5072.)  Peptide Purification and Labeling Digestions were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, 0.5% v/v) and desalted on Sep-Pak® Vac cartridges (WatersTM Cat No:  WAT054955) with a wash of 1 mL 0.1% TFA followed by elution in 70% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid (FA). Peptide concentrations were checked by Pierce Quantitative colorimetric assay (Cat No: 23275) and confirmed to be consistent across all samples.  Peptides were then labeled with 5 mg Tandem Mass Tag (TMTpro) reagent (manufactures instructions Thermo Fisher Scientific, TMTpro™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set; Cat No:  A44520, see Table X below) for two hours at room temperature, quenched with a final concentration v/v of 0.3% hydroxylamine at room temperature for 15 minutes. Labeled peptides were then mixed, and dried by speed vacuum.    Phosphopeptide Enrichment  The entire sample was reconstituted in 0.1% TFA and 1/10 of the sample was high pH fractionated immediately as described below for global proteome analysis.  The remainder was desalted using a Waters SepPak with a wash step of 5% acetonitrile 0.1% FA. The desalted peptides were dried and enriched for phosphopeptides using two High-Select™ TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kits (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat No: A32993). After preparing spin tips as per manufacturer’s instructions, each sample was applied to an individual enrichment tip, washed and eluted as per manufacturer’s instructions.  The phosphopeptide elution was immediately dried and then fractionated as described below. High pH Basic Fractionation For high pH basic fractionation, peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and fractionated on Sep-Pak® Vac cartridges using methodology and reagents from Pierce™ High pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (8 fractions for global proteomics and 4 for phosphoproteomics skipping every other; Thermo Fisher Cat No: A32993).

### Data Protocol
Proteome and Phosphoproteome Analysis Resulting RAW files were analyzed in Proteome Discover™ 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, RRID: SCR_014477) with a Homo Sapiens UniProt FASTA (reviewed entries only downloaded 20190919) plus common contaminants. Quantification methods utilized isotopic impurity levels available from Thermo Fisher Scientific. SEQUEST HT searches were conducted with a maximum number of 3 missed cleavages; precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm; and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Static modifications used for the search were, 1) carbamidomethylation on cysteine (C) residues; 2) TMTpro label on lysine (K) residues and 3) TMTpro label on peptide N terminus. Dynamic modifications used for the search were oxidation of methionines and acetylation of protein of N-termini. For phosphopeptide samples, phosphorylation of S, T, Y residues was included as a variable modification. Percolator False Discovery Rate was set to a strict peptide spectral match FDR setting of 0.01 and a relaxed setting of 0.05. IMP-ptm-RS node was used for all modification site localization scores. In the consensus workflows, peptides were normalized by total peptide amount with no scaling. Co-isolation thresholds of 50% and average reporter ion S/N cutoffs of 10 were used for quantification of global peptides and 60% and 5 respectively for phosphopeptides. Protein FDR validator node was set to a strict target FDR of 0.01 and relaxed of 0.05.  Resulting normalized abundance values for each sample type, abundance ratio and log2(abundance ratio) values; and respective p-values (protein abundance based ratio calculation and individual protein ANOVA) from Proteome Discover™ were exported to Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
Skeletal muscle dysfunction or reprogramming due to the effects of the cancer secretome is observed in multiple malignancies. Although mouse models are routinely used to study skeletal muscle defects in cancer, because of species specificity of certain cytokines/chemokines in the secretome, a human model system is required. Here, we establish simplified multiple skeletal muscle stem cell lines (hMuSCs), which can be differentiated into myotubes. Using single nuclei ATAC-seq (snATAC-seq) and RNA-seq (snRNA-seq), we document chromatin accessibility and transcriptomic changes associated with the transition of hMuSCs to myotubes. Cancer secretome accelerated stem to myotube differentiation, altered the alternative splicing machinery and increased inflammatory, glucocorticoid receptor, and wound healing pathways in hMuSCs. Additionally, cancer secretome reduced metabolic and survival pathway associated miR-486, AKT, and p53 signaling in hMuSCs. hMuSCs underwent myotube differentiation when engrafted into NSG mice and thus providing a humanized <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i> skeletal muscle model system to study cancer cachexia.

### Keywords
Human, Biomarker, Mir-486, Cancer cell line, Breast cancer, Skeletal muscle, Lc-msms., Muscle stem cells

### Affiliations
IUSM Center for Proteome Analysis, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN
Indiana University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Emma Doud

### Lab Head
Dr Amber Mosley
IUSM Center for Proteome Analysis, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN


