### Accession
PXD031962

### Title
Hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry of wt Mtr4 with various RNA substrates

### Description
Mtr4 is a eukaryotic RNA helicase required for RNA decay by the nuclear exosome. Previous studies have shown how RNA enroute to the exosome threads through the highly conserved helicase core of Mtr4. Mtr4 also contains an arch domain, although details of potential interactions between the arch and RNA have been elusive. To understand the interaction of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Mtr4 with various RNAs, we have characterized RNA binding in solution using hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, and affinity and unwinding assays. We have identified RNA interactions within the helicase core that are consistent with existing structures and do not vary between tRNA, single-stranded RNA, and double-stranded RNA constructs. We have also identified novel RNA interactions with a region of the arch known as the fist or KOW. These interactions are important for RNA unwinding and vary in strength depending on RNA structure and length. They account for Mtr4 discrimination between different RNAs. These interactions further drive Mtr4 to adopt a closed conformation characterized by reduced dynamics of the arch arm and intra-domain contacts between the fist and helicase core.

### Sample Protocol
Samples for the initial experiment were prepared from stocks of 12.5 μM Mtr4WT with or without 67.5 μM tRNAiMet (5.4-fold). Later experiments with additional RNAs were performed with 25 µM of each RNA (2-fold). Stocks were prepared in 50 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM TCEP, pH 6.5 and incubated for 10 min at 25°C. Following incubation, samples were diluted 2:23 with the same buffer containing H2O for controls (pHread = 6.5 at 25°C) or D2O for exchange samples (pHread = 6.1 at 25 °C; final D2O of 92%). Exchange proceeded at 25°C for 10 s, 102 s, 103 s, 104 s,or 105 s. Exchange was quenched by mixing samples 1:1 with cooled 1% (v/v) formic acid, 3.84 M guanidinium chloride, pH 1.75 (1:1 mix had a final pH of 2.3 at 0°C) and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Samples were prepared in triplicate and stored at -80°C. Samples were thawed for 50 s immediately prior to injection into a Waters™ HDX manager in line with a SYNAPT G2-Si. In the HDX manager, samples were digested by Sus scrofa Pepsin A (Waters™ Enzymate BEH) at 15 °C and the peptides trapped on a C4 pre-column (Waters™ Acquity UPLC Protein BEH C4) at 1°C using a flowrate of 100 μL/min for 3 min. The chromatography buffer was 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid. Peptides were then separated over a C18 column (Waters™ Acquity UPLC BEH) at 1°C and eluted with a linear 3-40% (v/v) acetonitrile gradient using a flowrate of 40 uL/min for 7 min. Samples were injected in a random order. Mass spectrometry data were acquired using positive ion mode in either HDMS or HDMSE mode. Peptide identification of water-only control samples was performed using data-independent acquisition in HDMSE mode. Peptide precursor and fragment data were collected via collision induced dissociation at low (6V) and high (ramping 22-44 V) energy. HDMS mode was used to collect low energy ion data for all deuterated samples. All samples were acquired in resolution mode. Capillary voltage was set to 2.8 kV for the sample sprayer. Desolvation gas was set to 650 L/hour at 175 °C. The source temperature was set to 80°C. Cone and nebulizer gas was flowed at 90 L/hour and 6.5 bar, respectively. The sampling cone and source offset were both set to 30 V. Data were acquired at a scan time of 0.4 s with a range of 100-2000 m/z. Mass correction was done using [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B as a reference. For ion mobility, the wave velocity was 700 ms-1  and the wave height was 40 V.

### Data Protocol
Raw data of Mtr4 water-only controls were processed by PLGS (Waters™ Protein Lynx Global Server 3.0.2) using a database containing S. scrofa Pepsin A and S. cerevisiae Mtr4WT or Mtr4ΔF. In PLGS, the minimum fragment ion matches per peptide was 3 and methionine oxidation was allowed. The low and elevated energy thresholds were 250 and 50 counts respectively, and overall intensity threshold was 750 counts. DynamX 3.0 was used to search the deuterated samples for peptides with 0.3 products per amino acid and 1 consecutive product found in 2 out of 7-10 controls. Data were manually refined. Structural images were made using scripts from DynamX in Pymol (Schrödinger, LLC, 2015), and heat maps were made using HD-eXplosion (Zhang et al., 2021).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Helicase, Hdx-ms, Bottom-up hdx, Hdx, Mtr4

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The University of Texas at Dallas, Dallas, TX, 75013, USA
The University of Texas at Dallas

### Submitter
Sheena D'Arcy

### Lab Head
Dr Sheena D'Arcy
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The University of Texas at Dallas, Dallas, TX, 75013, USA


