### Accession
PXD009110

### Title
SIRT3 Deacetylates TFAM to Promote Mitochondrial Biogenesis

### Description
SIRT3 is a NAD+-dependent mitochondrial protein deacetylase participating in the regulation of central metabolism and mitochondrial proteostasis. SIRT3 is downregulated in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC), a main type of renal cancers, but the function of SIRT3 in tumorigenesis and development of ccRCC remains unknown. In this study, we established a SIRT3 overexpressed cell line to explore the changes of proteomics and metabolomics regulated by SIRT3 expression. Both the results of quantitative proteomics, metabolomics and acetylome showed overexpression of SIRT3 increased mitochondrial biogenesis and reversed the mitochondrial dysfunctions in ccRCC. We found SIRT3 could increase the activity of TFAM through modulation of TFAM transcription, degradation and acetylation level. The acetylation of TFAM K154 decreased while TFAM protein expression increased after SIRT3 overexpression. Further study revealed that SIRT3 could bind with TFAM, and decrease the acetylation of TFAM, promoting TFAM activity in mitochondrial biogenesis. Overall, our results present a new mechanism of SIRT3 in regulating mitochondrial functions, and the downregulation of SIRT3 in ccRCC lowers the activity of TFAM, subsequently inhibits the transcription of mitochondrial genes and mitochondrial biogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
For LC-MS/MS analysis, the peptides were separated by a 120 min gradient elution with a flow rate of 0.250 μl/min in a Thermo-Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system, which was directly connected with a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. The analytical column was a home-made C-18 (300 Å 5 μm, Varian, Lexington, MA) resin packed fused silica capillary column (75 μm ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA). The mass spectrometer was operated by Xcalibur 3.0 software in the data-dependent acquisition mode and top N of MS/MS scans at 35% normalized collision energy for TMT labeled peptides or 30% for acetylated peptides followed a single full-scan mass spectrum in the orbitrap (350-1550 m/z, 120,000 resolution). The generated MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot Human database (January 10, 2015; 89105 sequences) using the SEQUEST searching engine in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software. The search parameters were set as the previous study [23]. For the acetylome data, acetylation (K), label-6 (K and R) were added as the variable modifications instead of TMT modifications. Peptide spectral matches (PSM) were validated using the Percolator provided by Proteome Discoverer software based on q-values at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Proteomic analysis was carried out in biological triplicates.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometer was operated by Xcalibur 3.0 software in the data-dependent acquisition mode and top N of MS/MS scans at 35% normalized collision energy for TMT labeled peptides or 30% for acetylated peptides followed a single full-scan mass spectrum in the orbitrap (350-1550 m/z, 120,000 resolution). The generated MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot Human database (January 10, 2015; 89105 sequences) using the SEQUEST searching engine in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software. The search parameters were set as the previous study [23]. For the acetylome data, acetylation (K), label-6 (K and R) were added as the variable modifications instead of TMT modifications. Peptide spectral matches (PSM) were validated using the Percolator provided by Proteome Discoverer software based on q-values at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Proteomic analysis was carried out in biological triplicates.

### Publication Abstract
SIRT3 is a NAD<sup>+</sup>-dependent mitochondrial protein deacetylase implicated in the regulation of central metabolism and mitochondrial proteostasis. SIRT3 is downregulated in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC), which is the most common form of renal cancer. Although ccRCC is characterized by a typical Warburg-like phenotype, mitochondrial dysfunction and elevated fat deposition, it is unknown whether SIRT3 plays a role in tumorigenesis and the development of this disease. In the present study, we found that SIRT3 overexpression and knockdown had opposing effects on the growth of ccRCC cells, decreasing and increasing the rate of cell proliferation, respectively. SIRT3 overexpression also increased mitochondrial mass in ccRCC cells. Unexpectedly, SIRT3 overexpression increased ROS levels, and sensitized cells to oxidative stress. Metabolomics and quantitative proteomics showed that SIRT3 overexpression alterd cellular metabolism and reversed the Warburg effect in ccRCC cells. Further studies demonstrated that SIRT3 promoted mitochondrial biogenesis by increasing both the expression and deacetylation of TFAM (transcription factor A, mitochondrial). Mutagenesis experiments revealed that acetylation of TFAM at K154 impaired TFAM interaction with mitochondrial DNA, thereby decreasing the activity of the protein and, consequently, mitochondrial biogenesis. Overall, our results suggest that SIRT3 regulates mitochondrial biogenesis and that its downregulation promotes a Warburg phenotype in ccRCC.

### Keywords
Mitochondrial biogenesis, Clear cell renal cancer, Proteomics, Sirt3, Tfam acetylation

### Affiliations
Tsinghua University
School of Life Sciences,Tsinghua University

### Submitter
Yuling Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Huan Liu
School of Life Sciences,Tsinghua University


