### Accession
PXD031578

### Title
A universal and cost-effective method for general and specific RNA-protein complex isolation_RBPome

### Description
The establishment of a protocol isolating specific RNPs by combining a total RNP isolation with an antisense probe-mediated specific RNP isolation

### Sample Protocol
After UV cross-linking, RNA and RNPs were purified by a silica-based purification. Afterwards the complete RBPome was separated by an AGPC separation. From materials and methods: The RNA part of the RNP molecules was degraded using Benzonase 99% pure. The RNP mixture was heated to 80°C to dissolve liquid-liquid phase separation complexes that can occur and could impede the Benzonase cleaving efficiency. The samples were cooled to 37°C and 12 U of Benzonase supplemented with 1 mM MgCl2 was added. After the Benzonase digest, the SP3 method (30) was used to digest the proteins into peptides and to desalt the samples following the published protocol scaled to our volumes. The peptides were eluted in 100 µl of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8) and sent on dry ice to the mass spectrometry Facility Core of the University of Ghent for further processing.  For each experimental condition of the plant samples, part of one replicate was pre-ran on the mass spectrometry set-up as a trial. The presence of a polymer resulting in clogging of the machine was observed. The samples were further purified using the Phoenix peptide clean-up kit successfully removing the polymer.Purified peptides of the plant sample for shotgun analysis were re-dissolved in 20 µl solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v) and peptide concentration was determined by measuring on a Lunatic spectrophotometer. 2ug of each sample was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion Source. Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD) and the plant sample was loaded on a 200 cm long micro-pillar array column with a C18-endcapped functionality mounted in the Ultimate 3000’s column oven at 50°C. For proper ionization, a fused silica PicoTip emitter (10 µm I.D.) was connected to the µPAC™ outlet union and a grounded connection was provided to this union. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 1 to 55% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/ACN (2:8, v/v)) over 145 min, first at a flow rate of 750 nl/min, then at 300 nl/min, followed by a 15 min wash reaching 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1,500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3E6. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 1.3E4 (minimum AGC of 1E3) were isolated for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28%. The C-trap was filled at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms and the MS/MS spectra (200-2,000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer with a fixed first mass of 145 m/z. Only peptides with charge states ranging from +2 to +6 were included for fragmentation and the dynamic exclusion was set to 12 s.

### Data Protocol
From materials and methods: LC-MS/MS runs of all samples were searched together using the MaxQuant algorithm with mainly default search settings, including a false discovery rate set at 1% on PSM, peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched for A. thaliana against the Arabidopsis protein sequences in the Swiss-Prot database, containing 39,359 sequences. The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of three (A. thaliana) missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification for A. thaliana samples. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis of the shotgun results of the study of the RBPome of A. thaliana was performed with the Perseus software and Limma package (moderated T-test) in R. Since the datasets we want to compare have a large difference in protein intensities (control group should be theoretically lacking proteins) iBAQ intensities were chosen over MaxLFQ intensities for quantification. To appoint proteins to be part of the RBPome both a semi-quantitative as a quantitative method, was used. If proteins were not detected in any of the non-cross-linked samples but present in 3 of the 5 replicates of the condition this protein was appointed to be an RBP in a semi-quantitative manner (31). Proteins with an iBAQ value in both the non-cross-linked control and cross-linked conditions a quantitative method was applied. Using Perseus, proteins yielding minimal 3 iBAQ values per 5 replicates were selected, log-transformed and the missing values were imputed with values drawn from a normal distribution. This modified dataset was used to perform the moderated t-test implemented in the R/Bioconductor package Limma. The p-values were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg test to calculate the adj p-value. Proteins with an adj p-value < 0.01 and a log2 Fold Change (CL/No-UV) > 1.5 were appointed to be true RNA binding proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Although methodological advances have been made over the past years, a widely applicable, easily scalable and cost-effective procedure that can be routinely used to isolate specific ribonucleoprotein complexes (RNPs) remains elusive. We describe the "Silica-based Acidic Phase Separation (SAPS)-capture" workflow. This versatile method combines previously described techniques in a cost-effective, optimal and widely applicable protocol. The specific RNP isolation procedure is performed on a pre-purified RNP sample instead of cell lysate. This combination of protocols results in an increased RNP/bead ratio and by consequence a reduced experimental cost. To validate the method, the 18S rRNP of S. cerevisiae was captured and to illustrate its applicability we isolated the complete repertoire of RNPs in A. thaliana. The procedure we describe can provide the community with a powerful tool to advance the study of the ribonome of a specific RNA molecule in any organism or tissue type.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Rbpome isolation, Saps

### Affiliations
Kuleuven; Department: Biologie; unit: Moleculaire Biotechnologie van Planten en Micro-organismen
KULeuven

### Submitter
Roosje Van Ende

### Lab Head
Dr Koen Geuten
Kuleuven; Department: Biologie; unit: Moleculaire Biotechnologie van Planten en Micro-organismen


