### Accession
PXD027074

### Title
FIRST ATTEMPT TO COUPLE PROTEOMIC WITH AhR REPORTER GENE BIOASSAY IN SOIL POLLUTION MONITORING AND ASSESSMENT

### Description
A topsoil sample obtained from a highly industrialized area was tested on CALUX® cell line and exposed cells processed with proteomic and bioinformatics analyses. GC-MS/MS analysis of topsoil extracts was also performed to confirm PCDD, PCDF and dl-PCBs presence.  CALUX® and GC-MS/MS data confirmed the presence of PCDD/Fs and dl-PCBs in the topsoil extract. Proteomic analysis of the cells exposed to the soil extracts identified 43 differential proteins. Enrichment analysis highlights biological processes such as cellular response to chemical stimulus, to stress, response to inorganic substance, regulation of translation, regulation of apoptotic process as well as response to organonitrogen compounds in light of particular drugs and compounds, extrapolated by bioinformatics and linked to the identified proteins modifications. These results confirm the complex epidemiological situation occurring among Taranto inhabitants and underline the need to further investigate the presence and sources of inferred chemicals in Taranto soils.  The combined analysis reveals a more complex scenarios of chemicals able to affect cellular pathways and leading to toxicities rather than those identified by the bioassay. The approach to couple proteomic to CALUX® is a promising tool and deserves further investigation to be applied in soil pollution monitoring and risk assessment.

### Sample Protocol
Rat hepatoma cells (H4IIE) used in the DR-CALUX® bioassays were exposed to the topsoil (DxCS) in 6-well plates in order to obtain enough amount of protein for quantification. A control sample with only cells in medium was included (Ctrl) as well as with the addition of 0.8% DMSO as used as carrier for dioxin and dioxin-like extracts. For each sample, 2 replicates were run (2 wells). After 24 h, exposure media were transferred in a falcon tube, cells were washed, trypsin was added and cells resuspended in the growth medium. Falcon tubes were centrifuged for 5 min at 1100g at room temperature and this step repeated 3 times with 1 mL of PBS using the same protocol. PBS was then discarded, and pellets stored at -80°C until their use. Cells pellets were resuspended for the proteomic analysis in 70 μl of lysis buffer (7M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 4% (w/v) CHAPS and 1% (w/v) DTE) to extract the whole protein content. Protein concentration was then estimated using a Bradford assay [33] before proceeding with two-dimensional electrophoresis. All sample aliquots were stored at -80°C until use. 2DE, performed on an immobilized nonlinear pH gradient, from pH 3 to 10, 18 cm in length, from GE Healthcare (Uppsala, Sweden), and image analyses were carried out as reported by Ontañon et al. (2018). Spots were considered differentially abundant when the percentage of relative volume (%V) means ratio was greater than 1.8-fold with a valid statistical test. The differently abundant spots for %V ratio was subjected to statistical analysis by non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test (p ≤ 0.05) by RStudio Desktop 1.1.463 (Integrated Development for RStudio, Inc., Boston, USA, https://www.rstudio.com). Cells samples were resolved by 2DE and final gels images were compared by Image Master Platinum software by intra- and inter-class analyses in order to extrapolate quantitative and qualitative differences. Significant results were followed by comparisons of mean ranks by Dunn’s test showing also p-adjusted and z-value. Detected spot differences were excised from MS-compatible silver staining gel and analyzed by Autoflex™ Speed mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) as earlier reported by Sulpizio et al (2011).

### Data Protocol
Search parameters for proteins identification on Mascot on-line-available software (Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK, http://www.matrixscience.com), are as follows: Swiss-Prot/TrEMBL and NCBInr as databases, taxonomy limited to Rattus or Mus musculus, peptide mass fingerprint enzyme, trypsin; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation (Cys); variable modifications, oxidation of methionine; mass values, monoisotopic; ion charge state was set to +1; maximum mis cleavages was set to 1; mass tolerance of 100 ppm for PMF and 0.6–0.8 Da for MS/MS.

### Publication Abstract
A topsoil sample obtained from a highly industrialized area (Taranto, Italy) was tested on the DR-CALUX<sup>&#xae;</sup> cell line and the exposed cells processed with proteomic and bioinformatics analyses. The presence of polyhalogenated compounds in the topsoil extracts was confirmed by GC-MS/MS analysis. Proteomic analysis of the cells exposed to the topsoil extracts identified 43 differential proteins. Enrichment analysis highlighted biological processes, such as the cellular response to a chemical stimulus, stress, and inorganic substances; regulation of translation; regulation of apoptotic process; and the response to organonitrogen compounds in light of particular drugs and compounds, extrapolated by bioinformatics all linked to the identified protein modifications. Our results confirm and reflect the complex epidemiological situation occurring among Taranto inhabitants and underline the need to further investigate the presence and sources of inferred chemicals in soils. The combination of bioassays and proteomics reveals a more complex scenario of chemicals able to affect cellular pathways and leading to toxicities rather than those identified by only bioassays and related chemical analysis. This combined approach turns out to be a promising tool for soil risk assessment and deserves further investigation and developments for soil monitoring and risk assessment.

### Keywords
Dr-calux; proteomics; polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins; polychlorinated dibenzofurans; dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyls.

### Affiliations
University of Siena
Functional Proteomics Lab, Life Sciences Department, University of Siena, Italy

### Submitter
Enxhi Shaba

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Luca Bini
Functional Proteomics Lab, Life Sciences Department, University of Siena, Italy


