### Accession
PXD000802

### Title
Profiling the secretome and extracellular proteome of the potato late blight pathogen Phytophthora infestans

### Description
Oomycetes are filamentous organisms that cause notorious diseases, several of which with high economic impact. Well known is Phytophthora infestans, the causal agent of potato late blight. Previously, in silico analyses of the genome and transcriptome of P. infestans resulted in the annotation of a large number of genes encoding proteins with an N-terminal signal peptide. This set is collectively referred to as the secretome and comprises proteins involved in, for example, cell wall growth and modification, proteolytic processes and the promotion of successful invasion of plant cells. So far, proteomic profiling in oomycetes was primarily focussed on subcellular, intracellular or cell wall fractions; the extracellular proteome has not been studied systematically. Here we present the first comprehensive characterization of the in vivo secretome and extracellular proteome of P. infestans. We have used mass spectrometry to analyse P. infestans proteins present in seven different growth media with mycelial cultures and this resulted in the consistent identification of over two hundred proteins. Gene ontology classification pinpointed proteins involved in cell wall modifications, pathogenesis, defense responses and proteolytic processes. Moreover, we found members of the RXLR and CRN effector families as well as several proteins lacking an obvious signal peptide. The latter were confirmed to be bona fide extracellular proteins and this suggests that, similar to other organisms, oomycetes exploit non-conventional secretion mechanisms to transfer certain proteins to the extracellular environment.

### Sample Protocol
The peptide mixes were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EasyLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column at a flow rate of 1.5-2 μl/min using a wash-volume of 4 times the injection volume, and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 12-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 5 μm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd. Japan). Chromatographic gradients started at 97% buffer A and 3% buffer B with a flow rate of 300 nl/min, and gradually increased to 93% buffer A and 7% buffer B in 1 min, and to 65% buffer A and 35% buffer B in 120 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 10 min with 10% buffer A and 90% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.2 kV and source temperature at 275 °C. Ultramark 1621 for the FT mass analyzer was used for external calibration prior the analyses. Internal calibration was performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.1200. The instrument was operated in data dependent mode in which a survey scan was followed by the sequential fragmentation of the ten most intense precursors. Full MS scans were acquired with 2 microscans at resolution of 30,000, and a mass range of m/z 350-2,000. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 1e6, dynamic exclusion to 60 s, and charge state filtering was set to disqualify singly charged peptides. Normalized collision energy of 35% was used. Fragment ion spectra produced via high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 7,500. AGC was set to 5e4, isolation window to 2.0 m/z, and activation time to 0.1 ms. A maximum injection time of 100 ms was used during data acquisition. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v2.1.

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer software suite (v1.4.0.288 Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.3.01, Matrix Science) were used for peptide identification. Data were initially searched against an in-house generated database based on the in silico predicted secretome of P. infestans. A precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm at the MS1 level was used, and up to three miscleavages for trypsin were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 20 mmu. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were defined as variable modification, whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as fixed modification. In all cases, false discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was evaluated by using a decoy database and it was set to a maximum of 1%. Identified proteins were grouped in protein groups using the algorithm implemented in Proteome Discoverer software suite (v1.4.0.288 Thermo Fisher Scientific), and only peptides uniquely mapping to a protein group were taken into consideration for the identification of protein groups and protein group members. Unassigned spectra from the P. infestans secretome sample were searched against a spectral library created with all PSMs belonging to control media samples using Spectrast tool, and matching spectra were excluded from further analyses. The remaining unassigned spectra were analyzed with PEAKS v6.0 using a de novo sequencing strategy associated with database search. A subset of NCBInr including only P. infestans sequences (January 2012, nearly 37350 sequences) was used. The identified proteins were annotated by comparison with other close organisms using Blast2GO. Newly identified proteins were manually curated and those related to secretion were added to the predicted secretome, which was used for a second database search (Mascot v2.4, Proteome Discoverer v1.4.0.288) using the same parameters of the previous database search.

### Publication Abstract
Oomycetes are filamentous organisms that cause notorious diseases, several of which have a high economic impact. Well known is Phytophthora infestans, the causal agent of potato late blight. Previously, in silico analyses of the genome and transcriptome of P. infestans resulted in the annotation of a large number of genes encoding proteins with an N-terminal signal peptide. This set is collectively referred to as the secretome and comprises proteins involved in, for example, cell wall growth and modification, proteolytic processes, and the promotion of successful invasion of plant cells. So far, proteomic profiling in oomycetes was primarily focused on subcellular, intracellular or cell wall fractions; the extracellular proteome has not been studied systematically. Here we present the first comprehensive characterization of the in vivo secretome and extracellular proteome of P. infestans. We have used mass spectrometry to analyze P. infestans proteins present in seven different growth media with mycelial cultures and this resulted in the consistent identification of over two hundred proteins. Gene ontology classification pinpointed proteins involved in cell wall modifications, pathogenesis, defense responses, and proteolytic processes. Moreover, we found members of the RXLR and CRN effector families as well as several proteins lacking an obvious signal peptide. The latter were confirmed to be bona fide extracellular proteins and this suggests that, similar to other organisms, oomycetes exploit non-conventional secretion mechanisms to transfer certain proteins to the extracellular environment.

### Keywords
Extracellular proteome, Virulence, Oomycete, Secretome, Phytophthora

### Affiliations
UPF/CRG Proteomics Unit
CRG/UPF Proteomics Unit

### Submitter
Francesco Mattia Mancuso

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabidò
UPF/CRG Proteomics Unit


