### Accession
PXD022240

### Title
Widespread multi-targeted therapy resistance via drug-induced secretome fucosylation

### Description
Cancer secretome is a reservoir for aberrant glycosylation. How therapies alter this post translational cancer hallmark and the consequences thereof remain elusive. Here we show that an elevated secretome fucosylation is a pan-cancer signature of both response and resistance to multiple targeted therapies. Large-scale pharmacogenomics revealed that fucosylation genes display widespread association with resistance to these therapies. In both cancer cell cultures and patients, targeted kinase inhibitors distinctively induced core fucosylation of secreted proteins less than 60 kDa. Label-free proteomics of N-glycomes revealed that fucosylation of the antioxidant PON1 is a critical component of the therapy induced secretome. Core fucosylation in the Golgi impacts PON1 stability and folding prior to secretion, promoting a more degradation-resistant PON1. Non-specific and PON1-specific secretome deglycosylation both limited the expansion of resistant clones in a tumor regression model. Our findings demonstrate that core fucosylation is a common modification indirectly induced by targeted therapies that paradoxically promotes resistance

### Sample Protocol
Precipitated AAL-enriched secretomes (45 µg) were run on a 1 mm thick 10% SDS-PAGE gel and stained with CBB G-250 staining solution (Bio-Rad) at RT for 1.5 h. 30-70 kDa lane portions were excised into 2×2 mm cubes and transferred to Protein Lo-Bind tubes (Eppendorf). Excised gels were partitioned into tubes, and destained multiple times in 75 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma) and 40% EtOH (1:1) in a shaking rack. Destained gel pieces were washed with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and acetonitrile (1:1), vortexed, and incubated at RT for 15 min. Gel pieces were diluted with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 51°C for 1 h. Gel pieces were cooled down to RT for 30 min followed by alkylation with 20 mM of iodoacetamide at RT for 45 min in the dark. Gel pieces were dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile and dried in a SpeedVac. In-gel proteins were digested with trypsin at a protein:enzyme ratio of 20:1 at 37°C for 12 h in a shaking incubator. Peptides were extracted in 100 µL extraction buffer (5% acetic acid/acetonitrile; 1:2) and incubated at 37°C for 15 min in a shaking incubator. Tryptic peptide mixture was eluted from the gel with 0.1% acetic acid. Mass spectrometry was performed as we described previously. Briefly, nanospray liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron) coupled to Agilent 1200 series G1312B binary pump SL and NanoLC AS-2 autosampler (Eksigent Technologies). Peptide mixtures (2 µL per sample) were loaded via the autosampler on 75-µm (inner diameter) fused silica capillary columns with electrospray tip packed with C18 reversed phase resin (Magic C18, 5-µm particles, 200-Å pore size; Michrom BioResources). Peptides were separated by reversed phase liquid chromatography with mobile phases as we described previously.

### Data Protocol
MS .RAW files were processed in MaxQuant, version 1.5.5.2.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer secretome is a reservoir for aberrant glycosylation. How therapies alter this post- translational cancer hallmark and the consequences thereof remain elusive. Here, we show that an elevated secretome fucosylation is a pan-cancer signature of both response and resistance to multiple targeted therapies. Large-scale pharmacogenomics revealed that fucosylation genes display widespread association with resistance to these therapies. In cancer cell cultures, xenograft mouse models, and patients, targeted kinase inhibitors distinctively induced core fucosylation of secreted proteins less than 60 kDa. Label-free proteomics of N-glycoproteomes identified fucosylation of the antioxidant PON1 as a critical component of the therapy-induced secretome (TIS). N-glycosylation of TIS and target core fucosylation of PON1 are mediated by the fucose salvage-FUT8-SLC35C1 axis with PON3 directly modulating GDP-Fuc transfer on PON1 scaffolds. Core fucosylation in the Golgi impacts PON1 stability and folding prior to secretion, promoting a more degradation-resistant PON1. Global and PON1-specific secretome de-N-glycosylation both limited the expansion of resistant clones in a tumor regression model. We defined the resistance-associated transcription factors (TFs) and genes modulated by the N-glycosylated TIS via a focused and transcriptome-wide analyses. These genes characterize the oxidative stress, inflammatory niche, and unfolded protein response as important factors for this modulation. Our findings demonstrate that core fucosylation is a common modification indirectly induced by targeted therapies that paradoxically promotes resistance.

### Keywords
Resistance, Targeted therapy, Fucosylation, Secretome, N-linked glycosylation

### Affiliations
Korea Advanced Institute of Sciences and Technology (KAIST)
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Pavel Sinitcyn

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Yoosik Kim
Korea Advanced Institute of Sciences and Technology (KAIST)


