### Accession
PXD039759

### Title
Comparative study of the data analysis tools for data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry

### Description
In-house generated datasets of different gradient lengths in comparing the performance of five DIA-MS analysis tools (OpenSWATH, EncyclopeDIA, Skyline, DIA-NN, Spectronaut).

### Sample Protocol
Mouse liver digests were spiked into Sciex TripleTOF 5600 at 30 minute and 120 minute gradient length.

### Data Protocol
We used five tools (OpenSWATH, EncyclopeDIA, Skyline, DIA-NN, Spectronaut) on six DIA datasets generated for this datasets generated from TripleTOF 5600. Using both library-based and library-free approaches, we compared identification and quantification metrics, and assessed the shared and unique cross-tool identifications. Library-free approaches surpassed the performance of the library-based ones with the spectral library of limited comprehensiveness.

### Publication Abstract
Data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry-based proteomics generates reproducible proteome data. The complex processing of the DIA data has led to the development of multiple data analysis tools. In this study, we assessed the performance of five tools (OpenSWATH, EncyclopeDIA, Skyline, DIA-NN, and Spectronaut) using six DIA datasets obtained from TripleTOF, Orbitrap, and TimsTOF Pro instruments. By comparing identification and quantification metrics and examining shared and unique cross-tool identifications, we evaluated both library-based and library-free approaches. Our findings indicate that library-free approaches outperformed library-based methods when the spectral library had limited comprehensiveness. However, our results also suggest that constructing a comprehensive library still offers benefits for most DIA analyses. This study provides comprehensive guidance for DIA data analysis tools, benefiting both experienced and novice users of DIA-mass spectrometry technology.

### Keywords
Mouse, Liver, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Westlake University
School of Life Sciences, Westlake University, Zhejiang Province, China

### Submitter
Tiannan Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Tiannan Guo
School of Life Sciences, Westlake University, Zhejiang Province, China


