### Accession
PXD019294

### Title
Spring phytoplankton bloom in the North Sea during the 2016 spring bloom

### Description
The dataset represents the proteome analysis of six sampling dates during the phytoplankton bloom at the island of Helgoland in the North Sea at the long term research station ‘Kabeltonne’ (54° 11' 17.88'' N, 7° 54' 0'' E) in 2016.

### Sample Protocol
Environmental sampling Samples were collected at the island of Helgoland in the North Sea at the long term research station ‘Kabeltonne’ (54° 11' 17.88'' N, 7° 54' 0'' E) during the 2016 spring bloom. The six metaproteome samples were collected on 17 & 31 March, 19 April, and 03, 12, & 17 May, while metagenome samples were collected on 16, 21 & 31 March, 12, 19 & 26 April, and 02, 12 & 17 May. Sampling procedures for both metaproteomics and metagenomics have been described previously (Teeling et al. 2012, 2016). Briefly, water for metagenomic analyses was filtered sequentially through polycarbonate filters with pore sizes of 10, 3, and finally 0.2 µm. The 0.2 – 3 µm size fraction was then used for sequencing and metaproteomics. Chlorophyll a concentrations measured via fluorescence, and bacterioplankton cell counts measured via staining with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) were done as described previously (Teeling et al. 2012,  2016). Metaproteome analyses – sample preparation To extract total proteins from the 0.2 µm pore size filters, we used a modified protocol (Deusch et al. 2015). In brief, 1/8 of a filter was cut into approximately 5 × 5 mm fragments and transferred to low binding tubes (Sorenson BioScience, Salt Lake City, UT, USA) containing 100 µl resuspension buffer 1 (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 0.1 mg ml-1 chloramphenicol, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)). Next these were incubated in 150 µl resuspension buffer 2 (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 2% SDS) for 10 min at 60 °C and 1 200 rpm in a thermo-mixer (Eppendorf, Wesseling-Berzdorf, Germany). After addition of 500 µl DNAse buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 0.1 mg ml-1 MgCl2, 1 mM PMSF, 1 μg ml-1 DNAse I) the cells were lysed by ultra-sonication (amplitude 51-60%; cycle 0.5; 4 × 2 min) and kept on ice. The lysate was incubated in the thermo-mixer for 10 min at 37 °C and 1 200 rpm. After centrifugation at 10 000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C the supernatant (protein extract) was collected and the pelleted filter pieces were stirred and centrifuged again at 10 000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was added to the previously collected supernatant in the same tubes. Proteins were then precipitated by adding pre-cooled trichloroacetic acid (TCA, 20% v/v). After centrifugation (12 000 × g, 30 min, 4 °C), the protein pellets were washed in pre-cooled ( 20 °C) acetone (3 × 10 min,12 000 × g, 4 °C) and dried by vacuum centrifugation at room temperature. Proteins were resuspended in 2× SDS sample buffer (4% SDS (w/v), 20% glycerine (w/v), 100 mM tris-HCl pH 6.8, bromphenol blue , 3.6% 2 mercaptoethanol (v/v) ), separated by 1D PAGE. After separation the gel lane of one sample was cut in either in 20 equal pieces (for the first two replicates) or in 10 pieces (for the third replicate) and trypsin-digested as described previously (Teeling et al. 2012). Metaproteome analyses - LC-MS/MS analysis To assess peptide composition, liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) measurements were performed. An Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto in-house packed capillary columns of 20 cm (for the first two replicates) or 30 cm (for the third replicate) length and 100 µm inner diameter. Columns were filled with 3 µm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Peptides were separated using either a 156 min (for the first two replicates) or a 226 min (for the third replicate) non linear binary gradient from 1% to 99% solvent B (95% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid) in solvent A (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid) at a constant flow rate of 300 nl*min-1 and 45 °C. The survey scan was carried out with a resolution of R=60k @ m/z 400 followed by CID fragmentation of the 20 most abundant precursor ions (top20). Dynamic exclusion was enabled.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6.0). Mascot was set up to search the database containing all protein sequences from the nine metagenomes obtained during the spring bloom 2016 assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. For database construction, first redundant proteins from the nine metagenomic samples were removed using Cd-hit (threshold: 99% identity) creating 6279079 sequence entries in the database (Li, Godzik 2006). A set of 42 common laboratory contaminants was added, amounting to 6279121 sequences in the final database. The search was performed with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.50 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Oxidation of methionine was specified as a variable modification.  Scaffold (version Scaffold_ 4.8.6, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to merge the search results and to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. During creation of the Scaffold file, an additional X! Tandem search was performed for validation (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)) with default settings. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 exclusive unique peptide count.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al. 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
The formation of sinking particles in the ocean, which promote carbon sequestration into deeper water and sediments, involves algal polysaccharides acting as an adhesive, binding together molecules, cells and minerals. These as yet unidentified adhesive polysaccharides must resist degradation by bacterial enzymes or else they dissolve and particles disassemble before exporting carbon. Here, using monoclonal antibodies as analytical tools, we trace the abundance of 27 polysaccharide epitopes in dissolved and particulate organic matter during a series of diatom blooms in the North Sea, and discover a fucose-containing sulphated polysaccharide (FCSP) that resists enzymatic degradation, accumulates and aggregates. Previously only known as a macroalgal polysaccharide, we find FCSP to be secreted by several globally abundant diatom species including the genera Chaetoceros and Thalassiosira. These findings provide evidence for a novel polysaccharide candidate to contribute to carbon sequestration in the ocean.

### Keywords
Phytoplankton bloom, Metaproteomics, North sea

### Affiliations
Institute for Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany
University of Greifswald, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics

### Submitter
Thomas Sura

### Lab Head
Dr Doerte Becher
Institute for Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


