### Accession
PXD014624

### Title
Mechanical forces regulate cardiomyocyte myofilament maturation via the VCL-SSH1-CFL axis

### Description
Mechanical forces regulate cell behavior and tissue morphogenesis.  In particular, cardiac tissues require mechanical stimuli generated by the heartbeat for differentiation and maturation, but the molecular mechanisms underlying these processes remain unclear.  Here, we first show that mechanical forces acting via the mechanosensitive factor Vinculin (VCL) are essential for cardiomyocyte myofilament maturation and that cardiac contractility regulates the localization and activation of Vinculin.  To further analyze the role of Vinculin in myofilament maturation, we examined its interactome in contracting cardiomyocytes and found many cytoskeletal factors including actinins.  We also identified Slingshot protein phosphatase 1 (SSH1), which we show is recruited by Vinculin to regulate F-actin rearrangement and myofilament maturation through its association with the actin depolymerizing factor Cofilin (CFL).  Together, our results reveal that mechanical forces generated by cardiac contractility regulate cardiomyocyte maturation through the VCL-SSH1-CFL axis, providing mechanistic insight into how mechanical forces are transmitted intracellularly to regulate myofilament maturation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein sample preparation and mass spectrometry analysis was performed as previously described (Rossi et al., 2015; Worzfeld et al., 2017).  In brief, immunoprecipitated samples were loaded on a gradient gel (NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris gel, Invitrogen) and separated by SDS-PAGE prior to in-gel digestion (Shevchenko et al. 2006).  Gel lanes were cut into 8 pieces and proteins were reduced (10 mM dithiothreitol), alkylated (55 mM iodoacetamide) and digested overnight by trypsin (Promega), using an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:100. Peptides were eluted from the gel and desalted by stop and go extraction (STAGE) tips (Rappsilber et al., 2003).  For mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, eluted peptides from STAGE tips were separated using an UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, ThermoFisher Scientific) and 20 cm, in-house packed C18 silica columns (1.9 µm C18 beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH) coupled in line to a QExactive HF orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) using an electrospray ionization source.  Peptides were subjected to a linearly increasing gradient concentration of solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) from 10% to 38% for 20 minutes and from 38% to 60% for 3 minutes, followed by washing with 95% of solvent B for 4 minutes and re-equilibration with 5% of solvent B.  The mass spectrometer was operated with the same settings as described (Rossi et al., 2015; Worzfeld et al., 2017).

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed by MaxQuant (1.5.6.5) (Cox and Mann, 2008) and the Andromeda search engine using the Uniprot database for Rattus norvegicus containing 37,425 entries (release 2017-01).  Beside the default parameter in MaxQuant, the LFQ mode for label free protein quantification was used. Only proteins with at least two peptides and at least one unique peptide were considered as identified and were used for further data analysis.  For Gene ontology (GO) analysis, the enrichment analysis tool (http://www.geneontology.org/) was used (Ashburner et al., 2000).  Statistical analyses were performed by t-test or one-way analysis of variance with Tukey’s test.  Data are considered statistically significant if the P-value is <0.05 (*).

### Publication Abstract
Mechanical forces regulate cell behavior and tissue morphogenesis. During cardiac development, mechanical stimuli from the heartbeat are required for cardiomyocyte maturation, but the underlying molecular mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we first show that the forces of the contracting heart regulate the localization and activation of the cytoskeletal protein vinculin (VCL), which we find to be essential for myofilament maturation. To further analyze the&#xa0;role of VCL in this process, we examined its interactome in contracting versus non-contracting cardiomyocytes and, in addition to several known interactors, including actin regulators, identified the slingshot protein phosphatase SSH1. We show how VCL recruits SSH1 and its effector, the actin depolymerizing factor cofilin (CFL), to regulate F-actin rearrangement and promote cardiomyocyte myofilament maturation. Overall, our results reveal that mechanical forces generated by cardiac contractility regulate cardiomyocyte maturation through the VCL-SSH1-CFL axis, providing further insight into how mechanical forces are transmitted intracellularly to regulate myofilament maturation.

### Keywords
Heart, Rattus norvegicus, Cardiac contractility

### Affiliations
Max-Planck-Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research

### Submitter
Johannes Graumann

### Lab Head
Dr Didier Y.R. Stainier
Max-Planck-Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany


