### Accession
PXD047020

### Title
Identification of RSK substrates using an analog-sensitive kinase approach

### Description
RSK1 and RSK4 are two of the four members of the p90 ribosomal protein S6 kinases (RSK) family. These kinases are downstream kinases of mitogen-activated protein kinase 1 (ERK or MAPK1) in the ERK MAP kinase pathway. RSKs are implicated in fine tuning of cellular processes such as translation, transcription, proliferation, and motility. Previous work showed that pathogens such as Cardioviruses could hijack any of the four RSK isoforms to inhibit PKR activation or to disrupt cellular nucleocytoplasmic trafficking. In contrast, some reports suggest non-redundant functions for distinct RSK isoforms and Coffin-Lowry syndrome has only been associated with mutations in the gene encoding RSK2. In this work, we used the analog-sensitive kinase strategy to ask whether the cellular substrates of distinct RSK isoforms differ. We therefore compared the substrates of 2 of the most distant RSK isoforms: RSK1 and RSK4. We identified a series of potential substrates for both RSKs in cells, and validated RanBP3, PDCD4, IRS2 and ZC3H11A as substrates of both RSK1 and RSK4, and SORBS2 as a RSK1 substrate. In addition, using mutagenesis and inhibitors, we confirmed analog-sensitive kinase data showing that endogenous RSKs phosphorylate TRIM33 at S1119. Our data thus identify a series of potential RSK substrates and suggest that the substrates of RSK1 and RSK4 largely overlap and that the specificity of the various RSK isoforms likely depends on their cell- or tissue-specific expression pattern.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) coupled online to the nano-LC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using HCD setting at 30, ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by MS/MS scans was applied for 3 sec for ions above a threshold ion count of 5.0E4 in the MS survey scan with 30.0 s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.1 kV. MS1 spectra were obtained with an AGC target of 4E5 ions and a maximum injection time of 50 ms, and MS2 spectra were acquired with an AGC target of 1E5 ions and a maximum injection set to 110 ms. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 325 to 1800. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Sequest HT search engine within Proteome Discoverer 2.4 SP1 against a Human database protein database obtained from Uniprot. Trypsin was specified as a cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide and up to 5 charges. A mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.1 Da for fragment ions. Oxidation on Met (+15.995 Da), phosphorylation on Ser, Thr and Tyr (+79.966 Da), conversion of Gln (−17.027 Da) or Glu (−18.011 Da) to pyro-Glu at the peptide N-term were considered as variable modifications. False discovery rate was assessed using Percolator and thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. For abundance comparison, abundance ratios were calculated by Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) of the precursor intensities within Proteome Discoverer 2.4 SP1.

### Data Protocol
Label free quantification was performed by obtaining the area under the curve (AUC) for each peptide using Proteome Discoverer 2.5, no normalization was applied. The quantitative values for the different replicates were first combined, log-transformed and median-normalized using the QFeatures Bioconductor package. In order to cope with the numerous drop-outs in peptide intensities and the peptide presence/absence patterns in particular, the proDA method was applied. The linear model included one indicator variable representing a replicated experiments, and a second one representing the experimental groups of interests (AS/WT and RSK1/RSK4). Then, AS vs WT effects for each peptide were tested for RSK1 and RSK4, using two-sided Wald tests. All p-values were adjusted using Benjamini-Hochberg corrections.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rsk1, Substrate, Mapk pathway, Kinase, Rsk4

### Affiliations
Molecular Virology unit, de Duve Institute, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium
UCL - de Duve Institute, Brussels Belgium

### Submitter
Didier Vertommen

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Michiels
Molecular Virology unit, de Duve Institute, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium


