### Accession
PXD037387

### Title
The protein complex of kinesin motor KIF1C and its hereditary spastic paraplegia associated mutant G102A

### Description
Regulated local translation, RNA transport and protein localization are critical for spatio-temporal gene expression in neurons. The localization of mRNA and subsequent local protein synthesis contribute to neuronal functions like synaptogenesis, synapse pruning, axon guidance, axonal regeneration and synaptic plasticity. Thus, mutations in motor proteins and subsequent cargo transport failure lead to motoneuron diseases. The kinesin family member 1 C has been shown to play a role in different cargo transport alongside the microtubule network, but the pathomechanisms behind KIF1C deficiency mediated motoneuron diseases has not been deciphered yet. Additionally, the exon junction complex has been suggested as a molecular link between splicing and cytoplasmic mRNA localization and local translation. Here we identified KIF1C as a EJC transporter in neuronal cells. We investigated the KIF1C proteome in differentiated SH-SY5Y cells and found an interaction of KIF1C with EJC components and other RNA-binding proteins in KIF1C overexpressing SH-SY5Y cells. The interaction could be validated via immunoprecipitation and an endogenous eIF4A3 co-immunoprecipitation. The co-localization of eIF4A3 and RBM8A with wildtpye KIF1C at protrusions of SH-SY5Ys further confirms the interaction. The mislocalization of eIF4A3 and RMB8A due to KIF1C mutation suggests a transport of the EJC by KIF1C.  Furthermore, the interaction of KIF1C with PABPC1 and EJC components is RNA mediated. We additionally demonstrate via complex capture with KIF1C overexpressing HEK293 cells that KIF1C interacts with RNA itself. We therefore suggest the interaction of KIF1C not only with the EJC, but with a complex containing RNA and the EJC.  Hence KIF1C is a transporter of mRNA and the EJC.

### Sample Protocol
Stable SH-SY5Y cell lines were cultured under standard conditions in Dulbecco's modified eagle medium (DMEM) high glucose (Sigma-Aldrich), supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 1 % neomycin (Sigma-Aldrich) for HEK 293 cells, and in DMEM/F12 (Sigma-Aldrich) with 15 % FBS and 1 % neomycin for SH-SY5Ys. Cells were trypsinised when confluent and plated according to the required cell number. To generate cell lines stably expressing KIF1C, we expressed plasmids containing the HA-tagged wildtype (WT) or mutant (mt) (c.305G>C; p.G102A (Caballero Oteyza et al. 2014) KIF1C open reading frame in a pSF-CMV-UB-NEO/G418 ASCI (Sigma-Aldrich) backbone and cultured cells under neomycin selection conditions. Control cell lines were generated with a plasmid expressing WT HA-tagged KIF5A, a gene mutated in Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia Type SPG10, and a plasmid only expressing the HA-Tag.  To induce neuronal differentiation of SH-SY5Y cells, the medium of 60 % confluent cells was switched to DMEM/F12 with reduced serum concentration (5 % FBS), 1 % neomycin and addition of 10 µM retinoic acid (RA) (Stemcell Technologies). At day 6 the cells were washed twice with warm PBS (Sigma-Aldrich) and the media was changed to serum-free DMEM/F12 with 1 % neomycin and 25 ng/ml BDNF (Peprotech). The cells were used from day 12 to day 18 after differentiation. For the immunoprecipitation (IP) of KIF1C and its bound interactors, Pierce™ Anti-HA Magnetic Beads (Thermo Scientific) were used following the manufacturer’s protocol with slight adaptations. After cell lysis (lysis buffer (Nonident P40 (v/v 0.5%; Roche) in TBS with PI)) proteins were isolated and equal amounts of proteins were incubated with previously washed 25 µl beads in 2-4 ml buffer for 60-90 min at 4°C on a rotator. After 3 washing steps the samples were eluted from the beads by on-bead digestiona s described earlier (Bahkti et al. 2022).  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on Ultimate3000 nanoRSLC systems (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) by a nano spray ion source. Tryptic peptide mixtures were injected automatically and loaded at a flow rate of 30 μl/min in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in HPLC-grade water onto a nano trap column (300 μm i.d. × 5 mm Pre collumn, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific). After 3 minutes, peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (75 μm i.d. × 25 cm, Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) by a linear gradient from 2% to 30% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 92 minutes. Remaining peptides were eluted by a short gradient from 30% to 95% buffer B in 5 minutes. Analysis of the eluted peptides was done on an LTQ Fusion mass spectrometer. From the high resolution MS pre-scan with a mass range of 335 to 1500, the most intense peptide ions were selected for fragment analysis in the ion trap by using a high speed method if they were at least doubly charged. The normalized collision energy for HCD was set to a value of 27 and the resulting fragments were detected with a resolution of 120,000. The lock mass option was activated; the background signal with a mass of 445.12003 was used as lock mass (Olsen et al. 2005). Every ion selected for fragmentation was excluded for 20 seconds by dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0) (Cox and Mann 2008; Cox et al. 2009). As a digesting enzyme, Trypsin/P was selected with maximal 2 missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set for fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The data were analyzed by label-free quantification with the minimum ratio count of 3. The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20, the main search peptide tolerance to 4.5 ppm and the re-quantify option was selected. For peptide and protein identification the mouse subset of the SwissProt database (release 2014_04) was used and contaminants were detected using the MaxQuant contaminant search. A minimum peptide number of 2 and a minimum length of 7 amino acids was tolerated. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. The match between run option was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. For each sample, 5 biological replicates were analysed. The statistical analysis including ratio, t-test and significance A calculation was done using the Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3, (Tyanova et al. 2016)). Proteins that were quantified in at least 3 of 5 experiments and met the criteria for significant enrichment (Significance A and permutation-based corrected t-test p<0.05) were considered as potential interactors. The moderate filter set included only Significance A p<0.05. The hits where then analyzed with WebGestalt (Liao et al. 2019) using gene ontology (GO) terms for cellular compartments, molecular and biological function. For the figure, String DB was used to depict the network of the detected 14 significant MS hits together with proteins listed in GO term exon junction complex.

### Publication Abstract
Neurons critically depend on regulated RNA localization and tight control of spatio-temporal gene expression to maintain their morphological and functional integrity. Mutations in the kinesin motor protein gene KIF1C cause Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia, an autosomal recessive disease leading to predominant degeneration of the long axons of central motoneurons. In this study we aimed to gain insight into the molecular function of KIF1C and understand how KIF1C dysfunction contributes to motoneuron degeneration. We used affinity proteomics in neuronally differentiated neuroblastoma cells (SH-SY5Y) to identify the protein complex associated with KIF1C in neuronal cells; candidate interactions were then validated by immunoprecipitation and mislocalization of putative KIF1C cargoes was studied by immunostainings. We found KIF1C to interact with all core components of the exon junction complex (EJC); expression of mutant KIF1C in neuronal cells leads to loss of the typical localization distally in neurites. Instead, EJC core components accumulate in the pericentrosomal region, here co-localizing with mutant KIF1C. These findings suggest KIF1C as a neuronal transporter of the EJC. Interestingly, the binding of KIF1C to the EJC is RNA-mediated, as treatment with RNAse prior to immunoprecipitation almost completely abolishes the interaction. Silica-based solid-phase extraction of UV-crosslinked RNA-protein complexes furthermore supports direct interaction of KIF1C with RNA, as recently also demonstrated for kinesin heavy chain. Taken together, our findings are consistent with a model where KIF1C transports mRNA in an EJC-bound and therefore transcriptionally silenced state along neurites, thus providing the missing link between the EJC and mRNA localization in neurons.

### Keywords
Hereditary spastic paraplegia, Neuronal cells, Kif1c

### Affiliations
Medical Bioanalytics
Institute for ophthalmic research University of Tuebingen

### Submitter
Karsten Boldt

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Karsten Boldt
Institute for ophthalmic research University of Tuebingen


