### Accession
PXD027551

### Title
Integrated metabolomics and proteomics dynamics of serum samples reveals dietary Zeolite clinoptilolite supplementation restores energy balance in high yielding dairy cows

### Description
Dairy cows can suffer from a negative energy balance (NEB) during their transition from dry period to early lactation when feed intake does not sufficiently meet the energy requirements for body maintenance and homeostasis. The subsequent metabolic changes can increase the risk of postpartum diseases such as clinical ketosis, mastitis and fatty liver. Zeolite clinoptilolite (CPL), due to its ion-exchange property, has been often used to treat NEB and other disorders such as rumen digestion in animals in farming.  However, limited information is available on the dynamics of global metabolomics and proteomic profiles in serum that could give us a better understanding on the associated altered biological pathways in response to CPL. Thus, in the present study, a total 64 cows randomly assigned to two groups: control (n=32) and CPL-treated (n=32) at time points of 30 days (n=8) and 10 days (n=8) prepartum stage and 5 days (n=8) and 26 (n=8) days postpartum stage. Labelled proteomics and untargeted metabolomics were performed following the determination of β-hydroxy-butyric acid (BHB) concentration in the samples indicating NEB. A total of 64 proteins were differentially expressed with a significant cohort appearing to play key roles in restoring the EB after CPL supplementation. In addition, 21 differentially expressed metabolites were chosen of 83 identified metabolites based on their high correlation with BHB. Joint pathway and interaction analysis revealed cross-talks among potential candidates such as valproic acid, leucic acid, glycerol, fibronectin and kinninogen-1 which could be responsible for restoring associated complications of NEB such as infertility or infection like mastitis. By using global proteomics and metabolomics strategy, the present study concluded that the CPL supplementation could lower NEB and restore energy balance in just a few weeks and explained the possible underlying pathways employed by the CPL.

### Sample Protocol
Both metabolomics and proteomics quantification were performed in Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). For metabolomics, a SeQuant® ZIC®-pHILIC column (150 mm × 4.6 mm, 5 μm column, polymer) (Merck-Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) was used with gradient elution under alkaline conditions in a UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germering, Germany). Mobile phase A was 20 mM ammonium carbonate in water and mobile phase B was 100% acetonitrile. The following gradient was used at a flow rate of 0.300 ml/min and 25 °C: 0.0-15.0 min 80%-20% B, 15.0-17.0 min decrease to 5% B and at 17.0 -27.0 min switched to 80% B. The injection volume was 10 μl and samples were maintained at 5°C prior to injection. The MS was operated in polarity switching mode and the MS settings had a resolution of 70,000, AGC of 1e6, m/z range of 70–1050, sheath gas 40, auxiliary gas 5, sweep gas 1, and capillary temperature of 320°C. For positive mode ionisation: source voltage +3.8 kV, S-Lens RF Level 60.00 and for negative mode ionisation: source voltage-3.8 kV.  For proteomics experiment, peptides were loaded on the trap column (C18PepMap100, 5 mm, 100A, 300 mm x 5mm) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and desalted for 12 min at the flow rate of 15uL/min using Ultimate 3000 system with an autosampler (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Subsequently, TMT-labelled peptides were and then separated on the analytical column (PepMap™ RSLC C18, 50 cm x 75 μm) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using linear gradient 5-55% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) over 120 min at the flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water. Ionisation was achieved using nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing a 10 μm-inner diameter SilicaTip emitter (New Objective, USA). MS was operating in positive ion mode using DDA Top8 method with parameters set as follows: full scan MS spectra range from m/z 350.0 to m/z 1800.0, resolution of 70000, injection time 120 ms, AGC target 1x106, isolation window ± 2.0 Da and the dynamic exclusion 30 s. For HCD fragmentation, resolution was set to 17500 and AGC target to 2x105.

### Data Protocol
For metabolomics, MzXML files were uploaded in Polyomics integrated Metabolomics Pipeline (PiMP) pipeline (Gloaguen et al., 2017) and processed in both a positive ionization mode and negative ionization mode version of each file. Metabolites were identified and annotated by KEGG and HMDB databases.  Metabolites are referred as identified if they are matched both by retention time and mass to a standard; while they are referred as annotated if they are assigned putatively on the basis of mass. For proteomics, all LC-MS/MS data were searched using the SEQUEST algorithm implemented into Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against Bos taurus NCBInr FASTA files (downloaded 04/04/2019, 69663 entries) to obtain peptide and protein identifications. For all searches, trypsin was specified as the enzyme for protein cleavage, allowing up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed peptide modification, while oxidation (M) and TMT sixplex (K, peptide N-terminus) as dynamic modifications. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Both peptide spectrum match and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 and determined using a Percolator node. The MS proteomics data and Metabolomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD012289 and METABOLOMICS DATABASE respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Dairy cows can suffer from a negative energy balance (NEB) during their transition from the dry period to early lactation, which can increase the risk of postpartum diseases such as clinical ketosis, mastitis, and fatty liver. Zeolite clinoptilolite (CPL), due to its ion-exchange property, has often been used to treat NEB in animals. However, limited information is available on the dynamics of global metabolomics and proteomic profiles in serum that could provide a better understanding of the associated altered biological pathways in response to CPL. Thus, in the present study, a total 64 serum samples were collected from 8 control and 8 CPL-treated cows at different time points in the prepartum and postpartum stages. Labelled proteomics and untargeted metabolomics resulted in identification of 64 and 21 differentially expressed proteins and metabolites, respectively, which appear to play key roles in restoring energy balance (EB) after CPL supplementation. Joint pathway and interaction analysis revealed cross-talks among valproic acid, leucic acid, glycerol, fibronectin, and kinninogen-1, which could be responsible for restoring NEB. By using a global proteomics and metabolomics strategy, the present study concluded that CPL supplementation could lower NEB in just a few weeks, and explained the possible underlying pathways employed by CPL.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Negative energy balance, Proteomics, Cows, Serum, Zeolite clinoptilolite

### Affiliations
Tulane University
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Croatia

### Submitter
Sudipa Maity

### Lab Head
Dr Vladimir Mrljak
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Croatia


