### Accession
PXD014384

### Title
Mating precedes selective immune priming which is maintained throughout bumblebee queen diapause

### Description
Diapause is a key life-history event characterised by arrested development, suppressed metabolism and increased stress tolerance. This state allows an organism to avoid prolonged periods of harsh and inhospitable environmental conditions. For species where only mated female adults undergo diapause, mating is performed prior to diapause. Mating can have a profound effect on the behaviour and physiology of females resulting in changes to the expression of key biological processes, including immunity. However, our understanding of how mating impacts long-term immunity and whether these effects persist throughout diapause is currently limited. Here we explored proteomic changes in the haemolymph of the ecologically important pollinator, Bombus terrestris. B. terrestris queens mate prior to diapause (a non-feeding arrest of development that can last 6-9 months). Using mass-spectrometry-based proteomics, we quantified changes in the pre-diapause queen haemolymph after mating, as well as the subsequent protein expression of mated queens during and post-diapause. Our results provide clear molecular evidence for the consequences and benefits of mating at the immune level through the selective increased abundance of antimicrobial peptides that are sustained throughout diapause. In addition our results provide novel insights into the molecular mechanisms by which bumblebees prepare for, survive, and recover from diapause, insights that may have implications for our general understanding of these processes in other insect groups.

### Sample Protocol
Bombus terrestris audax colonies were obtained from a commercial supplier. Haemolymph was obtained from six time-points were examined: 1) virgin queens (gynes); 2) pre-diapause mated queens; 3) early diapause queens; 4) late diapause queens;  and post-diapause queens collected at: 5) 6 hours post-diapause; and 6) 48 hours post-diapause.  Queens were anaesthetized using carbon dioxide and an incision was performed between the third and fourth sternite. Using this newly made incision, we collected haemolymph using a microcapillary tube and transferred the collected neat haemolymph into 100µl autoclaved phosphate buffered saline (PBS) (Sigma, Ireland). We centrifuged this solution at 8,000 g for 5 min at 4°C to pellet down haemocytes and other cellular debris. We transferred the supernatant to a fresh 1.5ml collection tube and stored at -80°C for later use.  Biological impurities were removed from haemolymph samples using the 2-D clean-up kit (GE Healthcare, UK), following the manufacturer's instructions. The resultant protein pellets were resuspended in 300µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Ambic), 1mM calcium chloride (CaCl2). We removed 50µg from each sample and reduced with 4µl of 200mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Fisher Scientific, Ireland). We then heated reduced samples to 95°C for 15 min followed by acetylation with 1M iodoacetamide (IAA) and incubated at 25°C for 45 min. The acetylation reaction was stopped by adding 20µl of 200mM DTT followed by incubation of the samples at 25°C for 45 min. 10µg of reduced and acetylated proteins were digested with 0.5µl of 0.5µg/µl trypsin (Medical Supply Company, Ireland), incubated at 37°C overnight. The samples were then speed vacuumed and stored at 4°C once dry.  Dried peptide samples were resolubilised in 0.1% Formic Acid (Sigma Aldrich, Ireland) and subjected to LC-MS/MS using a Thermo Scientific LTQ ORBITRAP XL mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Peptides were separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient on a Biobasic C18 PicofritTM column (100 mm length, 75 mm ID), using a 60 min reverse phase gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. All data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data-dependent switching mode. A high-resolution MS scan (300-2000 Dalton) was performed using the Orbitrap to select the seven most intense ions prior to MS/MS. For each scan performed, the twenty most intense ions were selected for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification from the MS/MS data were performed using the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant (version 1.5.6.5; http://maxquant.org/; (Cox & Mann 2008) to correlate the data against the protein reference sequences derived from the B. terrestris genome obtained from the National Centre for Biotechnology and Information (NCBI) repository (17,508 entries, downloaded September 2018). The following search parameters were used: first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, second search peptide tolerance 4.5ppm (standard parameters for Orbitrap data) with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites allowed, all standard. False Discovery Rates (FDR) were set to 1% for both peptides and proteins and the FDR was estimated following searches against a target-decoy database. Peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids were considered for identification and proteins were only considered identified when more than one unique peptide for each protein was observed or when a single peptide was identified across multiple samples by multiple MS/MS spectra.  LFQ intensities were calculated using the MaxLFQ algorithm  from razor and unique peptides with a minimum ratio count of two peptides across samples, log2-transformed and replicates were assigned to their respective samples (Table 1). Only proteins found in all four replicates in at least one life-stage group were retained in the analysis. A data-imputation step was conducted to replace non-detected values with values that simulate signals of low abundant proteins chosen randomly from a distribution specified by a downshift of 1.8 times the mean standard deviation (SD) of all measured values and a width of 0.3 times this SD.  Using Perseus (v. 1.5.5.3), we performed an analysis of variance (ANOVA) for multiple-samples across all the six life-stage groups using a permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR) of 5% and below to indicate statistically significant differentially abundant (SSDA) proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Amps, Diapause, Proteomics, Bombus

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Ireland
Biology

### Submitter
James Carolan

### Lab Head
Dr James Carolan
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Ireland


