### Accession
PXD005680

### Title
Application of Simulation Model to Uncover the Mechanisms of Flooding Tolerance and Difference between Flooding and Drought in Soybean

### Description
To decipher stress responses under flooding and drought as well as flooding-tolerant mechanisms in soybean, the mathematic biological approach of simulation model was applied. Furthermore, wild-type soybean with ABA treatment and flooding-tolerant mutant line, which displayed flooding tolerance, were used as the flooding-tolerant materials. Proteins acquired by gel-free/label-free proteomic technique were used for simulation model of responses under different stresses and flooding tolerant.

### Sample Protocol
Seeds of soybean (Glycin max L. cultivar Enrei) were surface sterilized using 3% sodium hypochlorite solution, rinsed in water, and then were sown in 450 mL silica sands with water in the seedling case (150 mm x 60 mm x 100 mm). Wide-type soybeans of 2-day age were treated without or with flooding and drought by adding extra water and withholding water, respectively, for 1, 2, 3, and 4 days. The wide-type soybeans were exposed to flooding with 10 μM ABA at the same time to conduct ABA treatment. Two-day-old flooding-tolerant mutant plants were exposed to flooding for 1, 2, 3, and 4 days. . Root including hypocotyl of soybeans at each time point was collected as samples.A portion (0.5 g) of root including hypocotyl was ground to powder in liquid nitrogen with a mortar and pestle. The powder was added to extraction buffer consisting of 10% trichloroacetic acid and 0.07% 2-mercaptoethanol in acetone, and the resulting suspension was mixed thoroughly by vortex. Mixture was sonicated for 10 min and incubated for 60 min at -20oC with vortex every 15 min. The suspension was centrifuged at 9,000 x g for 20 min at 4oC, the supernatant was discarded, and obtained pellet was washed twice with 0.07% 2-mercaptoethonal in acetone. The final pellet was dried using a Speed-Vac concentrator and re-suspended in lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 5% CHAPS, and 2 mM tributylphosphine by vigorous vortex for 60 min. The suspension was centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 20 min and the supernatant was collected as protein extract. Proteins (150 μg) in lysis buffer were enriched using methanol and chloroform to remove the detergent. ). A volume of 600 μL of methanol was added to 150 μL of protein sample and the solution was thoroughly mixed before addition of 150 μL of chloroform was added. After mixing by vortex, 450 μL of water was added to induce phase separation and the solution was centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min. The upper phase was discarded and 450 μL of methanol was added. The sample was further centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min, supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was dried. Dried pellet was re-suspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3, reduced with 50 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56oC, and then alkylated with 50 mM idoacetamide for 30 min at 37oC in dark. Alkylated proteins were digested with trypsin at a ratio of 1:100 enzyme/protein at 37oC for 16 h. The peptides were acidified with formic acid (pH < 3) and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min. The supernatant was collected and peptide sample was analyzed by nanoliquid chromatography (LC)-mass spectrometry (MS)/MS. The peptide sample (4 μL) was separated using an Ultimate 3,000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) and peptide ions were detected using a nanospray LTQ Orbitrap Discovery MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) in data-dependent acquisition mode with the installed Xcalibur software (version 2.0.7; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptide sample was loaded onto a C18 PepMap trap column (300 µm ID x 5 mm; Dionex) equilibrated with 0.1% formic acid and was eluted with a linear acetonitrile gradient (8%-30% over 150 min) in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. The eluted peptides were loaded and separated on a C18 capillary tip column (75 µm ID x 120 mm; Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) with a spray voltage of 1.5 kV. Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the MS over 400-1,500 m/z with a resolution of 30,000. A lock mass function was used to obtain high mass accuracy and the ions of C24H39O4 (m/z 391.28429), C14H46NO7Si7 (m/z 536.16536), and C16H52NO8Si8 (m/z 610.18416) were used. The top ten most intense precursor ions were selected for collision-induced fragmentation in the linear ion trap at a normalized collision energy of 35%. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 90 sec to prevent the repetitive selection of peptides. The acquired MS spectra were used for protein identification.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using the Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1; Matrix Science, London, UK) and Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.0.288; Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the Phytozome-Glycine max peptide database (Phytozome version 9.1, http://www/phytozome.net/soybean). The following parameters were used for Mascot search: carbamidomethylation of cysteine was the fixed modification; oxidation of methionine was the variable modification; trypsin was used as the specific proteolytic enzyme; one missed cleavage was allowed; peptides mass tolerance was 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance was 0.8 Da; and peptide charge was set at +2, +3, and +4. The peptide cut-off score was 10 and the S/N threshold (FT-only) was 1.5 for peak filtration. An automatic decoy database search was performed as part of the search. Mascot Percolator was used to improve the accuracy and sensitivity of peptide identification. False discovery rates (false positive/(false postive+true positive)) for peptide identification were less than 0.01. Peptides with a percolator ion score of more than 13 (p < 0.05) were used for protein identification. The search results were exported as XML format for comparison analysis. The relative abundances of peptides and proteins were compared using the commercial label-free quantification package SIEVE software (version 2.1.377; Thermo Fisher Scientific). For analysis, chromatographic peaks detected by MS were aligned and peptide peaks were detected as a frame on all parent ions scanned by MS/MS using 5 min of frame time width and 10 ppm of frame m/z width. Area of chromatographic peak within a frame was compared for each sample and ratios between samples were determined for each frame. The frames with MS/MS scan were matched to the Mascot search results. The ratios between samples were determined from the variance-weighted average of the ratios in frames, which matched the peptides in the MS/MS spectrum. The ratios of peptides were further integrated to determine the ratios of corresponding proteins. Total ion current was used for normalization of differential analysis of protein abundance. The outliers of ratio were deleted in frame table filter based on frame area. Isoforms were manually deleted according to protein ID. Significant changes of protein abundance between samples were examined (p < 0.05). The minimum requirement for protein identification was 2 matched peptides with significance.

### Publication Abstract
Flooding negatively affects the growth of soybeans. Recently, omic approaches have been used to study abiotic stress responses in plants. To explore flood-tolerant genes in soybeans, an integrated approach of proteomics and computational genetic modification effectiveness analysis was applied to the soybean (<i>Glycine max</i> L. (Merrill)). Flood-tolerant mutant and abscisic acid (ABA)-treated soybean plants were used as the flood-tolerant materials. Among the primary metabolism, glycolysis, fermentation, and tricarboxylic acid cycle were markedly affected under flooding. Fifteen proteins, which were related to the affected processes, displayed similar protein profiles in the mutant and ABA-treated soybean plants. Protein levels of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), aconitase 1, and 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase were higher in flood-tolerant materials than in wild-type soybean plants under flood conditions. These three proteins were positioned in each of the three enzyme groups revealed by our computational genetic modification effectiveness analysis, and the three proteins configured a candidate set of genes to promote flood tolerance. Additionally, transcript levels of GAPDH were similar in flood-tolerant materials and in unstressed plants. These results suggest that proteins related to energy metabolism might play an essential role to confer flood tolerance in soybeans.

### Keywords
Simulation, Root, Proteomics, Mutant, Abscisic acid, Soybean, Drought, Flooding

### Affiliations
NARO Institute of Crop Science

### Submitter
Wang Xin

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
NARO Institute of Crop Science


