### Accession
PXD012818

### Title
PPARbeta/delta chip-masspectrometry

### Description
MDA-MB231-luc2 cells were treated with either L165,041 or PT-S264 and ChIP-MS was performed according to the RIME-protocol (Active Motif Inc.).

### Sample Protocol
See https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26797456 Nat Protoc. 2016 Feb;11(2):316-26. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2016.020. Epub 2016 Jan 21. Rapid immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry of endogenous proteins (RIME) for analysis of chromatin complexes. Mohammed H, Taylor C, Brown GD, Papachristou EK, Carroll JS, D'Santos CS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with 'Scaffold Viewer 4.8.3'

### Publication Abstract
In the absence of ligands, the nuclear receptor PPAR&#x3b2;/&#x3b4; recruits the NCOR and SMRT corepressors, which form complexes with HDAC3, to canonical target genes. Agonistic ligands cause dissociation of corepressors and enable enhanced transcription. Vice versa, synthetic inverse agonists augment corepressor recruitment and repression. Both basal repression of the target gene ANGPTL4 and reinforced repression elicited by inverse agonists are partially insensitive to HDAC inhibition. This raises the question how PPAR&#x3b2;/&#x3b4; represses transcription mechanistically. We show that the PPAR&#x3b2;/&#x3b4; inverse agonist PT-S264 impairs transcription initiation by decreasing recruitment of activating Mediator subunits, RNA polymerase II, and TFIIB, but not of TFIIA, to the ANGPTL4 promoter. Mass spectrometry identifies NCOR as the main PT-S264-dependent interactor of PPAR&#x3b2;/&#x3b4;. Reconstitution of knockout cells with PPAR&#x3b2;/&#x3b4; mutants deficient in basal repression results in diminished recruitment of NCOR, SMRT, and HDAC3 to PPAR target genes, while occupancy by RNA polymerase II is increased. PT-S264 restores binding of NCOR, SMRT, and HDAC3 to the mutants, resulting in reduced polymerase II occupancy. Our findings corroborate deacetylase-dependent and -independent repressive functions of HDAC3-containing complexes, which act in parallel to downregulate transcription.

### Keywords
Agonist, Nuclear receptor, Pparbeta, Inverse agonist, Ppardelta, Cofactor

### Affiliations
Institute for molecular biology and tumor research Institute for medical bioinformatics and biostatistics Philipps University Marburg Germany
Institute for molecular and tumor biology, Philipps University Marburg, Germany

### Submitter
Florian Finkernagel

### Lab Head
Dr Till Adhikary
Institute for molecular biology and tumor research Institute for medical bioinformatics and biostatistics Philipps University Marburg Germany


