### Accession
PXD009408

### Title
Fission yeast NDR/LATS kinase Orb6 regulates exocytosis via phosphorylation of exocyst complex

### Description
NDR/LATS kinases regulate multiple aspects of cell polarity and morphogenesis from yeast to mammals, but few of their substrates are known. Fission yeast NDR/LATS kinase Orb6 has been proposed to control cell polarity via spatial regulation of Gef1, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for the small GTPase Cdc42. Here we show that Orb6 plays a critical role as a positive regulator of exocytosis, independent of Gef1. Through Orb6 inhibition in vivo and quantitative global phosphoproteomics, we identify several proteins involved in membrane trafficking as Orb6 targets, and we confirm Sec3 and Sec5, conserved components of the exocyst complex, as substrates of Orb6 both in vivo and in vitro. Our results suggest that Orb6 kinase activity is crucial for exocyst localization to actively-growing cell tips and for exocyst activity during septum dissolution after cytokinesis. We further show that Orb6 phosphorylation of Sec3 serine-201 contributes to exocyst function in parallel with exocyst protein Exo70. We propose that Orb6 contributes to polarized growth by regulating membrane trafficking at multiple levels.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC cultures supplemented with heavy arginine and lysine were grown for at least 8 generations to ensure complete isotopic labelling. Light and heavy SILAC cultures were grown to OD595 0.75 and then treated with either methanol or 30 µM 3-BrB-PP1 for 3 hr. In two replicate experiments, heavy cultures were treated with 3-BrB-PP1 and light cultures were treated with methanol, and in a third replicate, heavy cultures were treated with methanol and light cultures were treated with 3-BrB-PP1. Cells were harvested by centrifugation and washed once with STOP buffer (10 mM EDTA, 50 mM NaF, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM NaN3). The pelleted cells were resuspended in milliQ H2O at 400 mg/mL concentration and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Mechanical lysis of frozen cells (cryogrinding) was performed under liquid nitrogen in a SPEX SamplePrep LLC 6870 Freezer/mill® (sample pre-cool for 2 min, 10 rounds of “run” and “cool” cycle each for 2 min, beat rate=10).  ~800 mg of light and heavy cell powders were individually solubilized in denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) for 1 hr at room temperature and centrifuged at 4,500 x g for 15 min to obtain a clear supernatant. Protein concentration from both samples was measured using Bradford assay.   For protein abundance measurement of the SILAC samples, light and heavy cell lysates (5 mg each) were mixed, and 50 µg of the mixed protein lysate was separated by SDS-PAGE on Bolt® 4-12 % Bis-Tris Gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific; NW04120BOX). The protein gel was stained by Coomassie brilliant blue (Sigma; B0149) and the entire gel lane was excised into 10 bands and processed for protein abundance analysis (see “In-gel digestion for mass spectrometry”, below).  For SILAC phosphopeptide quantification, the remaining 9.95 mg of the mixed protein lysate was reduced in 1 mM DTT for 1 hr at room temperature. The reduced lysate was further alkylated in 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma; I1149) for 1 hr at room temperature in the dark. In-solution protein digestions were performed using Lysyl Endopeptidase (LysC) and trypsin in two stages. First, the lysate was digested by 90 µg of endopeptidase LysC (Waco Chemicals; 129-02541) for 3 hr at room temperature. The lysate was then diluted 5 times to final concentration of 1.6 M urea/ 0.4 M thiourea. 90 µg of trypsin (Thermo-scientific; 90057) was added to the lysate and incubated for 24 hr at room temperature. Digestion was terminated by acidification to final concentration of 0.4 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Sigma; 6508).  SCX fractionation was performed as in {Gruhler, 2005 #155} with some modifications.  Doubly-digested mixed lysate was fractionated using a Resource S SCX column (1 mL, GE Healthcare) in a ÄKTA protein purification system (GE Healthcare). Briefly, the mixed lysate was loaded onto the SCX column equilibrated in Solvent A (5 mM potassium dihydrogen phosphate, 30 % acetonitrile (ACN) (Fisher Chemicals, A955-212), pH 2.7 with TFA) at a flow rate of 1 mL/min. Flow-through during loading was kept for subsequent phosphopeptide enrichment. Peptides bound to the column were eluted as 2 mL fractions with a 0-50 % linear gradient of Solvent B (350 mM potassium chloride, 5 mM potassium dihydrogen phosphate, 30 % ACN, pH 2.7 using TFA) at a flow rate of 1 mL/ min, over a period of 30 min. Dilute fractions, based on estimation from the chromatogram, were pooled together for subsequent phosphopeptide enrichment. TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment was performed as in {Larsen, 2005 #156} with some modification. Each SCX fraction, including the flow-through and pooled fractions, was processed individually. Flow-through fraction was incubated with 10 mg TiO2 beads slurry (Titansphere; GL Sciences; 5020-75010) in 30 mg/mL 2,5 dihydrobenzoic acid (Sigma; 149357) and 80 % ACN, whereas other fractions were incubated with 5 mg TiO2 beads slurry and incubated at room temperature for 30 min. TiO2 beads were concentrated by 1 min centrifugation at 13,000 rpm and supernatant was removed. TiO2 beads were then washed with washing solution I (30 % ACN, 3 % TFA) and pelleted. TiO2 beads were then re-suspended with washing solution II (80 %, ACN, 0.1 % TFA) and transferred to C8-stage tip (~1 mm2 Empore C8 in 200 µL pipette tip). Washing solution II was removed from the stage-tip by centrifugation at 4,000rpm for 2-3 min. Phosphopeptides bound to the TiO2 beads were eluted three times by passing through elution solution (40 % ammonium hydroxide (Sigma; 338818), 60 % ACN). The eluates were loaded onto C18-stage tip (~1mm2 Empore C18 in 200 µL pipette tip) pre-washed with 0.1 % TFA. The stage tips were washed with 50 µL 0.1 % TFA and stored at -20ºC until further use. Because the flow-through fraction contains the most abundant phosphopeptide fraction, two additional rounds of phosphopeptide enrichment were performed on the flow-through fraction with fresh TiO2 beads (10 mg).

### Data Protocol
Coomassie-stained gel slices were destained and digested in-gel as described {Shevchenko, 1996 #123}. Briefly, the bands were destained by 3-4 rounds of incubation in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50 % ACN until the last trace of Coomassie blue was removed. Gel slices were reduced in 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 37ºC, alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark, and digested overnight at 37ºC with 12.5 ng/µL trypsin (Thermo-scientific; 90057). Digestion medium was then acidified by TFA and the eluted peptides were desalted using C18-stage tip as described {Rappsilber, 2003 #122;Rappsilber, 2003 #122}.  Peptides were eluted in 40 μL of 80 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % TFA and then concentrated down to 1μl by vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, UK). Samples were then diluted to 5 µl with 0.1 % TFA and prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS-analyses were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) and on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). Both were coupled on-line to Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano Systems (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). For samples that were analysed by Q Exactive, peptides were separated by an analytical column with a self-assembled particle frit (Ishihama et al 2002) and C18 material (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm; Dr. Maisch, GmbH, Germany) that was packed into a spray emitter (75 μm ID, 8 μm opening, 300 mm length; New Objective) using an air-pressure pump (Proxeon Biosystems, USA). The column was maintained at stable temperature (40oC) with the appropriate column oven (Sonnation, Germany). Peptides that were analysed by Fusion Lumos were separated on a 50cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific, UK) assembled in an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific, UK) and operated at 50oC. In both cases, mobile phase A consisted of 0.1 % formic acid in water while mobile phase B consisted of 80 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid. Peptides were loaded at a flow rate of 0.5 μl min-1 (for samples that analysed by the Q Exactive) and 0.3 μl min-1 (for samples on Fusion Lumos) and eluted at a flow rate was 0.2 μl min-1according to the following gradient: 2 to 40 % buffer B in 120 min, then to 95 % in 11 min.  For Q Exactive, FTMS spectra were recorded at 70,000 resolution (scan range 300-1700 m/z) and the ten most intense peaks with charge ≥ 2 of the MS scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.0 Thomson for MS2 (filling 1.0E6 ions for MS scan, 5.0E4 ions for MS2, maximum fill time 60ms, dynamic exclusion for 50 s). For Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™, survey scans were performed at 120,000 resolution (scan range 400-1900 m/z) with an ion target of 4.0e5. MS2 was performed in the ion trap with ion target of 1.0e4 and HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 27 {Olsen, 2007 #121}. The isolation window in the quadrupole was 1.4. Only ions with charge between 2 and 7 were selected for MS2. The MaxQuant software platform {Cox, 2008 #118} version 1.5.2.8 was used to process raw files, and search was conducted against Schizosaccharomyces pombe complete/reference proteome set of Pombe database (released in August, 2013), using the Andromeda search engine {Cox, 2011 #119}. The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20ppm while the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 pm. Isotope mass tolerance was 2 ppm and maximum charge to 7. Maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the N-terminal and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were selected as variable modifications. When SILAC labelled samples were analysed, the multiplicity was set to 2 and the appropriate labels were selected. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to 1 % FDR.

### Publication Abstract
NDR/LATS kinases regulate multiple aspects of cell polarity and morphogenesis from yeast to mammals. Fission yeast NDR/LATS kinase Orb6 has been proposed to control cell polarity by regulating the Cdc42 guanine nucleotide exchange factor Gef1. Here, we show that Orb6 regulates polarity largely independently of Gef1 and that Orb6 positively regulates exocytosis. Through Orb6 inhibition in&#xa0;vivo and quantitative global phosphoproteomics, we identify Orb6 targets, including proteins involved in membrane trafficking. We confirm Sec3 and Sec5, conserved components of the exocyst complex, as substrates of Orb6 both in&#xa0;vivo and in&#xa0;vitro, and we show that Orb6 kinase activity is important for exocyst localization to cell tips and for exocyst activity during septum dissolution after cytokinesis. We further find that Orb6 phosphorylation of Sec3 contributes to exocyst function in concert with exocyst protein Exo70. We propose that Orb6 contributes to polarized growth by regulating membrane trafficking at multiple levels.

### Keywords
Orb6, Fission yeast, Phosphoproteomics, Cell polarity, Silac

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Kenneth Sawin

### Lab Head
Dr Ken Sawin
University of Edinburgh


