### Accession
PXD000183

### Title
Human kidney primary proximal tubule cell LC-MSMS

### Description
Angiotensin II (AngII), the effector of the renin angiotensin system causes kidney disease progression by signalling through AT-1 receptor, but there are no measures of AngII activity in the kidney. Accordingly, we sought to define an AngII-regulated proteome in primary human proximal tubular epithelial cells (PTEC) in order to identify potential markers of AngII activity in the kidney. PTECs were labeled with SILAC heavy arginine(+6) and lysine(+8) OR light arginine and lysine for 6 doubling times. Heavy-labeled PTECs were stimulated with AngII and light-labeled PTECs were stimulated with the control medium. AngII-treated and control-treated PTEC lysates were mixed in 1:1 total protein ratio and their proteomes were compared. We generated 5 biological replicates (1 supernatant, 1 replicate with reverse labeling). LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer was used for LC-MSMS analysis. Of 4618 quantified proteins, 83 were differentially regulated by AngII in 4 biological replicates of PTEC lysates. We subsequently confirmed and verified 18 differentially regulated proteins by using SRM, RT-PCR and ELISA. We also went on to validate the main functional, enriched networks by using systems biology approach and an in vivo mouse model.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Angiotensin II (AngII), the major effector of the renin-angiotensin system, mediates kidney disease progression by signaling through the AT-1 receptor (AT-1R), but there are no specific measures of renal AngII activity. Accordingly, we sought to define an AngII-regulated proteome in primary human proximal tubular cells (PTEC) to identify potential AngII activity markers in the kidney. We utilized stable isotope labeling with amino acids (SILAC) in PTECs to compare proteomes of AngII-treated and control cells. Of the 4618 quantified proteins, 83 were differentially regulated. SILAC ratios for 18 candidates were confirmed by a different mass spectrometry technique called selected reaction monitoring. Both SILAC and selected reaction monitoring revealed heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) as the most significantly up-regulated protein in response to AngII stimulation. AngII-dependent regulation of the HO-1 gene and protein was further verified in PTECs. To extend these in vitro observations, we overlaid a network of significantly enriched gene ontology terms from our AngII-regulated proteins with a dataset of differentially expressed kidney genes from AngII-treated wild type mice and AT-1R knock-out mice. Five gene ontology terms were enriched in both datasets and included HO-1. Furthermore, HO-1 kidney expression and urinary excretion were reduced in AngII-treated mice with PTEC-specific AT-1R deletion compared with AngII-treated wild-type mice, thus confirming AT-1R-mediated regulation of HO-1. Our in vitro approach identified novel molecular markers of AngII activity, and the animal studies demonstrated that these markers are relevant in vivo. These interesting proteins hold promise as specific markers of renal AngII activity in patients and in experimental models.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Proximal tubule epithelial cell, Silac, Angiotensin ii, Kidney

### Affiliations
Department of the Institute of Medical Sciences, Division of Nephrology

### Submitter
Ana Konvalinka

### Lab Head


