### Accession
PXD025531

### Title
Confirmation of Arg-Glucosylation on multiple Death domain proteins

### Description
In vitro and tranfection analysis of death domain containing proteins to assess the ability of NleB2 to glycosylate these proteins.

### Sample Protocol
In-vitro glycosylated and immunoprecipitated proteins samples were prepared using S-trap columns (Protifi, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly samples were adjusted to contain 5% SDS, boiled for 10 minutes with 10mM DTT, allowed to cool to room temperature then alkylated with 40mM of iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark. Samples were then acidified with phosphoric acid to a final concentration of 1.2% and mixed with seven volumes of 90% methanol/100mM TEAB pH 7.1 before being applied to S-trap mini columns. Samples were washed four times with 90% methanol/100mM TEAB pH 7.1 to remove SDS then 2μg of trypsin (Promega, USA) in 100mM TEAB pH8.5 added to in vitro glycosylation samples and 1.25μg of GluC (Promega, USA) in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate added to immunoprecipitated RIPK1 samples. Proteases were spun through the S-trap columns and samples digested for 4 hours at 47°C for trypsin or 37°C for GluC digests. Peptides were collected from the S-traps by washing with 100mM TEAB pH8.5 or 100mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by 0.2% Formic acid followed by 0.2% Formic acid/50% acetonitrile. Peptide washes were pooled, dried and then resuspended in Buffer A* (0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile) before being cleaned up with home-made StageTips composed of 1 mg Empore™ C18 material (3M) and 1 mg of OLIGO R3 reverse phase resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) as previously described. Columns were wet with Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) and conditioned with Buffer A* prior to use. Resuspended samples were loaded onto conditioned columns, washed with 10 bed volumes of Buffer A* and bound peptides were eluted with Buffer B before being dried then stored at -20˚C.  LC-MS analysis of In-vitro glycosylated and immunoprecipitated RIPK1-DD samples. Stagetip cleaned up samples were re-suspended in Buffer A* and separated using a two-column chromatography set up composed of a PepMap100 C18 20 mm x 75 μm trap and a PepMap C18 500 mm x 75 μm analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Orbitrap Fusion™ Eclipse™ or Exploris™ 480 Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for immunoprecipitated proteins or an Orbitrap Q-Exactive plus Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for in vitro glycosylated samples. Samples were infused at 300 nl/minute via analytical columns using Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLCs (Thermo Fisher Scientific) on all systems. 95-minute gradients were run for each sample altering the buffer composition from 2% Buffer B to 23% B over 65 minutes, then from 23% B to 40% B over 20 minutes, then from 40% B to 80% B over 4 minutes, the composition was held at 80% B for 2 minutes, and then dropped to 2% B over 0.1 minutes and held at 2% B for another 4.9 minutes. The Eclipse™ and Exploris™ Mass Spectrometers were operated in a hybrid data-dependent and data-independent mode collecting 2.0 seconds of data-dependent scans followed by 1.4 seconds of data-independent scans. For data-dependent scans a single Orbitrap MS scan (300-1600 m/z, maximal injection time of 25 ms, an AGC of 300% and a resolution of 120k) was acquired followed by Orbitrap MS/MS HCD scans of precursors (NCE 30%, maximal injection time of 40 ms, an AGC of 200% and a resolution of 15k). After each round of data-dependent scans data-independent scans targeting the +3, +4 and +5 charge states of the RIPK1-DD peptide NLGKHWKNCARKLGFTQSQIDE in its unmodified, HexNAc modified and Hex modified states were undertaken (corresponding to the m/zs: 877.4467; 658.3369; 526.8709; 931.4643; 698.8501; 559.2815; 945.1398; 709.1067 and 567.4868). Each m/z were isolated and fragmented using stepped collision energy HCD scans (using the NCE of 25%, 30% and 38%, maximal injection time of 140 ms, an AGC set to 800% and a resolution of 60k). The Q-Exactive plus Mass Spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode automatically switching between the acquisition of a single Orbitrap MS scan (375-1400 m/z, maximal injection time of 50 ms, an Automated Gain Control (AGC) set to a maximum of 3*106 ions and a resolution of 70k) and up to 15 Orbitrap MS/MS HCD scans of precursors (Stepped NCE of 28%, 30% and 35%, a maximal injection time of 100 ms, an AGC set to a maximum of 2*105 ions and a resolution of 17.5k).

### Data Protocol
Proteomic analysis: Immunoprecipitated protein searches were processed with MaxQuant (v1.6.17.0. (6)) and searched against the human proteome (Unipro Accession: UP000005640), the Escherichia coli O127:H6 (strain E2348/69) proteome (Uniprot: UP000001521) and a custom database containing the predicted sequences. Searches were undertaken using “Trypsin” enzyme specificity with carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification as well as the variable modifications of oxidation of methionine, Arg-GlcNAcylation (H13C8NO5; 203.0793Da to Arginine) and Arg-Glucosylation (H10O5C6; 162.052 Da to Arginine). To enhance the identification of peptides between samples, the Match between Runs option was enabled with a precursor match window set to 0.75 minutes and an alignment window of 20 minutes with the label free quantitation (LFQ) option enabled (7).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Nleb2, Arginine glycosylation

### Affiliations
Centre for Innate Immunity and Infectious Diseases, Hudson Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, Victoria, Australia Department of Molecular and Translational Science, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Elizabeth L. Hartland
Centre for Innate Immunity and Infectious Diseases, Hudson Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, Victoria, Australia Department of Molecular and Translational Science, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia


