### Accession
PXD003637

### Title
TAILS proteomics of murine pancreatic tumors

### Description
Aberrant proteolysis by cysteine cathepsins is implicated in carcinogenesis, but knowledge of cathepsin substrates mediating tumor-promoting or suppressing effects is limited. Here we characterize tumor proteome and in vivo cathepsin substrates using cathepsin knockout mice and the RIP1-Tag2 model of pancreatic islet carcinogenesis. Applying an unbiased systems-level proteomics approach, Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates (TAILS), we identified cysteine cathepsin B, H, L, S, Z substrates and their cleavage sites. Among 1,935 proteins and 1,114 N-termini identified by TAILS using 8-plex iTRAQ protein labeling, 145 neo-N-termini were significantly changed in one (55%) or more knockouts suggesting a lack of direct compensation at substrate level by other cathepsins. Most affected N-termini (56-83% for different cathepsins) represented degradative cathepsin activity, whereas 17-44% of neo-N termini represented stable proteolytic products in the tumors and were enriched for extracellular proteins. We identified candidate substrates for mediating signaling roles of cysteine cathepsins in tumorigenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome preparation and analysis  Only pancreatic tumors < 2.5 mm3 were used. Each sample included tumors from one animal only. Pancreatic tumors from individual mice were homogenized for 1 min using Ultra-Turrax T25 homogenizer (Ika-Labortechnik) in 100 mM HEPES pH 8 supplemented with Complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Tissue homogenates were centrifuged for 10 min at 14,000 rpm at 4° C to separate soluble proteins from the organelles and membranes. The supernatant was carefully aspirated and placed on ice. The pellets were resuspended using minimal volume of 8 M GuHCl and diluted with 100 mM HEPES, pH 8 supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail. Both extracellular and cellular protein fractions were cleaned by TCA precipitation to remove primary amine-containing compounds; ice-cold 100% TCA was used to achieve a final 16% concentrations (vol/vol), followed by 30 min incubation on ice, 10 min at 14,000 rpm at 4° C, and methanol wash of the pellet. Pellets were resuspended in a minimal volume of 8 M GuHCl. A small aliquot was diluted ≥10 times for protein concentration determination using Bradford assay (Bio-Rad Protein Assay). The volume of each sample was adjusted with water, 1 M HEPES, pH 8 and 8 M GuHCl to achieve final concentrations of protein 2-3 mg/ml, 2.5 M GuHCl, 250 mM HEPES.  TAILS mass spectrometry analysis  For iTRAQ-TAILS 0.2-0.45 mg protein was used from each condition. Samples were denatured, reduced and alkylated as described previously (auf dem Keller et al., 2013; Kleifeld et al., 2011, 2010; Prudova et al., 2010). In brief, whole protein iTRAQ labeling using 8-plex reagents was performed at room temperature for 1 h using 1:5 protein:iTRAQ ratio (w/w) and 50% DMSO as a solvent, followed by brief quenching with ammonium bicarbonate. Following labeling, the individual reactions were combined at a 1:1 ratio and thoroughly mixed. The samples were cleaned by acetone-methanol precipitation, digested by trypsin and N-terminally enriched using dendritic polyglycerol aldehyde polymer (Flintbox, http://www.flintbox.com/public/project/1948/). Pancreatic tumors from 24 individual mice were analyzed as 3 biological replicates. To increase proteome coverage, extracellular and cellular proteins were analyzed separately for each animal. Each 8-plex analysis included samples from two wild-type RT2 mice and 6 different cathepsin knockouts. For each 8-plex analysis, the sample was analyzed before (pre-TAILS) and after N-terminal enrichment (TAILS). All samples were pre-fractionated offline on a SCX column and eluted using a high performance liquid chromatography salt gradient, followed by individual C18 STAGE-Tip clean up before tandem MS/MS analysis on a QStar XL Hybrid ESI mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems, MDS-Sciex) as described previously (Prudova et al., 2010).

### Data Protocol
MS2 scans were searched against the SwissProt database (release 15.13; taxonomy mouse (16,220 sequences)) by Mascot version 2.3 (Matrix Science) and X!Tandem. Searches were performed with the following parameters: semi-ArgC cleavage specificity with up to two missed cleavages, cysteine carbamidomethylation and peptide lysine iTRAQ8plex were set as fixed modifications, N-terminal iTRAQ8plex, N-terminal acetylation, and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Peptide tolerance and MS/MS tolerance were both set at 0.4 Da and the scoring scheme used was ESI-QUAD-TOF. For combining fractions, secondary validation and iTRAQ reporter ion quantification, the Trans Proteomic Pipeline (TPP v4.3 JETSTREAM rev 1, Build 201005211727) was used invoking PeptideProphet, iProphet, ProteinProphet and Libra with purity corrections provided by the manufacturer, respectively. Samples from pre-TAILS analyses were analyzed by Mascot and validated using PeptideProphet with default parameters (min pep length = 7, min prob = 0.05); TAILS samples were searched by either Mascot or X!Tandem, validated by PeptideProphet (min pep length = 7, min prob = 0, ‘No NTT model’) and searches combined by iProphet. Only peptides with an iProphet probability corresponding to an FDR <1% were included in further analyses. Pre-TAILS samples were also processed by ProteinProphet and proteins filtered for ProteinProphet probabilities of ≥0.9 (corresponding to an FDR<1%).

### Publication Abstract
Deregulated cathepsin proteolysis occurs across numerous cancers, but in&#xa0;vivo substrates mediating tumorigenesis remain ill-defined. Applying 8-plex iTRAQ terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates (TAILS), a systems-level N-terminome degradomics approach, we identified cathepsin B, H, L, S, and Z&#xa0;in&#xa0;vivo substrates and cleavage sites with the use of&#xa0;six different cathepsin knockout genotypes in the&#xa0;Rip1-Tag2 mouse model of pancreatic neuroendocrine tumorigenesis. Among 1,935 proteins and 1,114&#xa0;N termini identified by TAILS, stable proteolytic&#xa0;products were identified in wild-type tumors compared with one or more different cathepsin knockouts (17%-44% of 139 cleavages). This suggests a lack of compensation at the substrate level by other cathepsins. The majority of neo-N termini (56%-83%) for all cathepsins was consistent with protein degradation. We validated substrates, including the glycolytic enzyme pyruvate kinase M2 associated with the Warburg effect, the ER chaperone GRP78, and the oncoprotein prothymosin-alpha. Thus, the identification of cathepsin substrates in tumorigenesis improves the understanding of cathepsin functions in normal physiology and cancer.

### Keywords
Pancreatic neuroendocrine cancer, Degradation, Tails n-terminomics, Proteases, Cysteine cathepsins, Proteomics, Substrate discovery, Ecm, Proteolytic processing

### Affiliations
Technical University of Denmark
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Ulrich auf dem Keller

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher M. Overall
University of British Columbia


