### Accession
PXD002621

### Title
Phosphoproteomic Response To MEK Inhibition

### Description
SILAC Heavy and Light cells were treated for 24 hours with each MEKi vs. Control in duplicate (Heavy/Light as well as Light/Heavy).   For phosphoproteomic analysis, cells were treated for either 30 minutes or 24 hours with each MEKi vs. Control.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC Heavy and Light cells were treated for 24 hours with each MEKi vs. Control in duplicate (Heavy/Light as well as Light/Heavy). Cells were lysed by 2% SDS, Tris-HCl pH 7.5, and protein concentrations were measured by BCA (Pierce 23225). The reciprocal labels of MEKi and Control treated lysates were mixed 1:1, resulting in paired reciprocally labelled SILAC replicates (Heavy MEKi / Light Control and Light MEKi / Heavy Control). 500 μg of mixed lysate was digested by Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) (PMID: 19377485) using 1:100 Trypsin. Peptides were fractionated by isoelectric focusing, using an OFF-gel fractionator (Agilent, pH 3-10, 12 well strips). Fractions were desalted using C18 ziptip columns (Millipore) and lyophilized prior to LC-MS/MS analysis (see below).  Cells were lysed in 6 M urea, sonicated, centrifuged to clear cell debris and protein concentration was determined by BCA (Pierce 23225). 100 μg of each condition was individually digested by FASP (PMID: 19377485) using 1:100 Lys-C (Wako 125-05061), 1:100 Trypsin (Worthington)), and amine-TMT-10 plex labeled (Pierce 90111) on membrane (iFASP) (PMID: 23692318). TMT channel assignment: 126 = Control (Bio. Rep. 1); 127N = Control (Bio. Rep. 2), 127C = Control (Bio. Rep. 3); 128N = Control (Bio. Rep. 4); 128C = MEKi A (Bio. Rep. 1); 129N = MEKi A (Bio. Rep. 2); 129C = MEKi A (Bio. Rep. 3), 130N = MEKi B (Bio. Rep. 1); 130C = MEKi B (Bio. Rep. 2); 131 = MEKi B (Bio. Rep. 3). Peptides were then eluted, pooled, lyophilized and subjected to automated phosphopeptide enrichment (APE) (PMID: 25233145). Phosphopeptides were desalted using OLIGO R3 resin (Life Technologies 1-1339-03) and lyophilized prior to LC-MS/MS analysis (see below). SILAC fractions were re-suspended in 0.1 % formic acid and analysed on a LTQ Orbritrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a HP1200 reversed phase HPLC (Agilent). Peptides were resolved on a 75 μm I.D. C18 Pepmap column with 3 μm particle size (LC Packings/Dionex) over 90 min using a linear gradient of 96:4 to 50:50 buffer A:B (buffer A: 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) at 300nL/min. Peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization using 1.9 kV applied directly to the post-column LC eluent via a microtee built into the nanospray source. Sample was infused using a 20 μm I.D., 10 μm tapered tip non-coated SilicaTip emitter (New Objectives). The ion transfer tube was heated to 200°C and the S-lens set to 60%.  The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between Orbitrap MS and Ion-Trap MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 400-2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 400. The top 20 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation using collision-induced dissociation (CID). Automatic gain control was set to 1,000,000 for FT-MS and 30,000 for IT-MS/MS, full FT-MS maximum inject time was 500 ms and normalised collision energy was set to 35% with an activation time of 10 ms. Wideband activation was used to co-fragment precursor ions undergoing neutral loss of up to -20 m/z from the parent ion, including loss of water/ammonia. MS/MS was acquired for selected precursor ions with a single repeat count followed by dynamic exclusion with a 10 ppm mass window for 15 seconds based on a maximal exclusion list of 500 entries. Phosphopeptide samples were re-suspended in 0.1 % formic acid and analysed on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Scientific). Reversed-phase chromatographic separation was performed on a C18 PepMap 300 Å trap cartridge (0.3 mm i.d. x 5 mm, 5 μm bead size; loaded in a bi-directional manner), a 75 μm i.d. x 50 cm column (5 μm bead size) using a 120 minute linear gradient of 0-50% solvent B (MeCN 100% + 0.1% formic acid (FA)) against solvent A (H2O 100% + 0.1% FA) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between dual Orbitrap MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 400-2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400 and FT target value of 1 x 106 ions. The 20 most abundant ions were selected for fragmentation using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and dynamically excluded for 30 seconds. Fragmented ions were scanned in the Orbitrap at a resolution 35,000 at m/z 400. The isolation window was reduced to 1.2 m/z (to reduce ion co-isolation) and a MS/MS fixed first mass of 120 m/z was used (to ensure consistent TMT reporter ion coverage). For accurate mass measurement, the lock mass option was enabled using the polydimethylcyclosiloxane ion (m/z 445.120025) as an internal calibrant.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, raw data files produced in Xcalibur 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) were processed in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against Human Uniprot database using Mascot (v2.2). Searches were performed with a precursor mass tolerance set to 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance set to 0.05 Da and a maximum number of missed cleavages set to 2. Static modifications was limited to carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and variable modifications used were oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine / glutamine, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues. Peptides were further filtered using a mascot significance threshold <0.05, a peptide ion Score >20 and a FDR <0.01 (evaluated by Percolator (PMID: 17952086). Phospho-site localization probabilities were calculated with phosphoRS 3.1 (>75%) (PMID: 22073976). For relative phosphopeptide quantification, MEKi / Control ratios were calculated by Proteome Discoverer 1.4.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mek phosphoproteomics tmt ape silac

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research
Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Christopher Tape

### Lab Head
Dr Chris Marshall
The Institute of Cancer Research


