### Accession
PXD006064

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Glycine max seeds during controlled deterioration treatment

### Description
Controlled deterioration treatment (CDT) negatively affects the seed quality and vigor during post-harvest storage. A label-free proteomic approach was utilized to understand the CDT responses in soybean seeds. Soybean seed are rich in seed-storage proteins (SSPs) constituting up to 70 to 80% of the total seed protein content. Due to the presence of these SSPs, it is very difficult to identify and/or characterize the low-abundance regulatory proteins. Availability of appropriate methods for extraction of low-abundance proteins (LAPs) are now providing a platform for the identification of novel proteins involved in the signal perception and transduction during environmental perturbations. To enrich LAPs, the extracted total seed proteins were subjected to protamine sulfate precipitation (PSP) method to deplete SSPs. Fractionated protein fractions thus prepared were analyzed for identification of differential proteins using Label-free quantitative proteomics approaches.

### Sample Protocol
For control deterioration treatment, 25 g of soybean seeds were incubated in a closed plastic container with 99% relative humidity and 42°C for 3 and 7 days. For enrichment of low abundance proteins in CDT seeds, the extracted total seed proteins were subjected to protamine sulfate precipitation (PSP) method to deplete major seed storage proteins. These samples were subjected in-solution digestion. Obtained peptides after FASP were dissolved in solvent-A (water/ACN, 98:2 v/v; 0.1% formic acid) and separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a UHPLC Dionex UltiMate ® 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) instrument. For trapping the sample, the UHPLC was equipped with Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper C18, 5 μm, 100 Å) and subsequently washed with 98% solvent A for 6 min at a flow rate of 6 μL/min. The sample was continuously separated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 capillary column (75 μm × 15 cm, nanoViper C18, 3 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The LC analytical gradient was run at 2% to 35% solvent B over 90 min, then 35% to 95% over 10 min, followed by 90% solvent B for 5 min, and finally 5% solvent B for 15 min. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was coupled with an electrospray ionization source to the quadrupole-based mass spectrometer QExactive™ Orbitrap High-Resolution Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Resulting peptides were electro-sprayed through a coated silica emitted tip (PicoTip emitter, New Objective, USA) at an ion spray voltage of 2000 eV. The MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (200 m/z) in a mass range of 350-1800 m/z. A maximum injection time was set to 100 ms for ion accumulation. Eluted samples were used for MS/MS events, measured in a data-dependent mode for the 10 most abundant peaks (Top10 method), in the high ass accuracy Orbitrap after ion activation/dissociation with Higher Energy C-trap Dissociation (HCD) at 27 collision energy in a 100-1650 m/z mass range.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitative (LFQ) proteomic analysis was performed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30). All three biological replicates were cross-referenced against the G. max genome annotation database obtained from Phytozome (v 11.0). LFQ data processing was performed using default precursor mass tolerances set by Andromeda, which is set to 20 ppm of the first search and 4.5 ppm of the main search. Furthermore, LFQ data were searched based on 0.5 Da of a product mass tolerance. A maximum of two missed tryptic digestion was allowed. The fixed modifications specified were carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues. Additional modifications used in protein quantification were specified for acetylation of lysine residues and oxidation of methionine residues. A reverse nonsense version of the original database was generated and used to determine the FDR which was set to 1% for peptide identifications. Protein identifications with at least 2 unique peptides were considered as significant hits and used for further analysis. Label-free quantification was conducted within MaxQuant using MaxLFQ followed by data analysis using Perseus software (ver. 1.5.8.5) [30]. Normalization of all the identified proteins was carried out by dividing the LFQ intensity of a particular peptide to the total LFQ intensity of a sample to compensate the differences between LFQ intensities due to different total protein loads. As CDT leads to protein degradation, we observed many missing values in our dataset. Therefore, as a quality measurement, proteins that were present in at least 2 out of the 3 replicates (total 6 values out of 9 samples) were considered and used for the statistical analysis. Rest of the proteins was considered as CDT degraded (showing missing values in D3/D7) or CDT-induced (showing missing values in control) proteins. Missing values imputation of protein intensities were performed from a normal distribution (width: 0.3, down shift: 1.8) using Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cdt, Quantitative proteomics, Abundant protein depletion, Metabolic engineering, Soybean, Low-abundance proteins

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and Industry Convergence Research Institute, Pusan National University, Miryang, 627-706, South Korea
Pusan National University

### Submitter
Sun Tae Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Tae Kim
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and Industry Convergence Research Institute, Pusan National University, Miryang, 627-706, South Korea


