### Accession
PXD036630

### Title
A photo-oxidation driven proximity labeling strategy enables profiling of mitochondrial proteome dynamics in living cells

### Description
We herein report a photo-oxidation driven proximity labeling strategy to profile mitochondrial proteome by light dependence in living cells with high spatiotemporal resolution. Taking advantage of organelle-localizable organic photoactivated probe generating reactive species and nucleophilic substrate for proximal proteins oxidation and trapping, mitochondrial proteins were selectively labeled by spatially limited reactions in native environment. Integration of photo-oxidation driven proximity labeling and quantitative proteomics facilitated the plotting of mitochondrial proteome in which up to 310 mitochondrial proteins were identified with the specificity of 64% in HeLa cells. Furthermore, mitochondrial proteome dynamics was deciphered in drug resistant Huh7 and LPS stimulated HMC3 cells which were hard-to-transfect. A number of differential proteins were quantified which were intimately linked to critical processes and provided insights into the related molecular mechanisms of drug resistance and neuroinflammation in the perspective of mitochondria.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were washed with HBS buffer and incubated in fresh HBS buffer with 10 μM TPP-AcDBF for 10 min at 37 ℃. Then cells were washed three times, added fresh HBS buffer with 5 mM PA and incubated for 5 min at 37 ℃. After that the cells were illuminated for 0 min or 10 min by homemade green light irradiation device at room temperature and incubated for another 5min in the dark at 37 ℃. The cells were washed three times with pre-cold DPBS. Samples without illumination were used as controls.  The cells were harvested in pre-cold DPBS. The cell pellet was subsequently resuspended in lysis buffer, and lysed by ultrasonication for 3 min (10 s intervals every 5 s) in an ice bath. The cell lysate was boiled at 95 ℃ for 5 min and diluted with DPBS to 0.2% SDS. Then the solution was mixed with freshly premixed click solution (200 μM azo biotin-azide, 100 μM CuSO4, 800 μM THPTA ligand, 2.5 mM sodium ascorbate) and incubated at 37 ℃ for 3 h in the dark. After that the mixture was precipitated in acetone overnight at -20 ℃. The protein pellet was collected by centrifugation in 2000 g at 4 ℃ and air-dried. The protein pellet was redissolved in 0.2% SDS/DPBS. ~ 1.5 mg protein (2-3 mg/mL) each group was used for enrichment. 45 μL streptavidin agarose beads (Thermo, 20353, USA) were added to each sample solution to enrich biotin-labeled proteins by incubating 3 h at room temperature. After enrichment, beads were washed with 0.2% SDS/DPBS (×3), 1% SDS/DPBS (×2), DPBS (×1), 4 M NaCl + 0.2% Tween-20 + 50 mM Tris (pH=8.0) (×2), 0.1M NaCO3 + 50 mM Tris(pH=8.0) (×2), 2 M Urea + 50mM Tris(pH=8.0) (×2), PBS (×2) at room temperature in turn. Then the enriched proteins were eluted with 100μL eluent (300 mM Na2S2O4, 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 20 mM HEPES) by incubating for 30 min at 37 ℃ with gentle shaking and followed by another elution.  The elution was transferred to the filter membrane (MWCO 10000). After washing three times with ABC solution (50 mM), 200μL tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) (10mM) was added and incubated for 2 h at 37 ℃. The filter membrane was sequentially added 200 μL IAA (20 mM) and incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Then the filter membrane was washed three times with ABC solution (50 mM), once with phosphate buffer (100 mM, pH=8.0) respectively. Proteins were digested in 100 μL phosphate buffer with trypsin (1:25-1:50, trypsin: protein, w/w) in 37 ℃ for 12-16 h.  To each peptide solution was added 16 μL 4% CH2O or 13CH2O (v/v) (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, USA) and 16 μL 0.6 M NaBH3CN or NaBD3CN (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) (Control group: 13CH2O+ NaBH3CN (light); Sample group: CH2O+ NaBD3CN (heavy)). The mixture was vortexed and incubated for 1h at room temperature. Then the labeled peptide solution was combined in a ratio of 1:1 (v/v). 10 mg durashell C18 packing (5 μm, 100 Å) (Agela technologies, USA) was filled into a T-400 tip with soild phase extraction C18 disk (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) on top. Two mobile phases were A: H2O with NH3·H2O (pH=10) and B: 80% (v/v) ACN with NH3·H2O (pH=10). After C18 tip was washed with B mobile phase and A mobile phase for three times each, the mixed peptide solution was loaded. Then the C18 tip was washed with A mobile phase for three times and eluted with mobile phases containing different ratios of acetonitrile (6%, 9%, 12%, 15%, 18, 21%, 25%, 30%, 80%) in turn. The eluents were merged to three fractions (6%+15%+25%, 9%+18%+30%, 12%+21%+80%) and lyophilized for NanoLC-MS/MS. Fractions of enriched peptides were analyzed on an Easy-nLC HPLC system (Thermo, USA) coupled to high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry system (FAMIS, Thermo, USA) with compensation voltage of -45 V and -65 V, and followed by tandem MS, an Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo, USA). The HPLC capillary column (150 μm i.d. × 25 cm) was packed in-house with 1.9 μm, 100 Å Venusil XBP C18 silica particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Two mobile phases were (A) 2% (v/v) ACN with 0.1% (v/v) FA and (B) 98% (v/v) ACN with 0.1% (v/v) FA. The peptides were separated by a gradient of 120 min (from 6% to 28% B in 85min, from 28% to 38% B in 17 min, from 38% to 100% B in 8 min, keeping at 100% B for 10 min) with the flow rate of 600 nL/min. MS1 analysis was performed in full scan ranging from m/z 300 to 1500 with a mass resolution of 60,000 at positive ion mode. The spray voltage was set to 2200 V and the ion transfer tube temperature was 320 °C. MS/MS spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode with total cycle time of 2 s. The MS/MS spectra of each precursor ion were scanned twice for identification and quantification dividually using orbitrap detector. The qualitative scan was operated in auto scan range mode with a mass resolution of 15000 and the quantitative scan was performed in defined scan range from m/z 50 to 250 with a mass resolution of 30000. The isolation window (m/z) was 1.6. The dynamic exclusion time was 40s.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.5.0) against the Uniprot_Homo Sapiens Swiss-Prot database (updated on 06/20/2021, 20360 proteins). The MS/MS spectra were searched with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a product ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed for full tryptic digestion. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and variable modifications were set to oxidation (M) and dimethyl labeling (+ 30.04385 Da) at N-terminal/lysine for isotope modifications. The FDR for peptide spectral matches (PSMs), peptides, and proteins was controlled at 0.01 to filter the spectra based a target-decoy database strategy. The searched results were further quantified by extracting the intensity of a1 ion from spectra with pQuant software4. The median of isotope abundance ratio of a1 ion for all peptides was taken as the final ratio of proteins. Three independent biological replicates were performed separately. For each replicate, proteins identified as reverse hits and contaminants were removed and proteins containing more than 2 unique peptides with quantified heavy/light (H/L) ratios were retained for further processing. The proteins with explicit mitochondrial annotation were sorted out according to the MitoCarta 3.0 database, the Gene Ontology Cell Component database (from uniport) and literatures. Then the protein H/L ratios were normalized by dividing the median H/L ratio of non-mitochondrial proteins. Proteins with H/L ratio ≥ 2 were filtered out to be labeled proteome. Proteins identified by three biological replicates were retained as the final mitochondrial proteome.

### Publication Abstract
Mapping the proteomic landscape of mitochondria with spatiotemporal precision plays a pivotal role in elucidating the delicate biological functions and complex relationship with other organelles in a variety of dynamic physiological processes which necessitates efficient and controllable chemical tools. We herein report a photo-oxidation driven proximity labeling strategy to profile the mitochondrial proteome by light dependence in living cells with high spatiotemporal resolution. Taking advantage of organelle-localizable organic photoactivated probes generating reactive species and nucleophilic substrates for proximal protein oxidation and trapping, mitochondrial proteins were selectively labeled by spatially limited reactions in their native environment. Integration of photo-oxidation driven proximity labeling and quantitative proteomics facilitated the plotting of the mitochondrial proteome in which up to 310 mitochondrial proteins were identified with a specificity of 64% in HeLa cells. Furthermore, mitochondrial proteome dynamics was deciphered in drug resistant Huh7 and LPS stimulated HMC3 cells which were hard-to-transfect. A number of differential proteins were quantified which were intimately linked to critical processes and provided insights into the related molecular mechanisms of drug resistance and neuroinflammation in the perspective of mitochondria. The photo-oxidation driven proximity labeling strategy offers solid technical support to a highly precise proteomic platform in time and finer space for more knowledge of subcellular biology.

### Keywords
Mitochondrial proteome, Photo-oxidation, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
CAS Key Laboratory of Separation Science for Analytical Chemistry, National Chromatographic R & A Center, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian, China.
Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
He Wang

### Lab Head
Dr He Wang
CAS Key Laboratory of Separation Science for Analytical Chemistry, National Chromatographic R & A Center, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian, China.


