### Accession
PXD002579

### Title
Peanut LC-MS/MS, part 1 of 3 -  Proteomics analysis reveals differentially activated pathways that operate in peanut gynophores at different developmental stages

### Description
Cultivated peanut (Arachis hypogaea. L) is one of the most important oil crops in the world. After flowering, the peanut plant forms aboveground pegs (gynophores) that penetrate the soil, giving rise to underground pods. This means of reproduction, referred to as geocarpy, distinguishes peanuts from most other plants. The molecular mechanism underlying geocarpic pod development in peanut is poorly understood. To gain insight into the mechanism of geocarpy, we extracted proteins from aerial gynophores, subterranean unswollen gynophores, and gynophores that had just started to swell into pods. We analyzed the protein profiles in each of these samples by combining 1 DE with nanoLC-MS/MS approaches. In total, 2766, 2518, and 2280 proteins were identified from the three samples, respectively. An integrated analysis of proteome and transcriptome data revealed specifically or differentially expressed genes in the different developmental stages at both the mRNA and protein levels. A total of 69 proteins involved in the gravity response, light and mechanical stimulus, hormone biosynthesis, and transport were identified as being involved in geocarpy. Furthermore, we identified 91 genes that were specifically or abundantly expressed in aerial gynophores, including pectin methylesterase and expansin, which were presumed to promote the elongation of aerial gynophores. In addition, we identified 35 proteins involved in metabolism, defense, hormone biosynthesis and signal transduction, nitrogen fixation, and transport that accumulated in subterranean unswellen gynophores. Furthermore, 26 specific or highly abundant proteins related to fatty acid metabolism, starch synthesis, and lignin synthesis were identified in the early swelling pods. We identified thousands of proteins in the aerial gynophores, subterranean gynophores, and early swelling pods of peanut. This study provides the basis for examining the molecular mechanisms underlying peanut geocarpy pod development.

### Sample Protocol
Plants of “Luhua 14”, a widespread cultivar in Northern China, were sown in early May and harvested in early October in the experimental farm of Shandong Academy of Agricultural Sciences. The S1, S2, and S3 gynophores were collected from the farm-grown plants. The tip-most 1 cm was excised from the S1, S2, and S3 gynophores and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen for protein extraction. The proteins extracted from peanut samples were mixed with SDS loading buffer, and then denatured at 100℃ for 5 min. Proteins were separated on by 12% polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) at 100 V. After electrophoresis, gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 (Pierce, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein bands were sequentially and vertically cut into 10 slices, and each slice was placed in a separate Eppendorf tube. Each gel slice was cut into about 1-mm3 cubes, and was thoroughly destained using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 50% acetonitrile (ACN) at 37℃. Gel slices were incubated with 10 mM DTT containing 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 1 h at 60°C to reduce disulfide bonds, and then alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide containing 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. In-gel digestion was carried out by adding 0.01 µg/µL Trypsin Gold (Promega, USA) to the samples and incubating them at 37℃ overnight. After digestion, the peptides were further extracted twice using 0.1% formic acid (FA) in 50% ACN. The extracted peptides were dried and stored at -80℃ for LC-MS/MS analysis.  The tryptic-digested peptide samples were redissolved in Buffer A (5% ACN and 0.1% FA), and centrifuged at 4℃ and 20, 000 g for 10 min to remove the insoluble material. The final concentration of peptide was about 0.5 µg/µl. Then, 10 µl of supernatant was loaded onto the nanoHPLC system (Shimadzu, Japan) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The separation procedure was as follows. First, the peptides were loaded onto a 10-cm C18 trapping column (inner diameter, 75 μm; Waters, USA). In the separation process, samples were loaded at 8 μL/min for 4 min, and a 44-min gradient was then run at 300 nL/min starting with 2 to 35% Buffer B (98% ACN and 0.1% FA), followed by a 2-min linear gradient to 80% Buffer B, and maintenance at 80% Buffer B for 4 min, and finally a return to 5% Buffer B over a 1 min period. The peptides were subjected to nanoelectrospray ionization followed by tandem mass analysis. The separated peptides were subjected to tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo, USA) coupled online to the HPLC system. Intact peptides were scanned in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60, 000, and further selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) operating with a normalized collision energy setting of 35%. The ion fragments were detected in the LTQ. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by ten MS/MS scans was applied, and the ten most intense ions above a threshold ion count of 5, 000 were detected with the following Dynamic Exclusion settings: repeat counts, 2; repeat duration, 30 s; and exclusion duration, 120 s. The applied electrospray voltage was 1.5 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap and 1×104 ions were accumulated in the ion trap to generate CID spectra. For the MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 2, 000 Da.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files obtained from the Orbitrap were converted into MGF files using Proteome Discoverer 1.2 (Thermo, USA). Protein annotation was performed using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, UK; version 2.3.02) against the peanut transcriptome database, which contained 72, 527 unigenes. And the false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.05 for both peptides and proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Peanut, Gynophores, Pods

### Affiliations
Bio-Tech Research Center, Shandong Academy of Agricultural Sciences
Bio-tech Research Center, Shandong Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Jinan, China.

### Submitter
Chuanzhi Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Xingjun Wang
Bio-tech Research Center, Shandong Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Jinan, China.


