### Accession
PXD003048

### Title
Cell-specific analysis of tumour-endothelial contact-intiated signalling - PROTEOMICS

### Description
Metastasizing tumor cells exit the vascular system through dynamic interactions with endothelial cells that line the internal surface of vessels. While extravasation is a key event within the metastatic cascade, the signals regulating tumor cell adhesion to the endothelium and their subsequent transendothelial migration are poorly understood. Here, we combined Stable Isotope Labeling by Amino acids in Cell culture (SILAC) and phosphoproteomic analysis to identify cell-specific signaling pathways regulated between interacting breast cancer cells and endothelial cells (see PRIDE repository PXD001558). Further co-culture experiments were performed alongside the phosphoproteomic analysis in order to control for the protein quantity. These are presented here. Using SILAC, cell-specific labels were introduced into MDA-MB-231-LM2 cells (Human Breast cancer) and HUVECs (Human endothelial cells) to ensure each cell type had a distinct and traceable phosphoproteome when tumor and endothelial cells were co-cultured. To probe regulatory signaling events triggered in cancer cells following contact with endothelial cells, we labeled LM2 cells with medium or heavy isotopomers of arginine and lysine (Arg+6 Da, Lys+4 Da and Arg+10 Da, Lys+8 Da respectively). Heavy-labeled LM2 cells were collected by enzyme-free cell dissociation buffer, thereby preserving membrane proteins and adhesion receptors, and seeded onto a monolayer of light-labeled (Arg+0 Da, Lys+0 Da) HUVECs. Following 15 min of co-culture, non-adherent LM2 cells were gently removed and cancer cells that had attached to the endothelial layer were lysed together with the HUVECs. In parallel, medium-labeled LM2 cells were collected under the same conditions and maintained as suspension cells in monoculture to represent circulating tumor cells prior to any contact with the endothelium. These were then added to the harvested LM2-HUVEC co-culture in a 1:1 ratio of heavy:medium-labeled cells to provide a point of reference. Based on the SILAC labeling of the different cell populations, light-labeled peptides were assigned to HUVECs, medium-labeled peptides to monocultured LM2 cells in suspension, and heavy-labeled peptides to LM2 cells that had made contact with HUVECs. As such, the heavy/medium ratio for each peptide was used to quantify phosphorylation-dependent signaling changes occurring specifically in the LM2 cells upon contact with HUVECs. Conversely, to elucidate signaling events in HUVECs that were initiated by contacting cancer cells, light-labeled LM2 cells were seeded on top of a confluent monolayer of heavy-labeled HUVECs, while medium-labeled HUVECs were maintained in monoculture. Following 15 min of co-culture, the unattached LM2 cells were removed. Cells were lysed, mixed in a 1:1 ratio of heavy:medium HUVECs, followed by membrane fractionation and phosphoproteomic analysis as described above.  A variation in phospho-peptide quantity could be due to the experimental difficulties in mixing heavy and medium labels in a 1:1 ratio or a quick regulation of the protein quantity through modification of its expression/degradation balance. Thus, we performed relative quantification of non-phosphorylated peptides in parallel with the phosphoproteomic analysis to account for changes in total protein abundance (data presented here) or correct for experimental bias. Cytoplasmic fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS before TiO2 enrichment and their median log2(H/M) were used for normalization of the phosphoproteomic dataset. In order to increase the number of proteins quantified in the LM2 cells, we performed a supplementary co-culture experiment and fractionated the peptides by SDS-PAGE. In order to get a confident relative quantification of Ephrin type-A receptor 2 (EPHA2), we performed 2 independent experiments followed by EPHA2 IP and LC-MSMS.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC co-culture for analysis of contact-initiated signaling: heavy-labeled LM2 cells (Arg+10/Lys+8) (~70% confluency, serum-starved for 16 hours) were harvested with enzyme-free cell dissociation buffer, washed and plated onto light-labeled confluent monolayers of HUVECs (serum starved for 1.5 hours) in a 2:1 LM2:HUVECs cell ratio. Medium-labeled LM2 cells (Arg+6/Lys+4) were collected and kept in suspension in parallel to the co-culture. Cells were incubated for 15 min at 37˚C, 5% CO2. After incubation, unattached cells were removed from the dishes and counted to estimate the number of LM2 cells remaining attached to HUVEC monolayers. Co-cultured LM2 cells and HUVECs were lysed with medium-labeled LM2 cells (1:1 heavy:medium cell ratio) in ice-cold 0.1 M Na2CO3 pH 11, supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails and 10 mM sodium orthovanadate. To investigate the endothelial cells phosphoproteome, the same protocol was followed using heavy- and medium-labeled HUVECs with light-labeled LM2 in a 2:1 LM2:HUVECs cell ratio.   Sample preparation for cytoplasmic fractions: Cell lysates were centrifuged after snap freezing to separate soluble proteins from pelleted membrane-associated proteins. Pellets were entirely used for phosphoproteomic analysis (membrane-enriched fractions). Reduction, alkylation and digestion were performed on cytoplasmic fractions by Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP; Vivacon 10 K).   SDS-PAGE sample: The same protocol was followed for the co-culture. Cells were lysed in PLC buffer prior to SDS-PAGE. 10 gel bands were cut and analysed independently.   EPHA2-IP: EphA2 was immunoprecipitated from co-culture lysates (2 independent experiments) by incubation of protein extracts with anti-EphA2 (sc-924, Santa Cruz), using 1 μg antibody per 500 μg protein. Immune complexes were allowed to form under rotation at 4 °C overnight. Protein A-conjugated Sepharose (Sigma) was washed and equilibrated in PLC buffer before addition to complexes for a further rotation of 1-2 hours. Beads were collected by centrifugation and transferred into fresh, low bind microcentrifuge tubes for 3 subsequent washes in PLC buffer before boiling in SDS-PAGE sample loading buffer.  off line HPLC fractionation HPLC: 3 cytoplasmic fractions with LM2-labeled samples and 3 with HUVECs-labeled samples were subjected to RP HpH HPLC. High pH reverse phase chromatographic separation was performed on a Agilent Zorbax 300 extend –C18 column (4.6 X 150mm, 3.5 μm) using a 21 min stepped linear gradient of 0.5-40% solvent B (acetonitrile) against solvent A (H2O; 0.1% NH2O) and 40-85% solvent B against solvent A with a flow rate of 0.4 ml/min. Individual 10 second fractions were collected from 3 to 34 min. The 186 resulting fractions were pooled with equidistance across the gradient (checkboard) into 19 final fractions for LC-MS analysis.   LC-MSMS: Samples were run on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific). Reverse phase chromatographic separation was performed on a C18 PepMap 300 Å trap cartridge (0.3mm i.d. x 5 mm, 5 μm bead size; loaded in a bi-directional manner), a 75 μm i.d. x 50 cm column (5 μm bead size) using a 120 min linear gradient of 0-50% solvent B (acetonitrile; 0.1% formic acid) against solvent A (H2O; 0.1% FA) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between Orbitrap MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 400-2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400 and FT target value of 1 x 106 ions. The 10 most abundant ions were selected for fragmentation using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and dynamically excluded for 30 seconds. Fragmented ions were scanned in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 400.

### Data Protocol
Data analyis: For peptide identification, raw data files produced in Xcalibur 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and processed in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific). Searches against SwissProt human database using Mascot (v2.2) were performed with a precursor mass tolerance set to 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da and a maximum number of missed cleavages set to 2. Static modifications was limited to carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and variable modifications used were oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine / glutamine, isotopomeric labelled lysine (+4.025107 Da and +8.014199 Da), isotopomeric labelled arginine (+6.020129 Da and +10.008269 Da) and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues. Peptides were further filtered using a mascot significance threshold <0.05, a peptide ion Score >20 and a FDR ≤0.01 (PEP value from Percolator).  For relative peptide quantification, the threshold intensity for calculating SILAC ratio was set to the 5% quantile of the labels intensities in each sample.

### Publication Abstract
The exit of metastasizing tumor cells from the vasculature, extravasation, is regulated by their dynamic interactions with the endothelial cells that line the internal surface of vessels. To elucidate signals controlling tumor cell adhesion to the endothelium and subsequent transendothelial migration, we performed phosphoproteomic analysis to map cell-specific changes in protein phosphorylation that were triggered by contact between metastatic MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells and endothelial cells. From the 2669 unique phosphorylation sites identified, 77 and 43 were differentially phosphorylated in the tumor cells and endothelial cells, respectively. The receptor tyrosine kinase ephrin type A receptor 2 (EPHA2) exhibited decreased Tyr(772) phosphorylation in the cancer cells upon endothelial contact. Knockdown of EPHA2 increased adhesion of the breast cancer cells to human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and their transendothelial migration in coculture cell assays, as well as early-stage lung colonization in vivo. EPHA2-mediated inhibition of transendothelial migration of breast cancer cells depended on interaction with the ligand ephrinA1 on HUVECs and phosphorylation of EPHA2-Tyr(772). When EPHA2 phosphorylation dynamics were compared between cell lines of different metastatic ability, EPHA2-Tyr(772) was rapidly dephosphorylated after ephrinA1 stimulation specifically in cells targeting the lung. Knockdown of the phosphatase LMW-PTP reduced adhesion and transendothelial migration of the breast cancer cells. Overall, cell-specific phosphoproteomic analysis provides a bidirectional map of contact-initiated signaling between tumor and endothelial cells that can be further investigated to identify mechanisms controlling the transendothelial cell migration of cancer cells.

### Keywords
Mda-mb-231-lm2, "contact-initiated signaling", Huvec, Epha2

### Affiliations
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology
Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, The University of Manchester, Wilmslow Road, Manchester M20 4BX, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Marie Locard-Paulet

### Lab Head
Dr Claus Jorgensen
Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, The University of Manchester, Wilmslow Road, Manchester M20 4BX, United Kingdom


