### Accession
PXD023015

### Title
The self-peptide repertoire plays a critical role in transplant tolerance induction

### Description
While direct allorecognition underpins both solid organ allograft rejection and tolerance induction, the specific molecular targets of most directly-alloreactive CD8+ T cells have not been defined. In this study, we used a combination of genetically-engineered MHC I constructs, mice with a hepatocyte-specific mutation in the class I antigen-presentation pathway and immunopeptidomic analysis to provide definitive evidence for the contribution of the peptide cargo of allogeneic MHC I molecules to transplant tolerance induction. We established a systematic approach for the discovery of directly-recognised pMHC epitopes, and identified 17 strongly immunogenic H-2Kb-associated peptides recognised by CD8+ T cells from B10.BR (H-2k) mice, 13 of which were also recognised by BALB/c (H-2d) mice. As few as five different tetramers used together were able to identify almost 40% of alloreactive T cells within a polyclonal population. To our knowledge, this represents the first example of such an approach in the context of direct allorecognition.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoaffinity purification Two replicate samples were prepared for each tissue or experimental group. Around 1×108 purified hepatocytes from 4 - 5 mice were pooled per sample. Hepatocytes were lysed in 0.5% IGEPAL, 50 mM Tris (pH 8), 150 mM NaCl and protease inhibitors (Roche cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail; Merck, catalogue# 11836145001). Spleens, skin grafts (on d7 post-transplant) or tail skins from 5 - 9 donors were pooled per sample. Spleen and skin samples were ground in a Retsch Mixer Mill MM 400 under cryogenic conditions and then lysed in 0.5% IGEPAL, 50 mM Tris (pH 8), 150 mM NaCl, and protease inhibitors. Lysates were incubated for 1 hour at 4°C, then cleared by ultracentrifugation (40,000 rpm, 30 min) and MHC complexes were isolated from supernatant by immunoaffinity purification using solid-phase-bound monoclonal antibodies SF1-1.1.10 (anti H-2Kd), K9-178 (anti H-2Kb), Y3 (anti H-2Kb/Kk) and 28.14.8s (anti H-2Db) as described previously40. Peptides were dissociated from the MHC with 10% acetic acid. For purified hepatocyte and spleen samples, the mixture of peptides, class I HC and β2m was fractionated on a 4.6 mm internal diameter × 100 mm monolithic C18 column (Chromolith SpeedROD; Merck Millipore, catalogue# 1021290001) using an ÄKTAmicro RP-HPLC (GE Healthcare) system, running a mobile phase consisting of buffer A (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid; Thermo Fisher Scientific), running at 1 mL min−1 with a gradient of B of 2–40% over 4 min, 40–45% over 4 min and 45–99% over 2 min, collecting 500 μL fractions. Peptide-containing fractions were either unpooled or combined into pools, vacuum-concentrated and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for mass spectrometry analysis. For tail skin samples, the mixture of peptides, class I HC and β2m was purified using Millipore 5 kDa Amicon centrifugal units (Human Metabolome Technologies; catalogue# UFC3LCCNB_HMT) in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were extracted and desalted from the filtrate using ZipTip C18 pipette tips (Agilent Technologies, catalogue# A57003100K) in a final buffer of 30% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptide samples were vacuum-concentrated and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry Reconstituted peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an information-dependent acquisition strategy on a Q-Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously31. Briefly, peptides were trapped on a 2 cm Nanoviper PepMap100 trap column at a flow rate of 15 min using a RSLC nano-HPLC. The trap column was then switched inline to an analytical PepMap100 C18 nanocolumn (75 μm x 50 cm, 3 μm 100 Å pore size) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using an initial gradient of 2.5% to 7.5% buffer B (0.1% formic acid 80% ACN) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) over 1 min followed with a linear gradient from 7.5% to 32.5% buffer B for 58 min followed by a linear increase to 40% buffer B over 5 min and an additional increase up to 99% buffer B over 5 min. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 375–1800) were acquired in the Orbitrap with 70,000 resolution (m/z 200) after the accumulation of ions to a 5×105 target value with a maximum injection time of 120 ms. For Data Dependant Acquisition (DDA) runs, the 12 most intense multiply charged ions (z ≥ 2) were sequentially isolated and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 27% with an injection time of 120 ms, 35,000 resolution and target of 2×105 counts. An isolation width of 1.8 m/z was applied and underfill ratio was set to 1% and dynamic exclusion to 15 sec. For Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) runs, the MS1 survey scan and fragment ions were acquired using variable windows (Supplementary Table 6) at 35,000 resolution with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 ions. The mass spectrometry data will be deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE41 partner repository.  DDA data analysis For peptide identification, the acquired raw files were searched with PEAKS Studio X+ (Bioinformatics Solutions) against the Mus musculus (SwissProt) database. The parent mass error tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass error tolerance to 0.02 Da. Oxidation of methionine (M) was set as variable modifications and a false-discovery rate (FDR) cut-off of 5% was applied.

### Publication Abstract
While direct allorecognition underpins both solid organ allograft rejection and tolerance induction, the specific molecular targets of most directly alloreactive CD8+ T cells have not been defined. In this study, we used a combination of genetically engineered major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC I) constructs, mice with a hepatocyte-specific mutation in the class I antigen-presentation pathway, and immunopeptidomic analysis to provide definitive evidence for the contribution of the peptide cargo of allogeneic MHC I molecules to transplant tolerance induction. We established a systematic approach for the discovery of directly recognized pMHC epitopes and identified 17 strongly immunogenic H-2Kb-associated peptides recognized by CD8+ T cells from B10.BR (H-2k) mice, 13 of which were also recognized by BALB/c (H-2d) mice. As few as 5 different tetramers used together were able to identify a high proportion of alloreactive T cells within a polyclonal population, suggesting that there are immunodominant allogeneic MHC-peptide complexes that can account for a large component of the alloresponse.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Transplantation, Hla

### Affiliations
Monash University
Deputy Head (Research), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Infection and Immunity Program Room 214, level 2, 15 Innovation Walk Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia

### Submitter
Pouya Faridi

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Purcell
Deputy Head (Research), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Infection and Immunity Program Room 214, level 2, 15 Innovation Walk Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia


