### Accession
PXD000584

### Title
Shotgun Imaging Analyzer Gastric Cancer

### Description
The data discloses mass spectra of a gastric cancer biopsy sectioned into ten parts, each one subjected to a four step MudPIT analysis (i.e., increasing KCL concentrations of 85, 150, 250, and 400 mM). The biopsy was acquired from an area along the stomach that included tumor and resection margin, during the operation procedures on a male patient. Briefly, the tumor was located in the gastric antrum and the resection margin was macroscopically defined during the surgery as a 10 cm rim of healthy-looking tissue surrounding the tumor. The histological type was determined to be adenocarcinoma and classified as T4. Data analysis: The ProLuCID search engine (v 1.3) was used to compare experimental tandem mass spectra against those theoretically generated from our sequence database and select the most likely peptide spectrum matches (PSMs). Briefly, the search was limited to fully and semi-tryptic peptide candidates and imposed carbamidomethylation and oxidation of methionine as fixed and variable modification, respectively. The search engine accepted peptide candidates within a 50-ppm tolerance from the measured precursor m/z and used the XCorr and Z-Score as the primary and secondary search engine scores, respectively. The validity of the PSMs was assessed using the Search Engine Processor (SEPro, v 2.1.0.23). Identifications were grouped by charge state (+2 and > +3) and then by tryptic status (fully tryptic, semi-tryptic), resulting in four distinct subgroups. For each result, the ProLuCID XCorr, DeltaCN, and ZScore values were used to generate a Bayesian discriminator. Additionally, a minimum sequence length of six amino acid residues was required. Results were post-processed to only accept PSMs with less than 5 ppm and proteins supported by two or more independent evidences (e.g., identification of a peptide with different charge states, a modified and a non-modified version of the same peptide, or two different peptides).

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Accessing localized proteomic profiles has emerged as a fundamental strategy to understand the biology of diseases, as recently demonstrated, for example, in the context of determining cancer resection margins with improved precision. Here, we analyze a gastric cancer biopsy sectioned into 10 parts, each one subjected to MudPIT analysis. We introduce a software tool, named Shotgun Imaging Analyzer and inspired in MALDI imaging, to enable the overlaying of a protein's expression heat map on a tissue picture. The software is tightly integrated with the NeXtProt database, so it enables the browsing of identified proteins according to chromosomes, quickly listing human proteins never identified by mass spectrometry (i.e., the so-called missing proteins), and the automatic search for proteins that are more expressed over a specific region of interest on the biopsy, all of which constitute goals that are clearly well-aligned with those of the C-HPP. Our software has been able to highlight an intense expression of proteins previously known to be correlated with cancers (e.g., glutathione S-transferase Mu 3), and in particular, we draw attention to Gastrokine-2, a "missing protein" identified in this work of which we were able to clearly delineate the tumoral region from the "healthy" with our approach. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000584.

### Keywords
Gastric cancer lc/lc/ms/ms

### Affiliations
Laboratory for proteomics and protein engineering

### Submitter
Paulo Carvalho

### Lab Head


