### Accession
PXD021222

### Title
Inhibiting coronavirus replication by chemical ER stress, including SARS-CoV-2 and MERS-CoV

### Description
Coronaviruses (CoVs) are important human pathogens for which no specific treatment is available. Here, we provide evidence that pharmacological reprogramming of ER stress pathways can be exploited to suppress CoV replication. We found that the ER stress inducer thapsigargin efficiently inhibits coronavirus (HCoV-229E, MERS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2) replication in different cell types, (partially) restores the virus-induced translational shut-down, and counteracts the CoV-mediated downregulation of IRE1α and the ER chaperone BiP. Proteome-wide data sets revealed specific pathways, protein networks and components that likely mediate the thapsigargin-induced antiviral state, including HERPUD1, an essential factor of ER quality control, and ER-associated protein degradation complexes. The data show that thapsigargin hits a central mechanism required for CoV replication, suggesting that thapsigargin (or derivatives thereof) may be developed into broad-spectrum anti-CoV drugs.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were lysed in SDS lysis buffer as described above. Prior to digestion the SDS containing solution was exchanged to 8M urea applying the FASP protocol using Microcon YM-30 filter devices (Millipore, Cat. MRCF0R030). Cysteines were alkylated with Iodoacetamide and 8M urea buffer was exchanged to 50 mM ammonium-bicarbonate buffer with a pH of 8.0. Samples were digested within the filter devices by the addition of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Serva) and incubation at 37 °C over-night. Following, the filter-units were transferred to fresh tubes. Peptides were eluted by the addition of 50 µL 0.5 M NaCl solution and centrifugation (14.000 x g for 10 min). After drying the filtrates in a vacuum concentrator (Speed Vac), pellets were resuspended in 25 µL of 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were desalted and concentrated using Chromabond C18WP spin columns (Macherey-Nagel, Part No. 730522). Finally, Peptides were dissolved in 25 µL of water with 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The mass spectrometric analysis of the samples was performed using a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics). A nanoElute HPLC system (Bruker Daltonics), equipped with an Aurora C18 RP column (25cm x 75µm) filled with 1.7 µm beads (IonOpticks) was connected online to the mass spectrometer. A portion of approximately 200 ng of peptides corresponding to 2 µL was injected directly on the separation column. Sample Loading was performed at a constant pressure of 800 bar. Separation of the tryptic peptides was achieved at 50°C column temperature with the following gradient of water/0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (solvent B) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min: Linear increase from 2%B to 17%B within 60 minutes, followed by a linear gradient to 25%B within 30 minutes and linear increase to 37% solvent B in additional 10 minutes. Finally B was increased to 95% within 10 minutes and hold for additional 10 minutes. The built-in “DDA PASEF-standard_1.1sec_cycletime” method developed by Bruker Daltonics was used for mass spectrometric measurement.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using MaxQuant with the Andromeda search engine and Uniprot databases were used for annotating and assigning protein identifiers (Tyanova et al, 2016a). Perseus software (versions 1.6.10.50 and 1.6.14.0) was used for further analyses (Tyanova et al, 2016b).  For the data shown in Fig.1, raw data from 47 LC-MS/MS runs (representing two independent experiments and three technical replicates per sample for the 3 h, 6 h, 12 h, 24 h infection time points with the exception of the MERS-CoV 24 h time point which has only five replicates) were mapped to the homo sapiens proteome (uniprot ID  UP000005640). The normalized expression values assigned to uninfected HuH7 cells were derived from a total of 59 mock samples representing multiple technical repeats of two biological samples generated at each of the 3 h, 6 h, 12 h, 24 h time points in order to generate a common reference sample for the mean protein expression found in uninfected / untreated HuH7 cells.  This mean reference was used to calculate all ratio values. From the entire data set, only protein intensity values for 166 uniprot IDs assigned to KEGG 04141 were extracted, quantile normalized and further analyzed using the software tools described below.    For the data shown in Fig. 4 and 5, raw data from 96 LC-MS/MS runs (representing two independent experiments and three technical replicates per sample) were mapped to homo sapiens (uniprot ID  UP000005640 for HuH7 cells), Chlorocebus sabaeus (Green monkey, Cercopithecus sabaeus, uniprot ID  UP000029965 for Vero E6 cells), MERS-CoV (uniprot IDs  UP000139997 and UP000171868) or SARS-CoV-2 (uniprot ID UP000464024) peptide sequences. All data sets were processed by MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 (Tyanova et al., 2016a) including the matched between runs option enabled resulting in the identification of 5,372 (from HuH7) or 5,072 (from Vero E6 cells) majority protein IDs. For further quantifications, log2-tranformed protein intensities were quantile normalized with Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016b) and IDs assigned to contaminants and reverse sequences were omitted. For calculation of ratio values between conditions, the 2 x 6 replicates from each condition were assigned to one analysis group. Differentially expressed proteins were identified from log2 transformed normalized protein intensity values by Volcano plot analysis using Perseus functions. All subsequent filtering steps and heatmap representations were performed in Excel 2016 as described in the figure legends. Venn diagrams were created with tools provided at http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/Venn/. Overrepresentation analyses were done using the gene IDs / gene names of differentially enriched proteins and Metascape software with the express settings (Zhou et al., 2019). Mapping of ratio values on KEEG pathway 04141 was done with Pathview or Pathview Web software (Luo et al, 2017).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Thapsigargin, Coronavirus, Hcov-229e, Mers-cov

### Affiliations
Head of Core Facility Mass Spectrometry, Faculty of Chemistry, Philipps-University Marburg

### Submitter
Uwe Linne

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Linne
Head of Core Facility Mass Spectrometry, Faculty of Chemistry, Philipps-University Marburg


