### Accession
PXD009484

### Title
Seedling proteome of Arabidopsis thaliana pux10-3 mutants

### Description
Lipid droplets (LD) of seedlings lacking PUX10 stay significantly smaller during germination than the LDs of wild type seedlings. The observation that the removal of a LD-associated protein from a plant affects LD morphology has been observed previously {Siloto et al., 2006}{Gidda et al., 2016}. Especially the effect of the knock-out of the major structural LD protein Oleosin1 leading to a strongly increased size of LDs described by Siloto et al. might indicate that the abundance of structural LD proteins influences the LD size. Thus, the influence of the absence of PUX10 on the abundance of these proteins was investigated via a proteomic approach. Here, proteins isolated from homogenized seedlings of different lines (Ws-4 and pux10-3) and different developmental stages (wet seeds, and 1 to 3 days after imbibition (dai)) were subjected to tryptic digest and LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
For “total extract” samples, 10 to 15 mg dry seed material per biological replicate was sterilized and imbibed for 3 days at 4 °C in the dark. Then, the seedlings were grown on half strength MS media without added for a 24 h, 48 h, and 72 h growth period. Seedlings were taken up in 1.6 mL grinding buffer (62.5 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.5], 5 % (w/v) SDS, 10 % (v/v) glycerol, 1 mM DTT [Roth], 200 µM PMSF) and ground with sand in a mortar for 3 min. Then, the homogenate was incubated for 5 min at 95 °C, transfer transferred into a 15 mL reaction tube and 96 % ethanol was added to a total volume of 15 mL. All steps were performed on ice or at 4 °C. All protein fractions were precipitated and defatted with a final concentration of 80 % ethanol and washed with 96 % ethanol. The protein pellets were redissolved in 6 M urea and 5 % (w/v) SDS. Protein concentrations were determined with a Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific‎). 20 µg of protein was run on a 12% SDS-PAGE gel until they entered into the separation gel. A single gel piece per sample containing all proteins was excised, tryptic digested and derivatised as described (Shevchenko et al., 2006). Peptides were desalted over a Supelco C18 column (Sigma-Aldrich) according to (Rappsilber et al., 2007) and then subjected to LC-MS/MS (Schmitt et al., 2017).

### Data Protocol
Protein abundance was quantified using LFQ label-free quantification algorithm implemented in the MaxQuant software {Schaab et al., 2012} using the settings as described in the meta data files (tables S38-42). The values were calculated as permille of all values in one sample. Samples of the same time point were used in the same MaxQuant process, different time points were processed separately.

### Publication Abstract
The number of known proteins associated with plant lipid droplets (LDs) is small compared with other organelles. Many aspects of LD biosynthesis and degradation are unknown, and identifying and characterizing candidate LD proteins could help elucidate these processes. Here, we analyzed the proteome of LD-enriched fractions isolated from tobacco (<i>Nicotiana tabacum</i>) pollen tubes. Proteins that were highly enriched in comparison with the total or cytosolic fraction were further tested for LD localization via transient expression in pollen tubes. One of these proteins, PLANT UBX DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN10 (PUX10), is a member of the plant UBX domain-containing (PUX) protein family. This protein localizes to LDs via a unique hydrophobic polypeptide sequence and can recruit the AAA-type ATPase CELL DIVISION CYCLE48 (CDC48) protein via its UBX domain. PUX10 is conserved in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> and expressed in embryos, pollen tubes, and seedlings. In <i>pux10</i> knockout mutants in Arabidopsis, LD size is significantly increased. Proteomic analysis of <i>pux10</i> mutants revealed a delayed degradation of known LD proteins, some of which possessed ubiquitination sites. We propose that PUX10 is involved in a protein degradation pathway at LDs, mediating an interaction between polyubiquitinated proteins targeted for degradation and downstream effectors such as CDC48.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Seedling, Lipid droplet proteins, Pux10

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Biochemistry Georg-August-Universität Göttingen Justus-von-Liebig Weg 11 37077 Göttingen Germany   Tel. +49-551-39-14430
University of Münster

### Submitter
Till Ischebeck

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Till Ischebeck
Department of Plant Biochemistry Georg-August-Universität Göttingen Justus-von-Liebig Weg 11 37077 Göttingen Germany   Tel. +49-551-39-14430


