### Accession
PXD040420

### Title
LC-MS peptide analysis of cytotoxin digested with multiple-proteolytic enzyme

### Description
In this study, multiple enzyme digestion method was used to enhance the peptide sequence coverage of cytotoxin to characterize its epitope properties. This epitope excision method exhibits no preference for either consecutive or assembled epitopes, based on the specific binding between an antibody and cytotoxin. Following the binding of cytotoxin to its respective antibody, the epitope peptide sequences were shielded from enzymatic proteolysis experiment. Thesedigested peptides were then identified by LC-MS.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, anti-cytotoxin antibody (Absolute Antibody) was diluted in the ratio of 1:5000, 1:10000, and 1:30000 and pre-incubated with cytotoxin for 2 h at room temperature. The formation of immunocomplexes was monitored. Then, the sample was reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide, followed by multiple-enzyme digestion with trypsin, chymotrypsin and lys-C. The digested peptides were then desalted using ZipTip pipette tips and vacuum-dried before LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS was carried out on Agilent 6550 iFunnel Q-TOF LC-MS coupled to Agilent 1200 LC for separation of digested peptides. Mass spectra were acquired in an MS/MS mode m/z range of 50 - 3000. The data was then processed using the Peaks X+ software, searching against the Serpentes protein database (Taxid: 8570). The identified peptides were then aligned with multiple sequence alignments using Clustal Omega

### Publication Abstract
Approximate 70% of cobra venom is composed of cytotoxin (CTX), which is responsible for the dermonecrotic symptoms of cobra envenomation. However, CTX is generally low in immunogenicity, and the antivenom is ineffective in attenuating its in vivo toxicity. Furthermore, little is known about its epitope properties for empirical antivenom therapy. This study aimed to determine the epitope sequences of CTX using the immunoinformatic analyses and epitope-omics profiling. A conserved CTX was used in this study to determine its T-cell and B-cell epitope sequences using immunoinformatic tools and molecular docking simulation with different Human Leukocyte Antigens (HLAs). The potential T-cell and B-cell epitopes were 'KLVPLFY,' 'CPAGKNLCY,' 'MFMVSTPTK,' and 'DVCPKNSLL.' Molecular docking simulations disclosed that the HLA-B62 supertype exhibited the greatest binding affinity towards cobra venom cytotoxin. The namely L7, G18, K19, N20, M25, K33, V43, C44, K46, N47, and S48 of CTX exhibited prominent intermolecular interactions with HLA-B62. The multi-enzymatic-limited-digestion/liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (MELD/LC-MS) also revealed three potential epitope sequences as 'LVPLFYK,' 'MFMVS,' and 'TVPVKR'. From different epitope mapping approaches, we concluded four potential epitope sites of CTX as 'KLVPLFYK', 'AGKNL', 'MFMVSTPKVPV' and 'DVCPKNSLL'. Site-directed mutagenesis of these epitopes confirmed their locations at the functional loops of CTX. These epitope sequences are crucial to CTX's structural folding and cytotoxicity. The results concluded the epitopes that resided within the functional loops constituted potential targets to fabricate synthetic epitopes for CTX-targeted antivenom production.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Multiple enzyme digestion, Cytotoxin

### Affiliations
Toxin Pharmacology Lab, School of Science, Monash University Malaysia, Malaysia
Monash University

### Submitter
Michelle Yap

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle Yap
Toxin Pharmacology Lab, School of Science, Monash University Malaysia, Malaysia


