### Accession
PXD040765

### Title
Allosteric activation or inhibition of PI3Kγ mediated through conformational changes in the p110γ helical domain

### Description
To provide additional insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying p110 phosphorylation we carried out hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) experiments on p110 and phosphorylated p110 (90.8% phosphorylated S594/595, 92% phosphorylated S582. When we compared phosphorylated p110 (>90.8% as measured by mass spectrometry at both sites) to unphosphorylated p110 we observed extensive increases in dynamics in the C2, helical domain and kinase domain (Fig. 4A-D). The largest increases in exchange upon phosphorylation were located in the N-terminal region of the helical domain, with the peptides directly adjacent to the phosphorylation site showing almost complete deuterium incorporation at the earliest time points of exchange. This is indicative of significant disruption of the alpha helical secondary structure in this region.

### Sample Protocol
Exchange reactions to assess differences in p110γ upon phosphorylation were carried out at 20°C in 10 µL volumes with final concentrations of 1.6 µM for both apo and phosphorylated p110γ. A total of two conditions were assessed: p110 apo and PKCβ phosphorylated p110γ. The hydrogen-deuterium exchange reaction was initiated by the addition of 8 µL D2O buffer (94.3% D2O, 100 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5) to the 2 µL protein for a final D2O concentration of 75.4%. Exchange was carried out over five time points (3s on ice, and 3s, 30s, 300s and 3000s at 20°C) and the reaction was quenched with addition of 60 µL of ice-cold acidic quench buffer (0.7 M guanidine-HCl, 1% formic acid). After quenching, samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. All reactions were carried out in triplicate.  Protein Digestion and MS/MS Data Collection: Protein samples were rapidly thawed and injected onto an integrated fluidics system containing a HDx-3 PAL liquid handling robot and climate-controlled chromatography system (LEAP Technologies), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system, as well as an Impact HD QTOF Mass spectrometer (Bruker). The protein was run over two immobilized pepsin columns (Applied Biosystems; Poroszyme™ Immobilized Pepsin Cartridge, 2.1 mm x 30 mm; Thermo-Fisher 2‐3131‐00; at 10°C and 2°C respectively) at 200 μL/min for 3 minutes. The resulting peptides were collected and desalted on a C18 trap column [Acquity UPLC BEH C18 1.7 mm column (2.1 x 5 mm); Waters 186003975]. The trap was subsequently eluted in line with an ACQUITY 1.7 µm particle, 100 x 1 mm2 C18 UPLC column (Waters 186002352), using a gradient of 3-35% B (buffer A, 0.1% formic acid; buffer B, 100% acetonitrile) over 11 min immediately followed by a gradient of 35-80% B over 5 minutes. MS experiments acquired over a mass range from 150 to 2200 mass/charge ratio (m/z) using an electrospray ionization source operated at a temperature of 200°C and a spray voltage of 4.5 kV.  For the dose–response phosphorylation of p110γ, p110/p84, and p110/p101, each protein or complex (750nM) was mixed with ATP (200 µM), GFB (20 mM Hepes [pH 7.5], 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM TCEP, and 5% glycerol), MgCl2(20mM) and various amounts of PKC (4 μg, 800 ng, 160 ng, 32 ng, 6.4 ng, and 0 ng). Reactions were incubated for three hours on ice and quenched with 50 µL of ice-cold acidic quench buffer (0.7 M guanidine-HCl, 1% formic acid). followed by immediate freezing using liquid nitrogen and storage at −80 °C.  For the experiment studying the effect of nanobody on phosphorylation, p110γ or p110/p101, (500nM) was mixed with ATP (1 mM), GFB (20 mM Hepes [pH 7.5], 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM TCEP, and 5% glycerol), MgCl2(20mM), with nanobody and PKC present at 1200 nM and 500nM, respectively. Reactions were incubated for one hour at room temperature and quenched with 54 µL of ice-cold acidic quench buffer (0.7 M guanidine-HCl, 1% formic acid) followed by immediate freezing using liquid nitrogen and storage at −80 °C.

### Data Protocol
Peptide Identification: Peptides were identified using data-dependent acquisition following tandem MS/MS experiments (0.5 s precursor scan from 150‐2000 m/z; twelve 0.25 s fragment scans from 150-2000 m/z). MS/MS datasets were analyzed using PEAKS7 (PEAKS), and a false discovery rate was set at 0.1% using a database of purified proteins and known contaminants. Same approach was used to identify phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated peptides for our in-vitro phosphorylation experiments, with variable phosphorylation of STY residues was added to the search. The search parameters were set with a precursor tolerance of 20 parts per million, fragment mass error 0.02 Da, and charge states from 1 to 8  Mass Analysis of Peptide Centroids and Measurement of Deuterium Incorporation: HD‐Examiner Software (Sierra Analytics) was used to automatically calculate the level of deuterium incorporation into each peptide. All peptides were manually inspected for correct charge state, correct retention time, and appropriate selection of isotopic distribution. Deuteration levels were calculated using the centroid of the experimental isotope clusters. HDX-MS results are presented with no correction for back exchange shown in the Source data, with the only correction being applied correcting for the deuterium oxide percentage of the buffer used in the exchange (75.4%). Changes in any peptide at any time point greater than specified cut-offs (5% and 0.45 Da) and with an unpaired, two-tailed t-test value of p<0.01 was considered significant.  Phosphorylation of all proteins was confirmed using Mass spectrometry and PEAKS7 analysis. The phosphorylated and non phosphorylated peptide ratios were determined by generating extracted ion chromatograms for each peptide using their molecular formula and charge state in the Bruker Compass Data Analysis software. The area under each extracted curve was then extracted. The full MS quantification of each of the phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated peptide is provided in the source data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Phosphorylation, Pi3k, Hdx

### Affiliations
University of Victoria

### Submitter
John Burke

### Lab Head
Dr John Burke
University of Victoria


