### Accession
PXD019873

### Title
Molecular analyses of cotton (Gossypium hirsutum) identifies differential sensitivity to heat during stages of pollen development

### Description
Heatwaves resulting from global warming are a leading threat to plants because they specifically impair reproductive (gametophytic) development. We investigated pollen development using proteomics after exposure to heat (38/28 °C; day/night). Sampling enabled the identification of the impact of heat on gene products in tetrads (immediately post-meiosis), uninucleate and binucleate microspores (early mitosis), and mature pollen. A library consisting of 5257 G. hirsutum proteins was constructed using SWATH-MS, which led to quantification of 4501 proteins at the four distinct stages. Data analysis revealed that 880, 360, 307 and 166 proteins were differentially expressed when the tetrad, uninucleate, binucleate and mature pollen stages, respectively, were subjected to heat. Surprisingly, most of these DEPs were identified only at a single developmental stage, indicating translation of stage-specific proteins in response to heat. Especially, high numbers of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified in tetrads compared with the late developmental stages; these were mainly associated with protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum, oxidative phosphorylation, spliceosome, cytoskeletal response, chaperones and folding catalysts, carbon metabolism and membrane trafficking. We conclude that protein synthesis in tetrad cells responded acutely to heat by supplying cellular components that enable subsequent mitosis and structural changes in the haploid germ cells leading the mature pollen. We hypothesise that fewer DEPs at the later stages might reflect a lower sensitivity to high temperatures. Identifying the stage-specific proteins will lead to the identity of key heat-responsive genes and new genetic tools for improved resilience of all seed and fruit-based crops as climates keep warming.

### Sample Protocol
About 20 mg of pollen grains were ground into fine powder using a TissueLyser II (12090 Retsch, Qiagen), 5-6 Zirconox beads (2.8 to 3.3 mm) and liquid nitrogen. A phenol-based protocol was used for protein extraction. Proteins from each replicate were digested in-solution. Samples were desalted using 47-mm SDB-RPS disks (3MTM, USA). To increase the number of peptide identifications, a small fraction of all samples were pooled and fractionated using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) following manufacturer's instructions. To build a spectral library, nanoflow LC-MS/MS was performed using a Triple TOF 6600 mass spectrometer (Sciex, USA) equipped with an Eksigent nanoLC 400 liquid chromatography system (Sciex, USA) and nanoflex cHiPLC module (Sciex, USA).

### Data Protocol
Data generated in the DDA mode were processed using the Paragon algorithm (Sciex, USA) in ProteinPilotTM (Version 5.0, Sciex, USA) following biological modifications, thorough ID mode, unused cut-off score of 1.3 (95% confidence) and false discovery rate (FDR) analysis. MS/MS spectra from the DDA run were searched against the G. hirsutum UniProtKB database released on September 2019. ProteinPilotTM DDA search results were imported into PeakView (version 2.2, Sciex, USA) and used as a spectral library.

### Publication Abstract
Reproductive performance in plants is impaired as maximum temperatures consistently approach 40&#xb0;C. However, the timing of heatwaves critically affects their impact. We studied the molecular responses during pollen maturation in cotton to investigate the vulnerability to high temperature. Tetrads (TEs), uninucleate and binucleate microspores, and mature pollen were subjected to SWATH-MS and RNA-seq analyses after exposure to 38/28&#xb0;C (day/night) for 5&#x2009;days. The results indicated that molecular signatures were downregulated progressively in response to heat during pollen development. This was even more evident in leaves, where three-quarters of differentially changed proteins decreased in abundance during heat. Functional analysis showed that translation of genes increased in TEs after exposure to heat; however, the reverse pattern was observed in mature pollen and leaves. For example, proteins involved in transport were highly abundant in TEs whereas in later stages of pollen formation and leaves, heat suppressed synthesis of proteins involved in cell-to-cell communication. Moreover, a large number of heat shock proteins were identified in heat-affected TEs, but these proteins were less abundant in mature pollen and leaves. We speculate that the sensitivity of TE cells to heat is related to high rates of translation targeted to pathways that might not be essential for thermotolerance. Molecular signatures during stages of pollen development after heatwaves could provide markers for future genetic improvement.

### Keywords
Binucleate microspores, Uninucleate microspores, Swath, Heat stress, Anthesis, Cotton, Tetrads

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences at Macquarie University
Macquarie University

### Submitter
Farhad Masoomi-Aladizgeh

### Lab Head
Dr Brian J. Atwell
Department of Biological Sciences at Macquarie University


