### Accession
PXD016398

### Title
Impact of Zika Virus on the Human Type I Interferon Osteoimmune Response

### Description
Background: The developing field of osteoimmunology supports importance of an interferon(IFN) response pathway in osteoblasts. Clarifying osteoblast-IFN interactions is important because IFN is used as salvage anti-tumor therapy but systemic toxicity is high with variable clinical results. In addition, osteoblast response to systemic bursts and disruptions of IFN pathways induced by viral infection may influence bone remodeling. ZIKA virus(ZIKV) infection impacts bone development in humans and IFN response in vitro. Consistently, initial evidence of permissivity to ZIKV has been reported in human osteoblasts. Hypothesis: Osteoblast-like Saos-2 cells are permissive to ZIKV and responsive to IFN. Methods: Multiple approaches were used to assess whether Saos-2 cells are permissive to ZIKV infection and exhibit IFN-mediated ZIKV suppression. Proteomic methods were used to evaluate impact of ZIKV and IFN on Saos-2 cells.  Results: Evidence is presented confirming Saos-2 cells are permissive to ZIKV and support IFN-mediated suppression of ZIKV. ZIKV and IFN differentially impact the Saos-2 proteome. Both ZIKV and IFN suppress proteins associated with microcephaly/pseudo-TORCH syndrome (BI1, KIF20 and UBP18), and ZIKV induces potential entry factor PLVAP. Conclusions: Transient ZIKV infection influences osteoimmune state, and IFN and ZIKV activate distinct proteomes in Saos-2 cells, which could inform therapeutic, engineered, disruptions.

### Sample Protocol
Four 10cm dishes of osteoblasts were plated at 60-80% confluence in 10ml McCoy’s medium with 10% FBS. The following day, mock treatment or IFN (1,600 IU / ml) was administered directly into medium, without change of medium. Six hours later, 1.2 ml of mock (EMEM with 2% FBS) or 1.2 of ZIKV was added to medium for MOI of 1. Samples were labeled mock / mock, IFN / mock, mock / ZIKV, or IFN / ZIKV, according to treatment / infection status. Cells were then incubated for 48h. After 48h, supernatant was discarded, and cells were rinsed once with 1x sterile PBS. PBS was removed, followed by addition of SDS lysis buffer (2% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.7) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Lysate was then pipetted onto QIAshredder filter and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 1 minute, room temperature. Filtrate was collected and placed into microfuge tube followed by storage at -80˚C. Disulfide reduction was performed by adding dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 5 mM and heating to 37oC for 1 hour, followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 15 mM and incubation at room temperature in the dark for 30 minutes and quenching with DTT. Protein concentration was determined using a Micro BCA Protein Assay Kit. For each sample, an aliquot corresponding to 150 µg of total protein was withdrawn. Detergent was removed by methanol / chloroform protein precipitation. Precipitates were solubilized in freshly prepared 8M urea in 20 mM EPPS, pH 8.5 and 60 µg of solubilized total protein from each sample was then used for TMT labelling.  Following a 10 min incubation at 37oC, the urea concentration was diluted with 20 mM EPPS to 2M final concentration and digestion was performed by overnight incubation at room temperature in the presence of Lys-C protease at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:75.  Following further dilution of the sample with 20 mM EPPS to a final urea concentration of 0.8 M, further digestion was performed by incubation at 37oC for 6 hours with trypsin at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:75.  The missed cleavage rate was determined by LC-MS/MS. 1 µg of total protein was withdrawn from each sample and combined into a single sample. Only samples with a missed cleavage rate <10% were processed further.  Equal amounts of protein were removed from each sample and labelled using a TMT11plex Mass Tag Labelling Kit. TMT labelling efficiency and ratio checks were measured by LC-MS3 analysis of a combined 11-plex sample after combining equal volumes (about 1 µg) from each sample. Equal amounts of labelled peptide from each sample (as judged from ratio check data) were then combined for subsequent analysis. Quenching of TMT labelling reactions was performed by adding hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) and incubating samples for 10 minutes at room temperature.  Formic acid (FA) was added to a final volume of 2% (v/v) to lower the pH below 3.0 and samples were combined and de-salted using a Sep-Pak tC18 Vac RC Cartridge.  HPLC fractionation was performed using an Agilent 1200 Series instrument with a flow rate of 600 µl/minute over a period of 75 minutes.  Peptides were collected in a 96-well plate over a 65 min-gradient of 13-44 %B with Buffer A comprising 5% acetonitrile, 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8 and Buffer B comprising 90% acetonitrile,10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8. Fractions were then pooled into 24 samples, followed by sample clean-up using the Stage Tip protocol. This protocol uses C18 EmporeTM Extraction Disks. The matrix was primed with methanol and equilibrated with 70% acetonitrile, 1% FA followed by washing twice with 1% FA, loading the sample in 1% FA, followed once again by two 1% FA washes, and finally peptide elution using 70% acetonitrile, 1% FA.  Samples were dried before resuspension in MS Loading Buffer (3% acetonitrile, 5% FA).  Peptides were injected onto a 30 cm, 100 µm (internal diameter) column and separated using an EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC. The flow rate was 450 nl/min with a gradient of 6-28%B over 170 minutes with Buffer A comprising 3% acetonitrile, 0.4% FA and Buffer B comprising 100% acetonitrile, 0.4% FA.  The column was packed with 1.8 µm C18 beads with a pore size of 12 nm heated to 60oC using a column heater (constructed in-house). Samples from the HPLC were injected into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid MS using a multi-notch MS3 method. MS scans were performed in the Orbitrap over a scan range of 400-1400 m/z with dynamic exclusion.  The top 10 ions with charge states from 2 to 6 were selected for MS/MS. Rapid rate scans were performed in the Ion Trap with a collision energy of 35% and a maximum injection time of 120 ms.  TMT quantification was performed using SPS-MS3 in the Orbitrap with a scan range of 100-1000 m/z and an HCD collision energy of 55%.  Orbitrap resolution was 50,000 (dimensionless units) with a maximum injection time of 120 ms. MS isolation windows were varied depending on the charge state.

### Data Protocol
A compilation of commercially available software was used to convert mass spectrometric data (Thermo “.RAW” files) to mzXML format and to correct monoisotopic m/z measurements and erroneous peptide charge state assignments. Assignment of MS/MS spectra was performed using Sequest [86] (version 28 (rev.12) (http://fields.scripps.edu/yates/wp/?page_id=17)) based software against a size-sorted forward and reverse database of the human proteome, Human UniProt database (downloaded February 2014) with added sequences for ZIKV (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/KX520666) and common contaminant proteins. The database search included reversed protein sequences and known contaminants such as human keratins which were excluded for subsequent analyses. Searches were performed using a mass tolerance of 50 ppm for precursors, fragment ion tolerance 0.9 Da. This wide mass tolerance maximizes sensitivity in conjunction with SEQUEST searches and linear discriminant analysis. For the searches maximally 2 missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. We searched dynamically for oxidized methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) and applied a target decoy database strategy and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% set for peptide-spectrum matches following filtering by linear discriminant analysis (LDA) and a final collapsed protein-level FDR of 1%. Quantitative information on peptides was derived from MS scans. Quant tables were generated requiring an MS isolation specificity of >65% for each peptide and a sum of TMT s/n of >150 over all channels for any given peptide and exported to Excel and further processed therein. Details of the TMT intensity quantification method and further search parameters applied were described recently [87].  Linear discriminant analysis was used to distinguish forward and reverse hits [88]. Peptides were identified using an MS spectrum and a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% was achieved by applying the target-decoy database search strategy. Filtering was performed as described previously [85]. Variable extents of modification including the presence of oxidized methionine and over-labelling of TMT on serine, threonine and tyrosine [89] were considered during peptide assignment for whole-protein experiments. For protein identification and quantification, shared peptides were collapsed into the minimally sufficient number of proteins using rules of parsimony. Peptides with a total TMT value of > 200 and an isolation specificity of > 0.7 were included for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Helz2, Interferon effector, Osteoblast, Osteoimmunology, Interferon, Zika virus, Lumos

### Affiliations
Assistant Professor of Medicine Department of Medicine  Tulane University School of Medicine 1430 Tulane Avenue, New Orleans, LA,70114
Center for Protein Degradation/Dana-Farber Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Matthew Berberich

### Lab Head
Dr Dahlene N. Fusco MD PhD
Assistant Professor of Medicine Department of Medicine  Tulane University School of Medicine 1430 Tulane Avenue, New Orleans, LA,70114


