### Accession
PXD006871

### Title
Thyroid-associated orbitopathy and tears: a proteomics study

### Description
Thyroid-Associated Orbitopathy (TAO) is an autoimmune inflammatory disease that affects the eye. To date, this pathology is not very well characterised and the diagnosis remains sometimes quite challenging. The aim of this study was to try to discover in tears of TAO patients some potential biomarkers for TAO. Two TMT experiments were done in order to highlight some potential biomarkers for this disease.

### Sample Protocol
Two independent quantitative Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-6 experiments were done. After liquid digestion and isoelectric fractionation (off-gel electrophoresis), the 12 fractions were analysed with a Q Exactive™ Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a liquid chromatography. Raw files were searched against Swiss-Prot-AC database using Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.1.0.81, Homo sapiens taxonomy), with a false discovery rate of 1% at peptide and protein levels.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against Swiss-Prot-AC database using Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.1.0.81, Homo sapiens taxonomy), with a false discovery rate of 1% at peptide and protein levels. Trypsin was selected with 1 miss cleavage. The precursor mass tolerance and the fragment mass tolerance were 10 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively. The fixed modifications were carbamidomethyl on cysteine residues (57.02 Da) and TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (229.16 Da) while the dynamic modification was oxidation on methionine residues (15.99 Da). Target False Discovery Rate (FDR) for PSMs, peptides and proteins were set at 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed). minimum lenght of 6 amino acids

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Orbitrap velos pro, Off-gel electrophoresis, Lc-msms, Thyroid-associated orbitopathy, Tandem mass tag, Gaz- phase fractionation, Tears

### Affiliations
OPTICS group, Departement de Science des Protéines Humaines, Rue Michel Servet-1, 1206 Geneva, Switzerland
UNIGE

### Submitter
Marianne Dor

### Lab Head
Dr Natacha Turck
OPTICS group, Departement de Science des Protéines Humaines, Rue Michel Servet-1, 1206 Geneva, Switzerland


