### Accession
PXD008496

### Title
Differential proteomics of Desulfurella amilsii to explore sulfur reductive metabolism

### Description
Desulfurella amilsii is an acidotolerant sulfur-reducing bacterium isolated from sediments of an acidic river. It can grow in a broad range of pH and can obtain energy via respiring elemental sulfur or thiosulfate, as well as by disproportionating elemental sulfur. Its genome encodes the enzyme sulfur reductase, and several rhodanese-like proteins, possibly playing a role in sulfur respiration and disproportionation. Thiosulfate reductase and dissimilatory sulfite reductase are encoded and might play a role during the respiration of thiosulfate. The involvement of these enzymes in the reductive routes of sulfur metabolism is not yet clearly understood. Desulfurella amilsii was used in this study to combine strategies for sulfur metabolism research on the protein level to shed some light on the pathways involved in the metabolism of this microorganism.

### Sample Protocol
D. amilsii cells were grown to the late exponential phase in 500-mL anoxic medium at pH 3.5 or 6.5 in triplicates using different electron donors (e.g. H2  or acetate) and electron acceptors (e.g. elemental sulfur or thiosulfate). Cells were centrifuged, washed and resuspended in 0.5 mL 50 mM DTT + 4% (w/v) SDS in 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6) and 100 µM of phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride. Cells were disrupted by sonification. 15 µg Protein was loaded on a protein gel, run shortly and stained with Coomassie PageBlue. Proteins were reduced, and carbamidomethylated and each sample was divided into 3 slices which were cut and digested with trypsin. Peptides were measured by nLC – LTQ-OrbitrapXL MSMS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.5.2.8) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Many questions regarding proteins involved in microbial sulfur metabolism remain unsolved. For sulfur respiration at low pH, the terminal electron acceptor is still unclear. Desulfurella amilsii is a sulfur-reducing bacterium that respires elemental sulfur (S<sup>0</sup> ) or thiosulfate, and grows by S<sup>0</sup> disproportionation. Due to its versatility, comparative studies on D. amilsii may shed light on microbial sulfur metabolism. Requirement of physical contact between cells and S<sup>0</sup> was analyzed. Sulfide production decreased by around 50% when S<sup>0</sup> was trapped in dialysis membranes, suggesting that contact between cells and S<sup>0</sup> is beneficial, but not strictly needed. Proteome analysis was performed under the aforementioned conditions. A Mo-oxidoreductase suggested from genome analysis to act as sulfur reductase was not detected in any growth condition. Thiosulfate and sulfite reductases showed increased abundance in thiosulfate-reducing cultures, while rhodanese-like sulfurtransferases were highly abundant in all conditions. DsrE and DsrL were abundantly detected during thiosulfate reduction, suggesting a modified mechanism of sulfite reduction. Proteogenomics suggest a different disproportionation pathway from what has been reported. This work points to an important role of rhodaneses in sulfur processes and these proteins should be considered in searches for sulfur metabolism in broader fields like meta-omics.

### Keywords
Rhodanese-like protein, Sulfur reduction, Disproportionation, Thiosulfate reduction, Sulfur reductase, Desulfurella amilsii

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


