### Accession
PXD015432

### Title
Neuronal interactome changes upon aggregation of Tau

### Description
To understand at molecular level how aggregation of Tau modulates its interactions with proteins we reveal key determinant for derailing Tau protein network. By performing quantitative AP-MS we define a new set of interactors which bind Tau upon fibril formation. These interactors contain disordered regions with a unique amino acidic footprint. Such regions are enriched in positively charged Arginines which can engage aberrant binding to Tau fibrils through their guanidinium group via pi-stacking. We also find that the Hsp90 chaperone stalls formation of Tau fibrils and reshapes their abnormal interactome.

### Sample Protocol
Tau-RD* monomers, oligomers or fibrils (37 µM monomeric concentration, with or without 37 µM Hsp90, depending on the experiment) were incubated for 1h at 4°C with FLAG beads (Sigma) previously blocked in chicken egg albumin (Sigma). Beads were then separated using a magnet (Dynal, Invitrogen) and washed three times with aggregation buffer to remove unbound Tau-RD* and excess of albumin. Beads conjugated with the Tau-RD* aggregated proteins were then incubated with brain extracts for 1h at 4°C. Beads were then washed in washing buffer (20 mM Tris HCl, 150 mM KCl, 0.1% TritonX-100) for five times to remove aspecific neuronal proteins. For MS analysis, beads were then resuspended in 15 μl of 4x Laemmli Sample buffer (Biorad), boiled at 99ºC for 10 min and supernatants were loaded on 4-12% Criterion XT Bis-Tris precast gel (Biorad). The gel was fixed with 40% methanol and 10% acetic acid and then stained for 1h using colloidal coomassie dye G-250 (Gel Code Blue Stain, Thermo Scientific). Briefly, each lane from the gel was cut into three pieces and placed in 1.5 ml tubes. They were washed with 250 μl of water, followed by 15 min dehydration in acetonitrile. Proteins were reduced (10 mM DTT, 1 h at 56°C), dehydrated and alkylated (55 mM iodoacetamide, 1 h in the dark). After two rounds of dehydration, trypsin was added to the samples (20 μl of 0.1 g l-1 trypsin in 50 mM Ammoniumbicarbonate) and incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted with acetonitrile, dried down and reconstituted in 10% formic acid prior to MS analysis. All samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer plus or on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Agilent 1290 Infinity LC (Agilent Technologies). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Reprosil pur C18, Dr. Maisch, 100 µm x 2 cm, 3 µm; constructed in-house) with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) at a maximum pressure of 800 bar and chromatographically separated over the analytical column (Poroshell 120 EC C18, Agilent Technologies, 100 µm x 50 cm, 2.7 µm) using 90 min linear gradient from 7-30% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 150 nl min-1. The mass spectrometers were used in a data-dependent mode, which automatically switched between MS and MS/MS. After a survey scan from 375-1600 m/z the 10 or 12 most abundant peptides were subjected to HCD fragmentation. MS spectra were acquired with a resolution > 30.000, whereas MS2 with a resolution > 17.500.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to *.mgf files using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Database search was performed using the Uniprot rat database and Mascot (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, UK) as the search engine. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was set as cleavage specificity, allowing a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Data filtering was performed using a percolator {{3489 Kall 2007;}}, resulting in 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Additional filters were search engine rank 1 and mascot ion score >20. To infer protein abundancy of each individual protein co-purified with Tau-RD*, we relied on total numbers of PSMs; PSMs of each identified protein were then normalized on the PSMs of the purified Tau-RD* in each condition. Ratios were then calculated between normalized PSMs of the protein co-purified with Tau-RD* at different time point of aggregation and normalized PSMs of the same protein at the first time point (Tau aggregation experiments) or between normalized PSMs of samples with Hsp90 and their relative controls (Hsp90 experiment). Ratios were then transformed into log2. In parallel, raw spectra from the time-course experiments and from the hsp90 experiments were also analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0). Database search was performed using the Uniprot rat database. Carbamidomethyl of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was set as a proteolytic enzyme, allowing a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. PSM FDR and protein FDR were set at 0.01. Reverse and potential contaminant hits were removed. To infer protein abundancy of each individual protein co-purified with Tau-RD*, protein group intensities were used for the quantification. Intensities were then normalized on the Intensity of the purified Tau-RD* in each condition. Missing values were replaced with a constant value corresponding to the minimum intensity measured in each single replicate. Normalized intensities were then logarithmically transformed (log2). Differences were calculated from intensity at each time point against its intensity at the first time point (Tau aggregation experiments) or differences are calculated between Intensity in samples with Hsp90 with their relative controls (Hsp90 experiments).

### Publication Abstract
Aggregation of the Tau protein into fibrils defines progression of neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's Disease. The molecular basis for potentially toxic reactions of Tau aggregates is poorly understood. Here we show that &#x3c0;-stacking by Arginine side-chains drives protein binding to Tau fibrils. We mapped an aggregation-dependent interaction pattern of Tau. Fibrils recruit specifically aberrant interactors characterised by intrinsically disordered regions of atypical sequence features. Arginine residues are key to initiate these aberrant interactions. Crucial for scavenging is the guanidinium group of its side chain, not its charge, indicating a key role of &#x3c0;-stacking chemistry for driving aberrant fibril interactions. Remarkably, despite the non-hydrophobic interaction mode, the molecular chaperone Hsp90 can modulate aberrant fibril binding. Together, our data present a molecular mode of action for derailment of protein-protein interaction by neurotoxic fibrils.

### Keywords
Hsp90, Protein aggregation, Molecular chaperones, Fibrils, Tau, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
Cell Biology, Faculty of Science, Utrecht University
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Riccardo Stucchi

### Lab Head
Dr Casper Hoogenraad
Cell Biology, Faculty of Science, Utrecht University


