### Accession
PXD023975

### Title
Proteome remodeling in the Mycobacterium tuberculosis PknG knockout: molecular hints for the role of this kinase in cell envelope biogenesis and hypoxia.

### Description
Tuberculosis, a pulmonary disease caused by the etiological agent Mycobacterium tuberculosis, is the leading cause of death by a single infectious agent among human beings. One of M. tuberculosis's pathogenic hallmarks is its ability to persist in a dormant state in the host for long periods, reinitiating the infectious cycle when favorable environmental conditions are found. Thus, it is not surprising that this pathogen has developed different mechanisms to withstand the stressful conditions found in the host. In particular, the Ser/Thr protein kinase PknG has gained special relevance since it regulates nitrogen metabolism and facilitates bacterial survival inside macrophages. Nevertheless, the molecular mechanisms underlying these effects are far from being elucidated. To further investigate these issues, we performed quantitative proteomics analyses of protein extracts from M. tuberculosis H37Rv and a mutant derivative lacking PknG. Our results show that in the absence of PknG the mycobacterial proteome was remodeled since 6.5% of the proteins encoded by M. tuberculosis presented significant changes in its relative abundance when compared to the wild-type strain. The main biological processes affected by PknG deletion were the biosynthesis of cell envelope components and the response to hypoxic conditions. Altogether, the results presented here allow us to postulate that PknG regulation of bacterial fitness to stress conditions in host macrophages might be an essential mechanism underlying its reported effect on intracellular bacterial survival.

### Sample Protocol
For discovery proteomics: Total protein extracts (20 ug) from WT and DpknG samples (in triplicates) were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56 °C for 60 min and then alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 45 min. The samples were separated by SDS-PAGE using pre-cast 4%-12% gradient gels (NuPAGE, MES System, Invitrogen) and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250. Each lane was excised into ten slices that were destained by incubation with 0.2 M ammonium bicarbonate/ACN (1:1) for 1 h at room temperature with agitation. In-gel proteolytic digestion and peptide extraction were performed as described. Peptide samples were vacuum dried, resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and injected into a nano-HPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a reverse-phase column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm × 75 µm ID, PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, Thermo Scientific). Peptides separation was performed at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min and using a gradient from 0% to 50% of mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 0.1% formic acid, mobile phase B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 100 min. Peptide analysis was performed in an LTQ Velos nano-ESI linear ion trap equipment (Thermo Scientific) in a data-dependent acquisition mode. Xcalibur 2.1 was used for data acquisition in two steps: 1. acquisition of full MS scan in the positive ion mode with m/z between 300 and 1800 Da, 2. sequential fragmentation of the ten most intense ions with a normalized collision energy of 35, an isolation width of 2. The activation Q was set on 0.25, the activation time on 15 ms, and a dynamic exclusion time of 30 s. Standard MS source parameters were set as follows: 2.3 kV electrospray voltage and 260 °C capillary temperature.

### Data Protocol
For Discovery Proteomics: PatternLab for Proteomics (version 4.0.0.74) was employed to generate a target-decoy database using sequences from M. tuberculosis H37Rv (taxon identifier: 83332; 3993 sequences) downloaded from the Uniprot consortium in October, 2017. In addition, 127 common mass spectrometry contaminants were included giving rise a target-reverse database with 8228 entries. The Comet search engine was operated using the following parameters: trypsin as proteolytic enzyme with full specificity; oxidation of Met and phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, and Tyr as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation of Cys as fixed modification; and 800 ppm of tolerance from the measured precursor m/z. XCorr and Z-Score were used as the primary and secondary search engine scores, respectively.  Peptide spectrum matches were filtered using the Search Engine Processor (SEPro) and acceptable false discovery rate (FDR) criteria were set on ≤ 1% at the protein level and ≤ 2% at the peptide level. PatternLab’s statistical model for the Approximately Area Proportional Venn Diagram module was used to compare conditions and determine proteins that are likely to be exclusively detected in each situation due to differences in its abundance (p-value < 0.05). The Bayesian model integrated into PatternLab for Proteomics considers quantitative data and the number of appearances in different biological replicates to assign p-values. PatternLab’s T-Fold module was used to detect proteins present in both conditions at significantly different levels by spectral count analysis. Buzios module and Clustergram module were used to perform a Principal Component Analysis and a Heatmap, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the etiological agent of tuberculosis, is among the deadliest human pathogens. One of M. tuberculosis's pathogenic hallmarks is its ability to persist in a dormant state in the host. Thus, this pathogen has developed mechanisms to withstand stressful conditions found in the human host. Particularly, the Ser/Thr-protein kinase PknG has gained relevance since it regulates nitrogen metabolism and facilitates bacterial survival inside macrophages. Nevertheless, the molecular mechanisms underlying these effects are far from being elucidated. To further investigate these issues, we performed quantitative proteomic analyses of protein extracts from M. tuberculosis H37Rv and a mutant lacking pknG. We found that in the absence of PknG the mycobacterial proteome was remodeled since 5.7% of the proteins encoded by M. tuberculosis presented significant changes in its relative abundance compared with the wild-type. The main biological processes affected by pknG deletion were cell envelope components biosynthesis and response to hypoxia. Thirteen DosR-regulated proteins were underrepresented in the pknG deletion mutant, including Hrp-1, which was 12.5-fold decreased according to Parallel Reaction Monitoring experiments. Altogether, our results allow us to postulate that PknG regulation of bacterial adaptation to stress conditions might be an important mechanism underlying its reported effect on intracellular bacterial survival. SIGNIFICANCE: PknG is a Ser/Thr kinase from Mycobacterium tuberculosis with key roles in bacterial metabolism and bacterial survival within the host. However, at present the molecular mechanisms underlying these functions remain largely unknown. In this work, we evaluate the effect of pknG deletion on M. tuberculosis proteome using different approaches. Our results clearly show that the global proteome was remodeled in the absence of PknG and shed light on new molecular mechanism underlying PknG role. Altogether, this work contributes to a better understanding of the molecular bases of the adaptation of M. tuberculosis, one of the most deadly human pathogens, to its host.

### Keywords
Pkng, Serine/threonine protein kinase, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Hrp-1, Hypoxia, Msl3, Parallel reaction monitoring, Shotgun proteomics, Mas

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur de Montevideo, Proteomic and Analytical Biochemistry Unit
Institut Pasteur de Montevideo & Insituto de Investigaciones Biológicas Clemente Estable, Analytical Biochemistry and Proteomics Unit, Montevideo, Uruguay

### Submitter
Analía Lima

### Lab Head
Dr Rosario Durán
Institut Pasteur de Montevideo & Insituto de Investigaciones Biológicas Clemente Estable, Analytical Biochemistry and Proteomics Unit, Montevideo, Uruguay


