### Accession
PXD005335

### Title
ATPase activity in Plasmodium falciparum asexual blood stages and gametocytes

### Description
Characterization of ATPase activity associated with gametocytogenesis in P. falciparum

### Sample Protocol
Samples were labeled with ATP-ABP probe, enriched, digested with trypsin, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MSGF+ using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline

### Publication Abstract
Effective malaria control and elimination in hyperendemic areas of the world will require treatment of the <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> (<i>Pf</i>) blood stage that causes disease as well as the gametocyte stage that is required for transmission from humans to the mosquito vector. Most currently used therapies do not kill gametocytes, a highly specialized, non-replicating sexual parasite stage. Further confounding next generation drug development against <i>Pf</i> is the unknown metabolic state of the gametocyte and the lack of known biochemical activity for most parasite gene products in general. Here, we take a systematic activity-based proteomics approach to survey the activity of the large and druggable ATPase family in replicating blood stage asexual parasites and transmissible, non-replicating sexual gametocytes. ATPase activity broadly changes during the transition from asexual schizonts to sexual gametocytes, indicating altered metabolism and regulatory roles of ATPases specific for each lifecycle stage. We further experimentally confirm existing annotation and predict ATPase function for 38 uncharacterized proteins. By mapping the activity of ATPases associated with gametocytogenesis, we assign biochemical activity to a large number of uncharacterized proteins and identify new candidate transmission blocking targets.

### Keywords
Activity-based proteomics, Malaria, Atpase

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, USA
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Aaron Wright
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, USA


