### Accession
PXD038153

### Title
Hierarchical antagonistic regulatory elements in the TRPV4 intrinsically disordered N-terminus modulate lipid binding and channel activity through transient long-range interactions

### Description
Intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) are important for the functional regulation of membrane receptors. Among the TRP Vanilloid channels involved in thermo- and osmosensation, TRPV4 features the largest N-terminal IDR of ~150 residues. Here, we elucidate the structural ensemble of the TRPV4 IDR through an integrated structural biology approach. Novel structural and functional properties can be assigned to distinct IDR regions. Along the length of the entire IDR, a hierarchical interaction network of structurally and functionally coupled antagonistic regulatory modules can be mapped. Long-range transient crosstalk between these regulatory elements mediates channel responses to osmotic stimuli. Most notably, a highly conserved regulatory patch in the N-terminal IDR asserts dominant negative control over lipid binding and channel activity by acting on a sensitizing PIP2 binding site in the C-terminal IDR. This work demonstrates the importance of IDRs and “IDR cartography” for understanding TRP channel function and regulation.

### Sample Protocol
For structural analysis, 100 μg of purified protein were crosslinked by addition of DSS-H12/D12 (Creative Molecules) at a ratio of 1.5 nmol / 1 µg protein and gentle shaking for 2 h at 4 °C. The reaction was performed at a protein concentration of 1 mg/mL in 20 mM HEPES pH 7, 300 mM NaCl. After quenching by addition of ammonium bicarbonate (AB) to a final concentration of 50 mM, samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Then, proteins were denatured by resuspension in 8M urea, reduced with 2.5 mM Tris(2-carboxylethyl)-phosphine (TCEP) at 37 °C for 30 min and alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. After dilution to 1 M urea using 50 mM AB, 2 µg trypsin (protein:enzyme ratio 50:1; Promega) were added and proteins were digested at 37 °C for 18 h. The resulting peptides were desalted by C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters), then crosslinked peptides were enriched by size exclusion chromatography (Superdex 20 Increase 3.2/300, cytiva) prior to liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). MS measurement was performed in data-dependent mode with a cycle time of 3 s. The full scan was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000, a scan range of 400-1500 m/z, AGC Target 2.0e5 and an injection time of 50 ms. Monoisotopic precursor selection and dynamic exclusion for 30 s were enabled. Precursor ions with charge states of 3-8 and minimum intensity of 5e3 were selected for fragmentation by CID using 35 % activation energy. MS2 was done in the Ion Trap in rapid scan range mode, AGC target 1.0e4 and a dynamic injection time. All experiments were performed in biological triplicates and samples were measured in technical duplicates.

### Data Protocol
Crosslink analysis was done with the xQuest/xProphet pipeline (Leitner et al., 2014 ) in ion-tag mode with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm. For matching of fragment ions, tolerances of 0.2 Da for common ions and 0.3 Da for crosslink ions were applied. Crosslinks were only considered for further analyses if they were identified in at least 2 of 3 biological replicates with deltaS < 0.95 and at least one ld score ≥ 25.

### Publication Abstract
Intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) are essential for membrane receptor regulation but often remain unresolved in structural studies. TRPV4, a member of the TRP vanilloid channel family involved in thermo- and osmosensation, has a large N-terminal IDR of approximately 150 amino acids. With an integrated structural biology approach, we analyze the structural ensemble of the TRPV4 IDR and the network of antagonistic regulatory elements it encodes. These modulate channel activity in a hierarchical lipid-dependent manner through transient long-range interactions. A highly conserved autoinhibitory patch acts as a master regulator by competing with PIP<sub>2</sub> binding to attenuate channel activity. Molecular dynamics simulations show that loss of the interaction between the PIP<sub>2</sub>-binding site and the membrane reduces the force exerted by the IDR on the structured core of TRPV4. This work demonstrates that IDR structural dynamics are coupled to TRPV4 activity and highlights the importance of IDRs for TRP channel function and regulation.

### Keywords
Pip2 binding, Integrated structural biology, Trp channel, Long-range communication, Intrinsically disordered protein

### Affiliations
Universität Konstanz
Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Universitätsstraße 10, 78457 Konstanz, Germany

### Submitter
Florian Stengel

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Stengel
Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Universitätsstraße 10, 78457 Konstanz, Germany


