### Accession
PXD024784

### Title
Radiation resistance comparable to natural extremophiles achieved through experimental evolution

### Description
Recent human exploitation of high-level sources of ionizing radiation (IR) has generated a corresponding need to understand the effects of IR on living systems. Part of that research has focused on the astonishing capacity of some organisms to survive extraordinary levels of IR exposure. Using experimental evolution, we have generated populations of Escherichia coli with an IR resistance phenotype comparable to the extremophile Deinococcus radiodurans. Every aspect of cell physiology is affected. Cellular isolates exhibit approximately 1,000 base pair changes plus major genomic and proteomic alterations. The extreme IR resistance phenotype, stable without selection for at least 100 generations, has no single molecular origin. Defined and probable contributions include alterations in cellular systems involved in DNA repair, amelioration of reactive oxygen species, Fe metabolism and repair of iron-sulfur centers, DNA packaging, intermediary metabolism, and more. Some contributions to IR resistance are highly dependent on both genomic and environmental context.

### Sample Protocol
Irradiated (3000 Gy) and untreated (0 Gy) samples were lysed by addition SDS to a final concentration of 2.0%, then immediately subjected to protein extraction and concentration using a standard methanol:chloroform protocol. Purified protein pellets were solubilized in 8M urea with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC) and subjected to a standard BCA assay to determine protein concentration. For each of the samples, 10µg (varying volumes) of each was diluted to 4M urea with 50mM AMBIC and treated with 2mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 50 °C, 5mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in darkness, and then 2mM dithiothreitol for 5 min at room temperature. Samples were diluted further to 1M urea with TEAB, and 0.05µg of Trypsin and Lys-C proteases were each added (final protease mass:protein mass of 1:100) . Samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C, for 15hr total. Digestions were stopped with addition of neat formic acid to 1.0%, subjected to solid phase cleanup using Agilent C18 OMIX tips (Agilent Technologies; Santa Clara, CA) according to manufacturer’s protocol, and dried down to completion using a vacuum centrifuge.Samples were injected for analysis using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher; Walthan, MA) onto an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher; Waltham, MA). A 75µm x 50cm Pepmap RSLC column (Thermo Fisher; Waltham, MA) packed with 2µm beads and 100Å pore size was used as the stationary phase. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. A 75-minute elution gradient to 37.5% B was used, after which 95% B was flushed for 5 minutes and column re-equilibration using 2% B was performed for 10 minutes. DDA-MS was performed with the following parameters: MS1 spectra were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120K and a scan range of 350-1600 m/z. A normalized AGC target of 250% and automatic max inject time was used. Charge state filtering of 2-7, monoisotopic peak selection set to peptide, and dynamic exclusion of 10 seconds, n=1 and with a mass tolerance of +/-10 ppm were used for triggering MS2 acquisition. Cycle time between MS1 scans was set to a max of 1s. For MS2 acquisition, an isolation window of 0.7 Da was used, peptides were fragmented using HCD with a collision energy of 32%. MS2 were acquired in centroid mode in the Ion Trap using the automatic scan range parameter and scan rate set to turbo. An AGC target of 3e4 and an automatic max inject time were used.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed using the Sequest algorithm within Proteome Discoverer (PD) (Thermo Fisher; Waltham, MA). For E. coli searches, the Uniprot K12 E. coli proteome, downloaded on 7/2/2019, was used (PID: UP000000625, 4382 sequences including contaminants). For D. radiodurans searches, the Uniprot D. radiodurans proteome, downloaded on 3/27/2018, was used (PID: UP000002524, 3172 sequences including contaminants). Databases were searched with the specified parameters: trypsin with 2 possible missed cleavages, precursor and fragment mass tolerance 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively, and a max amount of 4 dynamic modifications per peptide. Dynamic modifications were specified as carbamidomethyl/+57.021Da (on C), oxidation/+15.995Da (on CDEFHILMNPQRSTVWY), carbonylation/+13.979Da (on ACDEFHILKMNPQRSTVWY), dioxidation/+31.990Da (on ACDEFHIKLMNPRSTVWY), and trioxidation/+47.985 Da (on CFWY). No static modifications were set. Searches were based on previous reports of abundance of the given modifications on each amino acid reside (25). A false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectral matches (PSMs), peptides, and proteins of 0.05% was used via percolator in PD. For quantification, a combination of the Minora Feature Detector, Feature Mapper, and Precursor Ions Quantifier nodes were used in PD. Samples were grouped per strain or organism as 5 untreated replicates untreated vs. 5 treated replicates. Default settings were used for the Minora Feature Detector and Feature Mapper nodes. For the Precursor Ion Quantifier node, Intensity was used for precursor quantification and normalization was performed using total peptide amount per file. Both unique and razor peptides were used to quantify protein level differences, excluding modified peptides. Protein levels were quantified using summed abundances, no data imputation, and ANOVA hypothesis testing on individual proteins. The Benjamini-Hochberg method was used to adjust p values, and the adjusted p values which were used for significance thresholds.

### Publication Abstract
Oxidative proteome damage has been implicated as a major contributor to cell death and aging. Protein damage and aging has been a particular theme of the recent research of Miroslav Radman. However, the study of how cellular proteins are damaged by oxidative processes is still in its infancy. Here we examine oxidative changes in the proteomes of four bacterial populations-wild type <i>E. coli</i>, two isolates from <i>E. coli</i> populations evolved for high levels of ionizing radiation (IR) resistance, and <i>D. radiodurans</i>-immediately following exposure to 3000 Gy of ionizing radiation. By a substantial margin, the most prominent intracellular oxidation events involve hydroxylation of methionine residues. Significant but much less frequent are carbonylation events on tyrosine and dioxidation events on tryptophan. A few proteins are exquisitely sensitive to targeted oxidation events, notably the active site of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) in <i>E. coli</i>. Extensive experimental evolution of <i>E. coli</i> for IR resistance has decreased overall proteome sensitivity to oxidation but not to the level seen in <i>D. radiodurans</i>. Many observed oxidation events may reflect aspects of protein structure and/or exposure of protein surfaces to water. Proteins such as GAPDH and possibly Ef-Tu may have an evolved sensitivity to oxidation by H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>.

### Keywords
E coli, D radiodurans, Radiation, Oxidation

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Center for Genomic Science Innovation Department of Biochemistry University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Benjamin Minkoff

### Lab Head
Dr Michael R Sussman
Center for Genomic Science Innovation Department of Biochemistry University of Wisconsin-Madison


