### Accession
PXD004556

### Title
Sheep’s Milk: a deep exploration of the low-abundance proteome

### Description
In the last years the amount of ovine milk production, mainly used to formulate a wide range of different and exclusive dairy products often categorized as gourmet food, is progressively increasing. Taking also into account that sheep milk (SM) also appears to be potentially less allergenic than cow’s one, an in-depth information about its protein composition is essential to improve the comprehension of its potential benefits for human consumption and the role of milk components during cheese-making processes. The present work reports the results of an in-depth characterization of SM whey proteome, carried out by coupling the Combinatorial Peptide Ligand Library (CPLL) technology applied at three different pH values with SDS-PAGE and high resolution UPLC-nESI MS/MS analysis. This approach allowed the identification of 949 unique species that, to our knowledge, represent the largest description so far of the SM proteome. Particularly, this massive identification has expanded literature data about sheep whey proteome by 223 novel proteins previously undetected, many of which are involved in the defence/immunity mechanisms or in the nutrient delivery system. A comparative analysis of the proteins here identified with the inventory of the gene products discovered in cow’s milk whey to date, evidenced that about 50% of the identified components appear to be unique of sheep whey milk proteome and include a heterogeneous group of components which seem to have health-promoting benefits.

### Sample Protocol
Milk was collected from fifty healthy animals in mid-lactation (2 months postpartum) of a strain called “Valle del Belice”, raised in a Sicilian farm. Immediately after collection the milk samples were pooled, added with one tablet (per 100 mL) of the Roche cocktail of five protease inhibitors and kept on ice during transportation to the lab. Prior to CPLL treatment, one liter of milk was first delipidated by centrifugation (3500 rpm, 30 min, 4°C) and then casein depleted by precipitation at pH 4.6 with sodium acetate/acid acetic buffer. The casein pellet was separated from the supernatant by centrifugation (8500 rpm, 30 min) at 4°C.  After lyophilization, six grams of total whey proteins were dissolved in 150 mL of 30 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.2. This solution was divided into three, fifty mL fractions. One of them was loaded onto 100 µL of CPLL beads equilibrated into the same pH 7.2 buffer, the other two fractions were titrated, respectively, to pH 2.2 and to pH 9.0 and loaded onto the same CPLL bead volumes equilibrates at these two last pH values. The capture was performed batch-wise, in small flasks gently rocking on a shacking platform for 2 hours. After that, the beads were rinsed twice with the equilibration buffers, so as to remove any excess of non-adsorbed proteins (see the scheme of Fig. 1). Desorption was implemented by washing the beads twice (each time with 50 µL) with a boiling 4% SDS solution containing 20 mM DTT, 12.5 % (v/v) glycerol, 0.005% (m/v) bromophenol blue, and 62.5 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8) Ten µL of the above eluates (labelled as 2.2, 7.2 and 9.0) and of the non-treated sample (Ctrl) were loaded onto an SDS-PAGE gel, composed by a 4% polyacrylamide stacking gel (125 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 0.1%, m/v, SDS) over a 12% resolving polyacrylamide gel (in 375 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.8, 0.1%, m/v, SDS buffer). Staining and destaining were performed with Colloidal Coomassie Blue and 7% (v/v) acetic acid in water, respectively.  After SDS-PAGE analysis, the four gel-lanes labelled Ctrl, E2 (i.e. pH 2.2), E7 (pH 7.2) and E9 (pH 9.0) (see Fig. 1) were manually cut into 10 segments of the same dimensions along the migration path. The excised bands were transferred to 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion. After in-gel digestion, the peptides were extracted from gel pieces with 0.1% aqueous TFA and subsequently with ACN. This extraction procedure was repeated three times. The total extracts were pooled with the first supernatant and lyophilized. The recovered peptides were then were reconstituted in 20 µL of water/acetonitrile (98:2) added with 0.1% FA (formic acid). nLC-nESI MS/MS analysis was performed using a Thermo Scientific Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Sunnyvale, CA) coupled on-line with a Thermo Fisher Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Q-OT-qIT) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Particularly, one microliter of the reconstituted samples was loaded onto an Acclaim® Nano Trap C18 Column (100 µm x 2 cm, 5 µm, 100Å). After washing the trapping column with solvent A (H2O/ACN, 98/2 + 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 7 µL/min for 3 min, the solution was switched from the trapping column onto a PepMap® RSLC C18 EASY-Spray column (75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm, 100Å). Peptides were separated by elution at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min and 40°C with a linear gradient of solvent B (ACN + 0.1% FA) in A from 1% to 15% in 10 min, followed by 15% to 30% in 65 min, 30% to 50% in 15 min, and 50% to 98% in another 10 min. We finished by holding 98% B for 5 min and re-equilibrating the column at 1% B for 20 min. The eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization using a source voltage of 1.75 kV and introduced into the mass spectrometer through a heated ion transfer tube (275 °C). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 200 to 1600 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (@ 200 m/z). Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.6 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 35, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. Only those precursors with charge state 2–4 and an intensity above the threshold of 5∙103 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles, meaning that the instrument would continuously perform MS2 events until the list of non-excluded precursors diminishes to zero or 3 s, whichever is shorter. MS/MS spectral quality was enhanced enabling the parallelizable time option (i.e. by using all parallelizable time during full scan detection for MS/MS precursor injection and detection).

### Data Protocol
LC/MS/MS data were analyzed and searched against the “Ruminantia” UniProt database (SwissProt and trEMBL release April 2016, containing 93493 entries) using two different search engines: Mascot algorithm (Matrix Science, London, UK, version 2.5.1) and PEAKS de novo sequencing software (v. 7.0, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON Canada). The amino acid sequences generated by PEAKS de novo sequencing software from each spectrum were searched using the SPIDER algorithm, a dedicated search tool of PEAKS that is specially designed to detect peptide mutations and perform cross-species homology search. Full tryptic peptides with a maximum of 3 missed cleavage sites were subjected to bioinformatic search. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine, transformation of N-terminal glutamine and N-terminal glutamic acid residue in the pyroglutamic acid form, N-acetylation of N-terminus protein, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues were included as variable modifications. The precursor mass tolerance threshold was 10 ppm and the max fragment mass error was set to 0.6 Da. Peptide spectral matches (PSM) were validated using Target Decoy PSM Validator node based on q-values at a 1% FDR. Proteins that contained same peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Finally, all the protein hits obtained by these two approaches were processed by using the inChorus function of PEAKS. This tool combines the database search results of PEAKS software with those obtained by the Mascot search engine with the aim not only to increase the coverage, but also the confidence since the engines using independent algorithms and therefore confirm each others’ results. Only protein hits with a minimum of InChorus Protein score of 50% and identified with at least two peptides with a Mascot score >20 and Expect <0.05 were considered valid.

### Publication Abstract
In the last years the amount of ovine milk production, mainly used to formulate a wide range of different and exclusive dairy products often categorized as gourmet food, has been progressively increasing. Taking also into account that sheep milk (SM) also appears to be potentially less allergenic than cow's one, an in-depth information about its protein composition is essential to improve the comprehension of its potential benefits for human consumption. The present work reports the results of an in-depth characterization of SM whey proteome, carried out by coupling the CPLL technology with SDS-PAGE and high resolution UPLC-nESI MS/MS analysis. This approach allowed the identification of 718 different protein components, 644 of which are from unique genes. Particularly, this identification has expanded literature data about sheep whey proteome by 193 novel proteins previously undetected, many of which are involved in the defence/immunity mechanisms or in the nutrient delivery system. A comparative analysis of SM proteome known to date with cow's milk proteome, evidenced that while about 29% of SM proteins are also present in CM, 71% of the identified components appear to be unique of SM proteome and include a heterogeneous group of components which seem to have health-promoting benefits. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier &lt;PXD004556&gt;.

### Keywords
Ovine milk proteome; low-abundance proteins; combinatorial peptide ligand libraries; orbitrap tribrid mass spectrometer

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Catania, Viale A. Doria 6, 95125 Catania, Italy
University of Catania

### Submitter
Vincenzo Cunsolo

### Lab Head
Dr Salvatore Foti
Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Catania, Viale A. Doria 6, 95125 Catania, Italy


