### Accession
PXD034565

### Title
Phosphoproteome dynamics of Streptomyces rimosus during submerged growth and antibiotic production

### Description
Streptomyces rimosus is an industrial streptomycete, best known as a producer of oxytetracycline, one of the most widely used antibiotics. Despite the significant contribution of Streptomyces species to the pharmaceutical industry, most omics analyses have only been conducted on the model organism, Streptomyces coelicolor. In recent years, protein phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine (Ser/Thr/Tyr) has been shown to play a crucial role in the regulation of numerous cellular processes, including metabolic changes leading to antibiotic production and morphological changes. In this study, we performed a comprehensive quantitative (phospho)proteomic analysis during the growth of S. rimosus under conditions of oxytetracycline production and pellet fragmentation. LC-MS/MS analysis combined with phosphopeptide enrichment detected a total of 3,725 proteins, corresponding to 45.6% of the proteome and 417 phosphorylation sites from 230 phosphoproteins. Significant changes in abundance during three distinct growth phases were determined for 494 proteins and 98 phosphorylation sites. Functional analysis revealed changes in phosphorylation events of proteins involved in important cellular processes, including regulatory mechanisms, primary and secondary metabolism, cell division and stress response. About 80% of the phosphoproteins detected during submerged growth of S. rimosus have not yet been reported in streptomycetes, and 55 phosphoproteins were not reported in any prokaryote studied so far. This enabled the creation of a unique resource that provides novel insights into the dynamics of (phospho)proteins and reveals many potential regulatory events during antibiotic production in liquid culture of an industrially-important bacterium.

### Sample Protocol
The wild type strain Streptomyces rimosus subsp. rimosus ATCC was used. Inocula for all subsequent experiments was obtained from spore suspensions (1010/ml) stored in 20% glycerol at 20 °C. Pre-cultivation was carried out overnight in 15 ml of seed media inoculated with 2% of dense young biomass suspension for subsequent cultivation in TSM5 medium optimized for antibiotic production. To obtain good aeration, 300 ml of this medium was inoculated with a 5% biomass suspension obtained from SM and incubated at 30 °C for up to 120 hours.   Mycelia were sampled at three selected time points: (i) during growth arrest within exponential phase, (ii) at late exponential phase and (iii) at late stationary phase. The mycelia were collected by centrifugation at 4500 rpm for 10 minutes, washed twice in 10 ml of a Lysis buffer and resuspended in a few ml of sonication buffer. Cell lysis was performed by freezing the sample in liquid nitrogen, quickly defrosting and boiling for 5 minutes. Phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride, was added after cooling on ice and the samples were sonicated on ice. Benzonase and N-octylglucoside were added to the lysate and incubated for 10 minutes at room temperature. Cell debris was discarded after centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 30 minutes, samples were dialyzed against large volumes of water and proteins were precipitated with methanol/chloroform.  Crude extract preparations were resuspended in a denaturation buffer, and protein concentrations were measured by the Bradford method. In brief, denaturated proteins were reduced using dithiothreitol (DTT) and subsequently alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA), digested with endoproteinase Lys-C (Waco), diluted with ammonium bicarbonate, and further digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega). The reaction was stopped by acidifying with TFA to pH < 3.  For quantitative analyses, peptides were loaded onto Sep-Pak C18 columns and labelled by dimethylation. The efficiency of labelling was determined by LC-MS/MS measurement of light, intermediate and heavy labelled samples. The labelled samples were mixed in equal peptide amounts and subjected to pilot LC-MS/MS measurements for validation of correct mixing.   Phosphopeptides were enriched by TiO2 chromatography where labelled peptides were incubated with TiO2 beads at a ratio of 1:10 for 10 minutes in 8-10 consecutive rounds. TiO2 beads were washed. Phosphopeptides were slowly eluted in three steps, first with 30 μl of 5% ammonium hydroxide into 20 ul of 20% TFA for 15 min at 1200 rpm. In the second elution, phosphopeptides were eluted with 70 μl of 20% ammonium hydroxide in 60% acetonitrile. Finally, phosphopeptides were eluted with 20 ul of 60 % ACN in 1% TFA. Acetonitrile was removed from the eluates by vacuum centrifugation, and samples were acidified with TFA, and purified by StageTips.  Eluted peptides were separated by an EASY-nLC II system coupled online to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source. Chromatographic separation was performed on a 20 cm fused silica analytical column with an inner diameter of 75μm, packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm particles. Peptides were loaded onto the column with solvent A at a 700 nl/min flow rate using a maximum back-pressure of 500 bar. Peptides were eluted using a 60 min (for phosphoproteome analyses) or 120 min segmented gradient (for proteome analyses). The gradient was generated by 10-50% of solvent B at 40 °C at a constant flow rate of 200 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, switching automatically between one full scan and subsequent MS/MS scans of either 12 or 7 (phosphoproteome measurement) most abundant peaks selected with an isolation window of 1.4 m/z. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired in a mass range from 300 to 1650 m/z at a target value of 3 × 106 charges with a maximum injection time of 25 ms and a resolution of 120,000. The higher-energy collisional dissociation MS/MS spectra were recorded with the maximum injection time of 45 or 220 ms (for phosphoproteome measurement) at a target value of 1 × 105 and a resolution of 30,000 or 60,000 for phosphoproteome measurement. The normalized collision energy was set to 27%, and the intensity threshold was kept at 1 × 105 or 5 × 104 for phosphoproteome measurement. The masses of sequenced precursor ions were dynamically excluded from MS/MS fragmentation for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software suite, version 2.0.3.0. MaxQuant generated peak lists were searched using the Andromeda search engine against the proteome of S. rimosus G7 genome (NCBI, access. number CP048261), as well as the associated plasmid (NCBI, access. number CP048262). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification while methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation were defined as variable modifications. Trypsin was chosen as a protease with up to two missed cleavages, and the minimum required peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Mass tolerance window for parent and fragment ion isolation was set at 4.5ppm and 20ppm, respectively. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was set at the peptide, protein and phosphorylation site levels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Streptomyces rimosus, Oxytetracycline production, Peptide dimethylation labeling, Pellet fragmentation, Proteome, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Division of Physical Chemistry, Institute Ruđer Bošković, Zagreb, Croatia
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Dušica Vujaklija
Division of Physical Chemistry, Institute Ruđer Bošković, Zagreb, Croatia


