### Accession
PXD008260

### Title
A U1-70K Protein Interaction Network Reveals a Functional Class of RNA Binding Proteins with Mixed Charge Domains

### Description
U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein 70 kDa (U1-70K) and other proteins of the spliceosome complex are mislocalized to cytoplasmic aggregates in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) brain, yet understanding of the specific mechanisms that cause their aggregation is limited. Many of the RNA binding proteins (RBPs) that aggregate in neurodegenerative diseases, including TDP-43 and FUS, self-assemble into RNA granules through disordered low complexity (LC) domains. We report here that a LC domain within U1-70K, that is comprised of tandem arrays of basic (R/K) and acidic (D/E) residues, shares many of the same properties of the Q/N-rich prion-like LC domains found in TDP-43 and FUS. These properties include the ability to self-assemble into oligomers, and to form nuclear granules in cells. To analyze the functional roles of the U1-70K LC domains, we performed co-immunoprecipitation of recombinant U1-70K and deletions lacking the C-terminal LC domain(s) followed by quantitative proteomics. Using a network-driven approach, functional classes of U1-70K interacting proteins were identified that showed a varying dependency on the U1-70K LC domain(s) for their interaction. We characterize a family of structurally homologous RBPs containing U1-70K LC1-like domains including LUC7L3 and RBM25, which require their respective LC1-like domains for reciprocal interactions with U1-70K and for participation in nuclear RNA granules. Finally, we also show that the LC1 domain of U1-70K can interact with Tau from AD brain supporting a hypothesis that mixed charge structural motifs on U1-70K and other RBPs could mediate cooperative interactions with pathological tau isoforms

### Sample Protocol
HEK 293T cells (ATCC CRL-3216) were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM, high glucose (Gibco)) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (Gibco) and penicillin-streptomycin (Gibco) and maintained at 37 °C under a humidified atmosphere of 5% (v/v) CO2 in air. For transient transfection, the cells were grown to 80-90% confluency in 10 cm2 culture dishes and transfected with 10 μg expression plasmid and 30 μg linear polyethylenimine. Cells were homogenized in ice-cold immunoprecipitation (IP) buffer containing (50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% (v/v) NP-40, 0.5% (v/v) CHAPS, Halt phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (1:100, Thermo Fisher). Samples were sonicated for 5 seconds on 5 seconds off at 30% amplitude for a total of 1.5 minutes (13 cycles).  The samples were cleared (14,000 x g for 10 minutes) and protein concentrations determined using a standard bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Pierce). Protein A Sepharose 4B beads (Invitrogen 101042; 20 uL per IP), were washed twice in IP buffer and then blocked with 0.1 mg/ml bovine serum albumin (Thermo #23209) and washed three additional times in IP buffer. Then anti-Myc (4µg) mouse monoclonal antibody (Cell Signaling 2276) or 4 µg IgG control (550339 BD Pharmigen) was allowed to incubate rotating with the bead slurry in IP buffer (500µL) for a minimum of 90 minutes to allow antibody conjugation to beads. Beads were washed 3 times in IP buffer. Lysates where pre-clear by centrifugation at 14,000 x g at 4oC for 10 minutes. The pre-cleared protein lysates were added to beads (1.5 mg per IP) and incubated rotating overnight at 4oC. The beads were washed 3 times in IP wash buffer (IP buffer without glycerol or CHAPS) by centrifugation at 500 x g for 5 min at 4oC then resuspended in IP wash buffer. Following the last wash, the bead suspension was transferred to a new Eppendorf tube to minimize contamination. The bound protein was eluted with 8M urea buffered in 10 mM Tris pH 8.0. For proteomics assays, 4 independent biological replicates were performed for each condition. For protein digestion, 50% of the eluted protein samples were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 25°C for 30 minutes, followed by 5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at 25°C for 30 minutes in the dark. Protein was digested with 1:100 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) at 25°C for 2 hours and diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of less than 2M urea. Samples were further digested overnight with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega) at 25°C. Resulting peptides were desalted with in-house stagetips and dried under vacuum.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Tryptic peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS essentially as described (28). Peptides were resuspended in loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 0.03% trifluoroacetic acid, 1% acetonitrile) and separated on a self-packed C18 (1.9 um Dr. Maisch, Germany) fused silica column (20 cm x 75 μM internal diameter; New Objective, Woburn, MA) by a NanoAcquity UHPLC (Waters, Milford, FA) and monitored on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Elution was performed over a 140-minute gradient at a rate of 300 nL/min with buffer B ranging from 3% to 80% (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO in water, buffer B: 0.1 % formic and 5% DMSO in acetonitrile). The mass spectrometer cycle was programmed to collect one full MS scan followed by 10 data dependent MS/MS scans. The MS scans (300-1800 m/z range, 1,000,000 AGC, 100 ms maximum ion time) were collected at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 in profile mode and the MS/MS spectra (2 m/z isolation width, 28 normalized collision energy (NCE), 50,000 AGC target, 50 ms maximum ion time) were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previous sequenced precursor ions for 30 seconds. Precursor ions with +1, and +6 or higher charge states were excluded from sequencing.  All raw files have been uploaded to the Proteome Xchange consortium. Protein Database Search. Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant v1.5.2.8 with Thermo Foundation 2.0 for RAW file reading capability (29). The search engine Andromeda was used to build and search a concatenated target-decoy UniProt Knowledgebase (UniProtKB) containing both Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL human reference protein sequences (90,411 target sequences downloaded April 21, 2015), plus 245 contaminant proteins included as a parameter for Andromeda search within MaxQuant (30). Methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da), asparagine and glutamine deamidation (+0.9840 Da), and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106 Da) were variable modifications (up to 5 allowed per peptide); cysteine was assigned a fixed carbamidomethyl modification (+57.0215 Da). Only fully tryptic peptides were considered with up to 2 miscleavages in the database search. A precursor mass tolerance of ±20 ppm was applied prior to mass accuracy calibration and ±4.5 ppm after internal MaxQuant calibration. Other search settings included a maximum peptide mass of 6,000 Da, a minimum peptide length of 6 residues, 0.05 Da tolerance for high resolution MS/MS scans. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectral matches, proteins, and site decoy fraction were all set to 1%. The label free quantitation (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant (31,32) was used for protein quantitation. All MaxQuant files are provided  Protein co-expression network analysis. The R package WGCNA was used to construct a co-enrichment networks using the source code found here (33). Threshold power Beta for reduction of false positive correlations (i.e. the beneficial effect of enforcing scale free topology) was sampled in increments of 0.5, and as the target scale free topology R² was approached, 0.1. The power selected was the lowest power at which scale free topology R² was approximately 0.80, or in the case of not reaching 0.80, the power at which a horizontal asymptote (plateau) was nearly approached before further increasing the power had a negative effect on scale free topology R².  Other parameters were selected as previously optimized for protein abundance networks (28). Thus, for the signed network build on protein LFQ abundances obtained from IP-LC-MS/MS, parameters were input into the WGCNA::blockwiseModules() function as follows: Beta 10.9, mergeCutHeight 0.07, pamStage TRUE, pamRespectsDendro TRUE, reassignThreshold p<0.05, deepSplit 4, minModuleSize 15, corType bicor, and maxBlockSize greater than the total number of proteins.T-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (tSNE) analysis was performed as follows (34). Proteins with WGCNA intramodular kME>=0.50 were retained, and all duplicated values removed, as well asproteins with any missing values for the 16 non-IgG measurements. Then Rtsne R package Barnes-Hut-Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (SNE) Rtsne function was run on the LFQ expression matrix to reduce dimensionality from 16 to 2. The remaining points or proteins (n=375) are colored according to WGCNA module membership. Gene Ontology (GO) Elite analysis was performed as described previously (28) on each module.

### Publication Abstract
The U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein 70 kDa (U1-70K) and other RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are mislocalized to cytoplasmic neurofibrillary Tau aggregates in Alzheimer's disease (AD), yet the co-aggregation mechanisms are incompletely understood. U1-70K harbors two disordered low-complexity domains (LC1 and LC2) that are necessary for aggregation in AD brain extracts. The LC1 domain contains highly repetitive basic (Arg/Lys) and acidic (Asp/Glu) residues, referred to as a basic-acidic dipeptide (BAD) domain. We report here that this domain shares many of the properties of the Gln/Asn-rich LC domains in RBPs that also aggregate in neurodegenerative disease. These properties included self-assembly into oligomers and localization to nuclear granules. Co-immunoprecipitations of recombinant U1-70K and deletions lacking the LC domain(s) followed by quantitative proteomic analyses were used to resolve functional classes of U1-70K-interacting proteins that depend on the BAD domain for their interaction. Within this interaction network, we identified a class of RBPs with BAD domains nearly identical to that found in U1-70K. Two members of this class, LUC7L3 and RBM25, required their respective BAD domains for reciprocal interactions with U1-70K and nuclear granule localization. Strikingly, a significant proportion of RBPs with BAD domains had elevated insolubility in the AD brain proteome. Furthermore, we show that the BAD domain of U1-70K can interact with Tau from AD brains but not from other tauopathies. These findings highlight a mechanistic role for BAD domains in stabilizing RBP interactions and in potentially mediating co-aggregation with the pathological AD-specific Tau isoforms.

### Keywords
U1-70k

### Affiliations
Emory University School of Medicine Departments of Biochemistry, Neurology
Emory University

### Submitter
Eric Dammer

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas T. Seyfried
Emory University School of Medicine Departments of Biochemistry, Neurology


