### Accession
PXD024800

### Title
Comprehensive micro-scaled proteome and phosphoproteome characterization of archived retrospective cancer repositories

### Description
In this study, we evaluated the feasibility of proteomics and phosphoproteomics on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) lung tissue for protein extraction protocols, quantification methods, pre-analytics, and sample size. First, we compared three protocols for the extraction of proteins from FFPE tissues and used the best-performing protocol to acquire a deep proteome of lung adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma. We quantified >8,000 proteins and >14,000 phosphosites with a tandem mass tag (TMT11) approach and 6,700 proteins and 7,000 phosphosites with a microscaled TMT approach, enabling the analysis of FFPE needle biopsies with limited amounts of tissue. This is a considerable increase in coverage compared to label-free quantification techniques. We also evaluated pre-analytical variables such as the influence of fixation times and the duration of heat-assisted de-crosslinking on protein extraction efficiency and proteome coverage. Our improved workflows provide quantitative information on protein abundance and phosphosite regulation for most relevant oncogenes, tumor suppressors, and signaling pathways in lung cancer. We also present general guidelines to what proteomics and phosphoproteomics methods are best suited for different applications for retrospective cancer studies.

### Sample Protocol
Deparaffinized NSCLC FFPE samples were treated with either direct trypsinization protocol (DTR, Föll et al.), dodium deoxycholate-based protocol (SDC, Wakabayashi et al.) or sodium dodecyl sulfate-based protocol (SDS-SP3, Hughes et al.) for the protocol comparison. All subsequent experiments were performed using the SDS-SP3 protocol. Digestion was performed overnight with LysC and trypsin (enzyme:substrate ratio 1:50). The next morning, samples were acidified with 100% formic acid, and desalted on C18 material. An aliquot of the desalted peptides was used for a peptide level BCA.  Dried down peptides (200 µg for equal loading TMT and 20 µg for the microscaled experiments) were reconstituted in 25 µL 50 mM HEPES, pH 8 for the patient samples selected for the deep multiplexed proteome analysis. The remaining 18 samples were combined in equal amounts for an internal standard, of which 200 µg were used for the equal loading TMT experiment and 2000 µg for the microscaled TMT experiments with biopsy equivalents and actual needle biopsies. The samples and the internal standard were labeled with TMT reagent with a reagent:peptide ratio of 1:1 for 1h, then the reaction was quenched with 1 µL 1M Tris for 15 min and the samples were mixed, dried down and subsequently desalted on C18 material. High pH reverse phase (hpH) fractionation of the labeled samples was performed on an Agilent 1290 system, as described by Mertins et al. The samples were initially separated into 96 fractions, of which every 28th fraction was then combined for the global proteome analysis. 10% of these 28 fractions was dried down and used for global proteome analysis. The remaining 90% were further combined into ten fractions for phosphoproteome analysis.  Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed on an Agilent Bravo automated liquid handling platform using Fe(III)-NTA cartridges. 100 µg peptide were used as input material for the cooking time comparison and duplicates of 100 µg TMT-labeled and hpH-fractionated peptide were enriched and subsequently combined for the deep phosphoproteome analysis. Mass Spectrometry data acquisition for LFQ comparison of ADC and SCC, as well as all TMT experiments, was performed on a Q Exactive HF-X instrument (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an easy nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific). For the cooking time comparison, a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Scientific) with an easy nLC 1200 system was used. The peptides were separated over a 110 min gradient with a flow rate of 250 nL with increasing concentration of buffer B (up to 60%) on a 20 cm reversed-phase column packed in-house with 1.9 µm beads (ReproSil Pur, Dr. Maisch GmbH).  The Q Exactive Plus was operated in data-dependent mode with 70K MS1 resolution, AGC target of 3*106 ions, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms, choosing the top 20 ions for MS2 scans with 17.5K resolution, AGC target of 5*104 ions and maximum injection time of 250 ms.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed using MaxQuant (v1.6.3.3) and the human reference proteome (UP000005640, downloaded 01/2019). Oxidation (M) and acetylation (N-term) were always included in the search as variable modifications, as well as carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification.  For the label-free comparison of 30 NSCLC cases, the integrated LFQ calculation was activated and the “match between runs” feature was used, as well as for the single-shot phosphopeptide-enriched samples, while it was turned off for protocol comparison and heat-incubation comparison. For TMT analyses, MS2 based labeling was chosen and the correction factor for each channel was entered according to the manufacturer’s information. Reporter PIF was set to 0.5. For phosphoproteome analyses, phosphorylation (STY) was included as an additional variable modification. Besides the standard MaxQuant settings for label-free analyses, formylation, the addition of a methylol group (-CH2O), and dimethylation (KR) were set as additional modifications. Proteins that were flagged as potential contaminants by MaxQuant were not removed during the analysis later on since three human cytokeratins are used as immunohistochemical markers for ADC and SCC. Reverse hits and proteins only identified by site were removed. The limma R package was used to perform moderated t-tests for the comparison of ADC and SCC in the different experiments. Multiple testing correction was performed via the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure and only hits with an adjusted p-value < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.  Gene set enrichment analysis was performed with the ssGSEA and PTM-SEA tool for proteome and phosphoproteome analysis, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues are a valuable resource for retrospective clinical studies. Here, we evaluate the feasibility of (phospho-)proteomics on FFPE lung tissue regarding protein extraction, quantification, pre-analytics, and sample size. After comparing protein extraction protocols, we use the best-performing protocol for the acquisition of deep (phospho-)proteomes from lung squamous cell and adenocarcinoma with &gt;8,000 quantified proteins and &gt;14,000 phosphosites with a tandem mass tag (TMT) approach. With a microscaled approach, we quantify 7,000 phosphosites, enabling the analysis of FFPE biopsies with limited tissue amounts. We also investigate the influence of pre-analytical variables including fixation time and heat-assisted de-crosslinking on protein extraction efficiency and proteome coverage. Our improved workflows provide quantitative information on protein abundance and phosphosite regulation for the most relevant oncogenes, tumor suppressors, and signaling pathways in lung cancer. Finally, we present general guidelines to which methods are best suited for different applications, highlighting TMT methods for comprehensive (phospho-)proteome profiling for focused clinical studies and label-free methods for large cohorts.

### Keywords
Ffpe, Nsclc, Proteomics

### Affiliations
DKFZ Heidelberg
MDC Berlin

### Submitter
Corinna Friedrich

### Lab Head
Dr Philipp Mertins
MDC Berlin


