### Accession
PXD004367

### Title
Integrative proteomics and phosphoproteomics profiling and systems biology analysis reveal dynamic signaling networks and mTORC1-dependent mitochondrial function in T cell activation

### Description
The underlying mechanisms by which naïve T cells exit from quiescence after antigen stimulation remain elusive. Using multiplex isobaric labeling proteomics technology, we report unbiased, temporal profiling of whole proteome (>8,000 proteins) and phosphoproteome (>13,000 phosphopeptides) during the activation in the wild type and Rptor-/- T cells. TCR stimulation results in dynamic reprogramming of the proteome and phosphoproteome, with predominant upregulation of molecular machineries in protein translation and mitochondrial activation. Loss of mTORC1 disrupts TCR-induced mitochondrial functions including mitoribosome biogenesis, one-carbon metabolism and oxidative phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
The cell pellets from wild type (WT) naïve T cells stimulated with α-CD3-CD28 for 0, 2, 8 and 16 h respectively with replicates for each and Rptor-/- T cells activated by α-CD3-CD28 for 2 h and 16 h were lysed, digested and labeled with 10 different TMT tags. The TMT labeled peptides were pooled with equal amount of each and fractionated into 10 fractions in a concatenated fashion on a RP-HPLC column (4.6 mm x 250 mm) under basic pH condition. Five percent of each fraction was further separated on a reverse phase column (100 cm X 100 µm, 1.9 μm C18 resin) during a 9h gradient of 20-55% buffer B (buffer A: 0.2% formic acid, 5% DMSO; buffer B: buffer A plus 65% ACN) and analyzed by Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific) with one MS scan and up to 10 data-dependent high resolution MS/MS scans. Phosphopeptides were enriched from 95% of each fraction and loaded on C18 column (90cm × 75 µm) packed with 1.9 µm resin, and eluted during a 9 h gradient (5–40% buffer B). The eluted peptides were analyzed on Q Exactive (Thermo Scientific) with one MS scan and top 20 high resolution MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw files are processed using the JUMP searching engine against UniProt mouse database.  Searches were performed using 6 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions due to JUMP’s auto mass correction function and 15ppm for fragment ions, allowing up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were used for static modifications and the dynamic modifications include oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da) and Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation (+79.96633) for phosphoproteome data. The assigned peptides are filtered by minimal peptide length, maximum miscleavages, mass-to-charge accuracy and matching scores. The peptides are then divided into groups according to peptide length, trypticity, modification, miscleavage, and charge and then further filtered by matching scores to reduce protein or phosphopeptide FDR to below 1%. Proteins or phosphopeptides were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matched PSMs using our in-house software.

### Publication Abstract
The molecular circuits by which antigens activate quiescent T&#xa0;cells remain poorly understood. We combined temporal profiling of the whole proteome and phosphoproteome via multiplexed isobaric labeling proteomics technology, computational pipelines for integrating multi-omics datasets, and functional perturbation to systemically reconstruct regulatory networks underlying T&#xa0;cell activation. T&#xa0;cell receptors activated the T&#xa0;cell proteome and phosphoproteome with discrete kinetics, marked by early dynamics of phosphorylation and delayed ribosome biogenesis and mitochondrial activation. Systems biology analyses identified multiple functional modules, active kinases, transcription factors and connectivity between them, and mitochondrial pathways including mitoribosomes and complex IV. Genetic perturbation revealed physiological roles for mitochondrial enzyme COX10-mediated oxidative phosphorylation in T&#xa0;cell quiescence exit. Our multi-layer proteomics profiling, integrative network analysis, and functional studies define landscapes of the T&#xa0;cell proteome and phosphoproteome and reveal signaling and bioenergetics pathways that mediate lymphocyte exit from quiescence.

### Keywords
Rptor, Mtorc1, T cell activation, Phosphoproteomics, Mitochondrial function, Proteomic, System biology, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
Proteomics

### Submitter
xusheng wang

### Lab Head
Dr Junmin Peng
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital


