### Accession
PXD027246

### Title
Increased cellular detoxification, cytoskeletal activities and protein transport explain physiological stress in a lagoon sponge

### Description
Tropical lagoon-inhabiting organisms live in highly irradiated ecosystems and are particularly susceptible to thermal stress resulting from climate change. However, despite living close to their thermal maxima, stress response mechanisms found in these organisms are poorly understood. We used a novel physiological-proteomic approach for sponges to describe the stress response mechanisms of the lagoon-inhabiting sponge Amphimedon navalis, when exposed to elevated seawater temperatures of +2 oC and +4 oC relative to a 26 oC ambient temperature for four weeks. After four weeks of thermal exposure, the buoyant weight of the sponge experienced a significant decline, while its pumping rates and oxygen consumption rates significantly increased. Proteome dynamics revealed 50 differentially abundant proteins in sponges exposed to elevated temperature, suggesting that shifts in the sponge proteome were potential drivers of physiological dysfunction. Thermal stress promoted an increase in detoxification proteins, such as catalase and glutathione-S-transferase, suggesting that an excess of reactive oxygen species in sponge cells were likely responsible for the significant increase in oxygen consumption. Elevated temperature also disrupted cellular growth and cell proliferation, promoting the loss of sponge biomass, and the high abundance of multiple alpha-tubulin chain proteins also indicated an increase in cytoskeletal activities within sponge cells, which may have induced the increase in sponge pumping rate. Our results show that sustained thermal exposure in susceptible lagoonal sponges may induce significant disruption of cellular homeostasis leading to physiological dysfunction, and that a combined physiological-proteomic approach may provide new insights into physiological functions and cellular processes occurring in sponges.

### Sample Protocol
At the end of the thermal experiment (T4), A. navalis sponges (n = 6 per treatment; two sponges from each tank) were frozen at -20 oC for proteome analysis. Prior to peptide extraction, sponge samples were kept overnight in 99.5% ethanol at -20 oC to remove any excess pigments associated with the sponge. Peptides were prepared using a sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in-solution digestion method modified from Oakley et al. (2016). Sponge samples were homogenized for 30 s using a tissue homogenizer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA) and incubated at 85 oC for 20 min in 5% SDC, followed by adding 1% β-mercaptoethanol (BME) to the solution to denature proteins. SDC and residual pigments were extracted from the solution via ethyl acetate phase transfer (Yeung and Stanley, 2010) and cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 10,000 × g for 2 min. Lysates were processed using a modified method of the filter-aided sample preparation from Wiśniewski et al. (2009). Lysates were transferred to 0.5 ml Amicon Ultra centrifugal units (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA), centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 15 min, mixed with 380 µl of 50 mM Tris buffer and centrifuged again. A subsample of 100 µg was alkylated using 50 mM acrylamide, incubated at room temperature for 20 min and digested with 2 µg trypsin at 37 oC for 12-18 hours. Formic acid (0.1% final) was added to terminate trypsin digestion and precipitate any remaining SDC. The peptide solution was centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 2 min to pellet the SDC precipitate. Peptides were then desalted using 50% and 30% acetonitrile (ACN) and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid at 37 oC for 30 min. Protein and peptide concentrations were assessed by bound dye fluorescence (Qubit, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA). Peptide separation was conducted on an Acclaim PepMap C18 column (Thermo Scientific, Auckland, New Zealand) and a liquid chromatogram system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA), using a 75 min linear gradient from 5% to 35% buffer B (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at 300 nL min-1. Peptide ionization was conducted by 1.8 kV electrospray and acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The acquisition of precursor mass spectra was performed using the following specifications: 120,000 resolution, rejecting single-charged ions, enabled quadrupole isolation with an automatic gain target of 7.0e5 and maximum injection time of 50 ms. Higher-energy collision dissociation was used to fragment the 20 most intense precursor spectra and analysis was performed in the ion trap (automatic gain target and maximum injection time set at 5.0e3 and 300 ms, respectively).

### Data Protocol
The Andromeda search algorithm in MaxQuant was used for protein identification (Cox et al., 2014) against the genome of the sponge Amphimedon queenslandica (Srivastava et al., 2010) in UniProtKB (UniProt Consortium, 2018). Trypsin digestion with a maximum of two missed cleavages was assumed. The carbamidomethylation of cysteine was assumed as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein n-terminus set as variable modifications. Peptide tolerances for first and main searches were 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively, and for ion trap MS2 search, a mass tolerance of 0.5 Da was used. Protein quantification was conducted using label-free quantification. Searches were performed with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 2.5% and a minimum of two peptides per protein were required for identification. Protein annotations were matched using the web-based tool QuickGo (Binns et al., 2009) in UniProtKB.

### Publication Abstract
Tropical lagoon-inhabiting organisms live in highly irradiated ecosystems and are particularly susceptible to thermal stress resulting from climate change. However, despite living close to their thermal maxima, stress response mechanisms found in these organisms are poorly understood. We used a novel physiological-proteomic approach for sponges to describe the stress response mechanisms of the lagoon-inhabiting sponge Amphimedon navalis, when exposed to elevated seawater temperatures of +2&#xb0;C and +4&#xb0;C relative to a 26&#xb0;C ambient temperature for 4&#xa0;weeks. After 4&#xa0;weeks of thermal exposure, the buoyant weight of the sponge experienced a significant decline, while its pumping rates and oxygen consumption rates significantly increased. Proteome dynamics revealed 50 differentially abundant proteins in sponges exposed to elevated temperature, suggesting that shifts in the sponge proteome were potential drivers of physiological dysfunction. Thermal stress promoted an increase in detoxification proteins, such as catalase, suggesting that an excess of reactive oxygen species in sponge cells was responsible for the significant increase in oxygen consumption. Elevated temperature also disrupted cellular growth and cell proliferation, promoting the loss of sponge biomass, and the high abundance of multiple &#x3b1;-tubulin chain proteins also indicated an increase in cytoskeletal activities within sponge cells, which may have induced the increase in sponge pumping rate. Our results show that sustained thermal exposure in susceptible lagoonal sponges may induce significant disruption of cellular homeostasis, leading to physiological dysfunction, and that a combined physiological-proteomic approach may provide new insights into physiological functions and cellular processes occurring in sponges.

### Keywords
Thermal stress, Climate change, Proteomics, Physiology, Sponge, Lagoon

### Affiliations
Victoria University of Wellington
School of Biological Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand

### Submitter
Clinton Oakley

### Lab Head
Dr Simon K Davy
School of Biological Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand


