### Accession
PXD001844

### Title
Analysis of the Candida albicans phosphoproteome

### Description
Candida albicans is an important human fungal pathogen in both immunocompetent and immunocompromised individuals. In response to environmental stimuli, C. albicans regulates complex phenotypic transitions between morphological states, mating competence, and biofilm formation. In addition, other processes related to virulence, stress resistance, and cell wall structure are also highly regulated. Based on the phenotypes of mutants lacking different kinases, it is clear that protein phosphorylation plays an important role in the regulation of these pathways. Here, we present a qualitative analysis of the phosphoproteome of C. albicans hyphae. We identified 19,590 unique peptides that corresponded to 15,906 unique phosphosites on 2,896 proteins. The ratios of serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphosites were 80.01%, 18.11%, and 1.81%, respectively. The majority of proteins (2,111) contained at least two detected phosphorylation sites. Consistent with findings in other fungi, cytoskeletal proteins were among the most highly phosphorylated proteins, and there were differences in GO terms for proteins with serine and threonine versus tyrosine phosphorylation sites. This large-scale analysis identified phosphosites in protein components of Mediator, an important transcriptional co-regulatory protein complex. In vitro studies revealed Cdk8 (Ssn3), a kinase within the Mediator complex, was sufficient to catalyze a subset of these phosphorylations suggesting the potential for autoregulation. These data represent the deepest single analysis of a fungal phosphoproteome, and will lay the groundwork for future analyses of the C. albicans phosphoproteome and specific phosphoproteins.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of C. albicans lysates A single colony of C. albicans strain SC5314 (34) was grown overnight in 50 mL YPD medium. From that overnight culture, four flasks with 1 liter YPD containing 5 mM N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) were each inoculated to an OD600 of 0.05, then incubated at 37°C at 150 rpm for 4 to 5 hours. The cells were collected by centrifugation in 250 mL centrifugation cups for 5 min at 6,000 rpm. Cell pellets were washed once in 20 mL of phosphate buffered saline, then pelleted in 50 mL Falcon tubes (5,000 rpm for 10 min). The cell pellets were frozen at -80°C for at least 1 hour. The frozen cell pellets were lyophilized overnight in a freeze dryer (Labconco) and dry weights were measured. The dried cell mass was ground to a fine powder using mortar and pestle in the presence of liquid nitrogen. The ground cells were transferred to fresh 50 mL Falcon tubes and stored at -80°C. Enrichment and analysis of C. albicans phosphopeptides and mass spectrometric analysis  Lyophilized C. albicans powder was homogenized in ice cold lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.1, 150 mM NaCl, phosphatase inhibitors (2.5 mM beta-glycerophosphate, 1 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 mM sodium molybdate, 1 mM sodium tartrate) and protease inhibitors (1 mini-Complete EDTA-free tablet per 10 ml lysis buffer; Roche Life Sciences) by means of sonication. The lysate was clarified by centrifugation, reduced, alkylated, and trypsin digested (35). After overnight digestion with trypsin at 37°C, the digest was acidified with TFA, peptides were desalted, and lyophilized (36). Two rounds of phosphopeptide enrichment using titanium dioxide microspheres were performed and phosphopeptides were separated by strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX) (36). After separation, the SCX fractions were dried, desalted, combined and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were redissolved in 5% ACN / 1% formic acid and loaded onto a trap column (ReproSil, C18 AQ 5 μm 200 Å pore (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany)) and eluted across a fritless analytical resolving column (30 cm length, 100 μm inner diameter, ReproSil, C18 AQ 3 μm 200 Å pore) pulled in-house with a 50 min gradient of 4-30% LC-MS buffer B (LC-MS buffer A: 0.0625% formic acid, 3% ACN; LC-MS buffer B: 0.0625% formic acid, 95% ACN) at 400nl/min. Raw data were searched using COMET in high resolution mode (37) against a target-decoy (reversed) (38) version of the C. albicans proteome sequence database with a precursor mass tolerance of +/- one Da and requiring tryptic peptides with up to two mis-cleavages, carbamidomethylcysteine as fixed modification, and oxidized methionine, phosphorylated serine, threonine and tyrosine, as variable modifications. The C. albicans proteome sequence database was generated by combining the UniProt C. albicans database (downloaded 2/2013; 18,226 total (forward & reverse) proteins) with proteins unique to the Candida Genome Database (CGD) (at least one amino acid difference between the sequence in the Candida Genome Database (CGD) and any sequence in the UniProt C. albicans database (downloaded 2/2013)). The resulting peptide spectral matches were filtered to < 1% false discovery rate (FDR), based on reverse-hit counting mass measurement accuracy (MMA) within -/+ 3.5ppm, a delta-XCorr (dCn) of greater than 0.12, and appropriate XCorr values for +2 and +3-charge state peptides (38). Probability of phosphorylation site localization was determined by PhosphoRS (39). Peptide motif analysis was performed based on (40).

### Data Protocol
GO term analysis The Gene Ontology Slim annotation was used for GO term analysis.  The gene association file, created 12/15/2014, was downloaded from the CGD website (www.candidagenome.org) and only annotations assigned to C. albicans (taxon: 5476) were used. In total 6,314 unique genes had at least one associated GO term and served as the background distribution of observed Gene Ontologies for the C. albicans genome in our study. GO enrichment analysis of the total phosphorylation (P-all), phospho-S/T (P-S/T) and phopho-Y (P-Y) were evaluated independently using the gene ontologies biological process, cellular component and molecular function. GO::TermFinder (41) as implemented via The Generic GO Term Finder (http://go.princeton.edu/cgi-bin/GOTermFinder) was used to test for ontology enrichment among phosphorylated peptides. To determine significance of enrichment of terms a Bonferroni corrected P-value cutoff of 0.05 was used. GO::TermFinder calculates a P-value using the hypergeometric distribution comparing the number of terms found in a set (phosphorylated genes) to the overall background of the genome (41). No evidence codes were excluded from the analysis.  The CGD Gene Ontology Slim Mapper available from the CGD website and an R script (GOstats.R, bioconductor) in which a GSEAGOHyperGParams function is used for calculating a P-value were also used to determine significant GO term enrichment and similar term enrichments were found. Heat maps of the categories were generated by calculating non-parametric ranking of percent values for each GO term using the “heatmap.2” function in the “gplots” package (42) in R (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria). Strain construction and Mediator complex purification Wild type C.albicans Mediator complex was purified from cTTR03 through 6XHis-3XFlag tagged Med8 (43).To allow for the affinity purification of Mediator complex from mutant strains, one or both copies of MED8 were C-terminal tagged with 6XHis-3XFLAG (44) in AZC52 (med12Δ/Δ(43)), AZC63(med9Δ/Δ(43)), cTTR01 (med15Δ/Δ(43)) and SN913 (ssn3Δ/Δ(45)) as described previously (44) or by PCR products amplified by primer pairs LM025/LM014 (44) from the plasmids pFA6a-6XHis-3XFlag-HIS1 and pFA6a-6XHis-3XFlag-ARG4. These two template plasmids were generated by replacing the SAT1 marker on pFA6a-6XHis-3XFlag-SAT1 (44) between the AscI and PmeI sites with HIS1 and ARG4 marker subcloned from pFA6a-TAP-HIS1 and pFA6a-TAP-ARG4 (46) respectively. Similarly, both copies of SSN3 and SSN8 were 6XHis-3XFLAG tagged in BWP17 (47) by using primer pairs SSN3tag_sense/SSN3tag_anti and SSN8tag_sense/SSN8tag_anti (48) to generate yLM256 and yLM255 respectively. Each species of Mediator complex, containing the core subunits, used in this study was isolated from the high salt elution fraction of the Heparin column by FLAG affinity purification through the 6XHis-3XFlag tag placed on the C-terminus of Med8 or Ssn3 subunit as previously described (44). Free CDK8 module, containing only Ssn3/Cdk8, Ssn8/CycC, Ssn5/Med12 and Ssn2/Med13, was purified from the Heparin flow-through fraction of yLM255 lysate by FLAG purification. The Flag purification method was identical to above except that the salt concentration of the Heparin flow-through was adjusted from 150mM KOAc to 300mM KOAc before application to the Flag-agarose. All strains used in this study are presented in Supplemental Table 1 (Table S1).

### Publication Abstract
Candida albicans is an important human fungal pathogen in both immunocompetent and immunocompromised individuals. C. albicans regulation has been studied in many contexts, including morphological transitions, mating competence, biofilm formation, stress resistance, and cell wall synthesis. Analysis of kinase- and phosphatase-deficient mutants has made it clear that protein phosphorylation plays an important role in the regulation of these pathways. In this study, to further our understanding of phosphorylation in C. albicans regulation, we performed a deep analysis of the phosphoproteome in C. albicans. We identified 19,590 unique peptides that corresponded to 15,906 unique phosphosites on 2,896 proteins. The ratios of serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphosites were 80.01%, 18.11%, and 1.81%, respectively. The majority of proteins (2,111) contained at least two detected phosphorylation sites. Consistent with findings in other fungi, cytoskeletal proteins were among the most highly phosphorylated proteins, and there were differences in Gene Ontology (GO) terms for proteins with serine and threonine versus tyrosine phosphorylation sites. This large-scale analysis identified phosphosites in protein components of Mediator, an important transcriptional coregulatory protein complex. A targeted analysis of the phosphosites in Mediator complex proteins confirmed the large-scale studies, and further in vitro assays identified a subset of these phosphorylations that were catalyzed by Cdk8 (Ssn3), a kinase within the Mediator complex. These data represent the deepest single analysis of a fungal phosphoproteome and lay the groundwork for future analyses of the C. albicans phosphoproteome and specific phosphoproteins.

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Dartmouth Med School
Department of Biochemistry Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth

### Submitter
Arminja Kettenbach

### Lab Head
Dr Arminja Kettenbach
Department of Biochemistry Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth


