### Accession
PXD003758

### Title
The dynamic interactome of Polycomb family complexes during stem cell differentiation

### Description
While the core subunits of Polycomb group (PcG) complexes are well characterized, little is known about the dynamics of these protein complexes during cellular differentiation. We used quantitative interaction proteomics to study PcG proteins in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) and neural progenitor cells (NPCs). We found the stoichiometry of PRC1 and PRC2 to be highly dynamic during neural differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
Label-free GFP pulldowns were performed in triplicate as previously described (Smits AH NAR 2013) with the following modifications. For GFP pulldowns, 2mg of nuclear extract was incubated with 7.5 ul GFP Nano trap beads (Chromotek) and 50 ug/mL ethidium bromide in Buffer C (300 mM NaCl, 20 mM Hepes/KOH, pH 7.9, 20% v/v glycerol, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA) with 0.1% NP-40, protease inhibitors, and 0.5 mM dithiothreitol in a total volume of 400 ul. 6 washes were performed: 2 with Buffer C and 0.5% NP-40, 2 with PBS and 0.5% NP-40, and 2 with PBS. Flag pulldowns were performed as above but with 10 ul anti-Flag M2 affinity gel (Sigma). Affinity purified proteins were subject to on-bead trypsin digestion as previously described (Baymaz, Spruijt, Vermeulen 2014). Tryptic peptides were acidified and desalted using StageTips(Rappsilber 2007) prior to mass spec analyses.   Tryptic peptides were separated with an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid and Buffer B was 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Eed-GFP LFQ samples were separated using a 120-min gradient from 7% until 32% Buffer B followed by step-wise increases up to 95% Buffer B. Mass spectra were recorded on a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), selecting the 15 most intense precursor ions of every full scan for fragmentation. The tryptic peptides from Ring1b-GFP ESC and NPC pulldowns, Bap1-GFP ESC pulldowns, and Flag-Pcgf2 pulldowns were separated using a 94-min gradient from 9-32% Buffer B followed by washes at 50% then 95% Buffer B for 120 min of total data collection time. Mass spectra were recorded on an LTQ-Orbitrap QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), selecting the top 10 most intense precursor ions for fragmentation. The tryptic peptides from Bap1-GFP NPC pulldowns, Asxl2-GFP ESC pulldowns, and all nuclear pellet pulldowns were measured by developing a gradient from 9-32% Buffer B for 114 minutes before washes at 50% then 95% Buffer B, for 140 minutes of total data collection time. Mass spectra were recorded on an LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Scans were collected in data-dependent top speed mode with dynamic exclusion set at 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files from LFQ AP-MS/MS were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.1.0 using default settings and searching against the UniProt mouse proteome, release 2014_09. Additional options for Match between runs, LFQ, and iBAQ were selected. Stoichiometry calculations and volcano plots were produced essentially as described (Smits AH NAR 2013) using Perseus version 1.4.0.8 and in-house R scripts.  Statistical cutoffs were chosen such that no proteins were present as outliers on the control, non-GFP side of the volcano plot.

### Publication Abstract
Although the core subunits of Polycomb group (PcG) complexes are well characterized, little is known about the dynamics of these protein complexes during cellular differentiation. We used quantitative interaction proteomics and genome-wide profiling to study PcG proteins in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and neural progenitor cells (NPCs). We found that the stoichiometry and genome-wide binding of PRC1 and PRC2 were highly dynamic during neural differentiation. Intriguingly, we observed a downregulation and loss of PRC2 from chromatin marked with trimethylated histone H3 K27 (H3K27me3) during differentiation, whereas PRC1 was retained at these sites. Additionally, we found PRC1 at enhancer and promoter regions independently of PRC2 binding and H3K27me3. Finally, overexpression of NPC-specific PRC1 interactors in ESCs led to increased Ring1b binding to, and decreased expression of, NPC-enriched Ring1b-target genes. In summary, our integrative analyses uncovered dynamic PcG subcomplexes and their widespread colocalization with active chromatin marks during differentiation.

### Keywords
Pcg, Pr-dub, Prc1, Prc2

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Chromatin Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Radboud University

### Submitter
Susan Kloet

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Department of Proteomics and Chromatin Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands


