### Accession
PXD033249

### Title
Silent recognition by Toll-like receptor 5 of flagellins from human gut commensal bacteria

### Description
Flagellins from commensal bacteria can be weak Toll-like receptor (TLR)5 agonists despite high affinity binding to TLR5, ligands we termed “silent flagellins”. To determine if silent flagellins are detectable in the human gut, endogenous flagellins produced by the microbiota were isolated from stool obtained from a healthy adult female donor. TLR5 was used as bait to enrich for silent flagellins and TLR5-bound flagellins were identified by searching peptides against a custom flagellin database built from metagenome sequences.

### Sample Protocol
Stool sample from healthy adult female (166 mg) was resuspended in PBS pH 7.4 supplemented with protease inhibitors to 0.03% w/v and vortexed at max speed for 20 min. Lysates were cleared following centrifugation at 13,700 x g for 10 min at 4°C. Protein levels in the supernatant were quantified by BCA, aliquoted, and stored at -80°C. TLR5-HA HEK cells were lysed on ice in 25 mM Tris⋅HCl pH 7.5, 1% v/v Igepal CA-630, 100 mM NaCl, 10% v/v glycerol supplemented with protease inhibitors and centrifuged at at 4°C (855 x g, 20 minutes). Cleared HEK cell lysates were incubated with 90 uL anti-HA resin (Roche Cat. No. 11815016001) for 2 hr at 4°C. Beads were washed 3x with lysis buffer prior to incubation with 1.8 mg stool proteins for 2 hr at 4°C. Input stool proteins were boiled for 5 min at 98°C and diluted in lysis buffer to final volume 300 uL prior to incubation. After incubation, beads were washed 3x with lysis buffer.  Protein in gel digestion: Eluted proteins were purified with a 12% NUPAGE Novex Bis-Tris Gel (Invitrogen) and tryptically digested. Extracted peptides after in gel digestion were desalted using C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al 2007). Eluted peptides were subjected to LCMS/MS analysis. Mass spectrometry: Peptide analysis was performed on an Easy-nLC 1200 system coupled to an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described elsewhere (Schmitt et al., 2020) with slight modifications: peptides were injected onto the column in HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and subsequently eluted with a 227 min segmented gradient of 10–33-50-90% HPLC solvent B (80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200nl/min. The 20 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. For both precursors and fragment ions the maximal injection time mode was set to auto and the AGC target to standard. Precursor masses with charge states between 2 and 6 were selected with a resolution of 60,000 at minimum intensity of 400,000 at a scan range of 300 to 1750m/z. They were excluded from further selection for 30 s. HCD collision energy for peptide fragmentation was set to 28%, resolution for MS2 scans was 30,000.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were processed with MaxQuant software suite version 1.6.7.0 (Cox & Mann, 2008), respectively. Database search was performed using the Andromeda search engine, which is a module of the MaxQuant. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Homo sapiens database obtained from Uniprot (released 07.10.2020, 97,795 entries), a database containing 103 flagellin sequences from various organisms (European Nucleotide Archive study accession number PRJEB47632), and a database consisting of 246 commonly observed contaminants. In database search, full tryptic specificity was required and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus were set as variable modifications Mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 4.5 ppm and for fragment ions to 20 pm. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were reported at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01, estimated by the target/decoy approach  (Elias and Gygi, 2007). For protein group quantitation a minimum of two quantified peptides were required. All search parameters were kept to default values except for the following. Minimal peptide length of 5 amino acid was required and the iBAQ algorithm was enabled (Schwanhäusser et al., 2011).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Toll-like receptor 5, Silent recognition, Commensal-derived flagellins, Silent flagellins

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiome Science, Max Planck Institute for Biology, Tübingen 72076, Germany. Cluster of Excellence EXC 2124 Controlling Microbes to Fight Infections, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
Prof. Boris Macek
Proteome Center Tuebingen
University of Tuebingen
Auf der Morgenstelle 15
72076 Tuebingen

### Submitter
Irina Droste-Borel

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth E. Ley
Department of Microbiome Science, Max Planck Institute for Biology, Tübingen 72076, Germany. Cluster of Excellence EXC 2124 Controlling Microbes to Fight Infections, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.


