### Accession
PXD024806

### Title
Inference of Kinase-Signaling Networks in Human Myeloid Cell Line Models by Phosphoproteomics using Kinase Activity Enrichment Analysis (KAEA)

### Description
Despite the indisputable efficacy of kinase-inhibitors in myeloid malignancies, cure remains an exception and most patients eventually progress. Therefore, there is an unmet clinical need in developing diagnostic pipelines for the characterization of kinase-activities and signaling networks to investigate their implications in response and resistance. Here, we used the BCR-ABL1 driven K562 and hetero-/homozygote FLT3-ITD driven MOLM13/MV4-11 human myeloid cell line models exposed to the clinically established BCR-ABL1 and FLT3 kinase-inhibitors, Nilotinib and Midostaurin, respectively. Titanium dioxide enrichment with liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS) was used and the differential phosphoproteomics profiles analyzed with the Kinase-Activity Enrichment Analysis (KAEA) pipeline. This novel pipeline allows inferring kinase activities within signaling networks. We observed correct detection of expected direct (ABL, KIT, SRC) and indirect (MAPK) targets of Nilotinib as well as the indirect (PRKC, MAPK, AKT, RPS6K) targets of Midostaurin, respectively. Moreover, our pipeline was able to characterize unexplored kinase-activities within the corresponding signaling networks. With our pipeline, we provide researchers and clinicians an instrument to monitor biological behavior of kinases in response or resistance to targeted treatment. Further investigations are warranted and ongoing to determine the utility of our pipeline to characterize mechanisms of disease progression and treatment failure.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and protein digestion: Cells were lysed in 8 M urea and 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 containing complete protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (11697498001, Roche) complemented with 10 mM sodium fluoride and 2 mM di-sodium orthovanadate. Proteins were reduced and alkylated as described elsewhere (PMID: 27738094). Samples were diluted by addition of 1/10-volume of 50 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0 before protein precipitation with 5 volumes of ice-cold acetone over night at -20 °C. Proteins were pelleted by centrifugation at 16’000 g for 10 min at 4 °C and the acetone supernatant was discarded. Pellets were dried at ambient air for 15 min and stored at -20 °C until further use.   Proteins were re-dissolved in 8 M urea in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and protein content determined by BCA assay. Urea was then diluted to 1.6 M by addition of 20 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0 with 2 mM calcium dichloride before a two-stage digestion for 2 hours at 37 °C followed by over-night at room temperature (RT) with 1/200 (w/w) trypsin-to-substrate ratio each time. Digestions were stopped by adding 1/20-volume of 20% (v/v) tri-fluoroacetic acid (TFA, Fluka) and loading on a pre-conditioned SEP Pak 1cc C18 cartridge (Waters). The cartridge was washed with 10 volumes of 0.1% TFA before elution of peptides with 1 mL glycolic acid (Sigma Aldrich) at 80 mg/mL in 80% acetonitrile (ACN) / 2.5% TFA (v/v) as loading buffer.  Phosphopeptide enrichment: Anatase titanium di-oxide (TiO2) beads (Sachtopore NP 5?m/100Å, SNX 010S 005) were washed with water and loading buffer before suspending in loading buffer at 100 mg/mL. Phosphopeptides were then enriched with a two-stage extraction procedure, where the first incubation step (INC1) serves as a depletion step for multiply phosphorylated and very acidic peptides, while the second incubation step (INC2) enriches for all remaining phosphopeptides. For INC1, TiO2 beads were added to the peptide solution at a ratio of 1:4 TiO2/protein (w/w) and incubated under constant shaking for 15 minutes at room temperature (RT). Beads were spun down and the supernatant transferred into a new vial containing TiO2 beads for INC2 at a ratio of 10:1 (w/w) followed by another incubation for 15 min at RT. The last supernatant was diluted to 100 ng/?L with 1% (v/v) TFA and 5 ?L subsequently analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS2) as the phospho-depleted compartment.   TiO2 beads were then washed several times with 300 ?L at constant shaking for 5 min and by discarding all the supernatants with following solutions: i) once with loading buffer, ii) twice with 80 mg/mL glycolic acid in 70% ACN / 0.1% TFA, iii) twice with 70% ACN / 0.1% TFA, iv) and finally twice with 0.1% TFA. Peptides were then eluted twice from TiO2 by incubation for 5 min at constant shaking with 50 ?L per 1 mg input protein of 50 mM di-sodium hydrogen phosphate / 5 mM sodium orthovanadate / 1 mM sodium fluoride. Both supernatants were transferred into a new vial containing 8 ?L formic acid (Merck). INC1 and INC2 eluates were centrifuged for 1 minute at 16’000 g and RT before transfer of the supernatant to an HPLC polypropylene vial and 5 ?L of both eluates were analyzed separately by MS. * Nano-liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry: nLC-MS2 was done by three subsequent injections of each sample on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method as described elsewhere (PMID: 30555495).

### Data Protocol
nLC-MS2 data interpretation was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.4.1) for Trypsin digest. Variable modifications included Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Phospho (STY), and fixed modification included Carbamidomethyl (C) only, multiplicity 1, first search at 10 ppm, main search at 4.5 ppm mass accuracy, 0.4 Da mass deviation for the fragment ions. Data was searched against human database (Uniprot Human) with a minimum peptide length of 7 and a false discovery rate (FDR) set at 0.01 for protein, peptides and sites.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kinase activity, Myeloid malignancies, Phosphoproteomics, Kinase-signaling network

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
Department of Hematology and Central Hematology Laboratory, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of Bern, Switzerland Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Nicolas Bonadies
Department of Hematology and Central Hematology Laboratory, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of Bern, Switzerland Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, Switzerland


