### Accession
PXD003111

### Title
Silencing of eIF5B Changes Proteostasis by Providing Negative Feedback on MAPK Signaling

### Description
Protein translational machinery is an important component of proteostasis network (PN) that maintains cellular proteostasis and regulates aging and other cellular processes. Ample evidence indicates that inhibition of translation initiation factor activities enhances stress resistance and extends life span in model organisms. Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5B (eIF5B) is responsible for joining of pre-40S subunits with 60S ribosomal subunits to give a 80S-like complex in protein translational initiation and its silencing may disrupt proteostasis and trigger cellular processes associated with stress responses. In the present work, eIF5B was genetically manipulated in 293T cells. The physiological aspects of eIF5B-knockdown cells (eIF5B-KN) were characterized showing that they grew slower, had a lower level of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS), an increased resistance to oxidative stress and an enhanced autophagy. Proteomic analysis showed that silencing of eIF5B resulted in up-regulation of 88 proteins and down-regulation of 130 proteins in eIF5B-KN compared to control cells, which involved in diverse cellular processes including metabolism, RNA processing, and protein metabolism, and DNA synthesis. The autonomous downregulation of the MAPK singnaling pathway was identified that led to the prolonged S-phase cell-cycle arrest and contributed to the slow growth of eIF5B-KN cells. Glutamine transporters were found to be downregulated which enhanced formation of autophagy. Furthermore, eIF5B knockdown compromised the integrity of 28S rRNA and 8.5.8S rRNA that can be rescued via restoring the eIF5B expression level. Taken together, these results demonstrated that eIF5B silencing providesd a negative feedback to down regulate the MAPK signaling pathway which reconstitutesd the proteostasis, resulting in a decrease in cell growth and an enhanced resistance to oxidative stress. Our data provide a useful resource to further biological exploration into functions of protein synthesis in regulation of proteostasis and aging and suggest that eIF5B plays a role in aging process.

### Sample Protocol
About 1x107 cells were lysed using 8M urea, and lysate was centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 20 minutes at 4°C. Protein concentrations were determined with the BCA method. Equal amount of proteins from control and eIF5B knockdown cells (about 100g) were reduced with 5mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 13 mM iodoacetamide. The concentration of urea was adjusted to 1.5M with phosphate buffered saline. In solution digestion was then carried out with sequencing grade trypsin at 37°C overnight. Then Sep-Pak C18 Vac cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) were used for desalting. The eluted peptides were then centrifuged in a speedvac until dry, then suspended with 100μl of 200mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Then TMT Label Reagent was added into the solution and the reaction was incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. Peptides from control cells were labeled by TMT6-127 and peptides from eIF5B knockdown cells were labeled by TMT6-129. Then 5% hydroxylamine was added into the reaction and incubated for 15 min to quench the reaction. The two samples were mixed and fractionated with reverse phase (RP) chromatography. The fractionation was performed on an Ultimate 3000 System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) by using a Xbridge C18 RP column (5μm,150 , 250 mm × 4.6 mm i.d., (Waters, Milford, MA)). Mobile phases A (2% acetonitrile, adjusted pH to 10.0 using ammonia) and B (98% acetonitrile, adjusted pH to 10.0 using ammonia) were used to develop a gradient. The solvent gradient was set as follows: 5%-8% B, 5 min; 8%-18% B, 25 min; 18%-32% B, 32 min; 32%-95% B, 2 min; 95% B, 6 min; 95%-5% B,5 min. The peptides were monitored at 214 nm and collected every minute. The fractions were pooled, dried and reconstituted in 20 μL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water and were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the TMT-labeled peptides were separated by a 120 min gradient elution at a flow rate 0.250 μl/min with a nano-HPLC system (Proxeon, Denmark) which was directly interfaced with a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary column(75μm ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA) packed with C-18 resin (300 , 5 μm, Varian, Lexington, MA). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The Q Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode using Xcalibur 2.1.2 software and there was a single full-scan mass spectrum in the Orbitrap (4001800 m/z, 75,000 resolution) followed by 20 data-dependent MS/MS scans in the ion trap at 30% normalized collision energy (HCD).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra from each LC-MS/MS run were searched against the human.fasta database downloaded from Uniprot (release date of January 10, 2015; 89105 entries) using an in-house Sequest HT Algorithm in Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The search criteria were the followings: full tryptic specificity was required; one missed cleavage was allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) and TMT sixplex (K and N-terminal) were set as the fixed modifications; the oxidation (M) was set as the variable modification; precursor ion mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm for all MS acquired in an orbitrap mass analyzer; and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 20 mmu for all MS2 spectra acquired. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator provided by Proteome Discoverer software. When the q value was smaller than 1%, the peptide spectrum match (PSM) was considered to be correct. False discovery was determined based on peptide spectrum match when searched against the reverse, decoy database. Peptides only assigned to a given protein group were considered as unique. The false discovery rate was also set to 0.01 for protein identifications. Relative protein quantification was performed using Proteome Discoverer software (Version 1.4) according to manufacturer’s instructions on the six reporter ion intensities per peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Here we provide data from three proteomics techniques; two-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE) followed by identification of selected spots using PSD MALDI-TOF MS/MS, one-dimensional gel electrophoresis followed by LC-MS/MS analysis of gel slices (GeLC) and dimethyl isotopic labelling of tryptic peptides followed by Orbitrap MS/MS (DML), to quantify the changes in the repertoire of bovine milk proteins that occurs after drying off. We analysed skim milk and whey sampled at day 0 and either day 3 or day 8 after drying off. These analyses identified 45 spots by MALDI-TOF, 51 proteins by GeLC and 161 proteins by DML, for which the detailed data work-up is presented as three Excel files. The data supplied in this article supports the accompanying publication "Changes in the repertoire of bovine milk proteins during mammary involution" (Boggs et al., 2015) [1]. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers ProteomeXchange: PXD003110 and ProteomeXchange: PXD003011.

### Keywords
Protein synthesis; proteomics; proteostasis; eif5b; ribosome.

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, China
PHD candidate

### Submitter
Xu Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Haiteng Deng
School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, China


