### Accession
PXD015335

### Title
Multilayered N-glycoproteome Profiling Reveals Highly Heterogeneous and Dysregulated Protein N-glycosylations Related to Alzheimer’s Disease

### Description
Protein N-glycosylation is ubiquitous in brain and closely related to cognition and memory. Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a multifactorial disorder that lacks clear pathogenesis and treatment. Aberrant N-glycosylation has been suggested to be involved in AD pathology. While the systematic variations of protein N-glycosylation and their roles in AD have not been thoroughly investigated due to technically challenging. Here, we applied multilayered N-glycoproteomics to quantify the global protein expression, N-glycosylation sites, N-glycans, and site-specific N-glycopeptides in AD mice brains (APP/PS1 transgenic) versus wild type. The N-glycoproteome landscape exhibited the highly complex site-specific heterogeneity in AD brains. Quantitative analyses explored the generally dysregulated N-glycosylations in AD, involving proteins such as glutamate receptors, as well as fucosylated and oligo-mannose glycans. Furthermore, functional study revealed the crucial roles of N-glycosylation on proteins and neuron cells. Our work provided a robust multilayered N-glycoproteomics workflow for AD and can be applied to widespread biological systems.

### Sample Protocol
Multiple technologies were used to quantify the proteome, N-glycoproteome, and glycome in the APP/PS1 and wild type (WT) mouse brains (Figure 1A). Quantitative proteomic analysis using iTRAQ labeling and 2D LC-MS/MS led to the quantification of 5,046 proteins in the APP/PS1 and WT mice (Table S1). In N-glycosylation site quantification, the iTRAQ labeled glycopeptides were enriched by ZIC-HILIC followed by the detachment of N-glycans. A total of 804 N-glycosites on 375 proteins were quantified (Table S2). Meanwhile, intact N-glycopeptides after ZIC-HILIC enrichment were directly identified with pGlyco 2.0 strategy and quantified using label-free method, and 3,524 intact N-glycopeptides were quantified (Table S3). The proteins extracted from brain tissues were also subjected to lectin microarrays containing 91 lectins with distinct glycan binding specificities and 83 lectins were positively detected (Table S4).

### Data Protocol
Ingenuity Systems Pathway Analysis software (Ingenuity Systems) was used to perform the molecular function and the pathway analysis of the identified proteome and N-glycoproteome. Protein surface accessibility and secondary structure predictions were depicted by NetSurfP.31 We applied the method to 596 N-glycosylated proteins and derived the predicted structures of 1,007 glycosylated asparagines. We used the t test to statistically estimate differences in secondary structure localization. The circular glycoproteome map was constructed with Circos.32

### Publication Abstract
Protein N-glycosylation is ubiquitous in the brain and is closely related to cognition and memory. Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a multifactorial disorder that lacks a clear pathogenesis and treatment. Aberrant N-glycosylation has been suggested to be involved in AD pathology. However, the systematic variations in protein N-glycosylation and their roles in AD have not been thoroughly investigated due to technical challenges. Here, we applied multilayered N-glycoproteomics to quantify the global protein expression levels, N-glycosylation sites, N-glycans, and site-specific N-glycopeptides in AD (APP/PS1 transgenic) and wild-type mouse brains. The N-glycoproteomic landscape exhibited highly complex site-specific heterogeneity in AD mouse brains. The generally dysregulated N-glycosylation in AD, which involved proteins such as glutamate receptors as well as fucosylated and oligomannose glycans, were explored by quantitative analyses. Furthermore, functional studies revealed the crucial effects of N-glycosylation on proteins and neurons. Our work provides a systematic multilayered N-glycoproteomic strategy for AD and can be applied to diverse biological systems.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
Fudan University
fudan university

### Submitter
Pan Fang

### Lab Head
Dr Huli Shen
fudan university


