### Accession
PXD036648

### Title
Cell-based characterization of caspase-3 cleavage sites by LATE and HYATNE

### Description
Proteins' N-termini contain information about their biochemical properties and functions, and they can undergo co- or post-translational modifications, as well as be processed by proteases. To expand the coverage of the N-terminome, we have developed LATE (LysN Amino Terminal Enrichment), a method that uses selective chemical derivatization of α-amines to isolate the N-terminal peptides. We applied LATE in combination with other N-terminomic method to study caspase-3 mediated proteolysis both in vitro and during apoptosis in cells. This enable us to identify many unreported caspase-3 cleavages, including some that cannot be identified by other methods. Furthermore, we find direct evidence that some of the caspase-3 generated neo-N-termini can be further modified by Nt-acetylation. This provides a global picture of the caspase-3 degradome and uncovers previously unrecognised functional crosstalk between post-translational Nt-acetylation and caspase proteolysis pathways.

### Sample Protocol
HCT116 were grown in a 10 cm plate until they reached 40% confluence, then the medium was changed to starvation medium (RPMI 2mM L-glutamine, 1% Pen-Strep solution without serum) for 2 hours. The cells were transfected with caspase-3/GFP bicistronic in starvation medium. Eight hours following transfection the media was changed back to RPMI supplemented with 10% FCS, 2 mM L-glutamine, 1% Pen-Strep solution, and the cells were grown to 80% confluence. The cells were detached with trypsin-EDTA, quenched by an equal volume of media, and centrifuged at 1500g for 5min. Next, cell sorting was done using BD FACS-Aria™️ (BD Bioscience) against GFP fluorescence. Between 1.5 and 2 million cells of GFP-positive (high caspase-3) and negative populations were collected per biological repeat. After sorting, samples were centrifuged at 1500g for 5min, re-suspended in 4 ml of RPMI, 20% FCS, 1% Pen-Strep, 2mM L-Glutamine, and seeded in a 6 cm plate. Cells were grown for another day while the media refreshed after 12 hours. Lastly, samples were treated with BCL-2 inhibitor ABT-199 at a final concentration of 150µM to induce caspase-3 activation. After 2 hours the media was removed and the cells were washed with PBS. The proteins were extracted by the addition of 1ml of 95℃ pre-heated 50mM HEPES, 8M Gu-HCl pH 8.0 onto the cells, scarping them and incubating the lysate for 5 min at 95℃. Next, the cell lysates were sonicated using UP200St with VialTweeter (Hielscher, Germany) at max amplitude, 70% cycle time for 5 minutes. The sonicated lysates were centrifuged at 15000g, 10 min, 4℃, and the cleared supernatants were collected. For both LysN Amino Terminal Enrichment (LATE) and HYdrophobic Tagging-Assisted N-termini Enrichment (HYTANE), one hundred ug protein (per sample) was re-suspended in 100mM HEPES, 4M Gu-HCl pH 7.5  reduced with 5mM DTT at 65℃ for 30 minutes followed by alkylation with 12.5mM chloroacetamide (CAA) for additional 20 minutes at room temperature in the dark. CAA leftovers were quenched with another dose of DTT, and the sample was diluted 1 to 4 with 20mM HEPES pH 8. For LATE, the lysate pH was further adjusted to 8.0 and LysN (Promega) was added at 1:100 w/w. The samples were digested for 12h at 37℃. N-terminal alpha amines specific labelling was done by adding 40mM (final) of C13D2 (heavy) or C12H2 (light) formaldehyde and 20mM (final) of sodium cyanoborohydride at 37℃ for 10min. Heavy and light labelled samples were quenched by the addition of glycine (final concentration 100mM) and incubation at room temperature for 10min. Next, heavy- and light-labelled samples were mixed and desalted using OASIS-HLB 100mg cartridge (Waters). Peptides were eluted with 60% ACN, and 0.1% FA and dried to completeness by speedvac. Next, samples were resuspended in 100µl of 100mM HEPES pH 7.0 with undecanal at 50:1 unedecanal:peptide w/w ratio. Undecenal was dissolved in ethanol to a final concentration of 20mg/ml. The undecanal labelling was carried out at 50℃ for 2 hours. Undecanal-labelled samples were centrifuged at 20000g for 5 minutes at RT and the supernatants were transferred to a new tube and dried to completeness using CentriVap Benchtop Vacuum Concentrator (Labconco, USA). Dried samples were dissolved in 2% ACN, and 0.1% FA and desalted with OASIS-HLB 100mg cartridge (Waters). For HYTANE, the lysate pH was further adjusted to 7.5 and each sample was labelled by adding 40mM (final) of either C13D2 (heavy) or C12H2 (light) formaldehyde and 20mM (final) of sodium cyanoborohydride and incubating at 37℃ overnight. The labelling was quenched with 100mM glycine (final) for 1 hour at 37C. Next, heavy and light-labelled samples were mixed and diluted 1 to 4 using 20mM HEPES pH 8.0. The mixed samples were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) in a 1:100 w/w ratio, at 37℃ overnight. The tryptic digestion was quenched by the addition of FA to a final concentration of 1%. The combined sample was desalted using OASIS-HLP and dried completely in a speedvac. Undecanal-based enrichment was done as described for LATE.  Desalted samples were subjected to LC-MS analysis using Q Exactive Orbitrap HF coupled to Easy-nanoLC 1000 capillary HPLC. The peptides were resolved by reversed-phase using a homemade 30 cm long 75µm-diameter capillary, packed with 3.5-µm silica using ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (Dr . Maisch GmbH). Peptides were eluted using a linear 120-minute gradient of 5–28% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, followed by a 15- minute gradient of 28–95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, and a 15-minute wash of 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (at flow rates of 0.15 μl/min). MS was performed in positive mode using an m/z range of 300–1800 in a data-dependent acquisition mode, a resolution of 70,000 for MS1, and a resolution of 17,500 for MS2; repetitively full MS scans were followed by high energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of the 20 most dominant ions selected from the first MS scan.

### Data Protocol
Data-dependent acquisition experiments were analyzed using Trans Proteomic Pipeline (version 6.1) (Deutsch et al., 2010). Searches were done using COMET (version 2020_01 rev 1)(Eng et al., 2013). Searches for acetylated, dimethylated, and methylated N-termini were done separately.  Comet results were further validated by PeptideProphet (Keller et al., 2002) at a false discovery rate of less than 1%. XPRESS was used for relative peptide quantification (Han et al., 2001). Mass tolerance for quantification was 20 ppm with The minimum number of chromatogram points needed for quantitation was set to 3, and the number of isotopic peaks to the sum was set to 0. Searches were conducted against Homo sapiens proteome containing 73248 sequences (ID:9606, downloaded from Uniprot in June 2019) and supplemented with cRAP sequences downloaded from ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP. Bioinformatic analysis of the N-terminome identifications was carried out using in-house python scripts (available for download from Github) and based on Uniprot annotations (The UniProt Consortium, 2021). These scripts were used to combine peptide identification into unified list, aggregate peptide ratios based on the sum of peak areas of different PSM of the same peptide.

### Publication Abstract
The N termini of proteins contain information about their biochemical properties and functions. These N termini can be processed by proteases and can undergo other co- or posttranslational modifications. We have developed LATE (LysN Amino Terminal Enrichment), a method that uses selective chemical derivatization of &#x3b1;-amines to isolate the N-terminal peptides, in order to improve N-terminome identification in conjunction with other enrichment strategies. We applied LATE alongside another N-terminomic method to study caspase-3-mediated proteolysis both in&#xa0;vitro and during apoptosis in cells. This has enabled us to identify many unreported caspase-3 cleavages, some of which cannot be identified by other methods. Moreover, we have found direct evidence that neo-N-termini generated by caspase-3 cleavage can be further modified by Nt-acetylation. Some of these neo-Nt-acetylation events occur in the early phase of the apoptotic process and may have a role in translation inhibition. This has provided a comprehensive overview of the caspase-3 degradome and has uncovered previously unrecognized cross talk between posttranslational Nt-acetylation and caspase proteolytic pathways.

### Keywords
Late, Hytane, Abt199, Lysn, Caspase-3, Peptidyl-lys metalloendopeptidase n-terminomics

### Affiliations
Technion
Faculty of Biology Technion - Israel Institute of Technology Haifa, Israel

### Submitter
Oded Kleifeld

### Lab Head
Dr Oded Kleifeld
Faculty of Biology Technion - Israel Institute of Technology Haifa, Israel


