### Accession
PXD044996

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of isolated murine brain endothelial cells (BECs) from 3-, 6-, 12-, and 18-months-old mice and Apoe-KO mice at 3 months followed by label-free quantification (LFQ)

### Description
Age-related decline in brain endothelial cell (BEC) function critically contributes to cerebrovascular and neurodegenerative disease. Comprehensive atlases of the BEC transcriptome have become available but results from proteomic profiling are lacking. To gain insights into endothelial pathways affected by aging, we developed a magnetic-activated cell sorting (MACS)-based mouse BEC enrichment protocol compatible with high-resolution mass-spectrometry based proteomics.  In this experiment, first we have compared MACS sorted BECs across multiple time points between 3 and 18 months of age. Using unsupervised cluster analysis, we found a segregation of age-related protein dynamics with biological functions including a downregulation of vesicle-mediated transport.   Our approach uncovered changes not picked up by transcriptomic studies such as accumulation of vesicle cargo and receptor ligands including Apoe.  Therefor in our next proteomics experiment we compared BECs from 3-months-old Apoe-KO and WT mice and found 111 and 103 proteins to be up- and downregulated, respectively. Comparing the BEC proteomic signature of young Apoe-KO mice with the signature of aged (18-months-old) WT mice we found a positive correlation suggesting an accelerating effect of Apoe deficiency on BEC aging.

### Sample Protocol
The entire brain of 3-, 6-, 12-, and 18-months old and 3-months-old Apoe-Ko mice without the olfactory bulb was used for BEC isolation. First, the brain was transferred to a Petri Dish placed on ice and minced with a scalpel. BECs were isolated using a modified version of the Adult Brain Dissociation kit (Miltenyi Biotec, Cat# 130-107-677), which allows for mechanical and enzymatic tissue dissociation. After tissue homogenization and filtration through 70 µm cell strainers (Corning, Cat# 431751), myelin was removed using a 30 % Percoll gradient (GE Healthcare Cat# 17-5445-02) followed by removal of erythrocytes using the Red Blood Cell Removal Solution (Miltenyi Biotec, Cat# 130-094-183). BECs were enriched from the single cell suspension using CD31 MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotec, Cat# 130-097-418) and magnetic activated cell sorting (MACS) using a modified MACS buffer with low bovine serum albumin (BSA) content (L-MACS buffer; containing 0.25 % BSA (BSA Fraction V, Sigma-Aldrich, Cat#10735096001) and 2 mM EDTA (ThermoFisher, Cat# 15575020) in PBS with calcium and magnesium (Corning, Cat#21-030-CV)). Following CD31 enrichment, the cell suspension was washed twice with PBS to remove residual L-MACS buffer and subsequently pelleted cells were used for further protein extraction. Protein was extracted from isolated BECs with RIPA buffer containing 150 mM NaCl (Roth, Cat# 3957.1), 1 M Tris-HCl pH 7.5 (Roth, Cat# 9090.3), 1 % NP40 (Sigma Alrich Cat# 74385), 0.5 % Deoxycholate (Roth, Cat# 3484.3), and 0.1 % SDS (Serva, Cat# 20765.03) and protein inhibitors cocktail (Roche, Cat# 4693159001). Samples were incubated in RIPA buffer for 30min on ice followed by centrifugation at 18,000 g for another 30 min at 4 °C. Supernatants were collected and kept at -80 °C for further analysis. The whole sample of acutely isolated BECs (~5 µg) was subjected to proteolytical digestion. After 1:2 dilution with water, a benzonase digestion with 12.5 units was performed to remove remaining DNA/RNA the single-pot solid-phase enhanced sample preparation (SP3) was used for protein digestion according to a previously published protocol (Hughes et al., Nat Prot, 2019) Samples were filtered with 0.22 µm spin filters (Costar Spin-x, Corning, USA) to remove remaining beads, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Dried peptides were dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic. The peptide concentration after proteolytic digestion was estimated using the Qubit protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, US). Samples were analyzed on a nanoLC system (EASY-nLC 1200, Thermo Scientific, US) which was coupled online via a nanospray flex ion source (Proxeon – part of Thermo Scientific, US) equipped with a PRSO-V2 column oven (Sonation, Germany) to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, US). A peptide amount of 1 µg per sample was separated using an in-house packed C18 column (30 cm x 75 µm ID, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) with a binary gradient of water (A) and acetonitrile (B) containing 0.1% formic acid at 50°C column temperature and a flow rate of 250 nl/min (gradient: 0 min, 2 % B; 3:30 min, 5 % B; 137:30 min, 25 % B; 168:30 min, 35 % B; 182:30 min, 60 % B). Full MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120,000. The top 15 peptide ions were chosen for Higher-energy C-trap Dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 26 %. Fragment ion spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15,000. A dynamic exclusion of 120 s was used for peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was analyzed by the software Maxquant (maxquant.org, Max-Planck Institute Munich) version 1.6.3.4. The MS data was searched against a one protein per gene canonical fasta databases of Mus musculus from UniProt (download: September 09th 2020, 21997 entries). Trypsin was defined as protease. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the database search. The option first search was used to recalibrate the peptide masses within a window of 20 ppm. For the main search peptide mass tolerances were set to 4.5 ppm. Peptide fragment mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as static modification. Acetylation of the protein N-term as well as oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate for both peptides and proteins were adjusted to less than 1 %. Label free quantification (LFQ) of proteins required at least two ratio counts of unique peptides. The option “match between runs” was enabled with a matching time of 1 min.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aging, Apoe, Brain endothelial cells

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
DZNE Munich, Neuroproteomics, Feodor-Lynen Str. 17, 81377 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
DZNE Munich, Neuroproteomics, Feodor-Lynen Str. 17, 81377 Munich, Germany


