### Accession
PXD004706

### Title
MSP22.8 is a protease inhibitor-like protein involved in shell mineralization in the edible mussel Mytilus galloprovincialis

### Description
MSP22.8 is a shell matrix protein described in Mytilus galloprovincialis. During the characterization of the monoclonal antibody M22.8, we have demostrated that MSP22.8 is secreted into the extrapallial space by cells of the mantle edge epithelium. The protein is detected in the extrapallial fluid and extrapallial hemocytes and finally becomes part of the shell matrix framework. In order to isolate the protein from the extrapallial fluid, a multi-step purification strategy was designed, involving ammonium sulfate precipitation followed by affinity or size-exclusion chromatography. Eluted fractions were further processed by SDS-PAGE or 2D-PAGE. Positivity of fractions, bands and spots were checked by Western or Dot blot. Positive bands and spots were manually excised and sent for mass spectrometry experiments for protein identification.

### Sample Protocol
Extrapallial fluid containing MSP22.8 was precipitated with ammonium sulfate and purified in an immunoaffinity chromatography column. Briefly, 0,6 mg of M22.8 antibody was covalently coupled to a 1ml HiTrapTM NHS-activated HP column (GE Healthcare, USA). The column was manually operated with a syringe. Preparation, ligand coupling, whashing and deactivation steps were strictly performed in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions. 4 ml of EPF were precipitated with ammonium sulfate. Pellets obtained at 75% of AS were desalted and incubated with the column. Purification steps were performed according to manufacturer suggestion, using 0.2 M Glycine/HCl pH 2,5 as elution buffer. Purified fractions were collected in clean eppendorf tubes containing neutralization buffer (1 M Tris/HCl pH 9.0) and were desalted and concentrated in a Amicon® Ultra 30K ultrafiltration column (Merck Millipore Ltd., Ireland). Alternatively, pellets obtained at 75% of ammonium sulphate were desalted and further fractionated with a size exclusion column (Superdex 10 / 300 GL, GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, England) coupled to a Fast Protein Liquid Chromatography system (Äkta purifier 10, GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, England). PBS 1x was used as equilibration and elution buffer. The flow rate was maintained at 0.5 mL / min-. After equilibrating the column and stabilize the signal at 280 nm, 500 uL of sample was injected. Eluted samples were collected according to their molecular size and tested by Dot blot in order to confirm positivity. From both experiments, resulting samples were further fractionated by SDS-PAGE or 2D-PAGE. MSP22.8 was confirmed by Western blot and positive bands or spots were excised for mass spectrometry experiments. Bands and spots were in-gel digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) following standard procedures. Briefly, gel slices were washed with water and 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.8, and 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.8 50 % acetonitrile, reduced with 10 mM DTT, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin overnight at 37ºC. Tryptic peptides were extracted with 0.5 % TFA, and twice with acetonitrile. The combined extracts were evaporated to dryness. The samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a high resolution LTQ/Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY SPRAY ion source (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Each extract was diluted up to 12 µL with 0.1% formic acid. 10 µL of samples were loaded in a chromatographic system consisting in a C18 preconcentration column (Acclaim PepMap 100 75µm x 2 cm) connected to a 50 cm long, 75 µm i.d. PepMap C18 column (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). The separation was done at 0.3 µL/min in a 240 minutes acetonitrile gradient from 5 to 25% (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid, solvent B: acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid). The HPLC system was an EASY nLC-1000 (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). The Orbitrap instrument was operated in the positive ion mode with a spray voltage of 1.8 to 2 kV. The scan range of each full MS was m/z 400-1700. The spectrometric analysis was performed in an automatic dependent mode, acquiring a full scan and 15 MS/MS of the most abundant signals. Both MS and dependent MSMS scans were performed in the FT mode to maximize the mass resolution and precision of the MS spectra. A dynamic exclusion was set to 1 to avoid the redundant selection of precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using SEQUEST (Proteome Discoverer 2.1, ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA) with the following parameters: peptide mass tolerance 8 ppm, fragment tolerance 0.02 Da, enzyme set as trypsin or semytrypsin and allowance up to two missed cleavages, static modification was cysteine carbamidomethylated (+57 Da) and dynamic modification was methionine oxidation (+16 Da). The Uniprot database (taxonomy: Mytilus), together with a contaminant database (taxonomy: mammals + human) was used for searching. Additional searches were done against transcriptome data from M. galloprovincialis and M. Edulis and identifed sequences were sent to BLAST for protein similarity search. At least 2 unique peptides were required for protein identification. Any sequence tag related to probable keratin and trypsin contamination was rejected and not considered for furhter processing. The chromatograms were reanalyzed using the PEAKS Studio search engine tools (PEAKS Studio 7.5, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada). The de novo search parameters were: mass tolerance 8 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Searches were performed againts same databases as described above. The result filtering parameters were: FDR 0.1% for peptide identification and at least 2 unique peptides per protein identification. Sequences identified against transcriptome data were sent to BLAST for protein similarity searches.

### Publication Abstract
The mussel shell protein 22.8 (MSP22.8) is recognized by a monoclonal antibody (M22.8) directed against larvae of the mussel <i>Mytilus galloprovincialis</i>. After being secreted by cells of the mantle-edge epithelium into the extrapallial (EP) space (the gap between the mantle and the shell), the protein is detected in the extrapallial fluid (EPF) and EP hemocytes and finally becomes part of the shell matrix framework in adult specimens of <i>M. galloprovincialis</i>. In the work described here, we show how MSP22.8 is detected in EPF samples from different species of mussels (<i>M. galloprovincialis</i>, <i>Mytilus edulis</i>, and <i>Xenostrobus securis</i>), and also as a shell matrix protein in <i>M. galloprovincialis</i>, <i>Mytilus chilensis</i>, and <i>Perna canaliculus</i>. A multistep purification strategy was employed to isolate the protein from the EPF, which was then analyzed by mass spectrometry in order to identify it. The results indicate that MSP22.8 is a serpin-like protein that has great similarity with the protease inhibitor-like protein-B1, reported previously for <i>Mytilus coruscus</i>. We suggest that MSP22.8 is part of a system offering protection from proteolysis during biomineralization and is also part of the innate immune system in mussels.

### Keywords
Shell matrix protein, Lc-msms, Extrapallial liquid, Mytilus galloprovincialis

### Affiliations
 Immunology, Biomedical Research Center (CINBIO) and Institute of Biomedical Research of Vigo (IBIV), University of Vigo, Vigo, Spain 
Immunology, Biomedical Research Center (CINBIO) and Institute of Biomedical Research of Vigo (IBIV), University of Vigo, Vigo, Spain

### Submitter
JUAN CALVO

### Lab Head
Dr África González-Fernández
Immunology, Biomedical Research Center (CINBIO) and Institute of Biomedical Research of Vigo (IBIV), University of Vigo, Vigo, Spain


