### Accession
PXD006884

### Title
Structural determinants of specificity and antagonistic Ca2+ and Zn2+ regulation of peptidase activity in human KLK8/neuropsin

### Description
Human KLK8/neuropsin, a kallikrein-related serine peptidase, is mostly expressed in skin and hippocampus, where it regulates memory formation by synaptic remodeling. Recombinantly expressed KLK8 revealed a good accordance two substrate profiling methods: positional scanning with fluorogenic tetrapeptides and a novel version of the proteomic PICS approach. Besides a strong preference for Arg in the P1 position, the enzyme favors Thr in P4, basic P3 residues, aliphatic P2, small P1′ and aliphatic P2′ residues. Enzyme kinetic studies with synthesized substrates showed stimulatory and inhibitory effects of Ca2+ and Zn2+, respectively, which are important for physiological functions. Two crystal structures of KLK8 with the active site inhibitor leupeptin explain the subsite specificity and display Ca2+ bound to the 75-loop, which is unique among the KLKs. The mutants D70K and H99A confirmed the antagonistic role of the cation binding sites, for which a comparison with the murine apo-KLK8 structure clarified further mechanistic details. Molecular docking and dynamics calculations provided insights in substrate binding and the dual regulation by Ca2+ and Zn2+, involving an allosteric surface loop network.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic Identification of Cleavage Sites  The general procedure has been described previously for KLK2, (Biniossek et al., 2016, Guo et al., 2016). The peptide library was generated by proteolysis of E. coli proteins by GluC.  KLK8 samples were incubated with the library with a 1:300 ratio in 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl at 37°C for 3 h. After the reaction, isotope labeling of protease-treated and control samples was performed, followed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (Q-Exactive plus MS with an Easy nanoLC 1000, Thermo Scientific). The spectrum to sequence assignment was done with X! Tandem (Version 2013.09.01) with E. coli strain K12 as reference proteome. Semi-specific peptides with an increase > 8-fold in the KLK8 samples were accepted as cleavage products. Prime side and non-prime side sequences were assigned according to the reference database and the corresponding protease specificity (Schilling et al., 2011).

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data was converted to the mzXML format (31), using msconvert (32) with centroiding of MS1 and MS2 data and deisotoping of MS2 data. For spectrum to sequence assignment X! Tandem (Version 2013.09.01) was used (33). The E. coli proteome database (strain K12, reference proteome) was used as described previously (34), consisting of 4304 protein entries and 8608 randomized sequences, derived from the original E. coli proteome entries. The decoy sequences were generated with the software DB toolkit (35). X! Tandem parameters included: precursor mass error of ± 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm, semi-tryptic, semi-GluC or semi-LysC specificity with up to one missed cleavage, static residue modifications: cysteine carboxyamidomethylation (+57.02 Da); lysine and N-terminal dimethylation (light formaldehyde 28.03 Da; heavy formaldehyde 34.06 Da or 36.08 Da, respectively); no variable modifications. X!Tandem results were further validated by PeptideProphet (36) at a confidence level of > 95 %. For relative peptide quantification, XPRESS (37) was used. Mass tolerance for quantification was 0.015 Da. An in-house PERL computer script (downloadable at http://www.mol-med.uni-freiburg.de/mom/schilling/TAILS_v21_xpress-only/at_download/file) then filters for semi-specific peptides, with their N- or C-terminus generated by the initial digestion protease and the respective other terminus derived from cleavage by the test protease. Similar to the original PICS procedure (5), the script then determines bioinformatically, through database lookup, the corresponding prime- or non-prime sequence

### Publication Abstract
Human KLK8/neuropsin, a kallikrein-related serine peptidase, is mostly expressed in skin and the hippocampus regions of the brain, where it regulates memory formation by synaptic remodeling. Substrate profiles of recombinant KLK8 were analyzed with positional scanning using fluorogenic tetrapeptides and the proteomic PICS approach, which revealed the prime side specificity. Enzyme kinetics with optimized substrates showed stimulation by Ca<sup>2+</sup> and inhibition by Zn<sup>2+</sup>, which are physiological regulators. Crystal structures of KLK8 with a ligand-free active site and with the inhibitor leupeptin explain the subsite specificity and display Ca<sup>2+</sup> bound to the 75-loop. The variants D70K and H99A confirmed the antagonistic role of the cation binding sites. Molecular docking and dynamics calculations provided insights in substrate binding and the dual regulation of activity by Ca<sup>2+</sup> and Zn<sup>2+</sup>, which are important in neuron and skin physiology. Both cations participate in the allosteric surface loop network present in related serine proteases. A comparison of the positional scanning data with substrates from brain suggests an adaptive recognition by KLK8, based on the tertiary structures of its targets. These combined findings provide a comprehensive picture of the molecular mechanisms underlying the enzyme activity of KLK8.

### Keywords
Peptide library, Protease

### Affiliations
nstitute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research  University of Freiburg  Stefan-Meier-Str. 17, Room 02 027 D-79104 Freiburg, Germany +49 761 203 9615 oliver.schilling@mol-med.uni-freiburg.de
University of Freiburg

### Submitter
Oliver Schilling

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Schilling
nstitute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research  University of Freiburg  Stefan-Meier-Str. 17, Room 02 027 D-79104 Freiburg, Germany +49 761 203 9615 oliver.schilling@mol-med.uni-freiburg.de


