### Accession
PXD026570

### Title
Extensive Three-Dimensional Intratumor Proteomic Heterogeneity Revealed by Multiregion Sampling in High-Grade Serous Ovarian Tumor Specimens

### Description
Enriched tumor epithelium, tumor-associated stroma, and whole tissue were collected by laser microdissection from thin sections across spatially separated levels of ten high-grade serous ovarian carcinomas (HGSOC) and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Unsupervised analyses of protein abundance data revealed independent clustering of enriched stroma and enriched tumor epithelium, with whole tumor tissue clustering driven by overall tumor “purity”. Comparing these data to previously defined prognostic HGSOC molecular subtypes revealed protein expression from tumor epithelium correlated with the differentiated subtype, whereas stromal proteins correlated with the mesenchymal subtype. Protein abundance in tumor epithelium and stroma exhibited decreased correlation in samples collected just hundreds of microns apart. These data reveal substantial tumor microenvironment protein heterogeneity that directly bears on prognostic signatures, biomarker discovery, and cancer pathophysiology, and underscore the need to enrich cellular subpopulations for expression profiling.

### Sample Protocol
LMD tissue in LC-grade water was dried, re-suspended in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB)/10% acetonitrile (ACN), and digested using SMART trypsin (1 µg/30 mm2 tissue; Thermo Fisher) and pressure cycling technology (PCT, Pressure Biosciences, Inc.) (Lee et al., 2020). For 343WM, the remaining tissue in the OCT block was washed with water and cryopulverized in liquid nitrogen in a mortar and pestle. The cryopulverized tissue was re-suspended in 100 mM TEAB/10% ACN and digested by PCT using SMART trypsin (1 µg protease/ 30 mm2 tissue). Peptide concentrations from trypsin digests were determined using the bicinchoninic acid assay (Pierce BCA). Tryptic peptides were labeled with isobaric Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) according to the manufacturer’s instructions using the TMT 10-Plex Kit or TMTpro 16-Plex Kit from Thermo Fisher. The TMT 10-Plex reagents and TMTpro 16-plex reagents were used for labeling samples from case 343WM and the remaining nine cases, respectively, to generate patient-specific TMT plexes. Briefly, peptide samples were individually mixed with respective TMT reagents for 1 h at room temperature, then quenched using 5% hydroxylamine. Empty TMT channels were filled using equivalent amounts of peptide mixed from each of the 5 levels of the whole tumor collections in the respective patient-specific plex. Each TMT-10 or TMTpro-16 multiplex set of samples were loaded onto a C-18 trap column in 10 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0) and fractionated by basic reversed-phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC) into 96 fractions through development of a linear gradient of acetonitrile (0.69% acetonitrile/min). For 343WM, 36 concentrated fractions were generated by pooling in a serpentine manner, each of which were analyzed for LC-MS/MS. For the remaining 9 cases, 24 concentrated fractions were generated following bRPLC which were individually analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The TMT-10 or TMTpro-16 sample multiplex bRPLC fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS employing a nanoflow LC system (EASY-nLC 1200, ThermoFisher Scientific, Inc.) coupled online with a Q Exactive HF-X MS (ThermoFisher Scientific, Inc.). In brief, each sample was loaded on a nanoflow HPLC system outfitted with a reversed-phase trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 2 cm, nanoViper, ThermoFisher Scientific, Inc) and a heated (50 °C) reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 m, 100 Å, 75 m × 500 mm, nanoViper, ThermoFisher Scientific, Inc). Peptides were eluted by developing a linear gradient of 2% mobile phase B (95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) to 32% mobile phase B within 120 min at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min. High resolution (R=60,000 at m/z 200) broadband (m/z 400 – 1,600) mass spectra (MS) were acquired from which the top 12 most intense molecular ions in each MS scan were selected for high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy of 30 for TMT-10 and 34 for TMTpro) acquisition in the orbitrap at high resolution (R=45,000 at m/z 200). Charge state selection was restricted to z = +2, +3 and +4. The RF lens was set to 30% and both MS1 and MS2 spectra were collected in profile mode. Dynamic exclusion (20s) was enabled to minimize redundant selection of peptide molecular ions for HCD.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identifications were generated by searching the .raw data files with a publicly-available, non-redundant human proteome database (Swiss-Prot, Homo sapiens, Proteome UP000005640, 20,257 sequences, downloaded 12-01-2017; http://www.uniprot.org/) appended with porcine trypsin (Uniprot: P00761) sequences using Mascot (Matrix Science) and Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Identification, normalization, and Log2 transformation of PSMs was performed as previously described (Lee et al., 2020) for calculation of protein-level abundances.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heterogeneity, High grade serous ovarian cancer, Tumor microenvironment, Laser microdissection, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Director of Women’s Health Research Women’s Service Line Inova Health System  Chief Scientific Officer Gynecologic Cancer Center of Excellence  John P. Murtha Cancer Center Research Program Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences
Women's Health Integrated Research Center

### Submitter
Brian Hood

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas P. Conrads, PhD
Director of Women’s Health Research Women’s Service Line Inova Health System  Chief Scientific Officer Gynecologic Cancer Center of Excellence  John P. Murtha Cancer Center Research Program Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences


