### Accession
PXD031330

### Title
YCf1 Phosphorylation status detection using mass spect

### Description
The Purified YCF1 protein was subjected to mass-spect for phosphorylation detection.

### Sample Protocol
To measure quantitative phosphorylation of purified Ycf1, 10 µg of Ycf1 were Trypsin/LysC (Promega, Madison WI) digested with an S-Trap column (ProtiFi, Farmingdale NY) using the manufacturer’s suggested protocol following reduction with DTT and alkylation with IAA with ProteaseMax (0.1% Promega) added to the digestions. Altogether, 2500ng of protein were loaded for each run. The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometry with an EASY-Spray nanoESI. Peptides were separated using an Acclaim Pepmap 100 trap column (75 micron ID x 2cm from Themo Scientific) and eluted onto an Acclaim PepMap RSKC analytical column (75 micron ID x 2cm, Thermo Scientific) with a gradient of solvent A (water and 0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The gradients were applied starting with 3-35% Solvent B over 90 minutes, then 25 to 50% solvent B over 20 minutes, 50-95% solvent B over 5 minutes, and a 100% solvent B for 10 min, and then 3% solvent B for 10 min.  Data were collected with a flow rate of 300 nL/min applied with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific) with data dependent scanning using Xcalibur v 4.0.27.1963. A survey scan at 70,000 resolution scanning mass/charge (m/z) of 350-1600 was performed with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1e6 with a maximum injection time (IT) of 65msec, then a high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) at 37 NCE (normalized collision energy) of the 11 highest intensity ions at 17,5000 resolution, 1.5m/z isolation width, 5e4 AGC, and 65msec maximum IT. Dynamic exclusion was used to select an m/z exclusion list for 30 sec after single MS/MS and ions with a charge state of +1, 7, >7, unassigned, and isotopes were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Search of MS and MS/MS data were performed against the Uniprot S. cerevisiae protein database (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002311), and a database of common contaminant proteins (including trypsin, keratin – found at ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP) with Thermo Proteome Discoverer v 2.4.0.305 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Fully tryptic peptides with up to 2 missed cleavage sites were considered in MS/MS spectral matches. The variable modifications considered included methionine oxidation (15.995 Da), cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.021 Da), and phosphorylation (79.966 Da) on serine, tyrosine, and threonine. XCorr score cutoffs at 95% confidence were used to identify proteins using a reverse database search64. Identification results from proteins and peptides were further analyzed with Scaffold Q+S v 4.11.1 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland OR), which integrates various search results (from Sequest, X!Tandem, MASCOT) and using Bayesian statistics to identify spectra 65. We considered protein identification that satisfied the criteria of a minimum of two peptides with 95% confidence levels for protein and peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Yeast Cadmium Factor 1 (Ycf1) sequesters heavy metals and glutathione into the vacuole to counter cell stress. Ycf1 belongs to the ATP binding cassette C-subfamily (ABCC) of transporters, many of which are regulated by phosphorylation on intrinsically-disordered domains. The regulatory mechanism of phosphorylation is still poorly understood. Here, we report two cryo-EM structures of Ycf1 at 3.4&#x2009;&#xc5; and 4.0&#x2009;&#xc5; resolution in inward-facing open conformations that capture previously unobserved ordered states of the intrinsically disordered regulatory domain (R-domain). R-domain phosphorylation is clearly evident and induces a topology promoting electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions with Nucleotide Binding Domain 1 (NBD1) and the Lasso motif. These interactions stay constant between the structures and are related by rigid body movements of the NBD1/R-domain complex. Biochemical data further show R-domain phosphorylation reorganizes the Ycf1 architecture and is required for maximal ATPase activity. Together, we provide insights into how R-domains control ABCC transporter activity.

### Keywords
S. cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Chemistry and Biochemistry University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ-85719
University of Arizona

### Submitter
Nitesh Kumar Khandelwal

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas M. Tomasiak
Chemistry and Biochemistry University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ-85719


