### Accession
PXD016619

### Title
Fam20C interactome in the secretory pathway under ER stress

### Description
Accumulated unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) will trigger the unfolded protein response (UPR) to increase protein-folding capacity. The ER proteostasis and UPR signaling should be precisely and timely regulated. In the project, by unbiased proteomics analysis, we identify that the serine 357 of protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) is rapidly phosphorylated by the secretory pathway kinase Fam20C under ER stress. Remarkably, phosphorylated Ser357 induces an open conformation of PDI and turns it from a ‘foldase’ to a ‘holdase’, which is critical for preventing protein misfolding in the ER.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. To identify the Fam20C interactome during ER stress, HepG2 cells were transfected with FLAG-tagged Fam20C for 36 h and treated with DMSO or 5 μM Tg for 30 min. For PDI phosphorylation site identification, HepG2 cells were treated with DMSO or 5 μM Tg for 10 min. The cell extracts were incubated with anti-FLAG or monoclonal mouse anti-PDI antibody overnight at 4℃, followed by addition of protein A+G beads for 2 h. The immunoprecipitates were washed by PBS for five times, separated by SDS-PAGE, stained by Coomassie blue and immunoblotted with polyclonal rabbit anti-PDI in parallel. In-gel digestion of proteins. For Fam20C-interactome identification, all bands below Fam20C excluding immunoglobulin chains were excised and cut into small plugs; for PDI phosphorylation site identification, the band corresponding to PDI was excised. After destaining, reduction (10 mM DTT in 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 45 min at 56 °C) and alkylation (40 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 45 min at RT in the dark), the plugs were washed twice with 50% acetonitrile, dried using a SpeedVac and digested with trypsin in 25 mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 37 °C to allow complete digestion. The reaction was terminated by adding formic acid to a 1% final concentration. LC-MS/MS analysis. The digested peptides were separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 capillary column (Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 μm; Dr. Maisch GmbH). A linear acetonitrile gradient was used to elute the bounded peptides at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The eluate was electrosprayed at a 2.0 kV voltage directly into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In the data-dependent acquisition mode, the MS data were acquired at a high resolution of 70,000 (m/z 200) across a mass range of 300–1600 m/z. The top 20 precursor ions were selected from each MS full scan with isolation width of 2 m/z for fragmentation in the HCD collision cell. Subsequently, MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 (m/z 200). The dynamic exclusion time was 40 sec.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification. The raw data from Q Exactive were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using SEQUEST HT search engine for protein identification and Percolator for false discovery rate (FDR, < 1%) analysis against a UniProt human protein database (updated 10-2017). The peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the MS/MS mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. The peptide confidence was set as high for peptide filter. Label free quantification (LFQ) analysis was performed using Consensus mode and parameters were set as follows: unique and razor used for peptide quantification; precursor abundance based on intensity; total peptide amount used for normalization mode; pairwise ratio for ratio calculation; maximum allowed fold change as 100. For Fam20C interactome identification, proteins (unique peptides ≥ 2) were selected and three independent experiments were performed. Based on DAVID GO term analysis, a total of 173 proteins localized in the ER and Golgi were identified in all three experiments. For PDI phosphorylation site identification, we selected phosphorylation for serine, threonine or tyrosine and methionine oxidation as variable modifications, and the cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. The tandem mass spectra of the matched phosphorylated peptides were manually checked for their validity.

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic cells have evolved multiple responses that allow endoplasmic reticulum (ER) homeostasis to be maintained even in the face of acute or chronic stresses. In this issue, Yu et&#xa0;al (2020) describe how site-specific phosphorylation switches protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) from a folding enzyme to a holdase chaperone which regulates ER stress responses, thus highlighting PDI as a key player in ER homeostasis.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Er stress, Pdi, Fam20c

### Affiliations
Institue of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences
National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China

### Submitter
Jianchao Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Lei Wang
National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China


