### Accession
PXD024869

### Title
Nutlin-3a-induced changes in the proteome of parental and RFX7 knock-out U2OS cells

### Description
Mass spectrometry-based whole proteome analysis of parental and RFX7 knock-out U2OS cells treated with 10 µM Nutlin-3a or DMSO solvent control. Ten biological replicates were used.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics analysis, samples were sonicated in a Bioruptor (Diagenode, Beligum) (10 cycles with 1 minute on and 30s off with high intensity @ 20°C). Samples were then heated at 95 °C for 10 minutes, before being subjected to another round of sonication in the Bioruptor. The lysates were clarified and debris precipitated by centrifugation at 14000 rpm for 10 minute, then incubated with iodacetamide (room temperature, in the dark, 20 minutes, 15 mM). 10% of the sample was removed to check lysis on a coomassie gel. Based on the gel, an estimated 25 µg of each sample was treated with 8 volumes ice cold acetone and left overnight at -20 °C to precipitate the proteins. The samples were then centrifuged at 14000 rpm for 30 minutes, 4 °C. After removal of the supernatant, the precipitates were washed twice with 300 µL of a solution of ice cold 80 % acetone. After addition of each wash solution, the samples were vortexed and centrifuged again for 10 minutes at 4°C. The pellets were then allowed to air-dry before being dissolved in digestion buffer at 1 µg/µL (1M guanidine HCl in 0.1M HEPES, pH 8). To facilitate the resuspension of the protein pellet, the samples were subjected to 5 cycles of sonication in the Bioruptor, as described above. Afterwards, LysC (Wako) was added at 1:100 (w/w) enzyme:protein ratio and digestion proceeded for 4 h at 37 °C under shaking (1000 rpm for 1 h, then 650 rpm). The samples were diluted 1:1 with milliQ water (to reach 1.5M urea) and were incubated with a 1:100 w/w amount of trypsin (Promega sequencing grade) overnight at 37 °C, 650 rpm. The digests were then acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid and then desalted with Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30µm under a slow vacuum following manufacturer instructions. Briefly, the columns were conditioned with 3x100 µL solvent B (80% acetonitrile; 0.05% formic acid) and equilibrated with 3x 100 µL solvent A (0.05% formic acid in milliQ water). The samples were loaded, washed 3 times with 100 µL solvent A, and then eluted into PCR tubes with 50 µL solvent B. The eluates were dried down with the speed vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 5% acetonitrile, 95% milliQ water, with 0.1% formic acid at a concentration of 1µg/µL. 10 µL was transferred to an MS vial and 0.25 µL of HRM kit peptides (Biognosys, Zurich, Switzerland) was spiked into each sample prior to analysis by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
For whole proteome analysis of U2OS parental and RFX7-/- cells, peptides were separated on a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7µm, 75µm x 250mm). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water, 0.1 % formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid. The samples (approx. 1 µg) were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A, at 5 µL/min onto the trapping column. Trapping time was 6 minutes. Peptides were eluted via a non-linear gradient from 1% to 40% B in 120 min. Total runtime was 145 min., including clean-up and column re-equilibration. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective) and a spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The RF ion funnel was set to 30%. For DIA analysis, the conditions were as follows: Full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120,000 FHWM. The filling time was set at maximum of 20 ms with limitation of 5 x 105 ions. DIA scans were acquired with 34 mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range. HCD fragmentation (normalized collision energy; 30%) was applied and MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 30,000 FHWM with a fixed first mass of 200 m/z after accumulation of 1 x 106 ions or after filling time of 70 ms (whichever occurred first). Data were acquired in profile mode. For data acquisition and processing Tune version 2.1 and Xcalibur 4.0 were employ. DIA data were searched against this spectral library using BGS factory settings, except: Proteotypicity Filter = Only Protein Group Specific; Major Group Quantity = Median peptide quantity; Major Group Top N = OFF; Minor Group Quantity = Median precursor quantity; Minor Group Top N = OFF; Data Filtering = Qvalue sparse; Normalization Strategy = Local normalization; Row Selection = Automatic. The candidates and protein report tables were exported from Spectronaut and used for volcano plots generation and Principal Component Analysis (PCA), respectively, using an in-house R script on R version 3.6.1. and RStudio server version 1.1.463. Protein groups were considered as significantly enriched in if they displayed a Q value < 0.01 and average log2 ratio > 1.5.

### Publication Abstract
Recurrently mutated in lymphoid neoplasms, the transcription factor RFX7 is emerging as a tumor suppressor. Previous reports suggested that RFX7 may also have a role in neurological and metabolic disorders. We recently reported that RFX7 responds to p53 signaling and cellular stress. Furthermore, we found RFX7 target genes to be dysregulated in numerous cancer types also beyond the hematological system. However, our understanding of RFX7's target gene network and its role in health and disease remains limited. Here, we generated RFX7 knock-out cells and employed a multi-omics approach integrating transcriptome, cistrome, and proteome data to obtain a more comprehensive picture of RFX7 targets. We identify novel target genes linked to RFX7's tumor suppressor function and underscoring its potential role in neurological disorders. Importantly, our data reveal RFX7 as a mechanistic link that enables the activation of these genes in response to p53 signaling.

### Keywords
Rfx7, Nutlin, Proteomics, Tumor

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute On Aging/Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstr. 11; D-07745 Jena; Germany
Leibniz Institute on Ageing Fritz Lipmann Institute Jena

### Submitter
Emilio Cirri

### Lab Head
Dr Steve Hoffmann
Leibniz Institute On Aging/Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstr. 11; D-07745 Jena; Germany


