### Accession
PXD013310

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of simian primary hepatocytes reveals candidate molecular markers for permissiveness to relapsing malaria Plasmodium cynomolgi

### Description
A major obstacle in deciphering the hepatic stage of the malaria parasite has been the challenges associated with culturing the infected hepatocytes through the entire liver stage cycle, including that of the dormant form known as hypnozoites. Primary hepatocytes lose their specialized functions in long-term in vitro culture. Hepatocyte infection represents the first step for clinically silent infection and development of malaria parasite Plasmodium in the liver. Thus this liver stage is an ideal target for development of novel antimalarial drugs and vaccine. However, drug discovery against Plasmodium liver stage is severely hampered by the poor understanding of host-cell and parasites interactions during the liver stage infection and development. In this study, we have performed tandem mass tags (TMT) labelling based quantitative proteomic analysis in simian primary hepatocytes cultured in three different systems of susceptibility to plasmodium infection. Our results represent the first documentation of potentially essential molecular markers including asialoglycoprotein receptor (ASGPR), apolipoproteins, squalene synthase and scavenger receptor B1 (SR-BI) required for productive infection and full development in relapsing Plasmodium species. The identification of these candidate proteins for constructive infection and development of Plasmodium in malaria paves the way to explore them as therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection and protein extraction: Samples from SGD7, FMD1 and OMD7 cultures were collected at the defined time points shown in the above diagram. The culture medium was removed by pipetting washed the cells thrice with PBS. Lysed the cells in 100μl lysis buffer (2% SDS, 100mM trise-HCl [pH 7.4], 1μM dithiothreitol (DTT), Protease inhibitor cocktail) by sonication at 40% amplitude for 1min. Insoluble cell debris were removed by centrifugation at 20000×g for 10 min at 4oC. The protein samples were purified by acetone precipitate. The purified protein pellets were reconstituted in 250μl urea buffer (8 M urea and protease inhibitor cocktail in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (ABB), pH 8). Protein content of each sample was measured by BCA based protein quantitation method. In-solution protein digestion and TMT labelling: 100μg equivalent amount of protein from each sample was taken and used for subsequent proteomic experiment. The urea concentration of the samples was reduced to <1 M by diluting with 100mM ABB and reduced with 10mM Tris 2-carboxyethyl phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) at 37oC for 2 hours. Reduced samples were then alkylated with 20mM Iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature for 45min in a dark. Reduced and alkylated protein samples were digested with trypsin at a trypsin-protein ratio of 1:40 at 37oC for overnight. Quenched the reaction by adding 10% TFA (final concentration of 0.4%). Tryptic peptides were desalted by using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) and dried in a SpeedVac (Eppendrop, USA). TMT labelling was performed using TMT 10-plex kits according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo scientific, USA). The samples were labelled with accordingly with respective tags. Samples from Monkey 1, FMD1, SGD7 and OMD7 were labelled with 126,127N and128C Tags and for the FMD1, SGD7 and OMD7 samples from monkey 2 and 3 were labelled with 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, 130N and 130C tags accordingly. The TMT-labelled peptides were pooled together and desalted accordingly. Fractionation of labelled peptides: TMT labelled tryptic peptides were fractionated by reverse phase chromatography at high pH (~pH8). Briefly, labelled peptides were reconstituted in buffer A (0.02% NH4OH in water) and fractionated using X-Bridge C18 column (4.6 × 200mm, 5μm particle size, 130Å pore size) (Waters, Milford, MA) on a HPLC unit (Prominence™, Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) at flow rate of 1ml/min. The HPLC gradient comprised 100-95% buffer A for 3 min; 5-35% buffer B (80% ACN and 0.02% NH4OH) for 40 min; then 35-70% buffer B for 12min, followed by 70% buffer B for 5min. The chromatograms were recorded at 280nm. A total of 60 fractions were collected within the 65min time period. The collected fractions were combined into 15 fractions by using concatenated pooling strategy and concentrated to dryness using vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS and data analysis: The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer coupled with online nano-HPLC system (Thermo Scientific; USA). Data acquisition was performed using Xcaliber 2.2 software (Thermo Scientific; USA). Protein identification and quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Fisher, MA) together with the Sequest search engine (parameters included cysteine alkylation with MMTS as static modification; methionine oxidation, and asparagine and glutamine deamidation as dynamic modifications; full trypsin digestion and maximum 2 missed and/or non-specific cleavages as digestion parameter; 10ppm precursor mass and 0.02Da fragment mass tolerance). The NCBI proteins of Macaca fascicularis proteins (downloaded on December, 2016, including 73,374 sequences and 58,200,443 residues) was used as a search database with a cut-off false discovery rate of <0.05% and <0.01% at the peptide and protein level accordingly. The resulting data set was automatically bias-corrected to eliminate potential variation due to unequal mixing when combining samples. All LC-MS/MS analysis was performed in triplicate. All statistical calculations were performed using the biological triplet. The quantitative proteomic results was first examined for quality using a Pearson correlation that showed a satisfactory linear correlation among all three biological replicates (n = 3). The proteomic data distribution patterns and cutoff levels of statistical significance were determined using Student's t-Test and volcano plots. Distribution of the Log2 TMT ratio was used to determine the cutoff for the differentially regulated hits (Figure 4a). The OMD7 samples were used as denominator for the relative quantification conditions given that they had the least infections. Proteins with ratios < 0.76 (Log2Ratio < -0.4) were classified as down282 regulated hits, whereas proteins with ratios > 1.32 (Log2Ratio > 0.4) were consider as up-regulated hits.

### Publication Abstract
A major obstacle impeding malaria research is the lack of an in vitro system capable of supporting infection through the entire liver stage cycle of the parasite, including that of the dormant forms known as hypnozoites. Primary hepatocytes lose their liver specific functions in long-term in vitro culture. The malaria parasite Plasmodium initiates infection in hepatocyte. This corresponds to the first step of clinically silent infection and development of malaria parasite Plasmodium in the liver. Thus, the liver stage is an ideal target for development of novel antimalarial interventions and vaccines. However, drug discovery against Plasmodium liver stage is severely hampered by the poor understanding of host-parasite interactions during the liver stage infection and development. In this study, tandem mass tag labeling based quantitative proteomic analysis is performed in simian primary hepatocytes cultured in three different systems of susceptibility to Plasmodium infection. The results display potential candidate molecular markers, including asialoglycoprotein receptor, apolipoproteins, squalene synthase, and scavenger receptor B1 (SR-BI) that facilitate productive infection and full development in relapsing Plasmodium species. The identification of these candidate proteins required for constructive infection and development of hepatic malaria liver stages paves the way to explore them as therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Malaria liver stage, Biomarker, Permissiveness to infection, Drug assay model development, Quantitative proteomic, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt

### Affiliations
School of Biological Sciences Nanyang Technological University 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551
Nanyang Technological University

### Submitter
Bamaprasad  Dutta

### Lab Head
Dr Siu Kwan SZE
School of Biological Sciences Nanyang Technological University 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551


