### Accession
PXD025224

### Title
Serum proteomic profiling in patients with advanced Schistosoma japonicum-induced hepatic fibrosis

### Description
Background: Schistosoma japonicum (S. japonicum) is a parasitic flatworm that is the aetiological agent of human schistosomiasis, an important cause of hepatic fibrosis. Schistosomiasis-induced hepatic fibrosis is a consequence of the highly fibrogenic nature of egg-induced granulomatuous lesions, the main pathogenic factor of schistosomiasis. Although global awareness of the association between schistosomiasis-indued hepatic fibrosis and s. japonicum infection is increasing, little is known about the molecular differences associated with rapid progression to schistosomiasis in cirrhotic patients. Methods: We systematically used data-independent acquisition (DIA)-based liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry to identify differentially expressed proteins in serum samples from patients with advanced S. japonicum-induced hepatic fibrosis. Results: On the basis of our analysis, we identified 1,144 proteins, among which 66 were differentially expressed between the healthy control and SHF-F2 groups and 214 were differentially expressed between the SHF-F2 and SHF-F4 groups (up- or downregulation of at least 1.5-fold in serum samples). Furthermore, our results indicated that two selected proteins (C1QA and CFD) are potential biomarkers for distinguishing patients with SHF-F2 and SHF-F4 resulting from S. japonicum infection. Conclusions: This report is the first to provide a global proteomic profile of serum samples from patients with advanced S. japonicum-induced hepatic fibrosis. C1QA and CFD are potentially diagnostic markers for patients with SHF-F2 and SHF-F4 resulting from S. japonicum infection, although further large-scale studies are needed. Our DIA-based quantitative proteomic analysis revealed molecular differences among individuals with different stages of advanced S. japonicum-induced hepatic fibrosis and might provide fundamental information for further detailed investigations.

### Sample Protocol
All serum samples were collected and immediately processed according to standard operating procedures to minimize preanalytical variation. The serum samples from 18 healthy controls and 36 patients with S. japonicum infection were divided into 3 groups: healthy control (Group A, n=18), SHF-F2 (Group B, n=18) and SHF-F4 (Group C, n=18)

### Data Protocol
A 5 kDa ultrafiltration centrifuge tube (Sartorius, Germany) was used for desalination and concentration of the components in the high- and low-abundance fractions. The proteins were precipitated with SDT lysis buffer at 95 °C for 15 min. After centrifugation at 14,000×g for 20 min, the protein concentration in the supernatant was quantified with a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA). Protein digestion was performed according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method as described previously. In brief, the protein samples (200 μg) for each condition were dissolved in UA buffer (8 M urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0)) and transferred into a new ultrafiltration centrifuge tube by repeated ultrafiltration (Microcon units, 10 kD). Then, 100 μl of iodoacetamide (IAA; 100 mM in UA buffer) was added to the protein samples, and the samples were further incubated at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Then, the filters were washed three times with 100 μl of UA buffer and two times with100 μl of 25mM NH4HCO3 buffer. For trypsin digestion, the protein suspensions were incubated with 4 μg of trypsin (Promega, USA) in 40 μl of 25mM NH4HCO3 buffer at 37 °C overnight. After trypsin digestion, the resulting peptides were desalted on a C18 cartridge column (Sigma, USA) and vacuum dried. After digestion, the resulting peptides were desalted on a Waters Oasis C18 solid-phase extraction column and lyophilized for peptide fractionation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Schistosomiasis-induced hepatic fibrosis

### Affiliations
The Affiliated Hospital of Jiaxing University

### Submitter
Dahai Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Dahai Wei
The Affiliated Hospital of Jiaxing University


