### Accession
PXD016688

### Title
Proteomic analysis of CRISPR Cas 9 mediated mdig deletion in triple negative breast cancer cells

### Description
Background Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer related deaths in women. Triple negative breast cancers are highly aggressive, have an overall poor prognosis and has limited therapeutic options. Previously, we have identified an environmental induced gene mdig that predicted the overall survival in breast cancer patients and regulated breast cancer cell growth, motility and invasion partially through DNA and histone methylation. Mdig’s role in breast cancer growth and motility has been revealed however a comprehensive analysis of the proteomic profile of mdig affected cells in triple negative breast cancer has not been attempted yet.  Methods We applied mass spectrometry technology featuring global proteomics and post translational modifications in triple negative breast cancer cells MDA-MB-231 that were deleted for mdig via CRISPR Cas 9 gene editing. Using label-free bottom up quantitative proteomics, we compared the proteomes of wildtype control (WT) and mdig knockout (KO) MDA-MB-231 cells and identified the proteins and pathways that are significantly altered with mdig deletion. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) platform was further used to explore the signaling pathway networks with differentially expressed proteins and identified top canonical pathways, upstream regulators, and causal disease networks.   Results 904 differentially expressed (p < 0.005) proteins were identified in MDA-MB-231 cells knocked out for mdig. Post-translational modification (PTM) analysis indicated that mdig loss reduced the abundance of oxidized histidine 39 of 60S ribosomal protein L27a (q = 0.00030) whereas global abundance of di-methylated lysine containing peptides was increased (p = 0.02).   Relevance Our data provides the first insight towards the protein expression pattern in breast cancer associated with a complete disruption of the mdig gene. Differentially expressed proteins between WT and KO MDA-MB-231 triple negative breast cancer cells provided substantial information regarding the key proteins, biological process and pathways that are specifically upregulated in breast cancer tumorigenicity and invasiveness. Mdig affected signaling pathways and hub molecules will benefit for the development of novel treatment strategies for the development of breast cancer therapies.

### Sample Protocol
In total 34 cell pellets were submitted for proteomics analysis. Samples were weighed and volumes matched with the addition of HPLC-grade water. 1% LiDS final was added to the samples and heated at 95°C for 5 min., followed by filtering through Pierce Handee Spin Columns (Thermo Scientific) to remove non-soluble material. Protein amount was determined by BCA Protein Assay (range from 0.278 mg to 1.064 mg). 50 ug aliquots of each were buffered with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC), reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) under standard conditions. Excess IAA was quenched with an additional 5 mM DTT. An overnight digestion was performed with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) in 100 mM AMBIC, 0.3 M urea, and 15% acetonitrile. The next day, detergent was removed from the samples using Pierce Detergent Removal Columns. Samples were speed vac’ed to dryness and solubilized in 0.1% FA for analysis. The peptides (4 µg-worth) were separated by reversed-phase chromatography (Easy Spray PepMap RSLC C18 50 cm column, Thermo Scientific), followed by ionization with the Easy Spray Ion Source (Thermo Scientific), and introduced into a Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Abundant species were fragmented with collision-induced dissociation (CID)

### Data Protocol
For protein quantification and pathway analysis mass spectrometry raw files were searched against the Uniprot human complete database downloaded 2017.07.14 using MaxQuant v1.6.2.10.  Match between runs was enabled and just one peptide was required for protein quantification.  All other parameters were left at their default values.  For PTM analyses the same raw files were searched using Proteome Discoverer v2.3.502 to take advantage of the percolator algorithm for sensitive peptide identification.  Two searches were conducted, one for histidine oxidation and the other for lysine di- and tri-methylation and lysine acetylation.  For histidine oxidation both histidine and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications.  For lysine acylation analysis lysine di-methylation, lysine tri-methylation lysine acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications.  All other aspects of the Proteome Discoverer searches were the same.  The Uniprot human complete database downloaded 2017.07.14 was used.  Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification.  MS1 mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS2 mass tolerance was set to 0.6 Da.  For all analyses, peptide spectra matches were accepted at a 1% false discovery rate as determined by a reversed database search.  PTMRS [98] was used to assess PTM localization confidence.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Signaling pathways, Mdig, Biomarker, Breast cancer, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
IEHS
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Eugene Applebaum College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Wayne State University, 259 Mack Avenue, Detroit, MI 48201, USA

### Submitter
Nicholas Carruthers

### Lab Head
Dr Fei Chen
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Eugene Applebaum College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Wayne State University, 259 Mack Avenue, Detroit, MI 48201, USA


