### Accession
PXD019469

### Title
A head and neck cancer protein interaction map reveals PIK3CA mutant drug sensitivity

### Description
Despite extensive DNA sequencing of patient tumors, it remains challenging to translate the immense landscape of heterogeneous genetic alterations into function and clinical outcomes due to a limited understanding of cancer specific molecular network architectures. To bridge this gap, we have used affinity purification-mass spectrometry to generate protein interaction networks for 31 proteins with significant alterations in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. This network includes 771 interactions covering both cancer and non-tumorigenic cell states, as well as wild-type and mutant proteins. Differential analysis across these dimensions reveals a strong interaction between PIK3CA and ERBB3 (HER3), dependent upon mutations in PIK3CA. We show that this interaction correlates with ERBB3 activity in vitro and can be targeted in vivo using a clinical ERBB3 inhibitor, CDX3379, to prohibit growth of tumors with common PIK3CA mutations. This study provides a roadmap for elucidating genetic complexity through multidimensional maps of cancer cell biology.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity Purification. One 10 cm plate of cells (~80% confluency) was washed with ice-cold DPBS and lysed with 300 μL of ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP40, 1 mM DTT, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, complete mini EDTA free), 125U Benzonase/mL). Lysates were flash-frozen on dry ice for 5-10 min, followed by a 30-45 s thaw in 37oC water bath with agitation, and rotation at 4oC for 15 min. Lysate was clarified by centrifugation at 13000 xg for 15 min at 4oC. A 30 μL lysate aliquot was saved for future BCA assay and western blot.  For FLAG purification, 25 μL of bead slurry (Anti-Flag M2 Magnetic Beads, Sigma) was washed twice with 1 mL of ice-cold wash buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA) and all of the remaining lysate was incubated with the anti-FLAG beads at 4oC with rotation for 2 hrs. After incubation, flow-through was removed and beads were washed once with 500 μL of wash buffer with 0.05% NP40 and twice with 1 mL of wash buffer (no NP40). Bound proteins were eluted by incubating beads with 15 μL of 100 ug/ml 3xFLAG peptide in 0.05% RapiGest in wash buffer for 15 min at RT with shaking. Supernatants were removed and elution was repeated. Eluates were combined and 10 μL of 8 M urea, 250 mM Tris, 5 mM DTT (final concentration ~1.7 M urea, 50 mM Tris, and 1 mM DTT) was added to give a final total volume of ~45 μL. Samples were incubated at 60oC for 15 min and allowed to cool to room temperature. IODO was added to a final concentration of 3 mM and incubated at room temperature for 45 min in the dark. DTT was added to a final concentration of 3 mM before adding 1 μg of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) and incubating at 37oC overnight. Samples were acidified to 0.5% TFA (ph<2) with 10% TFA stock and incubated for 30 min before desalting on C18 stage tip (Rainin).

### Data Protocol
Data Acquisition For AP-MS experiments, samples were resuspended in 15 μL of MS loading buffer (4% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and 2μL were separated by a reversed-phase gradient over a nanoflow 75μm ID x 25cm long picotip column packed with 1.9μM C18 particles (Dr. Maisch). Peptides were directly injected over the course of a 75 min acquisition into a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo), or over the course of a 90 min acquisition into a Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. For analysis of endogenous protein abundances in parental cell lines, ~500ng of peptides was separated over a 180 min gradient using the same column as for AP-MS experiments, and directly injected into a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer.  Data analysis  Raw MS data were searched against the uniprot canonical isoforms of the human proteome (downloaded March 21, 2018), and using the default settings in MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10), with a match-between-runs enabled (Cox and Mann, 2008). Peptides and proteins were filtered to 1% false discovery rate in MaxQuant, and identified proteins were then subjected to protein-protein interaction scoring. To quantify changes in interactions between WT and mutant baits, or differences in endogenous protein abundances between parental cell lines, we used a label free quantification approach in which statistical analysis was performed using MSstats (Choi et al., 2014) from within the artMS Bioconductor R-package. Detailed MS acquisition and MaxQuant search parameters are provided in Table S8.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Q-exactive, Cancer

### Affiliations
UCSF

### Submitter
Danielle Swaney

### Lab Head
Dr Danielle Swaney / Nevan Krogan
UCSF


