### Accession
PXD032262

### Title
PRECLINICAL STUDIES ON CONVALESCENT HUMAN IMMUNE PLASMA DERIVED EXOSOME (ChipEXO): omics and anti-viral properties to SARS-CoV-2.

### Description
The scale of the COVID-19 pandemic required the emergency development of treatment strategies. One of these strategies is the use of convalescent plasma (CP), isolated from patients recovered from a disease as a therapeutic for new patients. The use of convalescent human immune plasma derived exosomes (ChipEXO) in place of whole plasma can address issues associated with CP therapies while inducing a similar therapeutic response in recipients. Isolated exosomes would be pure of soluble protein contaminants such as coagulation factors, which can cause serious side effects such as blood clots and endothelial damage. In the light of this information, in this study, we examined the use of ChipEXO against the SARS-CoV-2 virus in terms of safety and efficacy, based on the omic analysis of ChipEXO in terms of protein and miRNA. The isolated ChipEXO was characterized according to the criteria determined by the MISEV commission. To elucidate the molecular mechanism of the exosome's activity, proteomic and miRNA analyzes were made and its content was clarified. After performing the ontological and orthological analyzes, the safety of ChipEXO for tissue and organism has been studied on both in vitro cell culture and in vivo animals. ChipEXO, which did not cause any toxic effects, was this time examined for its efficacy to examine the possible effects it may develop against SARS-CoV-2. With the guidance of the results obtained as a result of the studies, it has been revealed that ChipEXO has an effect that provides both anti-viral and tissue protection against the virus. In addition to these data, we encounter a picture in which the cytokine storm is suppressed and the complement system is modulated, and tissue homeostasis is provided in the detail of the molecular mechanism in which its anti-viral activity is discussed. With detailed pre-clinical and clinical studies to be done, ChipEXO is a promising drug candidate with high efficacy against SARS-CoV-2 therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic profiling of ChipEXOs was performed by mass spectroscopy. Briefly, proteins were separated via 12% SDS-PAGE followed by cleanup and concentration using ReadyPrep 2-DE Cleanup Kit (Biorad) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. SDS-PAGE gels were fixed in 40% methanol, 10% acidic acid and colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 in distilled water (v/v) overnight. Bands of proteins were excised for in-gel tryptic digestion (Thermo Fisher). Digested peptides were pre-concentrated and desalted in with a trap column, and separated using an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analytical column (75 μm x 15 cm x 2 μm, 100 Å diameter, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide identification was done with nLC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanosystem (Dionex, Thermo Fisher) coupled with a Q Exactive mass spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher). Full spectra mass spectroscopy of the peptides was obtained with the following settings: resolution of 70.000, scan range of 40-2000 m/z, spray voltage of 2.3 kV, target automatic gain control of ‘AGC’ 3x106, and a maximum injection time of 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
Identified peptides were matched to proteins using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher) with the following settings: a mass tolerance of 10 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance of 0.2 Da, mass accuracy of 2 ppm, tolerant miscarriage of 1, a minimum peptide length of 6, fixed changes cysteine carbamidomethylation, unstable changes methionine oxidation, and asparagine deamination. Final results were queried in the Uniprot/Swissprot database for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exosome, Sars-cov-2., Extracellular vesicles, Convalescent plasma

### Affiliations
Yeditepe University
Department of Genetics and Bioengineering, Faculty of Engineering and Architecture, Yeditepe University

### Submitter
Batuhan Bozkurt

### Lab Head
Dr Pakize Neslihan Taşlı
Department of Genetics and Bioengineering, Faculty of Engineering and Architecture, Yeditepe University


