### Accession
PXD003745

### Title
A proteomic approach to identify endosomal cargoes controlling cancer invasiveness

### Description
We have developed a proteomic approach to identify endosomal cargoes that contribute to cancer invasiveness.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC-labelled MDA-MB-231 cells were transfected with siRNAs targeting Rab17 or a non-targeting control and plated into 10cm plastic dishes.  48hr later cells were surface-biotinylated  by incubation with 0.2 mM sulpho-NHS-SS-Biotin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Paisley, UK) in PBS at 4 °C for 1 hr. To study the internalisome, surface-biotinylated cells were transferred to SILAC-DMEM (Gibco, Life technologies) at 37 °C for 20 min to allow internalisation of labelled protein, and then biotin remaining at the cell surface was removed by incubation with a cell impermeant reducing agent (MesNa) 20mM (Fluka Sigma-Aldrich, Dorset, England) in Tris-buffered saline (pH8.6) for 50 min at 4 °C.  Remaining MesNa was quenched by incubation with iodoacetamide (IAA; 20mM Sigma-Aldrich ). Cells were lysed in 200 mM NaCl, 75 mM Tris, 15 mM NaF, 1.5 mM Na3VO4, 7.5 mM EGTA, 1.5% Triton X-100, 0.75% Igepal CA-630, 0.5 mg/ml leupeptin (Melford, Suffolk, UK), 0.25 mg/ml aprotinin (Sigma), and 5 mM 4-(2-Aminoethyl)benzynesulphonyl fluoride (AEBSF) (Melford) and lysates cleared by centrifugation at 10,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatants from the heavy and light SILAC labelled cells were then mixed and biotinylated proteins were captured by incubation with streptavidin-agarose beads (UPSTATE, Millipore) for 1 h at 4 °C with constant rotation. Following extensive washing, specifically-associated proteins were eluted by treatment with cleavage with 0.1 M DTT (0.1M) in a Tris buffer (pH 7.5).   Proteins were separated on 4-12% gradient NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris gel (Life Technologies), visualised by staining of the gels with Comassie blue and digested in-gel (8 gel slices were cut for the Surfaceome/Internalisome; 5 gel slices for Rab17 IP) using trypsin  and desalted as described previously. For the proteome of cells silenced for Rab17, proteins were trypsin digested using the filter-aid sample preparation (FASP) method and 50 µg of peptides separated by strong anion exchange chromatography on StageTip. Digested peptides were loaded onto an EASY-nLC connected online to an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using a 20 cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in house with reversed-phase Reprosil Pur Basic 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH) and eluted with a flow of 200 nl/min from 5% to 20-30% of buffer containing 80% ACN in 0.5% acetic acid, in a 90 min (190 min gradient for the proteome of siRab17 cells) linear gradient. The full scan MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400. The top 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated for fragmentation using high-energy collision dissociation, and recorded at resolution of 15,000. Data were acquired with Xcalibur software (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.3.7.4 (proteome) and 1.3.8.2 (traffickome and interactome) and searched with the Andromeda search engine against the human UniProt database (release-2012 01, 88,847 entries). The common reverse and contaminant hits (as defined in MaxQuant output) were removed. Only protein groups identified with at least one uniquely assigned peptide were used for the analysis. For the SILAC experiments, the SILAC ratios between light and heavy peptides were calculated by MaxQuant. Protein groups were considered reproducibly quantified if identified and quantified in forward and reverse experiment. For label-free quantification proteins were quantified according to the label-free quantification algorithm available in MaxQuant.

### Data Protocol
Surfaceome and internalosome (SILAC): From the filtered list of quantified proteins, hits with opposite regulation (= opposite sign when SILAC ratio expressed as log2) in the two experiments were excluded. To identify differentially trafficked proteins upon Rab17 knockdown, proteins belonging to the 1st or 3rd of the SILAC ratio distribution of the forward and reverse experiment were considered. This statistical approach allowed us to select proteins with small but reproducible (in both forward and reverse SILAC experiments) changes in localization. Proteome siRab17 (SILAC): For forward and reverse experiment, protein groups with significant SILAC ratio were determined according to the Significance B (38), using 5% as FDR. The Significance B identifies outliers based on the standard deviation of the protein SILAC ratio of the main distribution and the protein abundance (Intensity measured at the MS). The significance B was chosen because, as typically shown for SILAC datasets (38), the distribution of the logarithmic SILAC ratios was dependent on the protein intensity, where the spread of nonregulated proteins was higher for low compared to high abundant proteins. For this reason, for low abundant proteins to be significant a higher deviation from the SILAC ratio main distribution is required. Conversely, for high abundant proteins a higher deviation is required. Interactome (label-free): Three independent replicates were generated per condition (Ctl and Rab17 IP) and significantly enriched proteins were selected using a Welsh test-based analysis (5% FDR). The Welsh test is particularly suitable for this kind of samples, IP where Ctl and Rab17 samples could recover different number and amount of interacting proteins, because this test is designed for studies where the two samples have unequal variances and unequal sample sizes.

### Publication Abstract
We have previously shown that Rab17, a small GTPase associated with epithelial polarity, is specifically suppressed by ERK2 (also known as MAPK1) signalling to promote an invasive phenotype. However, the mechanisms through which Rab17 loss permits invasiveness, and the endosomal cargoes that are responsible for mediating this, are unknown. Using quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics, we have found that knockdown of Rab17 leads to a highly selective reduction in the cellular levels of a v-SNARE (Vamp8). Moreover, proteomics and immunofluorescence indicate that Vamp8 is associated with Rab17 at late endosomes. Reduced levels of Vamp8 promote transition between ductal carcinoma <i>in situ</i> (DCIS) and a more invasive phenotype. We developed an unbiased proteomic approach to elucidate the complement of receptors that redistributes between endosomes and the plasma membrane, and have pin-pointed neuropilin-2 (NRP2) as a key pro-invasive cargo of Rab17- and Vamp8-regulated trafficking. Indeed, reduced Rab17 or Vamp8 levels lead to increased mobilisation of NRP2-containing late endosomes and upregulated cell surface expression of NRP2. Finally, we show that NRP2 is required for the basement membrane disruption that accompanies the transition between DCIS and a more invasive phenotype.

### Keywords
Silac; label-free; cancer; recyclome; orbitrap

### Affiliations
Cancer Research UK Beatson Institute
Tumour Microenvironment & Proteomics

### Submitter
Sara Zanivan

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Zanivan
Cancer Research UK Beatson Institute


