### Accession
PXD018978

### Title
Investigating the protein-protein interactions of EccA3 in Mycobacterium smegmatis

### Description
Mycobacterium smegmatis encodes three ESX secretion systems, ESX-1, -3 and -4. Previous research has suggested localisation of the ESX-1 secretion system at the growing polar region of M. smegmatis. In a seperate study, we demonstrated unipolar localisation of EccA3 from ESX-3 at the growing polar region of M. smegmatis. Here we demonstrate that affinity purification of N-terminally FLAG-tagged MSMEG_0615 (EccA3) followed by mass spectrometry resulted in the co-purification proteins previously identified in the membrane fractions of M. tuberculosis. Furthermore, we demonstrate that EccA3 co-purified with proteins known to localise at the growing polar region of asymmetrically growing M. smegmatis, including Wag31 and CwsA.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation: M. smegmatis, M. smegmatis::pNFLAG::pTEK and M. smegmatis::pNFLAG0615::pTEK was grown to an OD600 of 0.4 prior to crosslinking with formaldehyde at a final concentration of 1% for 10 minutes at 37°C. Crosslinking was stopped with the addition of Glycine at a final concentration of 125 mM for 10 minutes at 37°C. Cells were washed with PBS prior to being stored at -80°C. Cell pellets were resuspended in Lysis Buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100) supplemented with protease inhibitors (Roche cOmplete™ mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail). Cells were subsequently sonicated (QSonica Q700 probe sonicator) four times for 20 s at an amplitude of 30 with 5 min intervals on ice to lyse cells. Protein concentrations of whole cell lysates were determined using the Direct Detect (Merck) prior to the incubation of 0.5 mg whole cell lysate with Protein G Dynabeads (Invitrogen) in a total volume of 1 ml. M. smegmatis whole cell lysates were incubated with Protein G Dynabeads (bead only control). M. smegmatis, M. smegmatis::pNFLAG::pTEK and M. smegmatis::pNFLAG0615::pTEK whole cell lysates were incubated with 5 µg anti-FLAG antibody bound protein G Dynabeads. M. smegmatis::pNFLAG0615::pTEK whole cell lysates were also incubated with 5 µg anti-MYH antibody to serve as a non-specific antibody control. Immunoprecipitations were incubated at 4°C for 2 hours with rotations, prior to washing beads twice with IP buffer I (50 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% Sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS) supplemented with protease inhibitors. Beads were washed twice with IP buffer II (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 500 mM NaCl, 0.5% IGEPAL® CA-630, 0.5% Sodium deoxycholate) before a final two washed with 50 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Beads were incubated with 1 µg trypsin in 150 µl 50 µM TEAB at 37°C for 18 hours, shaking at 700 rpm. Supernatants were dried in a SpeedyVac, prior to resuspension in 50 µl 50 mM TEAB. Peptides were cleaned using the MagReSyn HILIC (ReSyn Biosciences) as stipulated by the manufacturer. Following cleanup, peptides were dried and stored at -80°C.  Mass spectromety Analysis: A total of 3 µl of peptides were purified and concentrated using an on-line enrichment column (Waters Symmetry Trap C18 100A, 5 µm, 180 µm ID x 20mm column).  Subsequent chromatographic separation was performed on a reverse phase nanospray column (Waters, Peptide BEH C18; 1.7 µm, 75 µm ID x 150 mm column, 45°C) using a 60 minute gradient: 2%-5% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in ACN over 1 minute followed by 5% A - 40% B over 54 minutes and 40-85% B over 5 minutes at a flow rate of 350 nanoliters/min.   Peptides were eluted directly into the mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific) and spectra were collected over a m/z range of 400–2000, positive mode ionization. Ions with charge state +2 or +3 were accepted for MS/MS using a dynamic exclusion limit of 2 MS/MS spectra of a given m/z value for 30 s (exclusion duration of 90 s). The instrument was operated in FT mode for MS detection (resolution of 60,000) and ion trap mode for MS/MS detection with a normalized collision energy set to 35%.  Compound lists of the resulting spectra were generated using Xcalibur 3.0 software (Thermo Scientific) with a S/N threshold of 1.5 and 1 scan/group.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.6.7.0. was used to analyse mass spectrometry data using the M. smegmatis mc2 155 database (UP000000757)containing 8794 predicted protein sequences obtained from Uniprot, October 2014. Carba- midomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification with four variable modifications oxidized methionine, the addition of glycine on lysine, serine and threonine residues, the addition of methylol and glycine on any histidine, asparagine, glutamine, tryptophan and tyrosine as well as the possible di-methylation of lysine and arginine residues. Two missed tryptic cleavages were allowed, and proteins were identified with a minimum of 1 unique peptide detected per protein. The protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) set at less than 0.01. Relative quantification was performed using the MaxQuant LFQ (MaxLFQ) algorithm in the MaxQuant package to obtain LFQ intensity values for identified protein groups and the “match between runs” algorithm was selected to detect peptides which were not selected for MS/MS ana- lysis in other experiments. LFQ intensity data for identified proteins from the proteinGroups.txt file was used for statistical analyses using Perseus. All potential contaminants, reverse hits and proteins only identified by site were removed before log 2 transformation and filtering to remove all proteins identified with only one unique peptide. Proteins were deemed identified when present in at least two of the three anti-FLAG immunoprecipitations. A list of 216 high confidence proteins were identified, with no identification in the any of the control immunoprecipitations. Following the removal of high confidence proteins, a non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test with an FDR of 0.05 using the Benjamini-Hochberg correction was used to identify a further 53 low confidence proteins. MSMEG annotations and protein descriptions of identified proteins were assigned using Uniprot.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Polar localisation, Mycobacterium smegmatis, Esx

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa.
Stellenbosch Univeristy

### Submitter
Nastassja Kriel

### Lab Head
Dr Samantha Sampson
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa.


