### Accession
PXD043728

### Title
Hydration status of geriatric patients is associated with changes of serum proteome especially of proteins involved in coagulation

### Description
Due to multifactorial reasons, such as decreased thirst and decreased total body water, elderly patients are vulnerable to dehydration. The study aims to investigate whether moderate dehydration or hyperhydration affects the blood proteome. Blood samples, medication and bioelectrical impedance analysis (BIA) details were collected from 131 geriatric patients (77 women, 54 men). Based on an evaluation by Bioelectrical Impedance Vector Analyses (BIVA) of this cohort, for each hydration status (dehydrated, hyperhydrated and control), five appropriate blood serum samples for both male and female were analyzed by LC-MS. Overall, 262 proteins for female patients and 293 proteins for male patients could be quantified. 38 proteins had significantly different abundance, showing that hydration status does indeed affect the serum proteome. Protein enrichment analysis of the affected proteins revealed “Wound Healing” and “Keratinization” as the two main biological processes being dysregulated. Especially, proteins involved in clot formation are affected by hydration status.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were collected during standard blood collection in the clinic. They were kept cold (4° C) until they were centrifuged at 2,500 × g for 30 min at 4° C on the same day within 3 hours after collection. Afterwards the supernatant (blood plasma) was transferred to 1.5 mL Tubes (Greiner) and frozen at -80° C.  The top 14 abundant proteins of each sample were depleted according to the manufacturer’s protocol with the High SelectTM Top14 Abundant Protein Depletion Mini Spin Columns (ThermoFisher Scientific, Germany). Total protein quantitation was determined using the Pierce 660nm Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific Fisher, Germany). After depletion a modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) was performed. An ultrafiltration using vivacon 500 filter unit (30 kDa MWCO) was applied. A corresponding volume of 30 µg of depleted plasma proteins of each sample were added to the filter and diluted with 8 M urea buffer including 0.5 M TCEP. This was followed by a thiol-alkylation with iodoacetamide (IAA) which was then incubated for 30 min without mixing in the dark. To get rid of the excess IAA, the filter was rinsed two times with 8 M urea in 0,5 M TCEP with pH 8,0. Then the filter units were transferred to a new collection tube and 10 µL of urea buffer and 80 µL of Trypsin (with an enzyme to protein ration 1:50) in 50mM TEAB buffer was added. The tubes were sealed with parafilm to prevent evaporation and incubated overnight at 37° C mixing at 600rpm. After centrifugation the collected peptide samples are stored at -80° C.  Subsequently the samples were labeled with the TMT10-plex Label Reagents (Thermo Scientific Fisher, Germany) in accordance to the manufactures protocol with the following changes: 27 µL of the appropriate 10plex-solution were mixed to the samples, and 5 µL of the quenching solution was used. After labeling, samples were pooled and fractionated using the Pierce high pH reversed phase fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher, Germany). Ultimately, the samples were analysed by LC-MS. 1 µg of labeled peptides were injected into an Easy-nLC 1200 coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). The peptides were separated on a 20-cm analytical HPLC column packed in-house using ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-μm silica beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Separation was achieved by applying a 120-min multistep gradient from 10% solvent A to 90% solvent B at a constant flow rate of 200 nL/min. As mobile phases 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 80% ACN, supplemented with 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent B) were applied. The eluting peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization at 3.2 kV. Data was acquired in data-dependent mode and controlled by XCalibur software (version 2.9). The survey scans were acquired in a scan range of 300–1650 m/z, a mass resolution of 60,000, AGC target of 3 × 106 and a maximum injection time of 25 ms. The top 10 most abundant precursor ions were selected for isolation (window of 0.7 amu) and fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy: 34). For MS2 scans in orbitrap mass analyzer, AGC target and maximum injection time were set to 1 × 105 and 110 ms, respectively. A dynamic exclusion for MS2 scans was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The proteomics raw data was analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.3) and the integrated protein identification algorithm Andromeda was utilized. The experimental spectra were matched against reference proteome of H. sapiens. Trypsin was defined as a position-specific protease in fixed mode with a tolerance of up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (cysteine) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (methionine) and acetylation (protein N-terminus) were set as optional modifications. A mass tolerance of 20 ppm (first search and fragment ions) and 4.5 ppm (main search) was allowed. Two peptides including at least one unique peptide was required for identification controlling the false discovery rate (FDR) to 0.05 for peptide spectrum matches and protein identification. The identified proteins were filtered to exclude potential contaminants and decoy entries.

### Publication Abstract
Due to multifactorial reasons, such as decreased thirst and decreased total body water, elderly patients are vulnerable to dehydration. The study aims to investigate whether moderate dehydration or hyperhydration affects the blood proteome. Blood samples, medication, and bioelectrical impedance analysis (BIA) details were collected from 131 geriatric patients (77 women and 54 men aged 81.1 &#xb1; 7.2 years). Based on an evaluation by Bioelectrical Impedance Vector Analyses (BIVAs) of this cohort, for each hydration status (dehydrated, hyperhydrated, and control), five appropriate blood plasma samples for both males and females were analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Overall, 262 proteins for female patients and 293 proteins for male patients could be quantified. A total of 38 proteins had significantly different abundance, showing that hydration status does indeed affect the plasma proteome. Protein enrichment analysis of the affected proteins revealed "Wound Healing" and "Keratinization" as the two main biological processes being dysregulated. Proteins involved in clot formation are especially affected by hydration status.

### Keywords
Human, Biomarker, Wound healing, Coagulation, Tandem mass tags, Serum, Tmt, Dehydration, Hyperhydration, Alzheimer, Dementia

### Affiliations
Coburg University of Applied Sciences and Arts, Institute for Bioanalysis, Friedrich-Streib-Str. 2, D-96450 Coburg, Germany
Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and Immunology

### Submitter
Johannes Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Johannes Schmidt
Coburg University of Applied Sciences and Arts, Institute for Bioanalysis, Friedrich-Streib-Str. 2, D-96450 Coburg, Germany


