### Accession
PXD036219

### Title
Chemical Denaturation and Protein Precipitation (CPP) on E. coli lysate

### Description
Chemical Denaturation and Protein Precipitation (CPP) was performed on an E. coli lysate in order to determine the precipitaiton midpoint for the proteome

### Sample Protocol
E. coli lysates were subjected to a chemical denaturation and protein precipitation (CPP) analysis using a protocol reported previously by Meng et al.33 The CPP analysis involved combining 13 μL aliquots of a cell lysate (35 mg/mL) with 7 μL of a range of GdmCl-containing buffers at varying concentrations. This resulted in final concentrations of 23 mg/mL lysate and GdmCl concentrations ranging from 0 M to 3 M across 10 samples. Lysates were allowed to incubate with denaturants for 1 hr at room temperature. Protein precipitation was then induced by fast-dilution upon the addition of 480 μL of water to each of the ten samples. After the addition of water, samples were quickly vortexed, and then centrifuged at 14,000 g at 4 ℃ for 20 minutes. A fixed volume was taken from the supernatant of each of the ten samples for bottom-up proteomics sample preparation using an iFASP protocol described by McDowell et al.32 Each sample was transferred into a 10 kDa MWCO centrifugal filter unit. Buffer exchange was performed by adding 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5 followed by TCEP reduction, MMTS alkylation, digestion with trypsin, and TMT10-Plex labeling according to manufacturer’s protocol. Labeled peptides were centrifuged through the filters after addition of 0.5 M NaCl. Equal volumes from each TMT10-Plex labeled sample were combined into one final sample. The final sample was transferred to a C18 Macrospin column for desalting prior to LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo) was used to search the raw LC-MS/MS files against the E. coli MG1655 (Proteome ID: UP000000625) proteins in the 2019-09-24 release of the UniProt Knowledgebase. The raw LC-MS/MS data generated in the protein expression experiments was searched using fixed MMTS modification on cysteine; TMT10-plex labeling of lysine side chains and peptide N-termini; variable oxidation of methionine; variable deamidation of asparagine and glutamine; and variable acetylation of the protein N-terminus. Trypsin (full) was set as the enzyme, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. For peptide and protein quantification, reporter abundance was set as intensity, and normalization mode and scaling mode were each set as none. All other settings were left as the default values. Data was exported at the protein-level for quantitation. Only proteins with FDR confidence labeled as "high" or “medium” (i.e., FDR < 1% or < 5%) were used for subsequent analyses. To fit individual protein CPP curves, chemical precipitation data sets were fitted to a four-parameter sigmoidal equation, eq 1, using a Mathematica-based program (developed in house). CPP midpoint values of the curves were exported for further statistical analyses as well as fitting p-values for variables “b” and “c”. Proteins with poorly fitted curves (fitting p-values < 0.01) were removed before further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Metal cations have been exploited for their precipitation properties in a wide variety of studies, ranging from differentiating proteins from serum and blood to identifying the protein targets of drugs. Despite widespread recognition of this phenomenon, the mechanisms of metal-induced protein aggregation have not been fully elucidated. Recent studies have suggested that copper's (Cu) ability to induce protein aggregation may be a main contributor to Cu-induced cell death. Here, we provide the first proteome-wide analysis of the relative sensitivities of proteins across the Escherichia coli proteome to Cu-induced aggregation. We utilize a metal-induced protein precipitation (MiPP) methodology that relies on quantitative bottom-up proteomics to define the metal concentration-dependent precipitation properties of proteins on a proteomic scale. Our results establish that Cu far surpasses other metals in promoting protein aggregation and that the protein aggregation is reversible upon metal chelation. The bulk of the Cu bound in the protein aggregates is Cu1+, regardless of the Cu2+ source. Analysis of our MiPP data allows us to investigate underlying biophysical characteristics that determine a protein's sensitivity to Cu-induced aggregation, which is independent of the relative concentration of protein in the lysate. Overall, this analysis provides new insights into the mechanism behind Cu cytotoxicity, as well as metal cation-induced protein aggregation.

### Keywords
Cpp, Precipitation, E. coli

### Affiliations
Chemistry, Fitzgerald, Duke university, USA
Duke University

### Submitter
grace bertles

### Lab Head
Dr Michael C. Fitzgerald
Chemistry, Fitzgerald, Duke university, USA


