### Accession
PXD017212

### Title
Proteome analysis and targeted proteolysis identify a developmentally relevant COPS3 deposit in mouse oocytes

### Description
An important facet of the oocyte to embryo transition in mammals is the rapid elimination of a subset of the maternal products that got accumulated during oogenesis. RNA studies support a view that the transition occurs quite rapidly. Whether this applies also for proteins remains to be determined beyond the very few cases known to date. We report that COPS3, the 3rd subunit of the COP9 signalosome complex, forms a large protein deposit in mouse oocytes (94th percentile of the riBAQ distribution). The one and only knock-out study had previously shown that Cops3 null (-/-) mouse embryos obtained from heterozygous intercrosses arrested after 5.5 dpc and were resorbed by 8.5 dpc mainly due to increased cell death in the epiblast (PMID: 12972600). However, more recent studies from our group ascribed Cops3 gene with a developmental role already at the 2-cell stage. Specifically, the sister blastomeres differ from each other in Cops3 mRNA levels and distribution, preceding the discordance of epiblast formation in derivative twin blastocysts, and implicating Cops3 in the molecular underpinnings of totipotency. This discrepancy between original knock-out result and recent observations can be resolved if we posit that the first requirement for Cops3 gene function was bridged by maternal protein that outlived the locus excision, consistent with the observation that Cops3 -/- blastocysts had the same immunostaining intensity as the +/- or +/+ counterparts in the original knock-out study. Thus, these contradicting observations support a hypothesis that 5.5 dpc may not have been the first time when the gene function was needed in development, but the second time. To test this hypothesis, pronuclear-stage mouse oocytes were subjected to an immunological method that directly targets the protein of interest by way of proteasomal degradation of the COPS3-antibody-TRIM21 complex. Briefly, pronuclear-stage mouse oocytes were microinjected with a mixture of the COPS3-specific purified monoclonal IgG antibody, mCherry-Trim21 mRNA and Oregon Green dextran beads (inert tracer). Injected oocytes were then allowed to develop and collected for lysis 24 hours later, when they reached the 2-cell stage but were not able to progress further. In addition to the COPS3, we targeted two additional proteins, OCT4 and TEAD4. The following seven experimental groups were examined by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using the pipeline described previously by Israel et al.: 1) non-manipulated 2-cell embryos; 2) 2-cell embryos from oocytes injected with Oregon Green dextran beads; 3) 2-cell embryos from oocytes injected with mCherry-Trim21 mRNA and Oregon Green; 4) 2-cell embryos from oocytes injected with mCherry-Trim21 mRNA, Oregon Green and anti-COPS3 (Abcam 79698); 5) 2-cell embryos from oocytes injected with anti-COPS3 (Abcam 79698) and Oregon Green; 6) 2-cell embryos from oocytes injected with mCherry-Trim21 mRNA, Oregon Green and anti-TEAD4 (Abcam 58310); 7) 2-cell embryos from oocytes injected with mCherry-Trim21 mRNA, Oregon Green and anti-OCT4 (Abcam 181557).

### Sample Protocol
Pronuclear-stage mouse oocytes (15 hours post-hCG) were microinjected with approx. 100 picoliters of a mixture of purified IgG antibody (0.4 mg/mL), mCherry-Trim21 mRNA (0.2 mg/mL) and Oregon Green dextran beads as inert tracer (0.017 mg/mL). Oocytes were collected 24 hours after microinjection, when they had reached the 2-cell stage and further processed for LC-MSMS analysis as described by Israel et al., except that all measurements were performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer. All lysates contained 200-250 embryos each, without the zona pellucida, which had been removed using acidic Tyrode solution. Original publication: Israel S, Casser E, Drexler HCA, Fuellen G, Boiani M: A framework for TRIM21-mediated protein depletion in early mouse embryos: recapitulation of Tead4 null phenotype over three days. BMC Genomics 2019, 20(1):755.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed for identification and quantification by MaxQuant Software (version 1.6.17.0 ), considering only the “light” versions of the proteins, with the iBAQ options ‘requantify’ and ‘iBAQ’ enabled. iBAQ stands for ‘intensity-based absolute quantification’. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification). For identification, the search was performed against the UniProt mouse database (release date 04/2019 ), supplemented with the sequence information for mCherry and for the rabbit Ig gamma chain C region, and concatenated with reversed sequence versions of all entries. Common lab contaminants were also added. Parameters defined for the search were trypsin as digesting enzyme, allowing two missed cleavages, a minimum length of seven amino acids, carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues as fixed modification, oxidation at methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation and ubiquitylation on lysine as variable modifications. The maximum allowed mass deviation was 20 ppm for the MS and 0.5 Da for the MS/MS scans. Protein groups were regarded as identified with a false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1% for all peptide and protein identifications; in addition, at least two matching peptides were required and at least one of these peptides had to be unique to the protein group. Briefly, a protein group is defined as all proteins that are identified by the same set of peptides, which are not included (all together) in any other protein group. In this study we focused on the iBAQ values of the ‘light’ peptide versions only (= peptides derived from oocyte proteins but not from the F9 spike-in standard). The iBAQ algorithm allows to calculate the abundance of proteins within one sample by summing all peptide peak intensities detected for a given protein and normalizing it by the number of theoretically observable tryptic peptides for this protein. Thus, a mass-related measure (intensity) is transformed into a measure that is proportional to molar amounts (iBAQ). iBAQ values for each protein were then divided by the sum of all iBAQ values for a given experiment to determine the molar fractional content of each protein P (riBAQP) in a sample according to the formula: riBAQP=riBAQP∑1niBAQ.

### Publication Abstract
Investigations of genes required in early mammalian development are complicated by protein deposits of maternal products, which continue to operate after the gene locus has been disrupted. This leads to delayed phenotypic manifestations and underestimation of the number of genes known to be needed during the embryonic phase of cellular totipotency. Here we expose a critical role of the gene Cops3 by showing that it protects genome integrity during the 2-cell stage of mouse development, in contrast to the previous functional assignment at postimplantation. This new role is mediated by a substantial deposit of protein (94th percentile of the proteome), divided between an exceptionally stable cortical rim, which is prevalent in oocytes, and an ancillary deposit in the embryonic nuclei. Since protein abundance and stability defeat prospects of DNA- or RNA-based gene inactivation in oocytes, we harnessed a classical method next to an emerging method for protein inactivation: antigen masking (for functional inhibition) versus TRIM21-mediated proteasomal degradation, also known as 'Trim away' (for physical removal). Both resulted in 2-cell embryo lethality, unlike the embryos receiving anti-green fluorescent protein. Comparisons between COPS3 protein-targeted and non-targeted embryos revealed large-scale transcriptome differences, which were most evident for genes associated with biological functions critical for RNA metabolism and for the preservation of genome integrity. The gene expression abnormalities associated with COPS3 inactivation were confirmed in situ by the occurrence of DNA endoreduplication and DNA strand breaks in 2-cell embryos. These results recruit Cops3 to the small family of genes that are necessary for early embryo survival. Overall, assigning genes with roles in embryogenesis may be less safe than assumed, if the protein products of these genes accumulate in oocytes: the inactivation of a gene at the protein level can expose an earlier phenotype than that identified by genetic techniques such as conventional gene silencing.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Proteomics, Silac, Oocyte, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry
Max PLanck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Max PLanck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany


