### Accession
PXD008003

### Title
Endogenous, in vivo, and site-specific characterization of the SUMO architecture across species and organs

### Description
Small ubiquitin-like modifiers (SUMOs) are post-translational modifications that play crucial roles in most cellular processes. While methods exist to study exogenous SUMOylation, large-scale characterization of endogenous SUMO has remained technically daunting. Here, we describe a proteomics approach facilitating system-wide and in vivo identification of lysines modified by endogenous and native SUMO2/3. We identified 14,869 endogenous SUMO sites in human cells during heat stress and proteasomal inhibition, and mapped 1,963 SUMO sites across eight mouse tissues; brain, heart, kidney, lung, liver, muscle, spleen, and testis. Quantification of the SUMO equilibrium highlighted striking differences in SUMO metabolism, between cells and tissues. Targeting preferences of SUMO varied across different organ types, coinciding with markedly differential SUMOylation states of all enzymes involved in the SUMO conjugation cascade. Collectively, our systemic investigation details the SUMOylation architecture across species and organs and provides a resource of endogenous SUMOylation sites on factors important in organ-specific functions and disease.

### Sample Protocol
Human HeLa, U2OS, or HEK cells, were either control treated or subjected to heat shock or MG132 treatment. Five normal young male adult mice were euthanized, and the brain, heart, kidney, liver, lung, muscle, spleen, and testis were extracted. Cells and tissues were homogenized in guanidine buffer, and digested with Lys-C. Peptides were subsequently desalted, lyophilized, and dissolved in mild IP buffer. SUMO antibodies were used to enrich SUMOylated peptides, which were subsequently digested with various proteolytic enzymes in order to maximize coverage of site identification and to determine an optimal digestion strategy. Enzymes used in the 2nd stage were trypsin, Glu-C, Asp-N, and wild-type alpha-lytic protease (WALP). After secondary digestion, samples were desalted and optionally fractionated on-StageTip using high-pH block elutions. StageTip elutions were dried completely using a vacuum centrifuge, and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid. Samples were analyzed on 15 cm long 75 μm internal diameter columns, packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads (Dr. Maisch), connected to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo). Column elution was performed using a multitude of different gradients, owing to considerable differences in peptide properties depending on high-pH fraction and the enzymes used for digestion of the peptide mixtures. Single-shot samples were analyzed with 140 min effective gradient time, and fractions with 70 min effective gradient time, with Buffer A (0.1% FA) as the initial buffer, and an increasing amount of Buffer B (80% ACN in 0.1% FA) over time. The following values represent the increasing value of Buffer B across the largest time-frame of the analytical gradients, and do not include initial ramp-up and washing blocks. Single-shot analyses; Glu-C: 5-30%, trypsin: 25-45%, WALP: 5-20%. Fraction analyses; Asp-N; F1: 13-24%, F2: 14-27%, F3-5: 15-30%, F6: 17-32%. Trypsin; F1-6: 26-42%. WALP; F1-2: 5-20%, F3-6: 5-30%. A column heater was used to heat the column to 40 °C, and ionization was performed using a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo). Analysis of the ion stream was performed using a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). Spray voltage was set to 2 kV, with a capillary temperature of 275 °C, and an S-Lens RF level of 50%. Full scans were made at a resolution of 60,000, with an AGC target of 3,000,000 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The following scan ranges were used; Asp-N: 400-1,600 m/z, Glu-C: 300-1,750 m/z, trypsin: 600-1,900 m/z, WALP: 300-1,200 m/z. Precursor fragmentation was achieved through higher-energy collision disassociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 25, an AGC target of 100,000, and an isolation width of 1.3 m/z. The following precursor charge states were considered for MS/MS; Asp-N: 2-6, Glu-C: 2-7, trypsin: 3-6, WALP: 2-5. A dynamic exclusion of 60 s and 45 s was used for single-shot samples and fractions, respectively. For collection and analysis of precursors by MS/MS, loop count was set to 7, MS2 resolution to 60,000, maximum injection time to 120 ms, and intensity threshold to 5,000.

### Data Protocol
All RAW files were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.30. For the human cell line data, data from different enzymes was analyzed in separate searches, because of considerable differences in peptides generated depending on digestive approach, which is not sufficiently supported by MaxQuant to warrant a single search. All mouse data was processed together in a single search. Additional searches were performed for initial comparison between different enzymes; however, results from these were not included in the final processed databases. Default MaxQuant settings were used, with exceptions and important settings outlined below. For generation of the theoretical peptide library, the FASTA database for human proteins was downloaded from UniProt on the 22nd of February, 2017, and for mouse proteins on the 10th of May, 2017. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled. For all searches, protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were included as potential variable modifications (default), in addition to phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine. SUMO mass remnants were defined as follows. Asp-N; DVFQQQTGG, H60C41N12O15, monoisotopic mass 960.4301, neutral loss b7-DVFQQQT, diagnostic mass remnants [b2-DV, b3-DVF, b4-DVFQ, b5-DVFQQ, b6-DVFQQQ, b7-DVFQQQT, b9-DVFQQQTGG, QQ, FQ, FQQ]. Glu-C, variant 1; VFQQQTGG, H49C33N9O10, monoisotopic mass 731.3602, neutral loss b6-VFQQQT, diagnostic mass remnants [b2-VF-CO, b2-VF, b3-VFQ, b4-VFQQ, b5-VFQQQ, b6-VFQQQT, b7-VFQQQTG, b8-VFQQQTGG]. Glu-C, variant 2; DTIDVFQQQTGG, H77C51N13O19, monoisotopic mass 1175.5459, neutral loss b10-DTIDVFQQQT, diagnostic mass remnants [b2-DT, b3-DTI, b4-DTID, b5-DTIDV-H2O, b5-DTIDV, b6-DTIDVF, b7-DTIDVFQ, b8-DTIDVFQQ, b9-DTIDVFQQQ, b10-DTIDVFQQQT]. Glu-C, variant 3; MEDEDTIDVFQQQTGG, H105C70N17O29S1, monoisotopic mass 1679.6985, neutral loss b14-MEDEDTIDVFQQQT, diagnostic mass remnants [b2-ME, b3-MED, b4-MEDE, b5-MEDED, b6-MEDEDT, b6-MEDEDT-H2O, b7-MEDEDTI, b7-MEDEDTI-H2O, b8-MEDEDTID, b8-MEDEDTID-H2O]. Glu-C, variant 3, oxidized; same as above but with one additional oxygen atom. Trypsin, variant 1; FDGQPINETDTPAQLEMEDEDTIDVFQQQTGG, H218C146N36O58S1, monoisotopic mass 3435.4936, neutral loss b30-FDGQPINETDTPAQLEMEDEDTIDVFQQQT, diagnostic mass remnants [b4-FDGQ, b6-FDGQPI, b7-FDGQPIN, b8-FDGQPINE, b10-FDGQPINETD, b11-FDGQPINETDT, b13-FDGQPINETDTPA, b14-FDGQPINETDTPAQ, b15-FDGQPINETDTPAQL, b16-FDGQPINETDTPAQLE]. Trypsin, variant 2; FRFDGQPINETDTPAQLEMEDEDTIDVFQQQTGG, H239C161N41O60S1, monoisotopic mass 3738.6632, neutral loss b32-FRFDGQPINETDTPAQLEMEDEDTIDVFQQQT, diagnostic mass remnants [b6-FRFDGQ, b12-FRFDGQPINETD, b13-FRFDGQPINETDT, b16-FRFDGQPINETDTPAQ, b17-FRFDGQPINETDTPAQL, b18-FRFDGQPINETDTPAQLE, b24-FRFDGQPINETDTPAQLEMEDEDT, b25-FRFDGQPINETDTPAQLEMEDEDTI, b26-FRFDGQPINETDTPAQLEMEDEDTID, b27-FRFDGQPINETDTPAQLEMEDEDTIDV]. The WALP mass remnant was searched as di-glycine, as it is identical to the tryptic ubiquitin mass remnant. Enzyme cleavage specificity was set as follows; Asp-N: C-term K and N-term D, E, up to 8 missed cleavages. Glu-C: C-term K, D, E, up to 8 missed cleavages. Trypsin: C-term K, R, up to 4 missed cleavages. WALP: C-term K, V, A, T, S, L, G, up to 10 missed cleavages. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and maximum peptide mass was set as follows; Asp-N: 6,000 Da, Glu-C: 7,000 Da, trypsin: 9,000 Da, WALP: 3,200 Da. Matching between runs was performed with a match time window of 2 min and an alignment time window of 40 min. Data was filtered for peptide-spectrum-match and protein assignment by posterior error probability to achieve a false discovery rate of <1% (default), with a recalibrated mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm (default). Automatic filtering of modified peptides was performed through application of a site decoy fraction of 2%, an Andromeda score cut-off of 40 (default), and a stringent delta score cut-off of 20.

### Publication Abstract
Small ubiquitin-like modifiers (SUMOs) are post-translational modifications that play crucial roles in most cellular processes. While methods exist to study exogenous SUMOylation, large-scale characterization of endogenous SUMO2/3 has remained technically daunting. Here, we describe a proteomics approach facilitating system-wide and in vivo identification of lysines modified by endogenous and native SUMO2. Using a peptide-level immunoprecipitation enrichment strategy, we identify 14,869 endogenous SUMO2/3 sites in human cells during heat stress and proteasomal inhibition, and quantitatively map 1963 SUMO sites across eight mouse tissues. Characterization of the SUMO equilibrium highlights striking differences in SUMO metabolism between cultured cancer cells and normal tissues. Targeting preferences of SUMO2/3 vary across different organ types, coinciding with markedly differential SUMOylation states of all enzymes involved in the SUMO conjugation cascade. Collectively, our systemic investigation details the SUMOylation architecture across species and organs and provides a resource of endogenous SUMOylation sites on factors important in organ-specific functions.

### Keywords
Human, Tissue, In vivo, Sumo, Endogenous, Mouse, Cells

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ivo Hendriks

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Department of Proteomics, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


