### Accession
PXD005812

### Title
Proteomics of FACS-sorted heterogeneous Corynebacterium glutamicum populations

### Description
The metabolic status of individual cells in microbial cultures can differ being relevant for biotechnology, environmental and medical microbiology. However, it is hardly understood in molecular detail due to limitations of current analytical tools. Here, we demonstrate that FACS in combination with proteomics can be used to sort and analyze cell populations based on their metabolic state. A previously established GFP reporter system was used to detect and sort single Corynebacterium glutamicum cells based on the concentration of branched chain amino acids (BCAA) using FACS. A proteomics workflow optimized for small cell numbers was used to quantitatively compare proteomes of a ?aceE mutant, lacking functional pyruvate dehydrogenase (PD), and the wild type. About 800 proteins could be quantified from 1,000,000 cells. In the ?aceE mutant BCAA production was coordinated with upregulation of the glyoxylate cycle and TCA cycle to counter the lack of acetyl CoA resulting from the deletion of aceE.

### Sample Protocol
FACS sorted cells on filter membranes, these were then cut into smaller pieces and proteolytically digested in a 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing trypsin at 37°C. After removal of cell debris and filter membranes by centrifugation supernatants were collected and lyophilized. Protein identification via 1D-nLC-ESI/MS: The lyophilized tryptic digests were re-suspended in buffer A (0.1 % v/v formic acid in water) by ultrasonication and subjected to mass spectrometric analyses, which were performed using a nanoAcquity UltraPerformance LC System connected to an auto-sampler equipped with a HSS T3 analytical column (1.8 µm particle, 75 µm x 150 mm) kept at 45°C, and a Symmetry C18 trap column (5 µm particle, 180 µm x 20 mm) (all Waters, USA) as well as a PicoTip Emitter (SilicaTip, 10 µm) from New Objective (USA) as a nanospray source, coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer from Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc. (USA). The LTQ Orbitrap was operated by instrument method files of Xcalibur (Rev. 2.2 SP1). The linear ion trap and Orbitrap were operated in sequence, i.e. after a full MS scan on the Orbitrap in the range of 300-2000 m/z at a resolution of 60,000, the 10 most intense precursors were subjected to CID fragmentation (ion target value of 10,000, 400ms maximal inject time, 35 % normalized collision energy) and fragments detected in the ion trap. The heated desolvation capillary was set to 275 °C. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and a 45 sec exclusion duration window. Singly charged ions and ions of unknown charge state were rejected from MS/MS. Flow rate was set to 400 nl/min and spray voltage was set to 1.5-1.8 kV. Peptides were eluted from Trap column onto a separation column using a multi-step gradient of buffer A to buffer B (0.1 % v/v formic acid in acetonitrile).

### Data Protocol
All database searches were performed using SEQUEST algorithm, embedded in Proteome DiscovererTM (Rev. 1.3, Thermo Electron © 1998-2007), with a C. glutamicum ATCC 13032 database provided by Jörn Kalinowski from Bielefeld University. Tryptic peptides with up to 2 missed cleavages were accepted and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. Mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 10 ppm and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 0.8 amu. For protein identification only peptides were used with a FDR threshold below 0.01 (q-value)and at least two unique peptides with serch result rank were required.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cellular heterogeneity, Corynebacterium glutamicum, Facs, Label-free quantification, Bcaa producer, Proteome analysis

### Affiliations
School of Biomedical and Healthcare Sciences  B427 Portland Square  Plymouth University  Drake Circus, Plymouth  Devon PL4 8AA  United Kingdom
Ruhr University Bochum

### Submitter
Andreas Harst

### Lab Head
Dr PD. Dr. Ansgar Poetsch
School of Biomedical and Healthcare Sciences  B427 Portland Square  Plymouth University  Drake Circus, Plymouth  Devon PL4 8AA  United Kingdom


