### Accession
PXD010202

### Title
Identification of PWWP2A interactors using label-free quantitative affinity enrichment mass spectrometry

### Description
Chromatin structure and function is regulated by reader proteins recognizing histone modifications and/or histone variants. We recently identified PWWP2A as a binder for H2A.Z-containing nucleosomes (Pünzeler, S. et al., EMBO J 2017). Here, as part of a larger project trying to characterize PWWP2A, we performed pulldowns using PWWP2A as a bait protein. Label-free quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics was used to detect and relatively quantify interaction partners of PWWP2A.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa Kyoto cells stably expressing GFP (control) or GFP-tagged PWWP2A were digested to mononucleosomes using MNase. Single-step IPs of mononucleosomes carrying GFP-tagged PWWP2A were essentially performed as described before (Keilhauer, E. C. et al. Mol Cell Proteomics 2015, 14, (1), 120-35). Bound proteins were eluted by on-bead digestion with trypsin and analyzed in single runs by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive plus or Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a top10 or top15 method. Proteins were identified with the MaxQuant software and quantified using the MaxLFQ algorithm for label-free quantification.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant (version 1.4.3.13). The derived peak list was searched with Andromeda against the May 2013 release of the UniProt complete human proteome sequence database, with a precursor mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm and allowing up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of proteins N-termini and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. The match between runs option was enabled with a match time window of 0.5 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Relative, intensity-based label-free quantification of proteins was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Chromatin structure and function is regulated by reader proteins recognizing histone modifications and/or histone variants. We recently identified that PWWP2A tightly binds to H2A.Z-containing nucleosomes and is involved in mitotic progression and cranial-facial development. Here, using in vitro assays, we show that distinct domains of PWWP2A mediate binding to free linker DNA as well as H3K36me3 nucleosomes. In vivo, PWWP2A strongly recognizes H2A.Z-containing regulatory regions and weakly binds H3K36me3-containing gene bodies. Further, PWWP2A binds to an MTA1-specific subcomplex of the NuRD complex (M1HR), which consists solely of MTA1, HDAC1, and RBBP4/7, and excludes CHD, GATAD2 and MBD proteins. Depletion of PWWP2A leads to an increase of acetylation levels on H3K27 as well as H2A.Z, presumably by impaired chromatin recruitment of M1HR. Thus, this study identifies PWWP2A as a complex chromatin-binding protein that serves to direct the deacetylase complex M1HR to H2A.Z-containing chromatin, thereby promoting changes in histone acetylation levels.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Mta1, Interaction proteomics, Pwwp2a, Histone variants, Nurd, Ae-ms, H2a.z, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Department Proteomics and Signal Transduction Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Department Proteomics and Signal Transduction Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried, Germany


