### Accession
PXD016862

### Title
Posttranslational modifications mediate the structural diversity of tauopathy strains

### Description
Tau aggregation is the defining pathological hallmark of tauopathies, but structural insights are revealing key differences between filaments across this class of disorders. Using cryo-electron microscopy, we identify a 107-residue fragment, K274-E380, which forms the insoluble core of tau filaments in the tauopathy corticobasal degeneration (CBD). This tau conformer is distinct from those identified in Alzheimer’s Disease (AD), Pick’s Disease, and Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy, pointing towards a “one strain per disease” paradigm. Each disease-specific conformer can pack into multiple fibril subtypes and, despite similarities in secondary structure elements between tau filaments from CBD and AD, mass spectrometry revealed key differences in posttranslational modifications (PTMs). Given the abundance of lysine residues in the insoluble tau filament core in both CBD and AD, ubiquitination and acetylation are  identified as key PTMs that compete to modify specific residues, which may ultimately determine filament morphology.

### Sample Protocol
Insoluble protein fractions (P3) were resuspended in 8M urea buffer and digested overnight with endopeptidase LysC and trypsin at a 1:10 protease:substrate ratio as previously described1. Peptide samples were resuspended in loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 0.03% trifluoroacetic acid and 1% acetonitrile) and loaded onto a 20-cm column (internal diameter, 75 µm) packed with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9-µm beads (Dr. Maisch) and eluted over a 2-h 1–50% buffer B reverse-phase gradient (buffer A, 0.1% formic acid and 1% acetonitrile in water; buffer B, 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) generated by an Easy nLC UPLC system (Thermo). Peptides were ionized with 2.4-kV electrospray ionization voltage from a nano-ESI source (Thermo) on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo). For samples analyzed in high resolution MS1 and MS2 scans, data-dependent acquisition of MS1 spectra were collected at 120,000 resolution (FWHM), and MS/MS spectra were collected in the Orbitrap at 15,000 resolution (FWHM) after higher energy dissociation (HCD) and/or electron-transfer dissociation (ETD) in a decision tree method2 or ETD supplemental activation with high energy (EThcD). For the first CBD case (CBD1) two mass spectrometry runs were performed. The first with EThcD and HCD decision tree (CBD1_a), whereas a second run utilized ETD and HCD decision tree (CBD1_b) for MS/MS analyses. The second CBD case (CBD2_a) was analyzed using only EThcD and HCD decision tree for MS/MS analyses. The AD case (AD1) was analyzed with EThcD and HCD decision tree for MS/MS (AD1_a). A second analyses was also performed with ETD and HCD decision tree (AD1_b) for MS/MS analyses in which the product ions were detected in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
To identify Tau peptides, Proteome Discoverer 2.3 was used to search and match MS/MS spectra to the human proteome database downloaded August 2019 from UniProt containing both Swissprot and TrEMBL entries (96,069 target entries) with a ±10-p.p.m. mass-accuracy threshold on the precursor. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was set in the search, with variable modifications including phosphorylation (S/T/Y, +79.9663 Da), lysine ubiquitination (K, +114.0429 Da), acetylation (N-term/K, +42.420106 Da), arginine and lysine mono-/di-methylation (R/K, +14.0157/28.0313 Da), and methionine oxidation (M, +15.9949 Da). Fixed modifications included carbamidomethylation on cysteine (C, +57.0215 Da). A separate search was performed to map lysine mono-/di-/tri-methylation (K, +14.0157/28.0313/42.046950 Da) sites with a product ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. No tri-methylated lysine peptides were identified on tau. Thus, lysine tri-methylation was not included in the global PTM search on the same raw files in which the product ion mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da for MS/MS data collected at high resolution. For AD1_b, the product ion mass tolerance was set to 0.6 Da for MS/MS data collected at low resolution in the ion-trap.  Percolator was used to filter the peptide spectral matches (PSM) in each sample to a false discovery rate (FDR) of <1%. All MS/MS spectra for putative Tau PTMs were manually inspected.

### Publication Abstract
Tau aggregation into insoluble filaments is the defining pathological hallmark of tauopathies. However, it is not known what controls the formation and templated seeding of strain-specific structures associated with individual tauopathies. Here, we use cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) to determine the structures of tau filaments from corticobasal degeneration (CBD) human brain tissue. Cryo-EM and mass spectrometry of tau filaments from CBD reveal that this conformer is heavily decorated with posttranslational modifications (PTMs), enabling us to map PTMs directly onto the structures. By comparing the structures and PTMs of tau filaments from CBD and Alzheimer's disease, it is found that ubiquitination of tau can mediate inter-protofilament interfaces. We propose a structure-based model in which cross-talk between PTMs influences tau filament structure, contributing to the structural diversity of&#xa0;tauopathy strains. Our approach establishes a framework for further elucidating the relationship between the structures of polymorphic fibrils, including their PTMs, and neurodegenerative disease.

### Keywords
Cbd, Tau, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Emory University
Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases

### Submitter
Duc Duong

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas Seyfried
Emory University


