### Accession
PXD014067

### Title
Comprehensive detection of isopeptides between human tissue transglutaminase and gluten peptides using a reciprocal proteomic approach

### Description
Celiac disease (CD) is a chronic inflammation of the small intestine triggered by the ingestion of gluten in genetically predisposed individuals. Tissue transglutaminase (TG2) is a key factor in the pathogenesis of CD, because it catalyzes both the deamidation of specific glutamine residues and the formation of covalent Nε-(γ-glutamyl)-lysine isopeptide crosslinks resulting in TG2-gluten peptide complexes. These complexes are thought to activate B cells causing the secretion of anti-TG2 autoantibodies that serve as diagnostic markers for CD, although their pathogenic role remains unclear. To gain more insight into the molecular structures of TG2-gluten peptide complexes, we developed a reciprocal proteomic analysis strategy, which facilitates the comprehensive identification of isopeptides in a complex protein hydrolysate. The workflow consists of four steps: (1) performance of the model reaction between TG2 and gluten peptide(s) followed by tryptic hydrolysis, clean-up and untargeted nLC-MS/MS analysis (2), prediction of tryptic TG2-derived lysine peptides that serve as potential isopeptide modifications (3) the search for isopeptides by configuring the TG2-modifications in MaxQuant and search against the α-gliadin fasta file and (4) the reciprocal search for isopeptides by configuring the gluten peptide(s) as modification in MaxQuant and search against the TG2 fasta file. After verification by manual data curation and visualization, this strategy enabled the identification of 26 different isopeptides involving 19 TG2 lysine residues, only six of which were known previously. Experiments with different TG2-gluten peptide molar ratios revealed that K-425, K-590, K-600 and K-649 were the most preferred lysine residues involved in isopeptide crosslinking. Further, expanding the model system to three gluten peptides allowed the localization of the preferred glutamine crosslinking sites. The described strategy is generally applicable to any hydrolysate containing isopeptides and these new insights into the structure of TG2-gluten peptide complexes may help clarify the role of extracellular TG2 in CD autoimmunity and in other inflammatory diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Model Reaction of TG2 and PepQ – The model reaction of TG2 (0.32 nmol/l) with PepQ was performed in TRIS/HCl buffer (0.1 mol/l, pH 7.4, 10 mmol/l CaCl2) at a molar ratio of TG2:PepQ of 1:150 at 37 °C for 120 min. For inactivation of TG2, all samples were heated at 95 °C for 10 min. The negative controls were prepared by adding PepQ after heat inactivation of TG2. Model Reaction with Three Different Model Peptides – The model reaction of TG2 was repeated with the simultaneous addition of the three different peptides P1, P2 and P3. According to the first model reaction, the molar ratios were TG2:P1/P2/P3 of 1:50, respectively. The molar ratios of P1:P2:P3 were 1:1:1. Tryptic Digestion and Clean-Up by Solid Phase Extraction – A trypsin stock solution was added at a trypsin:substrate ratio of 1:100 (w/w) in 50 mmol/l NH4CO3 to all samples. The solution was incubated at 37 °C for 24 h and the hydrolysis stopped with 3 µL formic acid (FA) to reach a pH value below 2. All samples were purified by solid phase extraction (SPE) using 50 mg Sep-Pak tC18 cc catridges (Waters, Eschborn, Germany). The C18-cartridges were activated with methanol (1 ml), equilibrated with acetonitrile/water/FA (80:20:0.1; 1 ml), and washed with acetonitrile/water/FA (2:98:0.1; 5 x 1 ml). After loading the samples, the cartridges were washed again, and the isopeptides and peptides were eluted with acetonitrile/water/FA (40:60:0.1; 1 ml). The solvent was removed using a vacuum centrifuge (37 °C, 4 h, 800 Pa) and the samples were reconstituted in FA (0.1 %, v/v). Prior to nLC-MS/MS analysis, the peptide concentrations of the reconstituted samples were determined with a NanoDrop Micro-UV/VIS spectrophotometer (NanoDrop One, Thermo Scientific, Madison, USA) at 280 nm. The samples were diluted in the 96 well plates to a concentration of 200 ng/µL with acetonitrile/water/FA (2:98:0.1). Nanoscale Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry – nLC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 nanoHLPC system (Dionex, Idstein, Germany) coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). The nanoscale LC system consisted of a trap column (75 µm x 2 cm, self-packed with Reprosil-Pur C18 ODS-3 5 µm resin, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) and an analytical column (75 µm x 40 cm, self-packed with Reprosil-Gold, C18, 3 µm resin, Dr. Maisch). After injection of 5 µL, the peptides were delivered to the trap column using solvent A0 (0.1 % FA in water) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min and separated on the analytical column using a 60 min linear gradient from 4 % to 32 % solvent B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min (solvent A1, 5 % DMSO, 0.1 % FA in water; solvent B, 5 % DMSO, 0.1 % FA in acetonitrile) (29). The MS was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, automatically switching between MS1 and MS2 spectra. The mass-to-charge (m/z) range of the acquisition of the MS1 spectra was 360 - 1300 m/z at an Orbitrap full MS scan (60,000 resolution, 3e6 automatic gain control (AGC) target value, 50 ms maximum injection time). In MS2, peptide precursors were selected for fragmentation by higher energy collision-induced dissociation (isolation width of 1.7 Th, maximum injection time of 25 ms, AGC value of 1e5). Analysis was performed using 25 % normalized collision energy at a resolution of 15,000.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis, the Thermo Xcalibur .raw files were directly used as input in the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.1) and searched against a human transglutaminase protein database containing 110 entries (UniProtKB, status January 2019) with a PSM- and protein-level false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. All identified tryptic TG2 peptides were filtered for the presence of at least one lysine residue, which resulted in 87 detectable, lysine-containing TG2 peptides. The chemical formulas of these 87 TG2 peptides were calculated (UniProtKB accession no. P21980). Next, we configured these peptides as variable modifications in MaxQuant (TG2-modifications, β-side of the isopeptide). The used settings were "anywhere" for position, "standard" for type and "Q" for modified amino acid. Theoretical proteases were configured to cleave the model peptides from existing gluten protein sequences with the following cleavage specificities: for PepQ: QP, YP; for P1: FP, YP; for P2: FL, LI; for P3: LV, LE. The parameters were set as follows for the individual search runs: digestion mode: specific; maximum missed cleavage sites: 2; variable modifications: each TG2-modification in one single search run; deamidation at Q; fasta files: UniProtKB accession no. P18573 for PepQ and P1, B6UKP4 for P2, P08453 for P3; contaminant fasta files included; fixed modifications: amidated C-term (only for PepQ); minimum score for modified peptides: 10; main search peptide tolerance: 4.5 ppm; mass tolerance for fragment ions: 0.5 Da; all other parameters were used as default settings. To verify the identified isopeptides by reversed search, PepQ (and its deamidated form PepE) were also configured as modifications in MaxQuant (α-side of the isopeptide, PepQ: C54H73N11O12, PepE: C54H72N10O13) and the raw files were searched against the TG2 sequence with the following parameters: enzyme: trypsin/P; digestion mode: specific; maximum missed cleavage sites: 2; variable modifications: PepQ; fasta file: UniProtKB accession no. P21980; minimum score for modified peptides: 10; main search peptide tolerance: 4.5 ppm; mass tolerance for fragment ions: 0.5 Da; all other parameters were used as default settings. The threshold for unambiguous localization was set to a localization probability of > 75%. To confirm the identities of the isopeptides and the identification of the binding site within the isopeptides, the b- and y-fragments of both sides (TG2, β-side and gluten peptides, α-side) were assigned to the respective MS/MS spectra using the software tool MaxQuant Viewer.

### Publication Abstract
Celiac disease (CD) is a chronic inflammation of the small intestine triggered by the ingestion of gluten in genetically predisposed individuals. Tissue transglutaminase (TG2) is a key factor in CD pathogenesis, because it catalyzes both the deamidation of specific glutamine residues and the formation of covalent N&#x3b5;-(&#x3b3;-glutamyl)-lysine isopeptide crosslinks resulting in TG2-gluten peptide complexes. These complexes are thought to activate B cells causing the secretion of anti-TG2 autoantibodies that serve as diagnostic markers for CD, although their pathogenic role remains unclear. To gain more insight into the molecular structures of TG2-gluten peptide complexes, we used different proteomics software tools that enable the comprehensive identification of isopeptides. Thus, 34 different isopeptides involving 20 TG2 lysine residues were identified in a model system, only six of which were previously known. Additionally, 36 isopeptides of TG2-TG2 multimers were detected. Experiments with different TG2-gluten peptide molar ratios revealed the most preferred lysine residues involved in isopeptide crosslinking. Expanding the model system to three gluten peptides with more glutamine residues allowed the localization of the preferred glutamine crosslinking sites. These new insights into the structure of TG2-gluten peptide complexes may help clarify the role of extracellular TG2 in CD autoimmunity and in other inflammatory diseases.

### Keywords
Celiac disease; transglutaminase; isopeptides; gluten

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Technical University of Munich, Gregor-Mendel-Str. 4, 85354 Freising, Germany
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Technical University of Munich, Gregor-Mendel-Str. 4, 85354 Freising, Germany


