### Accession
PXD039992

### Title
OMICS Analyses Unraveling Related Gene and Protein Driven Molecular Mechanisms Underlying PACAP 38 Induced Neurite Outgrowth in PC12 Cells

### Description
Recently, our group has shown that the pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP)-induced neurite projection elongation in rat adrenal-derived pheochromocytoma cell line (PC12) is mediated via PAC1 receptor-mediated dephosphorylation of CRMP2 majorly through PI3K/AKT and MEK/ERK pathways. However, the mechanism of neuronal outgrowth by PACAP, including CRMP2 dephosphorylation, remains unclear. In our previous report, we found that GSK-3β, CDK5, and Rho/ROCK dephosphorylated CRMP2 within 3 hours after the addition of PACAP, but the early dephosphorylation of CRMP2 by PACAP remains unclear. Thus, we considered it important to identify early factors in PACAP-induced neurite projection elongation and performed omics-based transcriptomic (whole genome DNA microarray) and proteomic (TMT-labeling in conjunction with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry) analyses of gene and protein expression profiles from 5-120 minutes after PACAP addition. Results surprisingly revealed a number of key regulators involved in neurite outgrowth, including known ones. We also identified factors that may be involved in CRMP2 dephosphorylation. Cross-referencing previous research, we tried to map these molecular components onto potential pathways. The results of this comprehensive analysis may provide important new information on the molecular mechanisms of neuronal differentiation induced by PACAP.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion was carried out using a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) approach using trypsin (enzyme-to-substrate ratio [w/w] of 1:100) dissolved in 50 mM TEAB buffer containing 5% acetonitrile (ACN) at 37°C overnight. After overnight digestion, the digested peptides were collected by centrifugation, and the filter device was rinsed with 50 mM TEAB and 50 mM NaCl. TMT labeling of digest peptides was performed as described previously and followed by the manufacturer’s instruction. Briefly, each TMT reagent (0.8 mg) was dissolved in 120 μL of anhydrous ACN, of which 25 μL was added to each channel of samples. Prior to incubation each sample sets, additional ACN was added as 30% of final concentration. After incubation at room temperature for 1 hour, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v). Finally, combined samples at equal amounts across all samples and lyophilized the sample to near dryness and subjected to the desalting procedure. The pooled TMT-labeled peptides were desalted using the HLB OASIS column according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Consequently, dried peptides were reconstituted in 200 μL of loading solution (15 mM Ammonium formate, 2% ACN) and loaded onto stage-tip prepared by packing C18 Empore disk membranes (3M, Bracknell, UK) at the bottom and POROS 20 R2 reversed phase resin into 200 μL yellow tip. Prior to load the peptides, the stage-tip was washed with 100% methanol, 100% ACN and equilibrated with loading solution. The peptide were loaded and 12 fractions were subsequently eluted with pH 10 buffer solution containing 5, 8, 11, 14, 17, 20, 23, 26, 29, 32, 35, 41, 44, 60, 80, and 100% ACN as described previous studies. Finally, the 12 fractions were lyophilized in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -80℃ until further LC-MS/MS analysis. Obtained peptides were dissolved in solvent-A (water/ACN, 98:2 v/v; 0.1% formic acid) and separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a UHPLC Dionex UltiMate ® 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) instrument. For trapping the sample, the UHPLC was equipped with Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper C18, 5 μm, 100 Å) and subsequently washed with 98% solvent A for 6 min at a flow rate of 6 μL/min. The sample was continuously separated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 capillary column (75 μm × 15 cm, nanoViper C18, 3 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The LC analytical gradient was run at 2% to 35% solvent B (100% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) over 90 min, then 35% to 95% over 10 minutes, followed by 90% solvent B for 5 minutes, and finally 5% solvent B for 15 minutes. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was coupled with an electrospray ionization source to the quadrupole-based mass spectrometer QExactive™ Orbitrap High-Resolution Mass Spectrometer. Resulting peptides were electro-sprayed through a coated silica emitted tip (Scientific Instrument Service, NJ, Amwell Township, USA) at an ion spray voltage of 2000 eV. The MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (200 m/z) in a mass range of 350-1650 m/z. The automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 3 x 106 and the isolation window for MS/MS was 1.2 m/z. Eluted samples were used for MS/MS events (resolution of 35,000), measured in a data-dependent mode for the 15 most abundant peaks (Top15 method), in the high mass accuracy Orbitrap after ion activation/dissociation with Higher Energy C-trap Dissociation (HCD) at 32 collision energy in a 100-1650 m/z mass range. The AGC target value for MS/MS was 2 x 105. The maximum ion injection time for the survey scan and MS/MS scan was 30 ms and 120 ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software (version 1.6.17.0) was used to apply for a database search. All the three technical replicates of matured and seed filling stage samples were cross-referenced against the Rat (Rattus norbegicus) and Mouse (Mus musculus) database (36,180 and 86,074 entries, respectively, https:// https://www.uniprot.org/). TMT data processing of two different data was performed using default precursor mass tolerances set by the Andromeda search engine, which is set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search. Reporter mass tolerance has to set the minimum as 0.003 Da and the minimum reporter precursor ion fraction (PIF) was set as 0.5. The product mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da and a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavage were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and acetylation of lysine residues and oxidation of methionine residues were specified as fixed and variable modifications respectively. A reverse nonsense version of the original database was generated and used to determine the FDR which was set to 1% for peptide identifications. Statistical analysis was carried out using Perseus software (ver. 1.6.17.0). The normalization of reporter ion intensities followed by the IRS methods as described previously. Briefly, we employed the multiple normalizations through Bioconductor of R program in which first sample loading (SL) normalization among the samples was conducted for corrections of sample loading errors using calculating by mean from sum value of each column and second internal reference scaling (IRS) method was applied among the technical replicates represented by separate MS runs. Missing values imputation was carried out from a normal distribution (width: 0.3, downshift: 1.8) using Perseus software. Multiple Sample test controlled by the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR threshold of 0.05, was applied to identify the significant differences in the protein abundance (≥ 1.5-fold change).

### Publication Abstract
The study aimed to understand mechanism/s of neuronal outgrowth in the rat adrenal-derived pheochromocytoma cell line (PC12) under pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP) treatment. Neurite projection elongation was suggested to be mediated via Pac1 receptor-mediated dephosphorylation of CRMP2, where GSK-3&#x3b2;, CDK5, and Rho/ROCK dephosphorylated CRMP2 within 3 h after addition of PACAP, but the dephosphorylation of CRMP2 by PACAP remained unclear. Thus, we attempted to identify the early factors in PACAP-induced neurite projection elongation via omics-based transcriptomic (whole genome DNA microarray) and proteomic (TMT-labeled liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry) analyses of gene and protein expression profiles from 5-120 min after PACAP addition. The results revealed a number of key regulators involved in neurite outgrowth, including known ones, called 'Initial Early Factors', e.g., genes <i>Inhba</i>, <i>Fst</i>, <i>Nr4a1,2,3</i>, <i>FAT4</i>, <i>Axin2</i>, and proteins Mis12, Cdk13, Bcl91, CDC42, including categories of 'serotonergic synapse, neuropeptide and neurogenesis, and axon guidance'. cAMP signaling and PI3K-Akt signaling pathways and a calcium signaling pathway might be involved in CRMP2 dephosphorylation. Cross-referencing previous research, we tried to map these molecular components onto potential pathways, and we may provide important new information on molecular mechanisms of neuronal differentiation induced by PACAP. Gene and protein expression data are publicly available at NCBI GSE223333 and ProteomeXchange, identifier PXD039992.

### Keywords
Pc12, Neurite, Rat, Proteomics, Tmt

### Affiliations
Institute of Health and Sport Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba 305-8574, Ibaraki, Japan
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba

### Submitter
Randeep Rakwal

### Lab Head
Dr Randeep Rakwal
Institute of Health and Sport Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba 305-8574, Ibaraki, Japan


