### Accession
PXD010756

### Title
Proteomics of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of acitretin treated patients

### Description
Acitretin has been shown to increase ADAM10 expression. In a phase II clinical trial, Alzheimer's disease patients were treated with acitretin or placebo to increase ADAM10 levels to counteract amyloid beta production. Analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid of from 18 AD patients treated with the synthetic retinoid acitretin or placebo were analyzed by label-free quantitative LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Nine patients per group were treated with either acitretin or vehicle control. Cerebrospinal fluid was collected before (baseline value) and after treatment. A volume of 5 µL of CSF per sample was subjected to proteolytic digestion in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 0.1% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma Aldrich, Germany) as previously described (Pigoni et al., 2016). Briefly, protein disulfide bonds were reduced with dithiothreitol and sulfhydryl residues were alkylated using iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested using 0.1 µg LysC (Promega) and 0.1 µg trypsin (Promega). Deoxycholate was precipitated by acidification and removed by centrifugation at 16,000 rcf and 4°C for 10 min. Proteolytic peptides were desalted by stop and go extraction (STAGE) with C18 tips (Rappsilber et al., 2003). The purified peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Samples were dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid. Samples were separated on a nanoLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Proxeon – part of Thermo Scientific, US; PRSO-V1 column oven: Sonation, Germany) using an in-house packed C18 column (30 cm x 75 µm ID, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) with a binary gradient of water (A) and acetonitrile (B) containing 0.1% formic acid at 50°C column temperature and a flow of 250 nl/min (0 min, 2% B; 3:30 min, 5% B; 137:30 min, 25% B; 168:30 min, 35% B; 182:30 min, 60% B). The nanoLC was coupled online via a nanospray flex ion source (Proxeon – part of Thermo Scientific, US) to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, US). Full MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000. The ten most intense ions exceeding an intensity of 1.5×104 were chosen for collision induced dissociation and spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500. The dynamic exclusion for peptide fragmentation was set to 120 s.

### Data Protocol
The data was analyzed with the software Maxquant (maxquant.org, Max-Planck Institute Munich) version 1.5.3.12. The MS data was searched against a reviewed fasta database of Homo sapiens from UniProt including isoforms (download: January 09th 2017, 42120 entries). Trypsin was defined as protease. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the database search. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as static modification. Acetylation of the protein N-term as well as oxidation of methionine we set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate for both peptides and proteins was adjusted to less than 1% using a target and decoy approach (concatenated forward/reverse database). Razor and unique peptides were used for quantification. Label-free quantification (LFQ) of proteins required at least two ratio counts of razor or unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The metalloprotease ADAM10 is a drug target in Alzheimer's disease, where it cleaves the amyloid precursor protein (APP) and lowers amyloid-beta. Yet, ADAM10 has additional substrates, which may cause mechanism-based side effects upon therapeutic ADAM10 activation. However, they may also serve-in addition to APP-as biomarkers to monitor ADAM10 activity in patients and to develop APP-selective ADAM10 activators. Our study demonstrates that one such substrate is the neuronal cell adhesion protein NrCAM ADAM10 controlled NrCAM surface levels and regulated neurite outgrowth <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i> in an NrCAM-dependent manner. However, ADAM10 cleavage of NrCAM, in contrast to APP, was not stimulated by the ADAM10 activator acitretin, suggesting that substrate-selective ADAM10 activation may be feasible. Indeed, a whole proteome analysis of human CSF from a phase II clinical trial showed that acitretin, which enhanced APP cleavage by ADAM10, spared most other ADAM10 substrates in brain, including NrCAM Taken together, this study demonstrates an NrCAM-dependent function for ADAM10 in neurite outgrowth and reveals that a substrate-selective, therapeutic ADAM10 activation is possible and may be monitored with NrCAM.

### Keywords
Acitretin, Alzheimer disease, Csf

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany


