### Accession
PXD024234

### Title
RNAmetasome, a multi-protein complex for the macromolecule biogenesis in human cells

### Description
The RNAmetasome, a multi-protein complex for the macromolecule biogenesis in human cells, is defined and characterized.

### Sample Protocol
Protein preparation of mass spectrometry analysis. For identification of proteins in nuclear extracts, nuclear extracts were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid (TCA) to desalt and remove outer compounds, such as Triton X-100, that are found in the extraction buffer. Nuclear extracts were mixed with 100% TCA to a final volume of 12.5% TCA and incubated overnight. The   proteins were precipitated by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 10 min. TCA precipitation was followed by one acetone and one methanol wash (1 mL each with centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 10 min) which were performed prior to protease digestion.   All samples precipitated nuclear extracts, as well as proteins derived from the immunoprecipitations, were resuspended in 100µL of 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.5 and digested at 37°C with trypsin at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio overnight. The sample was desalted via StageTip, dried via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS processing.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based in-house software pipeline. Spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching was performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Sequest searches and linear discriminant analysis 1, 2. Oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. PSMs were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Moreover, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Macromolecule biogenesis, Metasome

### Affiliations
Cell Biology Harvard Medical School USA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Cell Biology Harvard Medical School USA


