### Accession
PXD008014

### Title
Multifocal demyelinating motor neuropathy associated with a de novo PTEN mutation

### Description
Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) is a tumour suppressor gene associated with inherited tumour susceptibility conditions, macrocephaly, autism, ataxia, tremor and epilepsy. Functional implications of this protein have been investigated in Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s diseases. We describe the first patient presented with multifocal demyelinating motor neuropathy in association with a de novo PTEN mutation.  The pathogenicity of the mutation was supported by altered expression of several proteins involved in tumorigenesis and fibroblasts showed a reversible defect in catalytic activity of PTEN against the secondary substrate, phosphatidylinositol 3,4,-trisphosphate, suggesting a novel and potentially treatable mechanism for multi-focal demyelinating motor neuropathy.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and carbamidomethylation. Sample preparation and trypsin digestion. LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Label free data analysis   Data analysis of the acquired label free quantitative MS data was performed using the Progenesis Qi software from Nonlinear Dynamics (Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.). For the cytosolic and the membrane enriched proteomic comparison, four replicates of fibroblast measurements obtained from PTEN patient were compared to six replicates from corresponding controls, separately.   Alignment of MS raw data was conducted by Progenesis Qi which automatically selected one of the LC-MS files as reference. After peak picking, only features within retention time and m/z windows from 0-115 min and 300-1500 m/z, with charge states +2, +3, and +4 were considered for peptide statistics and analysis of variance (ANOVA). MS/MS spectra were exported in an mgf file as peak lists.   The mgf peak lists were searched against a concatenated target/decoy version of the human Uniprot database, (downloaded on 22nd of July 2015, containing 20,273 target sequences) using Mascot 2.4.0 (Matrix Science), X! TANDEM Vengeance (2015.12.15.2) and MS-GF+ Beta (v10282) (12/19/2014) with the help of searchGUI 3.1.4. Trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages was selected as enzyme. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed and oxidation of methionine was selected as variable modification. MS and MS/MS tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively.   We used our PeptideShaker software 1.13.3 (http://code.google.com/p/peptide-shaker/) for interpretation of peptide and protein identifications from searchGUI and Mascot. Combined search results were filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % on the protein level and exported using the advanced PeptideShaker features that allow direct re-import of the quality-controlled data into Progenesis Qi. Peptide sequences containing oxidized methionines were excluded for further analysis. Only proteins that were quantified with unique peptides were exported. Then, for each protein, the average of the normalized abundances (obtained from Progenesis Qi) from the replicate analyses was calculated to determine the ratios between the PTEN patient and the controls. Only proteins which were (i) commonly quantified in all the replicates with (ii) unique peptides, (iii) an ANOVA p-value of <0.05 (Progenesis Qi) and (iv) an average log 2 ratio of which protein that was either higher than the up-regulated cut-off or lower than the down-regulated cut-off was considered as regulated. The cut-off values were determined based on the 2x standard deviation and the normal distribution from all identified protein’s log2 ratio in which the bell curve is symmetric around the mean. Therefore, an average log2 ratio of a protein which < -2.08 or > 2.38 (corresponding to ~5.22-fold regulation; log2 ratios of 1.10) for comparative membrane-associated profile and an average log2 ratio < -3.03 or > 2.81 (corresponding to 7.03-fold regulation; log2 ratios of 0.92) for comparative cytosolic profile were considered as regulated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pten, Demyelinating motor neuropathy

### Affiliations
(1) Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK; (2) Leibniz-Institute für Analytische Wissenschaften-ISAS- e.V., Dortmund, Germany
ISAS

### Submitter
Vietxuan Phan

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Roos
(1) Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK; (2) Leibniz-Institute für Analytische Wissenschaften-ISAS- e.V., Dortmund, Germany


