### Accession
PXD010298

### Title
Shotgun proteomics analysis of saliva and salivary gland tissue from the common octopus Octopus vulgaris

### Description
The saliva of the common octopus (Octopus vulgaris) has been the subject of biochemical study for over a century. A combination of bioassays, behavioural studies and molecular analysis on O. vulgaris and related species suggests that it should contain a mixture of highly potent neurotoxins and degradative proteins. However, a lack of genomic and transcriptomic data has meant that the amino acid sequences of these proteins remain almost entirely unknown. To address this, we assembled the salivary gland transcriptome of O. vulgaris and combined it with high resolution mass spectrometry data from the posterior and anterior salivary glands of two adults, the posterior salivary glands of six paralarvae and the saliva from a single adult.  We identified a total of 2810 protein groups from across this range of salivary tissues and age classes, including 84 with homology to known venom protein families. Additionally, we found 21 short secreted cysteine rich protein groups of which 12 were specific to cephalopods.  By combining protein expression data with phylogenetic analysis we demonstrate that serine proteases expanded dramatically within the cephalopod lineage and that cephalopod specific proteins are strongly associated with the salivary apparatus.

### Sample Protocol
Three female and one male adult O. vulgaris individuals were caught with artisanal fishing equipment from Ría de Vigo, Spain, in January and February 2013. Paralarvae hatched approximately 55 days later and all batches were translocated to a 100 litre tank two days post hatching. Two paralarvae were randomly selected at days 1, 20 and 30. The animals were anaesthetised in a solution of seawater and 1.5% magnesium chloride hexahydrate for 10 minutes which was followed by euthanasia by immersion in 3.5% magnesium chloride hexahydrate for 30 minutes. A total of six octopus paralarvae were stored in 80% ethanol at -20C for two years.   Both PSGs from each paralarvae were dissected under a binocular microscope with 40x magnification in July 2015. One adult octopus was milked using the plastic bag technique as described by Ballering et al. This was followed by manual dissection of both anterior and posterior salivary glands. Three samples of the salivary glands and saliva from different adult octopuses were extracted and stored at -80C.  All samples were first dried using a SpeedVac Concentrator for 15 minutes before solubilisation into 50 µL of 7M Urea, 3M Tris pH=8.3. Proteins were then reduced overnight using 0.5 µL of TCEP (tris [2-carboxyethyl] phosphine hydrochloride, 200 mM solution in water). The alkylation step was as followed: addition of 2 µL IAA (iodoacetamide) at 1M and incubation for one hour in the dark. The samples were then diluted with 500 µL of 50 mM Tris (pH 8.3) before addition of one μg trypsin.  Samples were digested overnight at 37°C. The digests were acidified with 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and the peptides desalted on SDB-XC (Empore) StageTips as previously described.   Paralarvae tissue peptides reconstituted in 0.1% TFA and 2% acetonitrile (ACN) were loaded using a Thermo Scientific™ UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano system onto a trap column (C18 PepMap 300 µm ID × 2 cm trapping column, Thermo-Fisher Scientific) at 15 µl/min for six minutes.  The valve was then switched to allow the precolumn to be in line with the analytical column (Vydac MS C18, 3 µm, 300 Å and 75 µm ID × 25 cm, Grace Pty. Ltd.). The separation of peptides was performed at 300 nl/min at 45 °C using a non-linear ACN gradient of buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% ACN) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% ACN), starting at 5% buffer B to 45% over 105 minutes, then 95% B for five minutes followed by an equilibration step of 15 minutes (0.1% formic acid, 2% ACN). Data were collected on an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) in Data Dependent Acquisition mode using m/z 300–1500 as MS scan range, CID MS/MS spectra were collected for the 10 most intense ions. Dynamic exclusion parameters were set as follows; repeat count 1, duration 90 seconds, the exclusion list size was set at 500 with early expiration disabled. Other instrument parameters for the Orbitrap were the following: MS scan at 120 000 resolution, maximum injection time 150 ms, AGC target 1 × 106, CID at 35% energy for a maximum injection time of 75 ms with AGT target of 5000. The Orbitrap Elite was operated in dual analyser mode with the Orbitrap analyser being used for MS and the linear trap being used for MS/MS.  For the analysis of the adult tissue samples and saliva on the Q Exactive mass spectrometer, the peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% TFA and 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and loaded at 45 °C onto a C18 PepMap 300 µm ID × 2 cm trapping column (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) at 10 µl/min for six minutes, using a Thermo Scientific™ UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano system and washed for six minutes before switching the pre-column in line with the analytical column (BioSphere C18, 1.9 µm, 120 Å and 75 µm ID × 40 cm, NanoSeparation). The separation of peptides was performed at 45 °C, 250 nl/min using a non-linear ACN gradient of buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% ACN) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% ACN), starting from 2% buffer B to 12% B in six min and then to 33% B over 60 minutes followed by 50% B at 70 min. The gradient in then increased from 50% B to 95% B for one min and stayed at 95% B from five min. The column is then equilibrated for 15 minutes (0.1% formic acid, 2% ACN). Data were collected on a Q Exactive HF (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) in Data Dependent Acquisition mode using m/z 350–1500 as MS scan range at 60 000 resolution, HCD MS/MS spectra were collected for the 15 most intense ions per MS scan at 15 000 resolution. Dynamic exclusion parameters were set as follows: exclude isotope on, duration 30 seconds and peptide match preferred. Other instrument parameters for the Orbitrap were: MS maximum injection time 30 ms with AGC target 3 × 106, collision at 28% energy for a maximum injection time of 25 ms with AGT target of 1 × 105 and an isolation window of 1.4 m/z.

### Data Protocol
A compact and relatively comprehensive protein database for O. vulgaris saliva and salivary glands was constructed by combining predicted coding sequences from the de novo assembled O. vulgaris transcriptome along with sequences that would otherwise have been rejected as non-coding but whose presence in saliva or PSG was supported by mass spectrometry. We used TransDecoder, embedded in the Trinity software version 3.0.1 to predict coding sequences from the transcriptome. We termed this predicted set of proteins “known”.  In addition to the “known” proteins we generated a “novel” set consisting of all six-frame translations of transcript sequences longer than 15 amino acids.  We combined “known” and “novel” sets into a single database and then searched this against our complete mass spectrometry dataset which consisted of both Q-Exactive and Orbitrap Elite spectra across all samples of PSG and saliva from all stages, 15 samples, using the search engines X!Tandem and MS-GF+.  Search engine parameters were: Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation for variable modifications, Carbamidomethyl cysteines for fixed modification, precursor mass error 20ppm for both instruments and fragment ion error 0.4 Da for Orbitrap Elite Spectra and 0.1 Da for Q-Exactive spectra.  Allowed charges were set to 2+, 3+ and 4+, the cleavage enzyme used was Trypsin with up to two missed cleavages and semicleaved peptides allowed.  Since “known” and “novel” sets will have very different expected error distributions we separated peptide spectrum matches (PSM’s) returned from our search engines into “known” and “novel” sets for downstream statistical analysis with PeptideProphet and iProphet.  This resulted in a single iProphet generated pepXML file from each set which we then combined using ProteinProphet to generate a single protXML file. Our final protein database was then constructed using all “novel” proteins included in this file along with the full set of “known” proteins from TransDecoder.    All analyses were performed using wrapper scripts for search engines and downstream peptide and protein inference tools implemented as part of the protk (https://github.com/iracooke/protk) toolkit, with the workflow implemented as a Rake script.   In order to perform a quantitative analysis across tissues and life stages, the reference protein database was combined with the mass spectrometry data and analysed in MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0). MaxQuant settings included Carbamidomethyl C as a fixed modification and Oxidation of Methionine and Acetylation of protein N-terminus as variable modifications, decoys and contaminants were included automatically, MS/MS tolerance was set according to instrument type (20ppm for Q-Exactive, 0.5Da for Orbitrap Elite), two missed tryptic cleavages were allowed and PSMs were accepted at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). To allow comparisons based on approximate absolute protein abundance an intensity Based Absolute Quantification (iBAQ) score was calculated by MaxQuant. The standard MaxQuant Label Free Quantification (LFQ) intensity was used for comparisons of the same protein group across tissues.

### Publication Abstract
The salivary apparatus of the common octopus ( Octopus vulgaris) has been the subject of biochemical study for over a century. A combination of bioassays, behavioral studies and molecular analysis on O.&#xa0;vulgaris and related species suggests that its proteome should contain a mixture of highly potent neurotoxins and degradative proteins. However, a lack of genomic and transcriptomic data has meant that the amino acid sequences of these proteins remain almost entirely unknown. To address this, we assembled the posterior salivary gland transcriptome of O.&#xa0;vulgaris and combined it with high resolution mass spectrometry data from the posterior and anterior salivary glands of two adults, the posterior salivary glands of six paralarvae and the saliva from a single adult. We identified a total of 2810 protein groups from across this range of salivary tissues and age classes, including 84 with homology to known venom protein families. Additionally, we found 21 short secreted cysteine rich protein groups of which 12 were specific to cephalopods. By combining protein expression data with phylogenetic analysis we demonstrate that serine proteases expanded dramatically within the cephalopod lineage and that cephalopod specific proteins are strongly associated with the salivary apparatus.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Octopus vulgaris

### Affiliations
James Cook University

### Submitter
Ira Cooke

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Strugnell
James Cook University


