### Accession
PXD031374

### Title
Protein homeostasis is maintained by proteasomes containing PSMB9 induced by EEF1A2 upon mitochondrial stress

### Description
Perturbed proteostasis and mitochondrial dysfunction are often associated with age-related diseases such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases. However, the link between them remains incompletely understood. Mitochondrial dysfunction causes proteostasis imbalance, and cells respond to restore proteostasis by increasing proteasome activity and molecular chaperons in yeast and C. elegans. Here, we demonstrate the presence of similar responses in humans. Mitochondrial dysfunction upregulates a small heat shock protein HSPB1 and an immunoproteasome subunit PSMB9 leading to an increase in proteasome activity. HSPB1 and PSMB9 are required to prevent protein aggregation upon mitochondrial dysfunction. Moreover, PSMB9 expression is dependent on a translation elongation factor EEF1A2, and PSMB9-containing proteasomes are located near mitochondria, enabling fast local degradation of aberrant proteins. Our findings put a step forward in understanding the stress response triggered by mitochondrial dysfunction, and may be useful for therapeutic strategies to prevent or delay the onset of age-related diseases and attenuate their progression.

### Sample Protocol
Isolated protein aggregate fraction was solubilized for 1 h at room temperature with the use of 10 µl 0.1 % ProteaseMAX™ surfactant in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Then, 50 µl of digestion mixture (50 mM Tris-Cl pH 8.2; 5 mM TCEP; 10 mM iodoacetamide; 0.5 µg of sequencing grade modified trypsin and 0.02 % ProteaseMAX™ surfactant) was added and the sample was digested overnight at 37°C with shaking (850 rpm) in low protein binding tubes. Next, the sample was diluted with 100 µl of H2O2, and trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to a final concentration of 1 % in order to inactivate the trypsin. Then, the sample was mixed in the thermomixer at 850 rpm for 2 minutes at 37°C and centrifuged at 12000 g for 3 minutes at room temperature. The supernatants were stage-tip desalted, and concentrated with a SpeedVac. Prior to LC-MS measurement, the samples were resuspended in 0.1 % TFA, 2% acetonitrile in water. Chromatographic separation was performed on an Easy-Spray Acclaim PepMap column 15cm long × 75 µm inner diameter at 35 °C by applying a 90 min acetonitrile gradients in 0.1% aqueous formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. An UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer via an easy-spray source. The Q Exactive HF-X was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. Up to 12 of the most abundant isotope patterns with charges 2-6 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 27, while the dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200) were 45 and 22 ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 3e6 and for MS/MS to 10e5, and the minimum AGC target was set to 8e2.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed with MaxQuant v. 1.6.7.0 and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against Uniprot KB Human Proteome using the build-in Andromeda search engine. Raw files obtained from the LC-MS/MS measurements of protein aggregates originated from WT and NDUFA11 KO HEK293T cells the absence or presence of EGFP-TAU were processed together (4 groups, 3 samples each). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. For in silico digests of the reference proteome, cleavages of arginine or lysine followed by any amino acid were allowed (trypsin/P), and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites. Match between runs was enabled. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification enabling protein grouping (razor peptides are the peptides uniquely assigned to protein groups and not to individual proteins).

### Publication Abstract
Perturbed cellular protein homeostasis (proteostasis) and mitochondrial dysfunction play an important role in neurodegenerative diseases, however, the interplay between these two phenomena remains unclear. Mitochondrial dysfunction leads to a delay in mitochondrial protein import, causing accumulation of non-imported mitochondrial proteins in the cytosol and challenging proteostasis. Cells respond by increasing proteasome activity and molecular chaperones in yeast and C. elegans. Here, we demonstrate that in human cells mitochondrial dysfunction leads to the upregulation of a chaperone HSPB1 and, interestingly, an immunoproteasome-specific subunit PSMB9. Moreover, PSMB9 expression is dependent on the translation elongation factor EEF1A2. These mechanisms constitute a defense response to preserve cellular proteostasis under mitochondrial stress. Our findings define a mode of proteasomal activation through the change in proteasome composition driven by EEF1A2 and its spatial regulation, and are useful to formulate therapies to prevent neurodegenerative diseases.

### Keywords
Mitochondrial stress response, Ndufa11 ko

### Affiliations
ReMedy International Research Agenda Unit, IMol Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland
The International Institute of Molecular Mechanisms and Machines, Polish Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Remigiusz Serwa

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Agnieszka Chacinska
ReMedy International Research Agenda Unit, IMol Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland


