### Accession
PXD030570

### Title
LC-MS/MS identification of BMAL1 interaction proteins

### Description
Advances in circadian research revealed an intricate relationship between aging and circadian rhythms. However, whether and how the circadian machinery contribute to stem cell aging, especially in primates, remains poorly understood. In this study, we investigated the role of BMAL1, the only non-redundant circadian clock component, during aging in mesenchymal progenitor cells (MPCs). We observed an accelerated aging phenotype in both BMAL1 deficient human and cynomolgus monkey MPCs. Notably, this phenotype is mainly attributed to a transcriptional-independent role of BMAL1 in stabilizing the heterochromatin and thus preventing LINE1 activation. In senescent MPCs from human and cynomolgus monkeys, dampened LINE1 binding capacity of BMAL1 and synergistically activated LINE1 transcripts were observed. Furthermore, similar de-stabilized heterochromatin and aberrant LINE1s transcription was observed in the skin and muscle tissues from BMAL1-deficient cynomolgus monkey. Altogether, these findings uncover a noncanonical role of BMAL1 in stabilizing heterochromatin to inactivate LINE1 that drives aging in primates.

### Sample Protocol
The gel bands containing the protein sample were manually excised and digested followed methods as previous described 39. The digested gel bands solutions were then applied to a sample vial for LC-MS analysis which were performed on a Q Exactive (Thermo Scientific) thar equipped with an Easy n-LC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific). Further MS analysis was performed with Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) in a data-dependent acquisition mode, which allowed the MS data acquired at a high resolution 70,000 (m/z 200) across the mass range of 300–1600 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Then, the raw data were transferred to analysis for protein identification with Proteome Discovery version 1.4 using Sequest HT search engine. We searched data against Uniprot human protein database (updated on 02-2016). FDR (false discovery rate) analysis by Percolator were set < 1% for protein identification, and the peptides confidence were set as high for peptides filter.

### Publication Abstract
Aging in humans is intricately linked with alterations in circadian rhythms concomitant with physiological decline and stem cell exhaustion. However, whether the circadian machinery directly regulates stem cell aging, especially in primates, remains poorly understood. In this study, we found that deficiency of BMAL1, the only non-redundant circadian clock component, results in an accelerated aging phenotype in both human and cynomolgus monkey mesenchymal progenitor cells (MPCs). Unexpectedly, this phenotype was mainly attributed to a transcription-independent role of BMAL1 in stabilizing heterochromatin and thus preventing activation of the LINE1-cGAS-STING pathway. In senescent primate MPCs, we observed decreased capacity of BMAL1 to bind to LINE1 and synergistic activation of LINE1 expression. Likewise, in the skin and muscle tissues from the BMAL1-deficient cynomolgus monkey, we observed destabilized heterochromatin and aberrant LINE1 transcription. Altogether, these findings uncovered a noncanonical role of BMAL1 in stabilizing heterochromatin to inactivate LINE1 that drives aging in primate cells.

### Keywords
Bmal1;aging

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Membrane Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Jiang Xiaoyu

### Lab Head
Dr Liang Chuqian
State Key Laboratory of Membrane Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences


