### Accession
PXD019452

### Title
Proteomic signature of NPC1 KO microglia from conditional KO mice

### Description
Niemann-Pick type C (NPC) disease is a rare neurodegenerative disorder mainly caused by autosomal recessive mutations in Npc1 which result in abnormal late endosomal/lysosomal lipid storage. Although microgliosis is one of the prominent pathological features, consequences of NPC1 loss on microglial function and disease outcome remain largely unknown. Here, we provide an in-depth characterization of microglial proteomic signatures and phenotypes in an NPC1-deficient (Npc1-/-) murine model. We demonstrate that microglial defects, including enhanced phagocytosis and impaired lipid trafficking, occur early in the NPC pathological cascade and precede neuronal death. Compromised microglial function during Npc1-/- mouse development is reflected by enhanced synaptic pruning and deficient turnover of myelin. Accumulation of the undigested myelin occurs mainly within multi-vesicular bodies (MVBs) of Npc1-/- microglia and not within lysosomes. This is in agreement with the impairments in recycling of myelin into lipid droplets. Macrophages of NPC patients displayed similar molecular and functional alterations as murine Npc1-/- microglia, strengthening the role of NPC1 in immune homeostasis. Generated ex vivo assays using patient macrophages are novel promising clinical tools to monitor the progression and therapeutic efficacy in NPC patients.

### Sample Protocol
Primary microglia were isolated from mouse brains (cerebrum) using MACS Technology (Miltenyi Biotec) according to manufacturer´s instructions and as previously described (Daria et al., 2017). Briefly, brain cerebrum was dissected, freed from meninges and dissociated by enzymatic digestion using a Neural Tissue Dissociation Kit P (Miltenyi Biotec) and subsequent mechanical dissociation using 3 fire-polished glass Pasteur pipettes of decreasing diameter. CD11b positive microglia were magnetically labelled using CD11b MicroBeads, loaded onto a MACS LS Column (Miltenyi Biotec) and subjected to magnetic separation, resulting in CD11b-enriched (microglia-enriched) and CD11b-depleted (microglia-depleted) fractions. Obtained microglia-enriched pellets were either washed twice with HBSS (Gibco) supplemented with 7mM HEPES, frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for biochemical or mass-spectrometry analysis or resuspended in microglial culturing media and used for phagocytosis assay as described below. Microglia-enriched pellets were lysed in 200 µL of STET lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1% Triton, pH 7.5) at 4°C with intermediate vortexing. The samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 16,000 x g at 4°C to remove cell debris and undissolved material. The supernatant was transferred to a LoBind tube (Eppendorf) and the protein concentration estimated using the Pierce 660 nm protein assay (ThermoFisher Scientific). A protein amount of 15 µg was subjected to tryptic protein digestion applying the SP3 protocol (Hughes et al. 2018). After vacuum centrifugation, peptides were dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid (Biosolve) and indexed retention time peptides were added (iRT Kit, Biognosys). For label free quantification (LFQ) of proteins, peptides were analyzed on an Easy nLC 1000 or 1200 nanoHPLC (Thermo Scientific) which was coupled online via a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Sientific) equipped with a PRSO-V1 column oven (Sonation) to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). An amount of 1.3 µg of peptides was separated on in-house packed C18 columns (30 cm x 75 µm ID, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) using a binary gradient of water (A) and acetonitrile (B) supplemented with 0.1% formic acid (0 min., 2% B; 3:30 min., 5% B; 137:30 min., 25% B; 168:30 min., 35% B; 182:30 min., 60% B) at 50°C column temperature. For data independent acquisition (DIA), one scan cycle included a full MS scan (m/z range: 300-1400; resolution: 120,000; AGC target: 5E+6 ions) and 30 MS/MS scans covering a range of 300-1,400 m/z with consecutive m/z windows (resolution: 30,000; AGC target: 3E+6 ions). The maximum ion trapping time was set to “auto”. A stepped normalized collision energy of 26% ± 2.6% was used for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
A spectral library was generated in Spectronaut (version 12.0.20491.11, Biognosys) (Bruderer et al., 2015) using the search results of Maxquant of microglia from APPPS1 mice (Sebastian Monasor and Müller et al., 2020). The library includes 122,542 precursor ions from 91349 peptides, which represent 6223 protein groups. The DIA datasets were analyzed with this spectral library in Spectronaut Pulsar Enterprise with standard settings. Briefly, the FDR of protein and peptide identifications was set to 1%. LFQ of proteins was performed on peptide fragment ions and required at least two quantified peptides per protein. Protein quantification was performed on maximum three peptides per protein group.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Neurodegeneration, Niemann-pick disease, Microglia

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
DZNE Munich, Neuroproteomics, Feodor-Lynen Str. 17, 81377 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
DZNE Munich, Neuroproteomics, Feodor-Lynen Str. 17, 81377 Munich, Germany


