### Accession
PXD030493

### Title
Proteomic profiling of hCMEC/D3 cells exposed 3 days to laminar physiological shear stress

### Description
Endothelial cells (ECs) are constantly submitted in vivo to hemodynamical forces derived from the blood circulation, including shear stress (SS). EC are able to detect SS and consequently adapt their phenotype, thus affecting many endothelial functions. If a plethora of shear stress-regulated molecular networks have been described in peripheral EC, less is known about the molecular responses of microvascular brain ECs which constitute the blood-brain barrier (BBB). In this work, we investigated the response of human cerebral microvascular ECs to laminar physiological shear stress using the well characterized hCMEC/D3 cell line. Interestingly, we showed that hCMEC/D3 cells responded to shear stress by aligning perpendicularly to the flow direction, contrary to peripheral endothelial cells which aligned in the flow direction. Whole proteomic profiles were compared between hCMEC/D3 cells cultured either in static condition or under 5 or 10 dyn.cm-2 SS for three days. 3592 proteins were identified and expression levels were significantly affected for 3% of them upon both SS conditions. Pathway analyses were performed which revealed that most proteins overexpressed by SS refer to the antioxidant defense, probably mediated by activation of the NRF2 transcriptional factor. Regarding down-regulated proteins, most of them participate to the pro-inflammatory response, cell motility and proliferation. These findings confirm the induction of EC quiescence by laminar physiological SS and reveal a strong neuroprotective effect of SS on hCMEC/D3 cells, suggesting a similar effect on the BBB. Our results also showed that SS did not significantly increase expression levels nor did it affect the localization of junctional proteins or the functional activity of several ABC transporters (P-glycoprotein and MRPs). This work provides new insights on the response of microvascular brain EC to SS and on the importance of SS for optimizing in vitro BBB models.

### Sample Protocol
After 72 hours, cells were lysed with a solution containing 0.1% SDS (sodium dodecyl sulfate) in Tris-HCl 1.5M pH 8.8 and snap frozen. One replicate consists of the pool of two microslides to reach 0.4 M cells (roughly 60 µg proteins). Four or five replicates were used per condition for the proteomic analysis. Bottom-up experiments’ tryptic peptides were obtained by Strap Micro Spin Column according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Protifi, NY, USA). Briefly: 30 μg of proteins from the above lysate were diluted in a single step reducing and alkylating reaction (400 mM TEAB (tetraethylammonium bromide), pH 8.5, 4% SDS, 20 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine), 100 mM chloroacetamide) and heated for 5 min at 95 °C. Denatured proteins were digested during 14 h at 37 °C with 1 µg Trypsin sequencing grade (Promega). After speed-vaccum drying of eluted peptides, these were solubilized in 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and fractionated by strong cationic exchange (SCX) StageTips, mainly as described [20]. Liquid Chromatography-coupled Mass Spectrometry analysis (LC-MS) LC-MS analyses were performed on a Dionex U3000 RSLC nano-LC- system (ThermoFisher scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher scientific). After drying, peptides from SCX StageTip, the five fractions were solubilized in 10 μL of 0.1% TFA containing 2% acetonitrile. One μL was loaded, concentrated and washed for 3 min on a C18 reverse phase precolumn (3 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 2 cm length, from ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on an Aurora C18 reverse phase resin (1.6 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 25 cm length (IonOpticks, Middle Camberwell Australia) with a 170 minutes run-time gradient ranging from 99% of solvent A containing 0.1% formic acid in milliQ-grade H2O to 40% of solvent B containing 80% acetonitrile, 0.085% formic acid in mQH2O. The mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in a data-dependent scheme with full MS scans acquired, followed by up to 10 successive MS/MS HCD-fragmentations on the most abundant ions detected. Settings for Q-Exactive were: full MS AGC target 1.106 with 60ms maximum ion injection time (MIIT) and resolution of 70 000. The MS scans spanned from 350 to 1500 Th. Precursor selection window was set at 2 Th. HCD Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) was set at 27% and MS/MS scan resolution was set at 17,500 with AGC target 1.105 within 60ms MIIT. Dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s and spectra were recorded in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
Protein quantification and comparison The mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Maxquant version 1.6.17 [21]. The database used was a concatenation of Homo sapiens sequences from the Swissprot databases (release 2020-10) and an in-house list of frequently found contaminant protein sequences. The precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins was set as permanent modification and acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionines were set as variable modification. Second peptide search was allowed and minimal length of peptides was set at seven amino acids. False discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% on both peptides and proteins. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was done using both unique and razor peptides. At least 2 such peptides were required for LFQ. The “match between runs” (MBR) option was allowed with a match time 0.7 min window and an alignment time window of 20 min. For differential analysis, LFQ results from MaxQuant were quality-checked using PTXQC [22], imported into the Perseus software (version 1.6.14) [23]. Reverse and contaminant proteins were excluded from analysis. A protein was considered as significantly differentially expressed between two conditions when it was quantified in only one condition (ON and OFF proteins), or when: (1) the fold change is superior or inferior to 1.2, (2) ANOVA p-value is inferior to 0.01, and (3) Student t-test p-value is inferior to 0.01. Venn diagram were designed using FunRich (http://www.funrich.org/), and graphs were made with GraphPad Prism.   Ingenuity Pathway Analyses Data were first analyzed through the use of Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, QIAGEN Inc., https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/products/ingenuitypathway-analysis) version 60467501. Significantly overrepresented terms (canonical pathways, functions, upstream regulators) were identified with a right-tailed Fisher’s Exact Test that calculates an overlap p‐value determining the probability that each term associated with our lists of differential proteins was due to chance alone. The z-score is a statistical measure of correlation between relationship direction (activation or inhibition) and experimental protein expression. Its calculation assessed the activation (positive z-score) or repression (negative one) of each term. To be considered significant the z-score has to be greater than 2 in absolute value. Enrichments were further explored using Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) 4.1.0 software (https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/) [24,25]. GSEA determined whether gene sets from the Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB) Wikipathways collection (v7.4) were randomly distributed throughout our ranked protein lists or if they were located at the top or bottom of them. For these pathway analyses, selection criteria were enlarged (with p-values until 0.05) to provide an overview of the pathways and functions affected by SS.

### Publication Abstract
Endothelial cells (ECs) are constantly submitted in vivo to hemodynamical forces derived from the blood circulation, including shear stress (SS). ECs are able to detect SS and consequently adapt their phenotype, thus affecting many endothelial functions. If a plethora of shear stress-regulated molecular networks have been described in peripheral ECs, less is known about the molecular responses of microvascular brain ECs which constitute the blood-brain barrier (BBB). In this work, we investigated the response of human cerebral microvascular ECs to laminar physiological shear stress using the well characterized hCMEC/D3 cell line. Interestingly, we showed that hCMEC/D3 cells responded to shear stress by aligning perpendicularly to the flow direction, contrary to peripheral endothelial cells which aligned in the flow direction. Whole proteomic profiles were compared between hCMEC/D3 cells cultured either in static condition or under 5 or 10&#xa0;dyn.cm<sup>-2</sup> SS for 3&#xa0;days. 3592 proteins were identified and expression levels were significantly affected for 3% of them upon both SS conditions. Pathway analyses were performed which revealed that most proteins overexpressed by SS refer to the antioxidant defense, probably mediated by activation of the NRF2 transcriptional factor. Regarding down-regulated proteins, most of them participate to the pro-inflammatory response, cell motility and proliferation. These findings confirm the induction of EC quiescence by laminar physiological SS and reveal a strong protective effect of SS on hCMEC/D3 cells, suggesting a similar effect on the BBB. Our results also showed that SS did not significantly increase expression levels nor did it affect the localization of junctional proteins and did not afect either the functional activity of several ABC transporters (P-glycoprotein and MRPs). This work provides new insights on the response of microvascular brain ECs to SS and on the importance of SS for optimizing in vitro BBB models.

### Keywords
Q-exactive; endothelial cells; bottom up lfq proteomics; shear stress; blood-brain barrier; brain microvessels

### Affiliations
Université de Paris, Inserm, UMRS-1144 Optimisation Thérapeutique en Neuropsychopharmacologie
ICO Angers

### Submitter
François GUILLONNEAU

### Lab Head
Dr Xavier Decleves
Université de Paris, Inserm, UMRS-1144 Optimisation Thérapeutique en Neuropsychopharmacologie


