### Accession
PXD016169

### Title
Stability of hair proteomes and proteomic genotyping with age and time

### Description
Hair, a skin appendage, is a frequently procured biological specimen from crime scenes and has been used in forensic investigations for over a century. Proteomic analysis and identification of genetically variant peptides (GVPs) in hair samples for identification purposes is a recent but an efficiently advancing tool for forensic and archeological uses. However, the hair samples exposed to environmental insults have been seen to undergo degradation to various degrees depending on the physicochemical factors the samples have been exposed to. Therefore, one would expect that evidentiary hair samples stored for longer periods of time will undergo alterations in their proteomes and hence can affect their use on long-term samples stored as case work. To determine the degree to which age of individual or age of sample can affect the hair shaft proteome or inferred GVP profile, protein profiles of hair samples were compared from individuals of different ages as well as samples collected from same individual at different time points and stored in dry environment at room temperature for 5 - 65 years.

### Sample Protocol
For analysis of samples from different age groups, hair was collected from 30 African Americans (10 each of ages 20, 40, 60 years) and 40 European Americans (20 of age 20, 10 each of ages, 40 and 60), all female (Cohort 1). One sample from each donor was analyzed. To find the effect of age of sample, a second set of samples that had been collected at different times (stored at room temperature) from nine individuals (A-E (Cohort 2) and F-I (Cohort 3), total three females and six males), each analyzed in triplicate.  Hair samples (4 mg) were processed as described by Milan et al. in Forensic Science International: Genetics, (2019) 41:19-23. Briefly samples were rinsed with 2% sodium dodecanoate (SD) – 0.05M ammonium bicarbonate and incubated in 0.4ml of the buffer containing 50mM dithioerythritol to reduce the disulfides which were then alkylated with 100mM iodoacetamide. The pH was then set to ~3 with trifluoroacetic acid and SD was extracted thrice with ethyl acetate. The pH was then readjusted to ~8 with ammonium hydroxide and ammonium bicarbonate and tryspin was added in three batches over 72 hours with stirring at room temperature. The peptides were isolated on the fourth day and used for mass spectrometry analysis.  Samples were analyzed by a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer provided with a built-in proxeon nanospray and Proxeon easy-nLC II HPLC (Thermo Scientific, Asheville, NC, USA). The peptide samples were desalted online after loading on a 100 μm × 25 mM Magic C18 100 Å 5 U reverse phase trap and were then separated over a 90-minute gradient via 75 μm × 150 mM Magic C18 200 Å 3 U reverse phase column keeping the flow rate at 300nl/minute. An MS survey scan was acquired for m/z 300-1600 and MS/MS spectra were obtained by subjecting the top 15 ions in the MS spectra to HCD. An isolation mass window of 2.0m/z was employed for the precursor ions and were fragmented using 27% normalized collision energy. A 15 s duration was used for dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were submitted to X!Tandem peptide spectra matching algorithm (Global Proteome Machine Fury, X!Tandem Alanine 149 (2016.10.15.2)) after conversion to MzML format by MSConvertGUI (Proteowizard 2.1 http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net). Default search parameters of the algorithm were used except that the virus and prokaryote reference libraries were excluded and the point mutations were included in the search. Protein and peptide log(e) scores of -1, and fragment and parent mass error of 20ppm and 100ppm, respectively, were used. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57 Da) was set as a fixed post translational modification, while deamidation on glutamines and asparagines (+0.98 Da), oxidation (+15.99 Da) and dioxidation of methionines (+29.99 Da), pyroglutamation at glutamines (-17.02 Da) and glutamates (-18.01 Da), and acetylation (+42.01) and formylation (+27.99) of N-terminals and lysines were assumed as variable modifications. The xml files generated by the X!Tandem (The GPM Fury) were used to obtain the peptide data which was then provided to/pasted into GVP Finder available at https://www.parkerlab.ucdavis.edu.. From the list of GVPs putative GVPs, unique tryptic peptides carrying log(e) score of < -2 were used for GVP profiling if they displayed no other genetic or chemical modifications (except N/Q deamidation, methionine oxidation, cysteine carboxymethylation and N-terminal acetylation) and with no fragmentation masses corresponding to the reference alleles.

### Publication Abstract
Recent reports highlight possible improvements in individual identification using proteomic information from human hair evidence. These reports have stimulated investigation of parameters that affect the utility of proteomic information. In addition to variables already studied relating to processing technique and anatomic origin of hair shafts, an important variable is hair ageing. Present work focuses on the effect of age on protein profiling and analysis of genetically variant peptides (GVPs). Hair protein profiles may be affected by developmental and physiological changes with age of the donor, exposure to different environmental conditions and intrinsic processes, including during storage. First, to explore whether general trends were evident in the population at different ages, hair samples were analyzed from groups of different subjects in their 20's, 40's and 60's. No significant differences were seen as a function of age, but consistent differences were evident between European American and African American hair profiles. Second, samples collected from single individuals at different ages were analyzed. Mostly, these showed few protein expression level differences over periods of 10 years or less, but samples from subjects at 44 and 65&#x202f;year intervals were distinctly different in profile. The results indicate that use of protein profiling for personal identification, if practical, would be limited to decadal time intervals. Moreover, batch effects were clearly evident in samples processed by different staff. To investigate the contribution of storage (at room temperature) in affecting the outcomes, the same proteomic digests were analyzed for GVPs. In samples stored over 10 years, GVPs were reduced in number in parallel with the yield of identified proteins and unique peptides. However, a very different picture emerged with respect to personal identification. Numbers of GVPs sufficed to distinguish individuals despite the age differences of the samples. As a practical matter, three hair samples per person provided nearly the maximal number obtained from 5 or 6 samples. The random match probability (where the log increased in proportion to the number of GVPs) reached as high as 1 in 10<sup>8</sup>. The data indicate that GVP results are dependent on the single nucleotide polymorphism profile of the donor genome, where environmental/processing factors affect only the yield, and thus are consistent despite the ages of the donors and samples and batchwise effects in processing. This conclusion is critical for application to casework where the samples may be in storage for long periods and used to match samples recently collected.

### Keywords
Hair, Forensic proteomics, Proteomic genotyping, Genetically variant peptides, Hair protein profiles

### Affiliations
Environmental Toxicology, University of California Davis
UC Davis

### Submitter
Glendon Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Glendon John Parker
Environmental Toxicology, University of California Davis


