### Accession
PXD022428

### Title
Supercooled, subzero, high salinity incubations of Cp34H reveal long-term mitigation strategies and detectable (peptide) biomarkers for life on other icy worlds

### Description
Colwellia psychrerythraea is a marine psychrophilic bacterium known for its remarkable ability to maintain activity during long-term exposure to extreme subzero temperatures and correspondingly high salinities in sea ice. These microorganisms must have simultaneous adaptations to high salinity and low temperature to survive, be metabolically active, or grow in the ice. Here we report results obtained through an experimental design that allowed us to monitor culturability, activity, and proteomic signatures of Colwellia psychrerythraea strain 34H (Cp34H) to subzero temperature, salinity, and nutrient availability by performing long-term incubations in eight different conditions. Shotgun proteomics revealed novel metabolic strategies used to maintain culturability in response to each independent experimental variable, particularly in pathways regulating carbon, nitrogen, and fatty acid metabolism. For the first time, statistical analysis of differential abundances of proteins uniquely identified in these isolated conditions provide metabolism-specific protein biosignatures indicative of growth or survival in either increased salinity, decreased temperature, or nutrient limitation. Additionally, to aid in the search for extant life on other icy worlds, analysis of detected short peptides enriched and retained in -10oC incubations for four months identified over 400 potential biosignatures that could indicate the presence of terrestrial-like cold-active or halophilic metabolisms on other icy worlds.

### Sample Protocol
After four months of incubation, a 440 µL aliquot from each 600 µL cell suspension sample was subsampled, killed with 88 µL of cold 50% TCA, and cell debris and proteins were pelleted at 18,000 x g for 15 min at 4°C. After discarding supernatant, pellets were frozen at -70°C until proteomic sample preparation. All TCA-precipitated cell pellets for proteomic analyses were mechanically lysed (Branson 250 Sonifier; 20kHz, 10 x 10s on ice) and then proteins were solubilized, quantified, and digested following the detailed methods outlined in Nunn et al. (Nunn et al., 2015). Briefly, 100 µg aliquots of protein were reduced (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), alkylated (iodoacetamide) and then digested with Promega modified trypsin (4 hrs 37oC). Peptides were desalted using C18 miniprep centrifugal spin columns following manufacturer's instructions (Nest group MicroSpin columns) and cleaned up peptides were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid with final concentration of 0.5 µg protein µl-1.  The mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a QExactive Hybrid Quadrupole Orbitrap with an inline EASY-nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Reverse-phase chromatography was achieved using a Manufactured PicoTip fused silica capillary column (40 cm long, 75 µm i.d.) packed in-house with C18 particles (Dr. Maisch ReproSil-Pur; C18-Aq, 120 Å, 3 µm) fitted with an in-house packed kasil-frit 3 cm long, 100 µm i.d. precolumn (Dr. Maisch ReproSil-Pur; C18-Aq, 120 Å, 3 µm). To maintain a stable back-pressure on the liquid chromatography column, the 40 cm analytical column was held at 40oC. Peptides were eluted using an acidified (formic acid, 0.1% v/v) water-acetonitrile gradient (2–35% acetonitrile in 120 min). The top 20 most intense ions were selected for MS2 acquisition from precursor ion scans of 400–1200 m/z. Centroid full MS resolution data was collected at 70,000 with AGC target of 1E6 and centroid MS2 data was collected at resolution of 35,000 with AGC target of 5E4. Dynamic exclusion was set to 10 seconds and +2, +3, +4 ions were selected for MS2 using data dependent acquisition mode (DDA). Sample analyses on the MS were randomized to reduce batch effects and quality control (QC) peptide mixtures were analyzed every fifth injection to monitor chromatography and MS sensitivity. Skyline was used to determine that QC standards did not deviate >10% through all analyses (MacLean et al., 2010).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identifications from mass spectrometry data were completed using Comet 2018.01 rev. 2 (Eng et al., 2013; 2015) and the Uniprot Colwellia psychrerythraea protein database (downloaded 4/2/2019) concatenated with 50 common contaminants and the quality control peptides. Comet parameters included: reverse concatenated sequence database search, trypsin enzyme specificity, cysteine modification of 57 Da and modifications on methionine of 15.999 Da (oxidation). PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet were used to validate peptide spectral matches (PSMs) and determine thresholds for a false discovery rate <0.01 (proteins accepted if > 2 peptides identified, and p > 0.95 on ProteinProphet and p > 0.99 on PeptideProphet (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Abacus (in the QPROT software suite) was used to generate normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAF), the number of unique peptides identified for each protein across all experiments, and peptide spectral match (PSM) counts for all confidently identified proteins (Fermin et al., 2011; Choi et al., 2015) (Appendix S4). NSAF values were further analyzed with QPROT, to determine pairwise log-fold changes between treatments and were plotted using ggplot2 to generate volcano plots (Choi et al., 2015; Wickham, 2016) (Appendix S9). All data presented to be significantly changing passed log2 fold-change ≥ |0.5| and Z-statistic score ≥ |2.0| (equivalent to p-value <0.05; two tailed) (Choi et al., 2015). Nonparametric multidimensional scaling analysis (NMDS) was completed on NSAF values for each bioreplicate with ≥ 2 unique peptides identified per treatment using the package “vegan” with R studio version 1.2.1335 (Oksanen et al., 2013; Rstudio Team, 2020) (Appendix S4,5). Hierarchical clustering analysis was completed using the package “pheatmap” on peptides meeting more stringent significance thresholds of log2 fold-change ≥ |2| and Z-statistic score ≥ |2.0| (Appendix S7). Upset plots and Venn diagrams were completed on datasets where ≥ 2 unique peptides were detected across all experiments, and ≥ 2 spectral counts per bioreplicate (Chen, 2018; Gehlenborg, 2019) (Appendix S6). A defined list of 21 functional annotation terms for categorizing proteins was selected using EggNOG-mapper version 5.0, a database for defining proteins using orthologous relationships and gene evolutionary histories (Huerta-Cepas et. al., 2019) (Appendix S8). All identified proteins were also annotated with Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) using KOALA (Kanehisa et al., 2015), assigning K numbers to identified metabolic enzymes (Appendix S9). Proteins identified to be significantly changing were mapped onto pre-existing metabolic maps using KEGG Mapper - Search&Color Pathway tool (https://www.genome.jp/kegg/tool/map_pathway2.html).

### Publication Abstract
Colwellia psychrerythraea is a marine psychrophilic bacterium known for its remarkable ability to maintain activity during long-term exposure to extreme subzero temperatures and correspondingly high salinities in sea ice. These microorganisms must have adaptations to both high salinity and low temperature to survive, be metabolically active, or grow in the ice. Here, we report on an experimental design that allowed us to monitor culturability, cell abundance, activity and proteomic signatures of C. psychrerythraea strain 34H (Cp34H) in subzero brines and supercooled sea water through long-term incubations under eight conditions with varying subzero temperatures, salinities and nutrient additions. Shotgun proteomics found novel metabolic strategies used to maintain culturability in response to each independent experimental variable, particularly in pathways regulating carbon, nitrogen and fatty acid metabolism. Statistical analysis of abundances of proteins uniquely identified in isolated conditions provide metabolism-specific protein biosignatures indicative of growth or survival in either increased salinity, decreased temperature, or nutrient limitation. Additionally, to aid in the search for extant life on other icy worlds, analysis of detected short peptides in -10&#xb0;C incubations after 4 months identified over 500 potential biosignatures that could indicate the presence of terrestrial-like cold-active or halophilic metabolisms on other icy worlds.

### Keywords
Psychrophile, Subzero, Sea-ice, Proteomics, Biomarkers, Cp34h, Life detection, Arctic, Culturability

### Affiliations
Nunn Lab, University of Washington, Department of Genome Sciences, Seattle, WA USA
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Washington

### Submitter
Miranda Mudge

### Lab Head
Dr Brook Nunn
Nunn Lab, University of Washington, Department of Genome Sciences, Seattle, WA USA


