### Accession
PXD032276

### Title
Red blood cell BCL-xL is required for Plasmodium falciparum survival: insights into host-directed malaria therapies

### Description
The development of antimalarial drug resistance is an ongoing problem threatening progress towards malaria elimination, and antimalarial treatments are urgently needed for drug-resistant malaria infections. Host-directed therapies (HDT) represent an attractive strategy for the devel-opment of new antimalarials with untapped targets and low propensity for resistance. In addi-tion, drug repurposing in the context of HDT can lead to a substantial decrease in the time and resources required to develop novel antimalarials. Host BCL-XL is a major target in anti-cancer therapy and is essential for the development of numerous intracellular pathogens. We hypothe-sised that red blood cell BCL-XL is essential for Plasmodium development and tested this hypoth-esis by using six BCL-XL inhibitors, including one FDA-approved compound. All BCL-xL inhibitors tested impaired proliferation of P. falciparum 3D7 parasites in vitro at low parasite inhibitory concentrations. Western blot analysis and immunofluorescence microscopy assays revealed that host BCL-xL is transferred from the host red blood cells (RBCs) to the parasite upon infection. Further, immunoprecipitation of BCL-XL coupled with mass spectrometry analysis identified that BCL-XL forms unique molecular complexes with human μ-calpain in uninfected RBCs, and with human SHOC2 in infected RBCs. These results open exciting perspectives for the development of host-directed antimalarial therapies and drug repurposing efforts.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry. The BCL-xL immunoprecipitate samples (i.e., BCL-xL-coated magnetic beads and bound proteins) were resolved on a 1D PAGE gel (Mini-PROTEAN® TGXTM, Bio-Rad) at 200 V for 5 min and proteins were fixed on gels with Instant Blue stain (Expedion Ltd). Following gel destaining with MilliQ water, the entire area of protein migration was excised and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion, as previously described. Peptides were extracted, dried in a Speed-Vac, subjected to desalting as previously described, and reconstituted in 12 μl of 2 % acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1 % formic acid for mass spectrometry analysis. Liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was carried out as previously described with minor modifications. For label-free proteomics analysis, the HPLC gradient was set to 98 min using a gradient that reached 30 % ACN after 63 min, 34 % after 66 min, 79.2 % after 71 min for 6 min, following which there was an equilibration phase of 20 min at 2 % ACN. Peptide sequences and protein identity were determined using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.1) by matching protein database P. falciparum (UP000001450, release version 2016 04) and Homo sapiens (UP000005640, release version 2017 05). Uniprot fasta database and label free quantification of identified proteins was then carried out as previously described.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. The outputs from MaxQuant were filtered to remove known contaminants, reverse sequences, and proteins identified by a single site. Only proteins detected in at least two out of 3-5 biological replicates of uRBC- and iRBC-immunoprecipitated (IP) samples were taken for analysis. Proteins identified in the uRBC- or iRBC-IP samples and in the beads alone controls were excluded from the analysis. Interacting partners were based on the number of independent replicates the protein was identified in (2 or more) and the average intensities across all replicates for the specific proteins, which had to be greater than the treated (+inhibitor) samples.

### Publication Abstract
The development of antimalarial drug resistance is an ongoing problem threatening progress towards the elimination of malaria, and antimalarial treatments are urgently needed for drug-resistant malaria infections. Host-directed therapies (HDT) represent an attractive strategy for the development of new antimalarials with untapped targets and low propensity for resistance. In addition, drug repurposing in the context of HDT can lead to a substantial decrease in the time and resources required to develop novel antimalarials. Host BCL-x<sub>L</sub> is a target in anti-cancer therapy and is essential for the development of numerous intracellular pathogens. We hypothesised that red blood cell (RBC) BCL-x<sub>L</sub> is essential for <i>Plasmodium</i> development and tested this hypothesis using six BCL-x<sub>L</sub> inhibitors, including one FDA-approved compound. All BCL-x<sub>L</sub> inhibitors tested impaired proliferation of <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> 3D7 parasites <i>in vitro</i> at low micromolar or sub-micromolar concentrations. Western blot analysis of infected cell fractions and immunofluorescence microscopy assays revealed that host BCL-x<sub>L</sub> is relocated from the RBC cytoplasm to the vicinity of the parasite upon infection. Further, immunoprecipitation of BCL-x<sub>L</sub> coupled with mass spectrometry analysis identified that BCL-x<sub>L</sub> forms unique molecular complexes with human &#x3bc;-calpain in uninfected RBCs, and with human SHOC2 in infected RBCs. These results provide interesting perspectives for the development of host-directed antimalarial therapies and drug repurposing efforts.

### Keywords
Bcl-xl; malaria; plasmodium falciparum; host-directed therapy; red blood cells; host-parasite in-teraction

### Affiliations
Monash University
La Trobe University, Bundoora, VIC 3086, Australia

### Submitter
Ghizal Siddiqui

### Lab Head
Dr Teresa Carvalho
La Trobe University, Bundoora, VIC 3086, Australia


