### Accession
PXD029091

### Title
A genetically-encoded crosslinker screen identifies SERBP1 as a PKC substrate influencing translation and cell division

### Description
The PKC-regulated genome protective pathway provides transformed cells a failsafe to successfully complete mitosis. Despite the necessary role for Aurora B in this programme, it is unclear whether its requirement is sufficient or if other PKC cell cycle targets are involved. To address this, we developed a trapping strategy using UV-photocrosslinkable amino acids encoded in the PKC kinase domain. The validation of the mRNA binding protein SERBP1 as a PKC substrate revealed a series of mitotic events controlled by the catalytic form of PKC. PKC represses protein translation, altering SERBP1 binding to the 40S ribosomal subunit and promoting the assembly of ribonucleoprotein granules containing SERBP1, termed M-bodies. Independent of Aurora B, SERBP1 is shown to be necessary for chromosome segregation and successful cell division, correlating with M-body formation. This requirement for SERBP1 demonstrates that Aurora B acts in concert with translational regulation in the PKC-controlled pathway exerting genome protection.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were cultured in a 15 cm dish. Site-selective incorporation of AbK or DiZASeC into PKC and subsequent photocrosslinking was carried out as described above. Cells were first scraped into 1 ml ice-cold PBS, and pelleted by centrifuging at 500 x g for 5 minutes using a benchtop centrifuge. Cells were lysed using 300 l of HaloTag lysis buffer, 10 minutes at room temperature. The lysate was then cleared through centrifugation at 20000 x g for 15 minutes at 4 C, supernatant transferred to a new tube and diluted to 1 ml with 700 l 1x TBS. A 50 l aliquot of this supernatant was taken into 2x LDS sample buffer and boiled for SDS-PAGE analysis as the input to the purification. If necessary, protein concentration at this point was determined using a Microplate BCA assay kit (Thermo) to normalise the amount of protein loaded onto the HaloLink resin in the next step. 200 l of HaloLink resin slurry per sample was equilibrated through washing 4 times with 1 ml of TBS containing 0.05% Triton X-100. The lysate was the added to the washed HaloLink resin, and suspension shaken for 1 hour at 200 x g at room temperature using a ThermoMixer. The beads were then pelleted by centrifuging at 800 x g for 2 minutes using a benchtop centrifuge, and 50 l of the supernatant taken into 2x LDS sample buffer to assess binding of PKC to beads through comparison by western blot with the amount present in the lysate. Beads were then washed with 1% SDS in PBS (pH 8.0) three times, before being washed with 7M Urea, 0.5M NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, in Tris (pH 8.0) twice. The beads were then washed three more times with TBS containing 0.05% Triton X-100. If DiZASeC cleavage was not required, beads were directly submitted to on-bead trypsinolysis and mass spectrometry analysis. If DiZASeC cleavage was required, at this stage beads were resuspended in 100 l of 1% SDS in PBS (pH 8.0), and H2O2 added to 7 mM. This suspension was then rotary agitated at 200 x g at room temperature using a ThermoMixer for 2 hours. The supernatant was the subjected to SP3 purification for mass spectrometry analysis, and the beads were submitted for on-bead trypsinolysis treatment

### Data Protocol
The supernatant was the subjected to SP3 purification for mass spectrometry analysis, and the beads were submitted for on-bead trypsinolysis treatment.

### Publication Abstract
The PKC&#x3b5;-regulated genome protective pathway provides transformed cells a failsafe to successfully complete mitosis. Despite the necessary role for Aurora B in this programme, it is unclear whether its requirement is sufficient or if other PKC&#x3b5; cell cycle targets are involved. To address this, we developed a trapping strategy using UV-photocrosslinkable amino acids encoded in the PKC&#x3b5; kinase domain. The validation of the mRNA binding protein SERBP1 as a PKC&#x3b5; substrate revealed a series of mitotic events controlled by the catalytic form of PKC&#x3b5;. PKC&#x3b5; represses protein translation, altering SERBP1 binding to the 40&#x2009;S ribosomal subunit and promoting the assembly of ribonucleoprotein granules containing SERBP1, termed M-bodies. Independent of Aurora B, SERBP1 is shown to be necessary for chromosome segregation and successful cell division, correlating with M-body formation. This requirement for SERBP1 demonstrates that Aurora B acts in concert with translational regulation in the PKC&#x3b5;-controlled pathway exerting genome protection.

### Keywords
Human

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Protein Phosphorylation Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Andrew Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Parker
Protein Phosphorylation Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute


