### Accession
PXD034625

### Title
Semaglutide exerts stronger cardioprotective effects than caloric restriction in mice with HFpEF

### Description
Patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) often have an unfavorable cardiometabolic profile, and obesity-related HFpEF has become a well-recognized HFpEF sub-phenotype. Targeting this unfavorable cardiometabolic profile may therefore represent a rational treatment strategy. The glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist (GLP1-RA) semaglutide has been shown to induce significant weight loss and to improve cardiovascular outcomes. In this study, we investigated the cardiometabolic effects of semaglutide in a representative mouse model of HFpEF and compared it to the effects of weight loss by caloric restriction.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins were isolated from LV’s and plasma followed by denaturation, reduction, alkylation and tryptic digestion. Peptides were fractionated offline with an Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and subsequently separated with Easy-nLC 1200 coupled online to an Orbitrap QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Mass spectrometry data were acquired using a data-independent method.

### Data Protocol
DDA data was searched using the Pulsar search engine (Spectronaut version 15.1, Biognosys). Both data-dependent and data-independent raw files were used to generate a hybrid library using BGS factory settings. The plasma DDA data was searched in MaxQuant (version 1.6.7.0) with the integrated Andromeda Search engine using default settings and then imported into Spectronaut to generate a spectral library. Peptides were searched against the Mus musculus Uniprot reference database (downloaded 2017). Search criteria included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification as well as N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for both proteins and peptides. Cleavage specificity was set to trypsin/P, with a maximum number of two missed cleavages and a minimum peptide length of six amino acids during the database search. DIA MS data were searched in Spectronaut using default settings, including a FDR of 0.01. For plasma DIA data, cross-run normalization was set to Qvalue sparse with local normalization. The data was quantile normalized in Persues (version 1.6.15.0) using a R-package plugin. The data was filtered for a minimum of four valid values per group and a two-sample t-test with permutation-based statistics was used to identify significantly regulated proteins

### Publication Abstract
Obesity-related heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) has become a well-recognized HFpEF subphenotype. Targeting the unfavorable cardiometabolic profile may represent a rational treatment strategy. This study investigated semaglutide, a glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist that induces significant weight loss in patients with obesity and/or type 2 diabetes mellitus and has been associated with improved cardiovascular outcomes. In a mouse model of HFpEF that was caused by advanced aging, female sex, obesity, and type 2 diabetes mellitus, semaglutide, compared with weight loss induced by pair feeding, improved the cardiometabolic profile, cardiac structure, and cardiac function. Mechanistically, transcriptomic, and proteomic analyses revealed that semaglutide improved left ventricular cytoskeleton function and endothelial function and restores protective immune responses in visceral adipose tissue. Strikingly, treatment with semaglutide induced a wide array of favorable cardiometabolic effects beyond the effect of weight loss by pair feeding. Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists may therefore represent an important novel therapeutic option for treatment of HFpEF, especially when obesity-related.

### Keywords
Heart, Plasma, Cardioprotection, Hfpef, Proteomics, Semaglutide

### Affiliations
Global Research Technologies, Novo Nordisk A/S, Maaloev, Denmark.
University of Groningen,  University Medical Center Groningen,  Department of Cardiology,  The Netherlands, Hanzeplein 1, 9713 GZ,  Groningen,  the Netherlands

### Submitter
Christian Madsen

### Lab Head
Dr Rudolf A. de Boer
University of Groningen,  University Medical Center Groningen,  Department of Cardiology,  The Netherlands, Hanzeplein 1, 9713 GZ,  Groningen,  the Netherlands


