### Accession
PXD011810

### Title
ARID1A RIME in human cell lines and tissue xenografts.

### Description
Examination of chromatin-bound proteins associated with ARID1A, BRG1 and ERa in MCF7 cells and ERa in ER+ patient-derived xenografts using RIME protocol and mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
2X 15 cm plates of MCF7 cell lines processed for each RIME. Cells were double crosslinked with 2 mM Disuccinimidyl glutarate for 20 minutes and after removing DSG, 1% formaldehyde. Frozen clinical tissue were cryosectioned at 30 micron sections and around 90 sections were double crosslinked with 2mM DSG for 25 mins and 1% Formaldehyde in the same solution of DSG for 20 mins. Chromatin was isolated and specific proteins were immunoprecipitated using 5 ug antibody/sample coupled with 50 ul Protein A Dynabeads. Antibodies used: BRG1 antibody ab215998 Lot EPNCIR111A, ARID1A antibody HPA005456 Lot I114190, ER-alpha antibody mix ab3575 Lot GR3191181-1 and Millipore 06-935 Lot 3008172, IgG ab171870 Lot GR311135-2. After overnight incubation with antibody-coupled beads, beads were washed with modified RIPA buffer for 10 times and 100mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate twice. On-bead trypsin digestion was performed and PDX tissues were multiplexed with TMT labelling. For sample preparation, trypsin at final concentration 15ng/ul (Pierce) was added to the beads followed by overnight incubation at 37°C. A second digestion step was performed the next day for 4h and peptides were cleaned with the Ultra-Micro C18 Spin Columns (Harvard Apparatus) according to manufacturer’s instructions. For the quantitative experiment, samples were dried and labelled with the TMT-10plex reagents (Thermo Fisher) followed by fractionation using Reversed-Phase spin columns at high pH (Pierce #84868). For the qPLEX-RIME, peptide fractions were analyzed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the nano-ESI Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) mass spectometer. The Lumos was operated in a data-dependent mode for both MS2 and SPS-MS3 methods. The full scans were performed in the Orbitrap in the range of 380-1500 m/z at 120K resolution. The MS2 scans were performed in the ion trap with collision energy 35%. Peptides were isolated in the quadrupole with isolation window 0.7Th. The top 10 most intense fragments were selected for Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) HCD-MS3 analysis with MS2 isolation window 2.0Th. The HCD collision energy was set at 65% and the detection was performed with Orbitrap resolution 50K. For the non-quantitative experiments, peptides were analysed in the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. The full scan was performed in the Orbitrap in the range of 400-1600m/z at 60K resolution. For MS2, the top 10 most intense fragments were selected at resolution 30K. A 2.0Th isolation window was used and the HCD collision energy was set at 28%.

### Data Protocol
The collected CID and HCD tandem mass spectra were processed with the SequestHT search engine in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 and Proteome Discoverer 1.4 respectively. The SequestHT for the CID spectra included the following parameters: Precursor Mass Tolerance 20ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance 0.5Da, Dynamic Modifications were Oxidation of M (+15.995Da), Deamidation of N/Q (+0.984Da) and Static Modifications were TMT6plex at any N-Terminus/K (+229.163Da). The consensus workflow included calculation of TMT signal-to-noise and the confidence level for peptide identifications was estimated with the Percolator node with decoy database search. The peptide intensities for the qPLEX-RIME experiment were normalized and aggregated (by summing) to protein intensities. The differential protein expression was performed using limma (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4402510/) implemented in the qPLEXanalyzer tool (https://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/qPLEXanalyzer.html). The SequestHT for the HCD spectra included the following parameters: Precursor Mass Tolerance 20 ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance 0.02Da and Dynamic Modifications were Oxidation of M (+15.995Da) and Deamidation of N/Q (+0.984Da).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Rime, Qplex, Arid1a

### Affiliations
Cancer Research UK University of Cambridge Li Ka Shing Centre Robinson Way Cambridge, CB2 0RE
Cancer research UK Cambridge university

### Submitter
Igor Chernukhin

### Lab Head
Dr Jason Carroll, PhD
Cancer Research UK University of Cambridge Li Ka Shing Centre Robinson Way Cambridge, CB2 0RE


