### Accession
PXD032892

### Title
Kinetic of extracellular electron transfer compartmentalization and Fe2+/Hemes regulate reaction rates in Geobacter sulfurreducens

### Description
Comparison of the proteome of Geobacter sulfurreducens grown in two conditions: medium containing 10 uM FeSO4 and medium containing ca. 1 uM FeSO4.

### Sample Protocol
Disruption of cells and protein extraction of G. sulfurreducens were done in a sample homogenizer after adding a lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 8) and glass beads (0.18 mm). The same protein amount for each sample were further processed and analyzed.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were analyzed using the Spectronaut software version 15.7 with standard settings (without data imputation) in direct DIA mode using reference proteome of G. sulfurreducens (UniProt, UP000000577) and common contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Geobacter sulfurreducens</i> is a widely applied microorganism for the reduction of toxic metal salts, as an electron source for bioelectrochemical devices, and as a reagent for the synthesis of nanoparticles. In order to understand the influence of metal salts, and of electron transporting, multiheme <i>c</i>-cytochromes on the electron flux during respiration of <i>G. sulfurreducens</i>, the reduction kinetic of Fe<sup>3+</sup>, Co<sup>3+</sup>, V<sup>5+</sup>, Cr<sup>6+</sup>, and Mn<sup>7+</sup> containing complexes were measured. Starting from the resting phase, each <i>G. sulfurreducens</i> cell produced an electron flux of 3.7 &#xd7; 10<sup>5</sup> electrons per second during the respiration process. Reduction rates were within &#xb1; 30% the same for the 6 different metal salts, and reaction kinetics were of zero order. Decrease of <i>c</i>-cytochrome concentrations by downregulation and mutation demonstrated that <i>c</i>-cytochromes stabilized respiration rates by variation of their redox states. Increasing Fe<sup>2+</sup>/heme levels increased electron flux rates, and induced respiration flexibility. The kinetic effects parallel electrochemical results of <i>G. sulfurreducens</i> biofilms on electrodes, and might help to optimize bioelectrochemical devices.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Geobacter sulfurreducens

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631


