### Accession
PXD012107

### Title
Analysis of FucT and XylT1B mutants in C. reinhardtii

### Description
Secreted proteins found in the supernatant of different mutants were analyzed by mass spectrometry employing In source-CID. After analysis of intact N-glycopeptides on MS1 level, N-glycan compositions found were compared between two strains, consequently unraveling the molecular function of enzymes knocked down. Hereby, the role of a putative fucosyltransferase and the identity of a second core- xylosyltransferase could be confirmed.

### Sample Protocol
Culture supernatant (secretome) from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii was tryptically digested by filter-aided sample preparation. Chromatographic seperation of peptides was performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Scientific). The sample was desalted on a trap column (C18 PepMap 100, 300 µm x 5 mm, 5 mm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Scientific) and then separated on a separation column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 15 cm x 75 mm, 2 mm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Scientific). The LC system was coupled via a nanospray source to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operating in positive ion mode. MS data were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 for MS1. Fragmentation by higher-energy C-trap dissociation for MS2 (resolution of 17,500) was triggered in a data-dependent manner dynamically choosing the 12 most abundant precursor ions. IS-CID (80 eV) was applied for the analysis of intact N-glycopeptides leading to the fragmentation of glycosidic bonds before MS1. For these measurements, the 12 most abundant precursor ions were chosen by mass tags using masses of +/- 203.079373 (corresponding to the neutral loss of one HexNAc) with charges from 1 - 4 and 5 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Culture supernatant (secretome) from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii was tryptically digested by filter-aided sample preparation. Chromatographic seperation of peptides was performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Scientific). The sample was desalted on a trap column (C18 PepMap 100, 300 µm x 5 mm, 5 mm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Scientific) and then separated on a separation column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 15 cm x 75 mm, 2 mm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Scientific). The LC system was coupled via a nanospray source to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operating in positive ion mode. MS data were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 for MS1. Fragmentation by higher-energy C-trap dissociation for MS2 (resolution of 17,500) was triggered in a data-dependent manner dynamically choosing the 12 most abundant precursor ions. IS-CID (80 eV) was applied for the analysis of intact N-glycopeptides leading to the fragmentation of glycosidic bonds before MS1. For these measurements, the 12 most abundant precursor ions were chosen by mass tags using masses of +/- 203.079373 (corresponding to the neutral loss of one HexNAc) with charges from 1 - 4 and 5 ppm mass tolerance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Lc-ms/ms, N-gylcoproteomics

### Affiliations
Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology
University of Muenster, IBBP

### Submitter
Anne Oltmanns

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hippler
Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology


