### Accession
PXD025261

### Title
27-plex Tandem Mass Tag Mass Spectrometry for Profiling Brain Proteome in Alzheimer's Disease

### Description
Systematically optimized the protocol for the newly developed 16-plex TMT Reported a novel 27-plex method to enhance the multiplexity for large-scale proteomic profiling, by combining two sets of distinct isobaric tags (11-plex and 16-plex TMT) based on their disparate mass shifts on modified peptides.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 15 cases of human postmortem brain tissue samples (7 controls and 8 AD cases, ~10 mg tissue/case) were lysed. In total, sixteen samples including Alzheimer’s disease (AD) cases (n = 8), control cases (n = 7), and internal reference (n = 1) were digested. The samples were divided into two peptide aliquots. One aliquot was labeled with TMT16 reagents for the individual TMT16 experiment; the other aliquot of 11 samples (5 AD, 5 controls, and the internal reference) was labeled with TMT11 reagents for the individual TMT11 experiment. Furthermore, a portion of the pooled TMT11 and TMT16 peptides were mixed to generate the starting sample for the TMT27 experiment. The three sets of pooled peptides (TMT11, TMT16 and TMT27) were desalted and fractionated into 40 fractions on a RP-HPLC column (4.6 mm x 250 mm) under basic pH condition. Each fraction was subjected to Each fraction was analyzed with acidic pH reverse-phase LC-MS/MS with a self-packed column (75 μm × 15 cm with 1.9 µm C18 resin from Dr. Maisch GmbH, heated at 65°C to reduce back pressure) coupled with a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted in a 60 min gradient (buffer A: 0.2% formic acid, 5% DMSO; buffer B: buffer A plus 65% AcN) in a 90 min run. MS settings included MS1 scans (60,000 resolution, 410-1600 m/z scan range, 1 x 106 AGC, and 50 ms maximal ion time) and 20 data-dependent MS2 scans (60,000 resolution, starting from 120 m/z, 1 x 105 AGC, 120 ms maximal ion time, 1.0 m/z isolation window with 0.2 m/z offset, HCD, specified normalized collision energy (NCE), and 15 s dynamic exclusion).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed by JUMP search engine. The protein database was generated by combining downloaded Swiss-Prot, TrEMBL, and UCSC databases and removing redundancy (human: 83,955 entries; mouse: 59,423 entries). The target protein sequences were reversed to generate a decoy database to evaluate the false discovery rate (FDR). Major parameters included 6 ppm mass tolerance for precursor and 15 ppm for product ions, full trypticity, and two maximal missed cleavages. Cys carbamidomethylation (+57.02146) and TMT modification of Lys and N-termini (+229.16293 for TMT11 or +304.20715 for TMT16) were set as static modifications. Oxidation of Met (+15.99491) was set as a dynamic modification. The resulting PSMs were filtered by mass accuracy and then grouped by precursor ion charge state followed by the cutoffs of JUMP-based matching scores (Jscore and ΔJn) to reduce FDR below 1% for proteins. When the same peptide was derived from numerous homologous proteins, the peptide was matched to the protein with the top PSM number, according to the rule of parsimony. In TMT27 datasets, the same PSMs which matched to both TMT11- and TMT16-labeled peptides suggested a mixed spectra and were removed. The protein quantification was performed using the TMT reporter ion intensities with the reported method with y1-ion based correction of TMT data. The raw data of 27-plex were processed to obtain TMT11 and TMT16 datasets separately.

### Publication Abstract
Multiplexed isobaric labeling methods, such as tandem mass tags (TMT), remarkably improve the throughput of quantitative mass spectrometry. Here, we present a 27-plex TMT method coupled with two-dimensional liquid chromatography (LC/LC) for extensive peptide fractionation and high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) for peptide quantification and then apply the method to profile the complex human brain proteome of Alzheimer's disease (AD). The 27-plex method combines multiplexed capacities of the 11-plex and the 16-plex TMT, as the peptides labeled by the two TMT sets display different mass and hydrophobicity, which can be well separated in LC-MS/MS. We first systematically optimized the protocol for the newly developed 16-plex TMT, including labeling reaction, desalting, and MS conditions, and then directly compared the 11-plex and 16-plex methods by analyzing the same human AD samples. Both methods yielded similar proteome coverage, analyzing &gt;100&#x202f;000 peptides in &gt;10&#x202f;000 human proteins. Furthermore, the 11-plex and 16-plex samples were mixed for a 27-plex assay, resulting in more than 8000 protein measurements within the same MS time. The 27-plex results are highly consistent with those of the individual 11-plex and 16-plex TMT analyses. We also used these proteomics data sets to compare the AD brain with the nondementia controls, discovering major AD-related proteins and revealing numerous novel protein alterations enriched in the pathways of amyloidosis, immunity, mitochondrial, and synaptic functions. Overall, our data strongly demonstrate that this new 27-plex strategy is highly feasible for routine large-scale proteomic analysis.

### Keywords
Tmt; mass spectrometry; proteomics; proteome; alzheimer’s disease; brain tissue; disease network; aβ

### Affiliations
St.Jude Children's Research Hospital
Structure Biology Department St Jude Children’s Research Hospital

### Submitter
Zhen Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Junmin Peng
Structure Biology Department St Jude Children’s Research Hospital


