### Accession
PXD004530

### Title
Nucleocytoplasmic transport and membrane growth control nuclear size

### Description
How cells control the overall size of membrane-bound organelles is an important unanswered question of cell biology. Fission yeast cells maintain a nuclear size that is proportional to cellular size, resulting in a constant ratio between the nuclear and cellular volumes (N/C ratio). To shed light on nuclear size control we conducted a genome-wide visual screen of a fission yeast gene deletion collection for mutants altered in their N/C ratio, and found that defects in both nucleocytoplasmic mRNA transport and nuclear membrane proliferation alter the N/C ratio. Perturbing nuclear mRNA export causes general bulk accumulation of both mRNA and protein, and a N/C ratio increase which is dependent on new membrane synthesis. Dysregulation of nuclear membrane growth also results in an enlarged N/C ratio, and additionally generates an aberrant nuclear shape. We propose that both properly regulated nucleocytoplasmic transport and nuclear membrane growth are central for controlling nuclear size.

### Sample Protocol
Each SILAC sample was loaded onto a NuPAGE Bis-Tris Protein Gel, 1.0 mm, 10-well (Thermo Fisher), and allowed to migrate through the gel before being stained with coomassie blue. Polyacrylamide gel slices were prepared for mass spectrometric analysis using the Janus liquid handling system (Perkin-Elmer). Each lane was excised into eight equally sized protein gel pieces, destained with 50% acetonitrile + 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 10 mM DTT, and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. After alkylation, the proteins were digested with 6 ng/µl trypsin overnight at 37 °C. The resulting peptides were extracted in 2% formic acid/1% acetonitrile.  For LC-MS/MS an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos coupled to an UltiMate 3000 HPLC system for on-line liquid chromatographic separation was used for data acquisition. The extracted peptides were separated over a 70 min gradient elution (75 µm × 50 cm C18 column) with collision induced dissociation (CID) selected as the activation method.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS. Maxquant 1.3.0.5 was used for data processing and quantification. Default MaxQuant parameters were used with the following adjustments: Lys6 and Arg6 were the heavy labels, ‘Filter labelled amino acids’ was deselected, re-quantify was selected with the instruction to keep low-scoring versions of identified peptides within parameter groups and match between runs was selected. Data was searched against a UniProt extracted S. pombe FASTA file amended to include common contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
How cells control the overall size and growth of membrane-bound organelles is an important unanswered question of cell biology. Fission yeast cells maintain a nuclear size proportional to cellular size, resulting in a constant ratio between nuclear and cellular volumes (N/C ratio). We have conducted a genome-wide visual screen of a fission yeast gene deletion collection for viable mutants altered in their N/C ratio, and have found that defects in both nucleocytoplasmic mRNA transport and lipid synthesis alter the N/C ratio. Perturbing nuclear mRNA export results in accumulation of both mRNA and protein within the nucleus, and leads to an increase in the N/C ratio which is dependent on new membrane synthesis. Disruption of lipid synthesis dysregulates nuclear membrane growth and results in an enlarged N/C ratio. We propose that both properly regulated nucleocytoplasmic transport and nuclear membrane growth are central to the control of nuclear growth and size.

### Keywords
Silac, Nuclear cell ratio, Nuclear size

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis and Proteomics The Francis Crick Institute Mass Spectrometry STP
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Andrew Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Ambrosius Snijders
Protein Analysis and Proteomics The Francis Crick Institute Mass Spectrometry STP


