### Accession
PXD047936

### Title
Population context drives cell-to-cell variability in interferon response in epithelial cells

### Description
Isogenic cells respond in a heterogeneous manner to interferon. Using a micropatterning approach combined with high-content imaging and spatial analyses, we characterized how the population context (position of a cell with respect to neighboring cells) of epithelial cells affects single cell response to interferons. We identified that cells at the edge of cellular colonies are more responsive than cells embedded within colonies. We determined that this spatial heterogeneity in interferon response resulted from the polarized basolateral interferon receptor distribution, making cells located in the center of cellular colonies less responsive to ectopic interferon stimulation. This was conserved across cell lines and primary cells originated from epithelial tissues. Finally, we demonstrated that this population context-driven cell-to-cell variability influences the outcome of viral infection, as cells embedded within cellular colonies are not protected by interferons and therefore more susceptible to infection. Our data highlights that the behavior of isolated cells does not directly translate to their behavior in a population, placing the population context as one important factor influencing cell-to-cell heterogeneity during interferon response in epithelial cells.

### Sample Protocol
The supernatant containing the biotinylated surface proteins was then harvested, and loaded and ran on an SDS-PAGE for purification. Bands were excised and digested wit trypsin using a standard protocol (55). After digestion, peptides were extracted and dried for LC-MS analysis. Peptides were reconstituted in 15 μL of 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, 4% acetonitrile, and 6.6 μL were analyzed by an Ultimate 3000 reversed-phase capillary nano liquid chromatography system connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were injected and concentrated on a trap column (PepMap100 C18, 3 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm i.d. x 2 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific)equilibrated with 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in water. LC separations were performed on a capillary column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm i.d. x 25 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at an eluent flow rate of 300 nl/min. Mobile phase A contained 0.1 % formic acid in water, and mobile phase B contained 0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile / 20% water. The column was pre-equilibrated with 5% mobilephase B followed by an increase of 5-44% mobile phase B in 100 min. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode utilizing a single MS survey scan (m/z 350–1650) with a resolution of 60,000 and MS/MS scans of the 15 most intense precursor ions with a resolution of 15,000. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 20 seconds and automatic gain control was set to 3x106 and 1x105 for MS and MS/MS scans, respectively.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS raw data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.14.0) with implemented Andromeda peptide search engine (56). Data were searched against the human reference proteome downloaded from Uniprot (75,074 sequences,taxonomy 9606, last modified March 10, 2020) using the default parameters except for the following changes: label-free quantification (LFQ) enabled, match between runs enabled, iBAQ enabled, max missed cleavages: 3. Perseus downstream analysis was performed as follows: Proteins were cross referenced with the UniProt human database for gene ontology terms (Plasma membrane, plasma membrane part, cell surface, cell outer membrane), then filtered out if they had less than 3 replicates or if they had no GO term matching the above-mentioned search. Background samples were used to filter out any protein nonspecifically bound to the Neutravidin beads. Significantly enriched proteins on the apical or basolateral side were assigned based on their log(2) LFQ signal between apical- and basolateral-biotinylated samples, using pairwise t-tests coupled with sample randomization with false discovery rate (FDR) = 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Isogenic cells respond in a heterogeneous manner to interferon. Using a micropatterning approach combined with high-content imaging and spatial analyses, we characterized how the population context (position of a cell with respect to neighboring cells) of epithelial cells affects their response to interferons. We identified that cells at the edge of cellular colonies are more responsive than cells embedded within colonies. We determined that this spatial heterogeneity in interferon response resulted from the polarized basolateral interferon receptor distribution, making cells located in the center of cellular colonies less responsive to ectopic interferon stimulation. This was conserved across cell lines and primary cells originating from epithelial tissues. Importantly, cells embedded within cellular colonies were not protected from viral infection by apical interferon treatment, demonstrating that the population context-driven heterogeneous response to interferon influences the outcome of viral infection. Our data highlights that the behavior of isolated cells does not directly translate to their behavior in a population, placing the population context as one important factor influencing heterogeneity during interferon response in epithelial cells.

### Keywords
Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida)
Freie Universität Berlin, Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Laboratory of Protein Biochemistry, Thielallee 63, D-14195, Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Benno Kuropka

### Lab Head
Dr Steeve Boulant
Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida)


