### Accession
PXD041590

### Title
HAPSTR1 localizes HUWE1 to the nucleus to limit stress signaling pathways

### Description
HUWE1 is a large, enigmatic HECT domain ubiquitin ligase implicated in the degradation of numerous substrates and regulating diverse pathways including DNA repair, apoptosis, and differentiation. However, the mechanism by which HUWE1 acts in a pleiotropic manner to regulate a myriad of substrates is unknown. Recent work has established a physical and genetic interaction between HUWE1 and C16orf72/HAPSTR1, suggesting that HAPSTR1 positively regulates HUWE1 function. Here, we show that HAPSTR1 is both a HUWE1 substrate, and is required to localize HUWE1 to the nucleus. Quantitative proteomics across diverse cell types reveals that HUWE1 substrates are largely context specific. Transcriptomics following HUWE1 or HAPSTR1 loss of function reveals a broad transcriptional stress response. We show that nuclear HUWE1 impacts stress signaling pathways, including p53 and NFkB-mediated signaling, and is required for cell proliferation. Together, these data define a critical role for nuclear HUWE1 function that is dependent on HAPSTR1.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis was performed by the addition of Urea buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM NaCl, 50 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (EPPS) pH 8.5, Protease and Phosphatase inhibitors) followed by manual homogenization by 20 passes through a 21-gauge (1.25 in. long) needle. Lysate was clarified by centrifugation and protein quantified using bradford (Bio-Rad) assay. 50 µg of protein for each sample was reduced, alkylated and precipitated using methanol/chloroform as previously described (Donovan et al., 2018). The resulting precipitated protein was resuspended in 4 M Urea, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, buffer for solubilization, followed by dilution to 1 M urea with the addition of 200 mM EPPS, pH 8. Proteins were digested for 12 hours at room temperature with LysC (1:50 ratio), followed by dilution to 0.5 M urea and a second digestion step was performed by addition of trypsin (1:50 ratio) for 6 hours at 37 ºC. Anhydrous ACN was added to each peptide sample to a final concentration of 30%, followed by addition of Tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents at a labelling ratio of 1:4 peptide:TMT label. TMT labelling occurred over a 1.5 hour incubation at room temperature followed by quenching with the addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3%. Each of the samples were combined using adjusted volumes and dried down in a speed vacuum followed by desalting with C18 SPE (Sep-Pak, Waters). The sample was offline fractionated into 96 fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC (Agilent LC1260) through an aeris peptide xb-c18 column (phenomenex) with mobile phase A containing 5% acetonitrile and 10 mM NH4HCO3 in LC-MS grade H2O, and mobile phase B containing 90% acetonitrile and 5 mM NH4HCO3 in LC-MS grade H2O (both pH 8.0). The resulting 96 fractions were recombined in a non-contiguous manner into 24 fractions and desalted using C18 solid phase extraction plates (SOLA, Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by subsequent mass spectrometry analysis. Data were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC lump (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm 75 μm inner diameter EasySpray ES803a microcapillary column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated over a 190 min gradient of 6 - 27% acetonitrile in 1.0% formic acid with a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  Quantification was performed using a MS3-based TMT method as described previously (McAlister et al., 2014). The data were acquired using a mass range of m/z 340 – 1350, resolution 120,000, AGC target 5 x 105, maximum injection time 100 ms, dynamic exclusion of 120 seconds for the peptide measurements in the Orbitrap. Data dependent MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap with a normalized collision energy (NCE) set at 35%, AGC target set to 1.8 x 104 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. MS3 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with HCD collision energy set to 55%, AGC target set to 2 x 105, maximum injection time of 150 ms, resolution at 50,000 and with a maximum synchronous precursor selection (SPS) precursors set to 10.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for .RAW file processing and controlling peptide and protein level false discovery rates, assembling proteins from peptides, and protein quantification from peptides. The MS/MS spectra were searched against a Swissprot human database (January 2021) containing both the forward and reverse sequences. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.6 Da fragment ion mass tolerance, tryptic peptides containing a maximum of two missed cleavages, static alkylation of cysteine (57.02146 Da), static TMT labelling of lysine residues and N-termini of peptides (229.16293 Da), and variable oxidation of methionine (15.99491 Da). TMT reporter ion intensities were measured using a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z for each reporter ion in the MS3 scan. The peptide spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation (summed signal-to-noise across channels < 100 and precursor isolation specificity < 0.5), and the resulting data was filtered to only include proteins with a minimum of 2 unique peptides quantified. Reporter ion intensities were normalized and scaled using in-house scripts in the R framework (R Core Team, 2014). Statistical analysis was carried out using the limma package within the R framework (Ritchie et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
HUWE1 is a large, enigmatic HECT-domain ubiquitin ligase implicated in the regulation of diverse pathways, including DNA repair, apoptosis, and differentiation. How HUWE1 engages its structurally diverse substrates and how HUWE1 activity is regulated are unknown. Using unbiased quantitative proteomics, we find that HUWE1 targets substrates in a largely cell-type-specific manner. However, we identify C16orf72/HAPSTR1 as a robust HUWE1 substrate in multiple cell lines. Previously established physical and genetic interactions between HUWE1 and HAPSTR1 suggest that HAPSTR1 positively regulates HUWE1 function. Here, we show that HAPSTR1 is required for HUWE1 nuclear localization and nuclear substrate targeting. Nuclear HUWE1 is required for both cell proliferation and modulation of stress signaling pathways, including p53 and nuclear factor &#x3ba;B (NF-&#x3ba;B)-mediated signaling. Combined, our results define a role for HAPSTR1 in gating critical nuclear HUWE1 functions.

### Keywords
Hapstr1, Ubiquitin, Ligase, Huwe1, Substrates

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Eric Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Fischer
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA


