### Accession
PXD017123

### Title
Proteomics analysis of egg chorion from wt and Larp6 knockout zebrafish.

### Description
The protein content of fertilised egg chorions, from larp6a-/-, larp6b-/-, and larp6a-/-;larp6b-/- mutant female zebrafish crossed with mutant males to create maternal zygotic (MZ) mutant lays, were analysed by LC-MS/MS. Three independent biological replicates were analysed per genotype, and Maqxuant label-free quantification (LFQ) was employed to quantify changes in the protein contents.

### Sample Protocol
Chorions were dissected manually from 3-4 h old fertilized lays and 30 chorions washed into 40 µl of TNE buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM EDTA, 0.5% Tween20) followed by extraction in 10 µl of SDS sample buffer (250 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 10% SDS, 30% Glycerol, 10 mM DTT) at 95°C for 15 min.  Each chorion replicate protein sample (260-300 µg total protein) was subjected to trypsin digestion using Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol with some modifications (Wisniewski et al., 2011). Briefly, reduced samples were diluted 1 in 7 in UA buffer (8M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5), transferred to Vivacon-500 30kDa centrifugal filter units (Sartorius), and concentrated by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 15 min. Filters were then washed twice by addition of 0.2 mL of UA buffer and re-concentrating by centrifugation as before. Subsequently, the proteins were alkylated by addition of 100 µL of 50 mM iodoacetamide in UA buffer and incubation at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. The iodoacetamide solution was then removed by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 10 min, and samples were washed twice with 0.2 mL of UA buffer as before. This was followed by three washes with 0.2 mL of ABC buffer (0.04 M ammonium bicarbonate in water), prior to transferring the filters to new collection tubes, and addition of Digestion buffer (0.3 µg of MS grade Trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) in 50 µL of ABC buffer per filter). The proteins were digested overnight in a thermo-mixer at 37C with gentle shaking (600 rpm). The next day, the resulting peptides were eluted from the filters by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 10 min, followed by two further elutions, each with 100 µL of the ABC solution. The combined eluates were then reconstituted in 2% Acetonitrile (ACN), 0.2% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and desalted using C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007). The peptides were then dried in a speedvac and re-suspended in A* buffer (2%ACN, 0.5% Acetic acid, 0.1% TFA in water) before LC-MS/MS analysis. ~1 µg of each digested sample was analysed on a Q-Exactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled with a nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano HPLC platform (Thermofisher Scientific). Briefly, samples were resolved at a flow rate of 250 nL/min on an Easy-Spray 50 cm x 75 μm RSLC C18 column with 2 µm particle size (Thermofisher Scientific), using a 123 minutes gradient of 3% to 35% of buffer-B (0.1% formic acid in ACN) against buffer-A (0.1% formic acid in water), and the separated peptides were infused into the mass spectrometer by electrospray. The spray voltage was set at 1.95 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 255 ˚C. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent positive mode, with 1 MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans (top 15 method). The scans were acquired in the mass analyser at 375-1500 m/z range, with a resolution of 70,000 for the MS and 17,500 for the MS/MS scans. Fragmented peaks were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds. Three biological replicates per each experimental group (wild-type, larp6a-/-, larp6b-/-, and larp6a-/-;larp6b-/-) were analysed.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.3) software was used for database search and label-free quantification of mass spectrometry raw files (Tyanova et al., 2016a). The search was performed against a FASTA file of the Danio rerio proteome, extracted from Uniprot.org (2012). A precursor mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm, and a fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm was applied. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were included as variable modifications whilst carbamidomethylation was applied as a fixed modification. Two trypsin miss-cleavages were allowed, and the minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Default MaxQuant parameters for Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) were used. All raw files were searched together, with the match between runs option enabled. All downstream data analysis was performed by Perseus (version 1.5.5.3)(Tyanova et al., 2016b), using the MaxQuant ProteinGroups.txt output file. Briefly, protein LFQ intensities were converted to Log 2 scale. Reverse (decoy) hits, potential contaminants, and proteins identified only by modified peptides were filtered out. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one experimental group were also filtered out. Missing intensity values were then imputated for each replicate run, using a normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 2 standard deviations. The comparison of wild-type with each knockout group was then carried out using a two-sided two-sample t-test analysis, with an S0 of 0.1 and a permutation based False Detection Rate (FDR) of 5%, derived from 500 randomisations. Hierarchical clustering was performed in Perseus using average Euclidean distances.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Maxquant, Danio rerio, Lc-ms/ms, Q-exactive plus, Chorion, Zona pellucida, Label-free quantification, Larp6

### Affiliations
Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse square, London EC1M 6BQ.
qmul

### Submitter
Maria Dermit Salazar

### Lab Head
Dr Faraz Mardakheh
Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse square, London EC1M 6BQ.


