### Accession
PXD003598

### Title
Cyclin-dependant kinase (CDK) orders the cell cycle via substrate specific thresholds

### Description
The appropriate ordering of the cell cycle events in eukaryoates is thought to be brought about by qualitative differences in the substrate specificity of multiple differentially expression Cyclin-CDK complexes. Our analysis of fission yeast supports an alternative quantitative model. Here we report a phosphoproteomics based global analysis of CDK substrate phosphorylation. We show that the phosphorylation of different CDK substrates is precisely ordered during the cell cycle by a single Cyclin-CDK complex. This is achieved by the differential sensitivity of substrates to a progressively rising CDK-to-phosphatase activity ratio, with early-phosphorylated substrates more sensitive to CDK activity than late substrates. This is combined with a rapid substrate phosphorylation turnover to generate clearly resolved substrate-specific thresholds, which in turn ensures the temporal ordering of downstream cell cycle events. These observations can also explain the major genetic redundancies between different cyclins and CDKs in higher eukaryotes.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (25 min, 56 °C), alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (30 min, room temperature, dark) and quenched with 7.5 mM DTT. Samples were then diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reduce the urea concentration to <2 M, prior to trypsin digestion (37 °C, overnight). Peptides were acidified to 0.4 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and centrifuged (14000 rpm, 4 °C, 30 min). Peptides were then desaled using a C18 SepPak Lite, 130 mg bed volume, under vacuum and dried. To ensure complete digestion, peptides were further digested using Lys-C in 10 % acetonitrile, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (37 °C, 2 h), followed by trypsin digestion (37 °C, overnight). Digested peptides were then again desalted and dried. Phosphopeptide enrichment using titanium dioxide was then carried out as follows. Dried peptide mixtures were re-suspended in 80 % acetonitrile/5 % TFA/1 M glycolic acid, sonicated (10 min) and added to titanium dioxide beads (5:1 (w/w) TiO2 beads:protein). The beads were washed using 80 % acetonitrile and 1 % TFA followed by 10 % acetonitrile and 0.2 % TFA, and dried under vacuum centrifugation. For analysis of non-phosphorylated peptides, flowthrough fractions were retained. Phosphopeptides were then eluted from the beads by adding 1 % ammonium hydroxide followed by 5 % ammonium hydroxide, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Dried phosphopeptides were re-suspended in 100 µl of 1 % TFA and sonicated (15 min). A C18 membrane was packed into a 200 µl pipette tip and washed using methanol and equilibrated with 1 % TFA. The peptides were loaded onto the Stage Tip and washed with 1 % TFA followed by elution with 80 % acetonitrile, 5 % TFA. The eluted peptides were again dried under vacuum centrifugation. For analysis of non-phosphorylated peptides, the stored flowthrough fractions were dried, desalted using a C18 SepPak Lite, 130 mg bed volume, under vacuum and dried. Non-phosphorylated peptides were separated into 12 fractions using strong cation exchange liquid chromatography, and dried, if necessary, to 250 µl. An LTQ-Orbitrap Velos was used for data acquisiation of phosphopeptides, and an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro was used for data acquisition of non-phosphorylated peptides. Phosphopeptide mixtures were re-suspended in 35 µl 0.1 % TFA, and injected three times (10 µl per injection). Each run consisted of a 3 h gradient elution with one activation method per run: Collision Induced Dissociation (CID), Multi-Stage Activation (MSA) and Higher energy Collision Dissociation (HCD). Non-phosphopeptide mixtures were diluted 1:10 (v/v) in 0.1 % TFA, and injected three times (10 µl per injection). Each run consisted of a 3 h gradient elution with CID used as the activation method.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5) was used for all data processing and quantification. The data was searched against a UniProt extracted S. pombe fasta file amended to include common contaminants and account for the altered genetic background of the reference sample (P0000 = Cdc13-L-Cdc2). Default MaxQuant parameters were used with the following adjustments: Phospho (STY) was added as a variable modification (for the phospho-samples only), Lys6 and Arg6 were the heavy labels, 'Filter labelled amino acids' was deselected, re-quantify was selected with the instruction to keep low-scoring versions of identified peptides within parameter groups and match between runs was selected.

### Publication Abstract
S phase and mitotic onset are brought about by the action of multiple different cyclin-CDK complexes. However, it has been suggested that changes in the total level of CDK kinase activity, rather than substrate specificity, drive the temporal ordering of S phase and mitosis. Here, we present a phosphoproteomics-based systems analysis of CDK substrates in fission yeast and demonstrate that the phosphorylation of different CDK substrates can be temporally ordered during the cell cycle by a single cyclin-CDK. This is achieved by rising CDK&#xa0;activity and the differential sensitivity of substrates to CDK activity over a wide dynamic range. This is combined with rapid phosphorylation turnover to generate clearly resolved substrate-specific activity thresholds, which in turn ensures the appropriate ordering of downstream cell-cycle events. Comparative analysis with wild-type cells expressing multiple cyclin-CDK complexes reveals how cyclin-substrate specificity works alongside activity thresholds to fine-tune the patterns of substrate phosphorylation.

### Keywords
S. pombe, Cell cycle, Silac, Cdk, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Andrew Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Ambrosius P. Snijders
The Francis Crick Institute


