### Accession
PXD035339

### Title
On-capillary cell lysis enables top-down proteomic analysis of single HeLa cells by CE-MS/MS

### Description
Proteomic analysis of limited samples and single cells requires specialized methods that prioritize high sensitivity and minimize sample loss. Consequently, sample preparation is one of the most important steps in limited sample analysis workflows to prevent sample loss. In this work, we have eliminated sample handling and transfer steps by processing intact cells directly in the separation capillary, online with capillary electrophoresis coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (CE-MS/MS) for top-down proteomic (TDP) analysis of low numbers of mammalian cancer cells (<10) and single cells. We assessed spray voltage injection of intact cells from a droplet of cell suspension (~1,000 cells) and demonstrated 0-9 intact cells injected with a dependency on the duration of spray voltage application. Application of spray voltage for 2 min injected an average of 7±2 cells and resulted in 33-57 protein and 40-88 proteoform identifications (N=4). To analyze single cells, manual cell loading by hydrodynamic pressure was used. Replicates of single cells (N=4) lysed on the capillary and analyzed by CE-MS/MS demonstrated a range of 17-40 proteins and 23-50 proteoforms identified. Furthermore, an additional cell line, THP-1, was analyzed at the single-cell level and proteoform abundances were compared to show the capabilities of single-cell top-down proteomics   (SC-TDP) for assessing cellular heterogeneity. This study demonstrates the initial application of TDP in single-cell proteome-level profiling. These results represent the highest reported identifications from TDP analysis of a single HeLa cell and prove the tremendous potential for CE-MS/MS on-capillary sample processing for high sensitivity analysis of single cells and limited samples.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were harvested by centrifuging at 500 g for 5 min. Harvested cells were resuspended in PBS to wash off the residual medium. The washing step was repeated another two times. Before the final centrifugation, the cell density was estimated by hemocytometer counting. The PBS wash buffer was removed, and cell pellets were then resuspended in a corresponding volume of 200 mM ammonium acetate   (pH=6.7) to get to a final cell density of 1.5 million HeLa cells per mL. The cell viability was typically around 80% in the experiments. Intact cells were injected into the capillary using either ESI-voltage or gravity generated flow. Cell plugs were sandwiched between two plugs of 75% formic acid to lyse cells on the capillary.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were analyzed using TopPIC Suite22 and searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human database (downloaded on 3/30/2022, containing 20,378 sequences). A decoy database with a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was used for spectrum and proteoform level cutoff. An additional e-value cutoff of 0.01 was applied to the results.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic analysis of limited samples and single cells requires specialized methods that prioritize high sensitivity and minimize sample loss. Consequently, sample preparation is one of the most important steps in limited sample analysis workflows to prevent sample loss. In this work, we have eliminated sample handling and transfer steps by processing intact cells directly in the separation capillary, online with capillary electrophoresis coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (CE-MS/MS) for top-down proteomic (TDP) analysis of low numbers of mammalian cancer cells (&lt;10) and single cells. We assessed spray voltage injection of intact cells from a droplet of cell suspension (&#x223c;1000 cells) and demonstrated 0-9 intact cells injected with a dependency on the duration of spray voltage application. Spray voltage applied for 2 min injected an average of 7 &#xb1; 2 cells and resulted in 33-57 protein and 40-88 proteoform identifications (<i>N</i> = 4). To analyze single cells, manual cell loading by hydrodynamic pressure was used. Replicates of single HeLa cells (<i>N</i> = 4) lysed on the capillary and analyzed by CE-MS/MS demonstrated a range of 17-40 proteins and 23-50 proteoforms identified. An additional cell line, THP-1, was analyzed at the single-cell level, and proteoform abundances were compared to show the capabilities of single-cell TDP (SC-TDP) for assessing cellular heterogeneity. This study demonstrates the initial application of TDP in single-cell proteome-level profiling. These results represent the highest reported identifications from TDP analysis of a single HeLa cell and prove the tremendous potential for CE-MS/MS on-capillary sample processing for high sensitivity analysis of single cells and limited samples.

### Keywords
Single-cell proteomics, Tandem mass spectrometry, Capillary electrophoresis, Ce-ms/ms, Top-down proteomics, Single-cell top-down proteomics

### Affiliations
Barnett Insititute of Chemical and Biological Analysis, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Northeastern University
Barnett Institute of Chemical and Biological Analysis, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Northeastern University, 360 Huntington Ave., Boston, Massachusetts 02115, United States

### Submitter
Kendall Johnson

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander R. Ivanov
Barnett Institute of Chemical and Biological Analysis, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Northeastern University, 360 Huntington Ave., Boston, Massachusetts 02115, United States


