### Accession
PXD023043

### Title
Elucidating the Cellular Machinery for Lipid Storage in Plants

### Description
The overarching goal of this project is to understand the underlying mechanism for packaging storage lipids into lipid droplets in plant cells. Our group has identified several proteins involved in plant lipid droplet formation, but the inventory of proteins participating in this cellular process is far from complete. To search for new players involved in lipid droplet biogenesis and to gain more insights into how these players cooperate to package storage lipids into lipid droplets, we used an affinity capture approach coupled with mass spectrometry analysis to identify interactors of known lipid droplet-related proteins. Here, we used GFP-fused Arabidopsis thaliana LDIP and SEIPIN1 as baits to pull down their interactors in Nicotiana benthamiana leaves. The proteins that co-immunoprecipitated with GFP-LDIP and GFP-SEIPIN1 were analyzed by mass spectrometry and the results are shown here in this dataset.

### Sample Protocol
Agrobacterium tumefaciens containing appropriate binary vectors (pORE04-P19, pMDC32-EGFP, pMDC32-LEC2, pMDC43-LDIP, pMDC43-SEIPIN1) were used to infiltrate Nicotiana benthamiana leaves to transiently express GFP, GFP-LDIP and GFP-SEIPIN1 with or without LEAFY COTYLEDON 2 (LEC2). Leaves expressing free GFP, GFP-LDIP and GFP-SEIPIN1 were then collected for protein extraction. About 1.5 g of N. benthamiana leaves for each sample were flash frozen and ground to fine powder in liquid nitrogen. Then, 3 mL of extraction buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.5], 150 mM NaCl, 10% Glycerol, 1% NP-40, 1 mM PMSF, Roche protease inhibitor cocktail [2 tablets/10 mL buffer]) were added to the tissue powder, and samples were transferred into 15 mL test tubes and incubated for 30 minutes on ice with vortex mixing every 10 minutes. The cell lysates were centrifuged at 2500 g 4 °C for 10 minutes to remove cell debris. The supernatants were further clarified by centrifugation at 16000 g 4 °C for 20 minutes. The supernatants at 16000 g were incubated with 30 µL of GFP-Trap-A beads (Chromotek) for 3 hours at 4 °C on a rotating shaker. After incubation, beads were washed 4 times with extraction buffer, and proteins bound to the beads were then eluted with 100 µL of 4× SDS sample buffer and heating at 70 °C for 10 min. The protein was concentrated in a polyacrylamide gel by running through the stacking gel. Then the concentrated bands were cut out of the gel as a group just as they entered the separating gel. Gel bands were dehydrated using 100% acetonitrile and incubated with 10 mM dithiothreitol in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH~8, at 56 °C for 45 min, dehydrated again and incubated in the dark with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 20 min.  Gel bands were then washed with ammonium bicarbonate and dehydrated again. Further sample preparation and MS-based proteomics were performed by an academic core facility at Michigan State University. Sequencing grade, modified trypsin was prepared to 0.01 µg/µL in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and ~50 µL of this was added to each gel band so that the gel was completely submerged.  Bands were then incubated at 37 °C overnight.  Peptides were extracted from the gel by water bath sonication in a solution of 60% ACN/1% TCA and vacuum dried to ~2 µL.  Peptides were then re-suspended in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA to 25 µL.  From this, 5 µL were automatically injected by a Thermo (www.thermo.com) EASYnLC 1000 onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap 0.1 mm x 20 mm C18 peptide trap and washed for ~5 min.  Bound peptides were then eluted onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC 0.075 mm x 250 mm C18 column over 65 min with a gradient of 5% B to 28% B in 54min, ramping to 100% B at 55min and held at 100% B for the duration of the run at a constant flow rate of 0.3 µL/min (Buffer A = 99.9% Water/0.1% Formic Acid, Buffer B = 99.9% Acetonitrile/0.1% Formic Acid).

### Data Protocol
Eluted peptides were sprayed directly into a ThermoFisher Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (www.thermo.com) using a FlexSpray spray ion source.  Survey scans were taken in the Orbi trap (70000 resolution, determined at m/z 200) and the top ten ions in each survey scan are then subjected to automatic higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) with fragment spectra acquired at 17,500 resolution.  The resulting MS/MS spectra are converted to peak lists using Mascot Distiller, v2.6.1 (www.matrixscience.com) and searched against a database Nicotiana benthamiana protein sequences available from the Sol Genomics Network (downloaded from www.solgenomics.net , v0.4.4) and appended with common laboratory contaminants (downloaded from www.thegpm.org, cRAP project) using the Mascot searching algorithm, v 2.6.0.  The Mascot output was then analyzed using Scaffold, v4.7.5 (www.proteomesoftware.com) to probabilistically validate protein identifications.  Assignments validated using the Scaffold 1% FDR confidence filter are considered true.

### Publication Abstract
Cytoplasmic lipid droplets (LDs) are evolutionarily conserved organelles that store neutral lipids and play critical roles in plant growth, development, and stress responses. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying their biogenesis at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) remain obscure. Here we show that a recently identified protein termed LD-associated protein [LDAP]-interacting protein (LDIP) works together with both endoplasmic reticulum-localized SEIPIN and the LD-coat protein LDAP to facilitate LD formation in Arabidopsis thaliana. Heterologous expression in insect cells demonstrated that LDAP is required for the targeting of LDIP to the LD surface, and both proteins are required for the production of normal numbers and sizes of LDs in plant cells. LDIP also interacts with SEIPIN via a conserved hydrophobic helix in SEIPIN and LDIP functions together with SEIPIN to modulate LD numbers and sizes in plants. Further, the co-expression of both proteins is required to restore normal LD production in SEIPIN-deficient yeast cells. These data, combined with the analogous function of LDIP to a mammalian protein called LD Assembly Factor 1, are discussed in the context of a new model for LD biogenesis in plant cells with evolutionary connections to LD biogenesis in other eukaryotes.

### Keywords
Lipid droplet, Neutral lipids, Ldip, Seipin, Endoplasmic reticulum

### Affiliations
University of North Texas
BioDiscovery Institute, Department of Biological Sciences, University of North Texas

### Submitter
Yingqi Cai

### Lab Head
Dr Kent D. Chapman
BioDiscovery Institute, Department of Biological Sciences, University of North Texas


