### Accession
PXD007694

### Title
Characterization of detergent insoluble proteome in chronic traumatic encephalopathy

### Description
Proteomic sequencing of postmortem human brain can identify dysfunctional proteins that contribute to neurodegenerative disorders like Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal dementia. Similar studies in chronic traumatic encephalopathy are limited, but may provide important new insights into this disorder. Given our previous success with identifying pathology associated proteins, we performed proteomic sequencing of detergent insoluble brain homogenates from frontal cortex of deceased subjects with CTE covering a range of CTE pathologic stages. We compared the insoluble proteome of CTE brain to control and AD brains to identify differentially expressed proteins. We identified over 4000 proteins in CTE brains, including significant enrichment of the microtubule associated protein tau. We also found enrichment and pathologic aggregation of RNA processing factors as seen previously in AD, supporting the previously recognized overlap between AD and CTE. In addition to these similarities, we identified CTE-specific enrichment of a number of proteins which increase with increasing severity of CTE pathology. NADPH dehydrogenase quinone 1 (NQO1) was one of the proteins which showed significant enrichment in CTE and also correlated with increasing CTE stage. NQO1 demonstrated neuropathologic correlation with hyperphosphorylated tau in glial cells, mainly astrocytes. These results demonstrate that quantitative proteomic sequencing of CTE postmortem human brain can identify disease relevant findings and novel cellular pathways involved in CTE pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Brain detergent insoluble fractions were generated as described previously from fresh frozen human lateral pre-frontal cortex [Bai B et al, PNAS, 2013; Hales CM et al, Mol Neurodegen, 2014]. All attempts were made to utilize the same region for each brain. In brief, approximately 200mg of frozen human frontal cortex was dounce homogenized (buffer: 50mM HEPES pH 7.0, 250mM sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, and 1x HALT (Pierce) protease inhibitor cocktail) followed by the addition of N-lauroylsarcosine (final 1% w/v) and NaCl (final 0.5 M). The sample was sonicated followed by ultracentrifugation at 180,000 x g. The pellet was solubilized in 8M urea buffer and protein concentrations were determined (BCA method, Pierce). Proteins were digested with trypsin and LC-MS/MS was performed as previously described except isobaric tandem mass tags were added to peptides to allow for multiplexing and quantification [Gokhale A et al, J. Neurosci, 2016]. Four batches of TMT 10-plex peptide mixtures, were prepated and mixed such that batch-confounding by disease status or CTE stage was avoided, and each peptide batch was offline fractionated via ERLIC solid phase for liquid chromatography. 11 ERLIC fractions for each batch were run on a Fusion Orbitrap (Thermo) mass spectrometer. At least one TMT-labeled channel in each batch was comprised of a multi-brain mixture representing all cases analyzed as a standard by which abundances across batches could be normalized.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of MS/MS spectra for identification, and MS3 multinotch accumulated reporter ion intensities was performed as previously reported [Gokhale A et al, J. Neurosci, 2016], using Proteome Discover v2.1 (Thermo). Normalized log2 reporter ion intensity ratio versus the global multi-brain mixture was used to compare across cases and batches. Student’s t-test (two-tailed) was utilized to calculate p-values and significance for the differentially enriched or depleted proteins. Fold change comparison was calculated by subtracting the control log2 values from the CTE or AD log2 values.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative proteomics of postmortem human brain can identify dysfunctional proteins that contribute to neurodegenerative disorders like Alzheimer disease (AD) and frontotemporal dementia. Similar studies in chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) are limited, therefore we hypothesized that proteomic sequencing of CTE frontal cortex brain homogenates from varying CTE pathologic stages may provide important new insights into this disorder. Quantitative proteomics of control, CTE and AD brains was performed to characterize differentially expressed proteins, and we identified over 4000 proteins in CTE brains, including significant enrichment of the microtubule associated protein tau. We also found enrichment and pathologic aggregation of RNA processing factors as seen previously in AD, supporting the previously recognized overlap between AD and CTE. In addition to these similarities, we identified CTE-specific enrichment of proteins which increase with increasing severity of CTE pathology. NADPH dehydrogenase quinone 1 (NQO1) was one of the proteins which showed significant enrichment in CTE and also correlated with increasing CTE stage. NQO1 demonstrated neuropathologic correlation with hyperphosphorylated tau in glial cells, mainly astrocytes. These results demonstrate that quantitative proteomic analysis of CTE postmortem human brain can identify disease relevant findings and novel cellular pathways involved in CTE pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Proteostasis, Ad, Detergent insoluble proteome, Dementia pugilistica, Human brain cte, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
Emory University
Department of Neurology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322

### Submitter
Eric Dammer

### Lab Head
Dr Chadwick M Hales
Department of Neurology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322


