### Accession
PXD008018

### Title
Peptidomic Analysis of Hemorrhagic Shock Pig Plasma

### Description
A shotgun label-free quantitative proteomic approach was utilized to compare the peptidome of plasma samples from healthy and hemorrhagic shock pigs to verify the possible role of uncontrolled proteolytic activity in shock.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma was collected from pigs after hemorrhagic shock (HS)  and from healthy control (CTRL) pigs at various times after induction of shock. A two-step enrichment method was applied to selectively extract peptides and low molecular weight proteins from plasma, and directly analyze these samples by tandem mass spectrometry.  500 µL of each plasma sample were diluted with an equal volume of 32% (v/v) acetic acid, transferred to an Amicon Ultra-0.5 mL centrifugal filter (MWCO 10K), and centrifuged at 5000×g at 4 °C for 2 h to deplete the high molecular weight proteins. After the first centrifugation, 500 µL of 32% (v/v) acetic acid were added to the Amicon Ultra filter device and centrifuged at 5,000 × g for 2 h. The filtrate was precipitated with two volumes of cold acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.1% of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (stored at 4 °C for at least 1 h) and centrifuged at 13,200 rpm for 30 min to remove residual proteins. The supernatant containing peptides and low molecular weight proteins was collected, dried (Speed Vacuum), dissolved in 1% (v/v) formic acid and desalted (Zip-Tip C18, Millipore) before mass spectrometric (MS) analysis. LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC System with a PicoFrit ProteoPrep C18 column (200 mm, internal diameter of 75 μm) (New Objective, USA). Gradient: 1% ACN in 0.1 % formic acid for 10 min, 1-4 % ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 6 min, 4-30% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 147 min and 30-50 % ACN in 0.1% formic for 3 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. The eluate was electrosprayed into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) through a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The LTQ-Orbitrap was operated in positive mode in data-dependent acquisition mode to automatically alternate between a full scan (m/z 350-2000) in the Orbitrap (at resolution 60000, AGC target 1000000) and subsequent collision-induced dissociation (CID) MS/MS in the linear ion trap of the 20 most intense peaks from full scan (normalized collision energy of 35%, 10 ms activation). Isolation window: 3 Da, unassigned charge states: rejected, charge state 1: rejected, charge states 2+, 3+, 4+: not rejected; dynamic exclusion enabled (60 s, exclusion list size: 200). Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 and Tune 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5). The initial maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 15 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.5 Da for MS/MS peaks. Enzyme specificity was set as unspecific. N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and asparagine/glutamine deamidation were set as variable modifications. The spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the UniProt_KB_Sus_scrofa sequence database (04/10/2016). The required false positive rate was set to 5% at the peptide and 5% at the protein level, and the minimum required peptide length was set to 6 amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic technologies have identified 234 peptidases in plasma but little quantitative information about the proteolytic activity has been uncovered. In this study, the substrate profile of plasma proteases was evaluated using two nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS methods. Multiplex substrate profiling by mass spectrometry (MSP-MS) quantifies plasma protease activity in vitro using a global and unbiased library of synthetic peptide reporter substrates, and shotgun peptidomics quantifies protein degradation products that have been generated in vivo by proteases. The two approaches gave complementary results since they both highlight key peptidase activities in plasma including amino- and carboxypeptidases with different substrate specificity profiles. These assays provide a significant advantage over traditional approaches, such as fluorogenic peptide reporter substrates, because they can detect active plasma proteases in a global and unbiased manner, in comparison to detecting select proteases using specific reporter substrates. We discovered that plasma proteins are cleaved by endoproteases and these peptide products are subsequently degraded by amino- and carboxypeptidases. The exopeptidases are more active and stable in plasma and therefore were found to be the most active proteases in the in vitro assay. The protocols presented here set the groundwork for studies to evaluate changes in plasma proteolytic activity in shock.

### Keywords
Plasma, Hemorrhagic shock, Lc-ms/ms, Peptidome, Pig

### Affiliations
Università defli Studi di Milano, Dipartimento di Medicina Veterinaria
Università degli Studi di Milano

### Submitter
Elisa Maffioli

### Lab Head
Dr Gabriella Tedeschi
Università defli Studi di Milano, Dipartimento di Medicina Veterinaria


