### Accession
PXD006711

### Title
SNAIL is a key regulator of rhabdomyosarcoma progression and myogenic differentiation

### Description
Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is a frequent non-epithelial tumor of soft tissue that originates from a myogenic differentiation defect. Expression of SNAIL transcription factor is elevated in the alveolar subtype of RMS, characterized by a low myogenic differentiation status and high aggressiveness. SNAIL affects RMS metastasis by reorganization of actin cytoskeleton, regulation of ezrin expression and chemotaxis to HGF and SDF-1. The differentiation of human RMS diminishes SNAIL level. SNAIL silencing completely abolishes the growth of human RMS xenotransplants. SNAIL inhibits myogenic differentiation of RMS by binding to the MYF5 promoter, suppressing its expression, displacing MYOD from canonical to alternative E-box sequences and regulating myomiRs expression. SNAIL silencing allows the re-expression of MYF5 and canonical MYOD binding, promoting RMS cell myogenic differentiation. These novel results open potential avenues for the development of innovative therapeutic strategies based on SNAIL silencing.

### Sample Protocol
Cytoplasmic and nuclear protein fractions were isolated by the ProteoExtract Kit (Calbiochem). Protein samples were diluted with 8 M urea in 50 ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin on 30 kDa cut-off filter (Vivacon 500, Sartorius Stedim, Germany) using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure. Peptides were further analyzed in shotgun LC-MS/MS experiment using reversed-phase liquid chromatography (RP-LC) system (UltiMate 3000RS LCnanoSystem, Dionex) coupled with a quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (micrOTOF-Q II, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The RP-LC system consisted of a desalting trap column (75μm x 2 cm, C18 material, 3 μm, 100Å) and an analytical column (75μm x 50 cm, C18 material 2μm, 100Å) with a nanoflow solvent delivery. The LC-MS/MS data were acquired by online analysis of peptides eluted with a 90 min gradient ranging from 2% to 40% acetonitrile in 0.05% formic acid/water at a 300 nl/min flow rate. MS/MS data were obtained by targeting 5 precursor ions in the scan range of m/z 50 to 2500 Da. On the basis of the first run, a scheduled precursor list (SPL) was generated and used as an exclusion list during second LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed by Data Analysis 4.1 (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) and searched against Swiss Prot_201407 database with taxonomy restriction to Homo sapiens (20,284 sequences) using MASCOT search engine (v.2.3.0) embedded into ProteinScape 3.0 (Bruker Daltonics). The following parameters were used for the search: trypsin with maximum one missed cleavage, precursor and product ions mass tolerance were respectively ± 20 ppm and ± 0.05 Da; fixed modification - carbamidomethylation (C); variable modifications – oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ). Proteins below the 1% false discovery rate were considered. The complete analysis was composed of two LC-MS/MS runs. A compilation of obtained two runs for each sample was performed with the ProteinScape 3.0 platform.

### Publication Abstract
Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is a predominant soft tissue tumor in children and adolescents. For high-grade RMS with metastatic involvement, the 3-year overall survival rate is only 25 to 30%. Thus, understanding the regulatory mechanisms involved in promoting the metastasis of RMS is important. Here, we demonstrate for the first time that the SNAIL transcription factor regulates the metastatic behavior of RMS both <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i>. SNAIL upregulates the protein expression of EZRIN and AKT, known to promote metastatic behavior, by direct interaction with their promoters. Our data suggest that SNAIL promotes RMS cell motility, invasion and chemotaxis towards the prometastatic factors: HGF and SDF-1 by regulating RHO, AKT and GSK3b activity. In addition, miRNA transcriptome analysis revealed that SNAIL-miRNA axis regulates processes associated with actin cytoskeleton reorganization. Our data show a novel role of SNAIL in regulating RMS cell metastasis that may also be important in other mesenchymal tumor types and clearly suggests SNAIL as a promising new target for future RMS therapies.

### Keywords
Snail (snai1), Myogenic differentiation, Myod, Rhabdomyosarcoma (rms), Myomirs, Metastasis, Myf5

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University
Department of Physical Biochemistry, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland

### Submitter
Urszula Jankowska

### Lab Head
Dr Sylwia Kędracka-Krok
Department of Physical Biochemistry, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland


