### Accession
PXD015219

### Title
Accurate MS-based Rab10 phosphorylation stoichiometry determination as readout for LRRK2 activity in Parkinson’s disease

### Description
Pathogenic mutations in the Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the predominant genetic cause of Parkinson’s disease (PD). They increase its activity, resulting in augmented Rab10-Thr73 phosphorylation and conversely, LRRK2 inhibition decreases pRab10 levels. Monitoring pRab10 can thus serve as a readout for LRRK2 activity; however, no sufficiently accurate assay to quantify pRab10 levels for drug target engagement or patient stratification exists. Here, we developed an ultra-sensitive targeted mass spectrometry (MS)-based assay for determining Rab10-Thr73 phosphorylation stoichiometry in human samples. It uses synthetic stable isotope-labeled (SIL) analogues for both phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated tryptic peptides surrounding Rab10-Thr73 to directly derive the percentage of Rab10 phosphorylation from attomole amounts of the endogenous phosphopeptide. We test the reproducibility of our assay by determining Rab10-Thr73 phosphorylation stoichiometry in human neutrophils before and after LRRK2 inhibition. Compared to healthy controls, neutrophils of LRRK2 G2019S and VPS35 D620N carriers robustly display 1.4-fold and 3.7-fold increased pRab10 levels, respectively. Our generic MS-based assay further establishes the relevance of pRab10 as a prognostic PD marker and is a powerful tool for determining LRRK2 inhibitor efficacy and for stratifying PD patients for LRRK2 inhibitor treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Study participants and blood sample collection For setting up and validating our assay, we recruited volunteers from within the Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction at the Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry who kindly donated blood for our study. The data shown in Figures 1 and 3 and Supplementary Figures 1-3 are derived blood samples from healthy donors, which provided a written informed consent, with prior approval of the ethics committee of the Max Planck Society.  Neutrophil isolation, characterization, treatments and lysis Neutrophils were isolated directly from freshly drawn EDTA whole blood by immune-magnetic negative isolation using the MACSxpress® Neutrophil Isolation Kit (Miltenyi Biotec, Cat# 130-104-434). For 8 ml of blood, one vial of `Isolation Cocktail` (magnetic beads) from the neutrophil isolation kit, delivered as a lyophilized pellet, was reconstituted by adding 0.25 mL of Buffer A and 0.25 mL of Buffer B in order. Then, the cocktail was mixed by gently pipetting and added to 8 ml of whole blood in 15 ml falcon tube. The blood sample containing the cocktail was gently mixed by inversion and incubated at room temperature for 5 min. The falcon tube was next placed into the magnetic field of the MACSxpress Separator (# 130-098-308) for 15 min. The magnetically labeled cells (non-neutrophils) adhere to the wall of the tube while the aggregated erythrocytes sediment to the bottom. The supernatant (~ 7 ml) containing the enriched neutrophils was carefully pipetted into a new 15 ml falcon tube, avoiding touching the magnetic beads attached to the sides of the falcon tube as well as the red blood cells at the bottom of the tube. The supernatant containing the isolated neutrophils was centrifuged at 300×g for 10 min at room temperature (acceleration and deceleration is both 5 using a Beckman Coulter Allegra X-15R Centrifuge). To ensure the removal of erythrocytes, the pelleted neutrophil cells were resuspended in 10 ml of 1× Red Blood Cell Lysis Solution (# 130-094-183), incubated for 10 min at room temperature and centrifuged at 300×g for 10 min at room temperature. To assess the purity and recovery of the enriched neutrophils we fluorescently stained cells with CD14-PerCP, CD15-PE, CD16-APC, and CD193-FITC by flow cytometry. Cell debris, dead cells were excluded from the analysis based on scatter signals and DAPI. Finally, the cell pellet was resuspended with 10 ml room temperature RPMI 1640 media by gentle pipetting. At this stage, purified cells were subjected to MLi-2 (dissolved in DMSO) treatment at concentrations and periods of time as indicated in each figure legend. An equivalent volume of DMSO was added to negative control samples. Following treatment, cells were pelleted through centrifugation at 500 g for 5 min. Cells were then resuspended in 5 ml of ice-cold PBS and centrifuged again at 500 g for 5 min. The supernatant was carefully removed by pipetting. Cells were lysed in 300 μl of ice-cold NP-40 buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 50 mM NaF, 0.1% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol, 10 mM 2-glycerophosphate, 5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 0.1 µg/ml microcystin-LR, 270 mM sucrose, 0.5 mM DIFP (Sigma, Cat# D0879) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche)). Lysate was clarified by centrifugation at 16,000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C after a liquid nitrogen freeze-thaw cycle. Protein concentration was measured using Bradford assay (Thermo Scientific), snap-frozen and stored at −80°C. For the experiments shown in Figure 4, neutrophil lysates derived from either idiopathic PD patients, PD patients carrying a heterozygous LRRK2 G2019S or VPS35 D620N mutation or non-PD controls were used that had been previously used for publication ([11] and [15] respectively). All procedures were performed in compliance with the local ethics review boards and all participants provided informed consent. These lysates were subjected to MS analysis in a blinded experimental set-up, with the identity of the lysates only being revealed after completion of the MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis and phosphorylation stoichiometry calculations For the calculation of absolute Rab10-pThr73 occupancies, raw MS data were processed using Skyline 40 which is an open source software project and can be freely installed. The details and tutorials can be viewed on the website (http://proteome.gs.washington.edu/software/skyline). Raw files were directly imported into Skyline in their native file format. After data import, graphical displays of chromatographic traces for the top two isotopic peaks were manually inspected for proper peak picking of MS1 filtered peptides. All quantitation performed for phosphorylation occupancy calculations in this study were done on the precursor ion level. Only the most abundant first two peaks of the isotope cluster were used for quantitation. Peptide areas for the non-phosphorylated tryptic Rab10 peptide (FHTITTSYYR, m/z 644.8197++) and the phosphorylated tryptic Rab10 peptide (FHpTITTSYYR, m/z 684.8028++) with their R=13C615N4 heavy analogues were extracted to derive light-to-heavy ratios. The absolute quantification was determined by comparing the abundance of the known SIL internal standard peptides with the native peptides. The phosphorylation stoichiometry/occupancy is calculated by taking the ratio of the total amount of phosphorylated fraction to the total amount of both phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated forms, which is always represented as percentage (%). All details for occupancy calculations in this study are provided in the Supplementary Table 2.  For the deep proteome of human neutrophils, raw MS data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.6.8 40,41 with an FDR < 0.01 at the peptide and protein level against the Human UniProt FASTA database (2017). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, and the search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed for protease digestion, and peptides had to be fully tryptic.

### Publication Abstract
Pathogenic mutations in the Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the predominant genetic cause of Parkinson's disease (PD). They increase its activity, resulting in augmented Rab10-Thr73 phosphorylation and conversely, LRRK2 inhibition decreases pRab10 levels. Currently, there is no assay to quantify pRab10 levels for drug target engagement or patient stratification. To meet this challenge, we developed an high accuracy and sensitivity targeted mass spectrometry (MS)-based assay for determining Rab10-Thr73 phosphorylation stoichiometry in human samples. It uses synthetic stable isotope-labeled (SIL) analogues for both phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated tryptic peptides surrounding Rab10-Thr73 to directly derive the percentage of Rab10 phosphorylation from attomole amounts of the endogenous phosphopeptide. The SIL and the endogenous phosphopeptides are separately admitted into an Orbitrap analyzer with the appropriate injection times. We test the reproducibility of our assay by determining Rab10-Thr73 phosphorylation stoichiometry in neutrophils of LRRK2 mutation carriers before and after LRRK2 inhibition. Compared with healthy controls, the PD predisposing mutation carriers LRRK2 G2019S and VPS35 D620N display 1.9-fold and 3.7-fold increased pRab10 levels, respectively. Our generic MS-based assay further establishes the relevance of pRab10 as a prognostic PD marker and is a powerful tool for determining LRRK2 inhibitor efficacy and for stratifying PD patients for LRRK2 inhibitor treatment.

### Keywords
Parkinson's disease, Phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


