### Accession
PXD013822

### Title
Identification of Prolificacy-related Differentially Expressed Proteins from Sheep (Ovis aries) Hypothalamus by Comparative Proteomics

### Description
Reproduction, as a physiologically complex process, can significantly affect the development of the sheep industry. However, a lack of overall understanding to sheep fecundity has long blocked the progress in sheep breeding and husbandry. Herein, in present study, we aimed to identify differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) from hypothalamus in sheep without FecB mutation in two comparison groups: polytocous (PF) versus (vs.) monotocous (MF) sheep at follicular phase and polytocous (PL) vs. monotocous (ML) sheep at luteal phase,expecting to provide an alternative method to identify DEPs associated with sheep prolificacy from the hypothalamus.

### Sample Protocol
Animal processing Small Tail Han sheep with FecB ++ (without the effects of FecB mutation) and aged from 2 to 3 years were selected via TaqMan MGB probe technology. For the purpose of estrus synchronization, CIDRs (controlled internal drug releasing; InterAg Co., Ltd., New Zealand) (progesterone 300 mg) were inserted into the vaginas of those sheep for 12 days, ovulation rate (the number of corpus luteum) of those sheep was determined using the laparoscopy procedure six days after CIDR removal. According to littering records and ovulation rate, all STH ewes were categorized as being polytocous sheep (n=6) and monotocous sheep (n=6). All sheep had free access to water and food and were fed and housed at the Tianjin Institute of Animal Sciences, Tianjin. Tissue acquisition and sample preparation Six sheep containing three polytocous sheep and three monotocous sheep was slaughter within 45-48 h since CIDR removal (follicular phase), the remaining six sheep containing three polytocous sheep and three monotocous sheep was slaughter on day nine after CIDR removal (luteal phase). Totally, all STH ewes were categorized as being polytocous sheep at follicular phase (PF, n=3), polytocous sheep at luteal phase (PL, n=3), monotocous sheep at luteal phase (MF, n=3), or monotocous sheep at luteal phase (ML, n=3).  Twelve hypothalamic tissue samples were then obtained after slaughter and immediately stored at −80 °C until to be used. First, the hypothalamic samples were processed with the method of SDT [28] (constituted of 4%（w/v）SDS, 150mM Tris/HCL (pH8), 100mM DTT), an ultrasonic process (80W, 10 s on, 15 s off for 10 cycles), and the samples with tubes were placed in a boiling water bath for 15 min. The homogenized tissue was centrifuged at 14,000g for 40 minutes and the supernatant was removed by filtering it through a 0.22 μm filter. Finally, the filtrate was collected and protein quantification was performed using BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA), and sodium dodecyl sulfate-PAGE was also applied to determine their purity. Finally, the processed samples were stored at −80 °C.

### Data Protocol
FASP enzymatic hydrolysis and TMT labelling Thirty microliters of high-quality protein solution per sample was treated with Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) enzyme, and the filtrates was obtained, and then peptide quantification was carried out (measured by optical density at 280 nm; OD280). For each sample, 100 μg of peptide was labelled with TMT using the TMT Mass Tagging kits and reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Reversed-phase rating A high pH reversed-phase (RP) spin column was then performed to grade mixed peptide after balanced mix of labelled peptide using the pierce high PH reversed-phase fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The peptide label after grading was mixed and lyophilized. Subsequently, 100 μg of processed peptide was diluted with 300 μL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and transferred to a high pH RP spin column. The flow component was collected by centrifugation of 12000g, 5 minutes. A step gradient elution was begun after addition of 300 μL of pure water to collect the wash fraction by centrifugation of 12000g, 5 minutes. The samples were then lyophilized and reconstituted with 12 μL of 0.1% formic acid (FA). The peptide concentration was determined by measuring absorbance (OD280). Mass spectrometry  High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) Each sample was separated using a high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) liquid phase system Easy nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nanoliter flow rate. The buffer solutions A and B were 0.1% formic acid aqueous solution and 0.1% formic acid acetonitrile aqueous solution (84% acetonitrile) respectively. Buffer solution A (95%) was used to balance the chromatographic column and sample was loaded from the autosampler to the loading column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper C18). The peptides were separated by analytical column (Easy column, 10 cm, internal diameter 75 μm, 3 μm, C18-A2; Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectrometer identifications Mass spectrometry (MS) of separated samples was performed using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analytic time was around 60 minutes, positive ions were detected, and the scanned area of parent ion scan ranged from 300 to 1800 mass to charge ratio (m/z); the primary MS resolution, Automatic gain control (AGC) target, maximum inject time, number of scan ranges, and dynamic exclusion were 70,000 at 200 m/z, 3e6, 10 ms, 1, and 40.0 s, respectively. The m/z of polypeptide and polypeptide fragments were obtained as followed: ten fragment maps were collected after each full scan, and MS2 activation type, isolation window was HCD and 2 m/z respectively. In addition, secondary MS resolution was 17,500 at 200 m/z (TMT6plex); microscans, secondary maximum inject time, normalized collision energy, and underfill were 1,60 ms, 30 eV, and 0.1%, respectively. Data analysis and identification of DEPs The raw data of MS were output as RAM files, and Mascot 2.2 (Matrix Science, Boston, Mass) was used to map the raw data to Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to identify and quantify proteins. The parameter settings are given in Table S8. Proteins with a fold change >1.2 or < 0.83 and p-value < 0.05 in two comparable groups (PF vs. MF or PL vs. ML) were considered DEPs. GO and KEGG analysis Functional annotation of Gene Ontology (GO) was performed using Blast2GO software . The main steps were searching using the BLAST tool (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) protein sequence database, mapping, annotation, and annotation augmentation. For functional annotation of KEGG, we used the KAAS (KEGG Automatic Annotation Server)  to map DEPs to the KEGG genes database, and then the mapped proteins were categorized based on KEGG orthology. Finally, the pathways involving those classified proteins were obtained automatically. A GO term or KEGG pathway with p < 0.05 after fisher’s exact test was considered significantly enriched.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Reproduction, Tmt-based quantitative proteomics, Sheep, Hypothalamus, Gnrh

### Affiliations
Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100193, China.
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Zhuangbiao Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Mingxing Chu
Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100193, China.


