### Accession
PXD016458

### Title
AP-MS analysis of human RIOK1 and USP16

### Description
To discover novel factors involved in the final steps of 40S ribosomal subunit biogenesis in human cells, we isolated late cytoplasmic 40S subunit precursors by affinity purification (AP) of the assembly factor RIOK1. Subsequent analysis of their composition by mass spectrometry (MS) led to identification of the deubiquitinase USP16. AP-MS of USP16 confirms that it is a component of late cytoplasmic pre-40S particles and we further show that USP16 possesses a new, ribosome-associated function.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of cell extracts for StrepTactin pull-downs was performed as described previously (Wyler et al., 2011). In short, expression of the bait protein in HEK293 FlpIn TRex cell lines was induced with tetracycline (0.5 µg/ml) for 24 h. Then, cells were detached with PBS containing 0.5 mM EDTA and harvested by centrifugation (900 g, 5 min, 4°C). Cells were lysed in 10 mM Tris pH 7.5, 100 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.5% NP-40, 1 mM DTT, 1 µM avidin containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors using a dounce homogenizer and lysates were cleared by centrifugation (4500 g, 12 min, 4°C). Extracts were incubated with StrepTactin beads (IBA) for 30 min at 4°C while rotating. Beads were washed three times with TAP buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.5, 100 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2) before bound proteins were eluted with TAP buffer containing 2.5 mM d-desthiobiotin (Sigma). After precipitation of the eluate with trichloroacetic acid (TCA), proteins were denatured with 6 M urea, reduced with 12 mM DTT and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide. Samples were diluted to 1 M urea with 0.1 M NH4HCO3 before addition of trypsin (Promega) and incubation O/N at 30 °C. The digest was stopped by addition of 2% formic acid and peptides were cleaned up using Pierce C-18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

### Data Protocol
LC-MSMS data was acquired on a Thermo Q Exactive Plus in DDA mode. The raw files were converted to mzXML with msconvert and searched with Comet against a SwissProt-only human database complemented with the sequences of the flagged and/or mutant RIOK1 and USP16. The FDR was calculated by peptideProphet. The protein spectral counts were submitted to SAINT to yield the list of significant interactors for each dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Establishment of translational competence represents a decisive cytoplasmic step in the biogenesis of 40S ribosomal subunits. This involves final 18S rRNA processing and release of residual biogenesis factors, including the protein kinase RIOK1. To identify novel proteins promoting the final maturation of human 40S subunits, we characterized pre-ribosomal subunits trapped on RIOK1 by mass spectrometry, and identified the deubiquitinase USP16 among the captured factors. We demonstrate that USP16 constitutes a component of late cytoplasmic pre-40S subunits that promotes the removal of ubiquitin from an internal lysine of ribosomal protein RPS27a/eS31. <i>USP16</i> deletion leads to late 40S subunit maturation defects, manifesting in incomplete processing of 18S rRNA and retarded recycling of late-acting ribosome biogenesis factors, revealing an unexpected contribution of USP16 to the ultimate step of 40S synthesis. Finally, ubiquitination of RPS27a appears to depend on active translation, pointing at a potential connection between 40S maturation and protein synthesis.

### Keywords
Dda, Ap-ms, Usp16, Riok1

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Institute of Biochemistry, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Ludovic Gillet

### Lab Head
Dr Ulrike Kutay
Department of Biology, Institute of Biochemistry, ETH Zurich, Switzerland


