### Accession
PXD031166

### Title
Evidence for a ‘trap-and-flip’ mechanism in a proton-dependent lipid transporter

### Description
Lipid transporters from the major facilitator superfamily (MFS) have been reported to play central roles in diverse fundamental biological pathways. However, little is known about their transport mechanisms and only the structure of the MFS lipid transporter LtaA in an outward-facing conformation has been determined. LtaA was shown to be a proton-dependent lipid transporter, essential for anchoring of lipoteichoic acids (LTA) to the plasma membrane of the pathogenic bacteria Staphylococcus aureus. Here we used a ‘repeat swap’ approach in combination with cross-linking analysis to predict an inward-facing state of LtaA, performed molecular dynamics simulations, in vitro and in vivo activity assays, and mutagenesis analysis to characterize outward- and inward-facing conformations of LtaA in lipid membranes. Our results indicate that LtaA catalyze lipid translocation by a “trap-and-flip” mechanism, paving the way for the mechanistic characterization of other MFS lipid transporters.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for LC-MS analysis. 1-2 ug of either crosslinked or non-crosslinked LtaA protein were dissolved in 20 μl digestion buffer (0.02% of LMNG, 1 M urea, 0.1 M ammoniumbicarbonate, 10 mM TCEP, 15 mM chloroacetamide, pH = 8.5), reduced and alkylated for 60 min at 37 °C. Proteins were digested by incubation with either sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin), chymotrypsin sequencing grade (1/50, w/w, Sigma-Aldrich) or lys-C (1/100, w/w, Wako) overnight at 37°C. Then, the peptides were cleaned up using iST cartridges (PreOmics, Munich) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were dried under vacuum and dissolved in 0.1 % formic acid solution at 0.5 pmol/ul. All samples were prepared in triplicates.  Label-free targeted PRM-LC-MS analysis of cysteine-containing peptides. In a first step, parallel reaction-monitoring (PRM) assays (PMID: 22865924) were generated for all cysteine containing peptides of LtaA and the 5 isoforms for each protease including shared reference peptides for normalization. Therefore, the specific peptide sequences were loaded into Skyline (version 20.2.0.343 (https://brendanx-uw1.gs.washington.edu/labkey/project/home/software/Skyline/begin.view) and transitions were predicted using the integrated PROSIT algorithm for double and triple charged precursors. Then, protease and isoform specific isolation mass lists were exported and used to generate specific targeted LC-MS analyses.  This analysis was carried as described previously (PMID:27345528). Chromatographic separation of peptides was carried out using an EASY nano-LC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with a heated RP-HPLC column (75 μm x 30 cm) packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch). Aliquots of 1 pmol total peptides were analyzed per LC-MS/MS run using a linear gradient ranging from 95% solvent A (0.15% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and 5% solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 2% water, 0.15% formic acid) to 30% solvent B over 90 minutes at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a hybrid DDA (top5)/PRM LC-MS analysis. In detail, each MS1 scan was followed by high-collision-dissociation (HCD) of the precursor masses of the imported isolation list and the 5 most abundant precursor ions with dynamic exclusion for 20 seconds. For each isoform and protease, a specific LC-MS method was generated. Total cycle time was approximately 1 s. For MS1, 3e6 ions were accumulated in the Orbitrap cell over a maximum time of 100 ms and scanned at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). Targeted MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 3e6 ions, accumulation time of 100 ms and a resolution of 35,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) and a mass isolation window to 0.4 Th. MS1 triggered MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 1e5 ions, a resolution of 17,500 FWHM (at 200 m/z) and a mass isolation window of 1.4 Th. Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events. The normalized collision energy was set to 27% and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were converted to mgf-file format using MSConvert (v 3.0, proteowizard) and searched using MASCOT (Matrix Science, Version: 2.4.1) against a decoy database containing normal and reverse sequences of the predicted SwissProt entries of Staphylococcus aureus (strain NCTC 8325 / PS 47, www.ebi.ac.uk, release date 2020/08/21), the 5 LtaA isoforms and commonly observed contaminants (in total 6,574 sequences) generated using the SequenceReverser tool from the MaxQuant software (Version 1.0.13.13). The search criteria were set as following: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification and oxidation (M) as variable modification. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Then, Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.11.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 97.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Subsequently, all raw-files were imported into Skyline for protein / peptide quantification. To control for variation in sample amounts, all intensities were normalized against the 4 cysteine-free reference peptides. Only peptides that could be confidently identified by database searching were considered for quantification by PRM using the predicted transitions. Statical analysis and ratio calculations were performed in Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Targeted mass spectrometry, Ltaa

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland


