### Accession
PXD040503

### Title
Astaxanthin Supplementation Counters Exercise-Induced Decreases in Immune- Related Plasma Proteins

### Description
Astaxanthin is a dark red keto-carotenoid found in aquatic animals such as salmon and shrimp, and algae (Haematococcus pluvialis). Astaxanthin has a unique molecular structure that may facilitate anti-oxidative, immunomodulatory, and anti-inflammatory effects during physiological stress. The primary objective of this study was to examine the efficacy of 4-weeks ingestion of astaxanthin in moderating exercise-induced inflammation and immune dysfunction using a multi-omics approach.

### Sample Protocol
This study employed a randomized, double blind, placebo controlled, crossover design with two 4-week supplementation periods and a 2-week washout period. Study participants were randomized to astaxanthin and placebo trials, with supplements ingested daily for 4 weeks prior to running 2.25 h at close to 70%VO2max (including 30 min of 10% downhill running). After the washout period, participants repeated all procedures using the counterbalanced supplement. The astaxanthin capsule contained 8 mg of algae astaxanthin. Six blood samples were collected before and after supplementation (overnight fasted state), immediately post-exercise, and at 1.5h-, 3h-, and 24h-post-exercise. Plasma aliquots were assayed using untargeted proteomics. Briefly,5 µL of plasma was added to the wells of 1 mL 96-well plate containing 55 μL of 8M urea and 10 mM DTT in 50 mM TEABC. Denaturation and reduction of the proteins were performed by incubation at 30°C for 1 h, followed by alkylation in 20 mM IAA at room temperature for 1 h in dark. After diluting to below 1 M urea with 435 μL of 50 mM TEABC, 100 μL of each sample was transferred to a 200 μL 96-well plate, then a mixture of trypsin/lysin C (1:10 enzyme-to-protein ratio) was added and incubation at 37°C in a microplate incubator. Afterwards, samples were acidified with 1% FA.

### Data Protocol
Thirty-six GPF-DIA measurements were performed on immunodepleted or non-depleted, whole plasma samples (6 high-pH fractionations per each). To create the spectral library, GPF-DIA spectra were searched against the Uniprot human database using the MSFragger in FragPipe and the EasyPQP (Ver. 0.1.30). Individual sample DIA data were analyzed using DIA-NN (Ver. 1.8) in the "robust LC (high precision)" mode with RT-dependent cross-run normalization; MS1 and MS2 mass accuracies were set to 20 and 15 ppm, respectively, with a scan window size of 6, MBR enabled and the curated in-house spectral library.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Astaxanthin, High-throughput plasma proteomics, Shtpp

### Affiliations
The University of North Carolina at Greensboro
Center for Translational Biomedical Research, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, North Carolina Research Campus, Kannapolis, NC 28081

### Submitter
Jongmin Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Dr.Qibin Zhang
Center for Translational Biomedical Research, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, North Carolina Research Campus, Kannapolis, NC 28081


