### Accession
PXD021328

### Title
MTD project_title Fast detection of SARS-CoV-2 peptides by tandem mass spectrometry in clinical samples: a proof-of-concept study.

### Description
We developed a high-throughput targeted proteomics assay to detect SARS-CoV-2 proteins directly from clinical respiratory tract samples.

### Sample Protocol
Two hundred microliters of clinical specimens was transferred to 1.5-mL conical polypropylene tubes. Proteins were precipitated by the addition of 5 volumes of ethanol, followed by storage at −80 °C for 30 min and centrifugation at 4 °C, 14000 rpm for 15 min. Proteins were digested with trypsin using a modified single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) protocol.

### Data Protocol
Data-dependent acquisition raw files were processed by the MaxQuant software version 1.6.14 and searched against the UniProt SARS-CoV-2 pre-release (downloaded on March 13, 2020). Mass tolerance values for MS and MS/MS and the false discovery rate were set at 20 ppm and 1%, respectively. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Maxquant search results were imported into Scaffold (version 4.11) and exported as mzIdentML and MGF spectrum peaklists.

### Publication Abstract
The outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is pressing public health systems around the world, and large population testing is a key step to control this pandemic disease. Here, we develop a high-throughput targeted proteomics assay to detect SARS-CoV-2 nucleoprotein peptides directly from nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs. A modified magnetic particle-based proteomics approach implemented on a robotic liquid handler enables fully automated preparation of 96 samples within 4&#x2009;hours. A TFC-MS system allows multiplexed analysis of 4 samples within 10&#x2009;min, enabling the processing of more than 500 samples per day. We validate this method qualitatively (Tier 3) and quantitatively (Tier 1) using 985 specimens previously analyzed by real-time RT-PCR, and detect up to 84% of the positive cases with up to 97% specificity. The presented strategy has high sample stability and should be considered as an option for SARS-CoV-2 testing in large populations.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Targeted proteomics, Respiratory tract samples

### Affiliations
Fleury Group - Research and Development Department
Fleury Group

### Submitter
VALDEMIR CARVALHO

### Lab Head
Dr Valdemir Melechco Carvalho
Fleury Group - Research and Development Department


