### Accession
PXD033751

### Title
Complex regulation of Gephyrin splicing is a determinant of inhibitory postsynaptic diversity

### Description
Gephyrin (GPHN) regulates the clustering of postsynaptic components at inhibitory synapses and is involved in pathophysiology of neuropsychiatric disorders. Here, we uncover an extensive diversity of GPHN transcripts that are tightly controlled by splicing during mouse and human brain development. Proteomic analysis reveals at least a hundred isoforms of GPHN incorporated at inhibitory Glycine and gamma-aminobutyric acid A receptors containing synapses. They exhibit different localization and postsynaptic clustering properties, and altering the expression level of one isoform is sufficient to affect the number, size, and density of inhibitory synapses in cerebellar Purkinje cells. Furthermore, we discovered that splicing defectsreported in neuropsychiatric disorders are carried by multiple alternative GPHN transcripts, demonstrating the need for a thorough analysis of the GPHN transcriptome in patients. Overall, we show that alternative splicing of GPHN is an important genetic variation to consider in neurological diseases and a determinant of the diversity of postsynaptic inhibitory synapses.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of whole-brain lysates: After cervical dislocation, whole brains from adult male/female C57BL6 wildtype mice were removed from the skull and rapidly cooled to 4°C and homogenized in 1 ml lysate buffer (20 mM HEPES, 100mM KCH3COOH, 40mM KCl, 5mM EGTA, 5mM MgCl2, 5mM DTT, 1mM PMSF, 1% Triton X, cOmpleteTM EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Mannheim, Germany), pH 7.2) per 200 mg using a pistol homogenizer (8 strokes at 900 rpm). The homogenate was centrifuged at 10,000 × g and 4°C for 15 min. The supernatant was aliquoted and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C.  Gephyrin isolation from brain lysate: The resin for gephyrin pulldown was prepared in 400 μl micro-spin columns (Thermo Scientific, Karlsruhe, Germany). The Peptide FSIVGRYPRRRRC (KD (Gephyrin) = 140 pM) (10.1038/nCHeMBIO.2246) was dissolved in coupling buffer (50 mM Tris, 5mM EDTA, pH 8.5) at a concentration of 1 mM and incubated for 2 h at RT with washed and equilibrated Ultra Link iodoacetyl resin (Thermo Scientific, Karlsruhe, Germany). The resulting resin was washed and residual iodoacetyl groups were quenched by incubation with 1 mM Cysteine for 2 h and stored at 4 °C after extensive washing with a coupling buffer. Whole-brain lysate was incubated on the prepared FSIVGRYPRRRRC-resin for 30 min at 4°C and washed three times with lysate buffer. Bound proteins were eluted with NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Life Technologies) at 90°C for 3 min. Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphin (TCEP) was added to a final concentration of 20 mM and incubated at 90°C to achieve complete reduction. Subsequently, proteins were alkylated using iodoacetamide (120 mM) for 20 min at room temperature in the dark, 30 μl of the resulting denatured, reduced and alkylated proteins were separated by mass by NuPAGE Novex 4-12 % Bis-Tris gels (Life Technologies) with MOPS buffer. Gels were washed three times for 5 min with water, stained for 45 min with Simply Blue™ Safe Stain (Life Technologies) and washed with water for 1 h. Gel bands were excised and destained with 30 % acetonitrile in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 (pH 8), shrunk with 100 % acetonitrile, and dried in a vacuum concentrator (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, Germany). Digests were performed with 0.1 μg protease (trypsin, elastase, thermolysin or papain) per gel band overnight at 37 °C in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 (pH 8). After removing the supernatant, peptides were extracted from the gel slices with 5 % formic acid, and extracted peptides were pooled with the supernatant.  NanoLC-MS/MS Analysis NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an EASY-Spray Ion Source and coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a trapping column (2 cm x 75 μm ID, PepMap C18, 3 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) and separated on an EASY-Spray column (25 cm x 75 μm ID, PepMap C18, 2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) with a 30-minute linear gradient from 3 % to 40 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid. Both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60,000 for MS scans and 15,000 for MS/MS scans. HCD fragmentation with 35 % normalized collision energy was applied. A Top Speed data-dependent MS/MS method with a fixed cycle time of 3 seconds was used. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 30 seconds; singly charged precursors were excluded from selection. Minimum signal threshold for precursor selection was set to 50,000. Predictive AGC was used with AGC a target value of 2e5 for MS scans and 5e4 for MS/MS scans. EASY-IC was used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed with PEAKS Studio X+ (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Canada). Raw data refinement was performed with the following settings: Merge Options: no merge, Precursor Options: corrected, Charge Options: 1-6, Filter Options: no filter, Process: true, Default: true, Associate Chimera: yes. De novo sequencing and database searching were performed with a Parent Mass Error Tolerance of 10 ppm. Fragment Mass Error Tolerance was set to 0.02 Da, and Enzyme was set to none. The following variable modifications have been used: Oxidation (M), pyro-Glu from Q (N-term Q), phosphorylation (STY), acetylation (protein N-terminal) and carbamidomethylation (C). A maximum of 3 variable PTMs were allowed per peptide. Data were searched against a fasta database concatenated from UniProt_mouse (UP000000589, reference proteome, 55408 proteins, 5-Nov-2019, all variants), predicted (XP_) and validated (NP_) gephyrin sequences from NCBI and a custom ORF database constructed as described above. The list of identified peptides was filtered to 1% PSM-FDR. All gephyrin-derived peptides were matched to the entries of the ORF database using ProteoMapper.

### Publication Abstract
Gephyrin (GPHN) regulates the clustering of postsynaptic components at inhibitory synapses and is involved in pathophysiology of neuropsychiatric disorders. Here, we uncover an extensive diversity of GPHN transcripts that are tightly controlled by splicing during mouse and human brain development. Proteomic analysis reveals at least a hundred isoforms of GPHN incorporated at inhibitory Glycine and gamma-aminobutyric acid A receptors containing synapses. They exhibit different localization and postsynaptic clustering properties, and altering the expression level of one isoform is sufficient to affect the number, size, and density of inhibitory synapses in cerebellar Purkinje cells. Furthermore, we discovered that splicing defects reported in neuropsychiatric disorders are carried by multiple alternative GPHN transcripts, demonstrating the need for a thorough analysis of the GPHN transcriptome in patients. Overall, we show that alternative splicing of GPHN is an important genetic variation to consider in neurological diseases and a determinant of the diversity of postsynaptic inhibitory synapses.

### Keywords
Inhibitory synapses, Gephyrin, Splice variants

### Affiliations
Rudolf-Virchow-Zentrum Center for Integrative and Translational Bioimaging Universität Würzburg Josef-Schneider-Str. 2 97080 Würzburg
Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics

### Submitter
Andreas Schlosser

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Schlosser
Rudolf-Virchow-Zentrum Center for Integrative and Translational Bioimaging Universität Würzburg Josef-Schneider-Str. 2 97080 Würzburg


