### Accession
PXD039072

### Title
human ESCO2-interacting proteins in response to DNA damage

### Description
We used IP-MS to detected the proteins that interact with ESCO2 in response to DNA damage.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were lysed in modified RIPA buffer, sonicated, and precleared with protein G beads. The supernatants were incubated with anti-Flag affinity beads at 4 degrees Celsuis for 4 h and eluted with Flag peptide. The eluates were precipitated with TCA and subjected to mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were aligned with the Human Reviewed Swiss-Prot database by Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software. Proteins were considered to be major hits (positive) when matching the following criteria: 1) not found in negative control group; 2) high Protein FDR Confidence (FDR < 0.01); and 3) peptides ≥ 5.

### Publication Abstract
53BP1 is primarily known as a key regulator in DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair. However, the mechanism of DSB-triggered cohesin modification-modulated chromatin structure on the recruitment of 53BP1 remains largely elusive. Here, we identified acetyltransferase ESCO2 as a regulator for DSB-induced cohesin-dependent chromatin structure dynamics, which promotes 53BP1 recruitment. Mechanistically, in response to DNA damage, ATM phosphorylates ESCO2 S196 and T233. MDC1 recognizes phosphorylated ESCO2 and recruits ESCO2 to DSB sites. ESCO2-mediated acetylation of SMC3 stabilizes cohesin complex conformation and regulates the chromatin structure at DSB breaks, which is essential for the recruitment of 53BP1 and the formation of 53BP1 microdomains. Furthermore, depletion of ESCO2 in both colorectal cancer cells and xenografted nude mice sensitizes cancer cells to chemotherapeutic drugs. Collectively, our results reveal a molecular mechanism for the ATM-ESCO2-SMC3 axis in DSB repair and genome integrity maintenance with a vital role in chemotherapy response in colorectal cancer.

### Keywords
Huamn, Dna damage, Esco2

### Affiliations
Peking University

### Submitter
Jianfeng Fu

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaofeng Zheng
Peking University


