### Accession
PXD007707

### Title
Proteomic Profiling Exosomes from Vascular Smooth Muscle Cell

### Description
The components of the exosomes are essential to understand how vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) and endothelial cells communicate with each other. Exosomes secreted by human VSMCs were harvested and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS. The activity of the identified proteins were further assessed by the in vivo matrigel plug angiogenesis assay.

### Sample Protocol
The human VSMC line T/G-HA (T/G-HA-VSMC) was cultured in DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with 10% exosome-free FBS and 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin. Conditional medium was collected after a 24 h culture and cooled to 4°C. The medium was centrifuged at 300 g for 10 min, 2,000g for 10 min, 10,000 g for 30 min, and 100,000 g for 2 h. The sediment was washed with cold PBS, centrifuged at 100,000 g for 2 h and then collected as exosomes for further analyses. Protein samples were separated in a 4-15% gradient SDS-PAGE gel. The gel was stained with 0.25% Coomassie blue and then destained  (acetic acid:methanol v/v 4:1). After destaining, the gel was washed by distilled deionized water twice and the sample lanes were cut into 10 fractions. The fraction was then subject to trypsin digestion.   Ten peptide samples prepared from the ten gel fractions were analyzed by a nanoLC-MS/MS on a hybrid LTQ-Orbitrap-XL MS (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). The LC system consisted of an IntegraFrit trap column (100 μm × 1.5 cm, New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed with Magic C18AQ resin (5 μm, 200 Å pore size; Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA), followed by a PicoFrit analytical column (75 μm × 27 cm, New Objective) packed with Magic C18AQ resin (5 μm, 100 Å pore size). The columns were connected to an Eksigent 2D nano-HPLC (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA) with a vented system. The sample was loaded onto the trap column and desalted at a flow rate of 3 μL/min. After sample desalting, the flow was directed to the analytical column at 300 nL/min. A 100-min gradient was used for LC separation, starting from 5% ACN/0.1% TFA and progressing linearly to 35% ACN/0.1% TFA. During identification of the eluting peptides by MS, a full MS scan was followed by 10 MS/MS scans in the data-dependent mode with automatic switch. Full MS spectra (m/z from 300 to 2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution of 60,000. The top 10 precursor ions (signal intensity dependent) were selected for sequential fragmentation in the linear ion trap by collision-induced dissociation, with normalized collision energy of 35% and a minimum target intensity value of 10,000 counts.  The capillary was maintained at 175°C, while the spray voltage was kept at 2.2 kV.   We further combined the aforementioned ten peptide fractions and analyzed them using the Eksigent nanoLC Ultra 2D system (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA) combined with the cHiPLC-Nanoflex system in Trap-Elute mode. The peptides were loaded on the cHiPLC trap (200 µm x 500 µm ChromXP C18-CL 3 µm 300 Å) and washed for 10 min at 2 µL/min. An elution gradient of 5-35% ACN (0.1% formic acid) in a 110 min gradient at 300 nL/min was then used on a nano cHiPLC column (75 µm x 15 cm ChromXP C18-CL 3 µm 300 Å). Surveyed full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375 to 1,700) were acquired from the AB SCIEX TripleTOF® 5600 System  with resolution of 40,000 for both MS and MS/MS. The 50 most intense ions (signal intensity dependent) were sequentially isolated for fragmentation in the quadrupole by collision-induced dissociation. The interface temperature was maintained at 150°C and the spray voltage was kept at 2.5 kV.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from the LTQ-Orbitrap-XL were processed by DeconMSn (version 2.2.2.2, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNL)), DtaRefinery (version 1.2, PNL), DtaTextToMGF (version 1.2, PNL) to generate  mgf files. Peptide and protein identifications were performed using ProteinPilot 4.0 via a search of mgf and wiff files against the UniProt database. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate was set at 1% for the peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exosomes;vascular smooth muscle cells;nanolc-ms/ms;angiogenesis

### Affiliations
University of Washington
University of Georgia

### Submitter
Hong Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Lianchun Wang
University of Georgia


