### Accession
PXD017738

### Title
Proteomic analysis demonstrated transcription factor gene YRR1 deletion in Saccharomyces cerevisiae enhances its resistance to vanillin through the upregulation of transcriptional activator Haa1, coactivator Mbf1, and proteasome assembly chaperone Tma17 expression

### Description
Vanillin is one of the major phenolic inhibitors of Saccharomyces cerevisiae in lignocellulosic hydrolysates. Deleting transcription factor gene YRR1 improves vanillin resistance by promoting some translation-related processes that were confirmed at the transcription level in our previous studies. In this work, we investigated the effect of proteomic change on vanillin stress and YRR1 deletion. In wild-type cells, vanillin reduced the number of ribosomal proteins and thereby inhibited cells’ translation. YRR1 deletion increased 112 protein quantities; 48 of 112 up-regulated proteins are involved in the stress response, translational and basal transcriptional regulation. Fermentation data showed that the overexpression of HAA1, MBF1, and TMA17, which encode transcriptional activator, coactivator, and proteasome assembly chaperone, respectively, enhanced resistance to vanillin in S. cerevisiae. These results enriched the perspective of molecular mechanisms for YRR1 deletion to protect yeast from vanillin stress and offered novel targets for designing inhibitor-resistant ethanologenic yeast strains.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cells of BY4741 and BY4741(yrr1Δ) were harvested during the exponential growth phase (OD600=1.6–2.0) in SD medium with or without of 5 mM vanillin, respectively. All of the proteomic analyses were carried out in biological triplicate. The sample was ground by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. Four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) were added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor. The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4°C. Finally, the supernatant was collected, and the protein concentration was determined using a BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C and alkylated with 11-mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to reduce the urea concentration to < 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight; the second 4-h digestion process had a 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio. A peptide of trypsin digestion was labeled with TMT, according to the manufacturer’s protocol for a TMT kit. The labeling peptides were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5-μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, the peptides were first separated into 60 fractions with a gradient ranging from 8–32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile); the gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 20% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) over 20 min, from 20% to 33% in 11 min, and up to 80% in 4 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 320 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to an NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350–1800 for a full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. The secondary mass spectrometry scan range was set as a fixed first point of 100 m/z, and the resolution was 17,500. The data acquisition mode was a data-dependent scanning (DDA) program; the first 20 peptides with the highest signal intensity are selected to enter the HCD collision cell, and then 30% of the fragmentation energy is used for fragmentation after the first-stage scanning; the same step performed once more during the secondary mass spectrometry analysis. To improve the effective utilization of the mass spectrometer, the automatic gain control (AGC) is set as 5E4, the signal threshold is set as 1E4, and the maximum injection time is set as 200 ms with 30 seconds of dynamic exclusion time.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme and allowed up to two missing cleavages. The mass resistance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in the first search and 5 ppm in the main search, and the mass resistance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and oxidation on Met was specified as a variable modification. The method used to obtain relative protein expression ratios was set as TMT-6plex, and the FDR for protein identification and PSM identification was 1%. Proteins were classified into functional categories by GO annotation from the Uniprot-GOA database. Some undetermined proteins were identified using protein sequence-based algorithm software (InterProScan) to predict the GO function of the protein. Pathway enrichment analyses were carried out using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database, and the subcellular location of the proteins was determined using software WoLF PSORT. The function of representative proteins was estimated using the MIPS Functional Catalogue database (P-value < 0.01, Bonferroni correction). To explore the relationship between the proteome and the transcriptome, the relation of them was contrasted and verified by utilizing the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) software (Spearman's correlation analysis), and their overlap was displayed in a Venn diagram using a bioinformatic tool (http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/Venn/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yrr1; quantitative proteomics; vanillin resistance; bioethanol; saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Qilu University of Technology, Shandong Academy of Sciences
School of Biotechnology, Qilu University of Technology, Shandong Academy of Sciences, Jinan, 250353, China

### Submitter
Xinning Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Xinning Wang
School of Biotechnology, Qilu University of Technology, Shandong Academy of Sciences, Jinan, 250353, China


