### Accession
PXD026289

### Title
Sorting nexin-27 regulates AMPA receptor trafficking through the synaptic adhesion protein LRFN2

### Description
The endosome-associated cargo adaptor sorting nexin-27 (SNX27) is linked to various neuropathologies through sorting of integral proteins to the synaptic surface, most notably AMPA receptors. To provide a broader view of SNX27-associated pathologies we performed proteomics in rat primary neurons to identify SNX27-dependent cargoes, and identified proteins linked to excitotoxicity, epilepsy, intellectual disabilities and working memory deficits. Focusing on the synaptic adhesion molecule LRFN2, we established that SNX27 binds to LRFN2 and regulates its endosomal sorting. Furthermore, LRFN2 associates with AMPA receptors and knockdown of LRFN2 results in decreased surface AMPA receptor expression, reduced synaptic activity, and attenuated hippocampal long-term potentiation. Overall, our study provides an additional mechanism by which SNX27 can control AMPA receptor-mediated synaptic transmission and plasticity indirectly through the sorting of LRFN2 and offers molecular insight into the perturbed function of SNX27 and LRFN2 in a range of neurological conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoisolated samples were reduced (10 mM TCEP, 55°C for 1 hour), alkylated (18.75 mM iodoacetamide, RT for 30 min) and then digested from the beads with trypsin (2.5 µg trypsin: 37°C, O/N). The resulting peptides were then labelled with TMT six plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Scientific) and the labelled samples pooled and desalted using SepPak cartridges according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Waters).  Eluate from the SepPak cartridge was evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7  gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1 min., 6-15% B over 58 min., 15-32% B over 58 min., 32-40% B over 5 min., 40-90% B over 1 min., held at 90% B for 6min and then reduced to 1% B over 1min.) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0 kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 250°C. Tandem mass spectra were acquired using an LTQ- Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.  The Orbitrap was set to analyze the survey scans at 60,000 resolution (at m/z 400) in the mass range m/z 300 to 1800 and the top ten multiply charged ions in each duty cycle selected for MS/MS fragmentation using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 45%, activation time of 0.1 ms and at a resolution of 7500 within the Orbitrap.  Charge state filtering, where unassigned precursor ions were not selected for fragmentation, and dynamic exclusion (repeat count, 1; repeat duration, 30 s; exclusion list size, 500) were used.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Rat database (downloaded January 2019: 35759 entries) using the SEQUEST algorithm.  Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6 Da.  Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da), acetylation of the protein N-terminus (+42.011 Da) and Methionine loss plus acetylation of the protein N-terminus (-89.03 Da) as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) and the addition of the TMT mass tag (+229.163 Da) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed.  The reverse database search option was enabled, and all data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lrfn2, Snx27, Membrane trafficking, Ampa receptors

### Affiliations
School of Biochemistry Faculty of Life Sciences University of Bristol
University of Bristol

### Submitter
Boris Simonetti

### Lab Head
Dr Pete Cullen
School of Biochemistry Faculty of Life Sciences University of Bristol


