### Accession
PXD009074

### Title
Human T-cells EVs LC-MSMS -  Extracellular Vesicle Subtypes Released From Activated or Apoptotic T-Lymphocytes Carry a Specific and Stimulus-Dependent Protein Cargo

### Description
As it is likely that different stimuli promote the release of distinct EV populations, we analyzed EVs from human lymphocytes considering the respective release stimuli (activation vs. apoptosis induction). Morphology and size were analyzed by electron microscopy and nanoparticle tracking analysis. The protein content of these vesicles was analyzed by bidimensional gel electrophoresis followed by mass spec and western blot.

### Sample Protocol
1. Cell culture  Healthy donors were participated in this study after having given informed consent. The study, approved by the ethics committee of the University of Heidelberg, was conducted according to the ethics guidelines of our institution and those of the Declaration of Helsinki. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated by density gradient centrifugation (LSM 1.077, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) out of heparinized venous blood from normal healthy donors. PBMCs were washed twice in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, Sigma, Taufkirchen, Germany) and were cultured in RPMI 1640 (Life Science Technologies, Darmstadt, Germany) supplemented with 10% (v/v) heat inactivated fetal calf serum (Gibco-BRL, Eggenstein, Germany) 10mM HEPES buffer, 4mM L-glutamine and penicillin-streptomycin (Sigma, Taufkirchen, Germany). Cell viability was checked by trypan blue exclusion test. To generate activated T-lymphocytes 1µg/ml phytohemagglutinine (Sigma, Taufkirchen, Germany) and 0.5U/ml IL-2 (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) were added to the culture media for 5 days, leading to activation and marked proliferation of T-cells. These PHA/IL-2 activated lymphocytes are >95% CD3 positive (Kriegel et al. 2006; M Schiller et al. 2008; Canda-Sánchez et al. 2009; Nunes et al. 2011; Qesari et al. 2016; Arias et al. 2017). Cells were then washed and stimulated with additionally 0.5U/ml IL-2 to further expand T cells.  2. Isolation of LEVs and SEVs EV-depleted culture medium was prepared by overnight centrifugation at 100,000xg in a 70Ti rotor (Beckman Coulter, Krefeld Germany). To isolate EVs, T-cells were washed with PBS and plated into cell culture dishes with up to 100 x 10^6 T-cells per 30ml EV-depleted culture medium. T-cells were either activated by the addition of IL-2 or induced to undergo apoptosis by UV-B irradiation for 30s (90J/cm2). Afterwards T-cells were cultured for 20h, LEVs and SEVs were isolated by differential ultracentrifugation. Before EV isolation, cell vitality was always assessed by staining with AnnexinV (AxV, Böhringer, Mannheim, Germany) and propidiumiodide (PI, Sigma, Taufkirchen, Germany). In short, T-cells were incubated with 200ng of AxV-FITC and 500ng PI in 500µl Ringer’s solution (B. Braun, Melsungen, Germany) for 30min at 4°C and analyzed by flow cytometry. To deplete whole T-cells or apoptotic cellular remnants before EV isolation the cell suspension was centrifuged at 300xg, 5min and the remaining supernatant was passed through a 1.2µm non-pyrogenic, hydrophilic syringe filter into ultracentrifuge tubes (Beckman Coulter). Subsequently, EVs were isolated by centrifugation at 10,000xg for 45min at 10°C in a 70Ti rotor (Beckman Coulter) to receive LEV pellets. The resulting supernatant was then centrifuged at 100,000xg for 45min at 10°C to receive SEV pellets. All pellets were resuspended in either 50µl sterile PBS for nanoparticle tracking analysis or in 10µl RIPA-lysis buffer (c-c-pro, Neustadt, Germany) supplemented with protease inhibitors for protein analysis (complete Mini, Böhringer, Mannheim, Germany).

### Data Protocol
5. Two dimensional difference gel electrophoresis (DIGE) Isolated EVs obtained from activated and apoptozing T-lymphocytes (three normal healthy donors) were lysed in THC buffer supplemented with 1µg/ml Aprotonin, Leupeptin, Pepstatin and 200mM PMSF (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). Lysates were sonicated (program: 1s pulse and 5s pulse off, 3min, amplitude: 90%) two times at 4°C and centrifuged at 20’000rpm for 15min at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred into a new microfuge tube and protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay. Afterwards each probe was divided into three parts with equal protein amounts of 5µg. Each part was labeled with a specific dye for DIGE preparations (CYDYE DIGE Fluor CY3/CY5, VWR, Darmstadt, Germany). An internal standard was generated through mixing 5µg protein of each probe and labeling with CY2 (CYDYE DIGE Fluor, VWR, Darmstadt, Germany). After labeling, probes were loaded onto pH stripes (VWR, Darmstadt, Germany) for the protein separation in the first dimension (isoelectric point). Then proteins were separated in the second dimension (molecular weight, standard SDS-PAGE). The experiments were performed in triplicates. Including the standards, 36 gels were obtained. To identify protein spots, 2D-gels were scanned (IPGphor3, GE Healthcare, Freiburg, Germany) and analyzed by a DIGE DeCyder machine and software (V7.0). 6. Mass spectrometry After the analysis by the DIGE DeCyder machine and software (GE Healthcare, Freiburg, Germany) we selected 24 protein spots, for identification of the proteins by mass spectrometry. Selected protein spots were picked out of the SDS-gels using an Ettan spot picker (GE Healthcare, Freiburg, Germany) and analyzed by mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Mass spectrometry was performed at the Core Facility for Mass Spectrometry in the ZMBH in Heidelberg. Samples were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces, concentrated in a speedVac vacuum centrifuge and diluted to a total volume of 30ul with 0.1% TFA. 25ul of the sample was analyzed by a nanoHPLC system (nanoAcquity, Waters) coupled to an ESI LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Sample was loaded on a C18 trapping column and separated on an analytical column (75um x 250mm) with a flow rate of 300nl/min in an acetonitrile-gradient (3%-40% ). One survey scan (res: 60000) was followed by 5 information dependent product ion scans in the ion trap. MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swissprot database (20282 entries) using the Mascot software (Matrix Science). Trypsin was specified as enzyme. Carbamidomethyl was set as fixed modification of cysteine and oxidation (methionine), deamidation (asparagines, glutamine), N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation (serine, Threonine) as variable modifications. Mass tolerance was set to 10ppm and 0.5 Da for MS and MS/MS, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are released from nearly all mammalian cells and different EV populations have been described. Microvesicles represent large EVs (LEVs) released from the cellular surface, while exosomes are small EVs (SEVs) released from an intracellular compartment. As it is likely that different stimuli promote the release of distinct EV populations, we analyzed EVs from human lymphocytes considering the respective release stimuli (activation Vs. apoptosis induction). We could clearly separate two EV populations, namely SEVs (average diameter &lt;200&#x2009;nm) and LEVs (diameter range between 200 and 1000&#x2009;nm). Morphology and size were analyzed by electron microscopy and nanoparticle tracking analysis. Apoptosis induction caused a massive release of LEVs, while activated T-cells released SEVs and LEVs in considerably lower amounts. The release of SEVs from apoptotic T-cells was comparable with LEV release from activated ones. LEVs contained signaling proteins and proteins of the actin-myosin cytoskeleton. SEVs carried cytoplasmic/endosomal proteins like the 70-kDa heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) or tumor susceptibility 101 (TSG101), microtubule-associated proteins, and ubiquitinated proteins. The protein expression profile of SEVs and LEVs changed substantially after the induction of apoptosis. After apoptosis induction, HSP70 and TSG101 (often used as exosome markers) were highly expressed within LEVs. Interestingly, in contrast to HSP70 and TSG101, gelsolin and eps15 homology domain-containing protein 3 (EHD3) turned out to be specific for SEVs irrespective of the stimulus causing the EV release. Finally, we detected several subunits of the proteasome (PSMB9, PSMB10) as well as the danger signal HMGB1 exclusively within apoptotic cell-released LEVs. Thus, we were able to identify new marker proteins that can be useful to discriminate between distinct LEV subpopulations. The mass spectrometry proteomics data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009074.

### Keywords
Evs, Lc-msms, Microvesicles, Exosomes, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg
Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg Medizinische Klinik - Med.V Im Neuenheimer Feld 410 69120 Heidelberg

### Submitter
Christine Tucher

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Martin Schiller
Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg Medizinische Klinik - Med.V Im Neuenheimer Feld 410 69120 Heidelberg


