### Accession
PXD017342

### Title
Proteomics analysis with the Aurora-A PROTAC, JB170

### Description
To determine specificity of Aurora-A PROTAC (JB170), MV4-11 cells were labeled with medium containing different stable isotopes (SILAC), treated them with JB170 or Alisertib and subsequently compared their protein content to untreated cells by quantitative mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
MV4-11 cells (light, medium and heavy labeled) were seeded in triplicates day before the treatment. Cells were treated with DMSO (light), 100 nM JB170 (medium) and 100 nM Alisertib (heavy) for 6 hours. 3.5x106 cells per treatment (per replicate) were combined and washed twice with ice cold PBS with protease and phosphatase inhibitor. Cells were directly lysed in 500 µl 1.5x Laemmli sample buffer, and 25 units of benzonase (Novagen) were added to digest DNA for 20 minutes at room temperature. The samples were heated at 95 °C for 5 min. Protein precipitation was performed overnight at -20°C with fourfold volume of acetone. Pellets were washed three times with acetone at -20°C. Precipitated proteins were dissolved in NuPAGE® LDS sample buffer (Life Technologies), reduced with 50 mM DTT at 70 °C for 10 minutes and alkylated with 120 mM Iodoacetamide at room temperature for 20 minutes. Separation was performed on NuPAGE® Novex® 4-12 % Bis-Tris gels (Life Technologies) with MOPS buffer according to manufacturer’s instructions. Gels were washed three times for 5 min with water and stained for 45 min with Simply Blue™ Safe Stain (Life Technologies). After washing with water for 2 h, each gel lane was cut into 15 slices. The excised gel bands were destained with 30 % acetonitrile in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 (pH 8), shrunk with 100 % acetonitrile, and dried in a vacuum concentrator (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, Germany). Digests were performed with 0.1 µg trypsin per gel band overnight at 37 °C in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 (pH 8). After removing the supernatant, peptides were extracted from the gel slices with 5 % formic acid, and extracted peptides were pooled with the supernatant. NanoLC-MS/MS was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a PicoView Ion Source (New Objective) and coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on capillary columns (PicoFrit, 30 cm x 150 µm ID, New Objective) self-packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch) and separated with a 45-minute linear gradient from 3% to 30% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and a flow rate of 500 nL/min.  MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60,000 and 15,000, respectively. HCD fragmentation with 35 % normalized collision energy was applied. A Top Speed data-dependent MS/MS method with a fixed cycle time of 3 seconds was used. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 30 seconds; singly charged precursors were excluded from selection. Minimum signal threshold for precursor selection was set to 50,000. Predictive AGC was used with AGC a target value of 2e5 for MS scans and 5e4 for MS/MS scans. EASY-IC was used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.2.2. Database search was performed with Andromeda, within MaxQuant. The search was performed against the UniProt Human database. Additionally, a database containing common contaminants was used. The search was performed with tryptic cleavage specificity with 3 allowed miscleavages. Protein identification was under control of the false-discovery rate (<1% FDR on protein and peptide level). In addition to MaxQuant default settings, the search was performed against following variable modifications: Protein N-terminal acetylation, Gln to pyro-Glu formation (N-term. Gln) and oxidation (Met). Carbamidomethyl (Cys) was set as fixed modification. Further data analysis was performed using R scripts developed in-house. For quantification of pSILAC-labeled proteins, the median was calculated of the log2-transformed normalized peptide ratios heavy to light (H/L), medium to light (M/L), heavy to medium (H/L) for each protein. Two ratio counts were required for protein quantification. Protein ratios were normalized for each experiment in intensity bins (at least 300 proteins per bin), and outliers were identified by boxplot statistics as significantly altered, if their values were outside a 1.5× or 3× interquartile range (extreme outliers).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Degronimid, Jb170, Protac, Aurora-a, Mv4-11

### Affiliations
Cancer Systems Biology Group, Theodor Boveri Institute, University of Würzburg, Am Hubland, 97074 Würzburg, Germany
Cancer Systems Biology Group, Theodor Boveri Institute, University of Würzburg

### Submitter
Bikash Adhikari

### Lab Head
Dr Elmar Wolf
Cancer Systems Biology Group, Theodor Boveri Institute, University of Würzburg, Am Hubland, 97074 Würzburg, Germany


