### Accession
PXD001819

### Title
yeast-UPS1 standard LC-MS/MS dataset

### Description
Proteomic workflows based on nanoLC-MS/MS data-dependent-acquisition analysis have progressed tremendously in recent years due to the technical improvement of mass spectrometers, and now allow to extensively characterize complex protein mixtures. High-resolution and fast sequencing instruments have enabled the use of label-free quantitative methods, which appear as an attractive way to analyze differential protein expression in complex biological samples. Classical label-free quantitative workflows are based either on spectral counting of MS/MS sequencing scans for each protein, or on the extraction of peptide ion peak area values in the LC-MS map composed of all the survey MS scans acquired during the chromatographic gradient. However, the computational processing of the data for label-free quantification still remains a challenge. Here, we provide a dual proteomic standard composed of an equimolar mixture of 48 human proteins (Sigma UPS1) spiked at different concentrations into a background of yeast cell lysate, that was used to benchmark several label-free quantitative workflows, involving  different software packages developed in recent years. This experimental design allowed to finely assess their performances in terms of sensitivity and false discovery rate, by measuring the number of true and false-positive (respectively UPS1 or yeast background proteins found as differential). This dataset can also be used to benchmark other label-free workflows, adjust software parameter settings, improve algorithms for extraction of the quantitative metrics from raw MS data, or evaluate downstream statistical methods

### Sample Protocol
A yeast cell lysate was prepared in 8M urea / 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate buffer and this lysate was used to resuspend and perform a serial dilution of the UPS1 standard mixture (Sigma). Twenty µL of each of the resulting samples, corresponding to 9 different spiked levels of UPS1 (respectively 0,05 - 0,125 - 0,250 - 0,5 - 2.5 - 5 - 12,5 - 25 - 50 fmol of UPS1 /µg of yeast lysate), were reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide. The urea concentration was lowered to 1M by dilution, and proteins were digested in solution by addition of 2% of trypsin overnight. Enzymatic digestion was stopped by addition of TFA (0.5% final concentration). Samples (2µg of yeast cell lysate + different spiked level of UPS1) were analyzed in triplicate by nanoLC-MS/MS using a nanoRS UHPLC system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using a 105min gradient on a 15cm C18 column, and a top20 data-dependent acquisition method.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were searched in a yeast database from UniprotKB (S_cerevisiae_ 20121108.fasta, 7798 sequences) and a compiled database containing the UPS1 human sequences (48 sequences).Two series of database searches were perfomed with Mascot, resulting in 2 series of result files used in the different computational workflows described in the paper (Ramus et al, JPR). Serie 1 (used in workflows 1, 4 and 5, noted WF1-4-5_): the Mascot Daemon software (version 2.4; Matrix Science, London, UK) was used to perform database searches, using the Extract_msn.exe macro provided with Xcalibur (version 2.0 SR2; Thermo Fisher Scientific) to generate peaklists. Parameters used for creation of the peaklists were: parent ions in the mass range 400–4500, no grouping of MS/MS scans, and threshold at 1000. Peaklists were submitted to Mascot database searches (version 2.4.2).  ESI-TRAP was chosen as the instrument, trypsin/P as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at 5 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. Peptide variable modifications allowed during the search were: acetyl (Protein N-ter), oxidation (M), whereas carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification. Serie 2 (used in workflows 3 and 8, noted WF3-8_): Data were processed automatically using Mascot Distiller software (version 2.4.3.0, Matrix Science). ESI-TRAP was chosen as the instrument, trypsin/P as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at 5 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. Peptide variable modifications allowed during the search were: acetylation (Protein N-ter), oxidation (M), whereas carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
This data article describes a controlled, spiked proteomic dataset for which the "ground truth" of variant proteins is known. It is based on the LC-MS analysis of samples composed of a fixed background of yeast lysate and different spiked amounts of the UPS1 mixture of 48 recombinant proteins. It can be used to objectively evaluate bioinformatic pipelines for label-free quantitative analysis, and their ability to detect variant proteins with good sensitivity and low false discovery rate in large-scale proteomic studies. More specifically, it can be useful for tuning software tools parameters, but also testing new algorithms for label-free quantitative analysis, or for evaluation of downstream statistical methods. The raw MS files can be downloaded from ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001819. Starting from some raw files of this dataset, we also provide here some processed data obtained through various bioinformatics tools (including MaxQuant, Skyline, MFPaQ, IRMa-hEIDI and Scaffold) in different workflows, to exemplify the use of such data in the context of software benchmarking, as discussed in details in the accompanying manuscript [1]. The experimental design used here for data processing takes advantage of the different spike levels introduced in the samples composing the dataset, and processed data are merged in a single file to facilitate the evaluation and illustration of software tools results for the detection of variant proteins with different absolute expression levels and fold change values.

### Keywords
Ups1, Lc-ms/ms, Label-free quantification, Yesat

### Affiliations
IPBS CNRS
CNRS, Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale, Université de Toulouse

### Submitter
Emmanuelle Mouton Barbosa

### Lab Head
Dr Anne Gonzalez de Peredo
CNRS, Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale, Université de Toulouse


### SDRF
- Organism: Saccharomyces cerevisiae
- organism part: not available
- disease: not available
- cell type: not applicable
- label: label free sample
- instrument: LTQ Orbitrap Velos
- modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl
- modification parameters: Oxidation
- modification parameters: Acetyl

