### Accession
PXD042298

### Title
Capillary zone electrophoresis-tandem mass spectrometry for top-down proteomics of mouse brain integral membrane proteins

### Description
Mass spectrometry (MS)-based top-down characterization of integral membrane proteins (IMPs) is crucial for understanding their functions in biological processes. However, it is technically challenging due to their low solubility in typical MS-compatible buffers. In this work, for the first time, we developed an efficient capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE)-tandem MS (MS/MS) method for top-down proteomics (TDP) of IMPs enriched from mouse brains. Our technique employs a sample buffer containing 30% (v/v) formic acid and 60% (v/v) methanol for solubilizing IMPs and utilizes a separation buffer of 30% (v/v) acetic acid and 30% (v/v) methanol for maintaining the solubility of IMPs during CZE separation. Single-shot CZE-MS/MS identified 51 IMP proteoforms from the mouse brain sample. Coupling size exclusion chromatography (SEC) to CZE-MS/MS enabled the identification of 276 IMP proteoforms from the mouse brain sample and those proteoforms contained 1-4 transmembrane domains. This proof-of-concept work demonstrates the high potential of CZE-MS/MS for large-scale TDP of IMPs.

### Sample Protocol
A 2-month-old male mouse (strain BL-6, wild type) was used for the collection of the brain. Briefly, the tissue (~0.5 g) was washed with cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) three times and further homogenized in 5 mL of high salt buffer (2M NaCl, 1×PBS, pH 7.4 with protease inhibitor cocktail) using FisherbrandTM 150 Homogenizer for 2 minutes and repeated three times. The samples were sonicated on ice for five minutes with a Branson Sonifier 250 (VWR Scientific, Batavia, IL) using 7 output control and 50% duty cycle and repeated three times. Then the lysate was centrifuged at 1500 ×g for 10 minutes at 4 °C to collect the supernatant. To purify the integral membrane proteins, the solution was centrifuged at 29,700×g for 60 minutes at 4 °C. The pellet was resuspended in 2.5 mL high pH buffer (0.1M Na2CO3, pH 11.3 with protease inhibitor cocktail) and incubated on ice for 60 minutes to remove peripheral membrane proteins. The centrifugation was performed under the same conditions. After a repeated wash in 2.5 mL high pH buffer, the pellet was further washed twice with the urea buffer (4 M urea with 1×PBS with protease inhibitor cocktail) and centrifuged at 29,700×g for 60 minutes at 12 °C to diminish the soluble proteins. The pellet was washed with 1×PBS buffer twice, followed by a 10-minute 10000×g centrifugation at 4 °C to remove the urea. The membrane protein pellet was recovered in 2% SDS (1×PBS with protease inhibitor cocktail), aliquoted, and quantified by bicinchoninic acid assay. Around 2 mL solution was collected at a concentration of 0.92 mg/mL. Then the aliquot (120ug per tube) was precipitated with methanol/chloroform precipitation to remove lipids and stored at -80 °C before use.  The size exclusion chromatography column (4.6 x 300 mm, 3 µm particles, 500 Å pores) from Agilent was used for separation on a 1260 Infinity II HPLC system from Agilent (Santa Clara, CA). Detection was performed using an ultraviolet-visible detector at a wave length of 254 nm. After resuspending 120 μg proteins in 20 μL prechilled 90% formic acid (FA), the solution was diluted into 60 μL 3/6/1 FA/methanol/water (v/v) and ultrasonicated on ice for five minutes. The separation was carried out with the 5% FA and 60% methanol (v/v, pH 2.09) mobile phase with 0.25 mL/min under 30 °C column temperature. Four fractions were collected from 8 min to 16 min and dried by speed vacuum.  A CESI 8000 Plus was coupled to the Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap by EMASS-II (CMP Scientific) interface for CZE-ESI-MS/MS.3 A 2.2~2.4 kV spray voltage was applied on the 25~30 μm glass spray emitter containing 0.2% (v/v) formic acid and 10% (v/v) methanol sheath liquid. The capillary (1 m long, 50 μm i.d, 360 μm o.d) was coated with linear polyacrylamide (LPA) based on the previous protocol for 55 minutes to increase endurance. The tip of the capillary was etched by HF (48%-51% solution in water) for 90 minutes to decrease the distance between the capillary outlet to the emitter orifice to around 0.4 mm. The BGE is 30% acetic acid (AA) and 30% methanol in water (v/v). For the single-shot sample, one aliquot of the protein precipitation (120 μg) was resolubilized in cold 80% FA and diluted into 40 μL 3/6/1 FA/Methanol/water (v/v). SEC fractions were also resolubilized in cold 80% FA and diluted into 20 μL 3/6/1 FA/Methanol/water (v/v). After applying 5 psi for 29 s, 150 nL samples (7.5% of column volume, average protein concentration 1.4 mg/mL for SEC fractions, and 3 mg/mL for single-shot sample) were loaded into the capillary. Under a 30 kV separation voltage, the CZE separation was carried out under low pressure (0.1 psi for the first 80 minutes, 0.5 psi for 80-100 minutes, 2 psi for 100-110 minutes, and 10 psi for the last 10 minutes of flushing). The separation current is around 2.5-4.3 μA. After duplicate runs of each fraction, the capillary was cleaned by flushing with 0.5% ammonium hydroxide at 10 psi for 10 minutes, then flushed with water and BGE at the same condition.  For MS, we set up the temperature of the ion transfer tube at 320 °C, the S lens radio-frequency (RF) level at 60%, and turned on the intact protein mode. The MS/MS experiments were performed using data-dependent acquisition (DDA). MS1 spectra were collected with the following parameters: an m/z range of 600-2500, resolution of 120,000 (at m/z of 200), an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6, a maximum injection time of 100 ms, and a microscan number of 1. The top five most abundant precursor ions (charge state higher than 5 and intensity threshold 1e4) in full MS spectra were isolated with a window of 2 m/z and fragmented using HCD with Normalized collision energy (NCE) of 20%. The settings for MS2 spectra were a resolution of 60,000 (at m/z 200), an m/z range of 200-2000, a microscan number of 3, an AGC target value of 1e6, and a maximum injection time of 200 ms. The dynamic exclusion was applied with a duration of 30 s with the exclusion of isotopes.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were converted into mzML using MSConvert with peak picking algorithm and then deconvoluted by TOP-down mass spectrometry feature detection (TopFD) and searched by TOP-down mass spectrometry-based proteoform identification and characterization (TopPIC) (https://www.toppic.org/software/toppic/publications.html).7 The UniProt database of mouse (UP000000589, 55315 entries) was accessed on Sep 20th, 2022. TopFD was performed in the default settings to generate the deconvoluted msalign files, and TopPIC was performed using the target-decoy approach with a spectrum-level FDR of 1% and a proteoform-level FDR of 5%. For the combined database search of SEC-CZE-MS/MS data, TopPIC version 1.6.2 was used. For others, TopPIC version 1.6.0 was used. The maximum number of mass shifts is two, and the max variable PTM number is three. The mass error tolerance is 10 ppm with a 1.2 Da PrSM cluster error tolerance. For the single-shot experiment, the mass error tolerance is 15 ppm with a 1.2 Da PrSM cluster error tolerance.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry (MS)-based top-down characterization of integral membrane proteins (IMPs) is crucial for understanding their functions in biological processes. However, it is technically challenging due to their low solubility in typical MS-compatible buffers. In this work, for the first time, we developed an efficient capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE)-tandem MS (MS/MS) method for the top-down proteomics (TDP) of IMPs enriched from mouse brains. Our technique employs a sample buffer containing 30% (v/v) formic acid and 60% (v/v) methanol for solubilizing IMPs and utilizes a separation buffer of 30% (v/v) acetic acid and 30% (v/v) methanol for maintaining the solubility of IMPs during CZE separation. Single-shot CZE-MS/MS identified 51 IMP proteoforms from the mouse brain sample. Coupling size exclusion chromatography (SEC) to CZE-MS/MS enabled the identification of 276 IMP proteoforms from the mouse brain sample containing 1-4 transmembrane domains. This proof-of-concept work demonstrates the high potential of CZE-MS/MS for the large-scale TDP of IMPs.

### Keywords
Top-down proteomics; integral membrane protein; proteoform; capillary zone electrophoresis-mass spectrometry; mouse brain

### Affiliations
Michigan State University 
Department of Chemistry, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824

### Submitter
Liangliang Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Liangliang Sun
Department of Chemistry, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824


