### Accession
PXD027471

### Title
Exploration on survived mice after sepsis and proteomic analy-sis on LPS-activated macrophages supports the regulation of sepsis hyper-inflammation by intravenous immunoglobulin

### Description
Because the immune regulation in survivor after sepsis (an immune dysregulation from severe infection) might be applied for treatment, survivors and moribund mice after cecal liga-tion and puncture (CLP) and in vitro experiments on macrophages were explored. Most of the parameters in survivors (5-days post-CLP) were normalized, except for the slightly increase in alanine transaminase, IL-10, lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and gut leakage (FITC-dextran assay), with the enhanced adaptive immunity; serum immunoglobulin (using serum protein electrophoresis) and activated immune cells in spleens (flow cytometry analysis). Then, a clue to surviving sepsis may be effective innate immunity regulation by adaptive immune responses. Indeed, soluble heat aggregated immunoglobulin (sHA-Ig, a representative of immune complex) in LPS-activated macrophages reduced supernatant cytokines and down-regulated proteins in sev-eral processes (using proteomic analysis). As a proof of concept, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) attenuated sepsis severity in CLP mice as evaluated by serum creatinine, ALT, serum cy-tokines, spleen apoptosis (24 h post-CLP) and 48 h survival analysis. In conclusion, immuno-globulin may play a role in sepsis immune hyper-responsiveness. Despite the debate over IVIG's use in sepsis, adequate selection criteria for sepsis patients who may benefit the most from IVIG could lead to an increase use of this clinically viable treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Stimulated RAW246.7 cells after 24 h of LPS or LPS + sHA-Ig incubation was washed 3 times with ice-cold PBS, lysed in 8 M urea in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma) containing 1X protease inhibitor cocktail (ThermoFisher) and sonicated at 40% amplitude for 1 min. Cell debris were pelleted by centrifugation at 12,000 x g at 4 °C for 10 min. Protein concentration was measured by BCA assay (ThermoFisher). Then, 100 µg of each sample were processed with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Merck, Kenilworth, NJ, USA) at 37°C for 30 min, followed by alkylation with 40 mM iodoacetamide (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA) at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. These samples were further quenched with 40 mM DTT at least 15 minutes at room temperature and di-luted with 100 mM TEAB to lower urea concentration to < 1 M followed by incubation with trypsin (Promega) at a ratio of 1:50 (w/w) at 37 °C overnight. The tryptic peptides were labeled with TMTsixplexTM Isobaric Label Reagent Set (ThermoFisher) following the manufacturer’s protocols. Peptides derived from cells stimulated with LPS plus sHA-IG or LPS were labeled with 128 and 130 TMT reagent, respectively. After labeling, the samples were incubated for 1 h at room temperature and quenched with 5% hydroxylamine (Sig-maAldrich) for 15 minutes. Each labeled sample was combined and dried in a vacuum centrifugation. Then, the pooled labelled peptides were separated into 20 fractions and concatenated into 10 fractions using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Frac-tionation Kit (ThermoFisher) with minor modified instruction. Then, all fractions were dried in vacuo and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (Sigma) before MS analysis. After that, liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis of sam-ples was performed on an EASY-nLC1000 system coupled to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap Plus mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (ThermoFisher). The peptides were eluted with the following acetonitrile gradients in 0.1% FA: 5-8% for 3 min 8-15% for 60 min, 15-40% for 23 min, 40-95% for 2 min, and 95% for 5 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The MS methods included a full MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 followed by 10 data-dependent MS2 scans at a resolution of 35,000. The normalized collision energy of HCD fragmentation was set at 32%. An MS scan range of 200 to 2000 m/z was selected and precursor ions with unassigned charge states, a charge state of +1, or a charge state of greater than +8 were excluded. A dynamic exclusion of 30 s was used.

### Data Protocol
Peaklist-generating software of Thermo Xcalibur 3.0.63 (August 27, 2013) with Proteome Discoverer™ Software 2.1.1.21 (ThermoFisher) was used. The MS raw data files were searched against a composite database containing the forward and reversed peptide se-quences of the Mouse Swiss-Prot Database (17,051 proteins, December 2020) with a list of common protein contaminants (www.thegpm.org/crap/). The search parameters were set for the following fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146 Da), as well as TMT 6 plex of N-termini and lysine (+229.162932 Da). For variable modifications, the search parameters were set as follows: oxidation of methionine (+15.99491 Da) with a maximum of four modifications and two missed cleavages allowed per peptide. Parent and fragment monoisotopic mass errors were set at 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. A target–decoy approach was used to limit a false discovery rate of the identified peptides to less than 1%. The reporter ion intensity ratios of R+IC/R were transformed to log2 (R+IC/R). P-values were calculated with Student’s t-test based on the triplicate log2 (R+IC/R) against 0. The proteins with p-value ≤ 0.05 were considered as significantly altered proteins and these proteins were subjected to the online resource PANTHER Classification System (V. 16.0) to investigate the enriched biological process.

### Publication Abstract
Because both endotoxemia and gut dysbiosis post-splenectomy might be associated with systemic infection, the susceptibility against infection was tested by dextran sulfate solution (DSS)-induced colitis and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) injection models in splenectomy mice with macrophage experiments. Here, splenectomy induced a gut barrier defect (FITC-dextran assay, endotoxemia, bacteria in mesenteric lymph nodes, and the loss of enterocyte tight junction) and gut dysbiosis (increased Proteobacteria by fecal microbiome analysis) without systemic inflammation (serum IL-6). In parallel, DSS induced more severe mucositis in splenectomy mice than sham-DSS mice, as indicated by mortality, stool consistency, gut barrier defect, serum cytokines, and blood bacterial burdens. The presence of green fluorescent-producing (GFP) <i>E. coli</i> in the spleen of sham-DSS mice after an oral gavage supported a crucial role of the spleen in the control of bacteria from gut translocation. Additionally, LPS administration in splenectomy mice induced lower serum cytokines (TNF-&#x3b1; and IL-6) than LPS-administered sham mice, perhaps due to LPS tolerance from pre-existing post-splenectomy endotoxemia. In macrophages, LPS tolerance (sequential LPS stimulation) demonstrated lower cell activities than the single LPS stimulation, as indicated by the reduction in supernatant cytokines, pro-inflammatory genes (<i>iNOS</i> and <i>IL-1</i><i>&#x3b2;</i>), cell energy status (extracellular flux analysis), and enzymes of the glycolysis pathway (proteomic analysis). In conclusion, a gut barrier defect after splenectomy was vulnerable to enterocyte injury (such as DSS), which caused severe bacteremia due to defects in microbial control (asplenia) and endotoxemia-induced LPS tolerance. Hence, gut dysbiosis and gut bacterial translocation in patients with a splenectomy might be associated with systemic infection, and gut-barrier monitoring or intestinal tight-junction strengthening may be useful.

### Keywords
Sepsis; clp; macrophages; proteomic analysis; ivig

### Affiliations
Immunology Unit, Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand
Center of Excellence in Systems Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330

### Submitter
Jiradej Makjaroen

### Lab Head
Dr Asada Leelahavanichkul
Immunology Unit, Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand


