### Accession
PXD031919

### Title
Plasma samples processed with depletion and non depletion

### Description
Plasma samples processed with no depletion and most-abundant-proteins depletion procedures according to standard in-solution and single-pot, solid-phase-enhaced sample preparation (SP3) workflows using guanidyne hydrochloride and SDS lysis buffers for analysis with liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS).

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples were processed with non depletion using the in-solution and SP3 protocols and different lysis buffers with SDS or guanidium. Depletion of top 12 most abundant proteins in plasma was carried out with commercial depletion mini spin columns. Depleted samples were further processed with the SP3 method. Depleted and non depleted were desalted and analyzed unfractionated. Depleted samples were also fractionated by high-pH reversed phase chromatography. All samples were analyzed on an Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were indiviually analysed with Proteome Discoverer with standard DDA and label-free workflows and further analyzed in Excel. Proteome characterization was performed by gene ontology analysis and an STRING protein interactions study.

### Publication Abstract
The use of a proper sample processing methodology for maximum proteome coverage and high-quality quantitative data is an important choice to make before initiating a liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS)-based proteomics study. Popular sample processing workflows for proteomics involve in-solution proteome digestion and single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3). We tested them on both HeLa cells and human plasma samples, using lysis buffers containing SDS, or guanidinium hydrochloride. We also studied the effect of using commercially available depletion mini spin columns before SP3, to increase proteome coverage in human plasma samples. Our results show that the SP3 protocol, using either buffer, achieves the highest number of quantified proteins in both the HeLa cells and plasma samples. Moreover, the use of depletion mini spin columns before SP3 results in a two-fold increase of quantified plasma proteins. With additional fractionation, we quantified nearly 1400 proteins, and examined lower-abundance proteins involved in neurodegenerative pathways and mitochondrial metabolism. Therefore, we recommend the use of the SP3 methodology for biological sample processing, including those after depletion of high-abundance plasma proteins.

### Keywords
Plasma

### Affiliations
University of Bergen
Institute of biomedicine, University of Bergen

### Submitter
Maria Hernandez-Valladares

### Lab Head
Dr Frode Berven
Institute of biomedicine, University of Bergen


