### Accession
PXD042823

### Title
Examining the stability of nucleosomal modifications during pull-down affinity purification

### Description
Here we investigated the stability of nucleosomal modifications during pull-down affinity purification with HeLa nuclear extracts. Unmodified di-nucleosomes and di-nucleosomes decorated with H3K4me3K9acK14acK18acK23acK27ac, H4K5acK8acK12acK16acK20me2 and incorporating histone variant H2A.Z were incubated with HeLa nuclear extract or buffer alone for 4 hours at 4 degrees Celsius. The relative abundances of nucleosomal modifications were quantified using LC-MS.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear extracts were prepared from HeLa S3 cells as previously described (Bartke et al, 2010) except that no isotopically labeled amino acids were used. Nucleosome pull-downs were performed as described previously (Tvardovskiy, Nguyen, Bartke, 2022). Histone proteins were prepared for LC-MS analysis using the hybrid chemical derivatization (Maile et al, 2015) protocol adopted for in-gel sample preparation. For LC-MS analysis of modified histone proteins the acidified histone peptide digests were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, U.S.A.) coupled in-line to a nanoEasy LC (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark). Briefly, samples were automatically loaded onto an in-house packed 2 cm 100 µm ID C18 pre-column with buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and then eluted and separated on an in-house packed Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (3 µm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) analytical column (20 cm x 75 µm ID) using a 35 min. linear gradient from 0% to 40% buffer B (90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 1,000) and MS/MS fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 or 15,000 respectively, with maximum injection times of 50 ms each. Up to twenty most intense ions were selected for HCD fragmentation depending on signal intensity. Dynamic exclusion was disabled.


### Data Protocol
For the identification and quantification of histone PTMs, MS raw data files were manually analyzed using Skyline software version 20.1.0.31 6 (MacLean et al. 2010). Briefly, a list of unmodified as well as differentially modified histone H3 and H4 peptides was manually compiled and used to evaluate the modification status of histones in each sample. All lysine residues not bearing acetylation or methylation were considered to be propionylated and all peptide N-termini. The relative quantification for a given peptide was obtained by dividing its quantification by the sum of all quantifications of all peptides sharing the same amino acid sequence.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nucleosome pull-down

### Affiliations
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany.
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany

### Submitter
Andrey Tvardovskiy

### Lab Head
Dr Till Bartke
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany.


