### Accession
PXD034653

### Title
QuantitativeCancerProteomicAtlas1.2 observable peptides

### Description
This dataset contain evidences of observability of QCPA (v1.2) peptides, in whole cell tryptic proteome background.

### Sample Protocol
MV4-11 proteome was separately proteolyzed as described in Cifani & Kentsis 2017. Synthetic QCPA peptides (isotopically encoded with 13C6,15N2-lys, and 13C6,15N4-Arg) were mixed with MV4-11 cells tryptic proteome, and loaded at 500 fmol on column in 5 ug background proteome. Peptides were resolved by nanoscale SCX into 10 fractions, derectly onto a nanoscale reversed phase column, in line with the ESI source. Peptides were analyzed by a Thermo Fusion orbitrap set to collect MS1 at 120K resolution, and to deploy HCD fragmentation upon detection of expected m/z for QCPA peptides. Fragmentation spectra were recorded in the linar trap at normal resolution.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were analyzed using both MaxQuant and PeaksDB software to improve sensitivity, with STY-phosphorylation, M-oxidation, NQ-deamidation, and KR isotopic labeling set as variable modification. C-carbamidomethylation was set a fixed modification. PSMs were originally filtered to maintain 5% FDR, and the dataset was filtered to only contain QCPA peptides.

### Publication Abstract
In spite of extensive studies of cellular signaling, many fundamental processes such as pathway integration, cross-talk, and feedback remain poorly understood. To enable integrated and quantitative measurements of cellular biochemical activities, we have developed the Quantitative Cell Proteomics Atlas (QCPA). QCPA consists of panels of targeted mass spectrometry assays to determine the abundance and stoichiometry of regulatory post-translational modifications of sentinel proteins from most known physiologic and pathogenic signaling pathways in human cells. QCPA currently profiles 1&#x202f;913 peptides from 469 effectors of cell surface signaling, apoptosis, stress response, gene expression, quiescence, and proliferation. For each protein, QCPA includes triplets of isotopically labeled peptides covering known post-translational regulatory sites to determine their stoichiometries and unmodified protein regions to measure total protein abundance. The QCPA framework incorporates analytes to control for technical variability of sample preparation and mass spectrometric analysis, including TrypQuant, a synthetic substrate for accurate quantification of proteolysis efficiency for proteins containing chemically modified residues. The ability to precisely and accurately quantify most known signaling pathways should enable improved chemoproteomic approaches for the comprehensive analysis of cell signaling and clinical proteomics of diagnostic specimens. QCPA is openly available at https://qcpa.mskcc.org.

### Keywords
Human qcpa phosphorylation synthetic

### Affiliations
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory

### Submitter
Paolo Cifani

### Lab Head
Dr Paolo Cifani
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory


