### Accession
PXD004637

### Title
Label-free analysis of CD8+ T cell subset proteomes supports a progressive differentiation model of virus-specific T cells in humans

### Description
Different pathogens trigger naïve T cells to express distinct sets of effector proteins. To better understand the molecular mechanisms that drive this functional specification, we used high resolution, label-free mass spectrometry to measure proteomic differences between the seven largest circulating human CD8+ T cell subsets. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of the proteomes placed naïve and CD45RA-expressing effector-type T cells at the extremes of the spectrum with central-memory and other effector-memory stages located in between. Prominent differences between the subsets included expression of various granzymes, signaling proteins and molecules involved in metabolic regulation. Remarkably, whereas most of the proteomic changes between the subsets were gradual, a small proportion of proteins were regulated only in discrete subsets. The data obtained from this proteome analysis correspond best to a progressive differentiation model in which specific stable traits are gradually acquired during pathogen-specific development.

### Sample Protocol
Subjects  Buffycoats from 8 different healthy asymptomatic adults were obtained from the local bloodbank. PBMCs were separated using lymphoprep.  Immunofluorescence staining, sorting CD8 T cells were enriched using the MagniSort™ Human CD8 T cell Enrichment Kit (negative selection, eBioscience) according to manufacturing conditions and stored frozen until the day of sorting. The enriched T cells were subsequently thawed and stained in RPMI 5% FCS with the following antibodies: CD3 BV510, CCR7 BV421, CD45RA FITC, CD27 APC-eFluor 780, CD8 APC, CD28 PE. From the CD3+CD8+lymphocyte gate the following subsets were sorted on a 6-way influx sorter (BD). Some subsets could not be obtained from all donors owing to a natural variation in which these subsets are present in healthy adults: TN isolates were obtained from 5 different donors; TCM isolates were obtained from 6 different donors; TEM1 isolates were obtained from 4 different donors, 2 of which were pooled together to obtain sufficient cells shortly before protein isolation; TEM2 isolates were obtained from 6 different donors, 4 of which were pooled together to obtain sufficient cells shortly before protein isolation; TEM3 isolates were obtained from 6 different  donors, 4 and 2 of which, respectively, were pooled together to obtain sufficient cells shortly before protein isolation ; TEM4 isolates were  obtained from 6 different donors; 5 of which were pooled together to obtain sufficient cells shortly before protein isolation; TEMRA isolates were obtained from 5 different donors of which one was analyzed in duplicate.  Sample preparation for mass spectrometry analysis Cell pellets (1-2 ×106) were lysed in 30 μl 4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris.HCl pH 7.5 supplemented with HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific) and processed into tryptic peptides using the Filter Aided Sample Preparation method (Wisniewski et al. 2009). Peptides were desalted and concentrated using Empore-C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al. 2003) and eluted with 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid, 80 % (v/v) acetonitrile. Sample volume was reduced by SpeedVac and supplemented with 2 % acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA to a final volume of 12 μl. For each sample, 3 technical replicates were analyzed by injecting 3 μl of the sample.   Mass spectrometry data acquisition Tryptic peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse chromatography coupled on line to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex Ion Source, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a 20 cm 75–360 µm inner-outer diameter fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH). The column was installed on a Dionex Ultimate3000 RSLC nanoSystem (Thermo Scientific) using a MicroTee union formatted for 360 μm outer diameter columns (IDEX) and a liquid junction. The spray voltage was set to 2.15 kV. Buffer A was composed of 0.5 % acetic acid and buffer B of 0.5 % acetic acid, 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were loaded for 17 min at 300 nl/min at 5% buffer B, equilibrated for 5 minutes at 5%  buffer B (17-22 min) and eluted by increasing buffer B from 5-15% (22-87 min) and 15-38% (87-147 min), followed by a 10 minute wash to 90 % and a 5 min regeneration to 5%. Survey scans of peptide precursors from 400 to 1500 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 1.5 × 105 ion count target. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed by isolation with the quadrupole with isolation window 1.6, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan mass spectrometry analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 104 and the max injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–7 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis The RAW mass spectrometry files were processed with the MaxQuant computational platform, 1.5.2.8. Proteins and peptides were identified using the Andromeda search engine by querying the human Uniprot database (downloaded February 2015). Standard settings with the additional options match between runs, Label Free Quantification (LFQ), and unique peptides for quantification were selected. The generated ‘proteingroups.txt’ table was filtered for potential contaminants, reverse hits and ‘only identified by site’ using Perseus 1.5.1.6. The LFQ values were transformed in log2 scale, the three technical replicates per experimental condition grouped and averaged based on the median, and proteins were filtered for at least two valid values in one of the experimental groups. Missing values were imputed by normal distribution (width=0.3, shift = 1.8), assuming these proteins were close to the detection limit. Quantitative significance (Pearson correlation coefficient, Principle Component Analysis and ANOVA) was performed by Perseus software. To identify the proteins with the most prominent differences expression profiles within the different CD8+ T cell subsets, we used the built-in analysis-of-variance functions in PERSEUS using an FDR of 5% and S0 of 0.4 (the S0 parameter sets a threshold for minimum fold change). This identified a total of 286 differentially expressed proteins. Enrichment analysis of the significantly different genes was performed using the Cytoscape (version 3.2.1) plug-in BiNGO (version 3.0.3) with an FDR threshold of 0.05. Interaction network analysis of the significantly different genes was performed using STRING (version 10) using the parameters Active prediction method: Experiments, Databases, Neighbourhood and Score: 0.400. The identified network was uploaded into Cytoscape (version 3.2.1). For metabolic annotations we used the human metabolic network reconstruction RECON 1 (Duarte et al. 2007) supplemented with the genes involved in the main metabolism pathways (TCA cycle, Glycolysis, Lipid digestion, mobilization and transport, Penthose phosphate, Electron transport and Fatty acid biosynthesis). Adhesome annotations are literature based.  For comparison with Bottcher et al. (Nature Communications 2015) we downloaded Supplementary Data 3. We combined Z-scored log2 LFQ values of 549 proteins that were identified in both datasets and significantly different in either of the datasets using the built-in analysis-of-variance functions in PERSEUS (FDR of 5% and S0 of 0.4) as described above.

### Publication Abstract
Pathogens trigger T&#xa0;cells to express distinct sets of&#xa0;effector proteins. To better understand the molecular mechanisms that drive functional specification, we used high-resolution mass spectrometry and label-free protein quantification to measure proteomic differences between the seven largest circulating human CD8<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cell subsets. Hierarchical clustering of the proteomes placed naive and CD45RA-expressing effector-type T&#xa0;cells at the extremes of the spectrum,&#xa0;with central memory and other effector memory stages located in between. Prominent differences between the subsets included expression of specific&#xa0;granzymes, signaling proteins, and molecules involved in metabolic regulation and cell adhesion. Remarkably, whereas most of the proteomic relationships between the subsets occurred in linear variations, a small proportion of proteins was regulated only in discrete subsets. The data obtained from this proteome analysis correspond best to a progressive differentiation model in which specific stable traits are gradually acquired during development.

### Keywords
Human, Cd8+ t cells

### Affiliations
Sanquin Research
Department of Plasma Proteins, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, the Netherlands

### Submitter
Maartje van den Biggelaar

### Lab Head
Dr Maartje van den Biggelaar
Department of Plasma Proteins, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, the Netherlands


