### Accession
PXD004523

### Title
Metabolic reconstruction of lipid metabolism of Malassezia

### Description
Malassezia species are lipophilic and lipid dependent yeasts belonging to the human and animal microbiota. Typically, they are isolated from regions rich in sebaceous glands. They have been associated with dermatological diseases such as seborrheic dermatitis, tinea versicolor, atopic dermatitis, and folliculitis. Genome sequences of Malassezia globosa, Malassezia sympodialis, and Malassezia pachydermatis lack genes related to fatty acid synthesis. Here, lipid synthesis pathways of M. furfur, M. pachydermatis, M. globosa, M. sympodialis and an atypical variant of M. furfur were reconstructed using genome data and Constraints Based Reconstruction and Analysis. The metabolic reconstruction allowed us to predict variation in the fluxes of each reaction over the network to satisfy the biomass objective function. Proteomic profiling improved and validated the models through data integration. Results suggest that several mechanisms including steroid and butanoate metabolism explain the yeast’s growth under different lipid conditions. Flux differences were observed in production of riboflavin in M. furfur and the biosynthesis of glycerolipids in the atypical variant of M. furfur and Malassezia sympodialis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was carried out as described [1]. Strains of M. furfur CBS1878, Atypical M. furfur, M. globosa CBS7986, M. pachydermatis CBS1879, and M. sympodialis CBS7222 were grown on Dixon broth (20 g L-1 Oxbille (Sigma Aldrich, USA), 36g L-1 malt extract (Oxoid, UK), 6 g L-1 Peptone (Oxoid, UK), 2 mL L-1 glycerol (Sigma Aldrich, USA), 2 mL L-1 oleic acid (Sigma Aldrich, USA), 10 mL L-1 Tween 40 (Sigma Aldrich, USA), and 500 mg L-1 chloramphenicol (Sigma Aldrich, USA)) at 180 rpm and 33 °C. Aliquots of 5 mL were taken at early exponential(T1)and early stationary phases (T2) and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 10 min. The resulting pellet was washed three times with PBS, after which it was resuspended in extraction buffer (1:10 cell to extraction buffer ratio; 125 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich, USA), 20 mM E-aminocaproic acid (Sigma Aldrich, USA), 5 mM ethylenediaminetetra-acetic acid (Sigma Aldrich, USA), and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (Thermo Scientific, USA). Cells were disrupted by vortexing for 10 min with 4 mm silica beads and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm and 4°C for 10 min. The protein phase was taken and precipitated with 20% TCA (Sigma Aldrich, USA) [2]. The amount of protein was quantified using a Nanodrop (Thermo Scientific, USA) and visualized by SDS-PAGE electrophoresis. The protein extraction was carried out five times per sample. The extracted proteins were sent to the proteomic center of the University of California at Davis (http://proteomics.ucdavis.edu/). Protein profiling for each sample was done using the mass spectrometer Michrom HPLC Paradigm type, the Q-mass spectrometer ionization Proxeon Exactive nano-spray, and the Easy-LC II HPLC.  Tandem mass spectra were extracted by [unknown] version [unknown]. Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2013.02.01.1)). X! Tandem was set up to search the Atypical_20151130_tS_UBs database (unknown version, 24462 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. X! Tandem was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 PPM and a parent ion tolerance of 20 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in X! Tandem as a fixed modification. Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and tryptophan, dioxidation of methionine and tryptophan and acetyl of the n-terminus were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications.  1.  Kim HJ, Kim ET, Lim CY, Park C, Kang BT, Kim JW, et al. The immunoglobulin G response to Malassezia pachydermatis extracts in atopic and non-atopic dogs. Can Vet J Rev Vét Can. 2010;51: 869–872.  2.  Wood E. Protein Purification Methods: A Practical Approach. Biochem Educ. 1991;19: 39–40. doi:10.1016/0307-4412(91)90149-3

### Data Protocol
Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.4.6, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they exceeded specific database search engine thresholds. X! Tandem identifications required at least -Log(Expect Scores) scores of greater than 1,5. Protein identifications were accepted if they contained at least 1 identified peptides. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. proteins were compared against the Uniprot Ustilaginomycotina proteins and the Malassezia spp

### Publication Abstract
<i>Malassezia</i> species are lipophilic and lipid-dependent yeasts belonging to the human and animal microbiota. Typically, they are isolated from regions rich in sebaceous glands. They have been associated with dermatological diseases such as seborrheic dermatitis, pityriasis versicolor, atopic dermatitis, and folliculitis. The genomes of <i>Malassezia globosa</i>, <i>Malassezia sympodialis</i>, and <i>Malassezia pachydermatis</i> lack the genes related to fatty acid synthesis. Here, the lipid-synthesis pathways of these species, as well as of <i>Malassezia furfur</i>, and of an atypical <i>M. furfur</i> variant were reconstructed using genome data and Constraints Based Reconstruction and Analysis. To this end, the genomes of <i>M. furfur</i> CBS 1878 and the atypical <i>M. furfur</i> 4DS were sequenced and annotated. The resulting Enzyme Commission numbers and predicted reactions were similar to the other <i>Malassezia</i> strains despite the differences in their genome size. Proteomic profiling was utilized to validate flux distributions. Flux differences were observed in the production of steroids in <i>M. furfur</i> and in the metabolism of butanoate in <i>M. pachydermatis</i>. The predictions obtained via these metabolic reconstructions also suggested defects in the assimilation of palmitic acid in <i>M. globosa</i>, <i>M. sympodialis</i>, <i>M. pachydermatis</i>, and the atypical variant of <i>M. furfur</i>, but not in <i>M. furfur.</i> These predictions were validated via physiological characterization, showing the predictive power of metabolic network reconstructions to provide new clues about the metabolic versatility of <i>Malassezia</i>.

### Keywords
Malassezia furfur, Malassezia pachydermatis, Malassezia sympodialis, Malassezia globosa

### Affiliations
Universidad de los Andes
LAMFU, Biological Science department,universidad de los Andes,Colombia Molecular microbiology,Utrecht University, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sergio Triana

### Lab Head
Dr Adriana Celis
LAMFU, Biological Science department,universidad de los Andes,Colombia Molecular microbiology,Utrecht University, The Netherlands


