### Accession
PXD001731

### Title
Large-Scale Targeted Proteomics Using Internal Standard Triggered-Parallel Reaction Monitoring

### Description
Development, implementation, and evaluation of a new data acquisition scheme called internal standard triggered-parallel reaction monitoring (IS-PRM) to increase the scale of targeted quantitative experiments while retaining high detection and quantification performance. All the details about the dataset, the associated sample preparation and liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry methods, and the data processing procedures are provided in the manuscript by Gallien et al., entitled "Large-Scale Targeted Proteomics Using Internal Standard Triggered-Parallel Reaction Monitoring", Molecular and Cellular Proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Different types of samples were analyzed, including plasma, urine, and HeLa cells samples supplemented with synthetic peptides (unlabeled and/or isotopically labeled). The samples were analyzed by SRM on a triple quadrupole instrument (TSQ Vantage EMR) and/or by PRM/IS-PRM on quadrupole-orbitrap instruments (Q-Exactive, Q-Exactive Plus, and Q-Exactive HF).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Xcalibur (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and/or Pinpoint (version 1.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and processing tools developed in-house in C# programming language and based on MSFileReader library (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) when the intended operation was not possible with standard software (e.g., spectral matching). Confirmation of the identity and quantification of the peptides relied on extracted ion chromatograms and intensity of fragment ions.

### Publication Abstract
Targeted high-resolution and accurate mass analyses performed on fast sequencing mass spectrometers have opened new avenues for quantitative proteomics. More specifically, parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) implemented on quadrupole-orbitrap instruments exhibits exquisite selectivity to discriminate interferences from analytes. Furthermore, the instrument trapping capability enhances the sensitivity of the measurements. The PRM technique, applied to the analysis of limited peptide sets (typically 50 peptides or less) in a complex matrix, resulted in an improved detection and quantification performance as compared with the reference method of selected reaction monitoring performed on triple quadrupole instruments. However, the implementation of PRM for the analysis of large peptide numbers requires the adjustment of mass spectrometry acquisition parameters, which affects dramatically the quality of the generated data, and thus the overall output of an experiment. A newly designed data acquisition scheme enabled the analysis of moderate-to-large peptide numbers while retaining a high performance level. This new method, called internal standard triggered-parallel reaction monitoring (IS-PRM), relies on added internal standards and the on-the-fly adjustment of acquisition parameters to drive in real-time measurement of endogenous peptides. The acquisition time management was designed to maximize the effective time devoted to measure the analytes in a time-scheduled targeted experiment. The data acquisition scheme alternates between two PRM modes: a fast low-resolution "watch mode" and a "quantitative mode" using optimized parameters ensuring data quality. The IS-PRM method exhibited a highly effective use of the instrument time. Applied to the analysis of large peptide sets (up to 600) in complex samples, the method showed an unprecedented combination of scale and analytical performance, with limits of quantification in the low amol range. The successful analysis of various types of biological samples augurs a broad applicability of the method, which is likely to benefit a wide range of proteomics experiments.

### Keywords
Targeted proteomics, Quadrupole-orbitrap, Parallel reaction monitoring, High resolution and accurate mass, Remote control, Real-time data analysis

### Affiliations
Luxembourg Clinical Proteomics Center
Luxembourg Clinical Proteomics Center, Luxembourg Institute of Health, Luxembourg

### Submitter
Sebastien Gallien

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Domon
Luxembourg Clinical Proteomics Center, Luxembourg Institute of Health, Luxembourg


