### Accession
PXD025234

### Title
Cold acclimation process under limited light conditions in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
Plants in temperate regions have evolved mechanisms to survive sudden temperature drops. Previous reports have indicated that the cold acclimation mechanism is light-dependent and does not fully operate under a low light intensity. In these studies, plants were grown under a long-day photoperiod and were more sensitive to freezing stress. However, winter annuals like Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0 germinate in the fall, overwinter as rosettes, and therefore must acclimate under short photoperiods and low irradiance. The role of light intensity was analysed in plants grown under a short-day photoperiod at the growth stage 1.14. Plants were acclimated at 4 °C for seven days under 100 and 20 μmol m-2s-1 PPFD for control and limited-light conditions, respectively. All cold acclimated plants accumulated molecular markers reportedly associated with acquired freezing tolerance, including proline, sucrose, CBFs, and COR gene protein products dehydrins and low-temperature-responsive proteins LTIs. Observed changes indicated that low PPFD did not inhibit the cold acclimation process, and the freezing stress experiment confirmed similar survival rates. The molecular analysis found distinct PPFD-specific adaptation mechanisms that were manifested in contrasting content of anthocyanins, cytokinin conjugates, abundances of proteins forming photosystems, and enzymes of protein, energy, and ROS metabolism pathways. Finally, this study led to the identification of putative proteins and metabolite markers correlating with susceptibility to freezing stress of non-acclimated plants grown under low PPFD. Our data show that Arabidopsis plants grown under short-day photoperiod can be fully cold-acclimated under limited light conditions, employing standard and PPFD-specific pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein extracts were prepared as previously described (Hallmark 143 et al., 2020), and portions of samples corresponding to 5 μg of peptide were analysed by nanoflow reverse-phase liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry using a 15 cm C18 Zorbax column (Agilent), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-UPLC system and the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
The measured spectra were recalibrated and searched against Araport 11 protein database, as described previously (Berková et al., 2020). Only proteins with at least two unique peptides were 149 considered for the quantitative analysis. The quantitative differences were determined by Minora, employing precursor ion quantification followed by normalization and calculation of relative protein abundances.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Cold, Freezing stress, Light, Metabolome, Proteome, Cytokinin, Acclimation

### Affiliations
Mendel University in Brno

### Submitter
Martin Cerny

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Cerny
Mendel University in Brno


