### Accession
PXD010395

### Title
Proteomic analysis identifies highly expressed plasma membrane proteins for detection and therapeutic targeting of specific breast cancer subtypes

### Description
In recent years, there has been an emphasis on personalizing breast cancer treatment in order to avoid the debilitating side effects caused by broad-spectrum chemotherapeutic drug treatment. Development of personalized medicine requires the identification of proteins that are expressed by individual tumors. Herein, we reveal the identity of plasma membrane proteins that are overexpressed in estrogen receptor α-positive, HER2-positive, and triple negative breast cancer cells. The proteins we identified are involved in maintaining protein structure, intracellular homeostasis, and cellular architecture; enhancing cell proliferation and invasion; and influencing cell migration. These proteins may be useful for breast cancer detection and/or treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Materials and Methods Cell lines and culture  MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, and SK-BR-3 cells, derived from pleural effusions (metastatic sites), and MCF-10A cells, derived from a benign fibrocystic mammary lesion, were originally obtained from ATCC (Manassas, VA) and maintained as described [3]. Two TNBC cell lines, DT22 (basal claudin-low) and DT28 (basal-epithelial) were derived from dissociated primary tumors and maintained as described [3, 4].  Plasma membrane isolation Purified PM were prepared using differential centrifugation followed by aqueous two-phase partitioning [3, 5, 6]. Briefly, >4x107 cells were harvested and pelleted in PBS at 4°C, resuspended (108 cells /ml) in hypotonic buffer (0.2mM EDTA, 1mM NaHCO3 with protease inhibitors), and the nuclei and intact cells were removed by low-speed centrifugation (10 min at 800 x g). The supernatant was subjected to high-speed centrifugation (1 hr at 100,000 x g) to yield a crude membrane pellet. The pellet was resuspended in 200 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.2 and combined with the two-phase solution comprised of 6.6% dextran T500 (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and 6.6% w/w polyethylene glycol (Emerald Bio, Bainbridge Island, WA) in 200 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.2, vigorously mixed, spun (5 min at 1150 x g), and the top phase containing PM was removed. The bottom phase was re-extracted with fresh dextran/polyethylene glycol buffer and combined with the first top phase. Finally, the pooled top phase was diluted with 5 volumes of 1mM NaHCO3 and spun (1 hr at 100,000 x g). The PM pellets were flash frozen and stored at -80°C for subsequent MS analysis.  Mass spectrometry Pellets from ultracentrifugation were resuspended in 1 ml extraction buffer (635626, Clontech, Mountain View, CA,), followed by precipitation of 100 μg of protein in 23% TCA. Acetone-washed pellets were resuspended in 60 μl digestion buffer (0.1% Rapigest (Waters, Milford, MA) plus 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and heated at 60°C for 30 min. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (C4706, Sigma) and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma). Proteins were then digested for 18 hr at 37°C in 1 μg trypsin (V5111, Promega, Madison, WI). Digestion was terminated by addition of 5% formic acid followed by a 30 min incubation at 37°C. Debris was removed by centrifugation, 30 min at 18000 x g. MudPIT analysis was performed using an Accela HPLC pump (Thermo) and LTQ XL (Thermo) using an in-house built electrospray stage [7]

### Data Protocol
[7]. Protein and peptide identification were done with Integrated Proteomics Pipeline - IP2 (Integrated Proteomics Applications, San Diego, CA. http://www.integratedproteomics.com/). The tandem mass spectra were searched against a human protein database (UniprotKB, release 2013_10) with reversed sequences using ProLuCID (version 1.3.5) [8-10]. The search space included half and fully tryptic peptide candidates that fell within the mass tolerance window with no miscleavage constraint. Carbamidomethylation (+57.02146 Da) of cysteine was considered as a static modification. Data was filtered using DTASelect v2.0.49 with a protein false positive rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
In recent years, there has been an emphasis on personalizing breast cancer treatment in order to avoid the debilitating side effects caused by broad-spectrum chemotherapeutic drug treatment. Development of personalized medicine requires the identification of proteins that are expressed by individual tumors. Herein, we reveal the identity of plasma membrane proteins that are overexpressed in estrogen receptor &#x3b1;-positive, HER2-positive, and triple negative breast cancer cells. The proteins we identified are involved in maintaining protein structure, intracellular homeostasis, and cellular architecture; enhancing cell proliferation and invasion; and influencing cell migration. These proteins may be useful for breast cancer detection and/or treatment.

### Keywords
Human, Membrane, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA

### Submitter
James Moresco

### Lab Head
Dr Yvonne S. Ziegler
Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA


