### Accession
PXD043376

### Title
CdGAP is a Talin-binding protein and a target of TGF-β signaling that promotes HER2-positive breast cancer growth and metastasis

### Description
Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays a crucial role in metastasis, which is the leading cause of death in breast cancer patients. We show that Cdc42 GTPase-activating protein (CdGAP) promotes tumor formation and metastasis to lungs in the HER2-positive (HER2+) murine breast cancer model. CdGAP facilitates intravasation, extravasation, and growth at metastatic sites. CdGAP depletion in HER2+ murine primary tumors mediates crosstalk with a Dlc1-RhoA pathway and is associated with a transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β)-induced EMT transcriptional signature. To further delineate the molecular mechanisms underlying the pro-migratory role of CdGAP in breast cancer cells, we searched for CdGAP interactors by performing a proteomic analysis using HEK293 cells overexpressing GFP-CdGAP. We found that CdGAP interacts with the adaptor Talin to modulate focal adhesion dynamics and integrin activation. Moreover, HER2+ breast cancer patients with high CdGAP mRNA expression combined with a high TGF-β-EMT signature are more likely to present lymph node invasion. Our results suggest CdGAP as a candidate therapeutic target for HER2+ metastatic breast cancer by inhibiting TGF-β and Integrin/Talin signaling pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Protein lysates from HEK293 cells transfected with GFP-CdGAP or empty vector pEGFP-C1 were incubated with anti-GFP antibodies coupled to protein G-sepharose. The immunoprecipitates from three independent experiments were then subjected to proteomic analyses at the proteomic platform of the Research Institute of McGill University Health Center.

### Data Protocol
The results were analyzed using the (Scaffold viewer 4) Scaffold Q+ Scaffold_4.9.0 software (Proteome Sciences). For statistical analyses, t-test within the Scaffold was used after normalizing to total spectral counts. All proteins with a p-value of <0.05 and a fold change of two over the empty vector controls were considered as interactors of GFP-CdGAP.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Integrin, Cell invasion, Rhogap, Tgf-β, Talin, Tumorigenesis, Metastasis, Emt, Her2-positive breast cancer

### Affiliations
Professor Research Institute-MUHC Cancer Research Program,Montreal
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, McGill University

### Submitter
Nathalie Lamarche-Vane

### Lab Head
Dr Nathalie Lamarche-Vane
Professor Research Institute-MUHC Cancer Research Program,Montreal


