### Accession
PXD004589

### Title
PCP39: prostate cancer proteome for 39 patients by PCT-SWATH

### Description
here we processed 105 biopsy-level tissues from 39 prostate cancer patients using pressure cycling technology (PCT) and SWATH-MS

### Sample Protocol
The tissue samples were first washed to eliminate O.C.T., followed by PCT-assisted tissue lysis and protein digestion, and SWATH-MS analysis, as described previously (Guo et al., 2015).  Briefly, each tissue punch was washed with 70% ethanol / 30% water (30 s), water (30 s), 70% ethanol / 30% water (5 min, twice), 85% ethanol / 15% water (5 min, twice), and 100% ethanol (5 min, twice). Subsequently, the tissue punches were placed in PCT-MicroTubes with PCT-MicroPestle (manuscript under review) and 30 µl lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, Complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche) using a barocycler (model NEP2320-45k, PressureBioSciences, South Easton, MA) which offers cycling alternation of high pressure (45,000 p.s.i., 50 s per cycle) and ambient pressure (14.7 p.s.i., 10 s per cycle) for 1 h. The extracted proteins were then reduced and alkylated prior to lys-C and trypsin-mediated proteolysis under pressure cycling. Lys-C (Wako; enzyme-to-substrate ratio, 1:40) -mediated proteolysis was performed under 45 cycles of pressure alternation (20,000 p.s.i. for 50 s per cycle and 14.7 p.s.i. for 10 s per cycle), followed by trypsin (Promega; enzyme-to-substrate ratio, 1:20)-mediated proteolysis using the same cycling scheme for 90 cycles. The resultant peptides were cleaned using SEP-PAC C18 (Waters Corp., Milford, MA) and analyzed, after spike-in 10% iRT peptides (Escher et al., 2012), using SWATH-MS following the 32-fixed-size-window scheme as described previously (Gillet et al., 2012; Guo et al., 2015) using a 5600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer (Sciex) and a 1D+ Nano LC system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA). The LC gradient was formulated with buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC water) and buffer B (2% water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) through an analytical column (75 μm × 20 cm) and a fused silica PicoTip emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) with 3-μm 200 Å Magic C18 AQ resin (Michrom BioResources, Auburn, CA, USA). Peptide samples were separated with a linear gradient of 2% to 35% buffer B over 120 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μl min−1. Ion accumulation time for MS1 and MS2 was set at 100 ms, leading to a total cycle time of 3.3 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide quantification using OpenSWATH  SWATH files were analyzed using the prostate tissue proteome assay library described above and OpenSWATH software as described previously (Rost and al, 2014). Briefly, wiff files were converted into mzXML files using ProteoWizard (Kessner et al., 2008) msconvert v.3.0.3316, and then mzML files using OpenMS (Sturm et al., 2008) tool FileConverter. OpenSWATH was performed using the tool OpenSWATHWorkflow with input files including the mzXML file, the TraML library file, and TraML file for iRT peptides. The false discovery rate for peptide identification was below 0.1%. High confidence peptide features from different samples were aligned using the algorithm TRansition of Identification Confidence (TRIC) (version r238), which is available from https://pypi.python.org/pypi/msproteomicstools or https://code.google.com/p/msproteomicstools/. The following parameters for the feature_alignment.py are as follows: max_rt_diff = 30, method = global_best_overall, nr_high_conf_exp = 2, target_fdr = 0.001, use_score_filter = 1.  Protein quantification The concentration of each protein is quantified through the simultaneous measurement of several peptides. To optimize the protein quantification, we developed a new computational method, which combines maximally consistent peptides for each protein and excludes inconsistent (i.e. uncorrelated) peptides (Picotti et al., 2013). Given a set of peptides unambiguously assigned to a single protein, consistent peptides were selected using the following procedure: all pairwise correlations between all peptides of a protein across the samples were calculated at first. Peptide pairs with a Pearson correlation coefficient (R) of at least 0.3 were determined, resulting in clusters of correlated peptides. This procedure yielded one or more peptide clusters per protein. We used the largest cluster of each protein and we quantified the protein’s concentration as the average intensity across the peptides in that cluster. The minimum cluster size was set to 2 and proteins without a cluster of at least two correlated peptides were removed from the subsequent analysis. This procedure resulted in very robust concentration estimates for 1906 proteins with high correlation between technical replicates (R ≥ 0.95) and no missing values.  60 samples with 1,906 proteins quantified in each sample were clustered by heatmap in R. To further visualize the sample similarities, the protein intensity matrix was firstly turned to distance matrix by dist function, then turned to newick tree file by as.phylo function, and finally plotted by Figtree software.

### Publication Abstract
It remains unclear to what extent tumor heterogeneity impacts on protein biomarker discovery. Here, we quantified proteome intra-tissue heterogeneity (ITH) based on a multi-region analysis of prostate tissues using pressure cycling technology and SWATH mass spectrometry. We quantified 6,873 proteins and analyzed the ITH of 3,700 proteins. The level of ITH varied depending on proteins and tissue types. Benign tissues exhibited more complex ITH patterns than malignant tissues. Spatial variability of ten prostate biomarkers was validated by immunohistochemistry in an independent cohort (n=83) using tissue microarrays. PSA was preferentially variable in benign prostatic hyperplasia, while GDF15 substantially varied in prostate adenocarcinomas. Further, we found that DNA repair pathways exhibited a high degree of variability in tumorous tissues, which may contribute to the genetic heterogeneity of tumors. This study conceptually adds a new perspective to protein biomarker discovery: it suggests that recent technological progress should be exploited to quantify and account for spatial proteome variation to complement biomarker identification and utilization.

### Keywords
Prostate cancer; pct; swath

### Affiliations
Westlake University
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Tiannan Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH, Zurich, Switzerland


