### Accession
PXD027705

### Title
Regulated biogenesis and targeting of monotopic squalene monooxygenase requires the GET pathway

### Description
This study investigated get3 mutant yeast cell. Proteins of the GET pathway are involved in targeting of C-terminally anchored transmembrane proteins and protection against lipotoxicity. Get3 cells revealed an altered ergosterol production and susceptibility towards a sterol synthesis inhibiting drug terbinafine. Furthermore, we identified a member of a non-canonical GET pathway client, a monotopic membrane protein squalene monooxygenase Erg1 that may be responsible for the susceptibility of Get3 mutant to lipotoxic agents.

### Sample Protocol
Eluates from immunoprecipitation of TEV-GFP tagged proteins were resuspended in NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (ThermoFisher), incubated at 70°C for 5 min and resolved on NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris gels. 23 gel fractions were stunned from each gel using a custom-made cutter. Proteins in each gel fraction were reduced by incubating with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 56°C for 50 min, alkylated by incubation with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at RT in the dark, and digested using an MS-grade trypsin (Sigma). Digested peptides were extracted using acetonitrile and 5% formic acid and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Dried peptide samples were re-dissolved in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) loading buffer and injected into a nano-LC system operated by UltiMate 3000 RSLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The LC was equipped with a C18 PepMap100-trapping column (0.3 x 5 mm, 5 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an in-house packed C18 analytical column (75 µm x 300 mm; Reprosil-Pur 120C18 AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH). The LC was equilibrated using 5% (v/v) buffer B (80% (v/v) ACN 0.1% (v/v) FA in water) and 95% (v/v) buffer A (0.1% (v/v) FA in water). The peptides were eluted using following gradient: i) 10-45% linear increase of buffer B over 43 min; ii) wash-out at 90% buffer B for 6 min; iii) re-equilibration at 5% buffer B for 6 min. Eluting peptides were sprayed into Q Exactive HF (ThermoFisher Scientific) mass spectrometer operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode. MS1 scans of 350-1600 m/z range were collected at 60000 resolution and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1e6 and a maximum injection time (MaxIT) of 50 ms. 30 most intense precursor ions of charge 2-5 were subjected to fragmentation using a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30%. MS2 scans were acquired at a resolution of 15000, 1e5 AGC target, and MaxIT of 54 ms. The dynamic exclusion was set to 25 s.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (v. 1.6.5.0) was used to search raw data against Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein sequences downloaded from Uniprot in November 2017 (23650 entries). The parameters of the search were kept default. Following steps in data analysis were conducted in Perseus. First, the potential contaminants and decoy peptides were removed along with proteins not identified in all three replicates of Get3 DE-TEV-GFP. Intensity values were log2 transformed and missing values were imputed by sampling from a normal distribution (width: 0.3; down: 1.8) separately for each column. Differential analysis was performed using a Welch’s t-test. Further analysis focused on proteins that were significantly enriched (p < 0.05 and minimum fold change of 8) between the Get3 DE-TEV-GFP and Get3 DE FIDD-TEV-GFP samples.

### Publication Abstract
The guided entry of tail-anchored proteins (GET) pathway targets C-terminally anchored transmembrane proteins and protects cells from lipotoxicity. Here, we reveal perturbed ergosterol production in &#x2206;get3 cells and demonstrate the sensitivity of GET pathway mutants to the sterol synthesis inhibiting drug terbinafine. Our data uncover a key enzyme of sterol synthesis, the hairpin membrane protein squalene monooxygenase (Erg1), as a non-canonical GET pathway client, thus rationalizing the lipotoxicity phenotypes of GET pathway mutants. Get3 recognizes the hairpin targeting element of Erg1 via its classical client-binding pocket. Intriguingly, we find that the GET pathway is especially important for the acute upregulation of Erg1 induced by low sterol conditions. We further identify several other proteins anchored to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane exclusively via a hairpin as putative clients of the GET pathway. Our findings emphasize the necessity of dedicated targeting pathways for high-efficiency targeting of particular clients during dynamic cellular adaptation and highlight hairpin proteins as a potential novel class of GET clients.

### Keywords
Squalene monooxygenase, Get pathway, Erg1, Lfq, In-gel digestion, Lipotoxicity, Get3, Terbinafine

### Affiliations
MPI Biophysical Chemistry
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max-Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Goettingen, Germany

### Submitter
Ivan Silbern

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Henning Urlaub
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max-Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Goettingen, Germany


