### Accession
PXD010695

### Title
Characterization of the Sperm Proteome and Reproductive Outcomes with in Vitro Fertilization after a Reduction in Male Ejaculatory Abstinence Period

### Description
Semen samples from men after a short ejaculatory abstinence show improved sperm quality and result in increased pregnancy rates, but the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Herein, we report that ejaculates from short (1–3 hours) compared with long (3–7 days) periods of abstinence showed increases in motile sperm count, sperm vitality, normal sperm morphology, acrosome reaction capacity, total antioxidant capacity, sperm mitochondrial membrane potential, high DNA stainability, and a decrease in the sperm DNA fragmentation index (P < 0.05). Sperm proteomic analysis showed 322 differentially expressed proteins (minimal fold change of ±1.5 or greater and P < 0.05), with 224 up-regulated and 98 down-regulated. These differentially expressed proteins are profoundly involved in specific cellular processes, such as motility and capacitation, oxidative stress, and metabolism. Interestingly, protein trimethyllysine modification was increased, and butyryllysine, propionyllysine, and malonyllysine modifications were decreased in ejaculates from a short versus long abstinence (P < 0.05). Finally, the rates of implantation, clinical pregnancy, and live births from in vitro fertilization treatments were significantly increased in semen samples after a short abstinence. Our study provides preliminary mechanistic insights into improved sperm quality and pregnancy outcomes associated with spermatozoa retrieved after a short ejaculatory abstinence

### Sample Protocol
Ethical Statement—The study was conducted in accordance with ethical standards and the Helsinki Declaration of 1975. Study Design and Participants—This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at China Medical University and informed written consent was obtained from all participants prior to the initiation of the study. The participants were divided into 3 groups. Group I was a control group of 361 couples and an experimental group of 167 couples who underwent their first round of IVF. Men in the control group provided a semen sample after 3–7 days of abstinence, while in the experimental group, men were told the possible benefits of producing a consecutive ejaculate and provided a semen sample after 3–7 days of such abstinence followed by another sample after only 1–3 hours. All the women included in the study had normal ovarian reserve (designated as an anti-Müllerian hormone concentration of ≥ 1.1 ng/mL), and normal serum thyroid-stimulating hormone and prolactin concentrations. Clinical pregnancy was diagnosed by ultrasonographic evidence of intrauterine fetal heart beat at 7 weeks. Implantation, clinical pregnancy, early miscarriage, and live birth rates in fresh IVF or freeze-all cycles were compared. The subjects’ characteristics are given in Table 1. Group II was an experimental group of 20 normal men who provided a semen sample after 3–7 days of abstinence followed by another sample after only 1–3 hours, which were then used for physiologic and biochemical analyses of spermatozoa. Group III was an experimental group of 5 normal men who provided a semen sample after 3–7 days of abstinence followed by another sample after only 1–3 hours, which were used for sperm proteomic and protein modification analyses. The characteristics of the study groups are shown in Fig. 1. None of the included men had a medical history of orchitis, unilateral orchiectomy, vasectomy, ejaculatory disorders, genetic diseases, or other urinary system diseases; and were asked to maintain 3–7 days of ejaculatory abstinence before sample collection. The abstinence time was calculated by how long it took men to provide the consecutive ejaculate. Participants with a possible pituitary lesion on magnetic resonance imaging or with karyotype abnormalities were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatic Analysis—Principal components analysis (PCA) was performed to detect and visualize the variation in sperm proteins in ejaculate 1 and ejaculate 2 by using R packages: ggplot2, pca3d, and rgl. We plotted 2D and 3D graphs for 2 and 3 main principal components (Suppl. Fig. 1). The results showed that each group shares notable similarities and moderate variation among its samples. After confirming the PCA results, the empirical Bayes approach was performed to determine the differentially expressed genes by using the R package limma. Differentially expressed proteins were filtered by an average cut-off change of 1.5-fold and P < 0.05. Information regarding the differentially expressed proteins is listed in Suppl. Table 3. We then performed Gene Ontology (GO) analysis based on the differentially expressed proteins, and all differentially expressed proteins were assigned to their GO annotations (biological process, cellular component, and molecular function). Furthermore, for differentially expressed proteins, the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) annotations were obtained; and the R package gplots was used for data visualization. The STRING database was used to identify the functional enrichments in the network, and Cytoscape software 3.5.1 was used to visualize the interaction among proteins. Detailed descriptions of these analyses are given in the Supplemental Methods. Subsequently, we compared 4,959 identified sperm proteins and 322 differentially expressed proteins separately with 4 male reproductive tract-related tissues: testis, epididymis, seminal vesicle, and prostate, using the R package VennDiagram. The full dataset for all 4 tissues was downloaded from The Human Protein Atlas database (https://www.proteinatlas.org/humanproteome). Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale—The initial and consecutive ejaculates were treated as paired samples, and thus the paired t test was used when comparing parameters between the 2 ejaculates. The Chi-square test was used to test for any associations, where appropriate. The data are presented as means ± SD. Statistical differences in the data were evaluated by Student’s t-test or 1-way ANOVA as appropriate, and were considered significant at P < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Semen samples from men after a short ejaculatory abstinence show improved sperm quality and result in increased pregnancy rates, but the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Herein, we report that ejaculates from short (1-3 h) compared with long (3-7 days) periods of abstinence showed increases in motile sperm count, sperm vitality, normal sperm morphology, acrosome reaction capacity, total antioxidant capacity, sperm mitochondrial membrane potential, high DNA stainability, and a decrease in the sperm DNA fragmentation index (<i>p</i>, &lt; 0.05). Sperm proteomic analysis showed 322 differentially expressed proteins (minimal fold change of &#xb1;1.5 or greater and <i>p</i>, &lt; 0.05), with 224 upregulated and 98 downregulated. These differentially expressed proteins are profoundly involved in specific cellular processes, such as motility and capacitation, oxidative stress, and metabolism. Interestingly, protein trimethyllysine modification was increased, and butyryllysine, propionyllysine, and malonyllysine modifications were decreased in ejaculates from a short <i>versus</i>, long abstinence (<i>p</i>, &lt; 0.05). Finally, the rates of implantation, clinical pregnancy, and live births from <i>in vitro</i>, fertilization treatments were significantly increased in semen samples after a short abstinence. Our study provides preliminary mechanistic insights into improved sperm quality and pregnancy outcomes associated with spermatozoa retrieved after a short ejaculatory abstinence.

### Keywords
Ejaculatory abstinence; proteome; protein modifications; ivf treatment; reproductive outcomes, Sperm

### Affiliations
Center of Reproductive Medicine, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang 110004, China;
PTM Biolabs lnc.

### Submitter
xiaomei li

### Lab Head
Dr Da Li
Center of Reproductive Medicine, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang 110004, China;


