### Accession
PXD015674

### Title
Rapid and quantitative precipitation of a yeast proteome

### Description
Protein precipitation has applications as a front-end preparation strategy for proteome analysis, as well as depleting proteins in serum for small molecule analysis or for commercial preparation of bulk protein. The highly variable conditions previously implemented to precipitate proteins are reflected by inconsistent and low recovery, as well as incomplete proteome coverage, diminishing the utility of precipitation for sample preparation. We herein investigate and optimize the conditions affecting protein recovery, using acetone at a defined ionic strength. We show rapid (2 min) precipitation at room temperature provides consistently high protein recovery (98 +/- 1%), with MS protein identifications equivalent to overnight, -20 °C incubations. Our robust strategy to isolate proteins maximizes recovery with minimal structural bias, exploiting the analytical advantages of precipitation over alternative techniques.

### Sample Protocol
A yeast culture was grown from dry baker's yeast and extracted to a final protein concentration of 1 g/L. Samples were precipitated with 80% acetone and 0.1-100 mM NaCl for 2 min to 24 h at -20 °C and room temperature. Precipitated protein was pelleted by centrifugation and the supernatant was transferred to a clean vial. Pellet and supernatant fractions were dried, re-solubilized in 8 M urea and subject to conventional tryptic digestion, all at a final concentration of 0.5 g/L. LC peptide clean-ups were performed prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptide MS/MS spectra were searched using the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific), searching the Saccharomyces cerevisiae database with a false discovery rate of 1%, while also requiring that the protein was identified in each duplicate injection. Proteins were profiled using the online software, Venny 2.1. Grand average of hydropathicity (GRAVY) scores were extracted from an online calculator, http://www.gravy-calculator.de/.

### Publication Abstract
Protein precipitation is a common front-end preparation strategy for proteome analysis, as well as other applications (<i>e.g</i>., protein depletion for small molecule analysis, bulk commercial preparation of protein). Highly variable conditions used to precipitate proteins, ranging in solvent type, strength, time, and temperature, reflect inconsistent and low recovery. As a consequence, incomplete proteome coverage diminishes the utility of precipitation for proteome sample preparation ahead of mass spectrometry. We herein investigate and optimize the conditions affecting protein recovery through precipitation using acetone at a defined ionic strength. By increasing the salt concentration and incubation temperature with 80% acetone, we show that rapid (2 min) precipitation provides consistently high protein recovery (98 &#xb1; 1%) of complex proteome extracts. Rapid precipitation is also applicable to isolate dilute proteins starting as low as 1 &#x3bc;g mL<sup>-1</sup>. Furthermore, analysis of the protein pellet by bottom-up mass spectrometry (MS) reveals unbiased recovery of all proteins with respect to molecular weight, isoelectric point (pI), and hydrophobicity. Our robust strategy to isolate proteins maximizes recovery and throughput, exploiting the analytical advantages of precipitation over alternative techniques. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD015674.

### Keywords
Salt, Temperature, Bottom-up, Throughput, Acetone

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada
Dalhousie University

### Submitter
Jessica Nickerson

### Lab Head
Dr Alan Austin Doucette
Department of Chemistry, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada


