### Accession
PXD021581

### Title
Prognostic accuracy of Mass Spectrometric Analysis of Plasma in COVID-19

### Description
SARS-CoV-2 infection poses a worldwide public health problem affecting millions of people worldwide. There is a critical need for improvements in the noninvasive prognosis of COVID-19. We hypothesized that matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) analysis combined with molecular-weight directed bottom-up proteomic analysis of plasma proteins may predict high and low risk cases of COVID-19. Patients and Methods: We used MALDI MS to analyze plasma small proteins and peptides isolated using C18 micro-columns from a cohort containing a total of 117 cases of high and low risk cases split into training (n = 88) and validation sets (n= 29). The plasma protein/peptide fingerprint obtained was used to train the algorithm before validation using a blinded test cohort. Several sample preparation, MS and data analysis parameters were optimized to achieve an overall accuracy of 85%, a sensitivity of 90%, and a specificity of 81% in the training set. In the blinded test set, this signature reached an overall accuracy of 93.1%, a sensitivity of 87.5%, and a specificity of 100%. From this signature, we identified two distinct regions corresponding to the single and doubly protonated proteins in the MALDI-TOF profile belonging to the same proteoforms. A combination of 1D SDS-PAGE and quantitative bottom-up proteomic analysis allowed the identification of intact and truncated forms of serum amyloid A-1 and A-2 proteins. We found a plasma proteomic profile that discriminates against patients with high and low risk COVID-19. Proteomic analysis of C18-fractionated plasma may have a role in the noninvasive prognosis of COVID-19. Further validation will be important to consolidate its clinical utility.

### Sample Protocol
Venous punctures from the patients were performed. After the samples were collected into tubes containing EDTA anticoagulant, these were centrifuged in a refrigerated unit at 5000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C. Then, samples were carefully removed from the centrifuge not to resuspend cells, and the plasma fraction was collected and aliquoted at -80° C until further analyses. Proteins from case and control samples were separated by one-dimensional gel electrophoresis using a 12% gel. Gels were stained using Coomassie brilliant blue and the gel were scanned to identify differentially expressed bands. Bands were excised in the molecular weight range of 10,000 to 15,000 Da corresponding to the m/z of discriminant peaks. Bands were in-gel tryptic digested according to Shevchenko et al., and subjected to nanoflow LC-MS/MS analysis. The nLC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Easy nano LC1000 (Thermo) HPLC coupled with an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo). Peptides were loaded on a C18 EASY-column (2cm x 5 µm x 100 µm; 120 Å pore, Thermo) using a 300 nL/min flow rate of mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid) and separated in a C18 PicoFrit PepMap (10 cm x 10 µm x 75 µm; 135 Å pore, New Objective), over 105 minutes using a linear gradient 2-30 % of mobile phase B (100% ACN; 0,1% formic acid). The eluted peptides were ionized using electrospray. The top 20 most intense precursor ions with charge-state ≥ 2 were fragmented using CID at 35 normalized collision energy and 10 ms activation time. The MS scan range was set between 350-1500 m/z, the MS scan resolution was 60.000, the MS1 ion count was 1x10e6 and the MS2 ion count was 3x10e4.

### Data Protocol
nLC-MS/MS raw data were searched using Proteome Discoverer (v2.3.0.498, Thermo Fischer Scientific) for protein identification and label-free quantification (LFQ) quantification. The raw files were searched against Homo sapiens protein database containing 20359 reviewed protein sequences (UniProt, downloaded in June 2020). The database search was performed using the Sequest HT processing node with trypsin semi-specific as the proteolytic enzyme, 2 missed cleavages, 10 ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.6 Da fragment ions mass tolerance. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as dynamic modification. Label-free quantification was performed using the Minora algorithm in the processing workflow embedded in Proteome Discoverer 2.3. Precursor Ions Quantifier node and the Feature Mapper were added to the consensus workflow for retention time alignment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Plasma, Biomarker, Prognosis, Covid-19, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Sao Paulo
Glycoproteomics Laboratory, Department of Parasitology, ICB, University of São Paulo, Brazil Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 1374 05508-900 - São Paulo – SP - Brazil Tel: + 55-11-99920-8662 palmisano.gp@gmail.com palmisano.gp@usp.br

### Submitter
Giuseppe Palmisano

### Lab Head
Dr Giuseppe Palmisano
Glycoproteomics Laboratory, Department of Parasitology, ICB, University of São Paulo, Brazil Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 1374 05508-900 - São Paulo – SP - Brazil Tel: + 55-11-99920-8662 palmisano.gp@gmail.com palmisano.gp@usp.br


