### Accession
PXD017475

### Title
The lncRNA MIR31HG regulates the senescence associated secretory phenotype

### Description
Oncogene-induced senescence provides a barrier against malignant transformation. Senescent cells secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines and growth factors collectively known as the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP). Paradoxically, the SASP can also negatively impact the neighbouring tissues through inducing an inflammatory environment that promotes tumorigenesis and aged-related pathologies. We have previously shown that the lncRNA MIR31HG is overexpressed and located in the cytoplasm during BRAF-induced senescence. In young proliferating cells, nuclear MIR31HG inhibits p16/CDKN2A expression through interaction with polycomb repressor complexes (PRC1/2). Here, we show that MIR31HG regulates the expression and secretion of a subset of SASP components during BRAF-induced senescence. The SASP secreted from senescent cells depleted for MIR31HG fails to induce paracrine invasion without affecting the growth inhibitory effect. Mechanistically, MIR31HG interacts with the translation factor YBX1 facilitating its phosphorylation at serine 102 (p-YBX1S102) by the kinase RSK.  p-YBX1S102 induces IL1A translation which acts as upstream regulator inducing the transcription of the other SASP mRNAs. Our results suggest a dual role for MIR31HG in senescence depending on its cellular localization and place the lncRNA as a potential therapeutic target in the treatment of senescence-related pathologies.

### Sample Protocol
Secretome analysis:  Conditioned media for proteomics analysis was harvested from 6 cm plates as indicated above. CM was concentrated using Centricon (Milipore) 3kDa filter, precipitated by TCA and washed in acetone. Protein pellets were resuspended in 6M GndHCl in 10mM Tris/HCl pH 8.0 with 2mM DTT and incubated at 56C for 30min. In-solution digestion was performed after sample dilution with 50mM TEAB using 250ng of LysC (Wako) (at 2M GndHCl) and followed by 500ng of trypsin (Promega) (at 0.6M GndHCl). Reduced, alkylated and acidified peptides were desalted on 100ul C18 stage tips (Thermo) and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.  MIR31HG oligonucleotide-based pull down: Cells were grown in 150 and 500 cm2 dishes in 25 or 90ml media respectively up to ~90% confluency. Prior to collection cell were irradiated with UV light at 254 nm, then scraped in ice-cold PBS, spun down at 800 x g for 5min at 4°C and stored at -80°C. Amino-C12-LNA-containing oligonucleotides against MIR31HG and luciferase (five per target, Exiqon, custom design, Suppl. Tables) were coupled to Dynabeads MyOne Carboxylic Acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions using 1.5nmol oligo per 100ul beads. Prior to use, the coated beads were blocked in RNA pulldown (RP) buffer (50mM Tris/HCl ph7.5, 5mM EDTA, 500mM LiCl, 0.5% DDM, 0.2% SDS, 0.1% Na-deoxycholate, 4M Urea, 2.5M TCEP, protease inhibitors (Roche)) with addition of ssDNA (200ug/mL) and BSA (1mg/mL) and yeast RNA (200ug/mL). 0.5g cell pellet was used per condition and resuspended in 5mL volume of RP buffer with murine RNase inhibitor (NEB, 1:500). Lysates were sonicated in 15mL tubes with Branson tip sonicator (2x 10sek, with 30sek break, at setting 15%) and clarified at 16000 x g for 5min at 4°C. Supernatants were transferred to 2mL tubes and pre-heated to 65°C with 1200rpm shaking, then oligonucleotide-coated beads were added to lysates for 4h incubation at 65°C with shaking (250ul beads/0.5g initial cell pellet distributed in 2ml tubes). The beads were washed four times with RP buffer at room temperature and then washed with 1mL 50mM TEAB buffer to remove detergents. For mass spectrometry sample preparation the beads were resuspend in 100ul 50mM TEAB buffer (Sigma) including 2mM DTT. Trypsin was added (500ng) for O/N incubation at 37°C, then followed by treatments with DTT (10mM) and IAA (55mM) and acidification with TFA. 100ul StageTips (Thermo Fisher Scienfic) were used for desalting and purified peptides were subjected to LC-MS analysis (as described in the above section).  LC-MS settings: Tryptic peptides were identified by LC-MS using an EASY-nLC 1000 (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF (ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were separated on an in-house packed column of ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3µm resin (Dr Maisch, GmbH) using a 90-minute gradient of solvent A (0.5% acetic acid) and solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid) and a flow of 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a top 12 data-dependent acquisition, a resolution of 60,000 (at 400 m/z), a scan range of 300 – 1700 m/z and an AGC target of 3e6 for the MS survey.  MS/MS was performed at a scan range of 200-2000 m/z using a resolution of 30,000 (at 400 m/z), an AGC target of 1e5, an intensity threshold of 1.0e5 and an isolation window of 1.2 m/z. Further parameters included an exclusion time of 45 sec and a maximum injection time for survey and MS/MS of 15 ms and 45 ms respectively. The raw files obtained from LC‐MS were processed using the MaxQuant software 72 version 1.5.3.30. Peak lists were searched against the human UniProt database using the Andromeda search engine incorporated in MaxQuant with a tolerance level of 7 ppm for MS and 20 ppm for MS/MS. Trypsin was chosen as digestion enzyme with max 2 missed cleavages allowed. Variable modifications were set to methionine oxidation, protein N‐terminal acetylation, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and other parameters were kept as default.

### Data Protocol
Secretome analysis: Statistical analysis was conducted in R environment (https://www.r-project.org) using DEP (v. 1.8.0) bioconductor package for proteomics analysis, and visualizations were made using the ggplot2 R package (Wickham, 2009). Imputation of missing data was performed using MinProb setting based on minimal intensity values observed for each sample.   MIR31HG oligonucleotide-based pull down: Samples were analyzed using instrument settings described above, and the obtained data was analyzed with MaxQuant v. 1.5.2.8, using N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Fold change values of median peptide intensities were calculated for 5 replicates, and missing values were imputed using minimal intensity value detected in the analysis. Significantly enriched proteins in MIR31HG pulldown samples over control pulldown were selected based on pvalue < 0.05, signal intensity (fold enrichment over luciferase control) and number of unique peptides present in majority of replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lncrna senescence mir31hg ybx1 sasp braf

### Affiliations
Biotech Research and Innovation Centre, University of Copenhagen, Ole Maaløes Vej 5, Copenhagen 2200, Denmark
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Michal Lubas

### Lab Head
Dr Anders Lund
Biotech Research and Innovation Centre, University of Copenhagen, Ole Maaløes Vej 5, Copenhagen 2200, Denmark


