### Accession
PXD024756

### Title
Regulation of mammalian 3D genome organization and histone H3K9 dimethylation by H3K9 methyltransferases

### Description
Histone H3 lysine 9 dimethylation (H3K9me2) is a highly conserved silencing epigenetic mark. Chromatin marked with H3K9me2 forms large domains in mammalian cells and overlaps well with lamina-associated domains and the B compartment defined by Hi-C. However, the role of H3K9me2 in 3-dimensional (3D) genome organization remains unclear. We investigated genome-wide H3K9me2 distribution, transcriptome, and 3D genome organization in mouse embryonic stem cells following the inhibition or depletion of five H3K9 methyltransferases (MTases): G9a, GLP, SETDB1, SUV39H1, and SUV39H2. H3K9me2 was regulated by all five MTases; however, H3K9me2 and transcription in the A and B compartments were regulated by different MTases. H3K9me2 in A compartments was primarily regulated by G9a/GLP and SETDB1, while H3K9me2 in the B compartments was regulated by all five MTases. Furthermore, decreased H3K9me2 correlated with changes to the more active compartmental state that accompanied transcriptional activation.

### Sample Protocol
SDS-PAGE-separated histones were stained with Coomassie blue. The protein bands corresponding to histone H3 were excised out and were digested with Achromobacter protease I (Lys-C). The digests were performed nano-liquid chromatography - tandem mass spectrometry using EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer equipped with nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides containing the digests were separated with a linear gradient of 0-100%B buffer in A buffer (A:0.1% formic acid, B:80%acetonitrile/0.1%formic acid) for 20min with a reversed-phase column (NTCC analytical column, C18, φ75 μm ×150 mm, 3 μm; Nikkyo Technos, Japan). The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive-ion mode for mass spectrometry and tandem mass spectrometry, and the tandem mass spectrometry spectra were acquired using the data-dependent TOP 10 method.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data were processed using a MASCOT program 2.7 (Matrix Science) and Proteome Discoverer 2.4. (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The MASCOT searching was peformed with following parameters, Database : Histone 130611 (66 sequences; 15002 residues), Enzyme : Lys-C/P, Variable modifications : Acetyl (Protein N- term),Oxidation (M),Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q),Acetyl (K),Methyl (K),Trimethyl (K),Dimethyl (K), Mass values : Monoisotopic, Protein Mass : Unrestricted, Peptide Mass Tolerance : ± 15 ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance: ± 30 mmu, Max Missed Cleavages : 3, Instrument type : ESI-TRAP.  Protein quantification was performed base on a label-free quantification method using Proteome Discoverer. Protein methylation rates were obtained peak areas of selected ion chromatograms that are the tetra charged protonated molecules at m/z 381.9706 (methyl), m/z 385.4745 (dimethyl) and m/z 388.9784 (trimethyl) of “QTARKSTGGKAPRK” related peptides ( 1xAcetyl [K10]; 1xGln->pyro-Glu [N-Term]; 1xmethylations [K5]) using Qual Browser (Thermo xcalibur 4.1.50, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with ±15ppm width.

### Publication Abstract
Histone H3 lysine 9 dimethylation (H3K9me2) is a highly conserved silencing epigenetic mark. Chromatin marked with H3K9me2 forms large domains in mammalian cells and overlaps well with lamina-associated domains and the B compartment defined by Hi-C. However, the role of H3K9me2 in 3-dimensional (3D) genome organization remains unclear. Here, we investigated genome-wide H3K9me2 distribution, transcriptome, and 3D genome organization in mouse embryonic stem cells following the inhibition or depletion of H3K9 methyltransferases (MTases): G9a, GLP, SETDB1, SUV39H1, and SUV39H2. We show that H3K9me2 is regulated by all five MTases; however, H3K9me2 and transcription in the A and B compartments are regulated by different MTases. H3K9me2 in the&#xa0;A compartments is primarily regulated by G9a/GLP and SETDB1, while H3K9me2 in the B compartments is regulated by all five MTases. Furthermore, decreased H3K9me2 correlates with changes to more active compartmental state that accompanied transcriptional activation. Thus, H3K9me2 contributes to inactive compartment setting.

### Keywords
Histone h3 methylation

### Affiliations
RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN

### Submitter
Takehiro Suzuki

### Lab Head
Dr Naoshi Dohmae
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN


