### Accession
PXD022502

### Title
Identification of root surface proteins from potato strains susceptible and resistant to Spongospora subterranea infection

### Description
This project is aiming to identify specific root surface proteins from susceptible and resistant potato strains and identify those factors responsible for Spongospora subterranea zoospore binding.

### Sample Protocol
100mg of potato root material was extracted in lysis buffer(50 mM Tris-HCl pH7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, and 10 mM DTT) containing PI cocktail, acetone-precipitated then resuspended in urea/thiourea denaturation buffer for reduction and alkylation.  Proteins were digested using the SP3 method (30ug/sample) with trypsin/rLysC

### Data Protocol
DIA-MS data was acquired on a QE-HF system coupled to a U3000 RSLCnano. RAW files were converted to Biognosys HTRMS format and spectrum centric DirectDIA (Spectronaut software v14) used to extract peptide data from a library based on the full set of DIA runs.

### Publication Abstract
Potato (<i>Solanum tuberosum</i> L.) exhibits broad variations in cultivar resistance to tuber and root infections by the soilborne, obligate biotrophic pathogen <i>Spongospora subterranea</i>. Host resistance has been recognised as an important approach in potato disease management, whereas zoospore root attachment has been identified as an effective indicator for the host resistance to <i>Spongospora</i> root infection. However, the mechanism of host resistance to zoospore root attachment is currently not well understood. To identify the potential basis for host resistance to <i>S. subterranea</i> at the molecular level, twelve potato cultivars differing in host resistance to zoospore root attachment were used for comparative proteomic analysis. In total, 3723 proteins were quantified from root samples across the twelve cultivars using a data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry approach. Statistical analysis identified 454 proteins that were significantly more abundant in the resistant cultivars; 626 proteins were more abundant in the susceptible cultivars. In resistant cultivars, functional annotation of the proteomic data indicated that Gene Ontology terms related to the oxidative stress and metabolic processes were significantly over-represented. KEGG pathway analysis identified that the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway was associated with the resistant cultivars, suggesting the potential role of lignin biosynthesis in the host resistance to <i>S. subterranea</i>. Several enzymes involved in pectin biosynthesis and remodelling, such as pectinesterase and pectin acetylesterase, were more abundant in the resistant cultivars. Further investigation of the potential role of root cell wall pectin revealed that the pectinase treatment of roots resulted in a significant reduction in zoospore root attachment in both resistant and susceptible cultivars. This study provides a comprehensive proteome-level overview of resistance to <i>S. subterranea</i> zoospore root attachment across twelve potato cultivars and has identified a potential role for cell wall pectin in regulating zoospore root attachment.

### Keywords
Spongospora subterranea; zoospore; disease resistance; potato

### Affiliations
University of Tasmania
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Wilson
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania


