### Accession
PXD040463

### Title
Long non-coding RNA CASC2 regulates osteoblasts matrix mineralization

### Description
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are master regulators of gene expression and have recently emerged as potential innovative therapeutic targets. The deregulation of lncRNA expression patterns has been associated with age-related and noncommunicable diseases, including osteoporosis and bone tumors. However, the specific role of lncRNAs in physiological or pathological conditions in the bone tissue still needs to be further clarified, for their exploitation as therapeutic tools. In the present study, we evaluate the potential of the lncRNA CASC2 as a regulator of osteogenic differentiation and mineralization. Results show that CASC2 expression is decreased during osteogenic differentiation of human bone marrow-derived Mesenchymal Stem/Stromal cells (MSCs). CASC2 knockdown using small interfering RNA (siCASC2) increases the expression of the late osteogenic marker Bone Sialoprotein (BSP), but does not impact ALP staining levels, or the expression of early osteogenic transcripts including RUNX2 and OPG. Although siCASC2 does not impact hMSC proliferation nor apoptosis, it promotes the mineralization of hMSC cultured under osteogenic-inducing conditions, as shown by the increase of calcium deposits. Mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis revealed that 89 proteins are regulated by CASC2 at late osteogenic stages, including proteins associated with bone diseases or anthropometric and musculoskeletal traits. Specifically, the Cartilage Oligomeric Matrix Protein (COMP) is highly enhanced by CASC2 knockdown at late stages of osteogenic differentiation, at either transcriptional and protein level. Inhibition of COMP impairs osteoblasts mineralization as well as the expression of BSP levels. The results indicate that lncRNA CASC2 regulates late osteogenesis and mineralization in hMSC via COMP and BSP. In conclusion, this study suggests lncRNA CASC2 as a potential new therapeutic target in bone mineralization.

### Sample Protocol
hMSCs cells were cultured in osteogenic differentiation conditions for 14 days before transfection with the siRNA targeting the lncRNA CASC2 (siCASC2) or the respective negative control (siCTRL). Transfected cells were then cultured under osteogenic differentiation conditions for additional 7 days (until day 21) before being harvested, washed with cold PBS 1X and lysed in cold RIPA buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors and phosphatase inhibitors, for 30 min, as previously described [1]. Cell lysates were centrifuged at 20 000 g, for 10 min, at 4 °C and the protein-containing supernatant was quantified using a DC protein assay kit (Bio-Rad). Protein identification and label-free quantitation was performed by nanoLC-MS/MS, as described [1]. [1] Moura, S. R. et al. miR-99a in bone homeostasis: Regulating osteogenic lineage commitment and osteoclast differentiation. Bone 134, 115303 (2020).

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.3.0.523 software (Thermo Scientific). Protein identification was performed with Sequest HT search engine against the Homo sapiens entries from the UniProt database (https://www.uniprot.org/). Samples were normalized against to the total peptide signal and the quantitative evaluation of the detected peptides was performed using pairwise comparisons. Data was corrected using Benjamin Hochberg method. Bioinformatics and data analysis was performed for proteins expressed in the 3 independent experiments with fold change (FC) differences ≥ 1.25 or ≤ -1.25, with a minimum of two unique peptides, when comparing the siCASC2 against the siCTRL condition. Gene Ontology (GO) annotations of the differentially expressed proteins were collected using the Protein ANalysis THrough Evolutionary Relationships (PANTHER) tool and the gene-levels association study was performed with the data available data at the Musculoskeletal Knowledge Portal.

### Publication Abstract
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are master regulators of gene expression and have recently emerged as potential innovative therapeutic targets. The deregulation of lncRNA expression patterns has been associated with age-related and noncommunicable diseases in the bone tissue, including osteoporosis and tumors. However, the specific role of lncRNAs in physiological or pathological conditions in the bone tissue still needs to be further clarified, for their exploitation as therapeutic tools. In the present study, we evaluate the potential of the lncRNA CASC2 as a regulator of osteogenic differentiation and mineralization. Results show that CASC2 expression is decreased during osteogenic differentiation of human bone marrow-derived Mesenchymal Stem/Stromal cells (hMSCs). CASC2 knockdown, using small interfering RNA against CASC2 (siCASC2), increases the expression of the late osteogenic marker Bone Sialoprotein (BSP), but does not impact ALP staining level nor the expression of early osteogenic transcripts, including RUNX2 and OPG. Although siCASC2 does not impact hMSC proliferation nor apoptosis, it promotes the mineralization of hMSC cultured under osteogenic-inducing conditions, as shown by the increase of calcium deposits. Mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis revealed that 89 proteins are regulated by CASC2 at late osteogenic stages, including proteins associated with bone diseases or anthropometric and musculoskeletal traits. Specifically, the Cartilage Oligomeric Matrix Protein (COMP) is highly enhanced by CASC2 knockdown at late stages of osteogenic differentiation, at both transcriptional and protein level. On the other hand, inhibition of COMP impairs osteoblasts mineralization as well as the expression of BSP. The results indicate that lncRNA CASC2 regulates late osteogenic differentiation and mineralization in hMSC via COMP and BSP. In conclusion, this study suggests that targeting lncRNA CASC2 could be a potential approach for modulating bone mineralization.

### Keywords
Long non-coding transcripts, Extracellular matrix, Bone, Cell differentiation, Mesenchymal stem/stromal cells

### Affiliations
i3s - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde
i3s - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde; INEB - Instituto Engenharia Biomédica; ICBAS - Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar.

### Submitter
Sara Moura

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Inês Almeida
i3s - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde; INEB - Instituto Engenharia Biomédica; ICBAS - Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar.


