### Accession
PXD043553

### Title
USP16 is an ISG15 cross-reactive deubiquitinase targeting a subset of metabolic pathway-related proteins

### Description
The ubiquitin-like modifier ISG15 can modulate host and viral proteins to restrict viral and microbial infections, and act as a cytokine. Its expression and conjugation are strongly up-regulated by type I interferons. Here we identify the deubiquitinating enzyme USP16 as an ISG15 cross-reactive protease. Ubiquitin-specific protease 16 (USP16) was found to react with an ISG15 activity-based probe in pull-down experiments using chronic myeloid leukaemia-derived human cells (HAP1). Supporting this finding, recombinant USP16 cleaved pro-ISG15 and ISG15 iso-peptide linked model substrates in vitro, as well as ISGylated substrates present in cell lysates. Moreover, the interferon-induced stimulation of ISGylation in human HAP1 cells was increased by knockdown or knockout of USP16. Depletion of USP16 did not affect interferon signaling, and interferon treatment did not affect USP16 expression or enzymatic activity either. A USP16-dependent ISG15 interactome was established by anti-ISG15 immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry (IP-MS), which indicated that the deISGylating function of USP16 may regulate metabolic pathways involving GOT1, ALDOA, SOD1 and MDH1, all of which were further confirmed to be deISGylated by USP16 in HEK293T cells. Together, our results indicate that USP16 may contribute to regulating the ISGylation status of a subset of proteins related to metabolism during type I interferon responses.

### Sample Protocol
Activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) with biotin-ISG15-PA probe: Performed as previously described [13]. HAP1 cells were lysed in glass beads lysis buffer (GBL: 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM EDTA, and 250 mM Sucrose) and protein concentrations determined through a Pierce BCA Assay. The probe was added to the relevant cell lysates (1 mg of protein) at the pre-determined optimum ratio and all samples incubated: 30 min for the Biotin-ISG15-PA probe (Viva Biotech Ltd) at 37°C. The digest was quenched through the addition of 44 µL 5% (w/v) SDS and 27.5 µL 10% NP-40 to each Eppendorf. Samples were then diluted by adding 1212 µL NP-40 lysis buffer. 150 µL NeutrAvidin Agarose beads (Thermo Fisher) was aliquoted out into one 2 mL Eppendorf tube per sample. The resin was washed with NP-40 Lysis Buffer four times in total. The samples were added to the resins, sealed with Parafilm and incubated on a turning wheel overnight at 4°C. The following day the samples were washed with NP-40 lysis buffer four times. The probe labelled proteins bound to the agarose beads were eluted by adding 110 µL 2.5x LSLB with 3 mM biotin to the resin. The samples were vortexed briefly and boiled (10 min, 95°C). The beads were pelleted by centrifugation (2 000 g, 1 min, RT) and the supernatant containing the proteins carefully removed without disturbing the resin, and transferred to an Eppendorf tube. Samples are ready for either immunoblotting or LC-MS/MS analysis [13]. For MS analysis, sample eluates were diluted to 175 μL with ultra-pure water and reduced with 5 μL of DTT (200 mM in 0.1 M Tris, pH 7.8) for 30 min at 37 °C. Samples were alkylated with 20 μL of iodoacetamide (100 mM in 0.1 M Tris, pH 7.8) for 15 min at room temperature (protected from light), followed by protein precipitation using a double methanol/chloroform extraction method. Protein samples were treated with 600 μL of methanol, 150 μL of chloroform, and 450 μL of water, followed by vigorous vortexing. Samples were centrifuged at 17,000 × g for 3 min, and the resultant upper aqueous phase was removed. Proteins were pelleted following the addition of 450 μL of methanol and centrifugation at 17,000 × g for 6 min. The supernatant was removed, and the extraction process was repeated. Following the second extraction process, precipitated proteins were re-suspended in 50 μL of 6 M urea and diluted to <1 M urea with 250 μL of 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0) buffer. Protein digestion was carried out by adding trypsin (from a 1 mg/ml stock in 1 mM HCl) to a ratio 1:100, rocking at 12 rpm and room temperature overnight. Following digestion, samples were acidified to 1% trifluoroacetic acid and desalted on C18 solid-phase extraction cartridges (SEP-PAK plus, Waters), dried, and re-suspended in buffer A. ISG15 interactome immunoprecipitation: The whole has been performed as before [1] with the following modifications. HAP1 cells were lysed with Co-IP lysis buffer (20 mM Hepes pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.2% NP-40, 10 % glycerol, 5 mM NEM, phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktails; 25 ×106 cells per condition) and subjected to immunoprecipitation using 5 µg of ISG15 antibody (Boston Biochem #A-380) plus 25 μL of protein G Sepharose slurry (Invitrogen; #15920-10) for 16 h at 4 °C. Beads were washed 4 times with Co-IP lysis buffer and immunocomplexes were eluted with 2X Laemmli. 10% of the eluates was used for immunoblotting with the indicated antibody. The remaining eluate was prepared for MS analysis as previously described (DOI: 10.1126/science.ade8840). Eluted proteins were processed for mass spectrometry analysis using suspension traps (S-Traps). Proteins were reduced with 200 mM DTT in 0.1 M Tris pH 7.8, followed by alkylation with 200 mM iodoacetamide in 0.1 M Tris pH 7.8 in the dark. Samples were acidified by addition of 12% phosphoric acid and captured on S-TrapTM midi columns (C02-midi, ProtiFi). Columns were washed with 90% methanol in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TAEB) with centrifugation at 4000 g. Captured proteins were digested with trypsin (1:100 w/w) in 1 mM HCl overnight at RT. Peptides were eluted, dried and dissolved in Buffer A (98 % MilliQ-H20, 2 % CH3CN and 0.1 % TFA). Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis: LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-ultra high-pressure reverse-phase chromatography coupled on-line to a Fusion Lumos (ISG15 interactome) or a Q Exactive (ISG15 ABPP) mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) as described previously [13]. In brief, samples were separated on an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (500 mm × 75 μm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific) over a 60 min (120 min in the case of the matching proteome) gradient of 2–35% acetonitrile in 5% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 0.1% formic acid at 250 nL/min. MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z and the top 12 most abundant precursor ions were selected for high collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis From raw MS files, searches against the UniProtKB human sequence data base (92,954 entries) and label-free quantitation were performed using MaxQuant Software (v1.5.5.1). Search parameters include carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification, oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ as variable modifications, maximum 2 missed cleavages, matching between runs, and LFQ quantitation was performed using unique peptides. Label-free interaction data analysis was performed using Perseus (v1.6.0.2), and volcano and scatter plots were generated using a t-test with permutation FDR = 0.01 for multiple-test correction and s0 = 0.1 as cut-off parameters.  Other graphs were generated using GraphPad PRISM 8 and Excel and for the statistical analysis, we applied two-way ANOVA tests, including multiple comparison testing via the Dunnett method available through the GraphPad Prism software.  Immunoblot protein bands were quantified using Image Studio Lite Version 5.2.5. quantification Statistical evaluations report on Student’s t test (two-tailed distribution) with *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001, NS: not significant). All error bars correspond to the mean ± S.E.M.  Gene ontology and STRING network analysis The GO consortium web tool (http://geneontology.org/) was utilized to conduct GO analysis. To evaluate enriched GO terms of the identified USP16-dependent ISG15 interactome proteins, the PATHER overrepresentation test (released 20230510) was employed. The proteins were analyzed for overrepresentation of PANTHER GO-Slim biological process, PANTHER GO-Slim cellular component, and PANTHER GO-Slim molecular function terms using the Fischer exact test.  Network analysis of USP16-dependent ISG15 interactome proteins (Data Table S3) was performed using the online STRING database v11.5 (https://string-db.org/). The following setting were applied: Output settings: high confidence interaction score (0.7), edges show protein connections based on textmining, experiments, databases, co-expression, neighborhood, co-occurrence, and gene fusion. The network was exported as a TVS (tab-separated values) file, further analyzed and visualized in Cytoscape version 3.9.1. The Cytoscape plug-in MCODE (molecular complex detection) version 2.0.2 was applied to identify highly connected subclusters of proteins using a degree cutoff of two, cluster finding: haircut, a node score cutoff of 0.2, a K-core of two and a max depth of 100.

### Publication Abstract
Interferon-induced ubiquitin (Ub)-like modifier ISG15 covalently modifies host and viral proteins to restrict viral infections. Its function is counteracted by the canonical deISGylase USP18 or Ub-specific protease 18. Notwithstanding indications for the existence of other ISG15 cross-reactive proteases, these remain to be identified. Here, we identify deubiquitinase USP16 as an ISG15 cross-reactive protease by means of ISG15 activity-based profiling. Recombinant USP16 cleaved pro-ISG15 and ISG15 isopeptide-linked model substrates in vitro, as well as ISGylated substrates from cell lysates. Moreover, interferon-induced stimulation of ISGylation was increased by depletion of USP16. The USP16-dependent ISG15 interactome indicated that the deISGylating function of USP16 may regulate metabolic pathways. Targeted enzymes include malate dehydrogenase, cytoplasmic superoxide dismutase 1, fructose-bisphosphate aldolase A, and cytoplasmic glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase 1. USP16 may thus contribute to the regulation of a subset of metabolism-related proteins during type-I interferon responses.

### Keywords
Usp16, Metabolic enzyme, Innate immunity, Isg15

### Affiliations
COI-NDM (University of Oxford)
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Adan Pinto-Fernandez

### Lab Head
Dr Adán Pinto-Fernández
COI-NDM (University of Oxford)


