### Accession
PXD008051

### Title
Translational repression of pre-formed cytokine mRNA prevents chronic activation of memory T cells

### Description
Memory T cells are critical to protect us from recurring infections. Their instantaneous reactivity to pathogens is empowered by persistent expression of cytokine mRNA. How aberrant protein production of this pre-formed mRNA is prevented in the absence of infection, however, remains unresolved. We show that protein production in memory T cells is blocked through a 3’untranslated region (3’UTR)-mediated process, and that AU-rich elements (AREs) are key herein. Germ-line deletion of AREs leads to chronic IFN- production in bona fide memory T cells. Strikingly, the aberrant protein production does not result from increased mRNA levels and/or half-life. Rather, AREs block the recruitment of cytokine mRNA to ribosomes, a process that is mediated by the ARE-binding protein ZFP36L2. Thus, AREs are crucial elements for translational repression that allow murine and human memory T cells to contain pre-formed cytokine mRNAs, while preventing undesirable protein production in the absence of infection.

### Sample Protocol
Triplicates of 2×106 FACS-sorted CD8+ CD44hi OT-I T cells were incubated for 2h in IMDM containing 5% FCS and 1g/ml BrfA with or without the presence of 100nM OVA257–264 peptide. Cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and cell pellets were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cells were lysed in 40μl 1% Sodium Deoxy Cholate, 40mM Chloro Acetamide (both Sigma Aldrich), 10mM TCEP (Thermo Scientific), and 100mM TRIS-HCl pH 8.0 (Life Technologies), boiled at 95° for 5 minutes and sonicated for 10 minutes in a Sonifier bath (Branson). An equal volume of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich) was added, in which 600ng Trypsin Gold (Promega). Samples were digested overnight at room temperature, acidified by addition of 1μl trifluoroacetic acid (Thermo Scientific) and loaded on in-house prepared SDB-RPS STAGEtips (Empore). Peptides were desalted and eluted in three fractions by increasing concentrations of ammonium formate (VWR Chemicals) (100mM and 150mM) or 5% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide (Sigma Aldrich) and acetonitrile (BioSolve) (40%, 60% and 80% v/v)74. Sample volume was reduced by SpeedVac and supplemented with 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA.

### Data Protocol
Tryptic peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse chromatography coupled on line to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex Ion Source, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a 20 cm 75-360µm inner-outer diameter fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH). The column was installed on a Dionex Ultimate3000 RSLC nanoSystem (Thermo Scientific) using a MicroTee union formatted for 360μm outer diameter columns (IDEX) and a liquid junction. The spray voltage was set to 2.15 kV. Buffer A was composed of 0.5% acetic acid and buffer B of 0.5% acetic acid, 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were loaded for 17 min at 300nl/min at 5% buffer B, equilibrated for 5 minutes at 5% buffer B (17-22min) and eluted by increasing buffer B from 5-15% (22-87min) and 15-38% (87-147min), followed by a 10 minute wash to 90% and a 5min regeneration to 5%. Survey scans of peptide precursors from 400 to 1500 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 1.5 × 105 ion count target. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed by isolation with the quadrupole with isolation window 1.6, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan mass spectrometry analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 104 and the max injection time was 35ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2-7 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60s with a 10ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3s cycles. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software. The RAW mass spectrometry files were processed with the MaxQuant computational platform or 1.6.0.13 (memory OT-I T cells)75. Proteins and peptides were identified using the Andromeda search engine by querying the mouse Uniprot database (downloaded August 18, 2017, 51434 entries) for analysis of memory OT-I T cells. Standard settings with the additional options match between runs, Label Free Quantification (LFQ), and unique peptides for quantification were selected. The generated ‘proteingroups.txt’ table was filtered for potential contaminants and reverse hits using Perseus 1.5.1.6 (memory OT-I T cells). The LFQ values were transformed in log2 scale, the triplicates per experimental condition grouped, and proteins were filtered for at least three valid values in one of the experimental groups. Missing values were imputed by normal distribution (width=0.3, shift=1.8), assuming these proteins were close to the detection limit. To identify the proteins with the most prominent differences, we performed a two-sided t-test using an FDR of 5% and S0 of 0.4 (Volcano plot).

### Publication Abstract
Memory T cells are critical for the immune response to recurring infections. Their instantaneous reactivity to pathogens is empowered by the persistent expression of cytokine-encoding mRNAs. How the translation of proteins from pre-formed cytokine-encoding mRNAs is prevented in the absence of infection has remained unclear. Here we found that protein production in memory T cells was blocked via a 3' untranslated region (3' UTR)-mediated process. Germline deletion of AU-rich elements (AREs) in the Ifng-3' UTR led to chronic cytokine production in memory T cells. This aberrant protein production did not result from increased expression and/or half-life of the mRNA. Instead, AREs blocked the recruitment of cytokine-encoding mRNA to ribosomes; this block depended on the ARE-binding protein ZFP36L2. Thus, AREs mediate repression of translation in mouse and human memory T cells by preventing undesirable protein production from pre-formed cytokine-encoding mRNAs in the absence of infection.

### Keywords
Memory t cells, Orbitrap fusion etd, Mouse

### Affiliations
Sanquin Research
Department of Plasma Proteins, laboratory of Proteomics, Sanquin Research, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Maartje van den Biggelaar

### Lab Head
Dr Maartje van den Biggelaar
Department of Plasma Proteins, laboratory of Proteomics, Sanquin Research, The Netherlands


