### Accession
PXD005309

### Title
SPOP mutation -  SPOP Mutation Drives Prostate Tumorigenesis In Vivo through Coordinate Regulation of PI3K/mTOR and AR Signaling

### Description
Recurrent point mutations in SPOP define a distinct molecular subclass of prostate cancer. Here, we describe the first mouse model showing that mutant SPOP drives prostate tumorigenesis in vivo. Conditional expression of mutant SPOP in the prostate dramatically altered phenotypes in the setting of Pten loss, with early neoplastic lesions (high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia) with striking nuclear atypia, and invasive poorly differentiated carcinoma. In mouse prostate organoids, mutant SPOP drove increased proliferation and a transcriptional signature consistent with human prostate cancer. Using these models and human prostate cancer samples, we show that SPOP mutation activates both PI3K/mTOR and androgen receptor (AR) signaling, effectively uncoupling the normal negative feedback between these two pathways. Associated RNA-seq data deposited in GEO: GSE94839.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry The samples were treated with SDS-PAGE loading buffer supplied with 10 mM DTT for 5 min at 85ºC. The proteins were alkylated by the addition of iodoacetamide to the final concentration of 15 mM. The samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE and the whole lanes were cut out and digested with trypsin in-gel for 2 hours. The resulting peptides were extracted, dried and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid with 5% acetonitrile prior to loading onto a trap EASY-column (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an in-house made a nano HPLC column (20 cm x 75 um) packed with LUNA C18 media. Analysis was performed on Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated in data-dependent mode using 120-min gradients in EASY-LC system (Proxeon) with 95% water, 5% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA) (solvent A), and 95% ACN, 5% water, 0.1% FA (solvent B) at a flow rate of 220 nl/min. The acquisition cycle consisted of a survey MS scan in the normal mode followed by twelve data-dependent MS/MS scans acquired in the rapid mode. Dynamic exclusion was used with the following parameters: exclusion size 500, repeat count 1, repeat duration 10 s, exclusion time 45 s. Target value was set at 104 for tandem MS scan. The precursor isolation window was set at 2 m/z. The complete analysis comprised three independent biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis The resulting spectrum files were transformed into MGF format by MSConvert software and interrogated by MASCOT 2.4 search engine using mouse UniProt database concatenated with reverse sequences for estimation of false discovery rate (FDR) and with a list of common contaminants. The search parameters were as follows: full tryptic search, 2 allowed missed cleavages, peptide charges +2 and +3 only, MS tolerance 1 Da, MS/MS tolerance 0.5 Da. Permanent post-translational modifications was: cysteine carbamidomethylation. Variable post-translational modifications were: protein N-terminal acetylation, Met oxidation and N-terminal Glutamine to pyro-Glutamate conversion. The remaining analysis was performed as in (Poliakov et al., Mol Cell Proteomics. 2011 Jun;10(6)). To summarize, the minimal ion score threshold was chosen such that a peptide false discovery rate (FDR) below 1% was achieved. The peptide FDR was calculated as: 2 × (decoy_hits)/(target + decoy hits). Spectral counts for all detected proteins were assembled using an in-house written Python script. The adjustment of spectral counts was done by the same script as in (Poliakov et al., Mol Cell Proteomics. 2011 Jun;10(6)).

### Publication Abstract
Recurrent point mutations in SPOP define a distinct molecular subclass of prostate cancer. Here, we describe a mouse model showing that mutant SPOP drives prostate tumorigenesis in&#xa0;vivo. Conditional expression of mutant SPOP in the prostate dramatically altered phenotypes in the setting of Pten loss, with early neoplastic lesions (high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia) with striking nuclear atypia and invasive, poorly differentiated carcinoma. In mouse prostate organoids, mutant SPOP drove increased proliferation and a transcriptional signature consistent with human prostate cancer. Using these models and human prostate cancer samples, we show that SPOP mutation activates both PI3K/mTOR and androgen receptor signaling, effectively uncoupling the normal negative feedback between these two pathways.

### Keywords
Spop, Mutation, Prostate, Cancer

### Affiliations
Pathology
Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan

### Submitter
Anton Poliakov

### Lab Head
Dr Anton Poliakov
Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan


