### Accession
PXD018599

### Title
Sphingobium indicum B90A nLC-MS/MS

### Description
The project aims to to understand the response of the lin genes in Sphingobium indicum B90A under the stress of HCH isomers and the metabolites formed during degradation of hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH). Entire cell proteome from Sphingobium indicum B90A was extracted in presence of four HCH isomers. Quantitative proteomics confirmed the constitutive expression of the linA, linB and linC genes of the HCH degradation pathway crucial for the initiation of HCH isomers degradation. LinM and LinN were upregulated in the presence of β- and δ-isomers suggested the important role of ABC transporter system in the depletion of β- and δ-HCH. Besides this HCH isomers induced oxidative stress caused systemic changes in strain B90A proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Equal numbers of cells were harvested from each culture by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The cell pellets were once washed with phosphate buffer saline (PBS; pH 7.2) and suspended in 30 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.0). Cell numbers were determined by direct cell counting using epifluorescence microscopy (Budhraja et al, 2019). Equal amounts of cells were lysed by three successive freeze-thaw cycles. Cell debris was then removed by centrifugation at 10,000 g at 4° C for 5 min. The supernatant containing protein samples were reduced with 50 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at 30° C with slight shaking on a thermomixer at 400 rpm. Reduced proteins were further alkylated using 400 mM 2-iodoacetamide (IAA) for 1 h with slight shaking on a thermomixer at 400 rpm at room temperature in dark. The alkylated samples were then digested with 6.3 µg of trypsin (Proteomic Sequencing Grade, Promega) and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Digestion was quenched on the next day with 1 µL of 100% formic acid. The samples were desalted using ZipTip-μC18 columns (Merck Millipore) before LC-MS/MS analysis. The desalted peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and then analysed by nano-liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanoLC system (Dionex Ultimate 3000RSLC; Thermo Scientific) as described earlier (Seidel et al., 2018).

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-MS/MS data obtained from the mass spectrometric analysis was processed by Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) to identify proteins. For peptide matching, Sequest-HT was used as a search engine against a formatted proteome reference database of Sphingobium indicum B90A (UP000004550) downloaded from UniProt. Peptide sequences were identiﬁed at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the percolator node. Oxidation of methionine residues was selected as dynamic modification and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues as a fixed modification. Protein and peptides abundance values were calculated by intensity-based label-free quantification (LFQ) using the Minora node implemented in Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
Hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH) is a persistent organochlorine pesticide that poses threat to different life forms. Sphingobium indicum B90A that belong to sphingomonad is well-known for its ability to degrade HCH isomers (&#x3b1;-, &#x3b2;-, &#x3b3;-, &#x3b4;-), but effects of HCH isomers and adaptive mechanisms of strain B90A under HCH load remain obscure. To investigate the responses of strain B90A to HCH isomers, we followed the proteomics approach as this technique is considered as the powerful tool to study the microbial response to environmental stress. Strain B90A culture was exposed to &#x3b1;-, &#x3b2;-, &#x3b3;-, &#x3b4;-HCH (5 mgL<sup>-1</sup>) and control (without HCH) taken for comparison and changes in whole cell proteome were analyzed. In &#x3b2;- and &#x3b4;-HCH-treated cultures growth decreased significantly when compared to control, &#x3b1;-, and &#x3b3;-HCH-treated cultures. HCH residue analysis corroborated previous observations depicting the complete depletion of &#x3b1;- and &#x3b3;-HCH, while only 66% &#x3b2;-HCH and 34% &#x3b4;-HCH were depleted from culture broth. Comparative proteome analyses showed that &#x3b2;- and &#x3b4;-HCH induced utmost systemic changes in strain B90A proteome, wherein stress-alleviating proteins such as histidine kinases, molecular chaperons, DNA binding proteins, ABC transporters, TonB proteins, antioxidant enzymes, and transcriptional regulators were significantly affected. Besides study confirmed constitutive expression of linA, linB, and linC genes that are crucial for the initiation of HCH isomers degradation, while increased abundance of LinM and LinN in presence of &#x3b2;- and &#x3b4;-HCH suggested the important role of ABC transporter in depletion of these isomers. These results will help to understand the HCH-induced damages and adaptive strategies of strain B90A under HCH load which remained unravelled to date.

### Keywords
Sphingobium indicum b90a, Hexacholorocyclohexane, Nlc-ms/ms, Proteome, Stress response

### Affiliations
The energy and resources institute
The Energy and Resources Institute  Darbari Seth Block, IHC Complex, Lodhi Road New Delhi-110003, India.

### Submitter
RUP LAL

### Lab Head
Dr Rup Lal
The Energy and Resources Institute  Darbari Seth Block, IHC Complex, Lodhi Road New Delhi-110003, India.


