### Accession
PXD023302

### Title
High-throughput proteomic analysis of rectal cancer for prediction of non-complete response after concurrent chemoradiation therapy

### Description
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common lethal malignancy in Korea and worldwide. Rectal  cancer  patients  occupy  about  30%  of  CRC  patients,  and  the  majority  of rectal  cancer patients had locally  advanced disease at diagnosis. The standard treatment of locally advanced rectal  cancer  (LARC)  is  neoadjuvant  radiation  therapy  with  concurrent  chemotherapy  (CCRT) followed by total mesorectal excision (TME). This multidisciplinary team approach  improved local tumor control and overall survival of rectal cancer patients. High throughput proteomic analysis and machine learning algorithm identify DUOX2 (dual oxidase 2) as a novel biomarker for prediction of non-complete response after concurrent chemoradiation therapy for rectal cancer.High throughput proteomic analysis and machine learning algorithm identify DUOX2 (dual oxidase 2) as a novel biomarker for prediction of non-complete response after concurrent chemoradiation therapy for rectal cancer.

### Sample Protocol
The FFPE samples were used to perform label-free quantification proteomic analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Q exactive plus Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) equipped with an EASY nano-spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed in a Maxquant (version 1.6.1.0) environment (Tyanova et al., 2016) using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) against the Uniprot Human protein sequence database (December_2014, 88,657 entries) and the Uniprot Bovine protein sequence database with common contaminants. Mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 20 ppm for MS/MS peaks. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. A minimal peptide length of six amino acids was required. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were considered as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. The FDR was set to 1% for peptide, protein, and site identifications. The peptide identifications across different LC-MS runs and the spectral library were matched by enabling the “match between runs” feature in MaxQuant. Contaminant, reverse, and only site identifications were removed from further data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
High-throughput mass-spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic analysis was performed using formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) biopsy samples obtained before treatment from 13 patients with locally advanced rectal cancer (LARC), who were treated with concurrent chemoradiation therapy (CCRT) followed by surgery. Patients were divided into complete responder (CR) and non-complete responder (nCR) groups. Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining of 79 independent FFPE tissue samples was performed to validate the predictive ability of proteomic biomarker candidates. A total of 3637 proteins were identified, and the expression of 498 proteins was confirmed at significantly different levels (differentially expressed proteins-DEPs) between two groups. In Gene Ontology enrichment analyses, DEPs enriched in biological processes in the CR group included proteins linked to cytoskeletal organization, immune response processes, and vesicle-associated protein transport processes, whereas DEPs in the nCR group were associated with biosynthesis, transcription, and translation processes. Dual oxidase 2 (DUOX2) was selected as the most predictive biomarker in machine learning algorithm analysis. Further IHC validation ultimately confirmed DUOX2 as a potential biomarker for predicting the response of nCR to CCRT. In conclusion, this study suggests that the treatment response to RT may be affected by the pre-treatment tumor microenvironment. DUOX2 is a potential biomarker for the early prediction of nCR after CCRT.

### Keywords
Human, Ffpe, Rectal cancer, Lfq

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital


