### Accession
PXD032077

### Title
Impact of IRP deficiency on the proteome of Ly6G+ cells from the bone marrow in mice

### Description
The overall objective of the project is to evaluate the effects of loss of function of iron regulatory proteins (IRP1, encoded by Aco1)-1 and -2 (IRP2, encoded by Ireb2) during adult life. Mice carrying floxed Aco1 and Ireb2 alleles were crossed to a knockin strain expressing a tamoxifen-inducible CRE recombinase under the control of the Rosa26 promoter. The resulting Aco1flox/flox,Ireb2flox/flox,Rosa26+/CreERT2 mice are designated P1/2-KO; littermates lacking the CreER sequence (Aco1flox/flox,Ireb2flox/flox,Rosa26+/+) serve as reference and are designated P1/2-CTR. Adult mice were injected (i.p.) with tamoxifen on day 1 and day 3 to ablate the IRPs in the whole body, and were sacrificed on day 10 for analysis. Bone marrow cells were collected and LY6G+ cells were magnetically sorted for proteome analysis by LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system connected to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were separated via SDS-PAGEand ran over 0.5 cm. After Commassie staining,the total protein sample was excised and subjected to trypsin digestion on a DigestPro MSi robotic system (CEM GmbH, Kamp-Lintfort, Germany) as described previously (Shevchenkoet al., 2006).The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system directly connected to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were desalted on an Acclaim PepMap300 C18trap cartridge (5μm, 300Å wide pore from Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 3 min using a 30 μl/min flow of 0.05% trifluoroacetic acidin water. The analytical multistep gradient was carried out on a nanoEase MZ  Peptide analytical column (300Å,  1.7  μm,  75  μm  x  200 mm) from Waters GmbH (Eschborn, Germany) using 0.1% formic acid in wateras solvent Aand0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrilein wateras solvent B. Solvent B concentration was linearly increased from  2% to 38% during 134 minutes, followed  by  a  quick raise to  95% for two minutes. Solvent B concentration was then lowered to 2% and a 10 min equilibration step was added. Eluting peptides were analyzed in the mass spectrometer using a data depend acquisition (DDA) mode. A full scan at 60k resolution (380-1400 m/z, 300% AGC target, 45 ms maxIT) was followed by up to 2 seconds of MS/MS scans. Peptide features were isolated with a window of 1.4 m/z, fragmented using 26% normalized collision energy. Fragment spectra were recorded at 15k resolution (100% automatic gain controltarget, 54 ms maxIT). Unassigned and singly charged eluting features were excluded from fragmentation and dynamic exclusion was set to 35s.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was carried out by MaxQuant (version 1.6.14.0, Tyanovaet al., 2016a) using an organism specific database extracted from Uniprot.org under default settings. Identification FDR cutoffs were 0.01 on peptide level and 0.01 on protein level. Match between runs option was enabled but restricted to transfer peptide identifications across RAW files based on accurate retention time and m/z only within replicates.LFQ quantification was done using a label free quantification approach based on the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al, 2014). A minimum of 2 quantified peptides per protein was required for protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Iron is mostly devoted to the hemoglobinization of erythrocytes for oxygen transport. However, emerging evidence points to a broader role for the metal in hematopoiesis, including the formation of the immune system. Iron availability in mammalian cells is controlled by iron-regulatory protein 1 (IRP1) and IRP2. We report that global disruption of both IRP1 and IRP2 in adult mice impairs neutrophil development and differentiation in the bone marrow, yielding immature neutrophils with abnormally high glycolytic and autophagic activity, resulting in neutropenia. IRPs promote neutrophil differentiation in a cell intrinsic manner by securing cellular iron supply together with transcriptional control of neutropoiesis to facilitate differentiation to fully mature neutrophils. Unlike neutrophils, monocyte count was not affected by IRP and iron deficiency, suggesting a lineage-specific effect of iron on myeloid output. This study unveils the previously unrecognized importance of IRPs and iron metabolism in the formation of a major branch of the innate immune system.

### Keywords
Iron metabolism; neutrophils; granulopoiesis; hematopoiesis; iron regulatory proteins; iron responsive elements.

### Affiliations
DKFZ - German Cancer Research Center, “Division of Virus-Associated Carcinogenesis”, Im NeuenheimerFeld 280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
MMPU - molecular medicine partnership unit

### Submitter
Sandro Altamura

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Galy
DKFZ - German Cancer Research Center, “Division of Virus-Associated Carcinogenesis”, Im NeuenheimerFeld 280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany


