### Accession
PXD018855

### Title
Tau molecular diversity mediates clinical heterogeneity in Alzheimer’s disease

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) causes unrelenting, progressive cognitive impairments, but its course is heterogeneous, with a broad range of rates of cognitive decline. The spread of tau aggregates (neurofibrillary tangles) across the cerebral cortex parallels symptom severity. We hypothesized that the kinetics of tau spread may vary if the properties of the propagating tau proteins varied across individuals. We carried out biochemical, biophysical, and both cell- and animal-based bioactivity assays, and mass spectrometry, to characterize tau in 32 AD patients.  We found striking patient-to-patient heterogeneity in the hyperphosphorylated species of soluble, oligomeric, seed-competent tau. Tau seeding activity correlates with the aggressiveness of the clinical disease, and some post-translational modification sites appear to be associated with both enhanced seeding activity and worse clinical outcomes, while others are not. These data suggest that different individuals with “typical” AD may have distinct biochemical features of tau. These data are consistent with the possibility that individuals with AD, much like cancer patients, may have multiple molecular drivers of an otherwise common phenotype, and emphasizes the potential for personalized therapeutic approaches for slowing clinical progression in AD.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen brain tissue from thirty-two human Alzheimer’s disease subjects selected from the Massachusetts Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center Longitudinal Cohort study was collected for this study. Approximately 1 g of frontal cortex was dissected out of the frozen brain section corresponding to Brodmann Area 8/9 and kept at -80°C until homogenization. Frozen human tissue was thawed on wet ice and then immediately homogenized in 500 μL of PBS + protease inhibitor (Roche) in a 2 mL glass dounce homogenizer. The supernatant was collected and aliquoted to avoid excessive freeze/thaw cycles. For each human subject, 50 µL of PBS soluble brain extract containing 75 µg of total protein was pelleted at 150,000 x g for 30 min at 4°C in order to sediment seeding tau species. Pellets were subsequently resuspended in 1X PBS. Resuspended pellets were diluted in 8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and processed separately using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) (Wisniewski et al., 2009) on 10 kDa molecular weight cutoff filters (Millipore). Samples were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated using 1% acrylamide. Protein mixtures were digested with 100 µL 10 µg/mL trypsin (sequencing grade modified trypsin, Promega, Madison, WI) overnight at 37 °C. Peptide solutions were then acidified with formic acid (2% v/v) and desalted using C18 Microspin columns (Nest Group) and vacuum-dried overnight. Peptides were reconstituted in sample buffer (5% formic acid, 5% acetonitrile (ACN)) and analyzed in random order on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen). Peptides were separated on a LC system consisting of a micro-autosampler AS2 and a nanoflow HPLC pump (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) using a capflow PicoChip column (150 µm x 10 cm Acquity BEH C18 1.7 µm 130 Å, New Objective, Woburn, MA)  during a 120 minute gradient from 98% Buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in HPLC-H2O), 2% Buffer B (0.2% (v/v) formic acid in ACN), to 70% Buffer A 30% buffer B at a flowrate of 1 µl /min.. The PicoChip was heated to 50°C and mounted directly at the inlet to the mass spectrometer. The Q Exactive was operated in positive ion mode, with a data-dependent acquisition top 12 method. The MS1 scan settings were as follows: mass-to-charge (m/z) range 375-1400, resolution 70,000@ m/z 400, AGC target 3e6, max IT 60ms. MS2 scan settings: resolution 17,500@ m/z 400, AGC target 5e4, max IT 100ms, isolation window m/z 1.6, NCE 27, underfill ration 2% (intensity threshold 1e4), charge state exclusion unassigned, 1, >8, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion 25s.

### Data Protocol
To identify tau phosphorylation sites, raw files generated by Xcalibur were analyzed using MaxQuant (Cox & Mann ,2008) software version 1.6.5.0 searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein sequence human proteome database (October 2017) including isoform entries. The following settings were applied: digestion- trypsin with up to two missed cleavages, mass tolerances - 20 ppm for the first peptide search, 4.5 ppm for the second search, 20 ppm fragment ion mass tolerance. Propionamide on cysteine was set as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine (M), N-terminal acetylation, phosphorylation of serine, threonine, tyrosine, as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% on peptide spectrum match, protein, and site decoy fraction levels, and was determined by searching a reverse database. For all other search parameters, the default settings were used. In order to quantify modified peptides in each sample even in the absence of fragmentation of the precursor, an MS1 filtering approach using Skyline was used (Schilling et al., 2012). A Skyline document with entries for modified peptides representing phosphorylation sites identified on tau using MaxQuant was created. In cases where multiple co-eluting phosphoisomers of the same peptide were identified by MaxQuant (S198/S199/S202, S400/T403/S403), they could not be distinguished on the MS1 level and therefore treated as one entity. To generate a spectral library to facilitate peak identification, Mascot 2.6 was used to search 10 individual data files with the following settings: fixed propionamide on cysteine, phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine, N-terminal acetylation, and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Peptide mass tolerance 20 ppm, 20 mmu fragment mass tolerance. The Human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (October 2017) including isoforms was used with specific trypsin digestion and a maximum 2 missed cleavages. The results files were downloaded from Mascot and imported as a peptide search in Skyline to generate a spectral library using the DDA with MS1 filtering workflow. All raw files were imported in Skyline extracting chromatograms within 5 minutes of Mascot IDs. Extracted ion chromatograms were examined and peak boundaries were manually adjusted for each sample & peptide using retention time, mass error (<10ppm), isotope dot product (>0.8), fragment ions, and local peak landscape to guide peak picking. The sum of the peak areas of the three unmodified peptides was used to normalize the modified peptide peak area to total tau. Analysis of LC/MS data was performed blinded.

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD) causes unrelenting, progressive cognitive impairments, but its course is heterogeneous, with a broad range of rates of cognitive decline<sup>1</sup>. The spread of tau aggregates (neurofibrillary tangles) across the cerebral cortex parallels symptom severity<sup>2,3</sup>. We hypothesized that the kinetics of tau spread may vary if the properties of the propagating tau proteins vary across individuals. We carried out biochemical, biophysical, MS and both cell- and animal-based-bioactivity assays to characterize tau in 32 patients with AD. We found striking patient-to-patient heterogeneity in the hyperphosphorylated species of soluble, oligomeric, seed-competent tau. Tau seeding activity correlates with the aggressiveness of the clinical disease, and some post-translational modification (PTM) sites appear to be associated with both enhanced seeding activity and worse clinical outcomes, whereas others are not. These data suggest that different individuals with 'typical' AD may have distinct biochemical features of tau. These data are consistent with the possibility that individuals with AD, much like people with cancer, may have multiple molecular drivers of an otherwise common phenotype, and emphasize the potential for personalized therapeutic approaches for slowing clinical progression of AD.

### Keywords
Human, Brain, Qexactive

### Affiliations
Boston Children's Hospital
F.M Kirby Neurobiology Center, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

### Submitter
Pieter Beerepoot

### Lab Head
Dr Judith Steen
F.M Kirby Neurobiology Center, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA


