### Accession
PXD000107

### Title
Pseudomonas aeruginosa inner membrane proteome

### Description
The present dataset provides the first description of Pseudomonas aeruginosa inner membrane proteome. To achieve this, we combined efficient separation of membranes from PAO1 reference strain using discontinuous sucrose gradient centrifugation and mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis. Three biological replicates were prepared and analysed twice by nanoLC-MS/MS (LTQ-Orbitrap Velos pro). Using Mascot (v.2.4), IRMa (v.1.30.4) and homemade hEIDI (v.1.13), a core list of 991 non-redundant proteins was established.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a Gram-negative bacterium that can inhabit a wide variety of environments and infect different hosts. Human infections by this microbe are nowadays perceived as a major health problem due notably to its multiresistance. The present data set provides the first description of P. aeruginosa inner membrane proteome. To achieve this, we combined efficient separation of membranes from PAO1 reference strain using discontinuous sucrose gradient centrifugation and MS-based proteomic analysis. A core list of 991 nonredundant proteins was established and analyzed in terms of trans-membrane domains, signal peptide, and lipobox sequence prediction. Furthermore, functional insights into membrane-spanning and membrane-associated protein complexes have been explored. All mass spectrometry data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000107.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head


