### Accession
PXD023076

### Title
Omental adipose tissue metaboproteome: differential dysregulation by chronic binge alcohol and ovariectomy in simian immunodeficiency virus-infected female macaques

### Description
Effective antiretroviral therapy (ART) has significantly reduced mortality of people living with HIV (PLWH). Increased survival and aging of PLWH is associated with increased incidence of at-risk alcohol use and of metabolic comorbidities; and in women, menopause may be an additional factor contributing to metabolic dysregulation, particularly in adipose tissue. We examined the differential effects of chronic binge alcohol (CBA) administration and ovariectomy (OVX) on the omental adipose tissue (OmAT) proteome of simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infected macaques.  Quantitative discovery-based proteomics identified 1429 differentially expressed proteins. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis calculated z-scores, or activation predictions for a disease or functional pathway. Results revealed functional pathways associated with protein changes centered around the “OmAT metaboproteome profile”. CBA did not affect functional pathways of metabolic disease; but dysregulated proteins involved in AMPK signaling and lipid metabolism. Based on IPA’s calculated z-score, OVX-mediated proteome changes promote pathways associated with glucose and lipid associated metabolic disease. Additionally, OVX was predicted to promote apoptosis, necrosis and reactive oxygen species (ROS) pathways, while CBA was predicted to inhibit these OVX-associated changes. These results provide evidence for the role of ovarian hormone loss in mediating OmAT metaboproteome dysregulation in HIV/SIV and suggest that CBA modifies OVX-associated changes. In the context of OVX, CBA administraton produced larger metabolic and cellular effects; which we speculate may reflect a protective role of estrogen against CBA-mediated adipose tissue injury in female SIV-infected macaques.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was isolated from OmAT samples by the addition of 1% SDS and sonication. Protein concentration was determined using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and an 8-point standard curve. Based on the protein concentration, 100 μg of each sample was prepared for trypsin digestion by reducing the cysteines with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide (IAA).  After chloroform–methanol precipitation, each protein pellet was digested with trypsin overnight at 37 C. The digested product was labeled using a tandem mass tag (TMTpro) 16-Plex Reagent Set (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, and following a hydroxylamine quench was stored at -80 C until further use. An equal amount of each TMT-labelled sample was pooled together in a single tube and SepPak purified (Waters Chromatography, Dublin, Ireland) using acidic reverse phase conditions. To eliminate unreacted TMTpro, a 10% acetonitrile (ACN) wash was employed before elution of labeled peptids in 70% ACN. After drying to completion, an off-line fractionation step was employed to reduce the complexity of the sample. The sample was resuspended in 10 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10. This mixture was subjected to basic pH reversed-phase chromatography (Dionex UltiMate 3000; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, the fractions were ultraviolet (UV) monitored at 215 nm for an injection of 100 μL at 0.1 mL/min with a gradient developed from 10 mM ammonium hydroxide (pH = 10) to 100% acetonitrile (ACN) over 90 minutes. A total of 48 fractions (200 μL each) were collected in a 96-well microplate and recombined in a checkerboard fashion to create 16 “super fractions” (original fractions 1, 17, and 33 became new super fraction #1, etc.; original fractions 2, 18, and 34 became new super fraction #2, etc.) {Yang, 2012}.  The 12 super fractions were then analyzed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nano-flow system (LC) coupled to a Thermo Fisher Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (MS). Each fraction was subjected to a 90-minute chromatographic method employing a gradient from 2% - 25% ACN in 0.1% formic acid (ACN/FA) over the course of 65 minutes, a gradient to 50% ACN/FA for an additional 10 minutes, a step to 90% ACN/FA for 5 minutes, and a 10-minute re-equilibration into 2% ACN/FA. Chromatography was carried out in a “trap-and-load” format using an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific); trap column C18 PepMap 100, 5 µm, 100 A and the separation column was EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100 A, 25cm.  The entire run was at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min.  Electrospray was achieved at 1.8 kV. TMTpro data acquisition utilized an MS3 approach for data collection, as previously described {Pascale 2020}. Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap utilizing a resolution of 120,000. Data-dependent MS2 scans were performed in the linear ion trap using a collision-induced dissociation of 25%. Reporter ions were fragmented using high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) of 65% and detected in the Orbitrap using a resolution of 50,000. This was repeated for a total of three technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
TMTpro data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The 3 runs of the 12 “super fractions” were merged and searched using SEQUEST HT {Tab, 2001}. The Protein FASTA database was Macaca mulatta, SwissProt, Tax ID = 9544, version 2018-10-25 and contained 44,389 protein sequences. Static modifications included TMTpro reagents on lysine and N-terminus (+304.2071); carbamidomethyl on cysteines (+57.021); and dynamic modification of oxidation of methionine (+15.9949). Parent ion tolerance was 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was 0.6 Da, and the maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 2. Only high-scoring peptides were considered utilizing a false discovery rate (FDR) of <1%, and only one unique high-scoring peptide was required for inclusion of a given identified protein in our results.

### Publication Abstract
Effective antiretroviral therapy (ART) has significantly reduced mortality of people living with HIV (PLWH), and the prevalence of at-risk alcohol use is higher among PLWH. Increased survival and aging of PLWH is associated with increased prevalence of metabolic comorbidities especially among menopausal women, and adipose tissue metabolic dysregulation may be a significant contributing factor. We examined the differential effects of chronic binge alcohol (CBA) administration and ovariectomy (OVX) on the omental adipose tissue (OmAT) proteome in a subset of simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV)-infected macaques of a longitudinal parent study. Quantitative discovery-based proteomics identified 1,429 differentially expressed proteins. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) was used to calculate <i>z</i>-scores, or activation predictions, for functional pathways and diseases. Results revealed that protein changes associated with functional pathways centered around the "OmAT metaboproteome profile." Based on <i>z</i>-scores, CBA did not affect functional pathways of metabolic disease but dysregulated proteins involved in adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) signaling and lipid metabolism. OVX-mediated proteome changes were predicted to promote pathways involved in glucose- and lipid-associated metabolic disease. Proteins involved in apoptosis, necrosis, and reactive oxygen species (ROS) pathways were also predicted to be activated by OVX and these were predicted to be inhibited by CBA. These results provide evidence for the role of ovarian hormone loss in mediating OmAT metaboproteome dysregulation in SIV and suggest that CBA modifies OVX-associated changes. In the context of OVX, CBA administration produced larger metabolic and cellular effects, which we speculate may reflect a protective role of estrogen against CBA-mediated adipose tissue injury in female SIV-infected macaques.

### Keywords
Adipose alcohol ovariectomy siv macaques lc-ms tmtpro

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Proteomics Core Facility LSUHSC New Orleans, LA 70112
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
LSUHSC Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Jessie Guidry

### Lab Head
Dr Jessie Guidry
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Proteomics Core Facility LSUHSC New Orleans, LA 70112


