### Accession
PXD036595

### Title
The mitochondrial protease OMA1 acts as a metabolic safeguard upon nuclear DNA damage

### Description
The metabolic plasticity of mitochondria supports cell development and differentiation and ensures cell survival under stress. The peptidase OMA1 regulates mitochondrial morphology and stress signaling and orchestrates tumorigenesis and cell fate decisions in a cell and tissue-specific manner. Here, we have used unbiased systemic approaches to demonstrate that OMA1-dependent cell fate decisions are under metabolic control. A metabolism-focus CRISPR screen combined with an integrated analysis of human expression data unraveled a protective role of OMA1 against DNA damage. Nucleotide deficiencies induced by chemotherapeutic agents promote the selective, p53-dependent apoptosis of cells lacking OMA1. The protective effect of OMA1 does not depend on OMA1 activation nor on OMA1-mediated OPA1 and DELE1 processing. OMA1-deficient cells have reduced glycolytic capacity and accumulate OXPHOS proteins upon DNA damage. OXPHOS inhibition restores glycolysis and confers resistance against DNA damage. Thus, metabolic cues determine cell fate decisions by OMA1, which sheds new light on the role of OMA1 in cancerogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Culture  WT and Oma1-/- MEFs were grown at 37 ˚C and 5% CO2 in DMEM GlutaMAX (Life Technologies) with 4.5 g/l glucose supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Biochrom) and 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Gibco). After treatment with HU (150 µM) or vehicle (DMSO) for 16 h, cells were harvested and washed with PBS.  Protein Digestion  40 µL of 4% SDS in 100 mM HEPES (ph = 8.5) was pre-heated to 70°C and added to the MEF cell pellet for further 10 min incubation at 70°C on a ThermoMixer (shaking: 550 rpm).  The protein concentration was determined using the 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #22660). 20 µg of protein was subjected to tryptic digestion. Proteins were reduced (10 mM TCEP) and alkylated (20 mM CAA) in the dark for 45 min at 45 °C. Samples were subjected to an SP3-based digestion (Hughes et al., 2014). Washed SP3 beads (SP3 beads (Sera-Mag(TM) Magnetic Carboxylate Modified Particles (Hydrophobic, GE44152105050250),  Sera-Mag(TM) Magnetic Carboxylate Modified Particles (Hydrophilic, GE24152105050250) from Sigma Aldrich) were mixed equally, and 3 µL of bead slurry were added to each sample. Acetonitrile was added to a final concentration of 50% and washed twice using 70 % ethanol (V=200 µL) on an in-house made magnet. After an additional acetonitrile wash (V=200µL), 5 µL digestion solution (10 mM HEPES pH = 8.5 containing 0.5µg Trypsin (Sigma) and 0.5µg LysC (Wako)) was added to each sample and incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were desalted on a magnet using 2 x 200 µL acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted in 10 µL 5% DMSO in LC-MS water (Sigma Aldrich) in an ultrasonic bath for 10 min. Formic acid and acetonitrile were added to a final concentration of 2.5% and 2%, respectively. Samples were stored at -20°C before subjection to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics Data Analysis  DIA-NN (Data-Independent Acquisition by Neural Networks)  v 1.8  (Demichev et al., 2020) was used to analyze data-independent raw files. The spectral library was created using the reviewed-only Uniport reference protein (Mus Musculus, 17029 entries, downloaded September 2019) with the ‘Deep learning-based spectra and RTs prediction’ turned on. Protease was set to Trypsin and a maximum of 1 miss cleavage was allowed. N-term M excision was set as a variable modification and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. The peptide length was set to 7 – 30 amino acids and the precursor m/z range was defined from 340 – 1200 m/z. The option ‘Quantitative matrices’ was enabled. The FDR was set to 1 % and the mass accuracy (MS2 and MS1) as well as the scan window was set to 0 (automatic inference via DIA-NN). Match between runs (MBR) was enabled. The Neuronal network classifier worked in ‘double pass mode’ and protein interference was set to ‘Isoform IDs’. The quantification strategy was set to ‘robust LC (high accuracy)’ and cross-run normalization was defined as ‘RT-dependent’.  The ‘pg’ (protein group) output (MaxLFQ intensities (Cox et al., 2014)) was further processed using Instant Clue (Nolte et al., 2018) including principal component analysis and pairwise comparison using a t-test or one-way ANOVA followed by a permutation-based FDR correction (5%).

### Publication Abstract
The metabolic plasticity of mitochondria ensures cell development, differentiation, and survival. The peptidase OMA1 regulates mitochondrial morphology via OPA1 and stress signaling via DELE1 and orchestrates tumorigenesis and cell survival in a cell- and tissue-specific manner. Here, we use unbiased systems-based approaches to show that OMA1-dependent cell survival depends on metabolic cues. A metabolism-focused CRISPR screen combined with an integrated analysis of human gene expression data found that OMA1 protects against DNA damage. Nucleotide deficiencies induced by chemotherapeutic agents promote p53-dependent apoptosis of cells lacking OMA1. The protective effect of OMA1 does not depend on OMA1 activation or OMA1-mediated OPA1 and DELE1 processing. OMA1-deficient cells show reduced glycolysis and accumulate oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) proteins upon DNA damage. OXPHOS inhibition restores glycolysis and confers resistance against DNA damage. Thus, OMA1 dictates the balance between cell death and survival through the control of glucose metabolism, shedding light on its role in cancerogenesis.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Oma1, Dia, Mef

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, 50931 Cologne, Germany
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Department of Mitochondrial Proteostasis Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Langer
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Department of Mitochondrial Proteostasis Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne


