### Accession
PXD031814

### Title
Proteome analysis of binding protein of lncRNA Cpmer in mesoderm cells

### Description
These proteome datasets demonstrate the binding proteins of lncRNA Cpmer in mesoderm cells during mouse ESCs derived cardiomyocyte differentiation process. Antisense-Cpmer is used as negative conrol.

### Sample Protocol
IP was performed using streptavidin beads coated with biotin-labeled sense Cpmer or antisense Cpmer. The RNA-binding proteins were analyzed by LC-MS. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 16 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.3. Trypsin/P (or other enzymes if any) was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys were specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modification. Peptide confidence was set at high, and peptide ion score was set > 20.

### Publication Abstract
Previous studies have shown that eukaryotic elongation factor 1A2 (eEF1A2) serves as an essential heart-specific translation elongation element and that its mutation or knockout delays heart development and causes congenital heart disease and death among species. However, the function and regulatory mechanisms of eEF1A2 in mammalian heart development remain largely unknown. Here we identified the long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) Cpmer (cytoplasmic mesoderm regulator), which interacted with eEF1A2 to co-regulate differentiation of mouse and human embryonic stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes. Mechanistically, Cpmer specifically recognized Eomes mRNA by RNA-RNA pairing and facilitated binding of eEF1A2 with Eomes mRNA, guaranteeing Eomes mRNA translation and cardiomyocyte differentiation. Our data reveal a novel functionally conserved lncRNA that can specifically regulate Eomes translation and cardiomyocyte differentiation, which broadens our understanding of the mechanism of lncRNA involvement in the subtle translational regulation of eEF1A2 during mammalian heart development.

### Keywords
Mouse, Lncrna, Proteome

### Affiliations
Tongji University
Tongji Unviersity

### Submitter
Yao Lyu

### Lab Head
Dr Jiuhong Kang
Tongji University


