### Accession
PXD004561

### Title
Proteome-wide changes in proteostasis in C. elegans models of longevity and age-related disease.

### Description
The balance between protein synthesis and protein breakdown is known as protein homeostasis (proteostasis) and loss of proteostasis is one of the Hallmarks of Aging. The latter is maybe best illustrated by the fact that many age-related diseases like Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s are characterized by the appearance of protein aggregates. However, very few studies actually measure protein half-life, and hence the observed lowered protein translation rates in many longevity models do not necessarily mean that the combined rate of synthesis and degradation (i.e. proteostasis) is lost or changed. To get a better insight in the actual changes in proteostasis of each protein in the proteome we have developed a quantitative mass-spectrometry based method that allows for the estimation of the half-life of each individual protein in the proteome and that is suitable for use in C. elegans. We have used this method to determine protein half-lives in developing C. elegans models of longevity and age-related disease and found that proteostasis, as measured by proteome-wide protein half-life is indeed dramatically changed in these models. However, the observed changes are in some cases unexpected and suggest that the combined rate of protein synthesis and breakdown does not necessarily correlate with eventual lifespan or healthspan. Furthermore, we show that the proteostasis network has a remarkable plasticity; in the tested models large changes in protein half-life are observed in the entire proteome rather than in a subset of proteins, thereby largely balancing the relative rate at which various biological processes proceed. Lastly, our data indicate that proteostasis is regulated at the level of the whole organism rather than at the single cell level. The here described method and observations are a start to further unravel how proteostasis and healthy aging are intertwined.

### Sample Protocol
Worms were lysed in 150 µl 8M urea, 100 mM Tris pH 7.5 supplemented with protease inhibitors (Roche complete EDTA-free) by interval sonication (10x 30’’ at high) with a bioruptor sonication device and water bath (Diagenode). After sonication, samples were centrifuged and 40 µl of the supernatant was separated from other contaminating worm parts on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel (electrophoresed for ±1cm). With help of SimplyBlue staining the samples could be visualized and excised from the gel and further sliced into pieces of ±1mm3. Then a mixture of H2O and acetonitrile (ACN) (1:1) was used for destaining, followed by 20’ incubation with 6.5mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 10’ with 55mM iodoacetamide for reduction and alkylation. Between all steps the gel pieces were shrunk with 100% ACN  to allow the next solution to reach the sample completely.  Next the samples were washed with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate in milliQ. 100 ng trypsin + Lys-C was added on ice for 30’, after which another 100 ng was added and proteins were digested overnight at 37° C. The next day C18-stagetips were used for filter and loading of the protein digest. The stagetips were activated first by washing with methanol, followed by washing with buffer A (0.5% formic acid) and buffer B (0.5% formic acid in 80% ACN). After loading of the digested sample, stagetips were washed with buffer A and peptides were eluted with buffer B. Buffer B was removed by evaporation in a SpeedVac, followed by dissolving of the samples in buffer A.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analysed with the Maxquant software version 1.5.1.0 {Cox, 2008 #51} with deamidation of glutamine and asparagine, oxidation of methionine set as variable modification, and cysteine alkylation with iodoacetamide as fixed modification. For identification, the C. Elegans wormpep208 database from wormbase.org was searched with both the peptide as well as the protein false discovery rate set to 1%. The SILAC quantification algorithm was used in combination with the ‘match between runs’ tool (option set at two minutes), the IBAQ and the LFQ algoritm, all of which are integral parts of the Maxquant software {Schwanhausser, 2011 #52;Luber, 2010 #53}. Proteins identified with two or more unique peptides were filtered for reverse hits, decoy hits and standard contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pulse labeling of c. elegans

### Affiliations
Center for Molecular Medicine, Molecular Cancer Research, University Medical Center Utrecht. Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands.
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research




### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr Tobias B. Dansen
Center for Molecular Medicine, Molecular Cancer Research, University Medical Center Utrecht. Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands.


