### Accession
PXD006633

### Title
Discovery of non-canonical translation initiation sites through mass spectrometric analysis of protein N-termini

### Description
Translation initiation generally occurs at AUG codons in eukaryotes although it has been shown that non-AUG or non-canonical translation initiation can also occur. However, the evidence for non-canonical translation initiation sites (TISs) is largely indirect and based on ribosome profiling studies. Here, using a strategy specifically designed to enrich N-termini of proteins, we demonstrate that many human proteins are translated at non-canonical TISs. The large majority of TISs that mapped to 5’ untranslated regions were non-canonical and led to N-terminal extension of annotated proteins or translation of upstream small open reading frames (uORF). There has been little controversy on whether the corresponding amino acid to the start codon is incorporated at TIS or methionine is still incorporated. Notably, methionine was incorporated at almost all non-canonical TISs identified in this study. Comparison of the TISs determined through mass spectrometry with ribosome profiling data revealed that about two-thirds of the novel annotations were indeed supported by ribosome profiling data. The sequence orthology analysis and relative translation frequency analysis of non-canonical TISs over canonical ones suggests that those non-canonical TISs are not leaky but they can have certain biological functions. Overall, this study provides evidence of protein translation initiation at non-canonical TISs and indicates that further studies are required for elucidation of functional implications of such non-canonical translation initiation.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and human sample acquisition   HEK293T cells were cultured in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum supplement. HUVECs were cultured in EGM™ BulletKit™ Medium (Lonza) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Human colon tissue sample was collected during surgery and the tissue was snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Human substantia nigra tissue sample was obtained from a rapid autopsy program. The tissues were evaluated by the pathologist involved and microscopic observation showed minimal or no autolysis and putrefaction. Institutional ethical clearance was obtained for the use of the human samples from Johns Hopkins Medicine Institutional Review Board.   Protein extraction and N-terminal peptide enrichment by TAILS method HEK293T cells, HUVEC, human colon and substantia nigra tissues were sonicated for 5 min in 8 M guanidine hydrochloride, 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.0, 10 mM dithiotreitol in the presence of Halt proteinase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo) followed by heating at 90oC for 3 min and subsequent centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 10 min. After cooling, the proteins were alkylated by treating with 30 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 15 min. All the primary amine groups of the proteins were dimethylated and non N-terminal peptides of proteins were depleted as described previously (Kleifeld et al. 2011). Briefly, protein samples were diluted by adding the same volume of 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.0, formaldehyde and sodium cyanoborohydride were added to the final concentration of 40 mM and 20 mM, respectively. The pH was adjusted to 6.0-7.0 and incubated at 37oC overnight followed by quenching the reaction by adding ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 100 mM and incubation at 37oC for 4 h.  After blocking all the primary amine groups by demethylation, proteins were precipitated by adding 8 volumes of ice cold acetone and 1 volume of methanol   at -80oC for 3 h. The proteins were collected by centrifuging at 14,000  g in 4oC for 20 min and carefully decanting followed by washing with ice-cold methanol twice. The tube with protein precipitant was dried in room temperature and the proteins were resuspended with small volume (500 µl for a high-speed centrifuge tube of 50 ml capacity) of 50 mM NaOH. Once the protein pellet is fully dissolved, NaOH was diluted with 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.0 followed by trypsin digestion with the enzyme to protein ratio of 1:100. The protein was digested at 37oC overnight. Protein non-N-terminal peptides were depleted by adding HPG-ALD polymer (http://flintbox.com/public/project/1948) at a protein to polymer ratio of 1:2 followed by addition of 20 mM NaBH3CN. The peptide and polymer mixture were incubated at 37oC overnight. Protein N-terminal peptides that were not captured to HPG-ALD polymer were collected by spin column with 30-kDa molecular weight cutoff (Millipore). The collected N-terminal peptides were fractionated with high-pH reverse phase liquid chromatography from 10% to 35% of the gradient over 95 min gradient with 0.3 ml/min flow rate (buffer A: 10 mM tetraethylamine ammonium bicarbonate, buffer B: 10 mM tetraethylamine ammonium bicarbonate /90% acetonitrile). The fractionated peptides were concatenated into 24 fractions and dried by SpeedVac.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis MS/MS data obtained from LC-MS analyses were searched against RefSeq human protein database (version 70) for ORF region or customized databases for 5’ UTR with 248 common contaminant proteins using SEQUEST search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 2.1 platform (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). ArgC were used as the protease (since trypsin cleaves with ArgC specificity due to the dimethylation of lysines in the TAILS workflow) with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Acetylation and dimethylation of peptide N-termini and oxidation of methionine were included as variable modifications. Carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine and dimethyl modification of lysine were included as fixed modifications. The minimum peptide length was set to be 6 amino acids. The mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. The matched spectra were filtered using the Percolator algorithm within the Proteome Discoverer suite. The identified peptides were further filtered by protein level false discovery rate. Proteins were considered identified at a q value <0.01. The unmatched spectra from the Human Proteome Map project were searched using the same parameters as those used for TAILS experiments except for non-tryptic on N-terminal and tryptic on C-terminal, dynamic modification for peptide N-terminal acetylation, no fixed modification for Lys and 0 missed-cleavage allowed. The acetylated peptides identified from the searches against 5’ UTR were matched to NCBI non-redundant human protein database and the only peptides that have at least 3 amino acids mismatch were retained.  Validation of acetylated peptides mapped to 5’ UTR using synthetic peptides Representative acetylated peptides were synthesized (JPT Peptide Technologies, Berlin, Germany). Dried peptides were diluted using 10% formic acid and approximately 1 pmol of peptides to the final concentration were mixed and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis on the LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) or Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometry (Thermo Fisher). Database search was performed in the same manner as described in mass spectrometry data analysis section with exception for the database that is composed of synthetic peptides and 248 common contaminant proteins. Spectra of acetylated peptides from the samples were validated by aligning those from synthetic peptides using in-house generated software written in Python programming language.   Sequence alignment and motif analysis Homologous gene database was downloaded from Homologen of NCBI and genes and mRNA accessions corresponding to the genes for the proteins with N-terminal extension were retrieved. From stop codon to stop codon was taken and translated. Sequence alignments were performed with Clustal Omega. Sequence logo analysis was done with Web Logo3. DNA or protein sequences were taken and sequence logo was generated in probability mode.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Non-canonical, Tails

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Department of Biological Chemistry Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine USA

### Submitter
chanhyun na

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Department of Biological Chemistry Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine USA


