### Accession
PXD017502

### Title
Pil1 phosphorylation during starvation

### Description
We investigated eisosome rearrangement during glucose starvation. Pil1 phosphorylation was assessed in control and starvation conditions.

### Sample Protocol
We used C-terminal endogenous His tagged Pil1 to assess phosphorylation. For phosphoprotein analysis, phospho-peptides were subjected to enrichment by TiO2 resin (Calbochem ProteoExtract kit) and then desalted on stage tips.

### Data Protocol
We used Perseus software to analyze the data. For phosphopeptide analysis by MaxQuant, two options were added to the settings: variable modification of phosphorylation at S,T and Y, and dependent peptide search.

### Publication Abstract
As the physical barrier between the cell and the outside environment, the plasma membrane is well-positioned to be the first responder to stress. The membrane is also highly vulnerable to many types of perturbation, including heat, force, osmotic pressure, lipid shortage, and starvation. To determine whether the structural changes in the plasma membrane of <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> brought about by nutrient stress can be communicated to regulatory networks within the cell, we identified proteins that interact with stress granules (SGs), subcellular structures composed of proteins, and nontranslated RNAs that form when cells are stressed. We found that SG proteins interacted with components of eisosomes, which are subcortical membrane structures with a distinct lipid and protein composition. In response to starvation-triggered phosphorylation of eisosome proteins, eisosomes clustered and recruited SG components, including active Pkc1. The absence of eisosomes impaired SG formation, resulting in delayed recovery from nutrient deprivation. Thus, eisosome clustering is an example of interdomain communication in response to stress and identifies a previously unknown mechanism of SG regulation.

### Keywords
Starvation, Yeast, Eisosome, Pil1

### Affiliations
Department of Experimental Neurodegeneration, University Medical Center Goettingen
University Medical Center Goettingen

### Submitter
Triana Amen

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Kaganovich
Department of Experimental Neurodegeneration, University Medical Center Goettingen


