### Accession
PXD030941

### Title
Stoichiometry of the gene products from the tetrachloroethene reductive dehalogenase operon pceABCT

### Description
Organohalide respiration (OHR) is a bacterial anaerobic process in which halogenated compounds, e.g. tetrachloroethene (PCE), are used as terminal electron acceptors. Our model organisms are Dehalobacter restrictus strain PER-K23, an obligate OHR bacterium, and Desulfitobacterium hafniense strain TCE1, a bacterium with a versatile energy metabolism. The key catalytic enzyme is the tetrachloroethene reductive dehalogenase (PceA) that is, at genomic level, encoded in a highly conserved gene cluster (pceABCT) in both D. restrictus and D. hafniense strain TCE1. To date, the functions of PceA and PceT, a dedicated molecular chaperone for the maturation of PceA, are well defined. However, the role of PceB and PceC are still not elucidated. Here, we present a multilevel study aiming at deciphering the stoichiometry of the pceABCT individual gene products. The investigation was assessed at RNA level by reverse transcription and (quantitative) polymerase chain reaction, while at protein level, proteomic analyses based on parallel reaction monitoring were performed to quantify the PceA, B, C and T proteins in cell-free extracts as well as in soluble and membrane fractions of both strains using heavy-labelled reference peptides. At RNA level, our results confirmed the co-transcription of all pce gene products, while the quantitative analysis revealed a relative stoichiometry of the gene transcripts of pceA, pceB, pceC and pceT at approximately 1.0:3.0:0.1:0.1 in D. restrictus. This trend was not observed in D. hafniense strain TCE1, where no substantial difference was measured for the four genes. At proteomic level, a 2:1 stoichiometry of PceA and PceB was observed in the membrane fraction, and a low abundance of PceC in comparison to the other two proteins. In the soluble fraction, a 1:1 stoichiometry of PceA and PceT was identified. In summary, we show that the pce gene cluster is transcribed as an operon with, however, a level of transcription that differs for individual genes, an observation that could be explained by post-transcriptional events, such as RNA processing and differential RNA stability. Results at protein level suggest that PceA and PceB form a membrane-bound PceA2B protein complex, which, in contrast to the proposed model, seems to be devoid of PceC.

### Sample Protocol
Biomass pellets were lysed in HEPES buffer by several rounds of sonication. Unbroken cells were removed by centrifugation and 10 μg aliquots of the cell-free extracts, soluble fractions and membrane fractions were supplemented with 1% Rapigest (final concentration). Samples were reduced and alkylated as outlined below followed by in-solution overnight digestion at 37°C with Trypsin/LysC proteases. Protein digests were then subjected to C18 stage tip cleaning, dried in a speed-vacuum and stored at -20°C. Shotgun mass spectrometry (MS) analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer coupled to a nano-UPLC Dionex pump. For liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis, Trypsin/LysC digested samples were resuspended in 30-60 μL of a mobile phase (solvent A: 2% acetonitrile (ACN) in water, 0.1% formic acid (FA)) and then separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC system on a home-made 75 μm ID × 50 cm C18 capillary column (Reprosil-Pur AQ 120 Å, 1.9 μm) in-line connected with the MS instrument. Peptides were separated by applying a non-linear 150 min gradient ranging from 99% solvent A to 90% solvent B (90% ACN and 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. For spectral library and charge state determination of the peptides from PceA, PceB, PceC, PceT and the F1 α-subunit of the ATP synthase, the MS instrument was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA). Full-scan MS spectra (300-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120’000 at 200 m/z. Data-dependent MS/MS spectra were recorded followed by HCD (higher-energy collision dissociation) fragmentation on the ten most intense signals per cycle (2 s), using an isolation window of 1.4 m/z. HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60’000 using a normalized collision energy of 32 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 100’000 ions. Charge state screening was enabled such that unassigned and charge states higher than six were rejected. Precursors intensity threshold was set at 5’000. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for a duration of 20 s, and the mass exclusion window was set at 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
PEAKS Studio X+ Pro (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) software was used for data processing. The raw MS data files were imported into PEAKS Studio software using the following parameters for the database search: For protein identification the UniProt/Swiss-Prot Dehalobacter restrictus database (Proteome ID 232 UP000018934) (fasta files enclosed) combined with a decoy database was used. For peptide identification the following settings were used: Enzyme: Trypsin, missed cleavages: 2 precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.2 Da, minimum charge: 2, maximum charge: 5, fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications: Oxidation (M), phosphorylation (STY). False discovery rate (FDR) was calculated based on the target/decoy database and peptides as well as proteins with FDR threshold of   ≤ 1% were chosen as true positive hits. The PEAKS Studio database search files, containing protein sequences including PTM identifications were exported as mzIdentML files using the third party export option in PEAKS Studio X+ Pro.

### Publication Abstract
Organohalide respiration (OHR) is a bacterial anaerobic process that uses halogenated compounds, e.g., tetrachloroethene (PCE), as terminal electron acceptors. Our model organisms are <i>Dehalobacter restrictus</i> strain PER-K23, an obligate OHR bacterium (OHRB), and <i>Desulfitobacterium hafniense</i> strain TCE1, a bacterium with a versatile metabolism. The key enzyme is the PCE reductive dehalogenase (PceA) that is encoded in the highly conserved gene cluster (<i>pceABCT</i>) in both above-mentioned strains, and in other Firmicutes OHRB. To date, the functions of PceA and PceT, a dedicated molecular chaperone for the maturation of PceA, are well defined. However, the role of PceB and PceC are still not elucidated. We present a multilevel study aiming at deciphering the stoichiometry of <i>pceABCT</i> individual gene products. The investigation was assessed at RNA level by reverse transcription and (quantitative) polymerase chain reaction, while at protein level, proteomic analyses based on parallel reaction monitoring were performed to quantify the Pce proteins in cell-free extracts as well as in soluble and membrane fractions of both strains using heavy-labeled reference peptides. At RNA level, our results confirmed the co-transcription of all <i>pce</i> genes, while the quantitative analysis revealed a relative stoichiometry of the gene transcripts of <i>pceA, pceB, pceC</i>, and <i>pceT</i> at ~ 1.0:3.0:0.1:0.1 in <i>D. restrictus</i>. This trend was not observed in <i>D. hafniense</i> strain TCE1, where no substantial difference was measured for the four genes. At proteomic level, an apparent 2:1 stoichiometry of PceA and PceB was obtained in the membrane fraction, and a low abundance of PceC in comparison to the other two proteins. In the soluble fraction, a 1:1 stoichiometry of PceA and PceT was identified. In summary, we show that the <i>pce</i> gene cluster is transcribed as an operon with, however, a level of transcription that differs for individual genes, an observation that could be explained by post-transcriptional events. Despite challenges in the quantification of integral membrane proteins such as PceB and PceC, the similar abundance of PceA and PceB invites to consider them as forming a membrane-bound PceA<sub>2</sub>B protein complex, which, in contrast to the proposed model, seems to be devoid of PceC.

### Keywords
Stoichiometry, Reductive dehalogenase, Tetrachloroethene, Quantitative proteomics, Desulfitobacterium hafniense, Organohalide respiration, Dehalobacter restrictus, Firmicutes

### Affiliations
EPFL
Laboratory for Environmental Biotechnology, Ecole polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Adrien Schmid

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Holliger
Laboratory for Environmental Biotechnology, Ecole polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland


