### Accession
PXD014558

### Title
Palaeoproteomic analysis of ancient eggshell proteins from Çatalhöyük archaeological site

### Description
Palaeoproteomics analysis of archaeological bird eggshells from archaeological Çatalhöyük site. This project aimed to taxonomically identify fragments of eggshells from the site, using a combination of morphological observations (by light microscopy) and protein analyses (MALDI-MS and LC-MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
Eggshell fragments were weighed (5-40 mg), powdered using clean micro-pestles directly in eppendorf tubes, exposed to bleach (NaOCl, 12 % w/v for 72 hours) in order to isolate the intracrystalline fraction. Bleached powders were demineralised in cold 0.6M hydrochloridric acid (HCl), the solutions neutralised, lyophilised and resuspended in ammonium bicarbonate (50 mM). Alkylation / reduction of disulphide bonds was carried out using dithiothreitol (65°C, 60 min; Sigma Aldrich, St Louis, MO) and iodoacetamide (room temperature, 45 min; Sigma Aldrich). After overnight digestion at 37°C with trypsin (0.5 μg/μL; Promega, 2800 Woods Hollow Road Madison, WI 53,711 USA), samples were acidified and purified using C18 solid-phase extraction (Pierce zip-tip; Thermo-Fisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Obtained solution was evaporated to dryness using a centrifugal evaporator, resuspended in 0,1 % FA before LC-MS/MS analyses. The peptides were separated on a PepMAP C18 column (75 μm × 500 mm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC at 250 nL/min and acetonitrile gradient from 2% to 35% in 5% dimethyl sulfoxide/0.1% formic acid. Peptides were detected with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo) at a resolution of 70,000 @ 200 m/z. Up to 15 precursors were selected for High-energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Resulting product ion spectra were searched against a protein database obtained from NCBI (restricting the taxonomy to “birds”, downloaded 22/02/2019) and containing common contaminants (cRAP: https://www.thegpm.org/crap/) using the software PEAKS (version 8.5). For PEAKS, FDR rate was set at <0.5%, with protein identifications accepted with −10lgp scores ≥ 40 and ALC (%) ≥ 80.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Archaeology, Paleoproteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Eggshells

### Affiliations
University of Turin
Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology, University of Turin

### Submitter
Beatrice Demarchi

### Lab Head
Dr Beatrice Demarchi
Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology, University of Turin


