### Accession
PXD041124

### Title
Easy, robust, and reproducible online acid cleavage of proteins in mobile phase for fast quantitative LC-MS bottom-up proteomics – application for ricin detection

### Description
The data were recorded during the development, optimization, and characterization of a method for fast online acid cleavage of proteins directly in the mobile phase.

### Sample Protocol
Trastuzumab was used for the method development and its characterization. Twenty μL of the reconstituted trastuzumab (21 μg/μL) was mixed with 60 μL of 8M guanidine hydrochloride, incubated at 60 °C for 5 min, and subsequently reduced in 20 mM dithiothreitol at 60 °C for 30 min. Water was added to obtain a concentration of 1 μg/μL. Two microliters of reduced trastuzumab were injected for the online chemical cleavage for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS data were searched using Byonic v3.5 (Protein Metrics) against the FASTA sequence of trastuzumab or ricin. A nonspecific cleavage was chosen, and the mass tolerance was set at 5.5 ppm for precursors and 15 ppm for fragments. Trastuzumab and ricin peptides with NX[S/T] motif were screened for typical N-glycans. Oxidized Met, dehydration of Asp, and pyroglutamate formation from N-terminal Glu and Gln were set as dynamic modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Sample preparation involving the cleavage of proteins into peptides is the first critical step for successful bottom-up proteomics and protein analyses. Time- and labor-intensiveness are among the bottlenecks of the commonly used methods for protein sample preparation. Here, we report a fast online method for postinjection acid cleavage of proteins directly in the mobile phase typically used for LC-MS analyses in proteomics. The chemical cleavage is achieved in 0.1% formic acid within 35 s in a capillary heated to 195 &#xb0;C installed upstream of the analytical column, enabling the generated peptides to be separated. The peptides generated by the optimized method covered the entire sequence except for one amino acid of trastuzumab used for the method development. The qualitative results are extraordinarily stable, even over a long period of time. Moreover, the method is also suitable for accurate and repeatable quantification. The procedure requires only one manual step, significantly decreasing sample transfer losses. To demonstrate its practical utility, we tested the method for the fast detection of ricin. Ricin can be unambiguously identified from an injection of 10 ng, and the results can be obtained within 7-8 min after receiving a suspicious sample. Because no sophisticated accessories and no additional reagents are needed, the method can be seamlessly transferred to any laboratory for high-throughput proteomic workflows.

### Keywords
Bottom-up proteomics; lc-ms; online protein cleavage; acid hydrolysis; aspartic acid; ricin; artifacts

### Affiliations
Charles University, Faculty of Pharmacy in Hradec Králové Department of Analytical Chemistry Akademika Heyrovského 1203/8 500 05 Hradec Králové, Czech Republic
Faculty of Pharmacy, Charles University

### Submitter
Juraj Lenco

### Lab Head
Dr Juraj Lenco
Charles University, Faculty of Pharmacy in Hradec Králové Department of Analytical Chemistry Akademika Heyrovského 1203/8 500 05 Hradec Králové, Czech Republic


