### Accession
PXD038132

### Title
Chemoproteomic discovery of a human RNA ligase

### Description
RNA ligases are present across all forms of life. While enzymatic RNA ligation between 5'-PO4 and 3'-OH termini is prevalent in viruses, fungi, and plants, such RNA ligases are yet to be identified in vertebrates. Here, using a nucleotide-based chemical probe targeting human AMPylated proteome, we have enriched and identified the hitherto uncharacterised human protein chromosome 12 open reading frame 29 (C12orf29) as the first human enzyme promoting RNA ligation between 5'-PO4 and 3'-OH termini. C12orf29 catalyses ATP-dependent RNA ligation via a three-step mechanism, involving tandem auto- and RNA AMPylation. Knock-out of C12ORF29 gene impedes the cellular resilience to oxidative stress featuring concurrent RNA degradation, which suggests a role of C12orf29 in maintaining RNA integrity. This data provides the groundwork for establishing a human RNA repair pathway.

### Sample Protocol
In the chemical proteomics assay, 200 μM Ap3A, C2-eAp3A, or MilliQ® H2O were incubated with 2.0 mg/mL H1299 or HEK293T cell lysates in 1x AMPylation buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM DTT) at 37°C for 1 h in a total volume of 450 μL. The reaction was stopped by adding 1.8 mL pre-cold MeOH. The resulting mixture stood at -20 °C for 2 h to precipitate. Protein pellets were obtained after centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C, which were dried for 5 min and reconstituted in 450 μL 1x resuspension buffer (50 mM triethanolamine pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, and 4% SDS). A master mix was prepared freshly with 0.5 mM N3-(Arg)PEG3-DB, 2.5 mM CuSO4, 0.25 mM TBTA, and 2.5 mM TCEP in 0.4x AMPylation buffer. 300 μL of the master mix was added to the pre-cold reaction mixture to yield 0.2 mM N3-(Arg)PEG3-DB, 1.0 mM CuSO4, 0.1 mM TBTA, and 1.0 mM TCEP in a total volume of 750 μL. The CuAAC was conducted at 25 °C for 1 h, which was quenched by adding 3 mL pre-cold acetone. The resulting mixture stood at -20 °C overnight to precipitate. Protein pellets were obtained after centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C, which were washed with 300 μL cold MeOH trice and dried for 5 min. The pellets were reconstituted in 200 μL 1x PBS pH 7.4 supplemented with 4% SDS, followed by addition of 800 μL 1x PBS pH 7.4 and centrifugation at 13,400 rpm for 5 min at room temperature to remove any undissolved residue. The supernatant was incubated with high capacity streptavidin agarose beads in a bed volume of 25 μL at 25 °C for 15 min with an end-over-end rotator. The beads were pelleted by centrifugation at 1500 rpm for 2 min at room temperature, which were washed successively with 1x PBS pH 7.4 supplemented with 1% SDS (3 x 100 μL), washing buffer (8 x 100 μL, 1x PBS pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 4 M urea, and 1% SDS), and 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.8 (5 x 100 μL). The beads were treated with 0.8 mM biotin in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.8 supplemented with 0.1% RapiGest SF (3 x 50 μL) and incubated at 37°C for 10 min with shaking at 600 rpm to elute the AMPylated proteins. Prior to MS analysis, the elution fractions were treated with 5 mM DTT at 60 °C for 1 h.After cooling down, the mixture was treated with 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide at room temperature for 1 h in dark. In turn, the resulting mixture was incubated with 3 μg trypsin at 37 °C overnight. The digested protein mixture was added 3 μL TFA and incubated at 37 °C for 45 min to hydrolyse RapiGest SF. The resulting mixture was cleared by centrifugation at 13,400 rpm for 30 min at room temperature. The supernatant was transferred carefully and lyophilized overnight. Finally, the tryptic peptides were dissolved in 60 μL 0.1% TFA supplemented with 10 μL 10% TFA and desalted using U-C18 ZipTips. Tryptic peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using a 39 min gradient from 2.5% MeCN/0.1% formic acid to 32% MeCN/0.1% formic acid, 1 min to 75% MeCN/0.1% formic acid, followed by a 5 min washing step at 75% MeCN/0.1% formic acid. Mass spectra were recorded on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated in data dependent Top20 mode with dynamic exclusion set to 5 s. Full scan MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200) and scan range 350-1,600 m/z with an automatic gain control target value of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. Most intense precursors with charge states of 2-6 reaching a minimum automatic gain control target value of 1e3 were selected for MS/MS experiments. Normalized collision energy was set to 28.MS/MS spectra were collected at a resolution of 30,000 (at m/z 200), an automatic gain control target value of 1e5 and 100 ms maximum injection time. Each of the biological triplicates was measured as technical duplicates resulting in six measurements per condition (Ap3A, C2-eAp3A and bead control).

### Data Protocol
Raw files from LC-MS/MS measurements were analysed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0) with match between runs and label-free quantification (LFQ) (minimum ratio count 1) enabled. The minimal peptide length was set to 5. For protein identification, the human reference proteome downloaded from the UniProt database (download date: 2018-02-22) and the integrated database of common contaminants were used. Data of different cell types were quantified in separate analyses. Further data processing was performed using Perseus software (version 1.6.15.0). Identified proteins were filtered for reverse hits, common contaminants and proteins that were only identified by site. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed, filtered to be detected in at least 4 out of 6 replicate measurements of at least one condition and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (width 0.3 and shift 1.8), based on the assumption that these proteins were below the detection limit. LFQ intensities of technical replicates were averaged and significantly enriched proteins were identified by pairwise comparisons. For each cell type (HEK293T and H1299) two Student’s t-tests (S0 = 0.1 and FDR = 0.001) were performed, separately comparing C2-eAp3A against Ap3A and against the bead control. Only proteins significantly enriched and showing a t-testdifference > 1 in both comparisons were considered to be C2-eAp3A enriched for the cell type.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Proteomics, Ampylation, Rna ligation

### Affiliations
University of Konstanz
Organic Chemistry/Cellular Chemistry, Department of Chemistry, University of Konstanz

### Submitter
Philip Saumer

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Marx
Organic Chemistry/Cellular Chemistry, Department of Chemistry, University of Konstanz


