### Accession
PXD017386

### Title
Aquatic decomposition and its effects on the bone proteome for forensic applications

### Description
Methods currently available to estimate the post-mortem submerged interval (PMSI) of cadavers in water suffer from poor accuracy, being mostly based on morphological examination of the remains. Proteins present within bones have recently attracted more attention from researchers interested in the estimation of the post-mortem interval (PMI) in terrestrial environments. Despite the great potential of proteomic methods for PMI estimation, their application to aquatic environments has not yet been explored. In this study, we examined whether four different types of aquatic environment (tap water, saltwater, pond water and chlorinated water) affected the proteome of mice bones with increasing PMSIs (from zero to three weeks).

### Sample Protocol
A total of 22 mouse carcasses (Mus Musculus) were purchased frozen from an U.K. supplier. 16 of them were soaked individually in bottles containing four types of water: tap water, saltwater, pond water and chlorinated water. The tap water samples (labelled FM in the Results) were used as controls. All bottles were closed the top and placed in a fume cupboard for the whole duration of the experiment. For each type of water and PMSI tested, two identical mice were used as replicates and subjected to the same experimental treatment. Mice were then retrieved from each bottle at the selected PMSI (one- or three-weeks) and tibiae were collected from each individual straight after their recovery from the water. Additionally, two mice out of the 22 were allowed to defrost and tibiae were collected straight after (time zero control samples) without immersion in water. Terrestrial controls – four mice out of 22 left to decompose in a clear foil box in the same laboratory conditions (temperature 20°C, no access to insects or scavengers) for one- and three-weeks – were also included.  The samples subjected to protein extraction and LC-MS/MS were overall 22.  Proteins were extracted following the protocol proposed by Procopio and Buckley42. Collected bones were cleaned in deionized water and dried in a fume cupboard at room temperature. Tibiae were broken in half; one half was treated for protein extraction and the other half was preserved at room temperature. Each sample was decalcified with 1 mL of 10 v/v% FA for 6 hours at 4 °C. After removing all the acid soluble fraction, the acid insoluble fraction was incubated for 18 hours at 4°C with 500 µL of 6 M GuHCl/100mM TRIS buffer (pH 7.4). The buffer was exchanged into 100 µL of 50 mM AA with 10K MWCO filters, and samples were then reduced with 4.2 µL of 5 mM DTT for 40 min at room temperature and alkylated with 16.8 µL of 15 mM IAM for 45 min in the dark at room temperature53. Samples were then quenched with another 4.2 µL of 5 mM DTT, then digested with 0.4 µg of trypsin for 5 hours at 37°C and finally frozen. By adding 15 µL of 1 v/v% TFA, the digestion was stopped and the samples were then desalted, concentrated and purified using OMIX C18 pipette tips with 0.1 v/v% TFA as washing solution and 50 v/v% ACN/0.1 v/v% TFA as a conditioning solution. In short, the pipette tips were prepared with two volumes of 100 µL of 0.1 v/v% TFA and washed twice with 100 µL of 50 v/v% ACN/0.1 v/v% TFA. The sample was then aspirated into the tip at least ten times to efficiently bind peptides to the absorbent membrane. Finally, two wash steps with 100µL of 0.1 v/v% TFA were performed, and then the peptides were eluted into 100 µL of 50 v/v% ACN/0.1 v/v% TFA. Purified peptides were left in the fume cupboard with lids open to dry them completely at room temperature prior to their submission for LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples resuspended in 5 v/v% ACN/0.1 v/v% TFA were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate™ 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC) nano LC system (Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) coupled to a Q Exactive™ Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were separated on an EASY-Spray™ reverse phase LC Column (500 mm x 75 µm diameter (i.d.), 2 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) using a gradient from 96 v/v% A (0.1 v/v% FA in 5 v/v% ACN) and 4 v/v% B (0.1 v/v% FA in 95 v/v% ACN) to 8 v/v%, 30 v/v% and 50% B at 14, 50, and 60 min, respectively, at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 LC Column (5 mm x 0.3 mm i.d., 5 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used as trap column at a flow rate of 25 µL min-1 kept at 45 °C. The LC separation was followed by a cleaning cycle with an additional 15 min of column equilibration time. Then, peptide ions were analyzed in full scan MS scanning mode at 35,000 MS resolution with an automatic gain control (AGC) of 1e6, injection time of 200 ms and scan range of 375-1,400 m/z. The top ten most abundant ions were selected for data-dependent MS/MS analysis with a normalized collision energy (NCE) level of 30 performed at 17,500 MS resolution with an AGC of 1e5 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. The isolation window was set to 2.0 m/z, with an underfilled ratio of 0.4%, dynamic exclusion was employed; thus, one repeat scan (i.e., two MS/MS scans in total) was acquired in a 45 s repeat duration with the precursor being excluded for the subsequent 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide mass spectra were then searched against the Swiss-Prot database using the Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1; www.matrixscience.com) for matches to primary protein sequences, specifying the taxonomy filter to Mus musculus (house mouse). This search included the fixed carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine as it results from addition of DTT to proteins. In the light of our aims, deamidation (asparagine and glutamine) and oxidation (lysine, methionine and proline) were also considered as variable modifications. The enzyme was set to trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Mass tolerances for precursor and fragmented ions were set at 5 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. It was assumed that all spectra hold either 2+ or 3+ charged precursors.  Progenesis software (version 4.1; Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, U.K.) was used to identify the proteins and assess their relative abundance in each sample. The software enables protein comparisons among different experimental conditions and the identification of protein expression changes. Peptide ions with a score of <27, which indicates identity or extensive homology (p < 0.05), were excluded from the analysis based on the Mascot evaluation of the peptide score distribution. To further increase the reliability of the obtained results, proteins with a peptide count of <2 were also excluded from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Methods currently available to estimate the <i>postmortem</i> submerged interval (PMSI) of cadavers in water suffer from poor accuracy, being mostly based on morphological examination of the remains. Proteins present within bones have recently attracted more attention from researchers interested in the estimation of the <i>postmortem</i> interval (PMI) in terrestrial environments. Despite the great potential of proteomic methods for PMI estimation, their application to aquatic environments has not yet been explored. In this study, we examined whether four different types of aquatic environment affected the proteome of mice bones with increasing PMSIs. Results showed that increasing PMSIs can influence the protein abundances more than the different types of water. In particular, the abundance of the muscle protein fructose-bisphosphate aldolase A constantly decreased with increasing PMSIs. Additionally, the protein peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase showed a significant decrease between controls and aquatic environments. Furthermore, the coagulation factor VII was deamidated only in submerged samples and not in terrestrial controls. Finally, fetuin-A was significantly more deamidated in pond water compared to the other aquatic environments. Overall, this study identified novel potential biomarker candidates that would be useful for the estimation of the PMSI and for the characterization of the type of water involved in criminal investigations.

### Keywords
Aquatic decomposition, Forensic, Bone

### Affiliations
Ellison Building, Northumbria University, Newcastle Upon-Tyne, NE1 8ST, UK
University of Central Lancashire 

### Submitter
Noemi Procopio

### Lab Head
Dr Noemi Procopio
Ellison Building, Northumbria University, Newcastle Upon-Tyne, NE1 8ST, UK


