### Accession
PXD005207

### Title
PfCDPK1 mediated signaling in erythrocytic stages of Plasmodium falciparum

### Description
Calcium Dependent Protein Kinases (CDPKs) are key effectors of calcium signaling in malaria parasite.  We have elucidated a novel role of PfCDPK1, which is indispensable for the erythrocytic development of Plasmodium falciparum, in invasion of host Red Blood Cells (RBCs). To gain insights into the mechanisms via which PfCDPK1 is involved in parasitic processes, a comparative phosphoproteomic analysis was employed to identify its parasitic targets.  Proteins were isolated from CDPK1 knockdown and wild type parasites and processed for trypsin digestion and iTRAQ labeling. Quantitative proteomic analysis using high resolution mass spectrometry led to the identification of hypophosphorylated proteins, which can be the likely substrates for this kinase.  In addition, in vitro kinase assays and antibody based validation of the hypophosphorylated sites was carried out. This study will provide a novel insight into the CDPK1 mediated invasion by Plasmodium falciparum.

### Sample Protocol
The comparative phosphoproteomic and proteomic analyses were carried out as five replicates. Proteins were isolated from CDPK1 knockdown and wild type parasites. Equal amount of proteins from both the conditions were then processed for reduction, alkylation and trypsin digestion. Peptides from both the conditions were then labeled with iTRAQ in technical replicates. Peptides from CDPK1 knockdown parasites were labeled with iTRAQ label 116 and 117, whereas, peptides from wild type parasites were labeled with 114 and 115. The pooled peptides were then fractionated using bRPLC and an aliquot was taken out from each fraction for total proteomic analysis. Remaining sample from each fraction was further processed for TiO2-based enrichment of phosphopeptides. Phosphopeptides enriched fractions were then analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data obtained from all the LC-MS/MS analyses were searched against a combined protein database of human and Plasmodium falciparum using Sequest and Mascot search engine through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, peptide N-terminal and lysine side chain of iTRAQ were selected as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine was selected as dynamic modifications. Trypsin was set as the protease and maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.1 Da was allowed. All PSMs were identified at 1% FDR. The probability of phosphorylation for each site was calculated by the phosphoRS node in Proteome Discoverer. Only the phosphopeptides with >75% site localization were considered for further analysis. Phosphorylation fold change for each peptide was normalized with the total proteome level change and a normalized phosphorylation change of >1.33 fold was considered as significantly regulated.

### Publication Abstract
Calcium Dependent Protein Kinases are key effectors of calcium signaling in malaria parasite. PfCDPK1 is critical for asexual development of Plasmodium falciparum, but its precise function and substrates remain largely unknown. Using a conditional knockdown strategy, we here establish that this kinase is critical for the invasion of host erythrocytes. Furthermore, using a multidisciplinary approach involving comparative phosphoproteomics we gain insights into the underlying molecular mechanisms. We identify substrates of PfCDPK1, which includes proteins of Inner Membrane Complex and glideosome-actomyosin motor assembly. Interestingly, PfCDPK1 phosphorylates PfPKA regulatory subunit (PfPKA-R) and regulates PfPKA activity in the parasite, which may be relevant for the process of invasion. This study delineates the signaling network of PfCDPK1 and sheds light on mechanisms via which it regulates invasion.Calcium dependent protein kinase 1 (CDPK1) plays an important role in asexual development of Plasmodium falciparum. Using phosphoproteomics and conditional knockdown of CDPK1, the authors here identify CDPK1 substrates and a cross-talk between CDPK1 and PKA, and show the role of CDPK1 in parasite invasion.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteome, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.
Faculty Scientist, Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, India

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr Keshava Prasad
Faculty Scientist, Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, India


