### Accession
PXD035362

### Title
Dataset 3 from 'Protein complexes in Bacillus subtilis by AI-assisted structural proteomics'

### Description
We generated a whole cell interaction network using crosslinking mass spectrometry. We crosslinked B. subtilis cells in suspension with the membrane permeable crosslinker DSSO, which can be cleaved in the mass spectrometer to aid identification of the crosslinking peptides (Kao et al. 2011; Kolbowski et al. 2021). To crudely simplify the proteome prior to tryptic digestion, we lysed the crosslinked cells and separated the soluble proteome (Dataset 1), and the cell debris (Dataset 2) (see Fig. S1a and methods). These two samples were digested, crosslinked peptides were enriched and fractionated by cation exchange and then all fractions were further separated by size exclusion chromatography. To further increase the depth of analysis, we also separated the soluble proteome further by size exclusion chromatography to produce 9 pools that were each analyzed separately (Dataset 3) (Fig. S1A and methods). A 2% protein-protein interaction false discovery rate (PPI-FDR) was imposed on each of the datasets and together 560 protein interactions are reported at a combined FDR of 2.5% (with a 5% residue pair-level FDR (Lenz et al. 2020)) (Supplementary Table 1). These 560 protein interactions are underpinned by 1268 unique residue pairs.

### Sample Protocol
To prepare dataset 3, frozen crosslinked cell pellets weighing 600mg were used. The cells were lysed in the same manner as those used for Datasets 1 and 2, and the resulting supernatant was separated to simplify the crosslinked proteome for easier analysis. All steps were carried out at a temperature of 4°C. The lysate was clarified by centrifugation for 30 minutes at 20,000 g, and the soluble and insoluble proteome were separated by ultracentrifugation in a Beckman Coulter 70Ti fixed-angle rotor at 106,000 g for 1 hour. The pellet was retained for digestion and crosslinking MS analysis, while the supernatant was concentrated to 10% of its initial volume using a 100kDa cutoff Amicon filter (Merck Millipore).  For lysate separation by size exclusion chromatography, 100μl of concentrated lysate was loaded onto a Biosep SEC-S4000 (7.8 x 600) size exclusion column on an ÄKTA pure (GE) protein purification system pre-equilibrated with running buffer consisting of 5% glycerol, 100mM KCl, 50mM HEPES, 5mM NaCl, and 1.5mM MgCl2, and separated at a flow rate of 0.2 ml/min. A total of 50 x 200μl fractions were collected at elution volumes ranging from 10 ml (end of the void volume) to 20 ml, and were pooled into eight protein pools. The eight protein pools and the pellet from the ultracentrifugation step were digested as for Datasets 1 and 2, and stored on HyperSEP C18 SPE solid-phase columns at -80°C prior to peptide fractionation. SCX plus subsequent SEC fractionation was performed for each pool of peptides as described for Datasets 1 and 2. Whenever amounts were insufficient, SCX fractions were pooled to have at least 20μg prior to separation by SEC. The samples were then resuspended in 0.1% v/v formic acid and 3.2% v/v acetonitrile. LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted in duplicate for SEC and SCX fractions, using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) coupled on-line with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). The sample was separated and ionized by a 50cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and mobile phase B of 80% v/v acetonitrile with 0.1% v/v formic acid. LC–MS was performed at a flowrate of 0.3μl/min.  Gradients were optimized for each chromatographic fraction from offline fractionation ranging from 2% mobile phase B to 45% mobile phase B over 100 minutes, followed by a linear increase to 55% over 5.5 minutes, then an increase to 95% over 2.5 minutes. The MS data were acquired in data-dependent mode using the top-speed setting with a 2.5s cycle time. For every cycle, the full-scan mass spectrum was recorded in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 in the range 400-1,450m/z. Normalized AGC = 250%, maximum injection time = 50ms, and dynamic exclusion = 60s. For MS2, ions with a precursor charge state between 4+ and 7+ were selected with highest priority and 3+ were fragmented with any cycle time remaining. Normalized AGC target = 200% and maximum injection time = 118ms. Fragmentation was done with stepped-HCD collision energies 18, 24, and 30%, and spectra were recorded with 60,000 resolution with the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Spectra recalibration, database search with xiSEARCH, and FDR thresholding with xiFDR were performed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bacillus subtilis, Crosslinking mass spectrometry, Dsso

### Affiliations
NCI-NIH

### Submitter
Francis O'Reilly 

### Lab Head
 Juri Rappsilber 
NCI-NIH


