### Accession
PXD021735

### Title
Cerebrospinal Fluid Proteomics of Rats with Depression

### Description
Based on the proteomics of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), this study aimed to explore the mechanism of depression and antidepressants.

### Sample Protocol
CSF sample was prepared 24 hours after the T-maze test. The rats were anesthetized and exposed the foramen magnum. intravenous infusion needle (0.45#) was attached to syringe (1mL). CSF was collected from cisterna magna puncture,  centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 15 min at 4 °C. The supernatant of CSF was collected and frozen at -80 °C.

### Data Protocol
Protein was extracted from cerebrospinal fluid. After quantification and separation, 30 μL protein was taken from each sample for proteolysis. TMT labeling was carried out in accordance with the instructions of the TMT labeling kit (Thermo, US). High pH RP spin column was used for grading. The samples were separated by chromatography (Thermo, US) and analyzed by mass spectrometry (Thermo, US). The original data were identified and quantitatively analyzed by Mascot2.2 and Proteome Discoverer1.4. Proteins with a fold change more than 1.2 or less than 0.83 as well as a statistical P-value < 0.05 between two groups were selected as DEPs. Gene Ontology (GO) mapping and annotation of proteins were conducted using the Blast2GO. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) annotation were was performed using KAAS (KEGG Automatic Annotation Server). Enrichment analysis was performed by Fisher’s Exact Test with P-values less than 0.05 and an FDR value less than 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rats; cerebrospinal fluid; depression

### Affiliations
Research Center for Basic Integrative Medicine, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine
Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
Li-Li Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Can Yan
Research Center for Basic Integrative Medicine, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine


