### Accession
PXD016285

### Title
Metaproteomics analysis of microbial structure on the surface of Indian Ocean

### Description
In this study we characterize microbial community features on the surface of Indian Ocean. 11 samples were collected from Indian Ocean and subjected for quantitative metaproteomics analysis for taxonomic and functional analysis. Our results suggested that metabolic tuning at metaproteomics levels enabled microbial community to sustain stable when subjected to environmental perturbations in the oligotrophic ocean.

### Sample Protocol
Microbial community samples were collected from 11 sites of Indian Ocean. For each sample, protein were extracted by TRIzol and then protein concentration were evaluated using 2D Quant kit. After that, protein concentration of 11 samples were digested into peptides using trypsin. The peptides was separated by LC-20AB nano HPLC into 20 fragments for MS/MS analysis. Each fraction was run in DDA mode with Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data(.wiff) were converted into mgf format for database search. A three-step search strategy was used to generate the protein identification file. In brief, X!Tandem without any criterions was used for the first step searching. Sequences from the searching results were extracted and combined with its decoy datasets as a transition database for the second X!Tandem searching with more stringent filtrations. The secondary search results were constructed as the final library. Finally, MaxQuant was used to re-searching against the final library for identification and quantification. Database comes from translated metagenomics data of same region. Identification results were filtered with 1% FDR both from spectrum and protein level. Taxonomic and functional annotation were also mapped from metagenomics data annotation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Metaproteomics, Ocean microbial

### Affiliations
BGI
Xiamen University

### Submitter
keqiang yan

### Lab Head
Dr Da-Zhi Wang
Xiamen University


