### Accession
PXD029592

### Title
Poly(A) RNA interactome capture upon HDAC inhibition by Romidepsin

### Description
Immediate early genes (IEGs) represent a unique class of genes with rapid induction kinetics and transient expression patterns, which requires IEG mRNAs to be short-lived. Here, we establish cytoplasmic polyadenylation element-binding protein 4 (CPEB4) as a major determinant of IEG mRNA instability. We identified human CPEB4 as an RNA-binding protein (RBP) with enhanced association to poly(A) RNA upon inhibition of class I histone deacetylases (HDACs), which is known to cause widespread degradation of poly(A)-containing mRNA. Photoactivatable ribonucleoside-enhanced crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (PAR-CLIP) analysis using endogenously tagged CBEP4 in HeLa cells revealed that CPEB4 preferentially binds to the 3' untranslated region (UTR) of IEG mRNAs, at U-rich sequence motifs located in close proximity to the poly(A) site. By transcriptome-wide mRNA decay measurements, we found that the strength of CPEB4 binding correlates with short mRNA half-lives, and that loss of CPEB4 expression leads to the stabilization of IEG mRNAs. Further, we demonstrate that CPEB4 mediates mRNA degradation by recruitment of the evolutionarily conserved CCR4-NOT complex, the major eukaryotic deadenylase. While CPEB4 is primarily known for its ability to stimulate cytoplasmic polyadenylation, our findings establish an additional function for CPEB4 as an RBP that enhances the degradation of short-lived IEG mRNAs.

### Sample Protocol
1.6 x 106 HeLa cells were seeded in 15 cm dishes. The following day, cells were treated with 20 nM Romidepsin (Abcam) or an equal volume of solvent (DMSO) for 16 hours. For each condition, 3×15 cm dishes were used. Cells were washed twice with room temperature (RT) PBS and crosslinked with 0.05% (v/v) formaldehyde in PBS for 10 min at RT. Excess formaldehyde was quenched by addition of 0.25 M glycine pH 7.0 for 5 min at RT. Cells were harvested by scraping in ice-cold 1x PBS and harvested by centrifugation at 400 g for 3 min at 4 °C. Afterwards, cells were washed once with ice-cold 1x PBS and immediately flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cells were mechanically disrupted using a Tissuelyzer II (4x 15 sec, 25 Hz) in conjunction with 5 mm stainless steel beads (both from Qiagen). Cell powder was solubilized in IC lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 500 mM LiCl, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT) supplemented with cOmplete EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche). Lysates were vortexed briefly and incubated on a rotating shaker for 10 min at 4 °C. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 2000 rpm for 5 min at 4 °C. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). An equal amount of total protein was used for poly(A) RNA affinity purification with oligo d(T)25 magnetic beads (NEB) for 1 h at 4 °C while rotating. Beads were washed 1x 5 min with lysis buffer, 2x 5 min with IC wash buffer 1 (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 500 mM LiCl, 0.5% [w/v] LiDS, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT), 4x 5 min with IC wash buffer 2 (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 500 mM LiCl, 0.1% [w/v] LiDS, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT) and 2x 5 min with IC wash buffer 3 (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 200 mM LiCl, 0.1% [w/v] LiDS, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT). After each washing step, beads were separated in a magnetic stand, resuspended in wash buffer, and incubated for 5 min at 4 °C on a rotating shaker. Prior to protein elution with 2x SDS sample buffer (100 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 4% [w/v] SDS, 20% [v/v] glycerol, 200 mM DTT, bromophenol blue), pull-down samples were digested with 13 U RNase A (Sigma-Aldrich) and RNase T1 (Thermo Scientific) in 1x RNase buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% [v/v] NP-40, 0.5 mM DTT) for 1 h at 37 °C. Samples were incubated for 10 min at 95 °C and shortly run into a 10% NuPAGE polyacrylamide Bis-Tris gel using 1x Nu-PAGE MOPS SDS Running Buffer (both from Thermo Scientific). The gel was stained with colloidal Coomassie (VWR) and subjected to MS analysis at the Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Core Facility of the ZMBH.

### Data Protocol
Samples were pre-fractionated on a 10 % SDS-PAGE, cut into 8 fractions, reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a Digest pro MS liquid handling system (Intavis AG) following a protocole as described by Catreinet et al. the FEBS journal 272, 2892–900 (2005). Digested peptides were then extracted from the gel pieces with 50% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA, concentrated nearly to dryness in a SpeedVac vacuum centrifuge and diluted to a total volume of 30 µl with 0.1% TFA. 10 µl of the sample was analyzed by a nanoHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Sample was loaded on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 trap-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a flow rate of 30ul/min 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted and separated on an C18 Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75um x 250mm) with a flow rate of 300nl/min in a 50 min gradient of 3% buffer A (0.1% formic acid) to 40% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, acetonitrile. MS data were acquired with an automatic switch between a full scan and up to ten data-dependent MS/MS scans.  Raw files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30 (J. Cox, M. Mann, Nat Biotechnol 2008, 26, 1367) for peptide identification and quantification. MS2 spectra were searched against the Uniprot human proteome database (human_201605_UP000005640_9606) and the contaminants database by Andromeda search engine with the following parameters: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and Acetyl (K), deamidation (DQ,N), Oxidation (M) as variable modifications, trypsin/P as the proteolytic enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavages was allowed. The maximum false discovery rate for proteins and peptides was 0.01 and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids was required. All other parameters were default parameters of MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna-binding proteins (rbps), Acetylation, Hdac inhibition, Mrna turnover, Cpeb4

### Affiliations
Zentrum fuer Molekulare Biologie, University Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
ZMBH, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69122 Heidelberg

### Submitter
Thomas Ruppert

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Ruppert
Zentrum fuer Molekulare Biologie, University Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany


