### Accession
PXD035257

### Title
Distinct proteomic profile of extracellular vesicles from peritoneal exudates from WT and CD38-deficient mice 2 weeks after pristane injection (lupus disease model)

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are present in all body fluids. Shed by cells, their molecular make-up reflects that of their cell of origin and/or tissue pathological situation. Our working hypothesis was that analyzing the protein composition, protein abundance, and functional clustering of EVs released by peritoneal exudate cells (PECs) in the pristane experimental lupus model would allow us to identify predictive or diagnostic biomarkers that might discriminate the autoimmunity process in lupus from inflammatory reactions and/or normal physiological processes. Three pools of PE-EVs were isolated from pristane-treated mice (WT versus Cd38-/- mice) by qEV size exclusion column methodology (F5-12, F5-10 and F11-12). Protein extracts were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Protein identification was performed with ProteinScape, and MASCOT data searching using Swiss-Prot database. For relative quantification the emPAI-based method was used. The functional enrichment analysis was based on the latest publicly available data from multiple annotation and ontology resources that can be automatically accessed through ClueGO + CluePedia apps within Cytoscape environment. STRING app and EnrichR tools were also used. Gene Ontology (GO) and signaling pathways enrichment analyses of F5-10 and F11-12 PE-EVs via ClueGO analyses showed that the proteins clustered in functionally distinct GO terms and signaling pathways. Moreover, the predominance of given GO terms in PE-EVs seemed to vary with the extent of the inflammatory/autoimmune reaction to pristane. Compared with the protein content and protein abundance in PECs (mainly Ly6Chi inflammatory monocytes and neutrophils), PE-EVs showed an enrichment in neutrophil-associated functions, in particular in PE-EVs from Cd38-/- mice.

### Sample Protocol
PECs were harvested from mice under sterile conditions, after the sacrifice, at 2 weeks post-pristane treatment. Isolated PECs were count and viability was analyzed on a hemocytometer with 1:1 Trypan blue solution (Sigma-Aldrich Cat# T8154). Cells were washed thoroughly three times with cold 1x Ca2+ and Mg2+ free PBS, pH 7.6, 2 mM EDTA (filter sterilized in 0.22 mm filter); by centrifugation at 360 x g, 4˚C for 5 min, the supernatant aspirated and fresh 1XPBS-2mM EDTA was added to resuspend the cellular pellet. Cells were lysed 30 min on ice, as previously described (ref la ultima): 100 microliters of 1X lysis buffer per 10 million cells. The 1 X lysis buffer (1xLB) composition is as follows: 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES (pH: 7.6), 50 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM EGTA, 1% NP-40, and small peptide inhibitors (SPI) (stock, 50X) (refer); 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 10 mM iodoacetamide, and 1 mM PMSF, as phosphatases inhibitors; plus 0.25 μM trichostatin and 5 mM nicotinamide as acetylases inhibitors. Micro BCA Protein Assay (ThermoFisher Cat# 23235) was used for the analysis of the protein concentration of 17,000Xg-clarified PECs lysates.  Supernatants containing EV’s were sequentially centrifuged twice 10 min at 4ºC, first at 200 x g, and second at 1,000 x g. After each centrifugation, supernatants containing EV’s were transferred to new 15-ml sterile Falcon type tubes and cellular pellet was discarded. Supernatants containing EVs from the identical mice’s strain within the same experiment were combined into a new 30-ml sterile Falcon type tube. The pool of supernatants containing EVs was filtered through 0.22 μm Steriflip-GP Sterile Filter Unit (Millipore-Merck). The filtrate was concentrated on a Mr 50,000 MW-cutoff VivaSpin concentrator (Vivascience, Sartorius, Sigma refer) to a final volume between 1 to 1.5 ml.  EV isolation was performed by SEC in qEV sepharose columns (qEVoriginal / 70nm, Izon, https://izon.com/) following IZON´s protocol. The qEV columns were equilibrated with Ca2+ and Mg2+ free PBS, pH 7.6, 5 mM EDTA, and sterile filtered by means of 0.22 µm (PBS-E). Column flow was maintained between 0.8 to 1.2 ml/min. EVs sample volume loaded was ranged between 0.5 to 0.9 ml (median plus minus SE). 0.5 ml fractions were collected into 1.5-ml eppendorf tubes. The protein concentration in each fraction was evaluated by mean of the absorbance at 280 nm in a Thermo Scientific Nanodrop 2000 microvolume spectrophotometer (RRID:SCR_018042). Isolated EVs were analyzed from eluted fractions F5 to F12 (Figure 1A). Aliquots (20 to 30 microliters) from each fraction were separated for protein concentration, particle counting, and microscopy analysis. Isolated EVs from fractions F5 to F12 were lysed with 0.1% deoxycholic acid, in 1xLB (see above), 10 min, on ice. Proteins from lysed EVs from each fraction were precipitated with methanol/chloroform. After precipitation and drying at room temperature, the precipitate was resuspended in 60 mM octyl D-glucoside (ODG) in 1XLB containing 1% NP-40, described above; next the samples were incubated in a Thermomixer at 900 rpm, for 5 min, at room temperature (RT). Laemmli Sample buffer with β-mercaptoethanol was added to each sample to a final concentration of 1X and 5 % respectively. Incubation in the Thermomixer was repeated, followed by heat block incubation at 100˚C, 5 min, and 17,000 X g microfuge centrifugation, at RT. Within the same experiment, EVs fractions F5 to F12 were joint in a pool and saved at -80˚C. Proteins from pooled EVs fractions in 1X Laemmli reducing sample buffer were loaded on 4-20% Mini-PROTEAN TGX, Stain-free gels (BioRad Cat# 4568095). Likewise, thirty to 40 microgram of protein either from spleen cells or from PECs cell lysates in 1 X Laemmli sample buffer were also analyzed on 4-20% Mini-PROTEAN TGX, Stain-free gels. Electrophoresis was done at 200 V, in 25 mM Trizma base, 192 mM glycine, pH 8.3, and 0.1% SDS buffer, until the whole sample volume was introduced into the gel matrix. Proteins in the gel were visualized by the exposure of the gel during 5 min to UV light in a GelDoc EZ Image (BioRad). In addition, gels were fixed in 10% Metanol / 5%Acetic Acid and stained with SYPRO Ruby (BioRad Cat#1703126) according to the protocol of the manufacturers. An EXQuest Spot Cutter (BioRad) with the PDQuest Advanced program was used to cut the protein bands of the gel. Protein extracts were analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC‐MS/MS) (Amazon Speed, Bruker) at IPBLN-CSIC Proteomic Facility as described previously [4].

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was done with ProteinScape 4.0 (Bruker) and MASCOT 2.4 (RRID:SCR_014322) data searching using the SwissProt database. For label-free proteomic quantification, we used the exponentially modified protein abundance index (emPAI) implemented into the MASCOT data searching platform without any additional experimental steps. In order to compare between different samples, it is required to normalize emPAI values from MASCOT search to the sum of all emPAI values. Thus, the protein content in molar fraction percentage (M%) can be calculated using the following formula: Protein content (M%) = emPAI/(∑(emPAI), where ∑(emPAI) is the summation of emPAI values for all the identified proteins [5]. Several biological samples per mouse type and three technical replicates per biological sample were analyzed. The fold-change (FC) in protein abundance was calculated by dividing the M% value of and individual protein in Cd38-/- EVs with the cognate value in WT EVs. This ratio has been useful to identify which proteins are more or less abundant in Cd38-/- EVs vs WT EVs; proteins with a Cd38-/-/WT ratio > 1 will be more abundant in Cd38-/- EVs, and those with a Cd38-/-/WT ratio < 1 will be more abundant in WT EVs. The log2 value of the Cd38-/-/WT ratio was calculated and finally the absolute fold change calculated as 2±1*log2value of the Cd38-/-/WT ratio [6]. We selected a cutoff for biological significance of 1.3 fold in keeping with the fact that the emPAI methodology can reliably classify differences above 1.3-fold differences [7]. We used ClueGO_v2.5.8 (RRID:SCR_005748) [8] and CluePedia_v1.5.8 (RRID:SCR_015784) [9] within the Cytoscape_v3.9.1 software environment (RRID:SCR_003032) [10] for functional enrichment analysis of the lists of identified proteins. Results are visualized as networks in which Gene Ontology (GO) terms and pathways are grouped based on their biological role. CluePedia allows to expand ClueGO terms into nested networks with associated genes. Protein-protein interaction networks were searched using Cytoscape StringApp_v1.7.1 (RRID:SCR_005223) [11]. Data analysis was also performed using the R statistical computing environment (RRID:SCR_001905). The shared proteins between EV’s and PECs for each mouse model was calculated by the VennDiagram package (RRID:SCR_002414) and those proteins was transformed to Gene name and analyzed with the EnrichR software (RRID:SCR_001575) [12-14] in R environment. The –log10(FDR) was calculated for each database (KEGG, Biological Process, Molecular Function and Cellular Component) and the top 4 terms was selected to display in the graph.

### Publication Abstract
In CD38-deficient ( <i><i>Cd38<sup>-/-</sup></i> )</i> mice intraperitoneal injection of pristane induces a lupus-like disease, which is milder than that induced in WT mice, showing significant differences in the inflammatory and autoimmune processes triggered by pristane. Extracellular vesicles (EV) are present in all body fluids. Shed by cells, their molecular make-up reflects that of their cell of origin and/or tissue pathological situation. The aim of this study was to analyze the protein composition, protein abundance, and functional clustering of EV released by peritoneal exudate cells (PECs) in the pristane experimental lupus model, to identify predictive or diagnostic biomarkers that might discriminate the autoimmune process in lupus from inflammatory reactions and/or normal physiological processes. In this study, thanks to an extensive proteomic analysis and powerful bioinformatics software, distinct EV subtypes were identified in the peritoneal exudates of pristane-treated mice: 1) small EV enriched in the tetraspanin CD63 and CD9, which are likely of exosomal origin; 2) small EV enriched in CD47 and CD9, which are also enriched in plasma-membrane, membrane-associated proteins, with an ectosomal origin; 3) small EV enriched in keratins, ECM proteins, complement/coagulation proteins, fibrin clot formation proteins, and endopetidase inhibitor proteins. This enrichment may have an inflammation-mediated mesothelial-to-mesenchymal transition origin, representing a protein corona on the surface of peritoneal exudate EV; 4) HDL-enriched lipoprotein particles. Quantitative proteomic analysis allowed us to identify an anti-inflammatory, Annexin A1-enriched pro-resolving, neutrophil protein signature, which was more prominent in EV from pristane-treated <i>Cd38<sup>-/-</sup></i> mice, and quantitative differences in the protein cargo of the ECM-enriched EV from <i>Cd38<sup>-/-</sup></i> vs WT mice. These differences are likely to be related with the distinct inflammatory outcome shown by <i>Cd38<sup>-/-</sup></i> vs WT mice in response to pristane treatment. Our results demonstrate the power of a hypothesis-free and data-driven approach to transform the heterogeneity of the peritoneal exudate EV from pristane-treated mice in valuable information about the relative proportion of different EV in a given sample and to identify potential protein markers specific for the different small EV subtypes, in particular those proteins defining EV involved in the resolution phase of chronic inflammation.

### Keywords
Mouse; extracellular vesicles; peritoneal exudate cells; lc-msms; quantitative proteomics

### Affiliations
IPBLN-CSIC
Department of Cellular Biology and Immunology, Lab 201, Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina López-Neyra (IPBLN), Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Spain.

### Submitter
Jaime Sancho

### Lab Head
Dr Jaime Sancho
Department of Cellular Biology and Immunology, Lab 201, Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina López-Neyra (IPBLN), Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Spain.


