### Accession
PXD027073

### Title
FPB - 2021 - Azri et al - Physiological and proteomic analyses of Tunisian local grapevine cultivar Razegui in response to drought stress.

### Description
Cuttings from Razegui cultivar were cultivated in sand for 2 months according to the method we have described previously (Azri et al. 2020). Then grapevine plantlets were further grown in pots containing sand/peat mixture (2/1, v/v), in a controlled greenhouse (16 h light/8 h dark at PAR 300 μmol m-2 s-1 photoperiod, 24 °C day/20 °C night temperature and 65-75% relative humidity). They were watered daily with tap water and supplemented once a week with 100 mL of Gibeaut’s nutrient solution (Gibeaut et al. 1997). Drought stress was applied according to our previously described procedure (Azri et al. 2020): plants with 10-15 leaves were either irrigated daily with water (control) or non-irrigated at all (water deficit). After 4 time points (day 0, 4, 8 and 16) of water deficit, the 4th fully-developed leaf was harvested and used for physiological analyses. Three independent biological experiments were performed consisting each in 2 treatments (control and water deficit) and 3 plants per time point and treatment. Proteomic analysis was performed on the 5th fully developed leaves at the time point 16 days of drought treatment. Irrigated and non-irrigated leaves were harvested immediately in liquid nitrogen and stored at - 80 °C until analysis. Three biological replicates were carried out for each treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from frozen and finely ground 5th fully developed leaves samples using a phenol-based extraction protocol, as described in detail in the previous publication (Azri et al. 2020). Proteins were resuspended in the lysis buffer [7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% (w/v) of 3 [(3-cholamidopropyl)-dimethylammo-nio]-1-propane sulfonate (CHAPS), 50 mM DTT, 0.4% (v/v) Triton × 100 and 1% (v/v) IPG buffer (pH 4–6 and pH 5–7)]. Protein concentration was determined using Bradford’s method (Ramagli and Rodriguez, 1985). The 2-DE was performed with the PROTEAN Plus Dodeca Cell (Bio-Rad, USA) as described by Azri et al. (2020). Briefly, 800 μg of total proteins was applied onto an IPG strips (24 cm, pH 4–7 linear gradients, Bio-Rad, Hercules, USA) and actively rehydrated for 14 h at 50 V, and 20 °C. Isoelectric focusing was performed with the PROTEAN IEF Cell system (Bio-Rad, USA). The conditions of IEF and SDS-PAGE were the same as described by Azri et al.

### Data Protocol
The 2-D gels were stained overnight by using Coomassie blue G-250 (Neuhoff et al. 1988). After scanning with a ChemiDoc Imaging System (Bio- Rad, USA), the protein spot images of 2-D gel were analyzed using PDQuest software (ver. 8.0.1, Bio-Rad, USA). Only protein spot with significant (Student’s t test P < 0.05) and reproducible changes were used for trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis as described previously by (Azri et al. 2016, 2020). Protein identification was also performed as described previously by Azri et al. (2020). Each MS/MS spectrum was searched against the protein database of a closely related organism Vitis vinifera, vinifera, with the following parameters: parent mass tolerance set to 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance set to 0.02 Da, trypsin as the proteolytic agent, carbamidomethylated cysteine as fixed modifications and oxidized methionine as variable modifications. A new filtering stage was applied with specific parameters set as follows: 3 max variable PTMs per peptide and a threshold of 50 for average local confidence (ALC score). The identified protein was validated when at least 2 peptides were present.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Drought stress, Proteome, 2d electrophoresis, Vitis vinifera

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Plant Molecular Physiology, Centre of Biotechnology of Borj Cedria, P.O. Box 901, 2050 Hammam‑Lif, Tunisia.
UMR6270 CNRS - Université de Rouen, Plateforme Proteomique PISSARO (IRIB)

### Submitter
Pascal COSETTE

### Lab Head
Dr Ahmed Mliki
Laboratory of Plant Molecular Physiology, Centre of Biotechnology of Borj Cedria, P.O. Box 901, 2050 Hammam‑Lif, Tunisia.


