### Accession
PXD006880

### Title
Comparative proteomics of plasmodesmata

### Description
Plants as multi cellular organisms are composed of various specialized cell types. Most of these cell types are symplasmically connected via plasmodesmata (PD) allowing exchange of nutrients and signal molecules. To date, the molecular composition of PD is not well understood. A comprehensive and comparative proteomic approach was followed to identify proteins providing new insights into the composition of these important regulatory structures.

### Sample Protocol
The physical properties of PD in their surrounding cell wall as well as the reduced number in the cher1-4 mutant line enabled us to develop a deep proteomic comparative workflow to get insights into the composition of PD in fully developed Arabidopsis leaves. Building on the tight cell wall-association of PD and their mild detergent resistance (Link et al. 2011, Tilney, Cooke, Connelly and Tilney 1991), we started with three individual batches of fully developed leaves of wild type Col-0 and cher1-4. The leaf material was ground in liquid nitrogen (N2) and washed with mild detergent by repetitive low speed density centrifugation. Retracted PD-associated proteins in the cell wall enriched fraction were extracted using high concentrations of ionic detergent (2% sodium dodecyl sulphate [SDS]) and chaotropic salt (8M Urea), while ensuring reduction and alkylation of containing cysteines with its respective reagents. For subsequent peptidase digestion, proteins were precipitated in 80% acetone at -20°C overnight. The air-dried protein pellets were stepwise digested by the endopeptidase Lys-C and trypsin in order to facilitated a good peptide coverage (Glatter et al. 2012). The obtained tryptic peptides of all six samples were desalted on C18 spin columns and subsequently labelled with TMT 6-plex label reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to assign samples for later comparative analysis. The quenched samples were combined and pre-fractionated by high pH-reverse phase Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) to prepare deep proteomic analysis. In total 81 fractions were pooled to 27 samples in the formula (1+28+55,2+29+56…) for identification with LC-MS/MS while corresponding TMT reporter ions were quantified in MS3.

### Data Protocol
Using Peaks Studio 8.0 and the Arabidopsis tair10 protein database (November 2010, 35386 entries), in total of 5258 protein groups were identified and quantified in the three respective replicates of Col-0 and cher1-4 samples

### Publication Abstract
In plants, intercellular communication and exchange are highly dependent on cell wall bridging structures between adhering cells, so-called plasmodesmata (PD). In our previous genetic screen for PD-deficient Arabidopsis mutants, we described choline transporter-like 1 (CHER1) being important for PD genesis and maturation. Leaves of cher1 mutant plants have up to 10 times less PD, which do not develop to complex structures. Here we utilize the T-DNA insertion mutant cher1-4 and report a deep comparative proteomic workflow for the identification of cell-wall-embedded PD-associated proteins. Analyzing triplicates of cell-wall-enriched fractions in depth by fractionation and quantitative high-resolution mass spectrometry, we compared &gt;&#xa0;5000 proteins obtained from fully developed leaves. Comparative data analysis and subsequent filtering generated a list of 61 proteins being significantly more abundant in Col-0. This list was enriched for previously described PD-associated proteins. To validate PD association of so far uncharacterized proteins, subcellular localization analyses were carried out by confocal laser-scanning microscopy. This study confirmed the association of PD for three out of four selected candidates, indicating that the comparative approach indeed allowed identification of so far undescribed PD-associated proteins. Performing comparative cell wall proteomics of Nicotiana benthamiana tissue, we observed an increase in abundance of these three selected candidates during sink to source transition. Taken together, our comparative proteomic approach revealed a valuable data set of potential PD-associated proteins, which can be used as a resource to unravel the molecular composition of complex PD and to investigate their function in cell-to-cell communication.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, At3g15380, Pdlp;, Proteomics, At1g51570, Mee9, At1g22610, C2 domain, Choline transporter-like 1, Plasmodesmata, Er-body, Cher1

### Affiliations
Division of Biochemistry, Department of Biology, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Staudtstr 5, D-91058 Erlangen, Germany
FAU Erlangen

### Submitter
Max Kraner

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Sonnewald
Division of Biochemistry, Department of Biology, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Staudtstr 5, D-91058 Erlangen, Germany


