### Accession
PXD025455

### Title
A Panel of Glycopeptides as Candidate Biomarkers for Early Diagnosis of NASH Hepatocellular Carcinoma Using a Stepped HCD Method and PRM Evaluation

### Description
A comprehensive screening of glycopeptides as candidate biomarkers from human serum for early diagnosis of NASH hepatocellular carcinoma using a stepped HCD method and PRM evaluation. Glycopeptides from vitronectin(VTNC) has been reported as biomarkers for NASH-related HCCs.

### Sample Protocol
Serum high abundance serum proteins were depleted,fowllowed by tryptic digestion. The HILIC enrichment and fractionation were performed before LC-Stepped-HCD-DDA-MS detection. For LC-Stepped-HCD-PRM-MS detetion, the digested glycopeptides were enriched by 3kDa MWCO centrifugal filter.

### Data Protocol
For the DDA results, all spectra were searched with Byonic (Protein Metrics) incorporated in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo) against the UniProt human protein database which includes 20359 proteins. The research was performing using (1) fixed modification, carbamidomethyl (C); (2) variable modifications, oxidation (M); deamidation (N, Q) and N-glycan modifications (N); (3) up to 1 missed cleavage; (4) mass tolerance, 10 ppm for MS1 and 20 ppm for MS2. Results were filtered at a confidence threshold of Byonic score > 150, Delta modification score > 10, PEP2D < 0.05, and FDR2D < 0.01 in Byologic (Protein Metrics) software, which inputs both MS1 raw data and Byonic search results. The theoretical m/z of the oxonium ions from GlcNAc (m/z 138.05, m/z 168.05 and m/z 204.09), NeuAc (m/z 274.09 and 292.10), GlcNAc-Hex (m/z 366.14), HexHexNAcFuc (m/z 512.20) and HexNAcHexNeuAc (m/z 657.23) in glycopeptides from HCD-MS are known for glycan identification. Automatic quantitative analysis was also performed using Byologic,the peak area of the XIC of a given glycopeptide was automatically integrated and normalized against the sum of peak areas of all glycopeptides identified in each MS run, providing a relative quantitation of each N-glycopeptide in the sample. The abundance of a site-specific glycoform was represented by the sum of the glycopeptides bearing the same glycan at the glycosite. For the PRM results, we used the Skyline software for quantification of the selected glycopeptides. Similar to DDA analysis, oxonium ions GlcNAc, NeuAc, GlcNAc-Hex, HexHexNAcFuc and HexNAcHexNeuAc and other possible b/y ions were used for glycopeptides identification, while the Y1 ion (peptide+HexNAc) was used for quantification. For Skyline analysis, peptide settings and transition settings are required. Of the peptide settings, a library (.ssl file) was created with the parameters retrieved from a survey scan before PRM detection, including glycopeptide sequence, scan number, retention time, charges, and a .ms2 file converted from the survey scan raw data. A fasta file of the targeted proteins was uploaded as the background protein database. Of the transition settings, the precursor charges were set as +2 to +5, the ion charges were set as +1 and +2, and the ion types were set as y and b ions. The ion match tolerance was set as 0.05 m/z. The Y1 ions from the targeted glycopeptides were edited as (target peptide+HexNAc). The integral peak areas of the Y1 ions were exported from Skyline in .csv format, which were used for glycopeptide quantification and data normalization. Relative abundance of each glycopeptide was calculated by normalizing its peak area to the sum of peak areas of all targeted glycopeptides in each sample. Next, the relative abundances of the target glycopeptides were compared between different disease state groups and the scatter plots were created by GraphPad PRISM software (version 8.0).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Large-scale glycopeptides analysis, Stepped-hcd ms/ms, Biomarkers, Nash hcc

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Surgery, University of Michigan, USA (lab head)

### Submitter
Yu Lin

### Lab Head
Dr David M. Lubman
Department of Surgery, University of Michigan, USA (lab head)


