### Accession
PXD010466

### Title
Characterization of legumain degradation of intact proteins

### Description
Legumain or asparagine endopeptidase is a unique cysteine endopeptidase with a distinctive specificity for the hydrolysis of peptide bonds after asparagine and to a lesser extent after aspartate. In order to improve our understanding of legumain substrate recognition we have performed proteomic profiling of legumain specificity on native proteins using two different N-terminal labelling methodologies (FPPS and ISIL). Our data revealed a strict P1 specificity of legumain with clear cleavage preference for unstructured secondary regions in the substrate proteins. No extended cleavage specificity on native proteins was observed. Moreover, a limited number of identified cleavages on individual substrates suggest its primary role in precision proteolysis and regulatory proteolytic events.

### Sample Protocol
The MDA-MB231 cells were detached with enzyme-free dissociation solution (Millipore). After the centrifugation, the cell pellet was lysed on ice for 15 min in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 6.0, containing 150 mM NaCl, 0.05 % NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, 25 μM E-64, 1 mM PMSF. The insoluble material was removed and recombinant human legumain was added to each aliquot of the cell lysate at 0.2 μM and 1.0 μM final concentration. Samples were incubated at 37 °C for 1h before further processing. ISIL Samples were incubated in 6x SDS-PAGE loading buffer at 95 °C for 5 min and separated on a 12.5 % SDS-PAGE gel (Lonza). The gel was stained with Comassie brilliant blue and each of the protein lanes was cut into six bands and destained with 25 mM NH4HCO3 in 50 % acetonitrile/dH20. The proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT (56 °C, 45 min) and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. In-gel stable isotope labelling was performed with an addition of 1 mg Ac(D3)-NHS per sample. Prior to the labelling step Ac(D3)-NHS was dissolved in 100 mM phosphate buffer, pH 8.5. The reaction was performed at 30 °C for 1h and the labelling step was repeated one more time. To reverse any potential threonine and serine O-acetylation 1 mM hydroxylamine was added to each sample and the samples were incubated at room temperature for 20 min. The excess Ac(D3)-NHS reagent was quenched by adding 1 mg of glycine per sample followed by an incubation at 30 °C for 1h. The gel pieces were washed with acetonitrile and vacuum dried before rehydrating in 80 µl 25 mM NH4HCO3 solution containing 1 μg of sequencing-grade modified porcine trypsin per sample, and the trypsinization was then performed over night at 37 °C. The next day the peptides were extracted from the gel using the extraction solution (50 % acetonitrile, 5 % formic acid). FPPS The samples were transferred to a 500 µl micro-filter device with a cut-off of 3000 Da (Millipore) and the buffer was exchanged with 100 mM phosphate buffer pH 8.5. Subsequently, 2 mg of Ac(D3)-NHS reagent was dissolved in the sample followed by 1 hour incubation at 30 °C. Afterwards, the labelling step was repeated. To reverse partial labelling of serines, threonines and tyrosines, hydroxylamine was added to the sample at 1 mM concentration and left at room temperature for 20 min. Afterwards, 8 M was added and proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 hour at room temperature before addition of iodoacetamide at 50 mM final concentration for 1 hour in the dark at room temperature. After the free cysteines were alkylated, the unreacted iodoacetamide was quenched with 50 mM DTT for 30 min at room temperature before the buffer was exchanged with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.8. The sample volume was set to 250 µl before the overnight trypsinization at a 1:100 (w/w, enzyme/substrate) ratio at 30 °C. The peptide-rich flow-through was collected the next day by spinning the micro-filters in the centrifuge and concentrated to 50 µl. The peptide samples were fractionated using a SAX-C18 stage tip protocol as previously described. Accordingly, the samples were mixed with Britton & Robinson buffer (20 mM acetic acid, 20 mM phosphoric acid and 20 mM boric acid, pH 11) and the pH was set to 11 with 1 M NaOH. The SAX tips were prepared by stacking 6 discs of Empore/Disk Anion Exchange (Varian) in a 200 µl pipet tip (Eppendorf) and the C18 tips were prepared by stacking 4 discs of Empore/C18 (Varian). The samples were applied to the SAX-C18 tip and the peptide fractions were eluted using buffers at pH 11, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4 and 3. The eluting peptides were captured on C18 tips and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.   LC-MS/MS The LC-MS/MS analysis of the samples was performed using an Orbitrap LTQ Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nanoLC II HPLC (Thermo Fischer Scientific) operated automatically via XCalibur software (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The samples containing 0.1% FA were loaded onto a C18 trapping column (Proxeon Easy-column, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on a C18 PicoFrit Aquasil analytical column (New Objective). The peptides were eluted using a 5–40% (v/v) 50 min linear gradient of acetonitrile with 0.1% FA at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. The full MS mass spectra were acquired with the Orbitrap mass analyzer in the mass range of 300 to 2,000 m/z at resolution of 30,000 in the profile mode. The MS/MS spectra were obtained by HCD fragmentation of the nine most intense MS precursor ions and recorded at a resolution of 7,500 in the centroid mode. Only the precursor ions with assigned charge states (> 1) were chosen for MS/MS fragmentation. The dynamic exclusion was set to repeat count of 1, repeat duration of 30 s, and exclusion duration of 20 s.

### Data Protocol
For the identification of peptides we used the MaxQuant proteomic software and performed the database searches against the human proteome deposited in the UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (UniProtKB, Homo sapiens, canonical database, 20 336 entries). The settings for the database searches applied trideutero-acetylation of peptide N-termini (+45.029 Da) and methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) as variable modifications, trideutero-acetylation of lysines (+45.029 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.021 Da) as fixed modifications, Semi-ArgC/P as the enzyme specificity setting while allowing for one missed cleavage, precursor ion and fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. A reversed database search was performed and the false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 1% for peptide and protein identifications.  After the database searches, the identified modification specific peptides were filtered to obtain the true positive hits for the legumain cleavage sites. Peptides with trideutero-acetylated N-termini identified only in the legumain-treated samples were considered to be the result of legumain cleavages. Reverse and contaminant peptides were removed from the peptide list. Additionally, the peptides were filtered for posterior error probability (PEP values above 0.05 were discarded) and score (values below 40 were discarded) as described previously. The P1’–P4’ positions were determined from the peptide N-terminus, whilst the P4–P1 positions were determined bioinformatically. The iceLogo representations were generated using the frequencies of positional amino acid occurrences normalised to the natural amino acid abundances in the human Swiss-Prot database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cleavage specificity, Proteases, Legumain, Proteolysis, Degradome

### Affiliations
Jozef Stefan Institute
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular and Structural Biology, Jozef Stefan Institute, Jamova cesta 39, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia

### Submitter
Marko Fonovic

### Lab Head
Dr Marko Fonovic
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular and Structural Biology, Jozef Stefan Institute, Jamova cesta 39, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia


