### Accession
PXD009770

### Title
Arabidopsis mutant proteomics assay

### Description
We had a mutant that might be affected for certain protein translation. Triplicate samples were taken from mutant and wild type, each labeled individually for iTRAQ labels. Plant were taken at early vegetative grwoth state for total protein extraction and fractionation, followed by trypsin digestion and peptide analysis using LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
6 seedlings (3 weeks old, mutant and wild type from the same growth conditions, long day with 16hr photoperiod) from each genotype were harvested and grouped together as one biological replicate. 3 biological replicates were taken for mutant or wild type. Plant material were flash frozen. Total proteins were extracted and quantified by SDS-PAGE eletrophoresis. Trypsin digestion were used, generated peptides were labeled individually. iTRAQ labels for mutants were 113, 114 and 115; iTRAQ labels for wild type were 116, 117 and 118. Peptides were first fractionated by SCX grading, then quantified through LC-MS/MS. Peptides detected were blasted against TAIR_pep database for Arabidopsis protein seqeunces.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS Ion search was used with monoisotopic mass values. Max missed cleavage was set at 2. Peptide mass tolerance ± 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.1Da. TAIR_pep_2010114.fasta was used for sequence match, peptide FDR value was set at 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Modified nucleosides on tRNA are critical for decoding processes and protein translation. tRNAs can be modified through 1-methylguanosine (m1G) on position 37; a function mediated by Trm5 homologs. We show that AtTRM5a (At3g56120) is a Trm5 ortholog in Arabidopsis thaliana. AtTrm5a is localized to the nucleus and its function for m1G and m1I methylation was confirmed by mutant analysis, yeast complementation, m1G nucleoside level on single tRNA, and tRNA in vitro methylation. Arabidopsis attrm5a mutants were dwarfed and had short filaments, which led to reduced seed setting. Proteomics data indicated differences in the abundance of proteins involved in photosynthesis, ribosome biogenesis, oxidative phosphorylation and calcium signalling. Levels of phytohormone auxin and jasmonate were reduced in attrm5a mutant, as well as expression levels of genes involved in flowering, shoot apex cell fate determination, and hormone synthesis and signalling. Taken together, loss-of-function of AtTrm5a impaired m1G and m1I methylation and led to aberrant protein translation, disturbed hormone homeostasis and developmental defects in Arabidopsis plants.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Itraq

### Affiliations
Faculty of Plant Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, China
Huazhong Agricultural Univ

### Submitter
Peng Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Peng Chen
Faculty of Plant Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, China


