### Accession
PXD003174

### Title
Tma108, a putative M1 aminopeptidase, defines specialized ribosomes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
Ribosome specialization is an emerging concept which challenges the common assumption that translation relies on a standardized molecular machinery. In this work, we demonstrate that Tma108, a yeast uncharacterized translation machinery-associated factor, defines a subpopulation of the cellular ribosomes specifically involved in the translation of less than 200 mRNAs encoding proteins with ATP or zinc binding domains. Ribonucleoparticle dissociation experiments support the fact that Tma108 directly interacts with the nascent protein chain. Comparative genomic analyses and molecular modeling point out Tma108 as an original M1 metallopeptidase with specific residues in the catalytic pocket which may explain its selectivity. The involvement of Tma108 in co-translational regulations is attested by the drastic perturbation of the subcellular localization of ATP2 mRNA, one of its targets, upon TMA108 inactivation. Tma108 is an unique example of a nascent chain-associated factor with high selectivity and illustrates the existence of specific translation-associated factors, besides RNA binding proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Digestion was performed overnight at 37°C in the presence of 12.5 µg/ml of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, Wi, USA). Digests were analyzed by a LTQ Velos Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to an Easy nano-LC Proxeon system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Chromatographic separation of peptides was performed with the following parameters: column Easy Column Proxeon C18 (10 cm, 75 µm i.d., 120 Å), 300nl/min flow, gradient rising from 95 % solvent A (water - 0.1% formic acid) to 25% B (100 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in 20 min, then to 45% B in 40 min and finally to 80% B in 10 min. Peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap in full ion scan mode at a resolution of 30,000 and a mass range of 400-1800 m/z. Fragments were obtained with a collision-induced dissociation (CID) activation with a collisional energy of 40%, an activation Q of 0.25 for 10 ms, and analyzed in the LTQ. MS/MS data were acquired in a data dependent mode in which 20 most intense precursor ions were isolated, with a dynamic exclusion of 20 seconds and an exclusion mass width of 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to an in-house Mascot search server (Matrix Science, Boston, MA; version 2.4.1). The mass tolerance of fragment ions was set to 7 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Dalton for fragments. The following modifications were considered in mass calculation: oxidation (M), phosphorylations (STY), acetylation (Nterm, K), deamidation (NQ). The maximum number of missed cleavages was limited to 2 for trypsin digestion. MS/MS data were searched against the SwissProt database with the S.cerevisiae taxonomy. Only proteins with a Mascot score higher than 150 were considered for further analyses. Protein scores distributions were compared between immunoprecipitations from control (untagged BY4741) or proteinA-tagged strains, in order to distinguish specifically interacting proteins from the background. A threshold score was chosen to keep less than 10% false positive. Proteins below this threshold score in the control or with a ratio between IP and control inferior to 2 were excluded.

### Publication Abstract
The discovery of novel specific ribosome-associated factors challenges the assumption that translation relies on standardized molecular machinery. In this work, we demonstrate that Tma108, an uncharacterized translation machinery-associated factor in yeast, defines a subpopulation of cellular ribosomes specifically involved in the translation of less than 200 mRNAs encoding proteins with ATP or Zinc binding domains. Using ribonucleoparticle dissociation experiments we established that Tma108 directly interacts with the nascent protein chain. Additionally, we have shown that translation of the first 35 amino acids of Asn1, one of the Tma108 targets, is necessary and sufficient to recruit Tma108, suggesting that it is loaded early during translation. Comparative genomic analyses, molecular modeling and directed mutagenesis point to Tma108 as an original M1 metallopeptidase, which uses its putative catalytic peptide-binding pocket to bind the N-terminus of its targets. The involvement of Tma108 in co-translational regulation is attested by a drastic change in the subcellular localization of ATP2 mRNA upon Tma108 inactivation. Tma108 is a unique example of a nascent chain-associated factor with high selectivity and its study illustrates the existence of other specific translation-associated factors besides RNA binding proteins.

### Keywords
Yeast s. cerevisiae, Ribosomes, Affinity purification (ap-ms)

### Affiliations
Sorbonne Universités - UPMC Univ Paris 6 - UMR7238, Laboratoire de biologie computationnelle et quantitative, F-75006 PARIS, France
Institut Jacques Monod

### Submitter
Thibaut Léger

### Lab Head
Dr Mathilde GARCIA
Sorbonne Universités - UPMC Univ Paris 6 - UMR7238, Laboratoire de biologie computationnelle et quantitative, F-75006 PARIS, France


