### Accession
PXD013672

### Title
Hypoxic regulation of the inflammatory lung neutrophil proteome

### Description
This project aimed to define the proteome of inflammatory lung neutrophils and determine how his is regulated by exposure to in vivo hypoxia. An acute lung injury was induced using nebulised LPS. Following LPS administration mice were housed in either normal room air or in a hypoxic chamber set at an inspired oxygen concentration of 10%.   Highly pure bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) neutrophils were isolated from the lungs of C57Bl6 mice 24 hours after being treated with LPS.

### Sample Protocol
3 biological replicates from independent biological samples were analysed. Percoll purified BAL neutrophils were lysed in SDS lysis buffer with TCEP at a10mM working concentration and boiled for 5 minutes. Samples underwent 15 minutes of sonication then incubation with benzonase for 15 mins at 37°C. Following quantification, iodoacetamide (IAA) was added at a working concentration of 20mM and lysates incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. In-solution digestion was carried out using SP3 beads and LysC (overnight incubation at 37°C) at a concentration of 1mg LysC (Promega) per 100mg protein followed by trypsin (Promega) digestion, also at 1mg enzyme per 100mg protein overnight at 37°C. Peptides were eluted using acetonitrile (ACN) and quantified using the CBQCA assay. Samples were diluted to a concentration of 1mg/15ml with 5% formic acid and 1mg of peptide was submitted for fractionation. Samples were fractionated using strong anion exchange chromatography, analysed in an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos MS, and raw data processed using MaxQuant software.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analysed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.5.1 using Andromeda search engine software.  Each sample was run in 8 fractions. Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin and LysC with maximum of 2 missed cleavages. LFQ was on with a minimum ratio count of 2, minimum number of neighbours 3 and average number of neighbours 6. Minimum peptide length 7. PSM and protein FDR were set at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Limiting dysfunctional neutrophilic inflammation while preserving effective immunity requires a better understanding of the processes that dictate neutrophil function in the tissues. Quantitative mass-spectrometry identified how inflammatory murine neutrophils regulated expression of cell surface receptors, signal transduction networks, and metabolic machinery to shape neutrophil phenotypes in response to hypoxia. Through the tracing of labeled amino acids into metabolic enzymes, proinflammatory mediators, and granule proteins, we demonstrated that ongoing protein synthesis shapes the neutrophil proteome. To maintain energy supplies in the tissues, neutrophils consumed extracellular proteins to fuel central carbon metabolism. The physiological stresses of hypoxia and hypoglycemia, characteristic of inflamed tissues, promoted this extracellular protein scavenging with activation of the lysosomal compartment, further driving exploitation of the protein-rich inflammatory milieu. This study provides a comprehensive map of neutrophil proteomes, analysis of which has led to the identification of active catabolic and anabolic pathways that enable neutrophils to sustain synthetic and effector functions in the tissues.

### Keywords
Lung, Hypoxia, Inflammation, Neutrophil

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
The University of Edinburgh/ Centre for Inflammation Research The Queen's Medical Research Institute Edinburgh BioQuarter 47 Little France Crescent Edinburgh EH16 4TJ

### Submitter
Emily Watts

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Ruth Walmsley
The University of Edinburgh/ Centre for Inflammation Research The Queen's Medical Research Institute Edinburgh BioQuarter 47 Little France Crescent Edinburgh EH16 4TJ


