### Accession
PXD000743

### Title
Insight into the protein composition of immunoglobulin light chain deposits of eyelid, orbital, and conjunctival amyloidosis.

### Description
Amyloidosis is a disorder characterized by the formation of extracellular amyloid deposits.  Immunoglobulin light-chain amyloidosis the most common form of amyloidosis can appear as a local disorder presented with mild symptoms or as a life threatening systemic disease. Identification of the proteins forming amyloid fibrils is essential for the diagnosis of the disease and knowledge about the overall protein composition of the deposits may lead to a larger understanding of the deposition events thereby facilitating a more detailed picture of the molecular pathology.  In this study, we investigated the protein composition of AL amyloid deposits isolated from human eyelid, conjunctival and orbital specimens. Deposits and internal control tissue (patient tissue without apparent deposits) were procured by laser capture microdissection. Proteins in the captured amyloid and control samples were identified by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry and subsequently quantified using the label-free mass spectrometry quantification method exponential modified Protein Abundance Index.   Immunoglobulin light chain kappa or lambda was revealed to be the most predominant protein in the amyloid deposits. In addition, the protein profiles identified apolipoprotein E and serum amyloid P component to be associated with the immunoglobulin light chain deposits across all three tissues analyzed.   The method used in this study provides high sensitivity and specificity of typing amyloidosis and may provide additional information on the pathology of amyloidosis.

### Sample Protocol
Procuring of amyloid deposits was performed as previously described. Shortly, 8 µm thick tissue sections of formaldehyde fixed and paraffin embedded tissue were cut and placed centrally on non-charged glass slides, followed by deparaffinization, staining with Congo red, and dehydration using standard histological procedures. The Arcturus Autopix Laser Capture Microscope (Applied Biosystem) was used to isolate amyloid deposits appearing red due to the Congo red staining. In addition, tissue with no apparent amyloid deposits was likewise procured and used as control tissue. Tissue was collected on CapSure Macro LCM Caps (Applied Biosystem), subsequently placed in sterile 0.5 ml Eppendorf Biopur Microcentrifuge Tubes (VWR) and stored at -80°C until further processed. Proteins from the laser capture microdissected eyelid, conjunctival and orbital tissue samples were extracted using a modified protocol of the Liquid Tissue MS Protein Prep Kit (Expression Pathology Inc., Gaithersburg, MD). LCM films containing captured plaque and control tissue samples were stripped from the caps and incubated with 40 µl extraction buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 7.8, 0.1 % RapiGest (Waters)) at 95 ˚C for 90 min. Samples were centrifuged at 10.000 × g for 1 min and subsequently cooled on ice. Extracted proteins were incubated with 5 µg porcine trypsin (Sigma) at 37 ˚C for 16 hours, vortexing every 20 min for the first hour. Samples were then centrifuged at 10.000 × g for 5 min, supernatant isolated and incubated with 10 mM DTT at 95 ˚C for 5 min followed by incubation with 30 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min in the dark. Peptides generated from each digest were acidified with 5 µl of 5% formic acid and recovered using Stage-tips (Proxeon, Thermo Scientific). The peptides were eluted with 10 µl 70 % acetonitrile, and subsequently lyophilized before dissolved in 12 µl 0.1 % formic acid. The samples were subsequently analyzed by LC-MS/MS using nanoflow liquid chromatography on an Easy-nLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled directly to a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex). Samples were loaded on a 0.1x21 mm C18 trap column and a 0.075x150 mm C18 analytical column (NanoSeparations). Peptides were eluted and directly electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer using a 60 min gradient from 5-40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Data was acquired using an ion spray voltage of 2.6 kV, curtain gas of 30, and an interface heater temperature of 150 °C. For IDA, survey scans were acquired in 250 ms, and as many as 50 product ion scans were collected if exceeding a threshold of 125 counts per second (counts/s) and with a +2 to +5 charge-state. A sweeping collision energy setting of 40 ± 15 eV was applied to all precursor ions for collision-induced dissociation. Dynamic exclusion was set for ½ of peak width (~6 s), and then the precursor was refreshed off of the exclusion list.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data was processed and Swiss-Prot database was queried using an in-house Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, England version 2.2.06) with a peptide tolerance of +/- 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance of 0.2 Da, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation and proline hydroxylation as variable modifications, semiTrypsin as enzyme, 1 missed cleavage was allowed and ESI-QUAD-TOF mass spectrometer was selected as instrument. The Mascot search results were imported to the MS Data Miner (MDM) software with an ions score cut-off value of 45. MS/MS spectra validation of protein identifications based on less than 2 unique peptides with ion scores less than 100 were validated automatically in MDM and manually. Only MS/MS spectra containing a consecutive b or y-ion series of at least 3 fragments were accepted in MDM. The remaining MS/MS spectra of protein identifications were manually validated as only spectra containing a clear sequence tag of at least three consecutive residues with high intensity compared to the background were accepted. The data was then exported to excel and contaminating exogenous proteins were removed. Among these human tryptic peptides identical to porcine tryptic peptides were considered as contaminants as porcine trypsin was used for sample processing. The resulting endogenous proteins were listed according to their emPAI values, which reflect their relative abundance. The molar fractions of the endogenous proteins were calculated by dividing the emPAI value for each identified protein with the total emPAI value.

### Publication Abstract
Amyloidosis is a disease characterized by the formation of extracellular amyloid deposits. Immunoglobulin light-chain amyloidosis can appear as a local disorder presenting with mild symptoms or as a life threatening systemic disease. The systemic form of immunoglobulin light-chain amyloidosis is the most common type of amyloidosis in western countries although it is a rare disease. Identification of the proteins forming amyloid fibrils is essential for the diagnosis of the disease and knowledge about the overall protein composition of the deposits may lead to a larger understanding of the deposition events thereby facilitating a more detailed picture of the molecular pathology. In this pilot study, we investigated the protein composition of amyloid deposits isolated from human specimens of the eyelid, conjunctiva, and orbit. Deposits and internal control tissue (patient tissue without apparent deposits) were procured by laser capture microdissection. Proteins in the captured amyloid and control samples were quantified by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry using the label-free exponential modified Protein Abundance Index (emPAI) method. Immunoglobulin light chain kappa or lambda was found to be the most predominant protein in the amyloid deposits from the eyelid, conjunctiva, and orbit. Five proteins, apolipoprotein A-I, carboxypeptidase B2 (TAFI), complement component C9, fibulin-1 and plasminogen were found solely across all amyloid but not in the control tissue. In addition, the protein profiles identified apolipoprotein E and serum amyloid P component to be associated with the immunoglobulin light chain deposits across all three tissues analyzed. The method used in this study provided high sensitivity and specificity for the type of amyloid and may provide additional information on the pathology of the amyloid deposits in the ocular tissues studied.

### Keywords
Eyelid, Orbit, Laser capture microdissection, Amyloidosis, Conjunctiva, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Denmark
Aarhus University

### Submitter
Nadia Sukusu Nielsen

### Lab Head
Dr Jan J. Enghild
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Denmark


