### Accession
PXD039516

### Title
RB383 retinoblastoma cell line secretome

### Description
The proteins secreted from RB383 retinoblastoma cell line were analyzed by the GeLC-MS/MS approach.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed six times with culture medium without serum. Subsequently, cells were cultured in medium without serum for 24 hours and the culture supernatant was harvested. The supernatant was centrifuged, filtered through a 0.45-μm filter (Millipore), and concentrated using 3,000-Da cut-off Amicon Ultra Centrifugal Filter Units (Millipore). The proteins in each sample were fractionated by SDS-PAGE and visualized by Coomassie blue. Each gel lane was divided into six slices, and the proteins in each slice were digested in situ with trypsin (Promega; sequencing grade) in 40 mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 37°C. The resulting tryptic peptides were analyzed by HPLC-ESI-tandem mass spectrometry on a Thermo Fisher LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The Xcalibur raw files were converted to mzXML format and were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human protein database (UniProt release 2016_04) using X! TANDEM CYCLONE TPP (2011.12.01.1 - LabKey, Insilicos, ISB). Methionine oxidation was considered as a variable modification in all searches. Up to one missed tryptic cleavage was allowed. The X! Tandem search results were analyzed by the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline, version 4.3. Peptide/protein identifications were validated by the Peptide/ProteinProphet software tools.

### Publication Abstract
Retinoblastoma is a cancer of the infant retina primarily driven by loss of the Rb tumor suppressor gene, which is undruggable. Here, we report an autocrine signaling, mediated by secreted frizzled-related protein 2 (SFRP2), which suppresses nitric oxide and enables retinoblastoma growth. We show that coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor (CXADR) is the cell-surface receptor for SFRP2 in retinoblastoma cells; that CXADR functions as a "dependence receptor," transmitting a growth-inhibitory signal in the absence of SFRP2; and that the balance between SFRP2 and CXADR determines nitric oxide production. Accordingly, high SFRP2 RNA expression correlates with high-risk histopathologic features in retinoblastoma. Targeting SFRP2 signaling by SFRP2-binding peptides or by a pharmacological inhibitor rapidly induces nitric oxide and profoundly inhibits retinoblastoma growth in orthotopic xenograft models. These results reveal a cytokine signaling pathway that regulates nitric oxide production and retinoblastoma cell proliferation and is amenable to therapeutic intervention.

### Keywords
Secretome, Retinoblastoma

### Affiliations
Greehey Children’s Cancer Research Institute, The University of Texas Health Science Center
The University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio

### Submitter
Yuzuru Shiio

### Lab Head
Dr Yuzuru Shiio
Greehey Children’s Cancer Research Institute, The University of Texas Health Science Center


