### Accession
PXD027456

### Title
Proteomic Characterization of Post-Mortem Human Brain Tissue Following Ultracentrifugation-based Subcellular Fractionation

### Description
Proteomic characterization of human brain tissue is increasingly utilized to identify potential novel biomarker and drug targets for a variety of neurological diseases. In whole tissue studies, results may be driven by changes in the proportion of the largest and most abundant organelles or tissue cell-type composition. Spatial proteomics approaches enhance our knowledge of disease mechanisms and changing signaling pathways at the subcellular level by taking into account the importance of cellular localization, which critically influences protein function. Density gradient-based ultracentrifugation methods allow for subcellular fractionation and have been utilized in cell lines and fresh mouse brain tissue to predict the subcellular location of thousands of proteins, but to our knowledge have not been used in frozen human brain tissue. The use of frozen human tissue for tissue fractionation faces two major challenges, the post-mortem interval, during which proteins may leach from their usual location into the cytosol, and freezing, which results in membrane breakdown.  Despite these challenges, in this proof-of-concept study, we show that the majority of proteins segregate reproducibly into crude density-based centrifugation fractions, that the fractions are enriched for the appropriate organellar markers, and that significant differences in protein localization can be observed between tissue from individuals with Alzheimer’s Disease and control individuals.

### Sample Protocol
Samples Frozen post-mortem human brain tissue was obtained from the Massachusetts Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center (ADRC). Experiments were conducted in accordance with the Partners Healthcare IRB. 200 mg sections of angular gyrus tissue were sectioned on dry ice from 5 subjects diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease and 5 age, sex, and post-mortem interval-matched controls.  Fractionation Methods were adapted from Izthak et al. (2016). Samples were homogenized with a dounce homogenizer using 15 strokes at 800 rpm in lysis buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, 50mM sucrose, 0.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EGTA) with protease inhibitors. Following homogenization, sucrose concentration was readjusted to 250mM. All centrifugation steps were carried out in at 4 oC in a benchtop microcentrifuge (< 24,000xg) or a Beckman Coulter Ultracentrifuge (>24,000xg) using an MLA-50 rotor (Beckman Coulter) and 10ml polypropylene tubes. Pellets and supernatants were handled on ice at all times between spins. Centrifugation steps were: 1,000 x g 10 minutes, 3,000 x g 10 minutes, 5,400 x g 15 minutes, 12,200 x g 15 minutes, 24,000 x g 15 minutes, 78,400 x g 15 minutes. Following each centrifugation step, the supernatant was transferred to a new tube and pellets were frozen at -80C. The final supernatant, representing the cytosolic fraction, underwent acetone precipitation as follows: 400 l of supernatant was mixed with 1.6 mls of pre-cooled acetone and incubated for one hour at -20 oC. The resulting pellet was resuspended in solubilization buffer (8 M Urea , 0.4 M ammonium bicarbonate) and frozen at -80C. Sample preparation for Mass Spectrometry Pellets were resuspended in solubilization buffer (8 M Urea, 0.4 M ammonium bicarbonate) with protease inhibitors and briefly sonicated. Samples were cleared by centrifugation, total protein content was assessed by BCA, and each sample was adjusted to 100 g/50l of solubilization buffer. For samples with protein contents below this threshold, 50 l of the straight sample was used. Following reduction with dithiothreitol (45 mM at 1/10th sample volume) for 30 minutes at room temperature and alkylation with iodoacetamide (100 mM at 1/10th sample volume) for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature, samples were trypsin digested overnight with a 1:20 protein:enzyme ratio. Samples were acidified to stop digestion, desalted on C18 Microspin columns (Nest Group) and dried in a SpeedVac. Resulting pellets were frozen at -80 oC until transport. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion equipped with a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC system utilizing a binary solvent system (Buffer A: 100% water, 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  Trapping was performed at 5µl/min, 97% Buffer A for 3 min using a Waters Symmetry® C18 180µm x 20mm trap column.  Peptides were separated using an ACQUITY UPLC PST (BEH) C18 nanoACQUITY Column 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm (37ºC) and eluted at 300 nl/min with the following gradient: 3% buffer B at initial conditions; 6% B at 5 minute; 35% B at 170 minute; 50% B at 175 minutes; 97% B at 180 minutes; 97% B at 185 minutes; return to initial conditions at 186-200 minutes.  MS was acquired in the Orbitrap in profile mode over the 350-1,550 m/z range using wide quadrapole isolation, 1 microscan, 120,000 resolution, AGC target of 4E5, and a maximum injection time of 60 ms.  Data dependent MS/MS were collected in top speed mode with a 3s cycle time on species with an intensity threshold of 5E4, charge states 2-8, peptide monoisotopic precursor selection preferred.  Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds.  MS/MS were acquired in the Orbitrap in centroid mode using quadropole isolation (window 1.6m/z), HCD activation with a collision energy of 28%, 1 microscan, 60,000 resolution, AGC target of 1E5, maximum injection time of 110 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis Raw mass spectrometry data was processed in MaxQuant version 1.6.5.0 using default settings and the addition of the ‘match between runs’ feature. Spectra were searched against the Uniprot proteome UP000005640 downloaded 25th March 2019.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Subcellular fractionation, Human brain, Alzheimer's disease, Label free quantitation

### Affiliations
Yale University

### Submitter
TuKiet Lam

### Lab Head
Dr TuKiet Lam
Yale University


