### Accession
PXD004119

### Title
Comprehensive and quantitative proteomic analysis of  metamorphosis-related proteins in the veined rapa whelk, Rapana venosa

### Description
We analyzed the proteomes of competent Rapna venosa larvae and post-larvae, resulting in the identification of 5,312 proteins, including 470 that were down-regulated and 668 that were up-regulated after metamorphosis. The differentially expressed proteins reflected multiple processes involved in metamorphosis, including cytoskeleton and cell adhesion, ingestion and digestion, stress response and immunity, as well as specific tissue development. Our data improve understanding of the physiological traits controlling R. venosa metamorphosis and provide a solid basis for further study.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates of the frozen larvae (both competent and post larvae) were prepared for the iTRAQ analysis. The larvae was ground to powder in liquid nitrogen and dissolved in lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, and 40 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) containing 1 mM PMSF and 2 mM EDTA. 10 mM DTT was added to the lysis buffer after 5 min. An ultrasound on ice for 15 min was carried out to mix the suspension, which was then centrifuged at 25,000× for 20 min at 4 C. The supernatant was transferred to chilled acetone and precipitated at -20 ℃ overnight. The supernatant was discarded after centrifugation at 25,000  g for 30 min at 4 ℃, and the precipitate was washed three times with chilled acetone for 30 min each at 4 ℃. The pellets were air-dried and dissolved in lysis buffer using ultrasound. The supernatant was reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56 ℃ for 1 h after centrifugation at 25,000 g for 30 min at 4 ℃ and alkylated immediately with 55 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 1 h. The treated proteins were precipitated in acetone at -20 ℃ for 3 h. The proteins were dissolved in buffer containing 1mMPMSF and 2mMEDTA using ultrasound after centrifugation at 25,000×g for 20 min at 4 ℃ and air-drying. The proteins were recovered after centrifugation at 25,000× g for 20 min at 4 ℃ and quantified using the Bradford method. Protein digestion was performed with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for 16 h at 37°C, and peptides were dried in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator. Competent-larvae samples were labelled with iTRAQ tags 113, 114, and 115, whereas post-larvae samples were labeled with tags 118, 119, and 121, following manufacturer protocol in the iTRAQ 8-plex labelling kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Raw data from LC-MS/MS were transformed into MGF files with Proteome Discovery 1.2 (Thermo, Pittsburgh, PA, USA). Protein identification was performed in the Mascot search engine (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science, London, UK) using the R. venosa reference transcriptome [9]. Mascot search results were then normalized and quantified. Proteins with fold changes significantly (p < 0.05) >1.2 or <0.83 were considered differentially expressed  . We searched against the GO ((http://wego.genomics.org.cn/cgi-bin/wego/index.pl) and KEGG (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) databases to classify and identify differentially expressed proteins. Significant pathway enrichment was examined with the hypergeometric test, and significance was set at p <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Larval metamorphosis of the veined rapa whelk (Rapana venosa) is a pelagic to benthic transition that involves considerable structural and physiological changes. Because metamorphosis plays a pivotal role in R. venosa commercial breeding and natural populations, the endogenous proteins that drive this transition attract considerable interest. This study is the first to perform a comprehensive and quantitative proteomic analysis related to metamorphosis in a marine gastropod. We analyzed the proteomes of competent R. venosa larvae and post-larvae, resulting in the identification of 5312 proteins, including 470 that were downregulated and 668 that were upregulated after metamorphosis. The differentially expressed proteins reflected multiple processes involved in metamorphosis, including cytoskeleton and cell adhesion, ingestion and digestion, stress response and immunity, as well as specific tissue development. Our data improve understanding of the physiological traits controlling R. venosa metamorphosis and provide a solid basis for further study.

### Keywords
Itraq metamorphosis

### Affiliations
Institute of Oceanology Chinese Academy of Sciences
Key Laboratory of Marine Ecology and Environmental Sciences, Institute of Oceanology,Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao 266071, China

### Submitter
Song Hao

### Lab Head
Dr Hao Song
Key Laboratory of Marine Ecology and Environmental Sciences, Institute of Oceanology,Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao 266071, China


