### Accession
PXD018258

### Title
Proteomic analysis of necroptotic extracellular vesicles

### Description
Necroptosis is a regulated but inflammatory form of cell death. We and others have previously reported that necroptotic cells release extracellular vesicles (EVs). We found that necroptotic EVs are loaded with proteins, including the key necroptosis executor factor, phosphorylated mixed lineage kinase domain-like (pMLKL). However, the exact necroptotic EVs proteins composition and impact have not been delineated yet. To characterize their content, EVs from necroptotic and untreated U937 cells were isolated by ultracentrifugation and analyzed by mass spectrometry. A total of 3337 proteins were identified, sharing high similarity with exosome proteome databases. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of identified proteins distinguished between necroptotic and control EVs. A total of 353 proteins was significantly upregulated in the necroptotic EVs. Among these are MLKL and caspase-8, as validated by immunoblot. Components of ESCRTIII machinery and inflammatory signaling were found to be enriched in the necroptotic EVs, as well as yet unreported components of vesicles formation and transport and necroptosis signaling pathways. Moreover, we show that necroptotic EVs can be phagocytosed by macrophages to modulate cytokine and chemokine secretion. Finally, we reveal that necroptotic EVs contain tumor neoantigen and are enriched with proteins annotated as “antigen processing and presentation” biological process. In summary, our study reveals a new layer of regulation during the early stage of necroptosis by the secretion of specific EVs that influence their microenvironment and may instigate innate and adaptive immune responses. Future investigation will shed light on new players in the necroptosis signaling and its related EVs, and will uncover the functional tasks accomplished by the cargo of these necroptotic EVs.

### Sample Protocol
Pelleted EVs were suspended in 50 μL sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) gel loading buffer (buffer composition is described below) and samples were heated at 95 °C for 5 min immediately before loading. Samples were loaded into SDS-PAGE precast gels (BIO-RAD). The proteins in the gel were reduced with 2.8mM DTT (60ºC for 30 min), modified with  8.8mM iodoacetamide in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (in the dark, room temperature for  30 min) and digested in 10 % acetonitrile and 10mM ammonium bicarbonate with modified trypsin (Promega) at a 1:10 enzyme-to-substrate ratio, overnight at 37oC. An additional second trypsinization was done for 4 hours. The resulting tryptic peptides were resolved by reverse-phase chromatography on 0.075 X 200-mm fused silica capillaries (J&W) packed with Reprosil reversed phase material (Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany). The peptides were eluted with linear 105 minutes gradient of 5 % to 28 % acetonitrile with 0.1 % formic acid in water ,15 minutes gradient of 28 % to 90 % acetonitrile with 0.1 % formic acid in water and 15 minutes at 90 % acetonitrile with 0.1 % formic acid in water  at flow rates of 0.15 μl/min. Mass spectrometry was performed by a Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer (QE, Thermo) in a positive mode using repetitively full MS scan followed by High energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most dominant ion selected from the first MS scan.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data from the biological repeats was analyzed using the MaxQuant software 1.52.8 vs. the human part of the Uniprot database with 1 % FDR2,3. The data were quantified by label free analysis using the same software4.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neoantigens, Mlkl, Necroptosis, Cell death, Extracellular vesicles, Proteome

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv university, Tel Aviv, Israel

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Tamar Geiger
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv university, Tel Aviv, Israel


