### Accession
PXD010891

### Title
PAXX and its paralogues synergistically direct DNA polymerase I activity in DNA repair

### Description
In this study, we characterised the interactomes of PAXX and its paralogs, XLF and XRCC4, to show that these factors share the ability to interact with DNA polymerase lambda (Poll), stimulate its activityand are required for the recruitment of Poll to laser-induced DNA damage sites.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293F cells were transiently transfected with FLAG- or HA-tagged constructs of PAXX, XLF, XRCC4 and DNA-PKcs. The products were immunopreciptated and purified by gel-filtration. The resultant  fractions were run on SDS-PAGE gels and visualised using instant blue and cut into slices. The slices were destained, digested and extracted from the gel pieces. The extracts were dried (speedvac) takenup in injection solvent and injected for analysis into a Synapt G2Si. Further details at: Craxton, A., Somers, J., Munnur, D., Jukes-Jones, R., Cain, K., and Malewicz, M. (2015) XLS 0c9orf142) is a new component of mamalian DNA double-stranded break repair. Cell death and diferentiation 22, 890-897.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analysed using PLGS version 3 (Waters) and IsoQuant (Stefan Tenzer, Mainz). Further details available in reference above.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Xlf, Dna-pkcs, Polymerase lambda, Paxx, Xrcc4, Dna repair, Nhej, Double strand breaks

### Affiliations
MRC Toxicology Unit
MRC Toxicology Unit, University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Rebekah Jukes-Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Malewicz
MRC Toxicology Unit, University of Cambridge


