### Accession
PXD024590

### Title
Analysis of the substrate specificities and reaction kinetics of the yeast oligosaccharyltransferase isoforms

### Description
Oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) catalyzes the central step in N-linked protein glycosylation, the transfer of a pre-assembled oligosaccharide from its lipid carrier onto asparagine residues of secretory proteins. The prototypic hetero-octameric OST complex from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae exists as two isoforms that contain either Ost3p or Ost6p. These two OST complexes have different protein substrate specificities in vivo. The two OST complexes were purified from genetically engineered strains expressing only one isoform. The kinetic properties and substrate specificities were characterized using a quantitative in vitro glycosylation assay with short peptides and different synthetic lipid-linked oligosaccharide (LLO) substrates. We showed that the peptide sequence close to the glycosylation sequon affected peptide affinity and turnover rate. The length of the lipid moiety affected LLO affinity, while the lipid double bond stereochemistry had a greater influence on LLO turnover rates. The two OST complexes had similar affinities for both the peptide and LLO substrates but showed significantly different turnover rates.

### Sample Protocol
The yeast oligosaccharyltransferase complex was purified by IP. After purificaiton, complex was reduced and alkylated by DTT and IAA. Then, proteins were further digested by trypsin. For site-occupancy experiment, tryptic peptides were further digested by EndoH glycosidase. For glycoprofiling experiment, tryptic peptides were measured by LC/MS-MS after desalting.

### Data Protocol
All raw data were converted to mfg files by Proteome Discovery 2.1. For site-occupancy experiment, the mgf files were searched agaisnt Swissprot database (20200422) via Mascot search engine 2.6. For glycoprofiling, the raw data were analyzed by Byonic 3.4.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Substract specificity, Site-occupancy, Yeast oligosaccharyltransferase

### Affiliations
Functional genomics center Zurich
Institute of Microbiology, ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Chia-wei Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Markus Aebi
Institute of Microbiology, ETH Zurich


