### Accession
PXD041663

### Title
Endogenous pull-downs of human proteins ATP6V1A and AHNAK to validate interactions with influenza A virus proteins M2 and NEP by targeted mass spectrometry in virus-infected cells

### Description
Influenza A Virus (IAV) is a recurring respiratory virus with antiviral therapies of limited use. Understanding host proteins essential for IAV infection can identify targets for alternative host-directed therapies (HDTs). Using affinity purification-mass spectrometry (AP-MS) and global phosphoproteomic and protein abundance analyses with three IAV strains (pH1N1, H3N2, H5N1) in three human cell types (A549, NHBE, THP-1), we mapped 332 IAV-human protein-protein interactions (PPIs) and identified 13 IAV-modulated kinases. Whole exome sequencing of patients who experienced severe influenza revealed several genes, including the structural scaffold protein AHNAK, with predicted loss-of-function variants that were also identified in our proteomic analyses. Of our identified host factors, 54 significantly altered IAV infection upon siRNA knockdown, and two factors, COPB1 and AHNAK, were also essential for productive infection by SARS-CoV-2. Finally, 16 compounds targeting our identified host factors suppressed IAV replication, with two targeting CDK2 and FLT3 showing pan-antiviral activity across influenza and coronavirus families. This study provides a comprehensive network model of IAV infection in human cells, identifying functional host targets for pan-viral HDT. This project includes endogenous IP data from A549 cells and NHBE cells infected with H5N1 IAV validating IAV-host PPIs M2-ATP6V1A and NEP-AHNAK, respectively. M2-ATP6V1A and NEP-AHNAK PPIs were first identified in AP-MS data that is submitted under its own dataset identifier (PXD036077).

### Sample Protocol
A/Vietnam/1203/2004 H5N1 HALo IAV virus was rescued by reverse genetics from available sequences, engineered to contain a deletion in the HA polybasic cleavage site (Park et al., 2006), and propagated in embryonated chicken eggs (Eisfeld et al., 2014). Virus stocks were titrated in Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells by plaque assay. All infections with IAV were performed in accordance with institutional Biosafety Level 2+ biosafety procedures. One 15cm dish was seeded for each IP from both mock and H5N1 infection conditions in A549 cells (ATP6V1A or IgG baits) or NHBE cells (AHNAK or IgG1 baits). A549 cells were cultured in DMEM media with 10% FBS and 1X Pen/Strep in 15cm dishes until dishes contained 2x10^7 cells at time of infection. NHBE cells were cultured in BEBM media with nine BEGM supplemental singlequots in collagen I-coated 15cm dishes until dishes contained 7x10^6 cells at time of infection. A549 or NHBE cells were infected with A/Vietnam/1203/2004 H5N1 HALo at MOI 0.5 in 10mL 0.5% Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA) in 1X PBS per plate, or mock-infected with 10mL 0.5% BSA in 1X PBS per plate. Cells were incubated for 1 hour at 37ºC and 5% CO2 and rocked by hand every 10 minutes, after which inoculum was removed and replaced with 25mL DMEM with 0.1% FBS, 0.3% BSA and 0.5μg/mL TPCK-treated trypsin per plate (A549 cells) or 27mL BEBM growth media with 0.25μg/mL TPCK-treated trypsin per plate (NHBE cells). Cells were returned to incubate at 37ºC and harvested at 24 hours post-infection. Media was removed, and cells were detached from plates by cell scraper in 10mL cold 1X PBS and collected in 15mL Falcon tubes. Cells were pelleted at 1200RPM for 5 minutes at 4ºC (A549 cells) or 400xg for 3 minutes at 4ºC (NHBE cells), the supernatant was removed, and pellets were stored on ice. 10mL cold 1X PBS was added to the original 15cm plates for a second cell scraping, collected and used to wash existing cell pellets. Cells were pelleted, washed a second time in 10mL cold 1X PBS, and pelleted again. Cell pellets were frozen at -80ºC overnight, and subsequently thawed on ice in 1mL cold lysis buffer (IP buffer pH 7.4 at 4ºC [50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA] supplemented with 0.5% Nonidet P40 substitute [NP40], Complete mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor). Samples were transferred to lo-bind 1.5mL epitubes and rotated end-over-end at 4ºC for 30 minutes. Samples were subsequently frozen at -80ºC overnight, then thawed on ice and clarified by centrifugation at 3500xg for 20 minutes at 4ºC.   50μL of clarified lysate (roughly 25μg-50μg protein) was reserved as “input” samples, reduced in 4mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 20 minutes, alkylated in 10mM iodoacetamide for 20 minutes in the dark, and quenched in 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 5 minutes. Input samples were then subjected to methanol chloroform precipitation, after which the protein pellet was washed three times in 1mL 80% ice cold acetone. Precipitated proteins were air dried, resuspended in 8M urea, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate in HPLC-grade water, diluted 5-fold in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate in HPLC-grade water, and digested with sequencing-grade trypsin at a 1:100 (enzyme:protein w:w) ratio overnight at 37ºC. After digestion, peptides were acidified, desalted by OMIX C18 100μL tips, dried down by vacuum centrifugation, and stored at -80ºC until MS analysis.  950μL-1mL of clarified lysate (roughly 0.8-1.6mg total protein) from A549 cells was combined with 1:100 (antibody:lysate v:v) anti-ATP6V1A rabbit monoclonal (EPR19270) antibody or 1:200 (antibody:lysate v:v) rabbit IgG control antibody in a 1.5mL lo-bind epitube. 950μL-1mL of clarified lysate (roughly 0.3-0.5mg total protein) from NHBE cells was combined with 1:100 (antibody:lysate v:v) anti-AHNAK mouse monoclonal (EM-09) antibody or 1:200 (antibody:lysate v:v) mouse IgG1 isotype control (MOPC-21) antibody in a 1.5mL lo-bind epitube. Lysate-primary antibody mixtures were incubated for 16 hours at 4ºC with end-over-end rotation. Purification was performed with 50μL per sample Pierce Protein A+G magnetic beads. Beads were washed four times with 1mL cold lysis buffer by repeated bead binding and buffer exchange on a DynaMag-2 magnetic tube rack. 50μL washed beads were incubated with the lysate-primary antibody mixture for 2 hours at 4ºC with end-over-end rotation. Beads were then washed two times in 1mL cold wash buffer (IP buffer pH 7.4 at 4ºC with 0.05% NP40) and two times in 1mL cold IP buffer (no NP40). After the final wash, bead-bound proteins were reduced with 1mM DTT and alkylated with 3mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes in the dark, quenched with 3mM DTT, and digested on-beads by incubation with sequencing-grade trypsin overnight at 37ºC. Peptides were extracted from beads by gel-loading tips, acidified, desalted by OMIX C18 100μL tips, dried down by vacuum centrifugation, and stored at -80ºC until MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Digested, desalted and dried peptides were resuspended in 10μL (input samples) or 12μL (IP samples) of 3% acetonitrile, 2% FA for targeted MS acquisition. Targeted MS relied on first queuing data-dependent acquisition (DDA) runs on all reciprocal IP samples to select peptides for parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) acquisition and analysis. PRM was subsequently performed for all input and reciprocal IP samples. DDA data and PRM data were acquired on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Detailed PRM LC and MS acquisition parameters are reported in the MS parameters table; summaries are provided below.  For DDA-based acquisition, 1μL of each reciprocal IP sample (A549 cells) or 2μL of each reciprocal IP sample (NHBE cells) was separated on a PepSep C18 column (15cm x 150μm, 1.9μm particle size) over the course of a 60-minute data acquisition. Buffer A consisted of 0.1% FA in water, and buffer B was 0.1% FA in 80% acetonitrile. Spectra were acquired continuously in a data-dependent manner. One full scan in the Orbitrap (at 240,000 resolution in profile mode with an AGC target of 1x10^6 and maximum injection time of 50 milliseconds) was followed by as many MS/MS scans as could be acquired on the N most abundant ions in 1 second in the ion trap (rapid scan type, HCD collision energy of 32%, AGC target of 3x10^4, maximum injection time of 18 milliseconds). Singly and unassigned charge states were rejected. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 2, an exclusion duration of 20 seconds, and an exclusion mass width of ±10 ppm. Raw files were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.3) in two search groups: (1) ATP6V1A and IgG baits from mock-infected and H5N1-infected A549 cells; and (2) AHNAK and IgG1 baits from mock-infected and H5N1-infected NHBE cells. MS/MS spectra were searched against the human proteome (SwissProt human canonical sequences, downloaded 09 October 2018), IAV protein sequences and the eGFP sequence. Trypsin (KR|P) was selected to allow up to two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were assigned for: methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation. One static modification was assigned for carbamidomethyl cysteine. Label free quantitation (LFQ) was enabled. All other MaxQuant settings were left at default. The msms.txt results from the DDA-based MaxQuant searches were then imported into Skyline (version 21.2.0.536 dbaf6ccd2) to select peptides for PRM acquisition and analysis. For A549 cell samples, 8 peptides from ATP6V1A and 2 peptides from M2 were employed. For NHBE cell samples, 6 peptides from AHNAK and 3 peptides from NEP were utilized.  For PRM-based acquisition, 1μL of each ATP6V1A or IgG reciprocal IP sample (A549 cells), 2μL of each AHNAK or IgG1 reciprocal IP sample (NHBE cells), or 1μL of each input sample (NHBE and A549 cells) was separated on the same PepSep column described above using a similar gradient to the bait-matched DDA runs over a 60-minute data acquisition. PRM acquisition was performed using a time-window scheduling of 4 minutes per peptide, 0.9 m/z isolation window, 60,000 resolution (400 m/z), HCD peptide fragmentation (normalized collision energy of 33%), and AGC target of 1x10^7. The injection time was set to “dynamic”, with 9 points per peak as the target number of points.  Following PRM acquisition, PRM data was extracted in Skyline (version 21.2.0.536 dbaf6ccd2) with the following settings: MS/MS filtering was set to targeted using Orbitrap as the mass analyzer (60,000 resolution, high selectivity extraction), and MS1 filtering was disabled. A minimum of 6 and a maximum of 30 transitions from the library were allowed. After manual peak integration and removal of interfering transitions, the quantification per fragment was exported. Fragments having m/z < precursors or signal/background ratio less than 5 were removed to ensure robust quantitative accuracy. The transitions per peptides were summed and then the average across all peptides for a specific protein were used for quantification. For fold change calculations, the data was log2-transformed and the ratio of the IgG H5N1-infected A549 cell sample, or IgG1 H5N1-infected NHBE cell sample, was used to derive M2 enrichment from ATP6V1A-bait samples, or NEP enrichment from AHNAK-bait samples, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, H5n1, Protein-protein interaction, A549, Nhbe, Prm, Influenza a virus, Virus-host

### Affiliations
Dept. Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California - San Francisco (UCSF), USA
Department of Cellular & Molecular Pharmacology, University of California San Francisco

### Submitter
Kelsey Haas

### Lab Head
Dr Robyn Kaake
Dept. Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California - San Francisco (UCSF), USA


