### Accession
PXD001724

### Title
A Protein Deep Sequencing Evaluation of Metastatic Melanoma Tissues, fractionated approach

### Description
Malignant melanoma has currently the highest increase of incidence of malignancies in the western world. In early stages, front line therapy is surgical excision of the primary tumor. Metastatic disease has previously has very limited possibilities to be cured. Recently, several protein kinase inhibitors and immune modifiers have shown promising results but drug resistance in metastasized melanoma remains a major problem. The need for clinical biomarkers to follow disease progression and treatment effects is high. The aim of the present study was to build a protein sequence database in metastatic melanoma, searching for novel, relevant biomarkers. Ten lymph node metastases (South-Swedish Malignant Melanoma Biobank) were subjected to global protein expression analysis using two proteomics approaches (with/without orthogonal fractionation). Fractionation produced higher numbers of protein identifications (4284). Combining both methods, 5326 unique proteins were identified (2641 proteins overlapping). Deep mining proteomics may contribute to the discovery of novel biomarkers for metastatic melanoma, for example dividing the samples into two metastatic melanoma "genomic subtypes", ("pigmentation" and "high immune") revealed several proteins showing differential levels of expression. In conclusion, the present study provides an initial version of a metastatic melanoma protein sequence database producing a total of more than 5000 unique protein identifications. This dataset consists of data for four samples, analysed by applying strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX) step before the MS step. A sister dataset, consisting of ten samples (that included the current four), was analysed without the (SCX)  step.

### Sample Protocol
Clinical Samples This study was approved by the Regional Ethical Review Board, Southern Sweden; approval number: DNR 191/2007 and 101/2013. All patients within the study provided a written informed consent. The tumor tissues used were lymph nodes metastases from ten MM patients undergoing surgery at Lund University Hospital, Sweden. The fresh specimens were divided into two parts. One portion of the metastasis was fixed in formalin, paraffin embedded and sectioned for histopathological confirmation and the other part was snap frozen within minutes after removal and stored at -80 °C in the Biobank. The frozen specimens were used as described below for both protein expression analysis and histological comparisons.  Histology of Tumors Frozen tissue samples were sectioned on a cryostat into 6 μm thick sections, placed upon glass slides, dried at 37 °C for 30 min  and fixed with 100% methanol for 5 min. The sections were stained with HE [27,28], where protein-rich cytoplasm stains dark pink while cytoplasm that is actively synthesizing protein stains rich purple and the nucleus stains blue.  Sample Preparation Frozen tissue samples from each tumor were sliced into 10 x 10 μm thick sections using a cryotome. The sections were lysed in 200 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 6 M urea and sonicated with a Branson Sonifier 250 (output 4, 10% duty cycle) for 2 minutes followed by centrifugation at 10 000 g for 5 minutes. The amount of proteinin the samples was determined by the BCA method (Pierce, Rockford, IL). A fixed amount (150 μg) of protein were reduced with 10 mM DTT (1 h at 37 °C) and alkylated using 40 mM iodoacetamide (30 min, kept dark at room temperature) followed by buffer exchange with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 7.6). The samples were then digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) in a ratio 1:120 w/w (trypsin:protein) overnight at 37 ºC. The digestion was stopped by adding 30 μL 1% formic acid. The samples were dried using a centrifugal evaporator and resuspended in 150 μL 1% formic acid and centrifuged for 5 min at 10 000 g. The supernatants were stored at -80 °C until further use.  Sample Fractionation Each sample was analysed in three separate technical replicates.  Strong cation exchange chromatography was performed using Microspin columns (MA SEM HIL-SCX, 10-100 µg capacity, The Nest group Inc., South Borough) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. The amount of peptides loaded to the columns corresponded to 50 µg protein. The peptides were eluted by stepwise salt gradient using 0, 20, 40, 60, 100 and 500 mM KCl in 10 mM potassium phosphate, 20% acetonitrile, pH 2.8. The eluted fractions were dried using a centrifugal evaporator and resuspended in 0.1% TFA in water. Before LC-MS/MS analysis the fractions were desalted using Ultra Microspin column Silica C18 (SUM SS18V, 3-30 µg capacity, The Nest group Inc., South Borough) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. After elution with 50% ACN, 0.1% TFA in water, the fractions were dried using a centrifugal evaporator and each fraction was resuspended in 15 µL 1% formic acid.  LC-MS/MS Analysis of the Tumor Lysate Digest The samples were first loaded onto a trapping column (150 mm x 20 μm, Thermo Scientific, San José, CA, USA). The samples were then separated using a column (50 cm x 75 μm, C18, 2 μm and 100Å, PN 164540, Thermo Scientific, San José, CA, USA) with a flow rate of 250 nL/min. A nonlinear gradient was used, using solvent solution solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in ACN. The gradient started with 5% B and 20% B at 120 min, followed by 40% B at 180 min, increased to 90% at 185 min, which was maintained for 5 min. The tumor lysate digests were analyzed using a Q Exactive, using top10 data-dependent approach. Full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over m/z 350–1800 range with resolution 70,000 (at m/z200). The target value was 3.00E+06. The ten most intense peaks with charge state ≥ 2 were fragmented in the HCD collision cell with normalized collision energy of 30%, and tandem mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with resolution 17,500 at m/z 192 200. The target value was 1.00E+05. The ion selection threshold was 3.30E+05 counts, and the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 100 ms for full MS scans and 150 ms for tandem mass spectra. For all the experiments, dynamic exclusion was set to 90 s. The total protein amount of un-fractionated tumor lysate digest injected to the MS/MS platform was 1.25 μg and for the fractionated samples the protein amount was estimated to be 1 μg (50 μg of peptides were fractionated into 6 fractions, approximately 8.3 μg in each fraction). The fractions were dried and resuspended in 15 μL 1% formic acid which gave a concentration of 0.6 μg/μL and 2 μL was injected to the LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Raw data were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer v 1.3 (Thermo Scientific, San José, CA, USA) using both Sequest and Mascot search engines. Uniprot Human (release 06/03/2013) database was used. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 1 Da,where the maximum of missed cleavage sites was three and 1% false discovery rate was used. At least two unique peptides were necessary for protein identification, and at the parameter Peptide Confidence in the Proteome Discoverer was required to be at least “medium”.

### Publication Abstract
Malignant melanoma has the highest increase of incidence of malignancies in the western world. In early stages, front line therapy is surgical excision of the primary tumor. Metastatic disease has very limited possibilities for cure. Recently, several protein kinase inhibitors and immune modifiers have shown promising clinical results but drug resistance in metastasized melanoma remains a major problem. The need for routine clinical biomarkers to follow disease progression and treatment efficacy is high. The aim of the present study was to build a protein sequence database in metastatic melanoma, searching for novel, relevant biomarkers. Ten lymph node metastases (South-Swedish Malignant Melanoma Biobank) were subjected to global protein expression analysis using two proteomics approaches (with/without orthogonal fractionation). Fractionation produced higher numbers of protein identifications (4284). Combining both methods, 5326 unique proteins were identified (2641 proteins overlapping). Deep mining proteomics may contribute to the discovery of novel biomarkers for metastatic melanoma, for example dividing the samples into two metastatic melanoma "genomic subtypes", ("pigmentation" and "high immune") revealed several proteins showing differential levels of expression. In conclusion, the present study provides an initial version of a metastatic melanoma protein sequence database producing a total of more than 5000 unique protein identifications. The raw data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD001724 and PXD001725.

### Keywords
Lymph node metastases, Malignant melanoma

### Affiliations
Clinical Protein Science & Imaging, Dept. of Measurement Technology and Industrial Electrical Engineering, Lund University, Lund,  Sweden
Lund University and Warsaw University of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Krzysztof Pawlowski

### Lab Head
Dr György Marko-Varga
Clinical Protein Science & Imaging, Dept. of Measurement Technology and Industrial Electrical Engineering, Lund University, Lund,  Sweden


