### Accession
PXD012281

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of hippocampal tissues from mice treated with a CK1δ/ε inhibitor

### Description
Hippocampal tissues from 3xTg-AD mice treated with a CK1δ/ε inhibitor or vehicle, and non-transgenic mice treated with vehicle, were harvested and processed for proteomic analysis using label-free quantification.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from hippocampal tissues of individual mice were obtained by mechanical homogenization in lysis buffer containing 4% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC; pH 8.2) supplemented with complete protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Roche; Mississauga, ON, Canada), followed by sonication (three 10 s pulses with 30 s on ice between each pulse). Proteins from the resulting supernatant were precipitated in 50% acetone/50% ethanol (EtOH)/0.1% formic acid (FA) at a ratio of 1:5 volumes at –20°C overnight. Proteins were pelleted by centrifugation at 16,000g for 20 min at 4°C and pellets were washed three times with ice cold acetone. Proteins were resuspended in 8 M urea in 50 mM ABC (pH 8.2). Protein concentrations were determined using the DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad; Mississauga, ON, Canada). Proteins were reduced by incubating samples with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT; MilliporeSigma; Oakville, ON, Canada) for 30 min at 56°C with agitation (245 rpm) and subsequently alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA; MilliporeSigma) for 30 min in darkness at room temperature. Protein digestion was performed by incubation with 40:1 (w/w, protein:enzyme) trypsin (Worthington Biochemical Corporation; Lakewood, NJ, USA) overnight at 37°C with agitation (245 rpm). Samples were acidified using 10% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; MilliporeSigma), then desalted using in-house made C18 desalting cartridges (C18 beads: ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 10 μm; Dr. Maisch GmbH; Beim Brückle, Germany) and desiccated using a SpeedVac. Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) FA for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) using the integrated Andromeda search engine and UniProt FASTA database from mouse (Mus musculus; 2013_05). The search included variable modifications for methionine oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) as well as fixed modification for carbamidomethylation (C). Trypsin/P was set as the cleavage specificity with up to two missed cleavages allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) cutoffs were set at 0.01 at the peptide and protein levels and the minimum peptide length was set at 7. Identification across different replicates was achieved by enabling the "match between runs" option with a matching time window of 5 min.

### Publication Abstract
Sleep disturbances and memory impairment are common symptoms of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Given that the circadian clock regulates sleep, hippocampal function, and neurodegeneration, it represents a therapeutic target against AD. Casein kinase 1&#x3b4;/&#x3b5; (CK1&#x3b4;/&#x3b5;) are clock regulators and overexpressed in AD brains, making them viable targets to improve sleep and cognition. In this study, we evaluated the therapeutic potential of a small molecule CK1&#x3b4;/&#x3b5; inhibitor (PF-670462) in a triple transgenic mouse model of AD (3xTg-AD). Mass spectrometry-based proteomic analyses revealed that PF-670462 administration in 3xTg-AD mice reversed hippocampal proteomic alterations in several AD-related and clock-regulated pathways, including synaptic plasticity and amyloid precursor protein processing. Furthermore, PF-670462 administration rescued working memory deficits and normalized behavioral circadian rhythm disturbances in 3xTg-AD mice. Our study provides in vivo proof of concept for CK1&#x3b4;/&#x3b5; inhibition against AD-associated hippocampal proteomic changes, memory impairment, and circadian disturbances.

### Keywords
Mouse, Lfq, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology and Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Paula Adler

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology and Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada


