### Accession
PXD032039

### Title
DUSP1/6-mediated phosphorylation signaling events in CLL

### Description
Despite strong evidence of a significant role of MAPK signaling in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), phosphatase development and progression, this pathway is up to date not targeted in CLL therapy and available BRAF and MEK inhibitors are not efficient in reducing tumor progression. In this study, we evaluated the effects of targeted hyperactivation of the MAPK signaling pathway in CLL.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in 8 M urea, 40 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, in the presence of EDTA-free protease inhibitors cocktail (Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors mixture (Sigma Aldrich). Protein lysates were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37 °C for 40 min  on a thermoshaker at 700 rpm, and alkylated with 55 mM 2-chloroacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, 1:100 enzyme-to-substrate ratio) after 4-fold dilution with 40 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6. Peptide solution was performed using Sep‐Pak C18 cartridges and dried in vacuo. TMT 10-plex labeling (9 channels) was performed by reconstituting 200 µg of each digest in 20 μL of 50 mM HEPES. Five μL of 11.6 mM TMT reagents stock solution (Thermo) in 100% anhydrous ACN were then added to each sample. Labeling reaction was carried for 1 h at 20 °C on a thermoshaker at 400 rpm, and quenched by adding 2 μL of 5% hydroxylamine.  Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed by loading the TMT-labeled peptides on a Fe3+-IMAC column (Propac IMAC-10 4 × 50 mm column, Thermo). The eluate of the IMAC enrichment was desalted and subjected to high pH RP fractionation using self-packed StageTips, containing 5 disks of C18 material (3M Empore). For the global phosphoproteome analysis, a total of 6 fractions were collected, dried in vacuo and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis. For phosphotyrosine analysis, the TMT-labeled peptides were subjected to antibody-based enrichment using the PTMScan® Phospho-Tyrosine Rabbit mAb (P-Tyr-1000, Cell Signaling Technology) kit, according to the manufactures' recommendations. Nano flow LC-ESI-MS measurements were performed using either a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC+ or a nanoLC–Ultra (Eksigent) system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). Peptides were delivered to a trap column (75 μm × 2 cm, packed in-house with 5 μm Reprosil C18 resin; Dr. Maisch) and washed using 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 5 μL/min for 10 min. Subsequently, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (75 μm × 45 cm, packed in-house with 3 μm Reprosil C18 resin, Dr. Maisch) applying a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were chromatographically separated using a 100 min linear gradient from 6% to 34% solvent B (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO in ACN) in solvent A (0.1% FA in 5% DMSO). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS. Full-scan MS spectra were recorded in the orbitrap from 360 to 1300 m/z at a resolution of 60K, using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6 charges and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 10 or 25 ms. For the MS2-based TMT method, MS2 spectra were recorded in the orbitrap at 30K resolution (AGC of 2e5 charges, maxIT of 50 ms). The 25 most intense precursor were isolated with an isolation window of 1.2 m/z, and subsequently fragmented by HCD at a normalized collision energy of 33%. Dynamic exclusion was set to 35 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1 or 1.6.0.13). (3). Spectra were searched against the UniProtKB database (Human, UP000005640, 75,771 entries including isoforms, downloaded on 01.2018). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, and the search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and Ntem-acetylation of protein, oxidation of methionine, and/or phosphorylation of serine, threonine, tyrosine residue (STY) as variable modifications. . Up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Precursor tolerance was set to 5 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. Results were adjusted to 1 % false discovery rate at protein, peptide, and site levels.

### Publication Abstract
Despite available targeted treatments for the disease, drug-resistant chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) poses a clinical challenge. The objective of this study is to examine whether the dual-specific phosphatases DUSP1 and DUSP6 are required to negatively regulate mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) and thus counterbalance excessive MAPK activity. We show that high expression of DUSP6 in CLL correlates with poor clinical prognosis. Importantly, genetic deletion of the inhibitory phosphatase DUSP1 or DUSP6 and blocking DUSP1/6 function using a small-molecule inhibitor reduces CLL cell survival in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo. Using global phospho-proteome approaches, we observe acute activation of MAPK signaling by DUSP1/6 inhibition. This promotes accumulation of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species and, thereby, DNA damage and apoptotic cell death in CLL cells. Finally, we observe that DUSP1/6 inhibition is particularly effective against treatment-resistant CLL and therefore suggest transient DUSP1/6 inhibition as a promising treatment concept to eliminate drug-resistant CLL cells.

### Keywords
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia, Phosphoproteomics, Dusp1, Dusp6, Dna damage response, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany

### Submitter
Piero Giansanti

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany


