### Accession
PXD037866

### Title
PRM of eGFP and mCherry in human cells

### Description
We leverage existing state-of-the-art transcriptomics and proteomics datasets from the GTEx project and the Human Protein Atlas to compute the protein-to-mRNA ratios of 36 human tissues. Using this as a proxy of translational efficiency, we build a machine learning model that identifies codons enriched or depleted in specific tissues. In particular, we detect two clusters of tissues with an opposite pattern of codon preferences. We then use the identified patterns for the development of CUSTOM (https://custom.crg.eu), a codon optimizer algorithm which suggests a synonymous codon design in order to optimize protein production in a tissue-specific manner. In a human cell model, we provide evidence that codon optimization should indeed take into account particularities of the translational machinery of the tissues in which the target proteins are expressed and that our approach can design genes with tissue-optimized expression profiles.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation

HEK293T and A549 cells were seeded in 6-well plates. Expression vectors were transfected with Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen). Similarly, primary renal and small airway cells were seeded in 6-well plates and expression vectors were transfected using TransfeX (ATCC). Gene expression was induced with 500 ng/mL of doxycycline during 48h. To measure the expression of the fluorescent proteins, cells were washed twice with PBS and resuspended in 6M Urea/200mM ABC buffer. Samples (10 µg) were reduced with dithiothreitol (30 nmol, 37 ºC, 60 min) and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (60 nmol, 25 ºC, 30 min). The resulting protein extract was first diluted to 2M urea with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate for digestion with endoproteinase LysC (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, 6h, Wako, cat # 129-02541), and then diluted 2-fold with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate for trypsin digestion (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, o/n, Promega, cat # V5113). After digestion, peptide mix was acidified with formic acid and desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  Chromatographic and mass spectrometric analysis Samples were analyzed using an Orbitrap Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nanoLC 1200 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 50-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 2 μm C18 particles spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Chromatographic gradients started at 95% buffer A and 5% buffer B with a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 5 minutes and gradually increased to 25% buffer B and 75% A in 79 min and then to 40% buffer B and 60% A in 11 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 10 min with 10% buffer A and 90% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with an EASY-Spray nanosource at 2.4kV and at a source temperature of 305 ºC.

Library data

The acquisition was performed in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 120,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-1400 with detection in the Orbitrap mass analyzer. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to ‘standard’ and injection time to ‘auto’. In each cycle of data-dependent acquisition analysis, following each survey scan, the most intense ions above a threshold ion count of 10000 were selected for fragmentation. The number of selected precursor ions for fragmentation was determined by the “Top Speed” acquisition algorithm and a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds. Fragment ion spectra were produced via high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at normalized collision energy of 28% and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. AGC was set to 2E4, and an isolation window of 0.7 m/z and a maximum injection time of 12 ms were used. Digested bovine serum albumin (New England Biolabs, cat # P8108S) was analyzed between each sample to avoid sample carryover and to assure stability of the instrument and QCloud has been used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project.

PRM data

A full MS scan with 1 micro scans at resolution of 30,000 was used over a mass range of m/z 350-1400 with detection in the Orbitrap mass analyzer. A PRM (parallel reaction monitoring method was used for data acquisition with a quadrupole isolation window set to 1.4 m/z and MSMS scans over a mass range of m/z 300-2000, with detection in the Orbitrap at resolution of 120,000. MSMS fragmentation was performed using HCD at 30 NCE, the auto gain control (AGC) was set to 1e5 and maximum injection time of 118 ms. Peptide masses (m/z) were defined in the mass list table for further fragmentation: FSVSGEGEGDATYGK_GFP (m/z 752.3335, z 2), EDGNILGHK_GFP (m/z 491.7513, z 2), FEGDTLVNR_GFP (m/z 525.7644, z 2), KPVQLPGAYNVNIK_mCherry (m/z 514.2997, z 3), LDITSHNEDYTIVEQYER_mCherry (m/z 742.3501, z 3), HSTGGMDELYK_mCherry (m/z 619.2795, z 2).

### Data Protocol
Library data

Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.5, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.6, Matrix Science). The data were searched against a Swiss-Prot human database (as of March 2021, 20386  entries) plus GFP, mcherry, a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries. For peptide identification a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme, and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 1%. The best three peptides of mCheery and GFP were used in the PRM method.

PRM data

Skyline software (v20.2.1.278) was used to generate the libraries (observed as the output of the DDA data Proteome Discoverer (v2.5) search and predicted with Prosit) and extract the fragment areas of each peptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Lung, Prm, Kidney

### Affiliations
Centre de Regulació Genòmica
Systems Biology Unit, Design of Biological Systems, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Spain

### Submitter
Xavier Hernandez Alias

### Lab Head
Dr Luis Serrano
Systems Biology Unit, Design of Biological Systems, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Spain


