### Accession
PXD005793

### Title
Characterization of the acetylome associated with rapamycin-induced autophagy in HeLa cells

### Description
Autophagy is a lysosomal-mediated catabolic process that degrades cytoplasmic components to help maintain cellular homeostasis and cell survival during exposure to stress. Lysine acetylation is a reversible post-translational modification that plays an important role in the regulation of diverse cellular processes.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were maintained and labeled in SILAC kits (Invitrogen) with 13C-Lysine (“Heavy”) or 12C-Lysine (“Light”) labeling. After labeling completion and reaching desirable amount, cells with 12C-Lysine (“Light”) labeling were treated with 0.1 μM rapamycin (treatment group). Cells with 13C-Lysine (“Heavy”) labeling without treatment were used as control group. After cell harvest, equal numbers of cells from two groups were mixed and crude proteins were extracted. In this study, two Hela cell lines (control and Rapamycin treatment) with three biological replicates were performed SILCA proteome and acetylome quantification analysis.

### Data Protocol
All the proteins were digested with trypsin. Kac peptides were affinity-enriched with anti-acetyllysine antibody (PTM Biolabs). The resulting peptides were analyzed by nano-HPLC-MS/MS on Q Exactive mass spectrometer (PTM Biolabs). Details for data analysis were described in supplemental information

### Publication Abstract
Protein acetylation reportedly acts as a key regulator of autophagy. However, up to now, the relationship between acetylome and autophagy has remained unclear. Here stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture and high-throughput quantitative mass spectrometry were used to perform an acetylome analysis of rapamycin-induced autophagy in vitro. Our data revealed that 2135 sites were quantified on 1081 proteins. During autophagy, 421 sites were significantly regulated on 296 proteins, with 80.8% of sites downregulated and 19.2% upregulated. Motif enrichment analysis revealed five main motifs. Most of the downregulated sites conformed to the classical functional motif of p300/CBP [G-AcK]. Furthermore, acetylation targeted proteins involved mainly in ribosomes, spliceosomes, and AcCoA-related metabolic process. In-depth analysis indicated that most of the acetylation sites were in the critical domain, were functional sites, or could change their enzymatic activity by acetylation, highlighting the importance of site-specific acetylation patterns. Subsequently, we demonstrated that K1549 of p300 was also a functional site that could regulate the autophagic process in vitro. In conclusion, our data reveal a deacetylation-preponderant profile with autophagy. The specificity of the related motifs and the identification of site-specific acetylation patterns will assist searches for potential targets or subsequent mechanism-focused studies to elucidate site-specific protein networks in autophagy.

### Keywords
Autophagy; rapamycin; acetylome; acetylation; acetyltransferase

### Affiliations
The National Education Base for Basic Medical Sciences, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, Zhejiang Province, PR China
ptm-biolab

### Submitter
zhou lianqi

### Lab Head
Dr Shiping Ding
The National Education Base for Basic Medical Sciences, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, Zhejiang Province, PR China


