### Accession
PXD043976

### Title
Tissue Transglutaminase 2 has higher affinity for relaxed than for stretched fibronectin fibers

### Description
Chemical cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry was used to study the interaction between fibronectin (Fn; full-length or gelatin-binding domain fragment = Fn 45) with tissue transglutaminase 2 in oxidized and non-oxidized form. The complexes were cross-linked with disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS) or a combination of pimelic dihydrazide (PDH) in combination with the zero-length cross-linking reagent, DMTMM.

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking was performed following previously described procedures: Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014, for DSS and Mohammadi et al., Anal. Chem., 2021, for PDH/DMTMM. DSS cross-linking was performed at 1 mM final concentration, PDH/DMTMM linking at 44 mM PDH and 88 mM DMTMM (protocol 1) or 22/11 mM (protocol 2). Samples were digested using endoproteinase Lys-C followed by trypsin or with chymotrypsin. Digests were fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography (unless mentioned otherwise) and SEC fractions were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos system using MS/MS detection in either the orbitrap or the linear ion trap analyzer. Duplicate injections of three to four SEC fractions were performed, or samples were measured unfractionated. A detailed overview of all experimental conditions (protein constructs, cross-linking chemistries, enzymes, etc.) is provided in the spreadsheet “File_list_fibronectin.xlsx” submitted together with the experimental data. Additional experimental details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.5, against the sequences of target proteins and three E. coli proteins identified as contaminants. For fibronectin (isolated from natural sources), the isoform sequence P02751-1 from UniProt was selected. For Lys-C/trypsin digestion, protease specificity was set to cleavage after K and R unless followed by P, with a maximum of two missed cleavages per peptide allowed (excluding the cross-linking site, if applicable). For chymotrypsin, cleavage was considered after F, L, M, W, and Y, with a maximum number of missed cleavages set to four. The fragment mass error was set to ±15 ppm for orbitrap detection and to 0.2 Da and 0.3 Da for the detection of “common” and “xlink” fragment ion types for detection in the linear ion trap, respectively. All identifications were further filtered for a %TIC value ≥0.1 and a main xQuest score of ≥20 for fragment ion detection in the ion trap and ≥25 for fragment ion detection in the orbitrap analyzer, respectively. MS/MS spectra of the remaining candidates were evaluated and rejected if they did not contain at least four bond cleavages in total per peptide or at least three consecutive bond cleavages per peptide. All cross-link identifications are compiled in spreadsheets in Microsoft Excel format that are included with the submission.

### Publication Abstract
Transglutaminase 2 (TG2) plays a vital role in stabilizing extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins through enzymatic crosslinking during tissue growth, repair, and inflammation. TG2 also binds non-covalently to fibronectin (FN), an essential component of the ECM, facilitating cell adhesion, migration, proliferation, and survival. However, the interaction between TG2 and fibrillar FN remains poorly understood, as most studies have focused on soluble or surface-adsorbed FN or FN fragments, which differ in their conformations from insoluble FN fibers. Using a well-established in vitro FN fiber stretch assay, we discovered that the binding of a crosslinking enzyme to ECM fibers is mechano-regulated. TG2 binding to FN is tuned by the mechanical tension of FN fibers, whereby TG2 predominantly co-localizes to low-tension FN fibers, while fiber stretching reduces their affinity for TG2. This mechano-regulated binding relies on the proximity between the N-terminal &#x3b2;-sandwich and C-terminal &#x3b2;-barrels of TG2. Crosslinking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) revealed a novel TG2-FN synergy site within TG2's C-terminal &#x3b2;-barrels that interacts with FN regions located outside of the canonical gelatin binding domain, specifically FNI<sub>2</sub> and FNIII<sub>14-15</sub>. Combining XL-MS distance restraints with molecular docking revealed the mechano-regulated binding mechanism between TG2 and modules FNI<sub>7-9</sub> by which mechanical forces regulate TG2-FN interactions. This highlights a previously unrecognized role of TG2 as a tension sensor for FN fibers. This novel interaction mechanism has significant implications in physiology and mechanobiology, including how forces regulate cell adhesion, spreading, migration, phenotype modulation, depending on the tensional state of ECM fibers. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD043976.

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; dss; pdh; dmtmm; structural proteomics; fibronectin, Tissue transglutaminase 2

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland


