### Accession
PXD013954

### Title
Systematic analysis of the lysine succinylome in the model medicinal mushroom Ganoderma lucidum

### Description
Ganoderma lucidum, one of the best-known medicinal mushrooms in the world, produces more than 400 different bioactive compounds. By the combination of affinity enrichment and high-resolution LC-MS/MS analysis, large-scale lysine succinylome analysis was performed. Altogether, 742 lysine succinylation sites in 382 protein groups were identified. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that the modified proteins were involved in multiple cellular functions and participated in a wide variety of biological processes such as carbon metabolism and biosynthesis of secondary metabolites.

### Sample Protocol
The strain G.260125-1 was used for lysine succinylome analysis in this study and was maintained at 4 °C on potato dextrose agar (PDA) slants composed of 200 g/l potato, 20 g/l dextrose and 20 g/l agar. The strain G.260125-1 was incubated on PDA plates at 26 °C for 5 d. After that, aerial mycelia in the plates were harvested. The mycelia were ground in liquid nitrogen. The resulting cell powder was transferred to 10 ml lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 50 mM nicotinamide (NAM), 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 3 µM trichostatin A (TSA) and 0.1% protease inhibitor cocktail and sonicated three times using an ultrasonic processor. After centrifugation at 20,000×g and 4 °C for 20 min, the mycelia debrises were discarded, and the proteins in the supernatant were precipitated with ice-cold 15% tricarboxylic acid (TCA) for 6 h at 4 °C. The resulting precipitate was washed three times by cold acetone. Finally, the protein obtained above was redissolved in buffer containing 8 M urea, 100 mM NH4CO3. A 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare) was use to determine the protein concentration according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The proteins prepared as described in the previous section were chemically reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56 °C for 30 min, followed by alkylation using 11 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature for 25 min in the dark. The resulting sample was then diluted with 100 mM (NH4)2CO3 to urea concentration less than 2 M followed by trypsin digestion as described. In brief, trypsin was added at 1:50 enzyme-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight, followed by a second digestion (1:100 enzyme-to-protein mass ratio) for 4 h. The sample was then fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 10 over 80 min into 80 fractions, Then, the peptides were combined into 6 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. To enrich Ksucci peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% TFA. The eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. The resulting peptides were cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. The peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 7% to 25% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for 26 min, 25% to 40% for 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 350 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28; ion fragments were detected in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 5E3 in the MS survey scan with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the orbitrap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
To process the resulting MS/MS data, MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8) was employed. In brief, the obtained tandem mass spectra were searched against G. lucidum database concatenated with a reverse-decoy database. Trypsin/P was set as cleavage enzyme, and at most, 4 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide and 5 charges were allowed. Mass errors of fragment ions and precursor ions were set to 0.02 Da and 10 ppm, respectively. Carbamidomethylation (cysteine) was specified as fixed modification; oxidation (methionine) and succinylation (lysine) were set as variable modifications. The thresholds of false discovery rate (FDR) for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 0.01, and seven amino acid residues was specified as the minimum peptide length. The localization probability for succinylated site was set as ≥ 75%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ganoderma lucidum, Lc-ms/ms, Lysine succinylome

### Affiliations
College of Life Sciences, Shandong Province Key Laboratory of Applied Mycology, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao 266109, China
Shandong Province Key Laboratory of Applied Mycology, College of Life Sciences, Qingdao Agricultural University, Changcheng Road, No.700, Qingdao, 266109, China

### Submitter
Guangyuan Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Lizhong Guo
Shandong Province Key Laboratory of Applied Mycology, College of Life Sciences, Qingdao Agricultural University, Changcheng Road, No.700, Qingdao, 266109, China


