### Accession
PXD038501

### Title
High-throughput Quantitative Glycomics Enabled by 12-plex Isobaric Multiplex Labeling Reagents for Carbonyl-Containing Compound (SUGAR) Tags

### Description
Glycans, which are widely distributed on most proteins and cell surfaces, are a class of important biomolecules playing important roles in various biological processes such as immune response and cellular communication. Modern mass spectrometry (MS) and novel chemical probes together greatly facilitate the routine analysis of glycans. However, the requirement of high-throughput analysis still calls for advanced tools to be developed. Recently, we devised isobaric multiplex reagents for carbonyl-containing compound (SUGAR) tags for N-glycans analysis capable of processing four samples at a time. To further improve the throughput, we utilized the subtle mass differences among different isotopologues combinations and expanded the multiplexing capacity to twelve channels, a three-fold throughput improvement compared to the original setup and achieved ultra-high throughput N-glycans analysis in a single LC-MS/MS injection. We then applied 12-plex SUGAR tags to profile the N-glycans in four subtypes of human Immunoglobulin G (IgG) and to investigate the N-glycans changes in the endometrial cancer cells (ECC1) treated with Atovaquone, a quinone antimicrobial medication, and a dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH) inhibitor.

### Sample Protocol
The release of N-glycans using PNGase F was adapted from FANGS protocol with minor modification16. Briefly, for human IgGs, proteins were dissolved at a concentration of 5 µg/µL in 0.5 M TEAB buffer with 0.025 M TCEP and heat denatured. Then the proteins were transferred onto 30 K MWCO filters and performed three times of buffer exchange with 0.5 M TEAB before adding PNGase F at 1:50 enzyme/protein ratio and incubated at 37 °C overnight. Similar workflow apples to ECC1 cell lines, only with the lysis of cell pellet and extraction of proteins in advance. After enzymatic digestion, the filters were washed with 100 µL 0.5 M TEAB buffer for three times. The fractions were combined and treated with 1% AA for 4 h to convert glycosylamines to glycans with free reducing end and then dried in vacuo before labeling.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was compared against an in-house database including most possible combinations of N-glycan units (Hexose (H), HexNAc (N), Fucose (F), and NeuAc (S)). 12-plex SUGAR-labeled N-glycans were identified by accurate mass matching in full MS with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragmentation match in MS/MS spectra with the aid of GlycoWorkbench. Only those identified glycans with less than three channels of reporter ions having empty value counts for quantifiable. Intensities of the reporter ions for identified SUGAR-labeled glycans were extracted and used for relative quantification. Microsoft Excel and GraphPad Prism were used for calculations and plotting.

### Publication Abstract
Glycans, which are widely distributed on most proteins and cell surfaces, are a class of important biomolecules playing crucial roles in various biological processes such as immune response and cellular communication. Modern mass spectrometry (MS) coupled with novel chemical probes greatly facilitates routine analysis of glycans. However, the requirement of high-throughput analysis still calls for advanced tools to be developed. Recently, we devised i<u>s</u>obaric m<u>u</u>ltiplex rea<u>g</u>ents for c<u>ar</u>bonyl-containing compound (SUGAR) tags for 4-plex N-glycan analysis. To further improve the throughput, we utilized the subtle mass differences among different isotopologues and expanded the multiplexing capacity to 12 channels, a 3-fold throughput improvement for the original SUGAR tag design and achieved high-throughput N-glycan analysis in a single LC-MS/MS injection. We then applied 12-plex SUGAR tags to profile the N-glycans in four subtypes of human Immunoglobulin G (IgG) and to investigate the N-glycan changes in the endometrial cancer cells (ECC1) treated with Atovaquone, a quinone antimicrobial medication, and a dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH) inhibitor. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD038501.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, N-glycan, Isobaric labeling

### Affiliations
UW madison
School of Pharmacy University of Wisconsin 777 Highland Ave. Madison, WI 53705-2222

### Submitter
Min Ma

### Lab Head
Dr lingjun Li
School of Pharmacy University of Wisconsin 777 Highland Ave. Madison, WI 53705-2222


