### Accession
PXD024508

### Title
Global and phospho-proteome of Hek293T treated with kinase inhibitors

### Description
We examine the changes in HEK293T overexpressing alpha-synucleinA53T-GFP when treated with kinase inhibitors (SB203580, GF109203X,SB202190, Enzastaurin, VX-745). Main findings is altered protein translation, with an increase in lysosomal proteins for all compounds save VX-745

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were treated with 48 hours with inhibitors or DMSO prior to lysis and mass-spectrometry.  Unless stated otherwise, all the chemicals and solvents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany. Suspension traps (S-Traps) based digestion protocol was used for the sample processing according to the manufacturer’s instructions.[61] Cell pellets were lysed by using a detergent based lysis buffer (25 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL), pH=8.0). The lysates were boiled for 5 min at 95°C in a thermomixer with the mixing frequency of 500 rpm and then sonicated to denature proteins, shear DNA and enhance cell disruption by using a water-bath (4°C) sonicator Bioruptor (Diagenode) at High Power for 40 min (sonication cycle: 15 sec ON, 15 sec OFF).  The samples were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10 min at room temperature and the supernatant were transferred to new tubes. The concentration of protein was determined by using Pierce™ 660nm Protein Assay Reagent with Ionic Detergent Compatibility Reagent (IDCR) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL). Around 300 µg of cell lysates for each sample were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark. Afterward, each sample was acidified by aqueous phosphoric acid (Merck) with the final concentration of 1.2% and then seven volumes of S-Trap binding buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB, pH=7.1) was added. After gentle mixing, the protein solution was loaded directly onto the S-Trap spin column (Protifi, Huntington, NY) without any column pre-equilibration, and spun at 4000g for 30 seconds. The S-Trap column was washed 3 times by using 400 µL S-Trap binding buffer. Each sample was digested with 95 µL 50 mM TEAB containing Lys-C (FUJIFILM Wako Chemicals U.S.A. Corporation) at an enzyme: protein ratio of 1:50 w/w for 2 hours at 37°C and further digested with 30 µL 50 mM TEAB containing trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified, Promega, Madison, WI) at a trypsin: protein ratio of 1:50 w/w overnight at 37°C. The peptides were eluted by three stepwise buffers with 80 µL of each, including 50 mM TEAB, 0.2% formic acid (FA) in water and 0.2% FA in 50% acetonitrile (ACN). The three steps elution’s were pooled together and dried in a SpeedVac (Concentrator plus Eppendorf).  The peptide concentration was determined by using the Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL) and 180 µg peptides from each sample were loaded onto MacroSpin column (NestGroup, Southborough, MA) for desalting. In brief, the spin column was primed and equilibrated with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA and 0.1% TFA, respectively and was washed with 0.1% TFA after sample loading. The peptides were eluted with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA, dried in the SpeedVac and stored in -80°C freezer until further process. Phosphor enrichment was performed on the Agilent AssayMAP Bravo Platform (Agilent Technologies, Inc) and phosphorylated peptides were enriched by using 5 μL Fe(III)-NTA cartridges. Following the Phospho Enrichment v2.0 protocol, the cartridges were primed with 50% ACN/0.1% TFA and equilibrated with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. Peptides from desalting step were re-suspended with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA and loaded onto the cartridge for the enrichment. The phosphorylated peptides were eluted with 5% ammonia directly into 50% FA after being washed with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA, lyophilized in the SpeedVac and stored in -80°C freezer until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All the MS raw files were submitted to Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Scientific) for identification and quantification. The search was performed against the Homo sapiens UniProt revised database with the Sequest HT search engine and decoy database containing reversed version of all protein sequences was used to monitor false discovery rate (FDR). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. For peptide identification, precursor mass tolerance was set 15 ppm and fragment mass tolerance 0.05 Da respectively. A maximum of two missed cleavage sites was allowed. The IMP-ptmRS algorithm was used to score phosphorylation sites with a site probability threshold >75. After database searching, 1% false discovery rate (FDR) for both peptide-spectrum match (PSMs) and peptides was applied to filter out the wrong peptides. For statistical analyses, label-free quantification (LFQ) data was log2-transformed and normalized to median value of each sample. Multiple-sample test was performed within the Perseus software, with Dunnett’s T3 post-hoc test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sb202190, Hek293t, Lc-msms, Sb203580, Gf109203x, Enzastaurin, Vx-745, Alpha-synuclein

### Affiliations
Lund University Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Alexander Svanbergsson

### Lab Head
Dr Jia-yi Li
Lund University Sweden


