### Accession
PXD014750

### Title
TMTpro: Design and initial evaluation of a novel Proline-based isobaric 16-plex Tandem Mass Tag reagent set

### Description
The design and synthesis of a novel proline-reporter-based isobaric Tandem Mass Tag 16 tag set (TMTpro) was carried out and the data uploaded here is a comparison of the performance of the new TMTpro tags with the current commercially available dimethylpiperidine-reporter-based TMT10/11 reagents. Data from 2 experiments are provided.

### Sample Protocol
The design and synthesis of a novel proline-reporter-based isobaric Tandem Mass Tag 16 tag set (TMTpro) was carried out and the data uploaded here is a comparison of the performance of the new TMTpro tags with the current commercially available dimethylpiperidine-reporter-based TMT10/11 reagents. Data from 2 experiments are provided.  1) Assessment of the suitability of the TMTpro reagents for phosphopeptide analysis in comparison with the TMT10/11 reagents. 4-plex dilution series of TMT10/11 with labelling carried out in TEAB and HEPES buffers are compared with TMTpro labelling carried out in HEPES buffer. Sample material was a rat liver peptide digest. 2) Assessment of the ID rates over multiple TMT-plexes and quantitative performance were assessed as a double-proteome experiment replicated over two 30-plexes. HeLa digest and yeast digest were mixed to generate the double proteome samples. TMT10/11 30-plex using the double proteome samples S1 to S5 was assessed as 3 x 11-plex with 10-plex + reference design while the TMTpro 30-plex was assessed as 2 x 16plex with a 15-plex + reference design

### Data Protocol
Raw data were submitted to the Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software for searching via the SEQUEST-HT node. A tryptic search was performed against the UniProtKB Human or Rat databases, with up to two missed cleavages permitted. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 20 mmu. Static modifications were set as: Carbamidomethylation (C); TMT10 or TMTpro (K); and TMT10 or TMTpro at peptide N termini. Variable modifications were set as: deamidation (N/Q), oxidation (M) and N-terminal acetylation. In addition, for the 4-plex phosphopeptide analysis, phosphorylation of STY was searched.  Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were adjusted to 1% FDR using the Percolator algorithm. Phosphopeptide spectra were also searched using the PhosphoRS node (fragment mass tolerance of 20mmu, considering neutral loss peaks for CID and HCD) Additional searches were carried out with just SEQUEST for speed to determine rates of over-labelling. In these searches, the SEQUEST node was programmed to search for tryptic peptides (two missed cleavages) with the following modification settings. Protein-group level FDR was also applied within the Proteome Discoverer framework. PSMs were subsequently filtered to exclude those with a using isolation interference value above 50%. Applying in-house methods, isotope impurity correction was performed as well as median-scaling normalisation of TMTpro/TMT reporter ion intensities. After normalisation, PSM-level ratios of reporter ion intensities were calculated for experimental samples relative to the reference sample and log2-transformed. The PSM level log2 ratios were summarised to peptide level log2 ratios by taking the median of PSM ratios specific to a given peptide sequence identifier. The peptide log2Ratio data matrix was used further for pre-processing. Additionally, the peptide logRatios were normalized using a weighted mean-scaling technique. Missing values were analysed and those peptides with more than 35% missing quantitative values in a particular experimental group were removed from the data set. The remaining missing quantitative ratios were replaced by values imputed using an iterative PCA method.

### Publication Abstract
The design and synthesis of a proline-based reporter isobaric Tandem Mass Tag structure (TMTpro) is presented. An analysis is made of the performance of the new TMTpro tags in comparison with the current commercially available dimethylpiperidine-reporter-based TMT10/11 reagents. The new reporter structure provides a set of 16 tags for use with resolution of 6.3 mDa mass differences in high resolution mass spectrometers and a set of 9 reagents with 1 Da spacing between reporter ions for single dalton analysis using 9 heavy nuclei per tag. We show similar performance in terms of peptide identification rates and quantification between the TMTpro 16-plex and TMT10/11-plex reagents. We also demonstrate the suitability of the TMTpro reagents for phosphopeptide analysis. The ability to pool 16 samples reduces the overall amount of sample required for each channel, and we anticipate that TMTpro reagents will be a useful enhancement for any protocol that benefits from sample pooling and should reduce missing data.

### Keywords
Tmt, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Proteome Sciences
Proteome Sciences Plc, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Michael Bremang

### Lab Head
Dr Ian Pike
Proteome Sciences Plc, United Kingdom


