### Accession
PXD007098

### Title
Fragilariopsis Cylindrus dark survival experiment

### Description
The sea-ice dwelling diatom Fragilariopsis Cylindrus was cultured for 4 months under dark or light exposed conditions to mimic the effects of Antarctic winter growth conditions.   Cells were harvested periodically and LFQ proteomics used to investigate the molecular mechanisms of dark survival.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates were prepared by mechanical disruption and protein samples cleaned up by ethanol precipitation.  Peptide samples were prepared using solution tryptic digestion and LC/MS performed using an Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC and LTQ-Orbitrap MS

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant and Perseus pipeline was used for database searching and statistical analysis of deifference in relative protein abundances between dark and light conditions

### Publication Abstract
Light underneath Antarctic sea-ice is below detectable limits for up to 4&#xa0;months of the year. The ability of Antarctic sea-ice diatoms to survive this prolonged darkness relies on their metabolic capability. This study is the first to examine the proteome of a prominent sea-ice diatom in response to extended darkness, focusing on the protein-level mechanisms of dark survival. The Antarctic diatom Fragilariopsis cylindrus was grown under continuous light or darkness for 120&#xa0;d. The whole cell proteome was quantitatively analysed by nano-LC-MS/MS to investigate metabolic changes that occur during sustained darkness and during recovery under illumination. Enzymes of metabolic pathways, particularly those involved in respiratory processes, tricarboxylic acid cycle, glycolysis, the Entner-Doudoroff pathway, the urea cycle and the mitochondrial electron transport chain became more abundant in the dark. Within the plastid, carbon fixation halted while the upper sections of the glycolysis, gluconeogenesis and pentose phosphate pathways became less active. We have discovered how F. cylindrus utilises an ancient alternative metabolic mechanism that enables its capacity for long-term dark survival. By sustaining essential metabolic processes in the dark, F.&#xa0;cylindrus retains the functionality of the photosynthetic apparatus, ensuring rapid recovery upon re-illumination.

### Keywords
Sea-ice diatom, Quantitative proteomics, Dark survival

### Affiliations
Proteomics mass spectrometry core facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania, Australia
University of Tasmania

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Richard Wilson
Proteomics mass spectrometry core facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania, Australia


