### Accession
PXD014642

### Title
Probing the Function of Alternative Proteins in Cell Reprogramming by Large Scale Proteomics and Cross - Linking Mass Spectrometry

### Description
Many proteins are lacking from reference databases because they are issued from alternative ORFs neither respecting the rules decreed for the genome annotation or for the protein translation from mRNA. It was evidenced that not only a single protein is therefore translated from an mRNA. However, the function of these Alternative Proteins (AltProts) remain largely unknown. Here, we were interested by looking to the function of AltProts in the context of cancer cell reprogramming. We have developed a large scale approach based on shot-gun proteomics and cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) to identify the regulation of the reference proteins (RefProts) versus the AltProts and find the their interaction partners. The study was conducted from NCH82 human glioma cells which were stimulated by the protein kinase A (PKA) activator Forskolin upon 16H, 24H and 48H to induce cell differentiation and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The data have shown to enable tracing back the function of the AltProts by combining experimental data to in silico analysis using cytoscape with ClueGo for GO Term annotation and enrichment of pathways with String. Very interestingly many AltProts demonstrate to be involved in the regulation of tRNA through their interaction with aaRS proteins and of the cellular mobility.

### Sample Protocol
The protein extraction, reduction/alkylation and enzymatic digestion was performed using the FASP method (51). Briefly, the sample was taken up in 30 μL of 8M urea in 0.1 M Tris / HCl, pH 8.5 (UA buffer) and an equivalent volume of 100 mM in UA DTT. The sample was then incubated for 40 minutes at 56°C. Total proteins were loaded onto 10 kDa Amicon filters, supplemented with 200 μL of UA buffer and centrifuged for 15 min at 14,000 g. Then, 100 μL of a 0.05 M IAA in AU were added and incubated for 20 min in the dark before centrifugation for 15 min at 14,000 g. Finally, a 0.05 M ammonium bicarbonate solution in water (AB) was added and centrifuged again for 15 min at 14,000 g twice. For the digestion, 50 μL LysC/Trypsin at 20 μg/mL in AB buffer was added and incubated at 37°C overnight. The digested peptides were then recovered after centrifugation for 15 min at 14,000 g after transferring the filter into new tubes, reconstitution in 50 μL of AB buffer followed by a second centrifugation step for 15 min at 14,000 g. The eluted peptides were then acidified with 10 μL of 0.1% TFA and vacuum dried. The samples were reconstituted in 20 μL of a 0.1% TFA and desalted using a C18 ZipTip (Millipore, Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines, France). After elution with 20 µL of 80% ACN/0, 1% TFA from the ZipTip, the sample was vacuum dried. For the LC-MS, samples were then reconstituted in 0.1% FA in water /ACN (98:2, v/v), and separated by reverse phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) using a nanoAcquity UPLC equipped with a C18 pre-column (180 μm ID × 20 mm length, 5 μm PD, Waters) and a Peptide BEA C18 column (25 cm length, 75 μm ID, 1.7µm PD, Waters). Separation was performed using a linear gradient starting at 95% solvent A (0.1% FA in water) and 5% solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN) up to 70% solvent A and 30% solvent B for 120 min at 300 nL/min. The LC system was coupled onto a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer set to acquire the ten most intense precursors in data-dependent acquisition mode, with a voltage of 2.8 kV. The survey scans were set to a resolving power of 70 000 at FWHM (m/z 400), in positive mode and using a target AGC of 3E+6. For the shot-gun proteomics, the instrument was set to perform MS/MS from only from >+2 and <+8 charge state but for XL-MS were larger peptides are measured only >+3 charge state ions were selected excluding unassigned load states, +1, +2 and > +8 .

### Data Protocol
RAW data obtain from the nLC-MS/MS run were treated using MaxQuant V1.6.1.0 using the LFQ annotation of the protein identified. UniprotKB database for reviewed human of April 2018 containing 20303 protein sequences was used. Statistical analyses were carried out using Perseus software after filtering for “reverse”, and “contaminants” proteins. For the comparison between control and Forskolin-treated groups, t-test was performed with a permutation‐based FDR of 0.05, and p values less than 0.05 were considered to be statistically significant. A heat-map of differentially expressed proteins across the two different groups was also generated. Gene ontology (GO) analysis was performed using ClueGO on Cytoscape v3.7.1. AltProts peptide lists were searched against the human AltProt database HaltORF (reference name "HS_GRCh38_altorf_20170421"), since the conventional UniprotKB does not contain data about AltProts. This database is derived from the predicted H. sapiens alternative proteins (release hg38, Assembly: GCF_000001405.26) which contains 182,709 entries. This is a database for annotated long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), and mRNA uncoding regions. For unbiased analysis, the HaltORF database was used in combination with UniprotKB which contains the RefProts for a total of a bit more than 203012 entries. Additional online databases such as "Ensembl" (https://www.ensembl.org) and "ref Seq" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/refseq) were also used to trace back the origin of the identified AltProts after HaltORF data interrogation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alternative proteins, Cell reprogramming, Cross-linking mass spectrometry, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Laboratory PRISM INSERM U1192 University of Lille, France
Laboratoire PRISM INSERM U1192

### Submitter
Tristan Cardon

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
Laboratory PRISM INSERM U1192 University of Lille, France


