### Accession
PXD036432

### Title
TISSUE AND URINARY PROTEOMIC ANALYSIS OF KIDNEYS UNDERGOING SHORT PERIOD OF NORMOTHERMIC MACHINE PERFUSION.

### Description
To identify the main biological effects of the normothermic machine perfusion (NMP) in marginal kidneys, we measured, by mass spectrometry analysis, changes in the proteomic profile of kidney tissues and urines of eight organs reconditioned for 120 minutes (by a Kidney Assist device). Biopsy specimens were taken at the time of the pre-implantation histological evaluation (T-1), at the start of back table preparation (T0), and after 60 (T60) and 120(T120) minutes. Urine were collected at T0, T30, T60 and T120. Several bioinformatics/statistical algorithms (including SVM and PLS-DA) were used to select the most discriminative proteins. Bioinformatics analysis showed that, during NMP, a large number of proteins resulted down- or up-regulated in the kidneys (169 and 196, respectively). SVM and PLS-DA analysis restricted this panel to 50 top-discriminative proteins. Among these, 11 proteins resulted similarly up-regulated(LXN, ETFB, NUDT3, CYCS and UQCRC1)and down-regulated after NMP treatment (CFHR3, C1S, CFI, KNG1, SERPINC1, F9)in urine.Functional analysis, then, revealed that the most up-regulated proteins were involved in the oxidative phosphorylation system (OXPHOS) and ATPsynthesis, while thoseunder-expressed were implicated in the complement and coagulation cascade.Our proteomic analysis demonstrated that NMP (also for a brief period of time) may induce substantial metabolic and biochemical changes in marginal organs. This encourages use of this technology in clinic.

### Sample Protocol
100 ul of pseudo urine were denatured,  reduced and alkylated in 100 ul iST-LYSE Buffer (PreOmics) for 10 min at 95°C, 1000 rpm. Bioptic kidneys were washed three times with PBS and then transferred to 2 ml clean tubes to add 500 ul Guanidine lysis buffer (6M GdmCl, 10mM TCEP, 40mM CAA, 100mM Tris pH 8), in presence of protease and phosphatase inhibitors, and perform homogenization with a TissueLyser II (QIAGEN), four cycles of four minutes. The homogenized samples were lysed at 95°C for 10 min, 1000 rpm and sonicated with an Ultrasonic Processor UP200St (Hielscher), 3 cicles of 30 sec. The proteins amounts of lysates were measured by Tryptophan method [1]. Protein of both pseudo urine and bioptic kidneys were isolated by PAC method [2]. Briefly, proteins aggregation was induced by addition of 70% ACN  and 200 ug of magnetic beads were added to capture aggregated proteins. Magnetic beads were retained by magnet and the supernatant was removed. Beads were washed one time with 1 ml acetonitrile, followed by one wash with 1 ml 70% ethanol and one wash with 1 ml isopropanol. Washed beads were resuspended in 100 ul TRIS 25 mM pH 8 and captured proteins were digested O.N. at 37°C with Trypsin and LysC at a 1:50 and 1:100 ratio of enzyme to sample protein mg respectively. Obtained peptides were desalted in Stage-Tips (normalization to 7 ug peptides for pseudo urine and to 14 ug peptides for bioptic kidneys) and analyzed  by a nano-UHPLC-MS/MS system using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer with FAIMS Pro Interface (Thermo Scientific Instrument).

### Data Protocol
For urines Raw data were processed with MaxQuant software [3]  version 2.0.3.0. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 was set for the identification of proteins, peptides and PSM (peptide-spectrum match). For peptide identification a minimum length of 7 amino acids was required. Andromeda engine, incorporated into MaxQuant software, was used to search MS/MS spectra against Uniprot human database (release UP000005640_9606 July 2021). In the processing the Acetyl (Protein N-Term), Oxidation (M) and Deamidation (NQ) were selected as variable modifications and the fixed modification was Carbamidomethyl (C). Quantification intensities were calculated by the default fast MaxLFQ algorithm with the activated option ‘match between runs’. Raw data processed by MaxQuant were further processed by IceR [4] with default settings, to reduce the number of missing values. For kidney tissues Raw data were processed by FragPipe computational platform (version 17.1) with MSFragger (version 3.4) [5] using the DIA_SpecLib_Quant workflow [6], in which FragPipe with MSFragger are used to build spectral libraries and DIA-NN (version 1.8) is used for DIA quantification. The default setting has been set, except RT Lowess fraction modified to 0.01 for Spectral library generation. Protein sequence database H. sapiens (UP000005640) from UniProt (reviewed sequences only; downloaded on July 13, 2021) and common contaminant proteins, containing in total 20421 sequences  were used.

### Publication Abstract
Renal normothermic machine perfusion (NMP) is an organ preservation method based on the circulation of a warm (35-37&#xa0;&#xb0;C) perfusion solution through the renal vasculature to deliver oxygen and nutrients. However, its biological effects on marginal kidneys are unclear. We therefore used mass spectrometry to determine the proteomic profile of kidney tissue and urine from eight organs reconditioned for 120&#xa0;min using a Kidney Assist device. Biopsies were taken during the pre-implantation histological evaluation (T-1), at the start of back table preparation (T0), and after 60 and 120&#xa0;min of perfusion (T60, T120). Urine&#xa0;samples were collected at T0 (urine produced in the first 15&#xa0;min after the beginning of normothermic reperfusion), T30, T60 and T120. Multiple algorithms, support vector machine learning and partial least squares discriminant analysis were used to select the most discriminative proteins during NMP. Statistical analysis revealed the upregulation of 169 proteins and the downregulation of 196 during NMP. Machine learning algorithms identified the top 50 most discriminative proteins, five of which were concomitantly upregulated (LXN, ETFB, NUDT3, CYCS and UQCRC1) and six downregulated (CFHR3, C1S, CFI, KNG1, SERPINC1 and F9) in the kidney and urine after NMP. Latexin (LXN), an endogenous carboxypeptidase inhibitor, resulted the most-upregulated protein at T120, and this result was confirmed by ELISA. In addition, functional analysis revealed that the most strongly upregulated proteins were involved in the oxidative phosphorylation system and ATP synthesis, whereas the downregulated proteins represented the complement system and coagulation cascade. Our proteomic analysis demonstrated that even brief periods of NMP induce remarkable metabolic and biochemical changes in marginal organs, which supports the use of this promising technique in the clinic.

### Keywords
Urines, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Kidney, Normothermic machine perfusion

### Affiliations
IRCCS Istituto G Gaslini
IRCCS Gaslini

### Submitter
Martina Bartolucci

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
IRCCS Istituto G Gaslini


