### Accession
PXD005219

### Title
Longitudinal study of the small urinary extracellular vesicle proteome during living donor kidney transplantation

### Description
Urine was obtained from healthy kidney donors, from transplanted kidneys intrasurgery, at postoperative day 1 and at later timepoints. Exosomes were isolated and measured using nLC-MS/MS. For details, see the accompanying manuscript.

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes were isolated using ultracentrifugation, and exosomes were washed and solubilized in a buffer containing 8M urea. Proteins were digested over night and peptides were cleaned up using stage tips.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with MaxQuant as described in the accompanying paper.

### Publication Abstract
Kidney transplantation is the preferred renal replacement therapy available. Yet, long-term transplant survival is unsatisfactory, partially due to insufficient possibilities of longitudinal monitoring and understanding of the biological processes after transplantation. Small urinary extracellular vesicles (suEVs) - as a non-invasive source of information - were collected from 22 living donors and recipients. Unbiased proteomic analysis revealed temporal patterns of suEV protein signature and cellular processes involved in both early response and longer-term graft adaptation. Complement activation was among the most dynamically regulated components. This unique atlas of the suEV proteome is provided through an online repository allowing dynamic interrogation by the user. Additionally, a correlative analysis identified putative prognostic markers of future allograft function. One of these markers - phosphoenol pyruvate carboxykinase (PCK2) - could be confirmed using targeted MS in an independent validation cohort of 22 additional patients. This study sheds light on the impact of kidney transplantation on urinary extracellular vesicle content and allows the first deduction of early molecular processes in transplant biology. Beyond that our data highlight the potential of suEVs as a source of biomarkers in this setting.

### Keywords
Urine, Human, Transplantation, Exosomes, Kidney

### Affiliations
Kidney research center cologne
University Hospital Cologne

### Submitter
Markus Rinschen

### Lab Head
Dr Roman-Ulrich Mueller
University Hospital Cologne


