### Accession
PXD033847

### Title
Loss of ERG in  human lung endothelial cells leads to release of pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrotic factors.

### Description
: Although vascular dysfunction is a hallmark of chronic aging-associated diseases, including idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, the role of the pulmonary vasculature to lung repair versus lung fibrosis is not fully understood. We identified the endothelial transcription factor ETS-related gene (ERG) as an orchestrator of vascular homeostasis and repair following lung injury. To evaluate whether loss of endothelial ERG influences the activation of neighboring naïve lung fibroblasts, we collected the conditioned media (CM) generated by control- and ERG-silenced human lung endothelial cells (ECs) and we applied them to normal human lung fibroblasts. We found that CM from ERG-silenced human lung ECs strongly promoted human lung fibroblast activation and enhanced the effect of the fibrogenic mediator TGF. In support of these results, analysis of CM using nanoscale liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (nano LC-MS/MS) revealed increased secretion of numerous pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrogenic mediators by ERG-silenced human lung ECs in comparison to control-silenced human lung ECs.

### Sample Protocol
~10 ml of conditioned media was concentrated to 200 ul using a 4 ml Amicon Ultrafree 3K cut off centrifugal device (Millipore, Burlington MA), buffer exchanged into 20mM Hepes buffer, pH 8, evaporated almost to dryness in a speed vac, and solubilized in 30 ul of 8M urea/20mM HEPES buffer, pH 8. After reduction and alkylation with 5mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (1h at ambient temperature) and 10mM iodoacetamide (15 min at ambient temperature in the dark, the samples were diluted 4x to 2M urea. Samples were digested with trypsin (sequencing grade, Fisher ProMega, Madison, WI) at a 1:20 ratio of enzyme to protein for 16h at 37°C. After digest, Glygen TopTip C18 spin tips (Glygen Corp, Columbia, MD) were used according to manufacturer’s directions to desalt the peptide digests. Samples were dried down then reconstituted in 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 8.5, split into duplicates and labeled with 100ug of the ThermoScientific TMTsixplex isobaric reagents 127 and 129 for sample ERG siRNA and 128 and 130 for sample control siRNA. The labeling reaction went for 60minutes at room temperature, followed with quenching using 5ul 5% hydroxylamine. A small aliquot from each reagent reaction is pooled to check for labeling efficiency and to balance reporter ion channel volumes for sample pooling.  The excess TMT reagents are removed from the pooled mixture using Glygen C18 spin tips and the mass spectrometry data is acquired using a ThermoScientific Orbitrap Eclipse Tridbrid mass spectrometer coupled to a Thermo Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system. The digest is loaded onto a PepMap 100um x 2cm trap column and chromatography is performed using 0.2 % formic acid in both the A solvent (98%water/2%acetonitrile) and B solvent (80% acetonitrile/10% isopropanol/10% water), with a 3%B to 40%B gradient over 1200 minutes at 300 nl/min through a ThermoScientific 75um x 50cm EasySpray column.  The Eclipse mass spectrometer acquisition parameters were set for a scan range of 375-1700 m/z at 120K resolution,  200% AGC and 50ms max IT for the MS1 scans and a 3 second cycle time with MS2 scans at 60K resolution,   200% AGC target, 118ms for maxIT, 0.7 m/z for the isolation width, and the NCE set at 34.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was searched against the Swissprot human database (release 2020_03, 20304 entries) using Sequest HT in Proteome Discover (ver2.5. ThermoScientific)   with the parameter settings at 10ppm for the precursor mass tolerance, 0.6 Da for the fragment mass tolerance and full trypsin specificity.  Dynamic modifications allowed were oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-terminus, with static modifications TMT mass +229.163 set for peptide N-terminus and lysine and carbamidomethyl mass for cysteine.  Confident peptide and protein identifications are filtered at 1% FDR.    TMT reporter ion quantitation uses PSMs with a co-isolation threshold less than 50% with an average reporter s/n threshold of at least 10.  The quan abundances are normalized to the same total peptide amount per channer and scaled so that the average abundance per protein and peptide is 100.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lung, Fibrosis, Erg, Vasculature

### Affiliations
Mayo Clinic, Assistant Professor of Physiology
Mayo Clinic

### Submitter
Benjamin Madden

### Lab Head
Dr Nunzia Caporarello
Mayo Clinic, Assistant Professor of Physiology


