### Accession
PXD045513

### Title
Ola1p trafficking indicates an interaction network between mitochondria, Lipid droplets and stress granules in times of stress

### Description
Protein aggregates arise naturally under normal physiological conditions, but their formation is accelerated by age or stress-induced protein misfolding. One of the proteins that accumulate upon stress in yeast cells is Ola1p, know as the “super aggregator” Using a proximity labelling approach based upon the biotin ligase TurboID we were able to show that these Ola1p harbouring aggregates are, in fact, stress granules that interact with both mitochondria and LDs.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cells expressing OLA1-TurboID (a biotin ligase) were grown overnight and diluted to OD600 of 0.1. After 18-24h growth in YPD or SC-biotin media cells were pelleted and resuspended in 50ml YPD. Biotin was added to achieve a final concentration of 50 μM. Cells were then stressed for a defined time (either 10 or 20 min) at 46 °C. After this heat shock cells were centrifuged (3500 rpm for 5 min at 4 °C) and washed twice with dH2O. Pellets were lysed in RIPA buffer using glass beads. The bead beater was set to 5m/s and cells were shaken six times for 30 s with a 30 s rest on ice in between. The cell lysate was cleared by a centrifugation step (800 rpm for 5min at 4 °C). The supernatant was carefully transferred and recentrifuged for 10min at 14.000 rpm. Protein concentration was measured using a BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, USA). For the pulldown assay, 300 μl streptavidin magnetic beads (NEB, Ipswich, USA) were washed twice with RIPA buffer and then incubated with 6 mg protein at 4 °C on a rotary shaker overnight. Beads were then washed 2x with RIPA buffer, 1x with 1M KCl, 1x with 0.1 M Na2CO3, 1x with 2 M urea and 2x with TRIS-HCl pH 8.0. The beads were suspended in 100 μl Extraction Buffer 2 (from the ProteoExtract All-in-One Trypsin Digestion Kit, Merck Millipore, Billerica, USA) and 100 μl 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Disulfide bridges were reduced with DTT for 20 minutes at 60°C and alkylated with iodoacetamide for 1 hour at room temperature

### Data Protocol
Data acquired on the Q-Exactive LC-MS/MS system were analyzed with PEAKS Studio 10.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions). Database: UniProt/Yeast-reference, Search parameters: trypsin/semispecific, variable modifications: carbamidomethylation(C), oxidation(M), deamidation(NQ), FDR 0.1% corresponding to -10lgP 23.5. Label free quantification with PEAKS Studio.

### Publication Abstract
Protein aggregates arise naturally under normal physiological conditions, but their formation is accelerated by age or stress-induced protein misfolding. When the stressful event dissolves, these aggregates are removed by mechanisms, such as aggrephagy, chaperone-mediated autophagy, refolding attempts, or the proteasome. It was recently shown that mitochondria in yeast cells may support these primarily cytosolic processes. Protein aggregates attach to mitochondria, and misfolded proteins are transported into the matrix and degraded by mitochondria-specific proteases. Using a proximity labeling method and colocalization with an established stress granule (SG) marker, we were able to show that these mitochondria-localized aggregates that harbor the "super aggregator" Ola1p are, in fact, SGs. Our in&#xa0;vivo and in&#xa0;vitro studies have revealed that Ola1p can be transferred from mitochondria to lipid droplets (LDs). This "mitochondria to LD" aggregate transfer dampens proteotoxic effects. The LD-based protein aggregate removal system gains importance when other proteolytic systems fail. Furthermore, we were able to show that the distribution of SGs is drastically altered in LD-deficient yeast cells, demonstrating that LDs play a role in the SG life cycle.

### Keywords
Protein detoxification; protein aggregation; protein shuttling; stress response: lipid droplets; mitochondria; proximity labelling; turboid

### Affiliations
University of Salzburg
University of Salzburg, Department of Biosciences and Medical Biology, Salzburg, Austria

### Submitter
Peter Briza

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Briza
University of Salzburg, Department of Biosciences and Medical Biology, Salzburg, Austria


