### Accession
PXD015495

### Title
Profiling of retinaldehyde dehydrogenases in cancer cells

### Description
Retinaldehyde dehydrogenases convert retinal into all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), thereby regulating cell differentiation and cancer stem cell proliferation. Chemical tools and methods are valuable commodities to study aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity in human cells. Here, we describe the design, synthesis and application of LEI-945, a first-in-class activity-based probe modeled on retinal that reports on individual ALDHs in cancer cells. Comparative chemical proteomics with LEI-945 explained the ability of various breast cancer cell lines to produce ATRA via retinaldehyde dehydrogenases isozymes, whereas the ALDEFLUORTM assay could not. Competitive chemical proteomics using LEI-945 revealed that the ALDH inhibitor NCT-505 inhibited both ALDH1A1 and ALDH1A3 in MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cells inducing a cell cycle arrest in the G1 phase as well as cell death through necrosis. Our results show that LEI-945 holds promise to guide the discovery of ALDH-based therapeutics

### Sample Protocol
Cells were treated in-situ, harvested, lysed and adjusted to 1 mg/mL protein concentration as described above. 250 µL was taken from each sample and to this 25 µL freshly prepared “click” mixture containing 1 mM CuSO 4 (2.5 µL/sample, 100 mM in H 2 O), 5 mM NaAsc (1.25 µL/sample, 1M in H 2 O), 0.4 mM THPTA (1 µL/sample, 100 mM in DMSO), 40 µM biotin-N 3 (2.5 µL/sample, 4 mM in DMSO) and MilliQ (17.75 µL/sample) was added. Samples were incubated for 1 hour at 37°C while shaking (300 rpm). Excess click reagents were then removed by chloroform/methanol precipitation followed by another wash with methanol. Precipitated proteomes were then resuspended in urea buffer (250 µL, 6M urea and 25 mM ammonium bicabornate), DTT (2.5 µL, 1M) was added and the mixture was then incubated for 15 min at 65°C while shaking (600 rpm). The samples were then allowed to cool down to RT and then alkylated by addition of iodoacetamide (20 µL, 0.5M) for 30 minutes at RT in the dark. Addition of SDS (70 µL, 10% (v/v)) was followed by heating at 65°C for 5 minutes. For each sample 50 µL 50% slurry of Avidin-Agarose from egg white (Sigma-Aldrich) was washed three times with PBS and transferred in PBS (1 mL) to a 15 mL tube. To this another 2 mL of PBS was added followed by the corresponding proteome sample. The beads were incubated with the proteome for 2 hours at room temperature using an overhead shaker. The beads were then isolated by centrifugation (2 min, 2500g), washed with SDS in PBS (0.5% (w/v)) and washed three times with PBS. The beads were then transferred to low-binding Eppendorf tubes and proteins were digested overnight at 37°C and 950 rpm in 250 µL digestion buffer (100 mM Tris, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM CaCl 2 , 2% acetonitrile and 0.5 µg sequencing grade trypsin (Promega)). Digestion was stopped by addition of formic acid (12.5 µL) and the beads filtered off by centrifugation (2 min, 600g) using a Bio-Spin column (Bio-Rad). Samples were then desalted using stage tips, collected in low-binding Eppendorf tubes, concentrated using a SpeedVac (Eppendorf) and stored at -20°C until reconstitution before measurement 12 . All samples were prepared in at least three biological replicates. Samples were reconstituted in LC-MS sample solution (50 µL, 3% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid/20 fmol/µL enolase). Samples were then analysed using a NanoACQUITY UPLC System (Waters) coupled to a SYNAPT G2-Si high-definition mass spectrometer (Waters) as previously described 11,13 . Of each sample 5 µL was loaded on a nanoEASE TM M/Z Symmetry C18 trap column (particles 5 µm, 100 Å , 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) with 0.1% formic acid and separated on an nanoEASE TM M/Z HSS C18 T3 analytical column (particles 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters) heated at 80°C. A multistep gradient running from 5-40% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid during a 70 minute method at 300 nL/min was used to achieve peptide separation. Survey scans (m/z 50-2000 Da) were acquired in the Synapt with a scan time of 0.6 seconds in positive, resolution mode. The collision energy is set to 4 V in the trap cell for low-energy MS mode. For the elevated energy scan, the transfer cell collision energy is ramped using drift-time specific collision energies. The lock mass is sampled every 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed with ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS, v3.0.3, Waters). The MS E identification was also performed with PLGS using the human proteome from Uniprot (uniprot-homo-sapiens-trypsin-reviewed-2016-08-29.fasta). The following parameter settings were used: low energy treshold 150 counts, elevated energy treshold 30, peptide and protein FDR 1%, enzyme specficity trypsin, max missed cleavages max 2, variable modification methionine oxidation, fixed modiciation carbamidomethylation cysteine, fragments/peptide 2, fragments/protein 5, peptides/protein 1 and number of peptides to measure per protein 3. For label-free quantification ISOQuant (v1.5) was used 14,15 . Data were filtered to retain only proteins with two or more reported peptides and quantified in at least 3 replicates of the positive control (probe treated). Proteins were designated as significantly enriched by the probe when they showed 2-fold enrichment in quantification value when comparing negative control (vehicle treated) with positive control (probe treated) samples, probability as determined by a Student’s t-test (p &lt; 0.05) and Benjamini-Hochberg correction with an FDR of 10%.

### Publication Abstract
Retinaldehyde dehydrogenases belong to a superfamily of enzymes that regulate cell differentiation and are responsible for detoxification of anticancer drugs. Chemical tools and methods are of great utility to visualize and quantify aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity in health and disease. Here, we present the discovery of a first-in-class chemical probe based on retinal, the endogenous substrate of retinal ALDHs. We unveil the utility of this probe in quantitating ALDH isozyme activity in a panel of cancer cells via both fluorescence and chemical proteomic approaches. We demonstrate that our probe is superior to the widely used ALDEFLUOR assay to explain the ability of breast cancer (stem) cells to produce <i>all-trans</i> retinoic acid. Furthermore, our probe revealed the cellular selectivity profile of an advanced ALDH1A1 inhibitor, thereby prompting us to investigate the nature of its cytotoxicity. Our results showcase the application of substrate-based probes in interrogating pathologically relevant enzyme activities. They also highlight the general power of chemical proteomics in driving the discovery of new biological insights and its utility to guide drug discovery efforts.

### Keywords
Human, Aldehyde dehydrogenases, Activity-based protein profiling, Cancer

### Affiliations
Leiden Institute for Chemistry
Molecular Physiology, Leiden Institute for Chemistry, Leiden University, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Bogdan Florea

### Lab Head
Dr Mario van der Stelt, PhD
Molecular Physiology, Leiden Institute for Chemistry, Leiden University, The Netherlands


