### Accession
PXD030951

### Title
Plasma Proteomic Changes of Atherosclerosis After Exercise in ApoE knockout Mice

### Description
Atherosclerosis is the preliminary cause of coronary artery disease, one of the diseases that ac-count for the largest number of fatal mortalities. Physical activity is an effective strategy to restrain atherosclerosis from deterioration. Evidence indicated that the changes of proteomic profile is highly associated with the atherosclerosis development, but the mechanism behind the exercise for atherosclerosis amelioration has not yet been investigated from the proteomics perspective. Hence, the proteomic profiles could further elucidate the systematic effects of exercise interven-tion on ApoE knockout atherosclerotic model and high fat diet intervention. In current study, Apoeem1Narl/Narl mice were randomly allocated into a normal diet (ND), western diet (WD) and WD with 12 weeks exercise intervention (WD EX) groups. The plasm proteome between WD and WD EX demonstrate the significant difference, and ten major pathways, including cardiovascular disease (CVD)–hematological disease, cellular compromise–inflammatory response, protein synthesis, connective tissue disorders, cellular movement–immune cell tracking, inflammatory response, etc., were generated by the IPA analysis. The fourteen proteins (PROS, PROZ, C2, F5, C5, SERPINA 10, FGB, FGG, CFB, F12, CRP, CFHR1, HABP2, and PPIA) critically involved in CVD–hematological disease pathway showed significant difference among groups. The PROS, F5, C5, FGG, and CFB levels associated with thrombosis and atherosclerosis induced by WD were significantly decreased by exercise intervention in WD EX. Furthermore, the F5 and FGG were well-demonstrated the important roles for thrombosis of atherosclerotic pathogenesis but the complement factor C5 in the development of atherosclerosis is not fully understood. In current study, the exercise could significantly alleviate the significantly elevated C5 and inflammation induced by WD group in accordance to amelioration of atherosclerosis. Therefore, exercise could mitigate chemotaxis through the modulation of the C5 level and innate immunity, thereby alle-viating the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis in western-diet induced obese mice.

### Sample Protocol
For the proteomic analysis, plasma was digested with a SMART Digestion Trypsin Kit (P/N60109-101, Thermo Fisher, Bedford, MA, USA). Supernatant was denatured with dithiothreitol (DTT) at 58°C for 30 min. Protein lysate was alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature for 30 min. The peptide pool was then subjected to a desalting and purification using ZIPTIP C18 SPE pipette tips (Millipore Ziptips Micro-C18, P/NZ720003, Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) and SOLA SPE Plates (Thermo Fisher, Bedford, MA, USA), respectively. Prior to analysis, the extracted tryp-tic peptides were diluted with 0.1% formic acid for subsequent analysis using an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Waltham, MA, USA). The mass spectrometer was inline and coupled with a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Wa-ters, Milford, MA, USA), equipped with a C18 trap column (5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm, Symmetry C18, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and a BEH130 C18 separation column (1.7 μm, 100 μm × 100 mm, Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The gradient elution of peptides in nanoLC was from 3% to 40% acetonitrile (ACN) for 168 min, 40% to 95% ACN for 2 min, and 95% ACN for 10 min, all in 0.1% aqueous solution of formic acid at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min. The eluted peptides were ionized with a spray voltage of 2.33 kV and introduced into the LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. Mass spectrometry was conducted in the positive ion mode and on the basis of a data-dependent acquisition method (isolation width: 1.5 Da). Peptide mass spectrometry data were obtained using a full mass spectrometer survey scan (m/z range of 350–1600) with 30,000 resolution at m/z 400. According to the data-dependent acquisition method, the top 15 most inten-sively charged peptide ions were scanned. Collision-induced dissociation (CID) of the selected precursor peptide ions was stimulated with helium.

### Data Protocol
The UniProt mouse pro-tein database (http://www.uniprot.org/) was used to define the acquired proteomic raw data files with PEAKS Studio 7.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada). A protein was identified when at least one unique peptide was matched and quanti-fied based on a label-free quantitative analysis. Spectrum counts were normalized with the total identified spectra per biological sample and the proteins. One-way analyses of variance followed by the Duncan post hoc test were performed using SAS version 9.4 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA) to determine the significance of plasma peptide mass spectra. State-of-the-art Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, Ingenuity Systems Inc., Redwood City, CA, USA) software application was used to reveal the global network functions of all proteins differentially expressed. Accession numbers and expression fold changes of the proteins were uploaded into the IPA software application for in-teraction network and biological function grouping for different protein expressions. Fisher's exact test was used to calculate the values at which p was significant.

### Publication Abstract
Atherosclerosis is the preliminary cause of coronary artery disease, one of the diseases that account for the largest number of fatal mortalities. Physical activity is an effective strategy to restrain atherosclerosis from deterioration. Evidence indicated that changes in the proteomic profile are highly associated with atherosclerosis development, but the mechanism behind exercise for atherosclerosis amelioration has not yet been investigated from a proteomics perspective. Hence, the proteomic profiles could further elucidate the systematic effects of exercise intervention on ApoE knockout atherosclerotic model and high-fat-diet intervention. In the current study, Apoe<sup>em1Narl</sup>/Narl mice were randomly allocated into a normal diet (ND), Western diet (WD), and WD with 12-week exercise intervention (WD EX) groups. The plasma proteome between WD and WD EX groups demonstrate the significant difference, and ten major pathways, including cardiovascular disease (CVD)-hematological disease, inflammatory disease, infectious diseases, inflammatory response, cell-to-cell signaling and interaction, connective tissue disorders_inflammatory disease, metabolic disease_organismal injury and abnormalities, cell-to-cell signaling and interaction, connective tissue disorders_inflammatory disease, and endocrine system disorders_gastrointestinal disease, etc., were generated by the IPA analysis. The 15 proteins (MYOCD, PROS1, C2, SERPINA10, CRP, F5, C5, CFB, FGG, CFH, F12, PRDX2, PROZ, PPIA, and HABP2) critically involved in CVD-hematological disease pathway showed significant difference between WD and WD EX groups. In current study, exercise could significantly alleviate the significantly elevated C5 and inflammation induced by the WD group in accordance with amelioration of atherosclerosis. Therefore, exercise could mitigate chemotaxis through the modulation of the C5 level and innate immunity, thereby alleviating the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis in Western-diet-induced obese mice.

### Keywords
Atherosclerosis; complement factor c5; exercise; proteomic changes; chemotaxis

### Affiliations
Metabolomics-Proteomics Research Center, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei 11221, Taiwan
Proteomics Research Center,National Yang-Ming University

### Submitter
Chen-Chung Liao

### Lab Head
Dr Chen-Chung Liao
Metabolomics-Proteomics Research Center, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei 11221, Taiwan


