### Accession
PXD045994

### Title
The marine diterpenes pseudopteroxazole (Ptx) and pseudopterosin G (PsG) target the integrity of the gram-positive cell wall

### Description
Pseudopteroxazole (Ptx) and the pseudopterosins are marine natural products with promising antibacterial potential. While Ptx has attracted interest for its anti-mycobacterial activity, pseudopterosins are active against several clinically relevant pathogens. Both compound classes exhibit low cytotoxicity and accessibility to targeted synthesis, yet their antibacterial mechanisms remain elusive. In this study, we investigated the modes of action of Ptx and pseudopterosin G (PsG) in Bacillus subtilis employing an unbiased approach that combines gel-based proteomics with a mathematical similarity analysis of response profiles. Proteomic responses to sublethal concentrations of Ptx and PsG were compared to a library of antibiotic stress response profiles revealing that both induce a stress response characteristic for agents targeting the bacterial cell envelope by interfering with membrane-bound steps of cell wall biosynthesis. Microscopy-based assays confirmed that both compounds compromise the integrity of the bacterial cell wall without disrupting the membrane potential.

### Sample Protocol
Ptx and PsG-response-associated proteins that were at least two-fold upregulated in each of three biological replicates (termed as marker proteins) were cut from non-radioactive gels and prepared for mass spectrometric analysis by tryptic in-gel digest. For protein identification, tryptic digests were analyzed by a nanoACQUITY-UPLC-coupled Synapt G2-S-HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA) equipped with the NanoLockSpray-Source (Waters) and time-of-flight detection. The samples were loaded into a trap column (C18, particle size 5 µm, pore size 100 Å, column dimensions 180 µm x 20 mm), eluted from an analytical column (C18, particle size 1.7 µm, pore size 130 Å, column dimensions: 75 µm x 150 mm), and subjected to mass spectrometry using a linear 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile gradient of 350 µl/min at 40°C: initial, 2% buffer B; 2 min, 5% buffer B; 22 min, 60% buffer B. The spectra were recorded in a mass range of 50 to 1800 m/z with a 0.5 s/scan in positive mode. The following parameters were used for the NanoLockSpray source: capillary voltage 1.5 kV; sampling cone voltage 30 V; source temperature 100°C; desolvation temperature 150°C; cone gas flow, 50 L/h; desolvation gas flow 550 L/h. Leucine enkephalin was used as lock mass analyte and applied to the lock spray channel (lock spray capillary voltage, 2.5 V).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, the ProteinLynxGlobalServer (PLGS) software V3.5.3 (Waters) was used with the following parameters: chromatographic peak width, automatic; MS ToF resolution, automatic; lock mass window, 0.3 Da; low energy threshold, 250 counts; high energy threshold, 100 counts; intensity threshold, 750 counts. A non-redundant version of the B. subtilis 168 database (NCBI Bio Project accession PRJNA56675) containing 4180 protein entries (with added sequences of trypsin and human keratin) was used for protein identification using the following parameters: peptide tolerance, automatic; fragment tolerance, automatic; minimal fragment ion matches per peptide, 2; minimal fragment ion matches per protein, 5; minimal peptide matches per protein, 2; maximum protein mass, 250 kDa; primary digest reagent, trypsin; secondary digest reagent, none; missed cleavages, 1; fixed modifications, carbamidomethyl C; variable modifications, deamidation N and Q, oxidation M; and false positive rate, 4%.

### Publication Abstract
Pseudopteroxazole (Ptx) and the pseudopterosins are marine natural products with promising antibacterial potential. While Ptx has attracted interest for its antimycobacterial activity, pseudopterosins are active against several clinically relevant pathogens. Both compound classes exhibit low cytotoxicity and accessibility to targeted synthesis, yet their antibacterial mechanisms remain elusive. In this study, we investigated the modes of action of Ptx and pseudopterosin&#xa0;G (PsG) in Bacillus subtilis employing an unbiased approach that combines gel-based proteomics with a mathematical similarity analysis of response profiles. Proteomic responses to sublethal concentrations of Ptx and PsG were compared to a library of antibiotic stress response profiles revealing that both induce a stress response characteristic for agents targeting the bacterial cell envelope by interfering with membrane-bound steps of cell wall biosynthesis. Microscopy-based assays confirmed that both compounds compromise the integrity of the bacterial cell wall without disrupting the membrane potential. Furthermore, LC-MS<sup>E</sup> analysis showed that the greater potency of PsG against B.&#xa0;subtilis, reflected in a lower MIC and a more pronounced proteomic response, may be rooted in a more effective association with and penetration of B. subtilis cells. We conclude that Ptx and PsG target the integrity of the gram-positive cell wall.

### Keywords
Pseudopteroxazole, Natural products, Pseudopterosin g, Copr

### Affiliations
Ruhr-University Bochum
Ruhr-Universität Bochum, AG Angewandte Mikrobiologie, Universitätsstraße 150, 44780 Bochum, Raum: ND 06/795, Tel.: +49 234 32 23102

### Submitter
Niklas Janzing

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Bandow
Ruhr-Universität Bochum, AG Angewandte Mikrobiologie, Universitätsstraße 150, 44780 Bochum, Raum: ND 06/795, Tel.: +49 234 32 23102


