### Accession
PXD035212

### Title
Identification of PP1c-PPP1R12A Substrates Using K-BIPS (Kinase-Catalyzed Biotinylation to Identify Phosphatase Substrates)

### Description
Protein phosphatase 1 regulatory subunit 12A (PPP1R12A) interacts with the catalytic subunit of protein phosphatase 1 (PP1c) to form one of the many protein phosphatase 1 complexes, PP1c-PPP1R12A (or myosin phosphatase). In addition to a well-documented role in muscle contraction, the PP1c-PPP1R12A complex is associated with cytoskeleton organization, cell migration, adhesion, cell division, and insulin signaling. Despite the variety of biological functions, only a few substrates of the PP1c-PPP1R12A complex are characterized, which limits a full understanding of PP1c-PPP1R12A activities. Here, the chemoproteomics method K-BIPS (Kinase-catalyzed Biotinylation to Identify Phosphatase Substrates) was used to identify substrates of the PP1c-PPP1R12A complex in L6 skeletal muscle cells. K-BIPS enriched 136 candidate substrates with 14 high confidence hits. Two high confidence hits, AKT1 kinase and COPS4 signalosome proteins, were studied as novel PP1c-PPP1R12A substrates. Interestingly, both AKT1 and COPS4 were previously documented to regulate PP1c-PPP1R12A phosphatase activity. Therefore, the data suggest that PP1c-PPP1R12A influences its own phosphatase activity through substrate-dependent feedback mechanisms

### Sample Protocol
L6 muscle cells (20 X 106) stably transduced with lentivirus encoding doxycycline (Dox)-inducible shRNA targeting PPP1R12A23 were grown in DMEM media (45 mL, ThermoFisher) containing 10% FBS (fetal bovine serum, ThermoFisher) and 1X antimycotic-antibiotic solution (ThermoFisher) at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 environment. At ~80% confluency, cells were treated either with doxycycline (Dox, 45 µL, 100 µg/mL dissolved in DMEM media without FBS and antibiotic, Sigma Aldrich, D9891) or vehicle (45 µL, DMEM media without FBS and antibiotic). Two days later, the media was removed and fresh media containing Dox (45 µL, 100 µg/mL dissolved in the same DMEM media without FBS and antibiotic) or vehicle (45 µL, DMEM media without FBS and antibiotic) was added. After 16 additional hours, cells were serum-starved with FBS-free DMEM with or with Dox, as described above, containing 0.1% BSA (Bovine serum albumin, GenDEPOT, catalog number A0100-010) at 37 °C for 4 hours. Serum-starved cells were harvested by adding trypsin-EDTA (0.25%, 12 mL, ThermoFisher) after removing media and washing with DPBS (Dulbecco's Phosphate Buffered Saline, 10 mL, ThermoFisher). The released cells were collected by centrifugation at 1000 rpm at 4°C for 5 minutes. The collected cell pellet was washed once with cold DPBS (2 mL) and lysed by incubation with lysis buffer (150-300 µL, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton X-100 and 10% glycerol) at 4 °C for 20 minutes with gentle rocking. The cell debris was removed by spinning at 13,200 rpm for 20 minutes at 4°C. Protein concentration in the soluble fraction was determined by Bradford assay (Biorad). The lysates were either used immediately or stored at -80 °C for future use.   Assessment of PPP1R12A knockdown and GADD34 expression L6 lysates (160 µg total protein for the PPP1R12A knockdown studies; 100 µg total protein for the GADD34 expression studies) from Dox-treated and untreated cells were separated by a 10% SDS-PAGE after boiling at 95 °C for 1 min in Laemmli sample buffer (60 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 2% SDS, 10% glycerol, 0.0005% bromophenol blue, and 2% beta-mercaptoethanol). Proteins were transferred onto a membrane (Millipore, Immobilon P) and the levels of PPP1R12A and GADD34 were assessed by western blotting using primary antibodies to PPP1R12A (Santa Cruz Biotechnology: sc-25618) and GADD34 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology: sc-46661). Total proteins were visualized by Sypro®Ruby gel staining (Invitrogen™) using a Typhoon imager (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). K-BIPS experiment L6 lysates (600 µg total protein) with and without Dox treatment were biotin labeled by incubation with ATP-biotin (2 mM) for 2 hours at 31 °C in a final volume of 32 µL. After removing a portion of lysates (100 µg) for future analysis as the input, the rest of the lysates were filtered using centrifugal filter columns (Millipore, 3 kDa cutoff) to remove the remaining ATP-biotin and cellular biotin. Streptavidin resin (250 µL, Genscript) was washed three times with binding buffer (200-250 µL; 0.1 M phosphate pH 7.2, 0.15 M NaCl). Samples were incubated with the washed streptavidin resin for 1 hour at room temperature with rotation in spin columns (ThermoFisher). The flow-through was collected by centrifugation at 2300 rpm at room temperature for 1 minute. Streptavidin beads were then washed ten times with binding buffer (200-250 µL) and four times with water (200-250 µL). The final wash was saved to be later analyzed. Bound proteins were eluted by boiling the beads in 2% SDS in water (250 µL) for 8 minutes. The eluted protein sample was dried by lyophilization. The dried eluate was resuspended in water (~ 30 µL). The input, flow-through, last wash, and the eluate were run on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel after boiling at 95 °C for 1 min in Laemmli sample buffer. Total proteins were visualized by SYPRO®Ruby stain (Invitrogen).

### Data Protocol
The proteins in eluate lanes were in-gel digested, as previously described.30 Digested peptides were analyzed on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo) after being separated by an EASY nLC-1000 UHPLC system (Thermo) under acidic conditions (0.1% formic acid). MS1 profiling used a 375-1600 m/z range at a resolution of 70,000. MS2 fragmentation was achieved with higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) of the top 15 ions using a 1.6 m/z window and normalized collision energy of 29. Dynamic exclusion was used (15 s). MS Data Analysis  MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8)31, 32 was used with a rat database downloaded from Uniprot.  Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. The iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine was defined as a fixed modification. Searches included 2 missed tryptic cleavages. Mass tolerances for parent ions were 20 ppm for the first search, 4.5 ppm for the second search, and 20 ppm for fragment ions. Minimum protein and peptide identification probabilities were used at ≤ 1% false discovery rate (FDR) as determined by a reversed database search. All other parameters were default settings (Table S1). To generate a K-BIPS hit list of PP1c-PPP1R12A candidate substrates, proteins that showed at least 1.1-fold enrichment in untreated (PPP1R12A present) compared to dox-treated (PPP1R12A knockdown) samples in all three biological replicates were identified (Table S2). To create a high confidence list of substrate hits, the student’s paired t-test with a two-tailed distribution was used to identify candidate substrates showing a p-value < 0.05, in addition to a 1.1-fold enrichment in all three biological replicates (Table 1 and S3).  Protein classifications (cellular compartment, biological process, and molecular function) were analyzed using DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.8 software (https://david.ncifcrf.gov),33, 34 with the data plotted in Microsoft Excel (Figure 2). Abundance analysis was performed using the PAXdb database (pax-db.org) and the integrated Rattus Norvegicus database,35 with the data plotted in Microsoft Excel (Figure S3). The known physical protein–protein interactions among the hit proteins in human cells were mapped using the GeneMANIA 3.4.0 application in Cytoscape 3.3.0.36-39 Analysis of common protein hits compared to prior trapping was performed using Canva (www.canva.com/graphs/venn-diagrams/).

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphatase 1 regulatory subunit 12A (PPP1R12A) interacts with the catalytic subunit of protein phosphatase 1 (PP1c) to form the myosin phosphatase complex. In addition to a well-documented role in muscle contraction, the PP1c-PPP1R12A complex is associated with cytoskeleton organization, cell migration and adhesion, and insulin signaling. Despite the variety of biological functions, only a few substrates of the PP1c-PPP1R12A complex are characterized, which limit a full understanding of PP1c-PPP1R12A activities in muscle contraction and cytoskeleton regulation. Here, the chemoproteomics method Kinase-catalyzed Biotinylation to Identify Phosphatase Substrates (K-BIPS) was used to identify substrates of the PP1c-PPP1R12A complex in L6 skeletal muscle cells. K-BIPS enriched 136 candidate substrates with 14 high confidence hits. One high confidence hit, AKT1 kinase, was validated as a novel PP1c-PPP1R12A substrate. Given the previously documented role of AKT1 in PPP1R12A phosphorylation and cytoskeleton organization, the data suggest that PP1c-PPP1R12A regulates its own phosphatase activity through an AKT1-dependent feedback mechanism to influence cytoskeletal arrangement in muscle cells.

### Keywords
Protein phosphatase 1; pp1; ppp1r12a; chemoproteomics; substrate identification

### Affiliations
Wayne State University Chemistry
Wayne State University 

### Submitter
Eric Davis

### Lab Head
Dr Mary K Pflum
Wayne State University Chemistry


