### Accession
PXD029521

### Title
Differential proteomics of HeLa cells treated with PDS for 24 hours and untreated HeLa cells

### Description
Pyridostatin (PDS) is a well-known G-quadruplex (G4) inducer and stabilizer, yet its target genes have remained unclear. Herein, combining mass spectrometry based proteomics strategy with bioinformatics analysis, we revealed that PDS significantly downregulated 22 proteins, of which the genes contain rich G4 potential sequences, in HeLa cancer cells, consequently upregulating 16 proteins remarkably. The PDS-regulated proteins appeared to work synergistically to activate cyclin and cell cycle regulation, and to restrain the inhibition of ARE-mediated mRNA decay pathway, suggesting that PDS itself is not a potential anticancer agent, at least towards HeLa cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction. HeLa cells culturing in DMEM as described above were divided into control group and PDS treated group, and incubated in the absence and the presence of 10 μM PDS, respectively, at 37 °C for 24 h. The cells were then individually harvested, lysed on ice and extracted whole cell proteins by total protein extraction kit (BestBio). The concentration of raw protein extracts was measured by BCA Kit (Beyotime).  Protein digestion. Exactly 300 μg extracted proteins in lysis buffer from each group was transferred to 1.5 mL low protein binding microcentrifuge tube (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and DTT was added at a final concentration of 5 mM. The resulting mixture reacted at 37 °C for 1 h. Then IAA was added at a final concentration of 10 mM to alkylate the cyteine residues by incubation at 25 °C for 45 min in the dark. After diluted 3 times with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 6 µL 1 µg/µL trypsin was added to digest proteins at 25 °C overnight. Thereafter, the peptides were desalted in C18 cartridge (Waters Sep-Pak part No. WAT023590). The C18 column was firstly activated by 1 mL acetonitrile (ACN) and 1 mL 50% (vol/vol) ACN/H2O with 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid (FA) successively, followed by equilibration with 3 mL of 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA (trifluoacetic acid) in H2O. Then the peptides were loaded to the C18 column, and the desalting was achieved by washing the column with 3 mL 0.1% (vol/vol) TFA and 1 mL of 1% (vol/vol) FA. The peptide residues were sequentially eluted by1 mL 50% (vol/vol) ACN and 1 mL 80% (vol/vol) ACN/H2O, and the eluations were merged, followed by drying in vacuum centrifuge (CentriVap, ThermoFisher Scientific).  Stable isotopic labeling. Exactly 100 μg peptide residues of each group was re-dissolved in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) to a final concentration of 1 μg/μL and labeled with TMT labeling reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The sample of the control group was labeled with 130N, and the PDS group was labeled with 129C. The labeling reaction was initialized by incubation at room temperature for 1 h and quenched by 8 μL of 5% hydroxylamine. The labeled peptides derived from control group and PDS group were then equivalently mixed, desalted and dried as described above.  HPLC pre-fractionation. The labeled peptide mixture was re-dissolved in 100 μL 2% (vol/vol) ACN/H2O containing 4.5 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) for basic reverse-phase chromatography pre-fractionation. Aliquot (97 μL) of peptide mixture was load to HPLC (Agilent Technologies 1260 infinity) with Agilent ZORBAX 300 Extend-C18 column. The mobile phase A was 4.5 mM ammonium formate in 2% (vol/vol) ACN/H2O (pH 10), and phase B 4.5 mM ammonium formate in 90% (vol/vol) ACN/H2O (pH 10). The gradient started with 0% B until 7 min and continuously increased to 16% B at 13 min, 40% B at 73 min, 44% B at 77 min, and 60% B at 82 min and kept until 96 min, then increase to 90% B at 100 min. The flow rate was 1 mL/min. The fractions were collected chronologically into twelve tubes from 3 min to 96 min, lyophilized and re-dissolved with H2O containing 0.1% FA to a 500 ng/μL concentration for mass spectrometric analysis.  NanoLC-MS/MS analysis. Mass spectrometric quantification was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled with an EASY-nLC 1200 nanoUPLC system equipped with an Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 pre-column (20 mm  75 µm, 3 µm) and an Acclaim™ PepMap™ RSLC C18 analytical column (150 mm  75 µm, 2 µm). The UPLC mobile phase A was water containing 0.1% FA, and phase B 80% (vol/vol) methanol/water containing 0.1% FA. The UPLC gradient started with 2% B and increased to 7% at 7 min, then to 20% at 69 min, 35% at 90 min and sharply to 95% within 5 min, remained for 4 min, and finally decreased to 2% within 8 min and remained for 3 min. Aliquot (1 L) of each HPLC fraction described above was injected to UPLC, and the elution from the analytical column was directly infused to the mass spectrometer for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification. Raw MS/MS data were searched in Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific, version 2.3) database for peptide and protein identification. Sequest HT search engine was used for peptide-spectrum matching (PSM). The dynamic modifications were oxidation at methionine, methylation at lysine, glutarnine and arginine, acetylation at lysine and serine, phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine, and TMT labeling at lysine. The static modifications were carbamidomethylation at cysteine and TMT labeling at N-terminus of peptides. The quantitative results were normalized based on the total peptide amount in each group. Only proteins identified with false discovery rate (FDR) lower than 0.01, p-value lower than 0.05 and abundance ratio lower than 0.833 or larger than 1.20 were included for further analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Pyridostatin (PDS) is a well-known G-quadruplex (G4) inducer and stabilizer, yet its target genes have remained unclear. Herein, applying MS proteomics strategy, we revealed PDS significantly downregulated 22 proteins but upregulated 16 proteins in HeLa cancer cells, of which the genes both contain a number of G4 potential sequences, implying that PDS regulation on gene expression is far more complicated than inducing/stabilizing G4 structures. The PDS-downregulated proteins consequently upregulated 6 proteins to activate cyclin and cell cycle regulation, suggesting that PDS itself is not a potential anticancer agent, at least toward HeLa cancer cells. Importantly, SUB1, which encodes human positive cofactor and DNA lesion sensor PC4, was downregulated by 4.76-fold. Further studies demonstrated that the downregulation of PC4 dramatically promoted the cytotoxicity of trans-[PtCl2(NH3)(thiazole)] (trans-PtTz) toward HeLa cells to a similar level of cisplatin, contributable to retarding the repair of 1,3-trans-PtTz crosslinked DNA lesion mediated by PC4. These findings not only provide new insights into better understanding on the biological functions of PDS but also implicate a strategy for the rational design of novel multi-targeting platinum anticancer drugs via conjugation of PDS as a ligand to the coordination scaffold of transplatin for battling drug resistance to cisplatin.

### Keywords
Hela, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Yinzhu Hou

### Lab Head
Dr Fuyi Wang
Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences


