### Accession
PXD002903

### Title
Quantitative proteomics reveals that distant recurrence-associated protein R-Ras and Transgelin predict post-surgical survival of colorectal cancer Stage III patients

### Description
Surgical resection is the major clinical intervention for Stage III colorectal cancer (CRC) currently. However, as much as 30.8% of the patients who had ever taken curative resection came out of recurrence eventually. Therefore, to facilitate formulating effective treatment plans, there is an intense demand for Stage III CRC post-surgical prognostic biomarkers. In this study, we identified total 146 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) associated with poor prognosis in Stage III CRC patients with TMT-based quantitative mass spectrometry (MS). In these DEPs, the protein expression level of R-Ras and Transgelin were tested with immunohistochemistry (IHC) of 192 individual specimens. Further Kaplan-Meier analysis revealed that the level of R-Ras and Transgelin is associated with patients’ 5-year overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS) significantly, and multivariate Cox-regression analyses revealed that R-Ras and Transgelin are independent prognostic factors for OS and DFS respectively. In conclusion, our study presents that R-Ras and Transgelin are potential post-surgical prognostic biomarkers of Stage III CRC.

### Sample Protocol
TMT labeling The tissues were grinded in liquid nitrogen and solubilized in lysis buffer (8 M urea in PBS, pH 8.0) containing protease inhibitors. After incubation on ice for 30 min, the lysates were centrifuged at 10,000×g for 10 min. The protein concentration of the supernatant was determined with BCA protein assay kit. 100-µg protein of each sample was reduced and alkylated with dithiothreitol (DTT) and idoacetamide (IAA), and then diluted with 7-fold volume of PBS. The samples were digested with Lys-C and trypsin sequentially. Digestion was quenched by heating at 60°C.  Samples were desalted, dried and finally solved in 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer. TMT labeling follows the manufacturer’s protocol. After labeling, samples were pooled, dried and solved in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The solved samples were desalted and dried again, and finally solved in 100-µl 0.1% TFA. Pooled TMT-labeled samples were further fractionated with an Xbridge BEH300 C18 column on Thermo UltiMate 3000 UHPLC workstation into 50 fractions. With regard to the peptide abundance in each fraction, these fractions were combined into 20 samples, dried, and finally solved in 0.1% formic acid for MS analysis. Mass spectrometry LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as previously described with slight modification. Briefly, Samples were resolved with an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column on Thermo Scientific UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System. The eluate was online electrosprayed in positive-ion mode of Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer. The MS data, a single full-scan mass spectrum in Orbitrap (350-1,500 m/z, 60,000 resolution) followed by Top10 data-dependent MS/MS scan at 27% high-energy collision-induced dissociation, were collected with Thermo Scientific Xcalibur 2.1.2 software in data acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Protein identification and TMT-based quantification was performed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Scientific). In detail, spectra were extracted from raw MS data files and searched against Swiss-Prot reviewed human proteome database (downloaded on July 18, 2015, number of protein entries = 20,207) using Sequest HT algorithm. Precursor Mass Tolerance was 20 ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance was 0.02 Da and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Total Intensity Threshold was 20,000 and Minimum Peak Count was 200. Carbamidomethylation (on C) and TMT 6plex (on K and peptide N terminal) were set as static modification, and oxidation (on M) was set as dynamic modification. Protein identification was considered valid if at least one peptide was statistically significant (p<0.05 with a false discovery rate (FDR) at 5%). Parameters not mentioned above used default values. TMT 6plex was chosen as quantification method. Reporter monoisotopic m/z was tuned according to spectra raw data. Proteins were quantified with unique peptide ratio only. Protein relative abundance was presented with ratios to TMT-126. Quantification data were read using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 with peptide filter of high peptide confidence. To compare protein abundance between patients, ratios of protein ACTB in each patient were used for normalization. The differential expression threshold was defined as 1.5-fold change. As 2 good and 2 poor prognosis samples present in a quantification assay, a DEP associated with poor prognosis was defined as a protein, whose relative abundance of both poor prognosis samples is beyond 1.5-fold change compared with that of both good prognosis samples.

### Publication Abstract
Surgical resection supplemented with adjuvant chemotherapy is the current preferred treatment for Stage III colorectal cancer (CRC). However, as many as 48% of patients who undergo curative resection eventually suffer from incurable distant recurrence. To investigate the molecular mechanisms involved in Stage III CRC post-surgical distant recurrence, we identified a total of 146 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) associated with distant recurrence in Stage III CRC using TMT-based quantitative mass spectrometry. Among these DEPs, the altered expressions of R-Ras and Transgelin were then validated in 192 individual specimens using immunohistochemistry (IHC). Furthermore, Kaplan-Meier analysis revealed that the levels of R-Ras and Transgelin were significantly associated with 5-year overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS), and multivariate Cox-regression analyses revealed that R-Ras and Transgelin were independent prognostic factors for OS and DFS, respectively. In conclusion, this study identified potential biochemical players involved in distant recurrence and indicates that R-Ras and Transgelin are potential post-surgical prognostic biomarkers for Stage III CRC. This proteomics data have been submitted to Proteome Xchange under accession number PXD002903.

### Keywords
R-ras, Transgelin., Quantitative proteomics, Post-surgical recurrence, Stage iii colorectal cancer, Prognostic biomarker

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr wei ge
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences


