### Accession
PXD008344

### Title
Human brain LC-MS/MS -  Brain Citrullination Patterns and T Cell Reactivity of Cerebrospinal Fluid-Derived CD4+ T Cells in Multiple Sclerosis

### Description
Citrullination as a post-translational modification has been described in a couple of autoimmune diseases like rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and multiples sclerosis (MS). We investigated citrullination brain tissue from MS patients and healthy individuals (HD). The myelin sheath proteins have been the focus of citrullination and neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimers Disease (AD), Parkinsons and MS. We analysed whole brain tissue of MS patients and HD and established a catalogue of citrullinated proteins. Besides new citrullinated proteins we found additional citrullinated sites on the already described proteins: MBP, GFAP and Vimentin.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing protocol: Barocycler instrument (Barocycler 2320EXT) from Bioscience (Pressure BioSciences, Inc, South Easton, MA) was used to extract proteins from frozen tissue. Samples of 2-3mg were put into barocycler 150l micro tubes. The tubes were filled with 30l of lysis buffer (8M urea and 0.1M bicarbonate) and complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Switzerland) and closed with 150 l microcaps. The barocycler instrument was pre-heated for 30 min. at 33°C.   Run cycles were performed at 45 kpsi for 60 cycles and 1 min each. Each cycle lasted 50 sec. at high pressure and 10 sec. at ambient pressure at 33°C. Reduction and alkylation were carried out as follows: Mixing of TCEP 2.5mg and IAA 3.7mg in 50 l of lysis buffer. A volume of 4.88 l of this buffer was added to each l pestle tube, incubated at 25°C in a thermomixer while shaking at 1000rpm and protected from light. By adding lysis buffer, the urea concentration was diluted from 8M to 6M. Lys-C enzyme digestion was applied to an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:40. Lys-C (mass spectrometry grade, Wako, Richmond, VA, USA 20g/l) was dissolved in “Milli-Q-water” to a final concentration 4g/l. Digestion was performed in barocycler with 20kpsi for 45 min. and cycles of 50 sec. duration at high pressure and 10 sec. ambient pressure. A further dilution of urea from 6M to 1.6M with 0.1 M ammonium-bicarbonate buffer was necessary to achieve trypsin digestion conditions. Trypsin (sequencing grade modified, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added to an enzyme to substrate ratio 1:20. The digestion took place for 90 min. at 37°C in a barocycler at 20kpsi and cycle periods of 50 sec. at high pressure and 10 sec. at ambient pressure. Finally, the solution was transferred to a 1ml Eppendorf tube. The volume was adjusted to 1ml by adding a 0.1%TFA/ 3%ACN solution. The reaction was stopped by adding 10%TFA and pH adjusted to a value between pH 2 and 3. The peptides need to be “cleaned” on solid phase extraction columns (C18/17% Finisterre, Wicom Germany). Columns were pre-wet with methanol followed by 1ml of 60%ACN/ 0.1%TFA. Equilibration step of the columns with 1 ml of 3%ACN/ 0.1%TFA. This step was repeated twice. The columns were washed 6 times with 1 ml of 3%ACN 0.1%TFA and the peptides eluted with 1 ml of 60%TFA 0.1%TFA and subsequently with 400l of 100% ACN. The samples were vacuum dried in a “SpeedVac" at 45°C and the peptides re-dissolved in 3% ACN/0.1% formic acid in a volume of 20-50l to obtain a concentration of 1g/l. Peptide concentration was measured with Nanodrop instrument (Nanodrop 1000, spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, DE, USA) and a solution of a concentration of 0.5g/l prepared. Hydrophilic Interaction Chromatography (HILIC) Pools of peptide samples of the healthy tissue (HD), as well as the MS tissues, were prepared (300g each) and separated on a hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) (Agilent LC1200 equipped with a column Polyamin II 250 x 3.0 mm 120 Å, 5m). The gradient applied was made of the two solvents: A: 75 ACN%, 8mM KH2PO4 and B: 5%ACN, 100mM KH2PO4 (pH4.0) for 60 min. Fractions of 1 ml were collected in 27 tubes. To reduce the number of the samples to analyze on mass spectrometer the fractions were pooled from two tubes. Before injection, samples were purified on “Finisterre SPE” columns (Wicom international). For “cleaning-up” peptides after digest, the same protocol as mentioned above was applied. Samples of 1ml were vacuum dried and dissolved in an appropriate buffer, 3%ACN /0.1 %TFA. In total 11 fractions for each sample (HD and MS) were prepared. After another vacuum drying, peptides were dissolved in 3%ACN/ 0.1%FA buffer. Concentrations were measured with Nanodrop instrument and adjusted to 0.25g/l. Reference peptides (IRT) were added (iRT, Biognosys, Switzerland) to each sample. Data dependent analysis (DDA) of the HILIC fractionated samples The HILIC fractionated samples, 44 in total, were run on Easy-nLC 1000 linked to an Orbitrap Fusion instrument (Thermo Fisher) on a gradient of 80min. Column material was ReproSil-Pur, C18, 120 Å, AQ, 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH) and column dimensions ID 0.075mm/ length 150mm. Solvent A 0.1% formic acid in water and Solvent B 0.15 formic acid in acetonitrile. 4l of the sample at a concentration of 0.25l/l was injected.

### Data Protocol
“Raw” files were converted into “mgf” files and analyzed on MASCOT software with a human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein database (date: March 22, 2016 with 40912 entries): Search parameters were 0.05Da fragment mass tolerance and 10ppm precursor mass, minimal number of peptides 2, and FDR (false discovery rate) of 0.1%, allowing 2 mis-cleavages on trypsin fragments. Carbamidomethyl at cysteine was set as a static modification, and oxidation of methionine, deamidation on R (with or wihout neutral loss), Q and N was set as variable modification. To estimate FDR’s separately for deamidated and all the other proteins the mascot dat files were converted to the bibliospec file format.  For each unique peptide sequence the best peptide spectrum match (the one with the highest mascot score) was selected. Then the modified peptide FDR was commuted. Protein identifications (ID) were assigned to peptide sequences using the R-package “prozor”. The resulting tables were exported so they could be further analyzed in excel. Peptide identification with Ursgal  The universal python module combining bottom-up proteomics tools for large-scale analysis (ursgal) was used to perform a search with multiple search engines (xtandem vengeance, msgfplus_v9979 and myrimatch 2 2 140) (Kremer et al. 2016). Evaluation and post processing of the search results was performed using percolator_2_08. The workflow was based on a modified version of the do_it_all_folder_wide.py ursgal example script and the modified file is available as supplement  (see Supplement X). The variable and fixed modifications were set in the same way as the mascot settings. For instrument settings, the Q-Exactive+ ursgal profile is used. The “unified_percolator_validated.u_merged_accepted.u_merged.csv” tables (see Supplement X), generated by ursgal, where than loaded into R. For each peptide the best PSM is then selected according the lowest PEP and q.value score. The FDR on peptide level was re-estimated for the deamidated and all the other peptides separately, based on target-decoy information and the percolator PEP score. The results were exported to tsv files in long and wide format so that FDR filtering and further analysis can be performed in excel.

### Publication Abstract
Immune responses to citrullinated peptides have been described in autoimmune diseases like rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and multiple sclerosis (MS). We investigated the post-translational modification (PTM), arginine to citrulline, in brain tissue of MS patients and controls (C) by proteomics and subsequently the cellular immune response of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)-infiltrating T cells to citrullinated and unmodified peptides of myelin basic protein (MBP). Using specifically adapted tissue extraction- and combined data interpretation protocols we could establish a map of citrullinated proteins by identifying more than 80 proteins with two or more citrullinated peptides in human brain tissue. We report many of them for the first time. For the already described citrullinated proteins MBP, GFAP, and vimentin, we could identify additional citrullinated sites. The number of modified proteins in MS white matter was higher than control tissue. Citrullinated peptides are considered neoepitopes that may trigger autoreactivity. We used newly identified epitopes and previously reported immunodominant myelin peptides in their citrullinated and non-citrullinated form to address the recognition of CSF-infiltrating CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells from 22 MS patients by measuring proliferation and IFN-&#x3b3; secretion. We did not detect marked responses to citrullinated peptides, but slightly more strongly to the non-modified version. Based on these data, we conclude that citrullination does not appear to be an important activating factor of a T cell response, but could be the consequence of an immune- or inflammatory response. Our approach allowed us to perform a deep proteome analysis and opens new technical possibilities to analyze complex PTM patterns on minute quantities of rare tissue samples.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, (mbp), Citrullination, Pressure cycle technology (pct), Human post mortem brain tissue, Hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography hilic, Neurodegeneration, Multiple sclerosis (ms), Mass spectrometry, Myelin basic protein

### Affiliations
University Hospital Zurich
Neuroimmunology and MS Research University Hospital Zurich Frauenklinikstrasse 26 8091 Zurich Switzerland

### Submitter
Wolfgang Faigle

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Roland Martin
Neuroimmunology and MS Research University Hospital Zurich Frauenklinikstrasse 26 8091 Zurich Switzerland


