### Accession
PXD046752

### Title
Direct-to-biology: Accelerated E3 ligase modulator discovery

### Description
Quatintative  analysis of the effects of the E14 compound on the proteome of MM.1S cells.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Cell pellets were lysed with 8M urea lysis buffer for 15 min at 4°C (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM 2-chloroacetamide), supplemented with protease inhibitors (2 µg/ml aprotinin, 10 µg/ml leupeptin, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride) as described before (Mertins et al). Lysates were then clarified by centrifugation (20,000g, 15 min, 4°C). Disulfide bonds were reduced (5 mM dithiothreitol for 1h) and alkylated (40 mM chloroacetamide for 45 min in the dark). Afterwards samples were diluted 1:4 with 50 mM Tris–HCl pH 8 and digested using sequencing grade LysC (Wako Chemicals) for 2h in weight-to-weight ratio of 1:50. Finally sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added at a weight-to-weight ratio of 1:50, and digestion was carried out overnight. Samples were acidified with formic acid (FA) followed by centrifugation (20,000g, 15 min). The supernatant was further processed using Sep-Pak C18 cc Cartridges (Waters) for desalting.  Mass spectrometry  For the LC/MS analysis, 1 µg of desalted peptides was utilized for each sample. Peptide were separated on a Vanquish Neo System (Thermo Fisher) with a gradient lasting 106 minutes and a flow rate of 250 ul/min. The mobile phase B was gradually increased from 4% to 20% over the first 67 minutes, then to 30% over the next 20 minutes, followed by 60% for 10 minutes, 90% for 5 minutes, and finally 0% for 2 minutes.  MS data was acquired on an Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher) using data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode. Full scans were obtained at a resolution of 120,000, scanning a range of 350–1650 m/z. The maximum injection time (IT) was set at 20 ms, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6. Subsequent to the full scan, narrow isolation windows were used, covering the range of 375-1430 m/z with isolation windows ranging from 14 to 440 acquired at 30,000 resolution. The fixed first mass was set at 200 m/z, with an AGC target value of 300e6 (3000%), and a maximum IT of 54 ms. The normalized collision energy was set in stepped mode at 26%, 29%, and 32%. Dynamic exclusion was employed for 30 s, and ions with charge states of 1, 6, or higher were excluded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was searched using DIA-NN 1.8.1 software against the human UniProt reference proteome (Demichev et al.). Library-free mode was used, with the in silico FASTA digest parameter enabled. The peptide length range was set to 7-30, and the precursor charge range was set to 1-4. The m/z range for precursors was 340-1650, and for fragment ions, it was 200-1800. The 'match between runs' parameter was enabled.  LFQ protein intensities from the DIA-NN pg output table were log2 transformed, filtered for valid values (> 70%) and contaminants. The resulting intensities were median normalized, and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution with a downshift (-1.8 SD from the mean and the distribution width is 0.3 SD). Comparative analysis of experimental groups was conducted using a two-sided moderated two-sample t-test. The resulting p-values were corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. The data analysis was performed using R (4.3.1).

### Publication Abstract
Thalidomide and its analogs are molecular glues (MGs) that lead to targeted ubiquitination and degradation of key cancer proteins via the cereblon (CRBN) E3 ligase. Here, we develop a direct-to-biology (D2B) approach for accelerated discovery of MGs. In this platform, automated, high throughput, and nano scale synthesis of hundreds of pomalidomide-based MGs was combined with rapid phenotypic screening, enabling an unprecedented fast identification of potent CRBN-acting MGs. The small molecules were further validated by degradation profiling and anti-cancer activity. This revealed E14 as a potent MG degrader targeting IKZF1/3, GSPT1 and 2 with profound effects on a panel of cancer cells. In a more generalized view, integration of automated, nanoscale synthesis with phenotypic assays has the potential to accelerate MGs discovery.

### Keywords
Degraders, Multiple myeloma, Mm.1s

### Affiliations
Max-Delbrück-Centrum für Molekulare Medizin (MDC)
Max Delbrück Center

### Submitter
Valeriia Sapozhnikova

### Lab Head
Dr Philipp Mertins
Max-Delbrück-Centrum für Molekulare Medizin (MDC)


