### Accession
PXD011683

### Title
The development of minimal invasive therapy of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma based on optical tweezers technology.

### Description
Cell adhesion is of fundamental importance in the cell communication, signaling and motility, and its dysfunction occurs prevalently during cancer progression. The knowledge of the molecular and cellular processes involved in abnormalities in cancer cells adhesion has dramatically increased and it has been focused mainly on cellular adhesion molecules (CAMs) and tumor microenvironment. During the last decade, several methods for measuring and studying cell adhesion properties were also developed, including optical tweezers technology.  We have developed a non-invasive method employing optical tweezers technology in order to differentiate normal B-cells and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma cells derived from clinical samples.  Our approach bases on nascent adhesion formation between B-cell and mesenchymal stromal cell. In this method, a single B-cell is trapped and optically seeded on mesenchymal stromal cell and maintained direct contact until stable connection between cells is formed in time-scale. After we characterized the adhesive properties of the panel of clinical samples, we performed the deep proteomics investigations on cellular adhesion proteins using liquid chromatography- tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
Sample aliquots were processed using MED FASP 17 method.Proteins were consecutively digestedwith LysC and trypsin

### Data Protocol
The MS spectra were searched using MaxQuant software. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed. The maximum false peptide and protein discovery rate was specified as 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Follicular lymphoma (FL) represents the major subtype of indolent B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas (B-NHLs) and results from the malignant transformation of mature B-cells in lymphoid organs. Although gene expression and genomic studies have identified multiple disease driving gene aberrations, only a few proteomic studies focused on the protein level. The present work aimed to examine the proteomic profiles of follicular lymphoma vs. normal B-cells obtained by fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) to gain deep insight into the most perturbed pathway of FL. The cells of interest were purified by magnetic-activated cell sorting (MACS). High-throughput proteomic profiling was performed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and allowed to identify of 6724 proteins in at least 75% of each group of samples. The 'Total Protein Approach' (TPA) was applied to the absolute quantification of proteins in this study. We identified 1186 differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) between FL and control samples, causing an extensive remodeling of several molecular pathways, including the B-cell receptor signaling pathway, cellular adhesion molecules, and PPAR pathway. Additionally, the construction of protein-protein interactions networks (PPINs) and identification of hub proteins allowed us to indicate the key player proteins for FL pathology. Finally, ICAM1, CD9, and CD79B protein expression was validated in an independent cohort by flow cytometry (FCM), and the results were consistent with the mass spectrometry (MS) data.

### Keywords
Optical tweezers, Cell-to-cell adhesion, Cellular adhesion molecules (cams), Lc-ms/ms., Non-hodgkin’s lymphoma

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry. Martinsried, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Jacek Wisniewski

### Lab Head
Dr Jacek R Wisniewski
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry. Martinsried, Germany


