### Accession
PXD005178

### Title
Oligopeptide Importers AliC and AliD of Nonencapsulated Streptococcus pneumoniae Facilitate Mucosal Infections and Mediate Persistence during Invasive Disease

### Description
Nonencapsulated Streptococcus pneumoniae (NESp) is an emerging human pathogen that colonizes the nasopharynx and is associated with noninvasive disease such as otitis media (OM), conjunctivitis, and nonbacteremic pneumonia.  For decades, expression of a polysaccharide capsule appeared to be necessary for establishment of colonization and development of invasive pneumococcal disease (IPD).  Accordingly, the currently licensed pneumococcal vaccines target the polysaccharide capsule.  However, NESp expressing the novel oligopeptide importer proteins AliC and AliD have been isolated during IPD.  Our study reveals that NESp expressing AliC and AliD have intensified virulence compared to isogenic mutants, and we provide insight about how this pneumococcal population has become associated with IPD.  Our data demonstrates that AliC and AliD enhance murine nasopharyngeal colonization and are required for OM in a chinchilla model.  Furthermore, AliC and AliD increase pneumococcal survival in chinchilla whole blood and decrease deposition of human C3b on the bacterial surface.  As NESp become an increasing threat to public health, our study exposes specific virulence factors to possibly target for a broadened prevention of IPD through vaccination.

### Sample Protocol
Four replicates each of pneumococcal strains MNZ41 and JLB01 were subjected to proteomics analysis. Cell pellets were lysed with 100 l hexafluoroisopropanol (HFIP) (105228-100G, Sigma).  HFIP was removed using vacuum centrifugation and the dried lysate was digested usig trypsin.  Dried lysate was rehydrated with the addition of 10 l 100 mM dithiothreitol (43819-5G, Sigma) in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and placed at 85 ºC for 5 minutes to reduce disulphide bonds.  Samples were then alkylated with addition of 10 l iodoacetamide (I1149-5G, Sigma) in 100 mM ABC and placed at room temperature in the dark for 30 minutes.   Two g trypsin (T6567-20UG) in 200 l 100 mM ABC was added to each sample and placed at 37 ºC overnight for enzymatic digestion.  Post trypsin digest samples were desalted using a peptide reverse phase microtrap (Michrom BioResources), dried and ultimately resuspended in 2 l of 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Separation of peptides was performed using a Dionex U3000 splitless nanoflow HPLC system operated at 333 nl minute using a gradient from 2-50% acetonitrile over 4 hours, followed by a 15 minuted wash with 95% acetonitrile and a 15 minute equilibration with 2% acetonitrile.  The C18 column, an in-house prepared 75 m by 15 cm reverse phase column packed with Halo 2.7 m, 90Å C18 material (MAC-MOD Analytical) was located in the ion source just before a silica emitter.  A potential of 2100 volts was applied using a liquid junction between the column and emitter.  A Thermo LTQ Velos Pro mass spectrometer using a nanospray Flex ion source was used to analyze the eluate from the U3000.  Scan parameters for the LTQ Velos Pro were one MS scan followed by 10 MS/MS scans of the 5 most intense peaks. MS/MS scans were performed in pairs, a CID fragmentation scan followed a HCD fragmentation scan of the same precursor m/z.  Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a mass exclusion time of 3 min and a repeat count of 1 within 30 sec of initial m/z measurement.  Spectra were collected over the entirety of each 4 hour chromatography run.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra were converted to MGF format using MSConvert, part of the ProteoWizard software library (PMID: 1860660).  X!tandem 2013.09.01.1 (PMID: 14976030) and OMSSA (PMID: 15473683) algorithms were employed via the University of Arizona High Performance Computing Center to perform spectrum matching.  Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 0.25 Daltons for both OMSSA and X!tandem. Trypsin cleaveage rules were used for both algorithms with up to 2 missed cleavages.  Amino acid modifications searched consisted of single and double oxidation of Methionine, oxidation of Proline, N-terminal acetylation, carbamidomethylation of Cysteine, deamidation of Asparagene and Glutamine and phosphorylation of Serine, Threonine, and Tyrosine.  X!tandem xml and OMSSA xml results were filtered using Perl to remove any peptide matches with an E-value > 0.01 as well as proteins identified by a single peptide sequence.  The protein fasta database for MNZ41 was downloaded on November 11, 2015 from NCBI RefSeq.  A randomized version of the MNZ41 fasta was concatenated to the original as a way assess dataset quality.

### Publication Abstract
Nonencapsulated <i>Streptococcus pneumoniae</i> (NESp) is an emerging human pathogen that colonizes the nasopharynx and is associated with noninvasive diseases such as otitis media (OM), conjunctivitis, and nonbacteremic pneumonia. Since capsule expression was previously thought to be necessary for establishment of invasive pneumococcal disease (IPD), serotype-specific polysaccharide capsules are targeted by currently licensed pneumococcal vaccines. Yet, NESp expressing oligopeptide binding proteins AliC and AliD have been isolated during IPD. Thus, we hypothesize AliC and AliD are major NESp virulence determinants that facilitate persistence and development of IPD. Our study reveals that NESp expressing AliC and AliD have intensified virulence compared to isogenic mutants. Specifically, we demonstrate AliC and AliD enhance murine nasopharyngeal colonization and pulmonary infection and are required for OM in a chinchilla model. Furthermore, AliC and AliD increase pneumococcal survival in chinchilla whole blood and aid in resistance to killing by human leukocytes. Comparative proteome analysis revealed significant alterations in protein levels when AliC and AliD were absent. Virulence-associated proteins, including a pneumococcal surface protein C variant (CbpAC), were significantly downregulated, while starvation response indicators were upregulated in the double mutant relative to wild-type levels. We also reveal that differentially expressed CbpAC was essential for NESp adherence to epithelial cells, virulence during OM, reduction of C3b deposition on the NESp surface, and binding to nonspecific IgA. Altogether, the rise in NESp prevalence urges the need to understand how NESp establishes disease and persists in a host. This study highlights the roles of AliC, AliD, and CbpAC in the pathogenesis of NESp.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Despite the effective, widespread use of licensed pneumococcal vaccines over many decades, pneumococcal infections remain a worldwide burden resulting in high morbidity and mortality. NESp subpopulations are rapidly rising in the wake of capsule-targeted vaccine strategies, yet there is very little knowledge on NESp pathogenic potential and virulence mechanisms. Although NESp lacks a protective capsule, NESp lineages expressing AliC and AliD have been associated with systemic infections. Furthermore, higher antibiotic resistance rates and transformation efficiencies associated with emerging NESp threaten treatment strategies needed to control pneumococcal infections and transmission. Elucidating how NESp survives within a host and establishes disease is necessary for development of broadened pneumococcal prevention methods. Our study identifies virulence determinants and host survival mechanisms employed by NESp with a high pathogenic potential. Moreover, our study also identifies virulence determinants shared by NESp and encapsulated strains that may serve as broad prevention and therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Streptocuccus pneumoniae pneumococcus mhz41 ltq velos linear trap

### Affiliations
Veterinary Science and Microbiology
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, Mississippi, United States of America

### Submitter
Ken Pendarvis

### Lab Head
Dr Larry S. McDaniel
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, Mississippi, United States of America


