### Accession
PXD011541

### Title
In Search of the Altering Salivary Proteome in Metastatic Breast and Ovarian Cancer

### Description
Breast and ovarian cancers, the most common cancers in women in India. Metastatic organotropism is a non-random, predetermined process which represents a more lethal and advanced form of cancer with increased mortality rate. In an attempt to study organotropism, salivary proteins were analyzed by mass spectrometry indicative of pathophysiology of breast and ovarian cancers compared to healthy and ovarian chemotherapy subjects. Collectively, 646 proteins were identified, of which 409 proteins were confidently identified across all four groups. Network analysis of up-regulated proteins such as coronin-1A, hepatoma derived growth factor, vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP), and cofilin in breast cancer and proteins like coronin-1A, destrin and HSP90α in ovarian cancer were functionally linked and were known to regulate cell proliferation and migration. Additionally, proteins namely VASP, coronin-1A, stathmin and suprabasin were confidently identified in ovarian chemotherapy subjects, possibly in response to combined paclitaxel and carboplatin drug therapy to ovarian cancer. In summary, this proteomic study was performed to identify a pattern of differentially expressed salivary proteins as indicators of metastatic organotropism potential of breast and ovarian cancers, as well as their response to neoadjuvant (paclitaxel and carboplatin) drugs therapy.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were first reduced with 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) and cysteines were alkylated by adding 20mM final concentration of iodoacetamide (IAA). Subsequently, the samples were digested overnight at 37°C in a final concentration of 2M urea with 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, containing trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at an enzyme: substrate ratio of 1:50 for 16 h at 37°C. The reaction was stopped by addition of 90% formic acid to a final concentration of 4%. Digested samples were desalted using c18 silica cartridge (The Nest Group Inc., Southborough, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
All LC-MS/MS data were searched using the SEQUEST algorithm within Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (ThermoFisher Scientific) against the Uniprot Human proteome database to obtain peptide and protein identifications. For all searches, trypsin was specified as the enzyme for protein cleavage allowing up to two missed cleavages. Oxidation (M) and carbamidomethylation (C) were set as dynamic and fixed modifications respectively. For Sequest HT and MS Amanda 2.0 search, the precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Da respectively. Both peptide spectrum match and protein false discovery rate were set to 0.01 FDR and determined using percolator node. Relative protein quantification of the proteins was performed using Minora feature detector node of Proteome Discoverer2.2 with default settings using peptide spectrum matches (PSM) with confidence.

### Publication Abstract
Breast and ovarian cancers, the most common cancers in women in India, are expected to rise in the next decade. Metastatic organotropism is a nonrandom, predetermined process which represents a more lethal and advanced form of cancer with increased mortality rate. In an attempt to study organotropism, salivary proteins were analyzed by mass spectrometry indicative of pathophysiology of breast and ovarian cancers and were compared to healthy and ovarian chemotherapy subjects. Collectively, 646 proteins were identified, of which 409 proteins were confidently identified across all four groups. Network analysis of upregulated proteins such as coronin-1A, hepatoma-derived growth factor, vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP), and cofilin in breast cancer and proteins like coronin-1A, destrin, and HSP90&#x3b1; in ovarian cancer were functionally linked and were known to regulate cell proliferation and migration. Additionally, proteins namely VASP, coronin-1A, stathmin, and suprabasin were confidently identified in ovarian chemotherapy subjects, possibly in response to combined paclitaxel and carboplatin drug therapy to ovarian cancer. Selected representative differentially expressed proteins (eg, gelsolin, VASP) were validated by western blot analysis. Results of this study provide a foundation for future research to better understand the organotropic behavior of breast and ovarian cancers, as well as neoadjuvant drug response in ovarian cancer.

### Keywords
Neoadjuvant therapy, Quantitative proteomics, Saliva, Organotropism

### Affiliations
Assistant Professor, Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee,
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee

### Submitter
Kuldeep  Giri

### Lab Head
Dr Kiran Ambatipudi
Assistant Professor, Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee,


