### Accession
PXD016076

### Title
A Comparison of Proteomic, Genomic, and Osteological Methods of Archaeological Sex Estimation

### Description
Proteomic sex estimation of human remains via liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC- MS/MS) of sexually dimorphic amelogenin peptides in tooth enamel. The human remains analyzed in this study were recovered from two archaeological sites, Síi Túupentak (CA-ALA-565; ca. 200-600 cal BP) and Rummey Ta Kuččuwiš Tiprectak (CA-ALA-704/H; ca. 180-2240 cal. BP), Late Holocene ancestral Ohlone villages in Central California.  The X and Y chromosomes code for distinctive isoforms of amelogenin proteins, AMELX_HUMAN and AMELY_HUMAN. Fragments of these proteins can be detected using shotgun liquid chromatography mass spectrometry and assigned to the AMELX or AMELY isoform. We use nano-liquid chromatography coupled with orbitrap tandem mass spectrometry (LC-orbitrap-MS/MS). Signals of all peptides that can be unambiguously attributed to either AMELY or AMELX isoforms are summed and normalized for sample weight. Confident detection of AMELY specific peptides provides an unambiguous indicator of a male sex chromosome.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic Laboratory Methods A small amount of enamel, ~20 mg, was removed from teeth by cutting with a clean double sided, diamond-coated steel disc (Brasseler Inc., Savannah, GA, HP medium), or by grinding with an unused carbide steel burr (Brasseler Inc, Savannah, GA, US# 7 SH round). Blades were cleaned with ultrasonication and triple rinsed with 95% ethanol between samples. Powdered or cut enamel samples (~ 20 mg) were demineralized by adding 200μL of 1.2M hydrochloric acid to 2 mL sample vial with seven 2.8 mM ceramic beads (Omni-International Inc.). Samples were milled for 3 minutes at 7000 rpm in a MagnaLyzer (Roche Inc.), then centrifuged for 5 minutes at 16000 g. To reduce soluble proteins, 6μL of 0.5M dithioerythritol (DTE) was added to each sample vial and incubated at 56°C for 60 minutes. After incubation, 2M ammonium bicarbonate was added to each sample vial until the pH of the supernatant was 7.5-8.0. Alkylation was performed by adding 12μL of 0.5M iodoacetamide to the sample vials and incubated in the dark at 25°C for 60 minutes. The carbamidomethylation reaction was quenched by adding 12μL of 0.5M DTE to the sample vials and incubated at room temperature for 5 minutes. After incubation, 0.01% Protease Max (Promega Inc.) was added to the sample vials along with 0.5μg mass spectrometry grade trypsin (Thermo Pierce Inc.). Each sample was incubated at room temperature for 20 hours at 300 rpm. After incubation, sample vials were centrifuged for 5 minutes and 200μL of the supernatant transferred to 0.22μm centrifugal filters and centrifuged for 30 minutes. The filtrate was then transferred to clean Eppendorf® Protein LoBind tubes for ZipTip (Millipore Inc.) sample clean up to prepare for mass spectrometric analysis. Organic contaminants in aqueous stocks and solutions were removed by prior passage over solid phase extraction (SepPak, C18, Waters Inc.). Blank samples were prepared alongside each batch of samples.   Digested peptides were desalted and concentrated using ZipTip C18 pipette tips (Millipore Inc.) with the eluted material lyophilized and stored at 4°C in Lo-Bind (Eppendorf) tubes until analyzed via liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Prior to analysis, samples were resuspended in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA. Peptide concentration was measured using the Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Pierce, Inc.) and 1 µg of peptide, or 40% of the total sample if the sample was too diluted, was applied to mass spectrometry.   Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry of peptides was accomplished with a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a Proxeon Easy-nLC II HPLC (Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded a 100 micron x 25 mm Magic C18 100Å 5U reverse phase trap where they were desalted online before being separated using a 75 micron x 150 mm Magic C18 200Å 3U reverse phase column. Peptides were eluted using a 65 minute gradient with a flow rate of 300nl/min. An MS survey scan was obtained for the m/z range 300-1600, MS/MS spectra were acquired using an inclusion list of 28 ions (Parker et al. 2019) that were subjected to HCD (High Energy Collisional Dissociation). When inclusion list ions were not found, MS/MS was done on other ions in the MS survey scan. An isolation mass window of 1.6 m/z was used for precursor ion selection, and normalized collision energy of 27% used for fragmentation. A five second duration was used for the dynamic exclusion. Washes were applied between each sample. After 10 samples a blank run of BSA standards was applied to test for sample-to-sample contamination.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry datasets (.RAW format) were processed with PEAKS™ (10.0) peptide matching software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON). The FASTA formatted UNIPROT Homo sapiens reference protein database (http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640) was modified to include additional FASTA protein entries of peptide sequences from all splice variants associated with AMELX_HUMAN (Q99217-1, -2, -3) and AMELY_HUMAN (Q99218-1, -2) proteins gene products (Salido, et al., 1992, Simmer, 1995). The reference database was further modified to incorporate a decoy database and was validated in PEAKs™ Software (Zhang, et al., 2012). Peptide matching spectral assignment was conducted using default conditions with the following exceptions: error tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor mass and 0.04Da for fragment ions; cleavage with trypsin was set to non-specific, and up to two missed cleavages. The algorithm assumed all cysteines were carbamidomethylated, and the peptide was partially modified by deamidation (NQ), oxidation (MHW) and dioxidation (M), and pyroglutamate conversion from glutamate and glutamine. All peptide assignments were filtered by a 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Sex estimation of skeletons is fundamental to many archaeological studies. Currently, three approaches are available to estimate sex-osteology, genomics, or proteomics, but little is known about the relative reliability of these methods in applied settings. We present matching osteological, shotgun-genomic, and proteomic data to estimate the sex of 55 individuals, each with an independent radiocarbon date between 2,440 and 100&#xa0;cal BP, from two ancestral Ohlone sites in Central California. Sex estimation was possible in 100% of this burial sample using proteomics, in 91% using genomics, and in 51% using osteology. Agreement between the methods was high, however conflicts did occur. Genomic sex estimates were 100% consistent with proteomic and osteological estimates when DNA reads were above 100,000 total sequences. However, more than half the samples had DNA read numbers below this threshold, producing high rates of conflict with osteological and proteomic data where nine out of twenty conditional DNA sex estimates conflicted with proteomics. While the DNA signal decreased by an order of magnitude in the older burial samples, there was no decrease in proteomic signal. We conclude that proteomics provides an important complement to osteological and shotgun-genomic sex estimation.

### Keywords
Ancient dna, Sex estimation, Proteomics, Archaeoforensics, Biomolecular archaeology, Amelogenin

### Affiliations
University of California, Davis
UC Davis

### Submitter
Glendon Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Glendon J Parker
University of California, Davis


