### Accession
PXD028329

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of the role of miRNA156 in alfalfa under drought stress

### Description
Alfalfa is the most produced perennial forage crop in Canada. Drought stress is a major form of abiotic stress, affecting its productivity and annual yield. A small RNA, miR156, plays a major role in drought tolerance by downregulating downstream SPL genes, but its effects at the proteome level are unknown. In this study, the protein level perturbations of miR156 overexpression (A8) and empty vector (EV) control genotypes were compared under drought stress. Using label-free quantification, 3,000 protein groups were identified, of which 68 were upregulated in A8 and 84 were downregulated relative to EV under control conditions. Conversely, under drought stress, 610 proteins were upregulated and only 52 proteins were downregulated in A8 relative to EV. Functional analysis using PlantRegMap showed that the enriched proteins are likely involved in biological and molecular processes including antioxidant response, response to stress, signal transduction and biosynthesis of secondary metabolites. These proteins/pathways might be involved in the enhancement of drought stress tolerance mediated by miR156. Protein groups related to signaling, such as MAP kinase, calcium-dependent protein kinase, protein phosphatase 2C, and transcriptional regulators including bZIP and zinc finger proteins were found to be differentially expressed when a search was conducted against a drought stress gene database. The  proteomic dataset was validated by immunoblotting of selected proteins. The results of this study provide a better understanding and insight into the role of miR156 in drought stress tolerance in alfalfa at the proteomic level.

### Sample Protocol
In this study, alfalfa clone N4.4.2 was used. The empty vector (EV) control, miR156 overexpressed alfalfa (A8) genotype (having an ~200-fold increase in transcript level of miR156). Rooted stem cuttings were potted in PRO-MIX BX medium (Premier Tech, Rivière-du-Loup, Québec) in a 25.5 × 33 cm pot and allowed to grow under standard conditions in the greenhouse at 25-27  °C, 16 hour/8 hour light/dark cycle for 30 days. In a randomized design, half of the plants in one group were exposed to drought treatment for a period of 16 days (water withholding) and other group control plants were watered thrice a week. Leaf trifoliates from the primary stem at the second and third position from the apex were excised in four biological replicates and used as tissue samples and immediately transferred to liquid nitrogen.

### Data Protocol
The raw files obtained from MS/MS analysis were searched against M. truncatula protein sequence database, a reference species for alfalfa. Searches were conducted with the MaxQuant software (1.6.1.0) using default precursor mass tolerances set by Andromeda, a search engine that implements a matching and scoring algorithm (20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 for the main search). Trypsin and LysC were selected as enzyme setting with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation was selected as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine residues was selected as variable modification. The false discovery rate was set at 1% for the identification of peptides and proteins. The minimum peptide length for identification was set to 7 amino acids. The MaxLFQ algorithm for label free quantification (LFQ) and “match- between-runs feature” was enabled in MaxQuant. Raw output data files were loaded into Perseus and data were pre-processed to remove outliers or incorrect protein identifications. Protein groups only identified by modification site, reverse contaminants which were identified from the reversed part of the decoy database and protein groups found to be commonly occurring contaminant were removed for further data analysis. Next, missing values were imputed by replacing them from a normal distribution and data files were log2 transformed. Only protein groups that were quantified in 3 out of 4 biological replicates of at least one sample were retained.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
2. alfalfa, Squamosa promoter-binding protein, Proteome., Drought stress, Mir156

### Affiliations
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada

### Submitter
Frédéric Marsolais

### Lab Head
Dr Frédéric Marsolais
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada


