### Accession
PXD002855

### Title
A novel inducible retroviral expression system for StrepHA-tandem affinity purification mass-spectrometry-based proteomics

### Description
Tandem-affinity purification mass spectrometry using the streptavidin-hemagglutinin (SH)-tag has been successfully employed to map signaling networks in several large-scale  studies. However its application has so far been restricted to the small number of Flp/FRT-recombination competent cell lines. We present pRSHIC, a novel retroviral,  doxycycline-inducible Tet-On vector system suitable for expression of SH-tagged target proteins in a wide range of human and mouse cell systems. The additional feature of  concomitant reporter fluorophore expression makes pRSHIC a valuable tool for a diverse set of phenotypic analyses beyond TAP-MS experiments. The dataset demonstrates the  application of pRSHIC for TAP-MS analysis of two showcase bait proteins involved in cancer cell proliferation as well as cell death induction and identified novel high- confidence interacting proteins with possible pharmacological intervention potential.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were seeded, induced with doxycycline, lysed and subjected to TAP-LC-MSMS analysis. In brief, bait proteins were sequentially tandem-affinity purified via StrepTactin  sepharose and HA-agarose beads. Samples were eluted with formic acid, subjected to tryptic digestion and analyzed on a hybrid linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos  mass spectrometer coupled to an Agilent 1200 HPLC nanoflow system.

### Data Protocol
The RAW files were processed using ProteoWizard software (v2.1.2708) to extract the MS1 and MS2 spectra. Mass lists were re-calibrated using an initial database search using  Mascot (www.matrixscience.com, version 2.3.02) with broad mass tolerance as well as conservative score threshold. Mass tolerance of ± 10 ppm and ± 0.6 Da was used for  precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Other parameters include, fully-tryptic peptides with maximum of 1 missed cleavage; carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed  modification; and methionine oxidation variable modification. In addition, Mascot peptide ion score of 30 or above and a minimum of 3 unique peptides per protein were  required. Re-calibrated mass lists were searched using Mascot and Phenyx (GeneBio, SA, version 2.5.14) database search algorithms with mass tolerances of ± 4 ppm and ± 0.3  Da at precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Fixed and variable modifications were the same as in the initial search. Searches were performed against the human  UniProtKB/SwissProt database (www.uniprot.org release 2013.01) including all protein isoforms. In-house Perl-based programs were used to merge identifications from Mascot  and Phenyx as described in PubMed ID 20940065. Finally, using a reverse database search with same parameters, a false discovery rate of <1% and <0.1% for protein and peptide  identifications, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein-protein interaction, Tandem affinity purification-mass spectrometry, Streptavidin-hemagglutinin-tag

### Affiliations
Scientific Director, CeMM - Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria; Professor for Medical Systems Biology, Center for Physiology and  Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria (lab head)
CeMM Center for Molecular Medicine

### Submitter
Richard Kumaran Kandasamy

### Lab Head
Dr Giulio Superti-Furga
Scientific Director, CeMM - Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria; Professor for Medical Systems Biology, Center for Physiology and  Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria (lab head)


