### Accession
PXD003084

### Title
Absolute quantification of budding yeast proteome with PCS method

### Description
Absolute quantification of proteome is one of the most important tasks in proteomic research. The aim in this analysis is providing proof-of-principle of our originally developed strategy for absolute quantification of multiple proteins present at various concentrations in a cell, using stable isotope-labeled peptide concatenated standard (PCS). This study also provides insights into structures of regulation of metabolic pathway and into biological mechanisms for regulation of expressed protein abundance.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from cultured budding yeast were mixed with stable isotope-labeled peptide-concatenated standards (PCSs) and then digested into peptides with lysyl endopeptidase and trypsin. Tryptic peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS analyses with LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher scientific) mass spectrometry in a data dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw data of acquired MS/MS spectra were subjected to database search toward protein sequence fasta file containing ORF of the budding yeast (S. cerevisiae from Saccharomyces Genome Database (http://www.yeastgenome.org/)) and used standard (PCS) proteins plus trypsin and keratin sequences as contaminants. Mass-to-charge ratio from 400 to 1500 and up to one missed cleavages on tryptic peptide and cleavage at K-P site were considered for calculation of theoretical peptide mass. Mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were allowed at 10 ppm and 1 Da, respectively. Mass shift dependent on modifications were set as follows; carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021) as static modification and 13C6-Lys and 13C6-Arg (+6.020) as dynamic modifications. Resultant peptide spectra matches (PSMs) that fulfill false discovery rate with less than 1% were considered as identification list for peptides and proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The accurate and precise absolute abundance of proteins can be determined using mass spectrometry by spiking the sample with stable isotope-labeled standards. In this study, we developed a strategy of hierarchical use of peptide-concatenated standards (PCSs) to quantify more proteins over a wider dynamic range. Multiple primary PCSs were used for quantification of many target proteins. Unique "ID-tag peptides" were introduced into individual primary PCSs, allowing us to monitor the exact amounts of individual PCSs using a "secondary PCS" in which all "ID-tag peptides" were concatenated. Furthermore, we varied the copy number of the "ID-tag peptide" in each PCS according to a range of expression levels of target proteins. This strategy accomplished absolute quantification over a wider range than that of the measured ratios. The quantified abundance of budding yeast proteins showed a high reproducibility for replicate analyses and similar copy numbers per cell for ribosomal proteins, demonstrating the accuracy and precision of this strategy. A comparison with the absolute abundance of transcripts clearly indicated different post-transcriptional regulation of expression for specific functional groups. Thus, the approach presented here is a faithful method for the absolute quantification of proteomes and provides insights into biological mechanisms, including the regulation of expressed protein abundance.

### Keywords
Budding yeast, Absolute quantification, Peptide-concatenated standard (pcs)

### Affiliations
Meiji University
School of Agriculture, Meiji University, Japan

### Submitter
Keiji Kito

### Lab Head
Dr Keiji Kito
School of Agriculture, Meiji University, Japan


