### Accession
PXD019149

### Title
Extensive transfer of genes for edible seaweed digestion from marine to human gut bacteria

### Description
Humans harbor numerous species of colonic bacteria that digest the fiber polysaccharides in commonly consumed terrestrial plants. More recently in history, regional populations have consumed edible seaweeds (macroalgae) containing unique polysaccharides. However, it remains unclear how extensively gut bacteria have adapted to digest these novel nutrients. Here, we show that the ability of gut bacteria to digest seaweed polysaccharides is considerably more pervasive than previously appreciated. Using culture-based approaches, we show that known Bacteroides genes involved in seaweed degradation have mobilized into many members of this genus. We also identify new marine bacteria-derived genes, and their corresponding mobile DNA elements, that are involved in degrading several seaweed polysaccharides. Some of these new genes reside in gut-resident, Gram-positive Firmicutes, for which phylogenetic analysis suggests an origin in the Epulopiscium gut symbionts of marine fishes. Our results are important for understanding the metabolic plasticity of the human gut microbiome, the global exchange of genes in the context of dietary selective pressures and identifying new functions that can be introduced or engineered to design and fill orthogonal niches for a future generation of engineered probiotics.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron strain 3731 (herein, Bt3731) was cultured in triplicates (n=3) in MM with either 0.1% carrageenan or 0.2% galactose, from Cladosiphon okamurans (IEX purified) as described by Martens et al. (2008, "Mucosal glycan foraging enhances fitness and transmission of a saccharolytic human gut bacterial symbiont. Cell Host Microbe4(5):447–457). Pre-cultures with the same carbon source were used to set the starting OD600 of the main culture to 0.05. Cells were harvested in mid-exponential phase (OD600 = ~0.25) by centrifugation at 4,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C and stored at -80°C until analysis. The soluble proteome (all soluble proteins), the secretome (all secreted proteins) and the membrane proteome (all proteins attached to membranes) were selectively enriched for further analysis. The soluble total proteome was extracted from cell pellets of carrageenan- and galactose-grown Bt3731 by sonication (Heinz et al., 2012 "The genome of the obligate intracellular parasite Trachipleistophora hominis: new insights into microsporidian genome dynamics and reductive evolution." PLoS pathogens 8.10). The secretome of carrageenan-grown cells was enriched from carrageenan culture supernatants using StrataClean beads (Otto et al., 2017 "An Easy and Fast Protocol for Affinity Bead-Based Protein Enrichment and Storage of Proteome Samples" Methods Enzymol. 2017;585:1-13. doi: 10.1016/bs.mie.2016.09.012.), and the membrane proteome was enriched from carrageenan-grown cells using the trypsin shaving approach (Reisky et al., 2018 "Biochemical characterization of an ulvan lyase from the marine flavobacterium Formosa agariphila KMM 3901 T." Applied microbiology and biotechnology 102.16 (2018): 6987-6996). Soluble proteome and secretome samples were further analyzed in a gel-based proteomic approach, i.e. protein extracts were separated on a 10% polyacrylamide sodium dodecyl sulfate mini gel as previously described (Heinz et al., 2012). After CBB staining, entire gel lanes were dissected into 10 equal pieces, which were destained and overnight-digested with trypsin (1 µg/ml, sequencing grade, Promega), before MS analysis of the peptide mixes. Bt3731's secretome samples were subjected to gel-free digestion (Otto et al., 2017) before MS analysis. Peptides were separated on a C18 column and subjected to reversed-phase chromatography on a nano-ACQUITY-UPLC (Waters Corporation). Mass spectrometry (MS) and MS/MS data were acquired using an online-coupled LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were searched against a target-decoy protein sequence database, which included all predicted proteins of Bt3731 in forward and reverse directions (decoys) and a set of common laboratory contaminants. Validation of MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications was performed with Scaffold v4 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) using a maximum false discovery rate of 0.01 (1%) on the peptide level and 0.01 (1%) on the protein level. Only proteins that could be detected in at least two out of three biological replicates were considered identified. Normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAFs) were calculated using Scaffold’s ‘total spectrum counts’ for each protein, which allows comparing relative protein abundances between individual samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Seaweed, Polysaccharides, Bateroides, Gut bacteria, Microbiome

### Affiliations
Universität Greifswald Institut für Pharmazie, AG Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie Greifswald, Germany
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Stephanie Markert

### Lab Head
Dr Stephanie Markert
Universität Greifswald Institut für Pharmazie, AG Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie Greifswald, Germany


