### Accession
PXD006158

### Title
RIME against PBX1 protein in P19.6 mouse embryonal carcinoma cells treated for 48 hours with all-trans retinoic acid

### Description
Identification of PBX1 interactors in P19.6 mouse embryonal carcinoma cells treated for 48 hours with all-trans retinoic acid.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were processed as described in Serandour et al, Nucleic Acids Research 2012. RIMEs were performed as described in Mohammed et al, Cell Reports 2013, with the antibody anti-PBX1 from Abnova reference H00005087-M01. Control RIMEs were performed with non-immune serum from mouse.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data in Thermo Fisher .RAW format and mzIdentML exported from Scaffold

### Publication Abstract
Epigenetic mechanisms are believed to play key roles in the establishment of cell-specific transcription programs. Accordingly, the modified bases 5-methylcytosine (5mC) and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) have been observed in DNA of genomic regulatory regions such as enhancers, and oxidation of 5mC into 5hmC by Ten-eleven translocation (TET) proteins correlates with enhancer activation. However, the functional relationship between cytosine modifications and the chromatin architecture of enhancers remains elusive. To gain insights into their function, 5mC and 5hmC levels were perturbed by inhibiting DNA methyltransferases and TETs during differentiation of mouse embryonal carcinoma cells into neural progenitors, and chromatin characteristics of enhancers bound by the pioneer transcription factors FOXA1, MEIS1, and PBX1 were interrogated. In a large fraction of the tested enhancers, inhibition of DNA methylation was associated with a significant increase in monomethylation of H3K4, a characteristic mark of enhancer priming. In addition, at some specific enhancers, 5mC oxidation by TETs facilitated chromatin opening, a process that may stabilize MEIS1 binding to these genomic regions.

### Keywords
Pbx1

### Affiliations
INSERM
IGDR UMR U6290 CNRS Université de Rennes 1

### Submitter
Aurelien Serandour

### Lab Head
Dr Gilles Salbert
IGDR UMR U6290 CNRS Université de Rennes 1


