### Accession
PXD036565

### Title
Paenibacillus sp. GKG secreted proteins LC-MSMS

### Description
The advances of next-generation sequencing technologies enabled the continuous growth in the number of gene sequences deposited into the CAZy database, meanwhile, the number of biochemically characterized CAZymes is growing at a much slower rate. The biochemical characterization of discovered enzymes is important because of the industrially relevant properties such as high thermal stability or cold-adaptivity that these enzymes may possess. The aim of our project is to screen for up-to-date biochemically uncharacterized CAZymes. We screen for microorganisms that are able to produce extracellular CAZymes. We use LC-MSMS proteomics to identify extracellular enzymes produced by the selected microorganisms.

### Sample Protocol
Paenibacillus sp. GKG bacterium was cultivated in a liquid mineral medium containing yeast cell walls as a single carbon source. The culture medium was centrifuged to remove bacterial cells. Cell-free supernatant was concentrated using a filter membrane (MWCO=14 kDa). The concentrated supernatant was subjected to digestion according to FASP protocol. Tryptic digests were analyzed in the data-independent-acquisition (DIA) mode MSE using Synapt G2 mass spectrometer (Waters).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS) version 3.0.3 (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA). The following parameters were used to generate peak lists: low and elevated energy thresholds, 135 and 20 counts, respectively; reference mass correction window, 0.25 Da at 556.2771 Da/e. Processed data were analyzed using the following parameters: trypsin was selected as a primary digest reagent, one missed cleavage was permitted, carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Minimal identification criteria included 2 fragment ions per peptide, 5 fragment ions per protein, and a minimum of 1 peptide per protein. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 2%. Sequences (1,671,348 entries) retrieved from UniProt using the Paenibacillus genus keyword and internal standard rabbit muscle glycogen phosphorylase sequence (UniProt ID: P00489) were used as a reference database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ghs, Lc-msms, Paenibacillus, Secreted proteins

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology, Institute of Biochemistry, Life Sciences Center, Vilnius University, Sauletekio 7, Vilnius, LT-10257, Lithuania

### Submitter
Gediminas Plakys

### Lab Head
Dr Rolandas Meškys
Department of Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology, Institute of Biochemistry, Life Sciences Center, Vilnius University, Sauletekio 7, Vilnius, LT-10257, Lithuania


