### Accession
PXD015349

### Title
Analysis of the fragments from hTau degraded by proteasome 20s using mass spectrometry

### Description
We found two stable intermediates in the interaction of human Tau and proteasome 20s. The aim of this study is to determine the cleavage sites on hTau during this process.

### Sample Protocol
After incubation of human Tau and proteasome 20s for different time, samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE seperation followed by in-gel digestion of the two intermediates. Meanwhile, the free peptides in the incubation solution were analysed by LC-MS/MS after deleting the proteins. The long fragments were measured by intact mass.

### Data Protocol
Thermo Proteome discoverer (2.1.0.81) was used for database searching. In Proteome discoverer, the Sequest HT, fixed value PSM validator and Precursor Ions Area Detector nodes were used. Parameters for database searching were as follows: The hTau protein sequence (P10636-8) was downloaded from Swiss-Prot. Mass tolerances for precursors and fragment ions waswere set as ±10 ppm and ±20 ppm, respectively. Maximal missed cleavage was 4. Dynamic modifications were set as, oxidation (M) and Acetylation (protein N-terminal). For in-gel samples, fixed modification was carbamidomethylation (C). Trypsin were was used as the enzyme and its specificity was set as semi-specific. For in solution sample, no enzyme was set. For precursor ions area detector, mass precision was 2 ppm. Only the peptides which were identified with high confidence were used in this study. For in solution samples, the peak area of precursors was used for quantification of the identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) can be degraded in a ubiquitin-independent process by the 20<i>S</i> proteasome. Decline in 20<i>S</i> activity characterizes neurodegenerative diseases. Here, we examine 20<i>S</i> degradation of IDP tau, a protein that aggregates into insoluble deposits in Alzheimer's disease. We show that cleavage of tau by the 20<i>S</i> proteasome is most efficient within the aggregation-prone repeat region of tau and generates both short, aggregation-deficient peptides and two long fragments containing residues 1 to 251 and 1 to 218. Phosphorylation of tau by the non-proline-directed Ca<sup>2+</sup>/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II inhibits degradation by the 20<i>S</i> proteasome. Phosphorylation of tau by GSK3&#x3b2;, a major proline-directed tau kinase, modulates tau degradation kinetics in a residue-specific manner. The study provides detailed insights into the degradation products of tau generated by the 20<i>S</i> proteasome, the residue specificity of degradation, single-residue degradation kinetics, and their regulation by posttranslational modification.

### Keywords
Htau, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Fudan University
Max Planck Institute for biophysical chemistry

### Submitter
Pan Fang

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Max Planck Institute for biophysical chemistry


