### Accession
PXD028916

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid in West Highland white terriers with canine idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis C4PR_LIV

### Description
Canine idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (CIPF) is a chronic, progressive, interstitial fibrosing lung disease, manifesting as cough, exercise intolerance and ultimately, dyspnea and respiratory failure. It mainly affects West Highland white terriers (WHWTs), lacks curable treatment and has a poor prognosis. Aspiration of gastroesophageal refluxate may play a role in the development of CIPF. In the first part of this study, we completed label-free quantitative proteomic analysis of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) from CIPF and healthy WHWTs. In the second part, we evaluated potential protein markers of reflux aspiration from canine gastric juice and vomitus and evaluated whether these were present in BALF from the two groups.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 10 CIPF WHWTs (median age 11.5 years, range 7.9-13.9 years; five females and five males) and 10 healthy WHWTs (median age 8.5 years, range 4.5-13.8 years; six females and four males) were retrospectively selected for this study. All WHWTs were thoroughly examined; clinical workup included physical examination, hematology, serum biochemistry, arterial blood gas analysis, fecal sample analysis, cervicothoracic radiographs, bronchoscopy with BALF sampling and high-resolution computed tomography. CIPF diagnosis was verified with postmortem lung histopathology in all dogs. Owners reported no signs indicating gastrointestinal disease in any of the dogs at the time of sample collection. Additionally, two healthy dogs of other breeds were included in this study (gastric juice sample: Belgian shepherd, 7.5 years, female and vomit sample: Australian shepherd, 10.9 years, female). All dogs were client-owned pet dogs and were examined in the Veterinary Teaching Hospital of Helsinki University. Bile acid data used in this study are from previous study (Määttä et al., 2018).   Bronchoscopy and BALF sampling were performed under general anesthesia. BALF samples were collected from left and right caudal lung lobes using sterile saline (2 ml/kg/lobe). Supernatant was separated by centrifugation and stored at -80 °C (Rajamäki et al., 2001). Gastric fluid sample was collected during gastroscopy by flushing with saline and vomit sample by inducing vomiting with apomorphine (0.2 mg/kg). Both were stored similarly as BALF samples. BALF samples were diluted in 25 mm ammonium bicarbonate to a final volume of 160 μl to yield a total protein concentration between 0.11 – 0.13 mg/ml. Samples were treated with a 1% (w/v) solution of Rapigest SF Surfactant (Waters) to a final concentration of 0.05% (w/v) before incubation at 80 °C for 10 minutes. Disulfide bonds were reduced by the addition of dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 3 mM and incubated for 10 minutes at 60 °C. Iodoacetamide (IA) was added to a final concentration of 9 mm to alkylate the free sulfhydryl groups on the cysteine residues. After incubation for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark trypsin or endopeptidase GluC was added to a 50:1 protein: protease ratio and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Digestion was stopped by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) and incubated for 45 minutes at 37 °C. The samples were centrifuged to remove particulates.  Peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 nano system (Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK) coupled to a Q-Exactive-HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK) to acquire the masses of peptides derived from proteins extracted from the BALF samples. Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (50 cm) (Acclaim Pepmap 100) at 12 μl/min over 7 min with an aqueous solution containing 0.1% (v/v) TFA and 2% (v/v) acetonitrile. The trap column was set in-line with an analytical column (Easy-Spray Pepmap® RSLC) (Dionex). Peptides were eluted by applying a linear gradient of 3.8% to 50% solvent B (acetonitrile 80% (v/v) with 0.1% (v/v) FA over 35 min at 300 nl/min. Solvent A was HPLC grade water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent positive (ESI+) mode and full scan MS spectra (350-2000 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap. The 16 most intense multiply charged ions (z ≥ 2) were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the octopole collision cell by high energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and detected in the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Samples were searched against a database comprised of all canine protein sequences in the Uniprot Uni_Canine database (45,397 proteins) using trypsin or endopeptidase GluC as the specified enzyme, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, methionine oxidation as variable modification and one trypsin or endopeptidase GluC missed cleavage, precursor and fragment ion error tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.01 Da, respectively. The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using the decoy database tool in MASCOT. Only those proteins identified with an FDR <1% were accepted. Label-free quantification, including run alignment and peak picking, was carried out in Progenesis QI for Proteomics v4 (Nonlinear Dynamics), while database searching was carried out by MASCOT search engine (Matrix Science version 2.6.0.). The data exported from Progenesis was imported into Simplifi (simplifi.protofi.com) for rapid visualisation and calculation of non-parametric statistics and the output table from Simplifi is presented as Supplementary Table 2 Functional enrichment analysis of BALF core proteome were performed using g:Profiler (https://biit.cs.ut.ee/gprofiler/gost).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid; canine; reflux aspiration; proteomics: west highland white terrier

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Centre for Proteome Research, University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Rosemary Maher

### Lab Head
Dr Robert John Beynon
Centre for Proteome Research, University of Liverpool


