### Accession
PXD019437

### Title
Crosslinking/mass spectrometry analysis of Bacillus subtilis RNAP-Delta-HelD complexes

### Description
Crosslinking mass spectrometry was applied to investigate protein contacts and dramatic structural rearrangements triggered by HelD binding to RNAP. Four complexes RNAPΔδΔHelD , RNAPΔδΔHelD-δ, RNAPΔδΔHelD-HelD and RNAPΔδΔHelD-δ-HelD were assembled using RNAP purified from B. subtilis ΔhelDΔropE strain (RNAPΔδΔHelD), and recombinant δ and HelD. The four complexes were crosslinked using a heterobifunctional, photoactivatable crosslinker sulfosuccinimidyl 4,4′‐azipentanoate (sulfo-SDA). Crosslinked protein complexes were analyzed by LC-MS/MS, and crosslinked residue pairs were identified in form of crosslinked peptides.

### Sample Protocol
We used crosslinking mass spectrometry to examine the effects of HelD binding to RNAP. We created four complexes using purified RNAP and recombinant δ and HelD. We crosslinked the complexes using a photoactivatable crosslinker, then separated and analyzed them using LC-MS/MS and SEC.

### Data Protocol
xiSEARCH and xiFDR software was used to analyzed the crosslinking peptides and proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Cellular RNA polymerases (RNAPs) can become trapped on DNA or RNA, threatening genome stability and limiting free enzyme pools, but how RNAP recycling into active states is achieved remains elusive. In Bacillus subtilis, the RNAP &#x3b4; subunit and NTPase HelD have been implicated in RNAP recycling. We structurally analyzed Bacillus subtilis RNAP-&#x3b4;-HelD complexes. HelD has two long arms: a Gre cleavage factor-like coiled-coil inserts deep into the RNAP secondary channel, dismantling the active site and displacing RNA, while a unique helical protrusion inserts into the main channel, prying the &#x3b2; and &#x3b2;' subunits apart and, aided by &#x3b4;, dislodging DNA. RNAP is recycled when, after releasing trapped nucleic acids, HelD dissociates from the enzyme in an ATP-dependent manner. HelD abundance during slow growth and a dimeric (RNAP-&#x3b4;-HelD)<sub>2</sub> structure that resembles hibernating eukaryotic RNAP I suggest that HelD might also modulate active enzyme pools in response to cellular cues.

### Keywords
Crosslinking/mass spectrometry, Held, Bacillus rnap

### Affiliations
Technische Universität Berlin

### Submitter
Zhuo Chen 

### Lab Head
 Juri Rappsilber 
Technische Universität Berlin


