### Accession
PXD006375

### Title
Identification and quantification of allele specific proteins and homeolog expression bias in an allopolyploid non-model crop by integrating transcriptomics and proteomics.

### Description
The fate of doubled genes, from allopolyploid or autopolyploid origin, is controlled at multiple levels within the central dogma: gene loss or silencing, neo- and/or sub functionalization, inter genomic transfer, allele dominance/co-dominance, differences in transcription/translation efficiency, post translational modifications… These regulatory processes through evolution have caused a plethora of genotype x environment interactions displayed  in the modern day phenotypes. The study of non-model crops is challenging but solutions are emerging. More and more, one gets insight into the tolerance mechanisms of a specific genotype. By integrating transcriptomics into our proteomic data, we studied the genetic diversity of an allopolyploid ABB banana, a tolerant genotype, and compared it to two different sensitive AAA genotypes. The root growth of the ABB cultivar was 60 % higher under mild osmotic stress.  234,000 spectra were aligned and quantified, resulting in 2,753 identified root proteins. 383 gene loci displayed genotype specific differential expression whereof 252 showed at least one Single Amino Acid Polymorphism (SAAP). The homeoallelic contribution was assessed using transcriptome read alignment, thus revealing each allele contribution at the RNA level. This provides insight in the structure and the organization of the triploid genome. In the ABB cultivar, allele expressions are supposed to follow a 1/3 and 2/3 pattern. We found that many genes deviated from this expectation and we show that 32 gene loci even displayed a 100% read preference for the allele that was unique for the ABB tolerant genotype , suggesting that the presence of unique alleles and homoelog expression bias is correlated to the observed phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
In vitro banana plants of three genotypes representing important cultivated subgroups were selected: Cachaco (Bluggoe subgroup; ABB; ITC0643), Grande Naine (Cavendish subgroup; AAA; ITC0180), and Mbwazirume (Mutika-Lujugira subgroup; AAA; ITC0084). Plants were grown in growth medium which was refreshed whenever the volume reached 55% of the original volume in at least one plant. The stress treatment was initiated 35 days after the onset of growth: the stressed subgroup received fresh medium including 5% of PEG-8000, an osmotic stress agent mimicking mild drought stress (pF 2.7). The control plants received a medium without addition of PEG-8000. 3 biological replicates per cultivar were harvested 3 days after the start of the 5% PEG-8000 treatment. Root tips for proteomic analysis (± 4 cm long from the apex) were collected and the material was snap frozen in liquid nitrogen.  Proteins were extracted following the phenol extraction/ammonium acetate precipitation protocol (Buts et al. 2014; S. C. Carpentier et al. 2005). The digested samples (1 µg/5 µL) were injected and separated on an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Dionex, Thermo Scientific, USA) equipped with a Acclaim PepMap100 pre column (C18 3 µm-100Å, Thermo Scientific, USA) and an C18 PepMap RSLC (2 µm, 50 µm x 50 cm, Thermo Scientific, USA) following a multiple step gradient with a linear gradient (flow rate: 0.300 µL/min): 4% buffer B (80% acetonitrile (CAN), in 0.08% formic acid (FA)) for 3 min, 4% - 12% in 17 min, 12% - 15% in 10 min, 15% - 18% in 45 min, 18% -20% in 40 min, 20% -30% in 65 min, 30% -35% in 30 min, 35% - 65% in 10 min, 65% -95% in 5 min, 95% for 40 min, 95% - 4% in 1 min, 4% for 39 min. The Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA) was operated in positive ion mode with a nano spray voltage of 1.5 kV and the source temperature set to 250°C. ProteoMAss LTQ/FT-Hybrid ESI Pos. Mode Cal Mix (MSCAL5-1EA SUPELCO, Sigma Aldrich) was used as an external calibrant and the lock mass 445.12003 as an internal calibrant. The instrument was operated in data-dependent (DDA) mode with a survey MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 (fw hm at m/z 200) for the mass range of m/z 400-1600 for precursor ions, followed by MS/MS scans of the top ten most intense peaks with +2, +3, and +4, charged ions above a threshold ion count of 1e+6 at 17,500 resolution using normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25 eV with an isolation window of 3.0 m/z, a dynamic exclusion of 30 s, and an Apex Trigger of 5 - 15 s. All data were acquired with Xcalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Scientific, USA).  For identification, all raw data were converted into mgf-files using Progenesis (v 4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics, UK). For each cultivar, peak lists (mgf format) containing all MSMS spectra were extracted from Progenesis and were identified against developed cultivar specific databases (mRNA seq based) using integration of 3 database search algorithms: Mascot v2.2.06 (Perkins et al. 1999), X!Tandem version X!Tandem Vengeance (2015.12.15.2) (Craig and Beavis 2004) and MS-GF+ version Beta (v10282) (Kim and Pevzner 2014). The search was conducted using SearchGUI. The identification settings were as follows: enzyme trypsin, 2 missed cleavages (maximally), 10.0 ppm as MS1 and 0.02 Da as MS2 tolerance, Carbamidomethylation of C (+57.021464 Da) as fixed modification, Oxidation of M (+15.994915 Da), Acetylation of protein N-term (+42.010565 Da), Pyrolidone from E (-18.010565 Da), Pyrolidone from Q (-17.026549 Da), Pyrolidone from carbamidomethylated C (-17.026549 Da) as variable modifications.

### Data Protocol
The cultivar specific databases used for identification of MSMS spectra were constructed based on mRNA seq reads from our plants (available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/PRJNA305241, (Zorrilla-Fontanesi et al. 2016)). RNA-seq reads, contained in FASTQ files, were first trimmed based on low-quality ends and adapters were removed with cutadapt (v2.7.9 (M. Martin 2011)). Quality was checked with FastQC (v0.11.3). Reads were then mapped against the Musa acuminata genome of reference (DH Pahang) version 2 (http://banana-genome.cirad.fr/) (Droc et al. 2013; G. Martin et al. 2016) using the splice junction mapper for RNA-seq STAR (v2.5.0 (Dobin et al. 2013)) with default parameters. Read groups were added for each alignment, reads were split using SplitNCigarReads and locally realigned with InderlRealigner from GATK (Genome Analysis ToolKit v3.4 (McKenna et al. 2010)) finally resulting in sample specific Binary Alignment/Map (BAM) files. Cultivar specific databases were constructed by concatenating BAM files per cultivar (mpileup, SAMTools; Li 2011; Li et al. 2009), followed by variant calling, in reference to the Musa reference genome (45,855 sequences) (bcftools, SAMTools; Li 2011; Li et al. 2009). Each database was complemented by 116 common repository of adventitious proteins (CRAP, http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) and combined into a target/decoy database (Elias and Gygi 2010) which enables False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimation. The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI v3.1.4 (Vaudel et al. 2011, 2015). Peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using PeptideShaker v1.14.5 (Vaudel et al. 2015). Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1.0% False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution. Results were exported and processed further in R software (v 3.3.0) where PSMs were filtered, keeping the most confident peptide sequence matches. Only peptides identified in genes with average summed cultivar read count above 100 were kept as trustworthy identifications.

### Publication Abstract
The fate of doubled genes, from allopolyploid or autopolyploid origin, is controlled at multiple levels, resulting in the modern day cultivars. We studied the root growth of 3 different triploid banana cultivars under control and osmotic stress conditions. The root growth of the allopolyploid ABB cultivar was 42% higher under control and 61% higher under osmotic stress. By integrating transcriptomics and proteomics, we studied the gene expression of all 3 cultivars, resulting in 2,749 identified root proteins. 383 gene loci displayed genotype specific differential expression whereof 252 showed at least one Single Amino Acid Polymorphism (SAAP). In the ABB cultivar, allele expressions supposedly follow a 1/3 and 2/3 pattern for respectively the A and the B allele. Using transcriptome read alignment to assess the homeoallelic contribution we found that 63% of the allele specific genes deviated from this expectation. 32 gene loci even did not express the A allele. The identified ABB allele- specific proteins correlate well with the observed growth phenotype as they are enriched in energy related functions such as ATP metabolic processes, nicotinamide nucleotide metabolic processes, and glycolysis.

### Keywords
Allele specificity, Non-model crop, Musa acuminata, Integration transcriptomics and proteomics

### Affiliations
Division Crop Biotechnics, KU Leuven, Belgium
Laboratory of Tropical Crop Improvement, Division of Crop Biotechnics, KU Leuven, B-3001, Leuven, Belgium FAcility for System Biology based Mass Spectrometry (SYBIOMA), KU Leuven, B-3001, Leuven, Belgium

### Submitter
Jelle van Wesemael

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastien Carpentier
Laboratory of Tropical Crop Improvement, Division of Crop Biotechnics, KU Leuven, B-3001, Leuven, Belgium FAcility for System Biology based Mass Spectrometry (SYBIOMA), KU Leuven, B-3001, Leuven, Belgium


