### Accession
PXD030069

### Title
A census of Hsp70-mediated proteome solubility changes upon recovery from severe heat stress

### Description
Eukaryotic cells respond to heat shock through several regulatory processes including upregulation of stress responsive chaperones and reversible shutdown cellular activities through formation of protein assemblies. However, the underlying regulatory mechanisms of the recovery of these heat-induced protein assemblies remain largely elusive. Here, we measured the proteome abundance and solubility changes during recovery from severe heat shock in the mouse Neuro2a cell line. We found that prefoldins and translation machinery are rapidly down-regulated as the first step in the heat shock response. Analysis of proteome solubility reveals a rapid mobilization of protein quality control machineries, changes in cellular energy metabolism, changes in translational activity and nucleocytoplasmic transport are fundamental to the early stress responses, while the longer term adaptation to stress involves renewal of core cellular components. Hsp70 inhibition negatively affects the ribosomal machinery and delays the solubility recovery of many nuclear proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and TMT labeling for mass spectrometry. 100 µg of protein from each sample was treated with 10 mM DTT for 1 h, followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at 37 °C. Proteins were purified by chloroform/methanol precipitation (3). The resultant pellet was resuspended in 100 µL 8 M urea, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) with vigorous vortexing. The solution was then adjusted to a final concentration of 1 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, followed by trypsin digestion (enzyme: protein mass ratio = 1:40) overnight at 37 °C. The peptides were desalted with a solid-phase extraction (SPE) procedure using cartridges (Oasis HLB 1 cc Vac Cartridge, 10 mg sorbent, Waters Corp., USA), followed by lyophilization by freeze drying (Virtis, SP Scientific) overnight. The pellets were resuspended in distilled water and quantified by bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. 25 µg of each sample was labelled with TMT-11 plex isobaric labelling reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instruction. Briefly, the TMT labeling reagents were equilibrated to room temperature immediately before use. 41 μL of anhydrous acetonitrile was added to each tube. The reagents were dissolved with intermittent vortexing over 5 minutes. The pH of the peptide solution was adjusted to 8 with 1 M TEAB, and the concentration of acetonitrile (ACN) in the peptide solution was adjusted to at least 30% (v/v). 4.1 µL TMT label reagent was added to the corresponding peptide solution. The reaction was incubated at room temperature for 1 h with orbital shaking (~ 200 rpm), followed by reaction quenching with the addition of 4 µL of 5% hydroxyl amine and incubation for 15 min. Equal amounts of TMT labelled peptides for different samples were combined and lyophilized. The dried peptides were resuspended in 150 µL MS loading buffer (2% ACN, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water). The labeling schemes are shown in Fig. S2. Mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were analysed by liquid chromatography-nano electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-nESI-MS/MS). The nano-LC system, Ultimate 3000 RSLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (C18, 100 Å, 75 μm× 2 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 50 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) maintained at a temperature of 50 ℃. Typically for each LC-MS/MS experiment, 1 μg of the peptide mixture was loaded onto the enrichment (trap) column at an isocratic flow of 5 μL/min of 3% ACN containing 0.05% TFA for 5 min before the enrichment column was switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents used for the LC were water with 0.1% v/v formic acid and 5% v/v dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) for solvent A and acetonitrile with 0.1% v/v formic acid and 5% DMSO for solvent B. The gradient used (at a flow rate of 300 nL/min) was 3% B to 23% B for 144 min, 23% B to 45% B in 10 min, 45% B to 80% B in 10 min and maintained at 80% B for the final 5 min before dropping to 3% B in 1 min and equilibration for 8 min at 3% B prior to the next analysis. The MS experiments were performed using a nESI source at positive mode and Fusion Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). The spray voltages, capillary temperature and S-lens RF level were set to 1.9 kV, 275 °C and 30%. The mass spectrometry data was acquired with a 3 seconds cycle time for one full scan MS spectra and as many data dependent HCD-MS/MS spectra as possible. Full scan MS spectra had a m/z of 375-1500, a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, an auto gain control (AGC) target value of 4e5, a maximum ion trapping time of 50 milliseconds. The data dependent HCD-MS/MS of precursor ions (charge states from 2 to 7) was performed using an m/z isolation window of 0.7, a first mass at m/z of 100, a AGC target value of 1e5, a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 38%, a resolution of 50,000 at m/z 200 and a maximum ion trapping time of 105 milliseconds. All mass spectrometry data were acquired using Orbitrap mass analyzer. Dynamic exclusion was used for 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analysis. Raw MS/MS spectra were analysed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3.0.81; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science version 2.4.1). Data searches were conducted against the SwissProt Mus Musculus database (version 2015_07: Jun-24, 2015) with 548872 proteins. For protein identification, the search was conducted with 20 ppm MS tolerance, 0.2 Da MS/MS tolerance and 2 missed cleavages with trypsin were allowed. The fixed modification was carbamidomethylation of cysteines. The variable modifications were methionine oxidation, TMT labels on lysine and N-terminus. The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated by the Percolator node in Proteome Discoverer v 2.3.0.81, and accepted with 0.5% at the peptide level and 1% at the protein level. Proteins were filtered for those containing at least two unique peptides in all n=4 biological replicates. The common contaminant, Keratin, was excluded from the dataset. Peptide quantitation was performed in Proteome Discoverer v.2.3.0.81 using the precursor ion quantifier node. The protein abundance in each replicate was calculated by summation of the unique peptide abundances that were used for quantitation. For total and pellet proteome analysis, the median protein ratio (i.e., stress/control) of each replicate was normalized to 1; for supernatant proteome, the median protein ratio (i.e., pSup = supernatant/total) of each replicate was normalized to 0.8 based on the proportion (~ 0.8) of the supernatant fraction out of the total lysate determined by the BCA assay. Solubility changes were calculated as Δ pSup = pSupControl - pSupStress. One- sample t-test (for ratios generated from the total proteome) and two-sample t-test (for pSup values generated from the supernatant proteome) was performed to calculate the statistical significance with Perseus. The ratios from the total proteome and Δ pSup were scaled with a p-value weighted correction by the following two equations (16). Radjusted = 1 - (1 - R)*(1/20P) Δ pSupadjusted = Δ pSup *(1/20P) The resultant curves for Δ pSupadjusted during recovery from heat shock were clustered by K-means clustering where the optimal number of clusters was determined by manually to achieve minimal redundancy in clustered patterns. Bioinformatic analysis. For GO analysis, data were analyzed by the PANTHER overrepresentation test (PANTHER version 16.0, 20210224) using the PANTHER GO-Complete biological process, cellular component and molecular function datasets. Fisher’s exact tests using (false discovery rate) FDR correction for multiple testing were performed. Results were filtered for GO terms containing at least four proteins, and a fold enrichment over 2 and p value less than 0.05. Protein interaction networks were generated using Cytoscape 3.7.1 (17) with the built-in String (v11.0) tool (18) with a minimum required interaction score setting of 0.4 (medium confidence).  Statistical analysis. Statistical parameters are reported in the figures and corresponding figure legends. All statistical analyses were performed with Python.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chaperone, Heat shock protein 70, Disaggregation, Protein solubility, Recovery, Heat shock

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, The University of Melbourne, VIC 3010. Australia; Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, VIC 3010. Australia
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Shuai Nie

### Lab Head
Dr Danny M. Hatters
Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, The University of Melbourne, VIC 3010. Australia; Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, VIC 3010. Australia


