### Accession
PXD031171

### Title
iSPI: A Multi-dimensional, Regenerable, Proteome-scale, Human Phosphopeptide Resource for Phosphoproteomics

### Description
Mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics has become indispensable for understanding cellular signaling in complex biological systems. Despite the central role of protein phosphorylation, the field still lacks inexpensive, regenerable, and diverse phosphopeptides with ground truth phosphorylation positions that can serve as gold standards for method development and pipeline evaluation. Here, we present Iterative Synthetically Phosphorylated Isomers (iSPI), a proteome-scale library of human-derived phosphoserine-containing phosphopeptides produced in E. coli using the phosphoserine orthogonal translation system. Because phosphoserine is genetically encoded, the position of phosphorylation is precisely known. Since the library is synthesized in E. coli, phosphopeptide production is scalable and regenerable. We demonstrate the utility of iSPI as a phosphopeptide standard to investigate instrument acquisition methods, to evaluate and optimize phosphorylation site localization algorithms, and to compare performance across data analysis pipelines. As a direct result of iSPI analyses, we present AscorePro, an updated version of the Ascore algorithm that has been specifically optimized for localization of phosphorylation sites in higher energy fragmentation spectra. In addition, we provide the FLR Viewer for Phosphorylation Site Localization, a browser-based tool allowing the community to calculate phosphorylation site false localization rates using their own workflows and analysis pipelines. Thus, iSPI and its associated data constitute a useful, multi-dimensional resource for the phosphoproteomics community.

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay, and diluted to approximately 1mg/mL, followed by digestion with 1:100 LysC (Wako) overnight at room temperature and 1:100 trypsin for 6 hours. Samples were desalted using SepPak vacuum cartridges (Waters). Each subpool sample was divided into 3 aliquots, each of which was passed through a High-Select Fe-NTA enrichment column (Pierce) for phosphopeptide enrichment, using manufacterer’s recommendations. Samples were eluted with 200μL elution buffer into 100μL 10% formic acid, and dried in a rotary evaporator. Samples were re-constituted in 5% acetonitrile with 5% formic acid, and peptides were quantified by BCA assay. 25μg of each subpool was placed in a vial for label-free LC-MS/MS analysis. An additional 25ug of each subpool was dried in a rotary evaporator and reconstituted in 25uL 200mM EPPS. After the addition of anhydrous ACN to ~30%, phosphopeptides were labelled with TMTpro reagent. 1% of the sample was removed an analyzed to ensure complete labelling. TMTpro reactions were quenched with the addition of 0.3% hydroxylamine. Labelled peptides were dried in a rotary evaporated briefly to remove ACN, then desalted using in-house C18 stage tips. After drying in a rotary evaporator, samples were reconstituted in 20μL for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were collected on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC pump (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 35 cm in-house packed column (i.d. 100 μm, Accucore, 2.6 μm, 150 Å) using a 150 min gradient (from 5% - 30% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) at 500 nl/min. MS1 data were collected using the Orbitrap (120,000 resolution; maximum injection time 50 ms; AGC 4e5, 400-1400 m/z). Determined charge states between 2 and 5 were required for sequencing and a 90 s dynamic exclusion window was used. MS2 scans consisted of collision-induced dissociation (CID), multi-stage activation CID at 97.9763 Da, or higher-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) of precursors using a Top10 method. High resolution MS2 scans were collected in the Orbitrap with an isolation window of 0.7 Da, q-value of 0.25, AGC target of 50,000, and maximum injection time of 86ms. Low resolution MS2 scans were collected in the ion trap with an isolation window of 1.3 Da, q-value of 0.25, AGC target of 7500, and maximum ion injection time of 60ms. Consult Table S1 for the metadata on all included raw files (including labelling state, collision mode, resolution, FAIMS CV’s, etc.).     For the Comet/Ascore and Comet/AscorePro pipelines, raw ﬁles were converted to mzXML and monoisotopic peaks were re-assigned using Monocle33. Searches were performed using the Comet search algorithm. The protein database included common contaminant proteins (e.g., trypsin and keratins), human protein entries from Uniprot (2018), E.coli entries from EcoCyc17, and the Synthetic Human Serine Phosphoproteome15. The database was then concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. We used a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.02 Da product ion tolerance for MS2 scans collected in the Orbitrap and 1.0005 Da product ion tolerance for MS2 scans collected in the ion trap. Up to two missedcleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine residues (+0.9840 Da), phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues (+79.9663 Da) were set as variable modifications. TMTpro on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+304.2071 Da) were set as static modifications for TMTpro-labelled samples. A minimum peptide length of seven amino acids was required. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using linear discriminant analysis (LDA) as described previously, while considering the following parameters: Comet log expect, different sequence delta Comet log expect (percent difference between the first hit and the next hit with a different peptide sequence), missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, precursor mass accuracy, number of modifications, and fraction of ions matched. Only phosphorylated peptides were considered in LDA. Each run was ﬁltered separately. Protein-level FDR was subsequently estimated. The posterior probabilities reported by the LDA model for each peptide were multiplied to give a protein-level probability estimate. Proteins were ﬁltered to the target 1% FDR level for each run individually using the Picked FDR method.

### Publication Abstract
Mass-spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics has become indispensable for understanding cellular signaling in complex biological systems. Despite the central role of protein phosphorylation, the field still lacks inexpensive, regenerable, and diverse phosphopeptides with ground-truth phosphorylation positions. Here, we present Iterative Synthetically Phosphorylated Isomers (iSPI), a proteome-scale library of human-derived phosphoserine-containing phosphopeptides that is inexpensive, regenerable, and diverse, with precisely known positions of phosphorylation. We demonstrate possible uses of iSPI, including use as a phosphopeptide standard, a tool to evaluate and optimize phosphorylation-site localization algorithms, and a benchmark to compare performance across data analysis pipelines. We also present AScorePro, an updated version of the AScore algorithm specifically optimized for phosphorylation-site localization in higher energy fragmentation spectra, and the FLR viewer, a web tool for phosphorylation-site localization, to enable community use of the iSPI resource. iSPI and its associated data constitute a useful, multi-purpose resource for the phosphoproteomics community.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Synthetic biology, Flr

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Harvard University Medical School, Department of Cell Biology

### Submitter
Brandon Gassaway

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Harvard University Medical School, Department of Cell Biology


