### Accession
PXD021938

### Title
Mass spectrometry of circulating antigens products isolated from sera of mice infected with Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites

### Description
Toxoplasma gondii is a ubiquitous apicomplexan protozoan parasite that can infect all warm-blooded animals and lead to toxoplasmosis. Discovering efficient methods for diagnosing T. gondii infection and developing vaccine candidates are essential for controlling this disease. Circulating antigens (CAg) are reliable diagnostic indicators of acute infection and highly immunogenic compounds that induce protective immunity. We aimed to identify the CAg spectrum in infected mouse serum. Among 31 identified CAg, we evaluated the ability of RuvB-like helicase (TgRuvBL1), ribonuclease (TgRNaseH1), and ribosomal protein RPS2 (TgRPS2) to protect against T. gondii infection. These three proteins were found in the serum of infected mice. Vaccination with rTgRuvBL1 or rTgRPS2 elicited powerful humoral and cellular immune responses in mice, as levels of total IgG, IgG2a, IgG1, and CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes were significantly increased. The production of proinﬂammatory gamma-interferon, interleukin-2, and interleukin-12 was also significantly increased. The survival of mice immunized with rTgRuvBL1 (10.0 ± 0.30 days) or rTgRPS2 (11.5 ± 0.34 days) was significantly prolonged after challenge with virulent T. gondii RH strain (P < 0.05 vs. control). The three proteins are potential diagnostic candidates for acute T. gondii and TgRuvBL1 and TgRPS2 might serve as candidate vaccine antigens against toxoplasmosis.

### Sample Protocol
Circulating antigens were immunoprecipitated as described, mixed with sera at 60 h after challenge ( 20 μL per mouse), and diluted (1:10) in PBS. Protein G agarose beads (200 μL, 25%; Cat. No. P2009; Beyotime, Nantong, China,) were added, and stirred at 4°C for 3 h to remove serum antibodies. The supernatant was collected after centrifugation (260 × g, 4°C, 5 min), then 10 μL of anti-ESA mouse serum was added, and stirred slowly overnight at 4°C. Protein G agarose beads (200 μL) were added, and the mixture was stirred at 4°C for 3 h. The beads were collected by centrifugation (260 × g, 4°C, 5 min), washed three times with PBS, and boiled in 5 × SDS-PAGE sample buffer (60 μL) for 5 min. The supernatant collected after centrifugation (260 × g, 4°C, 5 min) was resolved by 10% PAGE, then analyzed by LC-MS/MS (Shanghai Applied Protein Technology Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China).

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer coupled with an Easy-nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) liquid chromatograph. Briefly, samples were reduced, alkylated, and trypsinized (mass ratio 1:50) at 37 °C for 20 h. The enzymolysis product was desalted, lyophilized, dissolved in 0.1% formic acid, and stored at -20°C. For MS analysis, solution A comprised 0.1% formic acid in high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-grade water, and solution B comprised 0.1% formic acid in 84% acetonitrile. After the chromatographic column was equilibrated with 95% solution A, samples were loaded from the autosampler to the trap column (0.5 H gradient). To collect mass spectra, the mass-to-charge ratios of peptides and peptide fragments were determined by collecting 20 fragment maps (MS2 scan) after each full scan. The original raw files from the MS test were used to search the UniProt database for proteins using Mascot 2.2 software. The search parameters were as follows: enzyme, trypsin; fixed modification, carbamidomethyl (C); variable modification, oxidation (M); missed cleavage, 2; peptide mass tolerance, 20 ppm; MS/MS tolerance, 0.1 Da; filter by score ≥ 20.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acute infection, Toxoplasma gondii, Proteomics, Circulating antigens, Vaccine, Diagnostic candidates

### Affiliations
Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science

### Submitter
Quan Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Quan Wang
Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science


