### Accession
PXD027817

### Title
Study on prognostic biomarkers of HCC based on mass spectrometry

### Description
using DIA, and PRM MS-based workflow to research the prognostic biomarkers of HCC

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and FASP enzyme digestion;Data acquisition by mass spectrometry;Mass spectrometry data analysis;PRM confirmation.

### Data Protocol
DDA data were retrieved in database by Proteome Discovery software and the iRT internal standard peptides sequences were added to the database according to the protein sequences database uniprot. Then DDA data were analyzed by Proteome Discovery software to obtain the identification information of proteins. Based on the information above, the spectral library was generated from the original raw files and database search results by Spectronaut software. Afterwards, the DIA data analysis was completed according to the Spectronaut software instructions. Then, bioinformatics analysis was conducted on the selected differential proteins, including Gene Ontology (GO) functional annotation and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis. The above analysis was performed using the DAVID database12. Only terms with FDR < 0.05 and minimum count of 2 were considered significant. Then, the PRM raw data collected by mass spectrometry were imported into Protein Discoverer 2.1 SP1 for database searches and the human protein dataset “uniprot-organism-9606+reviewed-yes.fasta” was used for analysis. Parameters of database searches were as follows: MS1 tolerance: 10 ppm, second-level fragment tolerance: 0.02 Da, control FDR < 0.01, and specific peptide > 1 at least. After that, the pdresults files generated by Protein Discoverer 2.1 SP1 database searches were imported into SpectroDive 8.0 (Biognosys company) to establish the spectral library and the spectrum confidence cutoff value was set as Qvalue<0.01. Then, according to the information of the spectral library, the sub-ion panel of the target peptides was established with the following parameters: the types of sub-ions: a b, y 400-1500 m/z; top three sub-ions in intensity. Then PRM raw data was imported into SpectroDive 8.0 for qualitative and quantitative analysis of the target peptides. Qvalue cutoff was controlled as 0.01 in qualitative analysis and Qvalue was chosen as <0.05 in quantitative value filtering.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hcc, Prm, Dia

### Affiliations
Department of Clinical Laboratory, National Cancer Center/ National Clinical Research Center for Cancer/ Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College
Department of Clinical Laboratory, National Cancer Center/ National Clinical Research Center for Cancer/ Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, P.R.China

### Submitter
岳 张

### Lab Head
Dr Yi-Qun Che
Department of Clinical Laboratory, National Cancer Center/ National Clinical Research Center for Cancer/ Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, P.R.China


