### Accession
PXD007960

### Title
RNA-binding activity of TRIM25 is mediated by its PRY/SPRY domain and is required for ubiquitination

### Description
TRIM25 is a novel RNA-binding protein and a member of the Tripartite Motif (TRIM) family of E3 ubiquitin ligases, which plays a pivotal role in the innate immune response. Almost nothing is known about its RNA-related roles in cell biology. Furthermore, its RNA-binding domain has not been characterized. Here, we reveal that RNA-binding activity of TRIM25 is mediated by its PRY/SPRY domain, which we postulate to be a novel RNA-binding domain. Using CLIP-seq and SILAC-based co-immunoprecipitation assays, we uncover TRIM25’s endogenous RNA targets and protein binding partners. Finally, we show that the RNAbinding activity of TRIM25 is important for its ubiquitin ligase function. These results reveal new insights into the molecular roles and characteristics of RNA-binding E3 ubiquitin ligases and demonstrate that RNA could be an essential factor for their biological functions.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were run on gel (NuPAGE Novex 4-12% Bis-Tris gel, Life Technologies, UK), in NuPAGE buffer (MES) and visualised using Imperial™ Protein Stain (ThermoFisher Scientific, UK). The stained gel lanes were excised and de-stained and proteins were digested with trypsin, as previously described (Shevchenko et al, 1996). Briefly, proteins were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich, UK) for 30 min at 37°C and alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, UK) for 20 min at ambient temperature in the dark. They were then digested overnight at 37°C with 12.5 ng μL-1 trypsin (Pierce, UK).  Following digestion, samples were diluted with equal volume of 0.1% TFA and spun onto StageTips as described by Rappsilber et al (2003). Peptides were eluted in 40 μL of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and concentrated down to 2 μL by vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, UK). Samples were then prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis by diluting them to 5 μL with 0.1% TFA. MS-analyses were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) coupled on-line, to Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano Systems (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). Peptides were separated on a 50 centimetre EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific) assembled in an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific), operated at 50 ºC column temperature. ). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water while mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.3 μL min-1 and eluted at a flow rate of 0.2 μL min-1 according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% buffer B in 120 min, then to 95% in 11 min. FTMS spectra were recorded at 70,000 resolution (scan range 350-1400 m/z) and the ten most intense peaks with charge ≥ 2 of the MS scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.0 Thomson for MS2 (filling 1.0E6 ions for MS scan, 5.0E4 ions for MS2, maximum fill time 60 ms, dynamic exclusion for 50 s).

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software platform (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.5.2.8 was used to process the raw files and search was conducted against Human complete/reference proteome set of UniProt database (released in March, 2017), using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm while the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 pm. Isotope mass tolerance was 2 ppm and maximum charge to 7. Maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the N-terminal and ubiquitination of lysine were set as variable modifications. Mulltiplicity was set to 2 and for for heavy labels Arginine 6 and Lysine 4 were selected. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Hela, Ubiquitination, Rna, Silac

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
WTCCB, University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Gracjan Michlewski

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Gracjan Michlewski
WTCCB, University of Edinburgh


