### Accession
PXD018256

### Title
Proteomics analysis in DIA mode of 24 weeks from the sorafenib treated and vehicle treated monkeys

### Description
Quantitative proteomics in DIA mode was used to analysis the proteomic profile of 24 weeks from the sorafenib treated and vehicle treated monkeys.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis were performed by data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mass spectrometry assay. Sample preparation and fractionation were performed as previously described (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Equal aliquots of the samples in this experiment were pooled into one sample for DDA library generation and quality control. All fractions for DDA library generation were injected into a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer connected to an Easy-nLC 1200 chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). Each sample peptides were analyzed in a data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode. The DIA cycle contained a full MS–selected ion monitoring (SIM) scan, and 30 DIA scans were performed covering a mass range of 350–1650 m/z with the following settings: SIM full scan resolution, 60,000 at 200 m/z; automatic gain control (AGC), 3e6; maximum ion trap (IT) time, 50 ms; profile mode; DIA scan resolution, 30,000; AGC target, 3e6; maximum IT, auto; and normalized collision energy, 30 eV. The runtime was 120 min with a linear gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Quality control samples (pools of equal aliquots of all the samples in the experiment) were injected in DIA mode at the beginning of the MS study and after every 5 injections throughout the experiment and were used to monitor MS performance.

### Data Protocol
The original raw file and DDA searching results were imported into Spectronaut Pulsar XTM_12.0.20491.4 (Biognosys) to construct spectral library. The DIA data of each sample was analyzed with Spectronaut Pulsar X based on the constructed spectral library. Filling of all NA values using the k nearest neighbours (KNN) algorithm in DMwR R package was restricted to proteins identified in at least 50% of the samples.

### Publication Abstract
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is becoming one of the leading causes of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Sorafenib is the only first-line therapy for advanced HCC despite its serious adverse effects. Here, we report that at an equivalent of approximately one-tenth the clinical dose for HCC, sorafenib treatment effectively prevents the progression of NASH in both mice and monkeys without any observed significant adverse events. Mechanistically, sorafenib's benefit in NASH is independent of its canonical kinase targets in HCC, but involves the induction of mild mitochondrial uncoupling and subsequent activation of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK). Collectively, our findings demonstrate a previously unappreciated therapeutic effect and signaling mechanism of low-dose sorafenib treatment in NASH. We envision that this new therapeutic strategy for NASH has the potential to translate into a beneficial anti-NASH therapy with fewer adverse events than is observed in the drug's current use in HCC.

### Keywords
Liver, Monkey, Dia

### Affiliations
Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430060, China

### Submitter
Xu Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Hongliang Li
Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430060, China


