### Accession
PXD006553

### Title
Altered inflammatory and pro-angiogenic responses caused by imbalanced protection against oxidative stress in endometriosis

### Description
Endometriosis is a common gynecological disease of women in reproductive age, and is primarily thought to arise from retrograde menstruation and implantation of endometrium, mostly into the peritoneal cavity. The condition is characterized by a chronic, unresolved inflammatory process, within which oxidative stress likely plays a critical role. Although elevated reactive oxygen species (ROS) and oxidative stress have previously been postulated as being involved in endometriosis pathogenesis, we set out for a more systematic study to identify novel factors defining oxidative stress in ectopic peritoneal lesions. Using combined proteomic and transcriptomic approaches, we identified novel targets, including upregulated pro-oxidative enzymes such as amine oxidase 3/vascular adhesion protein 1 (AOC3/VAP1), as well as downregulated protective factors such as alkenal reductase PTGR1 or methionine sulfoxide reductase, supporting the observation of increased oxidative protein modification in ectopic lesions and peritoneal fluid. The observed ROS-derived 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal-induced interleukin (IL)-8 release from monocytes indicates a further pathomechanism, whereby elevated IL-8 levels promote further immune cell infiltration and angiogenesis in lesions.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue samples (~1mm3) were homogenised in RIPA buffer and protease inhibitor (Roche). 20 µg of each lysate was used for processing. Proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide. Chloroform and methanol precipitation was used for buffer exchange and each pellet was resuspended solubilised. Trypsin (Promega) was added to each sample for overnight digestion at 37°C, 300 rpm. The samples were desalted using Sola cartridges (Waters) per the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, the cartridges were conditioned with buffer A (1% CH3CN, 0.1% TFA in water) prior equilibration with buffer B (65% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA in water). The acidified peptides were loaded onto the column, washed with buffer A and eluted with buffer B. The samples were dried by centrifugation in vacuo, resuspended in 1% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA in water and stored at -20oC until analysis. Analysis by mass spectrometry - Peptides were analysed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a Q Exactive-High Field (HF) mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientiﬁc, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography system (Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC, Thermo). The samples were loaded onto a PepMap RSLC column (C18, 2mm, 100A, 75mm x 50 cm, Thermo Scientiﬁc, Bremen, Germany) and analysed using a 60-minute linear gradient at a 250 nl/minute flow rate. The gradient used to elute the peptides started at 3 minutes with 2 % buffer B (0.1% TFA and 5% DMSO in CH3CN) increasing to 5% by 6 minutes, followed by an increase up to 35% by 63 minutes. The total length of the analysis was 100 minutes to allow column re-equilibration. The data were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 full-width at half maximum ion intensity with a mass/charge ratio of 400 and a lockmass enabled at 445.120025 m/z. Top 15 precursor ion selection, dynamic exclusion of 27 seconds and fragmentation were performed in higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) mode with a normalised collision energy of 28. Raw MS data was analysed using MaxQuant

### Data Protocol
normalised collision energy of 28. Raw MS data was analysed using MaxQuant (v1.3.1). Each sample was set as one experiment. The search settings were as  follows: trypsin with two miss cleavages allowed, oxidation (M) and Deamidation (N, Q) were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification. The data was searched against human protein sequences using the UPR_homoSapiens_20141015 fasta file along with the corresponding decoy revert database. Unique and razor peptides only were used for quantitation. The proteins identified in the search were processed using Perseus software (v15.6.0), which filtered contaminant and false positive identifications (decoys). After filtering, the remaining proteins were further investigated. The data were log2 transformed, and replicates were grouped into Ectopic, Eutopic and Eutopic control categories (SI Table 1). The missing values were replaced using a strategy that considers normal distribution of imputed values. Heatmaps were created in Perseus using the Pearson Correlation algorithm applied after converting values to Z scores.

### Publication Abstract
Endometriosis is a common gynaecological disease of women in reproductive age, and is thought to arise from retrograde menstruation and implantation of endometrial tissue, mostly into the peritoneal cavity. The condition is characterized by a chronic, unresolved inflammatory process thereby contributing to pain as cardinal symptom in endometriosis. Elevated reactive oxygen species (ROS) and oxidative stress have been postulated as factors in endometriosis pathogenesis. We here set out for a systematic study to identify novel mechanisms and pathways relating to oxidative stress in ectopic peritoneal lesions. Using combined proteomic and transcriptomic approaches, we identified novel targets including upregulated pro-oxidative enzymes, such as amine oxidase 3/vascular adhesion protein 1 (AOC3/VAP1) as well as downregulated protective factors, in particular alkenal reductase PTGR1 and methionine sulfoxide reductase. Consistent with an altered ROS landscape, we observed hemoglobin / iron overload, ROS production and lipid peroxidation in ectopic lesions. ROS-derived 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal induced interleukin IL-8 release from monocytes. Notably, AOC3 inhibitors provoked analgesic effects in inflammatory pain models in vivo, suggesting potential translational applicability.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Endometriosis

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
University of Oxford, NDM Research Building, Target Discovery Institute

### Submitter
Marie-Laëtitia Thézénas

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Benedikt Kessler
University of Oxford, NDM Research Building, Target Discovery Institute


