### Accession
PXD020286

### Title
Profiling of human spermatozoa glycoproteins by LC/MS/MS

### Description
N-linked glycoproteins are known to be important for spermatozoa development and gametes fusion. However, little is known about detailed information of these glycoproteins, particularly the glycosylation sites and its corresponding glycan structures in human spermatozoa. In present study, an in house software coupled with LC-MS/MS analysis of intact glycopeptides was employed to establish a large scale of site-specific N-glycoproteome map in human spermatozoa. The results mapped the large-scale N-glycoproteins in human spermatozoa and interpreted the precise glycan structures with the corresponding glycosites. These presented data laid the foundation for the exploration of biological function of glycosylation on human spermatozoa and glycan structure involved male infertility.

### Sample Protocol
Human semen was collected from ten healthy donors according to the World Health Organization 2010 recommendations.Spermatozoa samples were denatured and digested by 8 M urea/1 M NH₄HCO₃ and trypsin, respectively.IGPs were harvested after hydrophilic MAX columns enrichment and HLB desalination of trypsin-digested peptides. The intact glycopeptides were then subjected to LC−MS/MS analyses and followed by glycopeptide identiﬁcation using in house software StrucGP

### Data Protocol
The identification of intact glycopeptides was performed by in house software, StrucGP. Briefly, all “Raw” format MS data were first converted to “mzML” format by Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP, v5.0.0)22. The intact glycopeptide analyses were searched against the built-in glycan branch structure database from StrucGP and UniProt human protein databases (downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org May 2020) using our in house software - StrucGP. The protein enzymatic digestion was set as trypsin with maximal 2 missed cleavage sites and the potential glycosite-containing peptides were screened with the N-X-S/T motif (X is any amino acid except Proline).

### Publication Abstract
Spermatozoon represents a very special cell type in human body, and glycosylation plays essential roles in its whole life including spermatogenesis, maturation, capacitation, sperm-egg recognition, and fertilization. In this study, by mapping the most comprehensive N-glycoproteome of human spermatozoa using our recently developed site-specific glycoproteomic approaches, we show that spermatozoa contain a number of distinctive glycoproteins, which are mainly involved in spermatogenesis, acrosome reaction and sperm:oocyte membrane binding, and fertilization. Heavy fucosylation is observed on 14 glycoproteins mostly located at extracellular and cell surface regions in spermatozoa but not in other tissues. Sialylation and Lewis epitopes are enriched in the biological process of immune response in spermatozoa, while bisected core structures and LacdiNAc structures are highly expressed in acrosome. These data deepen our knowledge about glycosylation in spermatozoa and lay the foundation for functional study of glycosylation and glycan structures in male infertility.

### Keywords
Human, Spermatozoa, Lc/ms/ms, Glycan structures

### Affiliations
College of Life Science, Northwest University, Xi’an, Shaanxi Province 710069, P. R. China
Northwest University

### Submitter
Miaomiao Xin

### Lab Head
Dr Shisheng Sun
Northwest University


