### Accession
PXD028782

### Title
Detergent-resistant membranes in Agrobacterium tumefaciens

### Description
We established a protocol for the biochemical fractionation of Agrobacterium tumefaciens membranes, and characterized the proteome of detergent-sensitive and detergent-resistant membrane fractions by mass spectrometry. We found that well-established microdomain marker proteins co-purify with proteins associated with transport or secretion processes in the detergent-resistant fraction, suggesting a functional micro-compartmentalization of the Gram-negative membrane. The presence of components of virulence-associated secretion systems in detergent-resistant membranes supports the involvement of bacterial microdomains in host-microbe interaction and microbial competition.

### Sample Protocol
Cultures were grown in LB or AB minimal medium and OD600 was adjusted to 4. Cells were harvested at 4 °C and supernatant was discarded. Pellets were washed and resuspended in 700 µl 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4). 1 mM PMSF and 1.5 mg/ml lysozyme were added and cells were further incubated for 90 min at 4 °C. Disruption was achieved by ultrasonication using a VialTweeter instrument (Hielscher, Teltow, Germany). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 20.000 x g at 4 °C for 15 min. Membranes were pelleted via ultracentrifugation at 320.000 x g for 90 min at 4 °C. 200 µl of supernatant were transferred to a fresh microcentrifuge tube and stored for further analysis (cytosolic samples, “C”). Membrane pellets were resolved in 600 µl Lysis and Separation Buffer from the CelLytic™ MEM Protein Extraction Kit (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) containing 6 µl of the provided protease inhibitor cocktail. The lysate was centrifuged for 15 min at 20.000 x g and 4 °C. 100 µl of supernatant were transferred to a fresh microcentrifuge tube and stored for further analysis (membrane samples, M). Phase-separation between DSMs and DRMs was carried out following the manufactures’ instructions. 100 µl of each fraction were stored for further analysis. Proteins were concentrated to a single band in SDS gels by terminating electrophoresis when the migration front reached the interface between stacking and separating gel. Protein bands were cut out and digested with trypsin (Rexroth et al., 2003). Peptides were extracted from the gel using 50% (vol/vol) acetonitrile and 1% (vol/vol) formic acid prior to lyophilization. For LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were re-solubilzed in 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid. For reversed-phase chromatography a gradient of solvent A (0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid) and solvent B (99.9% (vol/vol) acetonitrile and 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid) was used.

### Data Protocol
MS-analysis was carried out using a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer in duty cycle consisting of one 400–2000 m/z FT-MS and four MS/MS LTQ scans. MS and MS/MS data were acquired using Xcalibur (all by Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Each sample consisted of three independent biological replicates. Obtained LC-MS/MS spectra were analyzed using the Sequest algorithm (Eng et al., 1994). Peptides were matched against UniProt database of A. tumefaciens for protein identification. Proteins were quantified using spectral counting and normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAF) when identified by at least one unique peptide in two of three replicates (Plohnke et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Agrobacterium, Membrane organization, Drm

### Affiliations
Biologie der Mikroorganismen Ruhr-Universität Bochum
Ruhr University Bochum

### Submitter
Simon Czolkoss

### Lab Head
Dr Franz Narberhaus
Biologie der Mikroorganismen Ruhr-Universität Bochum


