### Accession
PXD011255

### Title
co-immunoprecipitation of the Arabidopsis G protein β subunit AGB1

### Description
Heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding (G) proteins are composed of Gα, Gβ, and Gγ subunits, and function as molecular switches in signal transduction. In Arabidopsis thaliana there are one canonical Gα (GPA1), three extra-large Gα (XLG1, XLG2 and XLG3), one Gβ (AGB1) and three Gγ (AGG1, AGG2 and AGG3) subunits. To elucidate AGB1 molecular signaling, we performed immunoprecipitation using plasma membrane enriched proteins followed by mass spectrometry to identify the protein interactors of AGB1. After eliminating proteins present in the control immunoprecipitation, commonly identified contaminants, and organellar proteins, a total of 103 candidate AGB1-associated proteins were confidently identified. We identified all of the G protein subunits except XLG1, receptor-like kinases (RLKs), Ca2+ signaling related proteins and 14-3-3-like proteins, all of which may couple with or modulate G protein signaling.

### Sample Protocol
35S::FLAG-AGB1 was introduced into the pEarleyGate202 vector (Earley et al., 2006) and the construct was transformed into the agb1-2 background of Arabidopsis using the floral dip method (Clough and Bent, 1998). Col or the T2 generation of 35S::FLAG-AGB1 agb1-2 grown hydroponically for 4 weeks (Yu and Assmann, 2015) were treated with 100 mM NaCl in ¼ Hoagland’s solution for 0, 2 or 12 h. Plasma membrane proteins were extracted and enriched using the two-phase partitioning method (Qiu et al., 2002; Alexandersson et al., 2008) with some modifications. Specifically, rosette leaves (60-80 g fresh weight) from each treatment were homogenized in a cold room (4 oC) in 200 mL homogenization buffer containing 50 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.4), 330 mM sucrose, 5 mM EDTA (pH 7.8), 10% glycerol, 5 mM DTT, 0.6% Polyvinylpyrrolidone (MW 10,000), 1 μg/mL pepstatin A, 3 μg/mL Leupeptin, 1 mM PMSF and 5 mM ascorbic acid. The homogenates were filtered through a nylon filter and centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 min using a Beckman Coulter Avanti J-25 centrifuge. The supernatant was then spun down at 30,000 g for 50 min using a Beckman Coulter ultracentrifuge. The supernatant was kept as the cytosolic fraction, and the microsomal pellet was resuspended using a 5 mL pre-cooled Dounce homogenizer in 5 mL of 330 mM sucrose, 5 mM K2HPO4/KH2PO4 (pH 7.8), 3 mM KCl, 1 μg/mL pepstatin A, 1 μg/mL Leupeptin, 2 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF and 0.1 mM EDTA (pH 7.8). Nine grams of this homogenate were then added to 27 g of a phase mixture in a 50 mL centrifuge tube to obtain a final concentration of 6.1% PEG3350, 6.1% Dextran 500, 330 mM sucrose, 5 mM K2HPO4/KH2PO4 (pH 7.8), and 3 mM KCl. The tube was mixed thoroughly and carefully by slowly inverting the tubes 30 times, placed on ice for 5 min, and then centrifuged using a swinging bucket clinical centrifuge at 750 g for 5 min at 4 °C. The upper phase containing the plasma membrane fraction and lower phase containing the microsome fraction were diluted at least 3 fold with 20 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.4), 330 mM sucrose, 10% glycerol and 2 mM DTT and centrifuged at 100,000 g at 4 °C for 1 h. The pellets, containing either plasma membrane or microsomal vesicles, were resuspended using a paint brush and solubilized in IP buffer (20 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 % glycerol, 1 x cOmplete Protease inhibitor (Roche), 1 mM 4-Aminobenzamidine dihydrochloride, 5 mM 4-Aminobenzoic acid, 1 μg/mL pepstatin A, 5 mM NaF) with 1% n-Dodecyl β-D-maltoside (DDM) for 20 min on a rotator at 4 °C, and centrifuged at 100,000g at 4 °C for 1 h, and the supernatant was removed to new 1.5 mL tubes. Co-IP and subsequent trypsin digestion were modified from a previous method (Bommert et al., 2013). The solubilized plasma membrane proteins were diluted with IP buffer to obtain a final concentration of 0.25% DDM. IP was immediately performed by incubating ~150 μg (600 μL) proteins with 20 μL ANTI-FLAG® M2 Affinity Gel (Sigma) on a rotator for 2 h at 4 °C.  After washing twice with IP buffer plus 0.2% DDM, followed by two washes with 50 mM NH4HCO3, agarose beads with retained proteins were resuspended with 100 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3, 0.01% ProteaseMax (Promega) and 1 M Urea. Trypsin digestion was then performed by adding 1 μg Trypsin Lys-C (Promega) and incubating at 37 °C for 1 h with mild shaking (80 rpm). Then the partially digested proteins were released from beads by eluting twice with 50 μL of 5 mM DTT in 50 mM NH4HCO3, 0.01% ProteaseMax and 1 M Urea, followed by 30 min DTT reduction at 37 °C in the dark. The samples were then alkalized by adding iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 10 mM, and subjected to continued digested by Trypsin Lys-C overnight (~13h) at 37 °C in the dark. Digestion was terminated by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5%.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were lyophilized using a CentriVap -84 °C cold trap (Labconco), desalted using PierceTM C18 Tips (ThermoFisher), and then analyzed with a Sciex 5600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer at the Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core at Penn State Hershey. Specifically, peptide samples were injected using an Eksigent NanoLC-Ultra-2D Plus system (ABSciex/Eksigent) in a 60 min gradient. Trap and elute mode was used for separation using the microfluidics on an Eksigent cHiPLC Nanoflex system equipped with a trap column (200 µm x 0.5 mm Chrom XP C18-CL 3 µm 120 Å), and a Nano cHIPLC column (75 µm x 15 cm Chrom XP C18-CL 3 µm 120 Å). The elution gradient was run at a 300 nL/min flow rate from 95% A (0.1% formic acid dissolved in water)/ 5% B (0.1% formic acid dissolved in acetonitrile) to 65% A/35% B over 60 min, followed by 15 % A/85% B from 61-70 min, then 95% A/5% B from 71-80 min.  The eluate was delivered into the mass spectrometer with a NanoSpray III source using a 10 µm i.d. nanospray tip (New Objective, Woburn, MA). Typical gas and other mass spectrometer settings were curtain Gas 1(Nitrogen) = 10, Gas 3(Nitrogen) = 25. Each cycle consisted of a TOF-MS/MS spectra acquisition for 250 ms, followed by acquisition of up to 50 MS/MS spectra over 2.5 s for a total cycle time of 2.8 s.  The MS/MS spectra were analyzed using ProteinPilot 5.0.1 software based on the Paragon Algorithm Build 5.0.1.0.4874 contained in the software. The spectra were searched against the Arabidopsis database on NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein) plus 536 common human and lab contaminants (ABSciex_ContaminantDB_20070711).

### Publication Abstract
Heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding (G) proteins are composed of G&#x3b1;, G<i>&#x3b2;</i>, and G&#x3b3; subunits and function as molecular switches in signal transduction. In Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>), there are one canonical G&#x3b1; (GPA1), three extra-large G&#x3b1; (XLG1, XLG2, and XLG3), one G<i>&#x3b2;</i> (AGB1), and three G&#x3b3; (AGG1, AGG2, and AGG3) subunits. To elucidate AGB1 molecular signaling, we performed immunoprecipitation using plasma membrane-enriched proteins followed by mass spectrometry to identify the protein interactors of AGB1. After eliminating proteins present in the control immunoprecipitation, commonly identified contaminants, and organellar proteins, a total of 103 candidate AGB1-associated proteins were confidently identified. We identified all of the G protein subunits except XLG1, receptor-like kinases, Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling-related proteins, and 14-3-3-like proteins, all of which may couple with or modulate G protein signaling. We confirmed physical interaction between AGB1 and the receptor-like kinase FERONIA (FER) using bimolecular fluorescence complementation. The Rapid Alkalinization Factor (RALF) family of polypeptides have been shown to be ligands of FER. In this study, we demonstrate that RALF1 regulates stomatal apertures and does so in a G protein-dependent manner, inhibiting stomatal opening and promoting stomatal closure in Columbia but not in <i>agb1</i> mutants. We further show that AGGs and XLGs, but not GPA1, participate in RALF1-mediated stomatal signaling. Our results suggest that FER acts as a G protein-coupled receptor for plant heterotrimeric G proteins.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Co-immunoprecipitation, Heterotrimeric g protein, Agb1

### Affiliations
Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
Biology Department Pennsylvania State University

### Submitter
Yunqing Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah M. Assmann
Biology Department Pennsylvania State University


