### Accession
PXD010465

### Title
Arabidopsis leaf senescence

### Description
Monitor changes in the proteome of senescing leaves, using protein MS data obtained from the same leaf groups used for imaging. Arabidopsis thaliana mature leaves were grouped according to their chlorophyll content: Dark Green (DG), Green (G), Light Green (LG) and Yellow (Y), containing 100, 45, 25 and 6.5% chlorophyll relative to DG, respectivelyArabidopsis thaliana mature leaves were grouped according to their chlorophyll content: Dark Green (DG), Green (G), Light Green (LG) and Yellow (Y), containing 100, 45, 25 and 6.5% chlorophyll relative to DG, respectively

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Samples were subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion using a modified Filter Aided Sample Preparation protocol (FASP). All chemicals are from Sigma Aldrich, unless stated otherwise. Sodium dodecyl sulfate buffer (SDT) included: 4%(w/v) SDS, 100mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6, 0.1M DTT. Urea buffer (UB): 8 M urea (Sigma, U5128) in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.0 and UC buffer: 2M Urea, pH 7.6-8.0 (dilute UB X 4 with 0.1M Tris-HCl pH 7.6). Cells were dissolved in 100μL SDT buffer and lysed for 3min at 95°C. Then spun down at 16,000 RCF for 10min. 30μL were mixed with 200 μL UB and loaded onto 30 kDa molecular weight cutoff filters and spun down. 200 μl of UA were added to the filter unit and centrifuge at 14,000 x g for 40 min. Trypsin was then added and samples incubated at 37°C overnight. Digested proteins were then spun down, acidified with trifloroacetic acid and stored in -80°C until analysis. Liquid chromatography ULC/MS grade solvents were used for all chromatographic steps. Each sample was fractionated using high pH reversed phase followed by low pH reversed phase separation. 200μg digested protein was loaded using high Performance Liquid Chromatography (Agilent 1260 uHPLC). Mobile phase was: A) 20mM ammonium formate pH 10.0, B) acetonitrile. Peptides were separated on an XBridge C18 column (3x100mm, Waters) using the following gradient: 3% B for 2 minutes, linear gradient to 40% B in 50min, 5 min to 95% B, maintained at 95% B for 5 min and then back to initial conditions. Peptides were fractionated into 15 fractions. The fractions were then pooled: 1 with 8, 2 with 9, 3 with 10, 4 with 11, 5 with 12, 6 with 13 and 7 with 14-15. Each fraction was dried in a speedvac, then reconstituted in 25 μL in 97:3 acetonitrile:water+0.1% formic acid. Each pooled fraction was then loaded using split-less nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (10 kpsi nanoAcquity; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile phase was: A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and B) acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Desalting of the samples was performed online using a reversed-phase C18 trapping column (180 μm internal diameter, 20 mm length, 5 μm particle size; Waters). The peptides were then separated using a T3 HSS nano-column (75 μm internal diameter, 250 mm length, 1.8 μm particle size; Waters) at 0.35 μL/min. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 4% to 35%B in 150 min, 35% to 90%B in 5 min, maintained at 95% for 5 min and then back to initial conditions. Mass Spectrometry The nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nanoESI emitter (10 μm tip; New Objective; Woburn, MA, USA) to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) using a FlexIon nanospray apparatus (Proxeon). Data was acquired in DDA mode, using a Top20 method. MS1 resolution was set to 60,000 (at 400m/z) and maximum injection time was set to 20msec. MS2 resolution was set to 17,500 and maximum injection time of 60msec.

### Data Protocol
Data processing and analysis Raw data was imported into the Expressionist® software (Genedata) and processed as previously described1. The software was used for retention time alignment and peak detection of precursor peptides. A master peak list was generated from all MS/MS events and sent for database searching using Mascot v2.5 (Matrix Sciences). Data was searched against the Arabidopsis thaliana protein database (http://www.uniprot.org/) appended with 125 common laboratory contaminant proteins. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modification was set to oxidation of methionines. Search results were then filtered using the PeptideProphet2 algorithm to achieve maximum false discovery rate of 1% at the protein level. Peptide identifications were imported back to Expressions to annotate identified peaks. Quantification of proteins from the peptide data was performed using an in-house script1. Data was normalized base on the total ion current. Protein abundance was obtained by summing the three most intense, unique peptides per protein. Principal Component Analysis and 2 dimensional hierarchical clustering were used to assess global integrity of the data and search for outlier samples. A Student’s t-Test, after logarithmic transformation, was used to identify significant differences across the biological replica. Fold changes were calculated based on the ratio of arithmetic means of the case versus control samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Senescence, Arabidopsis, Leaf

### Affiliations
Institute of Plant Sciences  Faculty of Agriculture  The Hebrew University of Jerusalem  Rehovot 76100 ISRAEL
Institute of Plant Sciences	
Faculty of Agriculture	
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem	
Rehovot 76100
ISRAEL

### Submitter
Eyal Tamary

### Lab Head
Dr Zach Adam
Institute of Plant Sciences  Faculty of Agriculture  The Hebrew University of Jerusalem  Rehovot 76100 ISRAEL


