### Accession
PXD031418

### Title
Is the proteomic composition of the salivary pellicle dependent on the substrate material? PIV

### Description
This study aimed at characterizing the individual proteomic composition of the 3-min pellicle formed on bovine enamel and six restorative materials. Substrate material-specific adsorption patterns were analyzed by comparing the proteomic profiles of the 3-min pellicle with the corresponding saliva.

### Sample Protocol
The 3-min pellicles and saliva were collected from five nonsmoking healthy persons. For individual pellicle formation in each subject, two specimens of the respective substrate material were placed consecutively in the buccal sulcus of the lower jaw in the region of the premolar and molar teeth for 3 min and for three to four follow-up rounds. Proteins were eluted, precipitated and electrophoresed. After tryptic in gel digest, peptides were analysed by nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Fragmented peptide masses were initially analyzed by using the MASCOT algorithm and TF Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software. Peptides were matched to tandem mass spectra by Mascot version 2.4.0 (Matrix Science) by searching the SwissProt database (version 2018_03, number of protein sequences 557.992 containing 20.253 human sequences) against human proteins. Spectra were matched with a mass tolerance of 7 ppm for precursor masses and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. We used tryptic digestion and allowed for up to two missed cleavage sites. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, acetylation of lysine and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. The MASCOT output files were uploaded in the programme Scaffold (Version 4.8.9, Proteome Software Inc.). Peptide identifications were accepted if they had a probability greater than 95.0 % (peptide FDR ≤ 0.38 % decoy) by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they had a probability greater than 90.0 % (protein FDR ≤ 1.6 % decoy) and contained at least 2 unique peptides/protein

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dental materials, Salivary protein enrichment/depletion, Quantitative proteomic comparisons, Nano-lc-hr-ms/ms, Individual 3-min pellicle proteome

### Affiliations
PZMS
Clinic of Operative Dentistry, Periodontology and Preventive Dentistry, University Hospital, Saarland University, Kirrberger Strasse building 73, 66421 Homburg/Saar, Germany

### Submitter
Claudia Fecher-Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Hannig
Clinic of Operative Dentistry, Periodontology and Preventive Dentistry, University Hospital, Saarland University, Kirrberger Strasse building 73, 66421 Homburg/Saar, Germany


