### Accession
PXD017526

### Title
Quantitative proteomics on HeLa cell surface (iTraq)

### Description
While several clathrin-independent endocytic processes have been described so far, their biological relevance often remains elusive, especially in pathophysiological contexts such as cancer. In this study, we find that the tumor marker CD166/ALCAM (Activated Leukocyte Cell Adhesion Molecule) is a clathrin-independent cargo. We show that endophilin-A3 – but neither A1 nor A2 isoforms – functionally associates with CD166-containing early endocytic carriers and physically interacts with the cargo. Our data further demonstrates that the three endophilin-A isoforms control the uptake of distinct subsets of cargoes. In addition, we provide strong evidence that the construction of endocytic sites from which CD166 is taken up in an endophilin-A3-dependent manner is driven by extracellular galectin-8. Taken together, our data reveal the existence of a previously uncharacterized clathrin-independent endocytic modality, that modulates the abundance of CD166 at the cell surface, and regulates adhesive and migratory properties of cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of cell surface proteins: 48h after transfection with AllStars Negative control or µ2-adaptin siRNAs, HeLa cells were transferred in 15 cm diameter cell culture dishes for an additional 24h in order to obtain two 90-95% confluent dishes per condition. Surface proteins were then recovered using the Pierce Cell Surface Protein Isolation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In brief, after washes with ice-cold PBS++, cells were incubated for 30 min at 4°C with 0.4 mM EZ-Link Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin in PBS++. Cells were then washed with ice-cold PBS++, residual biotin compound was quenched with the kit quenching solution for 30 min, and two additional washes with ice-cold TBS (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.2, 150 mM NaCl) were performed. Cells were then scrapped and sonicated on ice in lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% SDS, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 2% NP-40, 10 mM iodoacetamide, 1 mM PMSF and protease inhibitor cocktail). After incubation of ice for 30 min with vortexing from time to time, lysates were clarified at 2,500xg for 5 min at 4°C. Clarified lysates were then incubated on NeutrAvidin agarose resin over-night at 4°C on a rotating wheel. Flow-through was discarded, after which resin was washed twice with lysis buffer, twice with high salt lysis buffer (500 mM NaCl) and once with a Tris buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM EDTA). Proteins were then eluted by heating for 5 min at 95°C in elution buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 2% SDS, 100 mM DTT).  Preparation of peptides by FASP (Filter-Aided Sample Preparation):  Tryptic digestion was performed on a 30 kDa cut-off filter, according to FASP protocol. Briefly, 60-100 µg eluted proteins were loaded on filter units and centrifuged several times for 10-15 min at 14,000xg. Lysis buffer was progressively replaced by 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 containing 8 M urea. A second alkylation step was added here: filter units were incubated with 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 8 M urea, 50 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min. Urea buffer was then progressively replaced by 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB, pH 8.5). PNGase F (New England Biolabs) treatment was performed on the filter unit for 4h at 37°C. Subsequent tryptic digestion (Promega) was performed over-night in 100 mM TEAB on the filter unit at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:20. Peptides were eluted by centrifugation, and a last wash of the filter unit was performed with 0.5 M NaCl to recover non-eluted peptides. Peptides were quantified here by UV spectrometry at 280 nm.  iTraq labeling and proteomic analysis:  20 µg of peptides of negative control and µ2-adaptin depleted conditions were vacuum-dried and iTraq 4-plex labelling was performed for 1h using the manufacturer's kit and protocol (Applied Biosystems). Two technical replicates of control condition were produced by labeling with 114 and 115 Da iTraq reporters. Similarly, two technical replicates of µ2-adaptin-depleted condition were produced by labeling with 116 and 117 Da iTraq reporters. 2 µg of labeled peptides were resuspended in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.5% (v/v) formic acid, and desalted on a C18 pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 2 cm, 100 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Eluted peptides were immediately subjected to reverse phase chromatography on a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 75 µm id x 25 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 150 min with a linear gradient from 5 to 35% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The iTraq-labeled peptides were analyzed by electrospray ionization on a TripleTOF 5600+ System (AB Sciex) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were analyzed with ProteinPilot Software 4.5 (AB Sciex). MS/MS spectra were analyzed thanks to reviewed human Swiss-Prot database (2019-01-15). The "iTRAQ 4plex peptide labelled" sample type and "a biological modification ID focus" were selected in the analysis method. Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme, with cysteine alkylation by iodoacetamide as modification. Data were normalized by ProteinPilot algorithm. All reported data were based on 99% confidence for protein identification as determined by ProteinPilot (ProtScore > or = 2). The confidence in protein identification was expressed as the "Unused ProtScore", which only considers peptides from spectra that have not already been used to identify higher scoring proteins. Proteins were further annotated based on GO annotations found in Swiss-Prot database. Relative quantification of cell surface proteins was obtained thanks to the iTraq labelling. In order to calculate ratios – corresponding to the fold change of abundance of a given protein between two samples – we used the sample labeled with the 114 Da reporter (negative control) as the reference. Each ratio is accompanied by a p-value calculated by ProteinPilot software, that reflects the confidence in the fact that the ratio is significantly different of unity. P-values take into account the quality of identification (i.e. number of peptides and confidence of identification of peptides). Ratios of relative abundance of each protein in the different conditions and their p-value were presented as Volcano plots.

### Publication Abstract
While several clathrin-independent endocytic processes have been described so far, their biological relevance often remains elusive, especially in pathophysiological contexts such as cancer. In this study, we find that the tumor marker CD166/ALCAM (Activated Leukocyte Cell Adhesion Molecule) is a clathrin-independent cargo. We show that endophilin-A3-but neither A1 nor A2 isoforms-functionally associates with CD166-containing early endocytic carriers and physically interacts with the cargo. Our data further demonstrates that the three endophilin-A isoforms control the uptake of distinct subsets of cargoes. In addition, we provide strong evidence that the construction of endocytic sites from which CD166 is taken up in an endophilin-A3-dependent manner is driven by extracellular galectin-8. Taken together, our data reveal the existence of a previously uncharacterized clathrin-independent endocytic modality, that modulates the abundance of CD166 at the cell surface, and regulates adhesive and migratory properties of cancer cells.

### Keywords
Hela, Itraq

### Affiliations
UCLouvain
Université catholique de Louvain (UCLouvain) Louvain Institute of Biomolecular Science and Technology (LIBST) Croix du Sud, 4-5 bte L7.07.14 1348 Louvain-la-Neuve Belgium

### Submitter
Henri-François Renard

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Morsomme
Université catholique de Louvain (UCLouvain) Louvain Institute of Biomolecular Science and Technology (LIBST) Croix du Sud, 4-5 bte L7.07.14 1348 Louvain-la-Neuve Belgium


