### Accession
PXD040516

### Title
Small Extracellular Vesicles derived from four dimensional-culture of mesenchymal stem cells induce alternatively activated macrophages by upregulating IGFBP2/EGFR to attenuate inflammation in the spinal cord injury of rats

### Description
Effectively reducing the inflammatory response after spinal cord injury (SCI) is a challenging clinical problem and the subject of active investigation. This study employed a porous scaffold-based three dimensional long-term culture technique to obtain human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cell (hUC-MSC)-derived Small Extracellular Vesicles (sEVs) (three dimensional culture over time, the “4D-sEVs”). Moreover, the vesicle size, number, and inner protein concentrations of the MSC 4D-sEVs contained altered protein profiles compared with those derived from 2D culture conditions. A proteomics analysis suggested broad changes, especially significant upregulation of Epidermal Growth Factors Receptor (EGFR) and Insulin-like Growth Factor Binding Protein 2 (IGFBP2) in 4D-sEVs compared with 2D-sEVs. The endocytosis of 4D-sEVs allowed for the binding of EGFR and IGFBP2, leading to downstream STAT3 phosphorylation and IL-10 secretion and effective induction of macrophages/microglia polarization from the pro-inflammatory M1 to anti-inflammatory M2 phenotype, both in vitro and in the injured areas of rats with compressive/contusive SCI. The reduction in neuroinflammation after 4D-sEVs delivery to the injury site epicenter led to significant neuroprotection, as evidenced by the number of surviving spinal neurons. Therefore, applying this novel 4D culture-derived Small Extracellular Vesicles could effectively curb the inflammatory response and increase tissue repair after SCI.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction: Sample was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Fi-nally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin Digestion: For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. To perform detection and analysis, the tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and directly loaded onto a homemade reversed-phase analytical column (25cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 8% to 22% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) over 20 min, 22% to 35% in 13 min, and climbing to 80% in 4 min, then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 600 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to the UPLC. The elec-trospray voltage applied was 2.2 kV. The m/z scan range was 400 to 1500 for the full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. The peptides were then selected for MS/MS using an NCE setting of 30, and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. The data-dependent procedure alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with a 30.0 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. The fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Homo_sapiens_9606_SP_20191115.fasta database concatenated with the reverse decoy and contaminants database. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm in the First search and 4.5 ppm in the Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and oxidation (M), deamidation (N, Q), and acetylation (protein N terminal) were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%, and the minimum score for peptides was set to > 40. Proteins with a fold change > 1.5 and P < 0.05 are significantly differen-tially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
Effectively reducing the inflammatory response after spinal cord injury (SCI) is a challenging clinical problem and the subject of active investigation. This study employed a porous scaffold-based three dimensional long-term culture technique to obtain human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cell (hUC-MSC)-derived Small Extracellular Vesicles (sEVs) (three dimensional culture over time, the "4D-sEVs"). Moreover, the vesicle size, number, and inner protein concentrations of the MSC 4D-sEVs contained altered protein profiles compared with those derived from 2D culture conditions. A proteomics analysis suggested broad changes, especially significant upregulation of Epidermal Growth Factors Receptor (EGFR) and Insulin-like Growth Factor Binding Protein 2 (IGFBP2) in 4D-sEVs compared with 2D-sEVs. The endocytosis of 4D-sEVs allowed for the binding of EGFR and IGFBP2, leading to downstream STAT3 phosphorylation and IL-10 secretion and effective induction of macrophages/microglia polarization from the pro-inflammatory M1 to anti-inflammatory M2 phenotype, both <i>in vitro</i> and in the injured areas of rats with compressive/contusive SCI. The reduction in neuroinflammation after 4D-sEVs delivery to the injury site epicenter led to significant neuroprotection, as evidenced by the number of surviving spinal neurons. Therefore, applying this novel 4D culture-derived Small Extracellular Vesicles could effectively curb the inflammatory response and increase tissue repair after SCI.

### Keywords
Spinal cord injury; small extracellular vesicles; four dimensional culture; macrophage polarization; igfbp2/egfr

### Affiliations
MOE Key Laboratory of Gene Function and Regulation, State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China

### Submitter
Jun Hua Wang

### Lab Head
Dr junhua wang
MOE Key Laboratory of Gene Function and Regulation, State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China


