### Accession
PXD006337

### Title
Human platelet LC-MSMS

### Description
The phosphorylation status of Dab2 and its functional consequences in thrombin-stimulated human plateletswere investigated.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and Immunoprecipitation Human platelets (1X109/ml) were stimulated with normal saline or 1 U/ml thrombin at 37℃ and 500 rpm for 10 min then centrifuged by 980 g for 10 min. The platelet lysates were collected for immunoprecipitation. 2 mg protein was incubated with Antibody-Protein G Mag Sepharose overnight at 4°C and then each sample was washed five times by lysis buffer.  The nano LC system The immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted by adding 50 μl 5% acetic acid at RT for 5 min. The extracted proteins were dried and redissolved in 20 μl of 100 mM sodium bicarbonate, reduced and alkylated respectively with dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide, and then incubated with trypsin (1:50, w/w) overnight at 37°C. After drying the peptides under a vacuum, the samples were suspended with 84 μl of labeling solution (200 mM sodium acetate buffer, pH 5.2). The tryptic peptide sample was mixed with 14 μl of freshly prepared 1 M sodium cyanoborohydride. After the addition of 4 μl of 20% formaldehyde (12CH2O, light labeling; or 13CD2O, heavy labeling) solution, the mixtures were allowed to react for 2 h at RT and quenched by adding 5 μl 100% formic acid (FA). Peptide separations were performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The sample was dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and loaded into a reverse phase (RP) trapping column (ZORBAX SB300-C18, 0.3 x 5 mm, Agilent) at a flow rate of 15 μl/min for 5 min. The trapping column was then connected to an RP analytical column (0.075 x 200 mm, pack with Synergi Hydro-RP particles from Phenomenex), which was controlled by a valve switching module. Peptides were separated by a linear acetonitrile (ACN) gradient (5 to 35%, in 0.1% formic acid) in 60 min at a flow of 300 nl/min, and the effluents were directly electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer. For phosphopeptide analysis, a TiO2 column (0.3 x 5 mm, packed with Titansphere particles, 10 μm, from GL Sciences) was installed in front of the RP-trapping column on an additional 2-position, 10-port valve. Peptide samples were dissolved in 4% trifluoroacetic acid containing 40% acetonitrile and injected into the TiO2 column. After washing the column with 0.1% TFA containing 60% ACN, phosphopeptides were eluted with 100 mM sodium carbonate containing 30% ACN at a flow rate of 0.4 μl/min. The solution containing eluted phosphopeptides was immediately diluted online with a stream of 0.1% FA in 100% H2O delivered at a flow rate of 40μl/min and then flow through the RP trapping column. The entire phosphopeptide enrichment process was accomplished by the autosampler which sequentially injected buffers for regeneration, equilibration, washing, and elution into the system. Finally, the phosphopeptides retained in the RP trapping column were separated by the analytical column as described above.  Mass spectrometry The effluent of nano LC system was analyzed using an Orbitrap Elite Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a spray voltage of 1.8 kV. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 400-1,600) were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400, and the MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap (LTQ). The m/z 536.1654 cyclosiloxane peak was used for lock mass calibration in the Orbitrap. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the data-dependent mode (DDA), in which twenty most intense ions in each full scan spectrum were selected and subjected to collision induced dissociation (CID) in the linear ion trap. Each precursor ion was allowed to be analyzed twice and then excluded dynamically for 60 sec. For the TiO2 column enriched sample, Top eight precursor ions were selected for fragmentation and the number of repeat count was increased to three to obtain better-quality spectra. The precursor isolation width was set to 2 Da, normalized collision energy was 35% and the maximum accumulation time for MS/MS was set to 200 msec with a value of automatic gain control (AGC) of 3,000. Neutral lost-directed MS3 spectrum acquisition were enabled for analyzing peptides with phosphoric acid lost, i.e. 98, 49, and 32.7 for ions with various charge status.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.1.14; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The CID spectra were searched against the UniProt database (version 2015_09) through Mascot search engine (version 2.5; Matrix Science, London, UK). The search parameters were as follows: enzyme specificity was trypsin; up to two missed cleavages were allowed; precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance was 0.7 Da; light (+28.03130 Da, 12C2H4) and heavy (+34.06312 Da, 13C2D4) dimethylation of peptide N-termini and lysine residues, acetylation of protein N-termini, glutamine to pyroglutamic acid conversion of peptide N-termini, phosphorylation of serine/threonine residues, and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications; and cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) of peptide/protein identifications was determined by employing a decoy database searching. Peptide identifications were then filtered with the requirements of rank 1 peptide with a minimum peptide length of seven amino acid residues. Only high confident peptide identifications (FDR<1%) were considered for further evaluation. Phosphorylation site determination was further evaluated using the phosphoRS 3.0 node in the Proteome Discoverer software. Protein quantification was done with a precursor ion quantification workflow using the following parameters: partially dimethylated peptides were not considered; limits of mass and retention differences between heavy and light pairs should be smaller than 4 ppm and 0.2 min, respectively; precursor ions with at least 2 isotopic peaks in both heavy and light pairs and only unique peptides were used for quantification; and protein ratio was determined using the median of the corresponding peptide ratios.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Disabled-2, Lc-msms, Thrombin stimulation, Human platelet

### Affiliations
Chang Gung University
Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Science, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, ROC

### Submitter
HUI JU TSAI

### Lab Head
Dr Ching-Ping Tseng
Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Science, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, ROC


