### Accession
PXD004544

### Title
LC-MS/MS of dithiothreitol-extracted proteins from the insect fungal pathogen Beauveria bassiana hyphal bodies (in vivo blastospores)

### Description
Proteins were extracted using 2 mM DTT from Beauveria bassiana hyphal bodies (in vivo blastospores) were identified and quantified using Label-free quantitative mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
1) Preparation of B. bassiana hyphal bodies (in vivo blastospores).  B. bassiana wild type strain Bb0062 (CGMCC 7.34) was routinely grown and maintained on Sabouraud dextrose agar (Difco Laboratories, Detroit, MI) supplemented with 1% (wt/vol) yeast extract (SDAY). The production of in vivo fungal cells, hyphal bodies, was performed essentially as described previously (Tartar and Boucias 2004; Wanchoo et al. 2009). Briefly, the silkworm Bombyx mori were used as hosts to isolate in vivo fungal cells. Third to fifth larval instars reared on an artificial diet (for M. sexta) or mulberry leaf (for B. mori) at 25˚C were challenged by injection of either (in vitro) blastospores or aerial conidia (5×104 cells per larva) into the haemocoel. Injected larvae were incubated for 68–72 h at 25˚C, after which individual larvae were injected with 0.5 ml anticoagulant solution (0.14 M NaCl, 0.1 M glucose, 26 mM citric acid, 30 mM trisodium citrate, 10 mM EDTA, pH 4.6; also inhibits the phenoloxidase cascade) and bled. In vivo fungal cells were separated from insect haemocytes by 25–50% step Percoll (Sigma) gradient centrifugation as a pellet at the bottom of the centrifuge tube. Pellets were washed free of gradient material into the desired uptake buffer and used immediately. Collection of haemolymph, centrifugation and subsequent washing steps were all performed at 4˚C. 2) Extraction of proteins from hyphal bodies (in vivo blastospores) using DTT.   Hyphal bodies (in vivo blastospores) were harvested by centrifugation and washed twice with pH 7.5 50 mM-Tris–HCl buffer. Subsequently, hyphal bodies (in vivo blastospores) were resuspended in 200 ml of the same buffer containing 2 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), shaken vigorously for 18 h at 4˚C and then pelleted. The supernatant was concentrated by ultrafiltration using a pore-size of 10,000 Da (Amicon®, Ultra, Millipore) at 4˚C and washed five times with ice-cold water. The concentrate was stored at -80˚C. Label-free quantitative mass spectrometry was used to identify and quantify protein profiles.

### Data Protocol
The lyophilized proteins were dissolved in 1 ml lysis solution (4 M urea), reduced using 10 mM DTT at 56˚C for 1 h, and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at darkness and 0.5 M triethylamine borane for 15 min. Then reaction mix was centrifuged at 30,000 g and 4˚C for 15 min and the protein concentration of each supernatant was assayed using a BCA protein assay kits (Generay Biotech Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China). A 100 μg aliquot of each sample was digested by incubating in trypsin (Promega) at a 1:20 enzyme: protein ratio, at 37oC for 4 h, after which another portion of trypsin was added at the same ratio, and incubated at 37˚C for additional 8 h. The tryptic peptides were dried using a vacuum centrifuge, resuspended in 4 mL buffer A (25 mM NaH2PO4 in 25% ACN, pH2.7), and injected onto a Ultremex SCX (strong cation-exchange) column (4.6 × 250 mm) equipped in LC-20AB liquid phase system (Shimadzu). Peptide elution from the column is done at a flow rate of 1 mL min-1 with a gradient elution consisting of an increase from buffer A for 10 min, 5-35% buffer B (25 mM NaH2PO4, 1 M KCl in 25% ACN, pH2.7) for 11 min, and 35-80% buffer B for 1 min. The elution was detected at 214 nm absorbance and 12 fractions were collected for each sample, which were separately desalted using Strata X desalting column, and lyophilized and keep at -80°C until further used. Identification and analysis of the separated peptides were performed on Triple TOF 5600 Mass spectrometer connected to LC-ESI-MS/MS system equipped with Symmetry C18 column (5 μm, 180 um x 20 mm) and BEH130 C18 column (1.7 μm, 100 um x100 mm)in nanoACQuity liquid phase system (Waters). Symmetry C18 column was used to absorb peptides and desalt, and BEH130 C18 column was used to separate peptides. The mobile phases A (H2O: ACN: formic acid = 98: 2: 0.1) and B (H2O: ACN: formic acid = 2: 98: 0.1), supplemented with a certain proportion of calibration solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The sample (2.25 μg in 9 μl) was loaded for each time and absorbed and desalted by elution using the mobile phases A at a flow rate of 2 μl min-1, and then rapidly eluted using 5% B at a flow rate of 300 nl min-1 for 1 min. A three-step linear gradient elution was started from 5 to 35% B in 40 min, increased to 80% B in 10 min, and constantly eluted using 80% B for 5 min. Afterwards, the column was left to re-equilibrate for 2 min. Eluted peptides were ionized at 2.5 kV and the ions were analyzed by a Triple TOF 5600 Mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON). Triple TOF 5600 Mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode to switch automatically between MS and MS/MS acquisition. The acquired MS/MS spectra were searched against the B. bassiana fasta formatted protein database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez?db=protein&term=txid655819%5BOrganism%5D&cmd=search). The protein polit v4.0 software was then used to identify proteins based on the corre-sponding peptide sequences and a ≥95% confidence threshold. The target-decoy database-search strategy was used to check the protein false discovery rate (FDR), which was control to be less than 0.05. Protein quantification was performed using Protein Quantitation 1.0 MicroApp sorftware (PeakView 1.1), and a minimum of 1.5-fold difference of the protein in different samples was used a standard to judge each protein at the p-value of less than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
The insect fungal pathogen Beauveria bassiana produces a number of distinct cell types that include aerial conidia, blastospores and haemolymph-derived cells, termed hyphal bodies, to adapt varied environment niches and within the host insect. These cells display distinct biochemical properties and surface structures, and a highly ordered outermost brush-like structure uniquely present on hyphal bodies, but not on any in vitro cells. Here, we found that the outermost structure on the hyphal bodies mainly consisted of proteins associated to structural wall components in that most of it could be removed by dithiothreitol (DTT) or proteinase K. DTT-treatment also caused delayed germination, decreased tolerance to ultraviolet irradiation and virulence of conidia or blastospores, with decreased adherence and alternated carbohydrate epitopes, suggesting involvement in fungal development, stress responses and virulence. To characterize these cell surface molecules, proteins were released from the living cells using DTT, and identified and quantitated using label-free quantitative mass spectrometry. Thereafter, a series of bioinformatics programs were used to predict cell surface-associated proteins (CSAPs), and 96, 166 and 54 CSAPs were predicted from the identified protein pools of conidia, blastospores and hyphal bodies, respectively, which were involved in utilization of carbohydrate, nitrogen, and lipid, detoxification, pathogen-host interaction, and likely other cellular processes. Thirteen, sixty-nine and six CSAPs were exclusive in conidia, blastospores and hyphal bodies, respectively, which were verified by eGFP-tagged proteins at their N-terminus. Our data provide a crucial cue to understand mechanism of B. bassiana to adapt to varied environment and interaction with insect host.

### Keywords
Llc-ms/ms; dtt-extracted proteins; beauveria bassiana; hyphal bodies; in vivo blastospores

### Affiliations
Biotechnology Research Center, No.2 Tiansheng Road, BeiBei District, Chongqing, 400715,P.R.China
College of Plant Protection, Biotechnology Research Center, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, People’s Republic of China

### Submitter
zhi Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Yongjun Zhang
Biotechnology Research Center, No.2 Tiansheng Road, BeiBei District, Chongqing, 400715,P.R.China


