### Accession
PXD045754

### Title
Neuroligin 2 Governs Synaptic Morphology and Function Through RACK1-Cofilin Signaling in Drosophila

### Description
Neuroligins are transmembrane cell adhesion proteins well-known for their genetic links to autism spectrum disorders. Neuroligins can function by regulating the actin cytoskeleton, however the factors and mechanisms involved are still largely unknown. Here, using the Drosophila neuromuscular junction as a model, we reveal that F-Actin assembly at the Drosophila NMJ is controlled through Cofilin signaling mediated by an interaction between DNlg2 and RACK1, factors not previously known to work together. The deletion of DNlg2 displays disrupted RACK1-Cofilin signaling pathway with diminished actin cytoskeleton proteo-stasis at the terminal of the NMJ, aberrant NMJ structure, reduced synaptic transmission, and abnormal locomotion at the third-instar larval stage. Overexpression of wildtype and activated Cofilin in muscles are sufficient to rescue the morphological and physiological defects in dnlg2 mutants, while inactivated Cofilin is not. Since the DNlg2 paralog DNlg1 is known to regulate F-actin assembly mainly via a specific interaction with WAVE complex, our present work suggests that the orchestration of F-actin by Neuroligins is a highly dynamic and complex process critical for neural connectivity.

### Sample Protocol
For the MS to detect the interacting proteins of DNlg2, DNlg2 tagged with EGFP was overexpressed using a ubiquitous driver (da-GAL4), and the protein complexes were extracted from lysates of Drosophila adult tissue using the GFP-Trap Agarose (Chromotek). GFP overexpression served as the negative control.  For the MS to detect the interacting proteins of the N/C terminals of DNlg2 respectively, the GST-tagged extracellular (M1-S965) and intracellular (A989-V1248) fragments of DNlg2 were expressed in the E. Coli and purified, respectively. These two fragments were then incubated with the fresh lysates of wildtype Drosophila adult head tissue, and further pulled down the protein complexes using the GST antibody and Pierce Protein A/G Agarose (Thermo Scientific). Afterwards, the fresh protein lysates were sent to Shanghai Applied Protein Technology Company for LC-MS, and the following protocol could be found on the company website.

### Data Protocol
The raw files obtained were searched against the protein database for Drosophila melanogaster from UniProt by using MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) against a nonredundant International Protein Index arabidopsis sequence database v3.85 (released at September 2011; 39679 sequences) from the European Bioinformatics Institute (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/). For protein identification, the following options were used. Peptide mass tolerance=20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance=0.1 Da, Enzyme=Trypsin, Missed cleavage=2, Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), Variable modification：Oxidation(M).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Neuroligin2, Drosophila

### Affiliations
Southeast University/Monash University
School of life science and technology, Southeast University, China

### Submitter
Yichen Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Xie
School of life science and technology, Southeast University, China


