### Accession
PXD012661

### Title
RNA-bound proteome of Mycobacterium bovis

### Description
The dataset accompanying a publication describing the RNA degradosome components in Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb). The RNA-bound proteome was determined by affinity purification of protein-RNA complexes from Mycobacterium bovis cells fed with 4-thiouridine and crosslinked via photoactivation at 365nm. Affinity purified RNA-protein complexes were subjected to LC-MS analysis

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed by ribolysing in an MP homogenizer. The cell lysate was precleared by centrifugation and loaded onto a linear gradient of sucrose. Fractions with low sedimentation index (less than the ribosomal 30S subunit) were collected and loaded onto resourceQ ion exchange column. The RNA-protein complexes were collected based on the UV260/280 ratios of the fractions eluting from a linear gradient of NaCl. The fractions containing RNA and proteins were further analysed by LC-MS. Resulting protein complexes were precipitated with pyrogallol red and later the pellets were dissolved in 50 μl of 100 mM NH4HCO3 and subjected to a standard procedure of trypsin digestion: the proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 56°C, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in darkness for 45 min at RT and digested overnight with 10 ng/μl trypsin. The resulting peptide mixtures were applied to RP-18 pre-columns of an HPLC system (Waters) using water containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid as the mobile phase, and transferred to a nano-HPLC RP-18 column (internal diameter: 75 μM, Waters) using an acetonitrile gradient (0%–35% ACN in 160 min) in the presence of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column outlet was directly coupled to the ion source of an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). A blank run ensured absence of cross-contamination from preceding samples. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode to automatically switch between Orbitrap MS and LTQ–MS/MS acquisition. Survey full-scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of R  =  15,000 at m/z 400 (after accumulation to a target of 1,000,000 charges in the LTQ). The method used allowed sequential isolation of the most intense ions (up to 5, depending on the signal intensity) for fragmentation on the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation at a target value of 30,000 charges. The target ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 60 s. Chromatographic peak apex detection triggered data dependent scans (expected peak width: 5 s, minimal signal threshold: 10,000 counts) with phase method activated and triggering window set to 30%. General MS conditions were as follows: electrospray voltage, 1.8 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow. The ion selection threshold was 10,000 counts for MS/MS, and an activation Q-value of 0.22 and activation time of 30 ms were also applied.

### Data Protocol
The .raw datafiles obtained from the Orbitrap Velos run were fed directly to a MaxQuant platform (1.3.0.5) and serched against a randomized M. bovis database using standard search parameters.

### Publication Abstract
The phenotypic adjustments of Mycobacterium tuberculosis are commonly inferred from the analysis of transcript abundance. While mechanisms of transcriptional regulation have been extensively analysed in mycobacteria, little is known about mechanisms that shape the transcriptome by regulating RNA decay rates. The aim of the present study is to identify the core components of the RNA degradosome of M. tuberculosis and to analyse their function in RNA metabolism. Using an approach involving cross-linking to 4-thiouridine-labelled RNA, we mapped the mycobacterial RNA-bound proteome and identified degradosome-related enzymes polynucleotide phosphorylase (PNPase), ATP-dependent RNA helicase (RhlE),&#xa0;ribonuclease E (RNase E) and ribonuclease J (RNase J)&#xa0;as major components. We then carried out affinity purification of eGFP-tagged recombinant constructs to identify protein-protein interactions. This identified further interactions with cold-shock proteins and novel KH-domain proteins. Engineering and transcriptional profiling of strains with a reduced level of expression of core degradosome ribonucleases provided evidence of important pleiotropic roles of the enzymes in mycobacterial RNA metabolism highlighting their potential vulnerability as drug targets.

### Keywords
Tuberculosis, Rna degradosome, Rna bound proteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences
Institute of Medical Biology of the Polish Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Przemyslaw Plocinski

### Lab Head
Dr Andrzej Dziembowski
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences


