### Accession
PXD005602

### Title
The response of B. pumilus cells to glucose starvation

### Description
In this study the proteome of soluble intracellular and extracellular samples have been analysed of the gram positive BAcillus pumilus.

### Sample Protocol
Strain Bacillus pumilus SAFR-032 was used in this study. It was grown aerobically at 37°C and 180 rpm in a chemically defined medium containing 15 mM (NH4)2SO4, 8 mM MgSO4 x 7H2O, 27 mM KCl, 7 mM Na-citrate x 2H2O, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) supplemented with 1.8 mM KH2PO4, 2 mM CaCl2, 1 µM FeSO4 x 7H2O, 10 µM MnSO4 x 4H2O, 0.03 % w/v glucose and 0.04 µM biotin. Growth on a non-glycolytic carbon source was performed by exchanging the glucose with an equal amount of ribose. In this experiment 4.5 mM glutamate was added to both cultures.  For quantification via 1D-gel LC-MS/MS we used a metabolic labeling approach with 14N (NH4)2SO4 and 15N (NH4)2SO4. Samples were taken during the exponential growth phase at an OD500 of about 0.6, during transient phase at an OD500 of about 0.9-1 and during stationary phase one hour later. All samples taken from cultures grown in the medium containing 15N (NH4)2SO4 were pooled and mixed 1:1 to each of the samples from cultures grown in the medium containing 14N (NH4)2SO4. To gain cytosolic protein extracts, cells were harvested by centrifugation (20000 x g, 4°C, 10 min), washed twice with 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5 and resuspended in TE buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 10 mM EDTA) containing 1.4 mM PMSF. Cell disruption was performed by sonication and cell debris was removed by centrifugation (20000 x g, 4°C, 30 min). Protein concentration of the extracts was determined with RotiNanoquant (Roth, Germany). To gain exoproteome samples the cells were removed by centrifugation (20000 x g, 4°C, 10 min). The secreted proteins were precipitated from the supernatant using a final concentration of 10 % TCA at 4 °C overnight. The proteins were collected by centrifugation (20000 x g, 4°C, 60 min). The pellet was washed six times with 98 % ethanol, twice with 70 % ethanol and once again with 98 % ethanol. The resulting pellet was dried using a vacuum concentrator and dissolved in a solution containing 8 M urea and 2 M thiourea. The protein concentration of the supernatant was determined with RotiNanoquant (Roth). Protein extracts were separated by 1D SDS-PAGE (12% acrylamide) and the gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue as described above. Ten bands were excised from the gel for each sample, destained and digested as described by Dreisbach et al. [15]. Peptide extraction was performed by covering the gel pieces with ultra-pure water (prepared with a Sartorius Stedim unit) followed by 15 min incubation in an ultrasonic water bath.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by LC-MS/MS using an LTQ OrbiTrap Velos as described by Otto et al. [5]. Relative quantification was performed using the Census software [16] as described by Otto et al. [5] by comparing the 14N-peaks of a unique peptide at each time point with its 15N counterpart. The results were median centered; ratios were log2-transformed and averaged over the biological replicates. Time course data for each protein were adjusted to the first time point as reference point

### Publication Abstract
Since starvation for carbon sources is a common condition for bacteria in nature and it can also occur in industrial fermentation processes due to mixing zones, knowledge about the response of cells to carbon starvation is beneficial. The preferred carbon source for bacilli is glucose. The response of Bacillus pumilus cells to glucose starvation using metabolic labeling and quantitative proteomics was analyzed. Glucose starvation led to an extensive reprogramming of the protein expression pattern in B. pumilus. The amounts of proteins of the central carbon metabolic pathways (glycolysis and TCC) remained stable in starving cells. Proteins for gluconeogenesis were found in higher amounts during starvation. Furthermore, many proteins involved in acquisition and usage of alternative carbon sources were present in elevated amounts in starving cells. Enzymes for fatty acid degradation and proteases and peptidases were also found in higher abundance when cells entered stationary phase. Among the proteins found in lower amounts were many enzymes involved in amino acid and nucleotide synthesis and several NRPS and PKS proteins.

### Keywords
Keywords bacillus pumilus/ glucose starvation/ proteome

### Affiliations
Institute for Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald F.-L.-Jahn-Str. 15 17489 Greifswald  phone: +49 3834 864073 fax:        +49 3834 864202
Institute for Microbiology

### Submitter
Andreas Otto

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Otto
Institute for Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald F.-L.-Jahn-Str. 15 17489 Greifswald  phone: +49 3834 864073 fax:        +49 3834 864202


