### Accession
PXD003865

### Title
mouse stem cell SWATH-MS

### Description
Adult stem cells (SCs) are essential for tissue maintenance and regeneration yet are susceptible to SC senescence during aging. Here we demonstrate the importance of cellular NAD+ level and its impact on mitochondrial activity as a pivotal switch to modulate muscle stem cell (MuSC) senescence. Importantly, the induction of the mitochondrial unfolded protein response (UPRmt) and of prohibitin proteins, subsequent to increasing cellular NAD+ with the precursor nicotinamide riboside (NR), rejuvenates MuSCs in aged mice. NR also prevents MuSCs senescence in Mdx mice, a mouse model of muscular dystrophy. Extending these observations to other SC pools and on the organism as a whole, we demonstrate that NR delays neural stem cell (NSC) and melanocyte stem cell (McSC) senescence, while also increasing mouse lifespan. Strategies that conserve cellular NAD+ could therefore be utilized to reprogram dysfunctional SCs in aging and disease to improve lifespan in mammals

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples for SWATH-MS were denatured, reduced by Dithiothreitol and alkylated using Iodoacetamide, and then digested with trypsin to generate peptides mixture. Peptide mixture were further cleaned-up by C-18 column in prior to mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptide spectral library were generated using results from shotgun MS. SWATH data extraction were done using OpenSWATH. mscore 0.01 and 0.05 were set for the first and second step respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Adult stem cells (SCs) are essential for tissue maintenance and regeneration yet are susceptible to senescence during aging. We demonstrate the importance of the amount of the oxidized form of cellular nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD(+)) and its effect on mitochondrial activity as a pivotal switch to modulate muscle SC (MuSC) senescence. Treatment with the NAD(+) precursor nicotinamide riboside (NR) induced the mitochondrial unfolded protein response and synthesis of prohibitin proteins, and this rejuvenated MuSCs in aged mice. NR also prevented MuSC senescence in the mdx (C57BL/10ScSn-Dmd(mdx)/J) mouse model of muscular dystrophy. We furthermore demonstrate that NR delays senescence of neural SCs and melanocyte SCs and increases mouse life span. Strategies that conserve cellular NAD(+) may reprogram dysfunctional SCs and improve life span in mammals.

### Keywords
Mouse stem cell, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
IMSB, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Biology

### Submitter
Yibo Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
IMSB, ETH Zurich, Switzerland


