### Accession
PXD009156

### Title
Physiological and proteomic changes in soft wheat seeds during accelerated aging

### Description
Wheat (Triticum aestivum L.), one of the most important crops in the world, is a staple food used for making flour, noodles, alcoholic beverages, biofuel and a variety of other products. In wheat, kernel texture and biochemical composition vary with different hardnesses. Previous study of our research group indicated that physiological properties changes including germination ratio, and physiological enzymatic activities in wheat with different hardnesses were different. A comparative proteomic analysis of soft and hard wheat embryos by our research group identified more proteins associated with anti-resistance in soft wheat than that in hard wheat. Additionally, quantitative proteomic analysis of medium-hard wheat ‘Aikang58’ seeds showed that 162 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) participated in metabolism, energy supply, and defense/stress responses were identified during artificial ageing were identified in our previous research. However, the dynamic physiological and quantitative proteomic changes in soft wheat seeds during accelerated aging remain unclear, thus need to be elucidated. In this work, we conducted the first Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-based dynamic quantitative proteomic analysis of elite Chinese soft wheat cultivar ‘Yangmai 15’ seeds during artificial ageing. The uncovered differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) with different functions might provide new insights into the comprehensive understanding of deterioration in soft wheat seeds.

### Sample Protocol
2.1. Wheat seeds and artificial ageing treatment The soft wheat cultivars of ‘Yangmai 15’ used in this study were purchased from the Henan Academy of Agricultural Science. The original germination rate (Gr) was 97.0% (designated as YM97), and the seed moisture content was 12.19%. 400g seeds with similar sizes and weights were selected and stored in a 5 L plastic bottles at 45°C (± 1°C) and 50% relative humidity in a constant temperature and humidity-controlled cabinet (Binder KMF720, Tuttingen, Germany) according to our previous research (Lv et al., 2016). The concentration of CO2 by wheat respiration and Gr calculation were performed as previously described (Dong et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2014). The Gr and concentration of CO2 was determined regularly and seed samples with three biological replicates were collected for further proteomic analysis when Gr were 97%, 45%, 28%, and 6% (designated as YM97, YM45, YM28 and YM6 respectively). 2.2. Protein extraction, trypsin digestion, TMT labeling and HPLC fractionation Protein extraction, trypsin digestion and HPLC fractionation were resolved as reported previously (Lv et al., 2016). After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The peptides from YM97, YM45, YM28, and YM6 were labeled with 126, 127, 130, and 131, respectively.

### Data Protocol
2.3. LC-MS/MS analysis and database search LC-MS/MS and database search were performed on the basis of a previous report (Lv et al., 2016). Briefly, the peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and separated using a reversed phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The resulting peptides were analyzed and subjected to a nanospray ion source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q Exactive™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to ultra-performance LC. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were used as query in the Uniprot_Triticum_aestivum database (136,892 sequences) concatenated with reverse decoy database. The false discovery rate was adjusted to < 1%, and the and minimum score for peptides was set > 40. The proteins displaying a 1.2-fold change between artificially aged and normal seeds (YM45 vs YM97, YM28 vs YM97 and YM6 vs YM97) were considered as DEPs if p < 0.05. 2.4. Protein annotation and functional-enrichment analysis Gene Ontology (GO) annotation and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses were performed as previously described (Wu et al., 2006). Additionally, domain annotation and subcellular localization were performed using InterProScan on InterPro (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) and Wolfpsort systems (version of PSORT/PSORT II; http://psort.hgc.jp/), respectively. Functional-enrichment-based clustering for different protein groups (GO, Domain, Pathway) was performed and cluster membership was visualized by using a heat map via the “heatmap.2” function from “gplots” R-package on the basis of a previous report (Lv et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
Previous research demonstrated that soft wheat cultivars have better post-harvest storage tolerance than harder cultivars during accelerated ageing. To better understand this phenomenon, a tandem mass tag-based quantitative proteomic analysis of soft wheat seeds was performed at different storage times during accelerated ageing (germination ratios of 97%, 45%, 28%, and 6%). A total of 1,010 proteins were differentially regulated, of which 519 and 491 were up- and downregulated, respectively. Most of the differentially expressed proteins were predicted to be involved in nutrient reservoir, enzyme activity and regulation, energy and metabolism, and response to stimulus functions, consistent with processes occurring in hard wheat during artificial ageing. Notably, defense-associated proteins including wheatwin-2, pathogenesis-related proteins protecting against fungal invasion, and glutathione S-transferase and glutathione synthetase participating in reactive oxygen species (ROS) detoxification, were upregulated compared to levels in hard wheat during accelerated ageing. These upregulated proteins might be responsible for the superior post-harvest storage-tolerance of soft wheat cultivars during accelerated ageing compared with hard wheat. Although accelerated ageing could not fully mimic natural ageing, our findings provided novel dynamic proteomic insight into soft wheat seeds during seed deterioration.

### Keywords
Tandem mass tag, Lc-ms/ms, Wheat, Differentially expressed proteins

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs lnc.
College of Biological Engineering, Henan University of Technology, Zhengzhou, PR China

### Submitter
xiaomei li

### Lab Head
Dr Yuansen Hu
College of Biological Engineering, Henan University of Technology, Zhengzhou, PR China


