### Accession
PXD011537

### Title
Rad21-mediated NF-κB signaling limits hematopoietic stem cell self-renewal in aging and inflammation

### Description
MTD project_description Inflammation and decreased stem cell function characterize organism aging, yet the relationship between these factors remains incompletely understood. This study shows that aged hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells exhibit increased ground-stage NF-κB activity, which enhances their responsiveness to undergo differentiation and loss of self-renewal in response to inflammation. The study identifies Rad21/cohesin as a critical mediator of NF-κB signals, by increasing chromatin accessibility of inter-/intra-genic and enhancer regions. Rad21/NF-κB are required for normal differentiation, but limit self-renewal of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) during aging and inflammation in an NF-κB dependent manner. HSCs from aged mice fail to downregulate Rad21/cohesin and inflammation/differentiation inducing signals in the resolution phase after acute inflammation. and The inhibition of cohesin/NF-κB is sufficient to revert the hypersensitivity of aged HSPCs to inflammation-induced differentiation.  During aging, myeloid-biased HSCs with disrupted and naturally occurring reduced expression of Rad21/cohesin are increasingly selected over lymphoid-biased HSCs. Together, Rad21/cohesin mediated NF-κB signaling limits HSPC function during aging and selects for cohesin deficient HSCs with myeloid skewed differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics of HSCs. HSCs were analyzed by Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry using a protocol optimized for low cells number. Briefly, cells were sorted directly into lysis buffer to a final concentration of 1% (w/v) SDS, 50 mM DTT, 100 mM HEPES pH 8.0, and lysed by sonication using a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode) with 10 cycles 60 sec ON/ 30 sec OFF at the highest setting at 20 °C. Following reduction and alkylation, proteins were acetone precipitated and digested with LysC (Wako) and Trypsin (Promega) at 37°C. Digested peptides were desalted using a Waters Oasis HLB µElution Plate. Peptides were spiked with retention time HRM kit (Biognosys AG) and analyzed on a Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo). Peptides were separated using the nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) fitted with a trapping and an analytical column. The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to the MS using the Proxeon nanospray source. Data acquisition was performed as follows: one full scan MS spectrum was followed by DIA scans that were acquired with variable mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range. For sample specific spectral library generation, representative samples of the different conditions were analyzed additionally by Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA), using the same gradients as for the DIA analyses.

### Data Protocol
Both types of data (DIA and DDA) were included in the library generation (DpD). The data were searched against the mouse Uniprot database (Swissprot entry only, release 2016_01, 16,747 entries) using the Pulsar search engine (Biognosys AG). Approximately 50-100,000 cells were derived for each sample by pooling HSCs obtained from different animals. For each sample group, at least 3 independent pools were analyzed. Data were processed using Spectronaut 11 and Spectronaut Pulsar X Biognosys AG)(Bruderer et al., 2017). Precursor matching, protein inference and quantification were performed in Spectronaut using default settings except that median intensities were used instead of Top3 to calculate protein quantities. Peptide and protein level FDR for DIA data were controlled to 1% (Rosenberger et al., 2017). Differential protein expression was evaluated using a pairwise t-test performed at the precursor level, followed by multiple testing correction.(Storey, 2002).

### Publication Abstract
Geometric topographies are known to influence cellular differentiation toward specific phenotypes, but to date the range of features and type of substrates that can be easily fabricated to study these interactions is somewhat limited. In this study, an emerging technology, two-photon polymerization, is used to print topological patterns with varying feature-size and thereby study their effect on cellular differentiation. This technique offers rapid manufacturing of topographical surfaces with good feature resolution for shapes smaller than 3 &#xb5;m. Human-induced pluripotent stem cells, when attached to these substrates or a non-patterned control for 1 week, express an array of genetic markers that suggest their differentiation toward a heterogeneous population of multipotent progenitors from all three germ layers. Compared to the topographically smooth control, small features (1.6 &#xb5;m) encourage differentiation toward ectoderm while large features (8 &#xb5;m) inhibit self-renewal. This study demonstrates the potential of using two-photon polymerization to study and control stem cell fate as a function of substrate interactions. The ability to tailor and strategically design biomaterials in this way can enable more precise and efficient generation or maintenance of desired phenotypes in vitro and in vivo.

### Keywords
Aging, Inflammation, Hematopoietic stems cells

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Research Group on Stem Cell Aging  Leibniz Institute on Aging – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstraße 11 07745 Jena, Germany

### Submitter
Joanna Kirkpatrick

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Lenhard Rudolph
Research Group on Stem Cell Aging  Leibniz Institute on Aging – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstraße 11 07745 Jena, Germany


