### Accession
PXD006167

### Title
Analysis of phospho-proteome change following MST3/4 depletion

### Description
Mammalian STE20-like protein kinases 3 and 4 (MST3/4) have recently emerged as crucial regulators of several key cellular processes such as proliferation, migration, and polarity. However, the downstream target pathways which are regulated by the kinase activity of MST3/4 remain poorly characterised. To assess downstream targets of MST3/4 kinases in an unbiased manner, we transiently co-depleted MST3 and MST4 in HeLa cells by siRNA and quantified the change in their phospho-proteome using SILAC.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC heavy and light labelled HeLa cells were seeded and transfected with a total of 10nM MST3 + MST4 (heavy), or non-targeting control (light) siRNAs, using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After 60hrs, cells were lysed in 2% SDS, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, sonicated for 10 sec, before measurement of the protein concentrations using BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equal amounts of the heavy and light labelled lysates were then mixed together and reduced by addition of DTT to a final concentration of 100mM followed by heating to 95̊C for 10mins. Trypsin digestion was performed using Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) (Wisniewski et al., 2009). A total of ~6mg of mixed lysate was digested. The digest was cleaned up using a Sep-pak Plus C18 cartridge (Waters), according to manufacturer’s instructions. The peptides were then resolved on a 30cm Hydrophilic Interaction Liquid Chromatography (HILIC) column with 10mm particle size and 7.8mm ID (Tosoh 14459), fitted onto an Ultimate 3000 (Dionex) high-performance liquid chromatography instrument, as described before (Tape et al., 2016). Twelve fractions were collected. Each fraction was subjected to phospho-peptide enrichment analysis on Titansphere TiO tips (GL sciences), according to manufacturer's instructions. Samples were subjected to a final clean-up using Ziptip C18 pipette tips (Millipore), before being dried and reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile / 0.1% formic acid. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on a Thermo Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer coupled with an HP1200 platform (Agilent, Wokingham, UK) as described previously (Mardakheh et al., 2015). 86% of each phospho- fraction were analysed as 6µL injections. The top 10 most intense ions were fragmented by CID and analysed using enhanced ion trap scans. Multistage activation (MSA) was used to target phosphoserine/threonine peptides by fragmenting precursor ions undergoing neutral loss of 32.70, 49.00, 65.40 and 98.00 m/z, corresponding to loss of phosphate, in case of detection in the top 3 most intense fragment ions. MS/MS was acquired for selected precursor ions with a single repeat count followed by dynamic exclusion with a 10ppm mass window for 15s, based on a maximal exclusion list of 500 entries.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were searched and quantified using Maxquant (Cox & Mann, 2008). Searches were performed against the Human Uniprot database. Mass tolerance filters of 6ppm and 0.5Da were used for precursor and fragment masses, respectively. Re-quantify, second-peptide search, and match between runs (2 minutes window) options were enabled. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal Acetylation, and phosphorylation (STY) were considered as variable modifications, while Carbamidomethylation was considered as a fixed modification. A maximum of 2 tryptic missed cleavages were allowed. An FDR rate of 1% was used. All subsequent data analyses on the search results were performed by Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016), using the Maxquant ‘Phospho (STY)Site’ output file as input.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mst3; mst4; ccm3; gckiii; fam65a; stripak

### Affiliations
Centre for Molecular Oncology, Barts Cancer Institute,  Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ, The United Kingdom.
Barts Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Faraz Mardakheh

### Lab Head
Dr Faraz Mardakheh
Centre for Molecular Oncology, Barts Cancer Institute,  Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ, The United Kingdom.


