### Accession
PXD017510

### Title
Probing the ovarian cancer O-glycoproteome by the Macrophage Galactose like C-type Lectin (MGL): dissecting novel patterns of immune recognition

### Description
Glycosylation, the posttranslational linking of sugar molecules to proteins, is notoriously altered during tumor transformation. More specifically in carcinomas, GalNAc-type O-glycosylation, is characterized by biosynthetically immature truncated glycans present on the cancer cell surface which profoundly impacts anti-tumor immune recognition. The tumor associated glycan pattern may thus be regarded as a biomarker of immune modulation.   In Epithelial Ovarian Cancer (EOC) there is a particular lack of specific biomarkers and molecular targets to aid early diagnose and develop novel therapeutic interventions, respectively. The aim of this study was therefore to interrogate the ovarian cancer O-glycoproteome and identify tumor associated glycoproteins relevant in tumor-Dendritic Cell (DC) interactions, mediated by the MGL C-type lectin, recognizing the tumor associated Tn O-glycan. Here we present a strategy, employing a recombinant human MGL protein, to probe the ovarian cancer O-glycoproteome. This was achieved by a MGL Lectin Weak Affinity Chromatography (LWAC) approach  using glycoengineered ovarian cancer cells and ovarian cancer tissues as input material. Biochemical and bioinformatics analysis allowed us to identify the glycan structure/arrangement identified by MGL and furthermore to recognize potential MGL binders located at cell membrane, as expected, but also within the intracellular compartment and the matrisome, strongly suggesting that MGL in vivo could act as sensor of cellular distress/damage and modulator of DC motility.  The tumor glycoproteins binders for MGL may become relevant as potential “onco-immune” biomarkers for EOC progression and prognosis. Furthermore, these results contribute to the design of glyco-immunogens for DC-based cancer immunotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
2.6 Sample preparation and lectin enrichment Total Cell Lysate (TCL) and culture medium (Secretome) from OVCAR-3 SC and SKOV-3 SC and TCL from HEK 293 SC and STn were processed as previously described [22]. Conditioned media obtained from 48-72 h cell cultures was dialyzed and treated with neuraminidase to remove sialic acid (SA) (3 h at 37°C). Glycoproteins were enriched by capture on a short VVA agarose column (400 µL) and then eluted by heating the lectin (4 x 80°C, 10 min) with 0.05% Rapigest. TCL were obtained by addition of 2 ml 0.05% RapiGest and sonication of cell pellets from one confluent T175 flask. Cell lysates and glycoprotein-enriched media were reduced with 5 mM DTT for 40 min at 60°C, alkylated with 10 mM Iodoacetamide in dark for 50 min and digested with trypsin (25 μg o/n at 37°C). Then, peptides and glycopeptides were purified by C18 Sep-Pak, treated with neuraminidase (except for HEK 293 STn TCL), and diluted in lectin-binding buffer. Lectin chromatography was performed as previously described for VVA [25] and performed as described above for MGL. For rhMG-LWAC protease-digested TCL and secretome (160 mL starting material for each run) were loaded on a 0.9 m-long MGL column (1.2 mg of rhMGL) in MGL binding buffer. The MGL-flow trough of 3 different 160 mL runs of the OVCAR-3 SC or SKOV-3 SC Secretome were pooled together and passed on 2.6-m-long VVA agarose column. Only one MGL-flow trough of the OVCAR-3 SC or SKOV-3 SC TCL was passed on 2.6-m-long VVA agarose column. Enriched glycopeptides were desalted by Stage Tips and submitted for MS analysis. EASY-nLC 1000 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific) interfaced via nanoSpray Flex ion source to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos ProFusion spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) was used for glycoproteomic study. A precursor MS1 scan (m/z 350–1,700) of intact peptides was acquired in the Orbitrap at a nominal resolution setting of 30120,000. The five most abundant multiply charged precursor ions in the MS1 spectrum at a minimum MS1 signal threshold of 50,000 was triggered for sequential Orbitrap HCD-MS2 and ETD-MS2 (m/z of 100–2,000). MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 7,50050,000 for HCD MS2 and 15,000 for ETD MS2. Activation times were 30 and 200 ms for HCD and ETD fragmentation, respectively; isolation width was 4 mass units, and 1 microscan was collected for each spectrum. Automatic gain control targets were 1,000,000 ions for Orbitrap MS1 and 100,000 for MS2 scans, and the automatic gain control for fluoranthene ion used for ETD was 300,000. Supplemental activation (20 25 %) of the charge-reduced species was used in the ETD analysis to improve fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion for 60 s was used to prevent repeated analysis of the same components. Polysiloxane ions at m/z 445.12003 were used as a lock mass in all runs.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were interrogated against the non-redundant mouse proteome using the SEQUEST-HT search engine in Proteome Discoverer 2.2. The search parameters were defined as follows: full enzymatic  cleavage with up to 2 missed cleavages, variable serine, threonine or tyrosine HexAc, HexHexNAc or methionine oxidation and fixed cysteine carbamidomethyl modification. The initial search was performed on a 15ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment ion tolerance with a FDR of 1%. Only PSMs of rank 1 were used for further analysis. Identifications were further filtered by precursor mass ( 5ppm Orbitrap Fusion). For further annotation all ambiguous glycosites were assigned to a minimal possible peptide based on the presence of serines, threonines or tyrosines.

### Publication Abstract
Glycosylation, the posttranslational linking of sugar molecules to proteins, is notoriously altered during tumor transformation. More specifically in carcinomas, GalNAc-type <i>O</i>-glycosylation, is characterized by biosynthetically immature truncated glycans present on the cancer cell surface, which profoundly impact anti-tumor immune recognition. The tumor-associated glycan pattern may thus be regarded as a biomarker of immune modulation. In epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) there is a particular lack of specific biomarkers and molecular targets to aid early diagnosis and develop novel therapeutic interventions. The aim of this study was to investigate the ovarian cancer <i>O</i>-glycoproteome and identify tumor-associated glycoproteins relevant in tumor-dendritic cell (DC) interactions, mediated by macrophage galactose-like C type lectin (MGL), which recognizes the tumor-associated Tn <i>O</i>-glycan. Lectin weak affinity chromatography (LWAC) was employed to probe the <i>O</i>-glycopeptidome by MGL and <i>Vicia villosa</i> agglutinin (VVA) lectin using glycoengineered ovarian cancer cell lines and ovarian cancer tissues as input material. Biochemical and bioinformatics analysis gave information on the glycan arrangement recognized by MGL in tumor cells. The potential MGL binders identified were located, as expected, at the cell membrane, but also within the intracellular compartment and the matrisome, suggesting that MGL in vivo may play a complex role in sensing microenvironmental cues. The tumor glycoproteins binders for MGL may become relevant to characterize the interaction between the immune system and tumor progression and contribute to the design of glycan targeting-based strategies for EOC immunotherapeutic interventions.

### Keywords
Tumor biomarker, Tn antigen, Dcs, O-glycosylation, Cancer immunotherapy, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Sergey Vakhrushev

### Lab Head
Dr Sergey Vakhrushev
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen


