### Accession
PXD002120

### Title
The external PASTA domain of the essential serine/threonine protein kinase PknB regulates mycobacterial growth

### Description
PknB is an essential serine/threonine protein kinase required for mycobacterial cell division and cell wall biosynthesis. Here we demonstrate that over-expression of the external PknB_PASTA domain in mycobacteria results in delayed regrowth, accumulation of elongated bacteria and increased sensitivity to -lactam antibiotics. These changes are accompanied by altered production of certain enzymes involved in biosynthesis of cell wall as revealed by proteomics studies. The growth inhibition caused by over-expression of the PknB_PASTA domain is completely abolished by enhanced concentration of magnesium ions but not muropeptides. Finally, we show that the addition of recombinant PASTA domain could prevent regrowth of Mycobacterium tuberculosis and therefore offers an alternative opportunity to control replication of this pathogen. These results suggest that the PknB_PASTA domain is involved in regulation of peptidoglycan biosynthesis and maintenance of cell wall architecture.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics was carried out by the University of Leicester Proteomics Facility (PNACL, University of Leicester). Trypsin digestion was carried out using a filter-aided sample preparation method. Samples were mixed in the filter unit with 200µL urea solution (8M Urea in 0.1M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) and spun through at 14000g. An additional wash with the urea solution was performed and the flow through discarded. The membrane was incubated with iodoacetamide (50mM iodoacteamide in the urea solution described above) for 20 minutes. The filter was then spun at 14000g for 10 minutes, 100µL of urea solution added and then spun at 14000g for 15 minutes, and two additional urea solution washes were performed. A wash with 100µL triethylammonium bicarbonate (50mM in water) was carried out and the filter spun at 14000g for 10 minutes. Trypsin was added to the filter (5µg trypsin in 40uL of the triethylammonium bicarbonate solution described above) and incubated at 37°C for 12 hours in a wet chamber. The filters were then spun at 14000g for 10minutes and the flow through was collected. An additional 40µL of triethylammonium bicarbonate solution was added to the filter, spun through and collected. Samples were speedvacced until dry, labelled using Tandem Mass Tags (Life Technologies) according to the kit instructions and combined. Samples were speedvacced until dry and immediately prior to mass spectrometry were resuspended in 20µL 0.1% formic acid / 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid / 2% acetonitrile. LC-MS/MS was carried out using an RSLCnano HPLC system (Dionex, UK) and an LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded at high flow rate onto a reverse-phase trap column (0.3mm i.d. x 1mm), containing 5μm C18 300 Å Acclaim PepMap media (Dionex) maintained at a temperature of 37 °C. The loading buffer was 0.1% formic acid / 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid / 2% acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted from the trap column at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min and through a reverse-phase PicoFrit capillary column (75μm i.d. x 400mm) containing Symmetry C18 100 Å media (Waters, UK) that was packed in-house using a high pressure device (Proxeon Biosystems, Denmark). Peptides were eluted over a period of four hours, with the output of the column sprayed directly into the nanospray ion source of the LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer. The LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer was set to acquire a 1 microscan FTMS scan event at 60000 resolution over the m/z range 300-2000 Da in positive ion mode. The maximum injection time for MS was 500ms and the AGC target setting was 1e6. Accurate calibration of the FTMS scan was achieved using a background ion lock mass for C6H10O14S3 (401.922718 Da). Subsequently up to 10 data dependent HCD MS/MS were triggered from the FTMS scan. The isolation width was 2.0 Da, normalized collision energy 42.5. Dynamic exclusion was enabled. The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 250 ms and the AGC target setting was 5e4.

### Data Protocol
The .raw data file obtained from LC-MS/MS was processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Scientific) and searched using Mascot (version 2.2.04, Matrix Science Ltd.) against the M.smegmatis reference proteome downloaded from the UniProtKB-Swissprot database, with the sequence of TMP-PASTA inserted. The peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Fixed modifications were set as carbamidomethyl (C), TMT6-plex (N-term) and TMT6-plex (K). Variable modifications set as oxidation (M). A decoy database search was performed. The output from Proteome Discoverer was processed using Scaffold Q+S (version Scaffold_4.0.5, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR). Upon import, the data was searched using X!Tandem (The Global Proteome Machine Organization). PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet (Institute for Systems Biology) probability thresholds of 95% were calculated from the decoy searches and Scaffold was used to calculate an improved 95% peptide and protein probability threshold  based on the data from the two different search algorithms. Genome Ontology Associations (Uniprot-GOA) for M.smegmatis were imported into Scaffold for identified proteins. Scaffold Q+S was used to quantitate TMT-labelled peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability. Peptide Probabilities from X! Tandem were assigned by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Peptide Probabilities from Mascot were assigned by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.  Channels were corrected by the matrix [0.000,0.000,0.929,0.0710,0.000]; [0.000,0.00400,0.942,0.0540,0.000]; [0.000,0.0110,0.940,0.0490,0.000]; [0.000,0.0150,0.941,0.0440,0.000]; [0.001000,0.0260,0.948,0.0250,0.000]; [0.00200,0.0290,0.944,0.0250,0.000] in all samples according to the algorithm described in i-Tracker (Shadforth, I et al BMC Genomics 2005;6 145-151).   Acquired intensities in the experiment were globally normalized across all acquisition runs. Individual quantitative samples were normalized within each acquisition run. Intensities for each peptide identification were normalized within the assigned protein. The reference channels were normalized to produce a 1:1 fold change. All normalization calculations were performed using medians to multiplicatively normalize data.

### Publication Abstract
PknB is an essential serine/threonine protein kinase required for mycobacterial cell division and cell-wall biosynthesis. Here we demonstrate that overexpression of the external PknB_PASTA domain in mycobacteria results in delayed regrowth, accumulation of elongated bacteria and increased sensitivity to &#x3b2;-lactam antibiotics. These changes are accompanied by altered production of certain enzymes involved in cell-wall biosynthesis as revealed by proteomics studies. The growth inhibition caused by overexpression of the PknB_PASTA domain is completely abolished by enhanced concentration of magnesium ions, but not muropeptides. Finally, we show that the addition of recombinant PASTA domain could prevent regrowth of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and therefore offers an alternative opportunity to control replication of this pathogen. These results suggest that the PknB_PASTA domain is involved in regulation of peptidoglycan biosynthesis and maintenance of cell-wall architecture.

### Keywords
Serine/threonine protein kinase, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Muropeptides, Pknb, Magnesium, Pasta domain

### Affiliations
Department of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Leicester, Leicester, LE1 9HN
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Andrew Bottrill

### Lab Head
Dr Galina V. Mukamolova
Department of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Leicester, Leicester, LE1 9HN


