### Accession
PXD038430

### Title
Insights into myopic choroidal neovascularization based on quantitative proteomics analysis of the aqueous humor

### Description
Previous studies on the biomarkers of pathologic myopia choroidal neovascularization (pmCNV) development merely detected limited types of proteins and provide a meagre illustration of the underlying pathways. Hence, an intact picture of molecular changes in the aqueous humor (AH) of pmCNV patients is lacking. Here, to explore the potential mechanisms and biomarkers of pmCNV, we analyzed the correlation between atrophic (A) lesions and neovascular (N) lesions in a myopic cohort based on the ATN grading system for myopic maculopathy (MM). In a quantitative proteomics test of AH profile of our patients, a significant correlation was found between A and N lesions (R = 0.5753, P < 0.0001). Accordingly, groups were divided into patients without MM, patients with myopic atrophic maculopathy (MAM), and patients with pmCNV (N2a lesion). In proteomics analysis, the existence of GFAP and complement-associated molecules in AH samples of the 3 groups also supported that MAM and pmCNV shared similar characteristics. Analyses of the differentially expressed proteins between the pmCNV group and two controls were performed. We identified several potential biomarkers for pmCNV, including FCN3, GFAP, EGFR, SFRP3, PPP2R1A, SLIT2, and CD248. Taken together, our study provides new insights for further research on pmCNV development.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics The cellular debris from AH sample was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Then, the supernatant was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. The most abundant 14 proteins in human serum (human serum albumin, albumin, IgG, IgA, IgM, IgD, kappa and lambda light chains of IgE, alpha-1-acidglycoprotein, alpha-1-antitrypsin, alpha-2-macroglobulin, apolipoprotein A1, fibrinogen, haptoglobin, and transferrin) were removed by Pierce™ Top 14 Abundant Protein Depletion Spin Columns Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific， Waltham, MA, USA). Then, the protein concentration was quantified by a BCA kit. Before digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM Tetraethylammonium Bromide (TEAB) until urea concentration was less than 2 M. Trypsin was added (1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio) for a first digestion overnight(14-16h)-digestion and then (1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio) for a subsequent 4 h-digestion. After digestion into peptides, the samples were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/in water) and loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). Peptides were separated with a gradient from 5% to 25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) over 90 min, 25% to 35% in 22 min and ascending 80% in 4 min then holding at 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flowrate of 450 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  The separated peptides were analyzed in Exploris 480TM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nano-electrospray ion source. The electrospray voltage applied was set as 2.2 kV and the compensation voltages was -35 V. The full MS scan resolution was set to 60,000 for a scan range of 400–1200 m/z. The precursors underwent 20s dynamic exclusion, and selected for next higher energy collision induced fragmentation (HCD) procedure at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%. The fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Database search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database (20422 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin (Full) was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. To ensure a higher-quality result, FDR was adjusted to < 1%. Bioinformatic analysis Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database ( http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Identified protein ID was matched to Uniprot ID and then mapping to GO IDs by protein ID through application of eggnog-mapper (v2.0). The unannotated proteins in Uniprot-GOA database would be explored by the InterProScan soft based on protein sequence alignment method. Proteins were classified by GO annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment and molecular function. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The GO with a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomic; pathologic myopia; choroidal neovascularization; aqueous humor; gfap; biomarker.

### Affiliations
Department of Ophthalmology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1095 Jie-fang Road, Wuhan, Hubei Province, China

### Submitter
Xufang Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Xufang
Department of Ophthalmology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1095 Jie-fang Road, Wuhan, Hubei Province, China


