### Accession
PXD012152

### Title
Proteomic and genomic analysis of the marine fungus Paradendryphiella salina

### Description
We set out to investigate the genetic adaptions of the known marine fungus Paradendryphiella salina CBS112865 to the degradation of brown macro-algae, expecting to find a repertoire of carbohydrate active enzymes highly specialized to the degradation of algal polysaccharides. We performed whole genome, transcriptome sequencing and shotgun proteomic analysis of the secretome of P. salina growing on three species of brown algae and under carbon starvation. The genome comparison to close terrestrial fungal relatives, revealed P. salina to have a similar, but reduced carbohydrate active enzyme (CAZyme) profile, except for the presence of three putative alginate lyase 7 genes, most likely acquired via ancient horizontal gene transfer event from a marine bacterium and a polysaccharide lyase 8 gene with similarity to ascomycete chondroitin AC lyases. The proteomic analysis revealed both PL7 and PL8 enzymes to be highly abundant in the algal fermentations together with enzymes necessary for degradation of laminarin, cellulose, lipids and peptides. Our findings indicate that the base CAZyme repertoire of saprobic and plant pathogenic ascomycetes with the necessary addition of alginate lyases provide the fungi with the enzymatic capabilities to thrive on brown algae polysaccharides and even cope with the algal defense mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Paradendryphiella salina was grown on three species of brown algae and under carbon starvation for 14 days in 5 replicates. The supernatants was harvested and the total protein content from the replicate supernatants were precipitated by trichloroacetic acid (Sigma, Germany) overnight at -20°C. The protein pellet was washed three times in acetone and resolubilized by boiling in 6M Guanidinium hydrochloride (Sigma) and then diluted in digestion buffer, consisting of 10% Acetonitrile (Sigma) and 50mM HEPES buffer pH 8.5 (Sigma). The protein concentration was estimated using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 10μg of protein from each sample was subsequently reduced, alkylated, in-solution digested with trypsin (Sigma) and LysC (Wako, Japan) and desalted on C18 filters (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA). The digested protein content was estimated on a NanoDrop Spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) before analyzing 1μg from each sample by Liquid Chromatography-tandem Mass Sspectrometry (LC-MS/MS)

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using the open-source software MaxQuant v1.6.3.4 [47] with a minimum of two peptides, LFQ, iBAQ and match between runs options selected. Deamination (N) was added to variable modifications and minimum peptide length set to six. The data was treated in Perseus [48]. A hit was only considered if present in three out of five biological replicates. The iBAQ values were summed and normalized across the samples and the original protein concentration in the supernatants factored in before averaged and used for composition analysis. The predicted protein sequences from the P. salina genome were used as sequence database.

### Publication Abstract
We set out to investigate the genetic adaptations of the marine fungus Paradendryphiella salina CBS112865 for degradation of brown macroalgae. We performed whole genome and transcriptome sequencing and shotgun proteomic analysis of the secretome of P. salina grown on three species of brown algae and under carbon limitation. Genome comparison with closely related terrestrial fungi revealed that P. salina had a similar but reduced CAZyme profile relative to the terrestrial fungi except for the presence of three putative alginate lyases from Polysaccharide Lyase (PL) family 7 and a putative PL8 with similarity to ascomycete chondroitin AC lyases. Phylogenetic and homology analyses place the PL7 sequences amongst mannuronic acid specific PL7 proteins from marine bacteria. Recombinant expression, purification and characterization of one of the PL7 genes confirmed the specificity. Proteomic analysis of the P. salina secretome when growing on brown algae, revealed the PL7 and PL8 enzymes abundantly secreted together with enzymes necessary for degradation of laminarin, cellulose, lipids and peptides. Our findings indicate that the basic CAZyme repertoire of saprobic and plant pathogenic ascomycetes, with the addition of PL7 alginate lyases, provide P. salina with sufficient enzymatic capabilities to degrade several types of brown algae polysaccharides.

### Keywords
Fungi, Marine, Supernatant, Lc-ms/ms, Macro-algae

### Affiliations
Technical university of Denmark
Bioengineering, Protein Chemistry & Enzyme Technology, Technical Univesity of Denmark (DTU), Denmark

### Submitter
Bo Pilgaard

### Lab Head
Dr Anne S. Meyer
Bioengineering, Protein Chemistry & Enzyme Technology, Technical Univesity of Denmark (DTU), Denmark


