### Accession
PXD035897

### Title
Quantitative proteome dataset profiling UBC4 and UBC5 deletion strains in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
The Ubiquitin-Proteasome System (UPS) regulates many cellular processes in eukaryotic cells. Ubiquitylation by the UPS mainly directs proteins to proteasomal degradation, but it can also have non-degradative functions, such as regulating protein activity or localization. The small protein ubiquitin is conjugated to its substrates via a cascade of E1-E2-E3 enzymes. Dysregulation of the UPS has been implicated in the genesis and progression of many diseases, such as neurodegenerative diseases and cancer; thus, the UPS components are attractive targets for developing pharmaceutical drugs. E2s, or ubiquitin conjugating enzymes, are central players of the UPS. E2s function in tandem with specific ubiquitin ligases (E3s) to transfer ubiquitin to substrates. Here, we present the first proteome stability analysis of two closely related ubiquitin conjugating enzymes, UBC4 and UBC5, in S. cerevisiae. These two E2s are nearly identical, having 92% sequence identity and differing by only 11 amino acid residues. This dataset is of broad interest because higher eukaryotes express ubiquitin conjugating enzymes that are analogous to the yeast UBC4/5.

### Sample Protocol
All yeast strains used in this study are isogenic to W303 (ade2‐1, trp1‐1, leu2‐3,112, his3‐11, 15, ura3). Standard yeast genetics was used to generate ubc4 and ubc5 strains [1] Cells were grown as described previously [2] . Briefly, triplicate cultures of wild type, ubc4 and ubc5 cells were grown overnight at 25°C in YEPD medium (1% yeast extract, 2% bactopeptone, 50 mg/l adenine, 2% glucose). The next day cultures were diluted with fresh medium to OD600=0.3 (wild type and ubc5or OD600= 0.4 (ubc4and allowed to grow at 25°C until mid-exponential phase (OD600~1). Cells were collected by centrifugation at 2,000g for 2 minutes, rinsed with 1 ml cold water, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at 80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Database searching included all entries from the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD; August 2021). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences for that database in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling and the product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were selected to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with database searching. TMTpro tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+304.207 Da) and alkylation of cysteine residues with N-ethylmaleimide (+125.048 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, as described previously. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMTpro reagents according to manufacturer specifications. The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed and these values were normalized such that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent to account for equal protein loading.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Ubiquitin proteasome system, Protein stability, Tmt, Isobaric tagging

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA 02115, USA


