### Accession
PXD009335

### Title
The FAM83 family of proteins are anchors for Casein Kinase 1 isoforms through the DUF1669 domain

### Description
The Casein Kinase 1 (CK1) family of Ser/Thr protein kinases are implicated in the regulation of many cellular processes, including cell cycle, circadian rhythm, Wnt and Sonic Hedgehog signalling. Regarded as constitutively active kinases, their regulation in cells is critically important but poorly understood. We report here that members of the FAM83 family of uncharacterized proteins are central regulators of CK1 isoforms in cells. The eight members of the FAM83 family (A-H) interact and co-localize with different CK1 alpha, alpha-like, delta and epsilon isoforms. We demonstrate that the interaction with CK1 isoforms is mediated through a number of residues within a conserved domain of unknown function, termed DUF1669, which characterises the FAM83 family. CK1-binding deficient mutants of FAM83 proteins interfere with the subcellular localization of CK1 isoforms as well as FAM83 proteins themselves and their cellular functions. We propose that DUF1669 be renamed the Polypeptide Anchor of CK1 (PACK1) domain.

### Sample Protocol
Mass Spectrometry The expression of GFP-tagged FAM83 proteins in stable Flp-In T-Rex HEK293 and U2OS cells was induced with 20 ng/ml doxycyline for 24 h prior to lysis. Proteins were affinity purified from clarified extracts by GFP-trap beads (ChromoTek) as described above. Purified proteins were resolved by 4-12% gradient SDS-PAGE, the gels were Coomassie stained and gel slices covering each lane were excised and trypsin digested. The peptides were subjected to mass spectrometric analysis performed by LC-MS-MS on a Linear ion trap-orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Orbitrap-VelosPro, Thermo) coupled to a U3000 RSLC Hplc (Thermo). Peptides were trapped on a nanoViper Trap column, 2 cm x 100 m C18 5 m 100 Å (Thermo, 164564) then separated on a 15 cm Thermo EasySpray column (ES800) equilibrated with a flow of 300 nl/min of 3% Solvent B. [Solvent A: 2% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, 3% DMSO in H2O; Solvent B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid, 3% DMSO in H2O]. The elution gradient was as follows; Time(min):Solvent B(%); 0:3, 5:3, 45:35, 47:99, 52:99, 55:3, 60:3. Data were acquired in the data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS-MS acquisition. Full scan spectra (m/z 400-1600) were acquired in the orbitrap with resolution R = 60,000 at m/z 400 (after accumulation to an FTMS Full AGC Target; 1,000,000; FTMS MSn AGC Target; 50,000). The 20 most intense ions, above a specified minimum signal threshold (2,000), based upon a low resolution (R=15,000) preview of the survey scan, were fragmented by collision induced dissociation and recorded in the linear ion trap (Full AGC Target; 30,000. MSn AGC Target; 5,000).

### Data Protocol
Data files were analysed by Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (www.ThermoScientific.com), using Mascot 2.4.1 (www.matrixscience.com), and searching the SwissProt Human database. Scaffold Q/Q+S V4.4.7 (www.ProteomeSoftware.com) was also used to examine the Mascot result files. Allowance was made for the following fixed, Carbamidomethyl (C), and variable modifications, Oxidation (M), Dioxidation (M). Error tolerances were 10ppm for MS1 and 0.6 Da for MS2. Scaffold Q/Q+S V4.3 (U2OS) or V4.4.6 (HEK293) (www.ProteomeSoftware.com) was used to further analyse the data and obtain values for the Top 3 precursor ion intensities of each protein.

### Publication Abstract
The majority of mutations identified in patients with amelogenesis imperfecta have been mapped to FAM83H. As FAM83H expression is not limited to the enamel, how FAM83H contributes to amelogenesis is still largely unknown. We previously reported that members of the FAM83 family of proteins interact with and regulate the subcellular distribution of the promiscuous serine-threonine protein kinase CK1 family, through their shared N-terminal DUF1669 domains. FAM83H co-localises with CK1 isoforms to speckle-like structures in both the cytoplasm and nucleus. In this report, we show FAM83H, unlike other FAM83 proteins, interacts and colocalises with NCK1/2 tyrosine kinase adaptor proteins. This interaction is mediated by proline-rich motifs within the C-terminus of FAM83H, specifically interacting with the second and third SH3 domains of NCK1/2. Moreover, FAM83H pathogenic AI mutant proteins, which trigger C-terminal truncations of FAM83H, retain their interactions with CK1 isoforms but lose interaction with NCK1/2. These AI mutant FAM83H proteins acquire a nuclear localisation, and recruit CK1 isoforms to the nucleus where CK1 retains its kinase activity. As understanding the constituents of the FAM83H-localised speckles may hold the key to unravelling potential substrates of FAM83H-associated CK1 substrates, we employed a TurboID-based proximity labelling approach and uncovered several proteins including Iporin and BAG3 as potential constituents of the speckles.

### Keywords
Fam83 proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Gopal Sapkota

### Lab Head
Dr Gopal P Sapkota
University of Dundee


