### Accession
PXD000961

### Title
Integrated metagenomic and metaproteomic analyses of marine biofilm communities

### Description
Metagenomic and metaproteomic analyses were utilized to determine the composition and function of complex air-water interface biofilms sampled from the hulls of two ships that were deployed in different geographic locations.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted by phenol extraction method (Leary et al 2012). Precipitated by ammonium acetate in ice cold methanol. Protein pellets were redissolved in 2%SDS and quantified by amino acid analysis. Proteins were separated by 1D-SDS-PAGE, in-gel digested and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Some samples were quantified by 18O labeling and ITRAQ.

### Data Protocol
Extracted MS/MS spectra were searched against the matched metagenomic database and Public database UniMES by Mascot and XTandem! All search results were validated in Scaffold. Mascot Disteller and Mascot server were used for quntitative analysis of 18O and ITRAQ labeled samples.

### Publication Abstract
Metagenomic and metaproteomic analyses were utilized to determine the composition and function of complex air-water interface biofilms sampled from the hulls of two US Navy destroyers. Prokaryotic community analyses using PhyloChip-based 16S rDNA profiling revealed two significantly different and taxonomically rich biofilm communities (6,942 taxa) in which the majority of unique taxa were ascribed to members of the Gammaproteobacteria, Alphaproteobacteria and Clostridia. Although metagenomic sequencing indicated that both biofilms were dominated by prokaryotic sequence reads (&gt; 91%) with the majority of the bacterial reads belonging to the Alphaproteobacteria, the Ship-1 metagenome harbored greater organismal and functional diversity and was comparatively enriched for sequences from Cyanobacteria, Bacteroidetes and macroscopic eukaryotes, whereas the Ship-2 metagenome was enriched for sequences from Proteobacteria and microscopic photosynthetic eukaryotes. Qualitative liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry metaproteome analyses identified 678 unique proteins, revealed little overlap in species and protein composition between the ships and contrasted with the metagenomic data in that ~80% of classified and annotated proteins were of eukaryotic origin and dominated by members of the Bacillariophyta, Cnidaria, Chordata and Arthropoda (data deposited to the ProteomeXchange, identifier PXD000961). Within the shared metaproteome, quantitative (18)O and iTRAQ analyses demonstrated a significantly greater abundance of structural proteins from macroscopic eukaryotes on Ship-1 and diatom photosynthesis proteins on Ship-2. Photosynthetic pigment composition and elemental analyses confirmed that both biofilms were dominated by phototrophic processes. These data begin to provide a better understanding of the complex organismal and biomolecular composition of marine biofilms while highlighting caveats in the interpretation of stand-alone environmental '-omics' datasets.

### Keywords
Biofouling; diatoms; metagenome; metaproteome; quantitative proteomics; ship hul

### Affiliations
Naval Research Laboratory

### Submitter
Dasha Leary

### Lab Head
Dr Dasha Leary
Naval Research Laboratory


