### Accession
PXD036236

### Title
Proteomic profiling reveals distinct phases to the restoration of chromatin following DNA replication

### Description
Chromatin organization must be maintained during cell proliferation to preserve cellular identity and genome integrity. However, DNA replication results in transient displacement of DNA bound proteins, and it is unclear how they regain access to newly replicated DNA. Using quantitative MS-based proteomics coupled to isolation of proteins on nascent DNA (iPOND), we provide time resolved binding kinetics for thousands of proteins behind replisomes in the lung fibroblast cell line TIG-3 (JCRB0506, JCRB Cell Bank). Performing hierarchical clustering, we identified four groups of protein behaviour: Transient enriched on nascent, restored within 11min, peaking in G2/M, and delayed restored. Overall, our data show that most proteins (85%) regain access within the first 2h after the passage of the fork. Only a small percentage of proteins is restored after 2h post-replication, with 5.3 % of factors peaking in G2/M and 9.1% factors not restored before the next G1 phase. We provide evidence that DNA replication not only disrupts but also promotes recruitment of transcription factors and chromatin remodelers, providing a significant advance in understanding how DNA replication could contribute to programmed changes of cell memory.

### Sample Protocol
iPOND was performed as described by Sirbu et al., 2012, with few modifications. 1.5 × 108 synchronised TIG-3 cells (per time point) were labelled with 20 μM EdU (E10187, Thermo Fisher) for 11 min. The thymidine chased sample were washed twice and subsequently further incubated in medium containing 20 μM thymidine for the indicated times. All samples were crosslinked with 1% formaldehyde (F8775, Sigma) for 15 min at room temperature followed by 5 min incubation with 0.125 M glycine to quench the formaldehyde. Afterwards, cells were scraped from the plate (on ice), permeabilized in 0.25% Triton X-100 in PBS for 30 min at room temperature and washed with 0.5% BSA in PBS. To conjugate biotin to EdU-labeled DNA, click chemistry reactions were performed for 1.5 h in the dark (10 μM Biotin-azide, 10 mM Sodium ascorbate, 2 mM CuSO4 in 1xPBS). Cells were lysed (1% SDS in 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, protease inhibitor), sonicated (Bioruptor, Diagenode), the lysate diluted 1:1 (v/v) with cold PBS containing protease inhibitor, and streptavidin beads (65002, Thermo Fisher) used to capture the biotin-conjugated DNA-protein complexes. At this point, the protein lysate is collected to be analysed together with the iPOND pulldown. Captured complexes were washed extensively using lysis buffer and 1 M NaCl. The proteins were eluted under reducing conditions by boiling in 2X LSB sample buffer for 30 min. Sample processing for TMT-Mass Spectrometry TMT MS. Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-based MS for quantitative proteomics analysis. iPOND samples were prepared using SP3 protocol for TMT labelling as described in (Hughes et al., 2014). In brief, protein samples were mixed with SP3 beads (1: 10) and digested with trypsin (1: 50, trypsin: protein). Equal amounts (100 μg) of each peptide sample were dried and dissolved in 100 μL 100 mM TEAB buffer. TMT labelling of each sample were followed by the TMT10plex™ Isobaric Mass Tag Labelling Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) manual. The TMT labelled peptide samples were further fractionated using offline high-pH reverse-phase (RP) chromatography, as previously described (Brenes et al., 2019). The 24 fractions were subsequently dried and the peptides re-dissolved in 5% formic acid and analyzed by nanoLC–MS/MS system as previously described (Brenes et al., 2019) (Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano Liquid Chromatography System). The MS data were analysed using MaxQuant (v 1.6.10.43) and searched against Homo Sapiens database from Uniport (Swissport, January 2020) (Cox and Mann, 2011). The TMT quantification was set to reporter ion MS3 type with 10plex TMT (LOT: UH285228). Protein groups output table from MaxQuant was cleaned, filtered and median normalised with Perseus (1.6.7.0) (Tyanova et al., 2016). Because iPOND involves formaldehyde crosslinking, non-chromatin proteins could be captured. Filtering the datasets in silico using the interphase chromatin probability score developed by ChEP and machine learning (Kustatscher et al., 2014) did not affect the conclusions of our analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were analysed using MaxQuant (v 1.6.10.43) and searched against Homo Sapiens database from Uniport (Swissport, January 2020) (Cox and Mann, 2011). The TMT quantification was set to reporter ion MS3 type with 10plex TMT (LOT: UH285228). Protein groups output table from MaxQuant was cleaned, filtered and median normalised with Perseus (1.6.7.0) (Tyanova et al., 2016). Because iPOND involves formaldehyde crosslinking, non-chromatin proteins could be captured. Filtering the datasets in silico using the interphase chromatin probability score developed by ChEP and machine learning (Kustatscher et al., 2014) did not affect the conclusions of our analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Chromatin organization must be maintained during cell proliferation to preserve cellular identity and genome integrity. However, DNA replication results in transient displacement of DNA-bound proteins, and it is unclear how they regain access to newly replicated DNA. Using quantitative proteomics coupled to Nascent Chromatin Capture or isolation of Proteins on Nascent DNA, we provide time-resolved binding kinetics for thousands of proteins behind replisomes within euchromatin and heterochromatin in human cells. This shows that most proteins regain access within minutes to newly replicated DNA. In contrast, 25% of the identified proteins do not, and this delay cannot be inferred from their known function or nuclear abundance. Instead, chromatin organization and G1 phase entry affect their reassociation. Finally, DNA replication not only disrupts but also promotes recruitment of transcription factors and chromatin remodelers, providing a significant advance in understanding how DNA replication could contribute to programmed changes of cell memory.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Tmt

### Affiliations
Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Vanesa Alvarez

### Lab Head
Dr Constance Alabert
Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom


