### Accession
PXD022968

### Title
A map of post-translational modifications of macroH2A1 splicing variants  and their interactome

### Description
The aim was to characterize PTM of macroH2A1.1 and macro H2A1.2 by LC-MS/MS to facilitate the understanding of their distinct biological functions in health and disease. Next, the interactome of macroH2A1 isoforms was investigated to elucidate whether the two variants could differentially orchestrate genome maintenance and efficiency of reprogramming, i.e., two key aspects of the induced pluripotent stem cell technology (iPSC).

### Sample Protocol
HepG2 cells were harvested and pelleted for protein isolation. Each sample type (i.e., macroH2A1.1-GFP, macroH2A1.2-GFP, and GFP control) was represented by four biological replicates. Isolation of macroH2A1.1-GFP and macroH2A1.2-GFP was performed using GFP-Trap® (#gtma-20, ChromoTek, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany). The cell lysate was pre-cleared by incubating with Binding Control Magnetic Agarose (#bmab-20, ChromoTek) to minimize unspecific binding of proteins to the beads. Pre-cleared lysate was then incubated with GFP-Trap® beads. Immunocomplex was washed with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Each sample was divided in two fractions. One fraction was directly on-bead-digested with trypsin while the second fraction was on-bead-derivatized with propionic anhydride, and then digested with trypsin. Tryptic digests comprising peptides of bait proteins together with their potential binding partners were measured using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The RAW mass spectrometric data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software with in-house Mascot search engine (Matrixscience, UK; version 2.6.2) to compare acquired spectra with entries in the UniProtKB human protein database (version 2018_09; 21053 protein sequences), modified cRAP contaminant database (based on http://www.thegpm.org/crap/, 112 sequences) and in-house macroH2A1 database (version 2018_11; 6 protein sequences). Mass tolerances for peptides and MS/MS fragments were 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. For the macroH2A1 database searches, trypsin enzyme specificity with up to six missed enzyme cleavages and the following modifications were set: acetylation (K, protein N-term), methylation (K, R), dimethylation (K), trimethylation (K), and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) as variable modifications.  For searches against the cRAP and UniProtKB human databases, trypsin enzyme specificity with up to two missed enzyme cleavages, and oxidation (M), and deamidation (N, Q) as variable modifications were set. For database searches of chemically derivatized samples, propionylation (K) was added to above mentioned parameters. Rank 1 peptides with Mascot expectation value < 0.01 and Ion Score ≥ 30 were considered.  The abundance of peptides was quantified automatically using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software.  The peak intensity corresponding to each precursor ion was calculated from the extracted ion chromatograms (EICs) using the Precursor Ions Quantifier node. Selected macroH2A1.1 and macroH2A1.1 peptide identifications including post-translationally modified peptides were manually verified and quantified from the peak areas derived from the EICs using Skyline software.  To identify potential interacting partners of macroH2A1 splicing variants, the RAW mass spectrometric data files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (v1.6.2.10) with inbuild Andromeda search engine. Acquired spectra were compared with entries in the UniProtKB human protein database (version 2018_09; 21053 protein sequences), modified cRAP contaminant database (based on http://www.thegpm.org/crap/, 112 sequences) and in-house macroH2A1 database (version 2018_11; 6 protein sequences).  Modifications for all database searches were set as follows: oxidation (M), deamidation (N, Q), and acetylation (Protein N-term) as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was tryptic with two permissible miscleavages. Only peptides and proteins with false discovery rate threshold under 0.01 and proteins with at least two peptide identifications were considered. Relative protein abundance was assessed using protein intensities calculated by MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> Gene expression in eukaryotic cells can be governed by histone variants, which replace replication-coupled histones, conferring unique chromatin properties. MacroH2A1 is a histone H2A variant containing a domain highly similar to H2A and a large non-histone (macro) domain. MacroH2A1, in turn, is present in two alternatively exon-spliced isoforms: macroH2A1.1 and macroH2A1.2, which regulate cell plasticity and proliferation in a remarkably distinct manner. The N-terminal and the C-terminal tails of H2A histones stem from the nucleosome core structure and can be target sites for several post-translational modifications (PTMs). MacroH2A1.1 and macroH2A1.2 isoforms differ only in a few amino acids and their ability to bind NAD-derived metabolites, a property allegedly conferring their different functions in vivo. Some of the modifications on the macroH2A1 variant have been identified, such as phosphorylation (T129, S138) and methylation (K18, K123, K239). However, no study to our knowledge has analyzed extensively, and in parallel, the PTM pattern of macroH2A1.1 and macroH2A1.2 in the same experimental setting, which could facilitate the understanding of their distinct biological functions in health and disease. <b>Methods:</b> We used a mass spectrometry-based approach to identify the sites for phosphorylation, acetylation, and methylation in green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged macroH2A1.1 and macroH2A1.2 expressed in human hepatoma cells. The impact of selected PTMs on macroH2A1.1 and macroH2A1.2 structure and function are demonstrated using computational analyses. <b>Results:</b> We identified K7 as a new acetylation site in both macroH2A1 isoforms. Quantitative comparison of histone marks between the two isoforms revealed significant differences in the levels of phosphorylated T129 and S170. Our computational analysis provided evidence that the phosphorylation status in the intrinsically disordered linker region in macroH2A1 isoforms might represent a key regulatory element contributing to their distinct biological responses. <b>Conclusions:</b> Taken together, our results report different PTMs on the two macroH2A1 splicing isoforms as responsible for their distinct features and distribution in the cell.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Dna repair, Histone

### Affiliations
CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno
Mendel Centre for Plant Genomics and Proteomics, Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Gabriela Lochmanova

### Lab Head
Dr Zdrahal Zbynek
Mendel Centre for Plant Genomics and Proteomics, Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic


