### Accession
PXD006403

### Title
Glycopeptides from recombinant EBV gH, gL and gp42 with EThcD

### Description
Soluble ectodomains of Epstein Barr Virus glycoproteins gH/gL and gp42 were expressed in HEK293F cells for structural characterization by cryo electron microscopy. The purified material was additionally analyzed by LC-MS/MS after digestion with trypsin or chymotrypsin to identify N-linked glycosylation from EThcD glycopeptide fragmentation spectra.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 250 pmol of gH/gL and gp42 were separately prepared for mass spectrometry analysis of glycopeptides. Stock solutions were denatured, reduced and alkylated by dilution to 5 µM in 50 µL of buffer containing 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM iodoacetamide and 2% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate. Samples were first heated to 95°C for 10 min and then incubated for an additional 20-30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The samples were split in two for digestion with trypsin and chymotrypsin (Sigma Aldrich) in parallel, by diluting 20 µL of sample for each protease in a total volume of 100 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5. Protease was added to the samples in a ratio of 1:75 by weight and left to incubate at 37°C overnight. After digestion, 2 µL of formic acid was added to the samples to precipitate the sodium deoxycholate from solution. After centrifugation for 20 minutes at maximum speed in a bench top centrifuge, 80 µL of the supernatant was collected. For each sample 8 µL was injected on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer. A 35-cm analytical column and a 3-cm trap column filled with ReproSil-Pur C18AQ 5 μm (Dr. Maisch) beads were used. Nanospray LC-MS/MS was used to separate peptides over a 110-min gradient from 5% to 30% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. A positive spray voltage of 2,100 was used with an ion-transfer-tube temperature of 350 °C. An electron-transfer/higher-energy collision dissociation ion-fragmentation scheme(Frese et al., 2013) was used with calibrated charge-dependent ETD parameters and supplemental higher-energy collision dissociation energy of 0.15. A resolution setting of 120,000 with an AGC target of 2 × 10^5 was used for MS1, and a resolution setting of 30,000 with an AGC target of 1 × 10^5 was used for MS2.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with Protein Metrics Byonic software (Bern et al., 2012), using a small custom database of recombinant protein sequences including gH, gL, gp42, other viral glycoproteins and the proteases used to prepare the glycopeptides. Reverse decoy sequences were also included in the search. Specificity of the search was set to C-terminal cleavage at R/K (trypsin) or F/W/Y/M/L (chymotrypsin), allowing up to two missed cleavages, with EThcD fragmentation (b/y- and c/z-type ions). We used a precursor mass and product mass tolerance of 12 ppm and 24 ppm respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cyteines was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation as variable modification, and all four software provided N-linked glycan databases were used to identify glycopeptides.

### Publication Abstract
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is a causative agent of infectious mononucleosis and is associated with 200,000 new cases of cancer and 140,000 deaths annually. Subunit vaccines against this pathogen have focused on the gp350 glycoprotein and remain unsuccessful. We isolated human antibodies recognizing the EBV fusion machinery (gH/gL and gB) from rare memory B cells. One anti-gH/gL antibody, AMMO1, potently neutralized infection of B cells and epithelial cells, the two major cell types targeted by EBV. We determined a cryo-electron microscopy reconstruction of the gH/gL-gp42-AMMO1 complex and demonstrated that AMMO1 bound to a discontinuous epitope formed by both gH and gL at the Domain-I/Domain-II interface. Integrating structural, biochemical, and infectivity data, we propose that AMMO1 inhibits fusion of the viral and cellular membranes. This work identifies a crucial epitope that may aid in the design of next-generation subunit vaccines against this major public health burden.

### Keywords
Glycopeptide; epstein barr virus

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Joost Snijder

### Lab Head
Dr David Veesler
University of Washington


