### Accession
PXD008398

### Title
S-acylated and S-palmitoylated proteins in HeLa

### Description
S-fatty-acylation is the covalent attachment of long chain fatty acids, predominately palmitate (C16:0, S-palmitoylation), to cysteine (Cys) residues via a thioester linkage on proteins. This post-translational and reversible lipid modification regulates protein function and localization in eukaryotes and is important in mammalian physiology and human disease. While chemical labeling methods have improved the detection and enrichment of S-fatty-acylated proteins, mapping sites of modification and characterization of endogenously attached fatty acids is still challenging. here, we optimized and compared two methods widely employed to identify S-fatty-acylated proteins by MS-based proteomics. While these methods identified an overlapping list of fatty-acylated proteins, only alk-16 chemical reporter combined with NH2OH specifically and robustly identified S-fatty-acylated proteins. Alk-16 chemical reporter labeling alone gave a list of S/N/O-fatty acylated proteins, while acyl-RAC provided a list of S-acylated proteins. Acyl-RAC identifies any proteins with a thioester modification and is often misused in the literature to validate S-fatty-acylated proteins. It would be preferable, when validating new S-fatty-acylated proteins, to use acyl-RAC and alk-16 (+/-NH2OH) in combination.

### Sample Protocol
-alk-16 chemical reporter HeLa were treated with alk-16. Cells were lysed and alk-16 labeled proteins were tagged with az-biotin via CuAAC (copper azide-alkyne cycloaddition) reaction. Samples were treated -/+ hydroxylamine to selectively hydrolyze thioesters. Biotinylated proteins were enriched on Neutravidin beads, proteins were digested with trypsin and the peptides were reduced/alkylated before being  analyzed by  LC-MS/MS. 8 samples labeled xx = 1 to 8 MS162701XL_emmanuelle_hang_xx 1-4: alk-16 +NH2OH(four biological replicates) 5-8: alk-16  (four biological replicates)  -Acyl-RAC HeLa cells were lysed and free Cys were capped with N-ethyl maleimide (NEM) in the presence of TCEP. Acylated Cys were hydrolyzed with hydroxylamine (NH2OH) and reacted with the thiopropyl sepharose 6B resin to enrich S-acylated proteins. Lysate not subjected to NH2OH treatment was used as a negative control. Proteins were on-bead digested with trypsin, peptides were reduced/alkylated (TCEP/iodoacetamide). 8 samples were xx = 1 to 8 MS151730XL_emmanuelle_hang_xx 1-4: -NH2OH (four biological replicates) 5-8: +NH2OH (four biological replicates)

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis: Extracted tryptic peptides were desalted on a trap column prior to separation on a 12 cm/75 μm reversed phase C18 column (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd. Japan). A 120 minutes method increasing from 10% B to% 45% B in 77 minutes (A: 0.1% Formic Acid, B: Acetonitrile/0.1% Formic Acid) were delivered at 200 nL/min. The liquid chromatography setup was coupled to an Orbitrap XL (Thermo, San Jose, CA, USA) mass spectrometer operated in top-8-CID-mode. Mass spectra were collected in a 300-1800 m/z mass range using 60,000 resolution. Maxquant search: The data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.0.25, and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against the database using the Andromeda search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and Cysteine modified by NEM were used as variable modifications. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were used as variable modifications. For the identification, the false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites, the minimum peptide length allowed was seven amino acids, and the minimum number of unique peptides allowed was set to one. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. “Unique and razor peptides” mode was selected; this calculates ratios from unique and razor peptides (Razor peptides are non-unique peptides assigned to the protein group with the most other peptides).

### Publication Abstract
S-Fatty-acylation is the covalent attachment of long chain fatty acids, predominately palmitate (C16:0, S-palmitoylation), to cysteine (Cys) residues via a thioester linkage on proteins. This post-translational and reversible lipid modification regulates protein function and localization in eukaryotes and is important in mammalian physiology and human diseases. While chemical labeling methods have improved the detection and enrichment of S-fatty-acylated proteins, mapping sites of modification and characterizing the endogenously attached fatty acids are still challenging. Here, we describe the integration and optimization of fatty acid chemical reporter labeling with hydroxylamine-mediated enrichment of S-fatty-acylated proteins and direct tagging of modified Cys residues to selectively map lipid modification sites. This afforded improved enrichment and direct identification of many protein S-fatty-acylation sites compared to previously described methods. Notably, we directly identified the S-fatty-acylation sites of IFITM3, an important interferon-stimulated inhibitor of virus entry, and we further demonstrated that the highly conserved Cys residues are primarily modified by palmitic acid. The methods described here should facilitate the direct analysis of protein S-fatty-acylation sites and their endogenously attached fatty acids in diverse cell types and activation states important for mammalian physiology and diseases.

### Keywords
Hela, S-palmitoylation, Alk-16 chemical reporter, Fatty acylation, Lc-ms/ms, Label free quatification, Acyl-rac, S-acylation

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Laboratory of Chemical Biology and Microbial Pathogenesis, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA

### Submitter
Emmanuelle Thinon

### Lab Head
Dr Howard C Hang
Laboratory of Chemical Biology and Microbial Pathogenesis, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA


