### Accession
PXD043550

### Title
Mouse and Human Conjunctiva Organoids to Study Ocular Surface Homeostasis and Disease

### Description
The conjunctival epithelium covering the eye consists of two main differentiated cell types: mucus-producing Goblet cells and ‘keratinocytes’ of unknown function. Here, we describe long-term expanding organoids representing human conjunctiva. To check if interleukins may boost secretome expression, we stimulated the organoid cells with pleiotropic anti-inflammatory cytokines interleukin-4 and IL-13. Secretions were identified by shotgun MS to quantitatively enriched secreted proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were reduced in 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 20oC for 1 hr, and then alkylated with 20mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at 20oC for 30 min in the dark. An additional 10 mM DTT was added to quench the excess IAA. 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was used to dilute to reach a final concentration of 2 M Urea. Sequentially digested with Lys-C (1:75 enzyme to protein ratio, Wako) and trypsin (same ratio, Sigma, USA) at 37 °C for 4 h and overnight, separately. After desalting, samples were dried  using a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -80 °C.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed on MaxQuant software (version 2.4.2.0) with an integrated Andromeda search engine and searched against the human protein database from UniProt appended with 35 sequences from fatal bovine serum (FBS). Digestion was defined as Trypsin/P and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied for both peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) and protein identification using a target-decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
The conjunctival epithelium covering the eye contains two main cell types: mucus-producing goblet cells and water-secreting keratinocytes, which present mucins on their apical surface. Here, we describe long-term expanding organoids and air-liquid interface representing mouse and human conjunctiva. A single-cell RNA expression atlas of primary and cultured human conjunctiva reveals that keratinocytes express multiple antimicrobial peptides and identifies conjunctival tuft cells. IL-4/-13 exposure increases goblet and tuft cell differentiation and drastically modifies the conjunctiva secretome. Human NGFR+ basal cells are identified as bipotent conjunctiva stem cells. Conjunctival cultures can be infected by herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV1), human adenovirus 8 (hAdV8), and SARS-CoV-2. HSV1 infection was reversed by acyclovir addition, whereas hAdV8 infection, which lacks an approved drug therapy, was inhibited by cidofovir. We document transcriptional programs induced by HSV1 and hAdV8. Finally, conjunctival organoids can be transplanted. Together, human conjunctiva organoid cultures enable the study of conjunctival (patho)-physiology.

### Keywords
Organoids, Proteomics, Secretome, Conjunctiva

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands  Singapore Immunology Network (SIgN), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 138648 Singapore, Singapore.  Department of Pharmacy, National University of Singapore, 117543, Singapore, Singapore.
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Ziliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Wu
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands  Singapore Immunology Network (SIgN), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 138648 Singapore, Singapore.  Department of Pharmacy, National University of Singapore, 117543, Singapore, Singapore.


