### Accession
PXD015424

### Title
Hypusine Biosynthesis in β Cells Links Polyamine Metabolism to Facultative Cellular Proliferation to Maintain Glucose Homeostasis

### Description
Deoxyhypusine synthase (DHPS) utilizes the polyamine spermidine to catalyze the hypusine modification of the mRNA translation factor eIF5A and promotes oncogenesis through poorly-defined mechanisms.  Because germline deletion of Dhps is embryonically lethal, its role in normal postnatal cellular function in vivo remains unknown.  We generated a mouse model that allows for inducible, postnatal deletion of Dhps specifically in postnatal islet β cells, which function to maintain glucose homeostasis.  Removal of Dhps did not have an effect under normal physiologic conditions.  However, upon development of insulin resistance, which induces β-cell proliferation, Dhps deletion caused alterations in proteins required for mRNA translation, reduced production of the cell cycle molecule Cyclin D2, impaired β-cell proliferation, and overt diabetes.  We found that hypusine biosynthesis was downstream of protein kinase C-ζ and was required for c-Myc-induced proliferation.  Our studies reveal a requirement for DHPS in β cells to link polyamines to mRNA translation to effect facultative cellular proliferation and glucose homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, cell pellets were lysed in 8 M Urea (100 mM Tris.HCl), reduced, alkylated, diluted to 2 M Urea and subjected to Trypsin/Lys-C based proteolytic digestion. Following samples clean-up using SepPack reversed phase columns, resulting peptides were labelled with Tandem Mass Tags (TMTs) labels. Resulting samples were then mixed, dried and loaded onto SCX and C18 material containing in-house developmed columns and a MudPIT based seperations were carried out to separate and elute the peptides. Peptides eluted at the end of the column were subjected to data dependent mass spectrometry methodology (details provided in the manuscript) on a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC HPLC system (Thermo Scientific)

### Data Protocol
Resulting RAW files were analyzed using Proteome Discover 2.2 (ThermoScientific). The MS/MS/MS spectra were searched against in silico tryptic digest of a Mus musculus proteins database (FASTA format) downloaded from the UniProt sequence database using the SEQUEST HT search engine.

### Publication Abstract
Deoxyhypusine synthase (DHPS) uses the polyamine spermidine to catalyze the hypusine modification of the mRNA translation factor eIF5A and promotes oncogenesis through poorly defined mechanisms. Because germline deletion of <i>Dhps</i> is embryonically lethal, its role in normal postnatal cellular function in vivo remains unknown. We generated a mouse model that enabled the inducible, postnatal deletion of <i>Dhps</i> specifically in postnatal islet &#x3b2; cells, which function to maintain glucose homeostasis. Removal of <i>Dhps</i> did not have an effect under normal physiologic conditions. However, upon development of insulin resistance, which induces &#x3b2; cell proliferation, <i>Dhps</i> deletion caused alterations in proteins required for mRNA translation and protein secretion, reduced production of the cell cycle molecule cyclin D2, impaired &#x3b2; cell proliferation, and induced overt diabetes. We found that hypusine biosynthesis was downstream of protein kinase C-&#x3b6; and was required for c-Myc-induced proliferation. Our studies reveal a requirement for DHPS in &#x3b2; cells to link polyamines to mRNA translation to effect facultative cellular proliferation and glucose homeostasis.

### Keywords
Proliferation, Polyamines, Β cell, Hypusine

### Affiliations
Director of the Proteomics Core at Indiana University School of Medicine
Indiana University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Emma Doud

### Lab Head
Dr Amber Mosley
Director of the Proteomics Core at Indiana University School of Medicine


