### Accession
PXD046447

### Title
A knockdown gene approach identifies an insect vector membrane protein with Leucin Rich Repeats as one of the receptors for the VmpA adhesin of flavescence dorée phytoplasma

### Description
The adhesion of flavescence dorée phytoplasma to the midgut epithelium cells of their insect vectors is partially mediated by the Variable Membrane Protein A (VmpA), an adhesin which shows lectin properties. In order to identify the insect receptor for VmpA, we lokked for Euscelidius variegatus cells proteins interacting with recombinant VmpA-His6 by mass spectrometry analysis of VmpA-E. variegatus protein complexes formed upon in vitro interaction assays.

### Sample Protocol
Three 75 cm2 flasks of E. variegatus Euva cells were trypsinized. The cellular pellet obtained from 54 mL of culture were washed once with PBS 1x and then resuspended in 100 µL in Rx buffer (0.1% Triton X-100, 100 mM KCl, 3 mM NaCl, 3.5 mM MgCl2, 1.25 mM EGTA, 10 mM Hepes, pH 7.3, (Suzuki et al., 2006; Galetto et al., 2011). The sample was vortexed, incubated at room temperature for 5 min and centrifuged for 3 min at 14000 g. The supernatant of Euva proteins was then recovered and the concentration of proteins was measured using the Bradford assay (BioRad). Resuspended proteins (1.3 mg) were incubated overnight at 4°C with 1 mg of the recombinant protein VmpA-His6 of the FD92 phytoplasma and protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich). Then, the mixture was purified on an affinity nickel column using the ӒKTA™ system (GE Healthcare, US) (reference du dossier nb200311). As a negative control, a purification on affinity nickel column was performed using 1.3 mg of Euva cell supernatant proteins in the absence of VmpA (files nb201102). The pellet of trypsinized Euva cells resulting from the extraction with Rx buffer described previously was resuspended in Rx-T-DOC buffer (1% Triton X100, 0.5 % DOC, 100 mM KCl, 3 mM NaCl, 3.5 mM MgCl2, 1.25 mM EGTA, 10 mM Hepes, pH 7.3), vortexed and then incubated at 4°C on an orbital shaker for 1 h to isolate membrane fractions. A centrifugation of three minutes was performed at a speed of 14000 g at a temperature of 4°C. The supernatant containing an extract enriched with membrane proteins was then recovered and the pellet directly mixed with Laemmli buffer. In summary, the proteins were separated into three fractions, the proteins soluble in Rx fraction, the Rx-T-DOC soluble fraction and the insoluble fraction, i.e. pellet suspended directly in Laemmli buffer. An amount of 30 µg of proteins present in the Rx supernatant fraction and the equivalent in volume of supernatant recovered with Rx-T-DOC, were suspended in Laemmli buffer to a final volume of 26 µL. Samples were boiled just before being separated by SDS-PAGE on two equivalent 10% acrylamide gels. Proteins from the first gel were then transferred on a nitrocellulose membrane for 1.25 h in at 70V. The membrane was washed with purified water and then saturated with a blocking buffer consisting in a solution of PBS containing 5% of skimmed milk for 4 h at room temperature. After saturation, the membrane was incubated overnight at 4°C on an orbital shaker with the protease inhibitor cocktail (1/1000) (Sigma-Aldrich) and the recombinant protein VmpA-His6 at a concentration of 45 µg.mL-1. The membrane was then washed in PBS then in PBS + 0,2% Tween 20 prior to incubation with a primary anti-VmpA monospecific polyclonal antibody diluted 1:7000 (Covalab). After incubation, the membrane was washed with PBS, then with PBS + 0,2% Tween 20 and incubated with the secondary antibody anti-IgG rabbit-HRP (Sigma-Aldrich). After washing with PBS, the membrane was incubated with HRP substrate and visualized through ChemiDoc Imaging System (BioRad). The second gel was stained with Coomassie blue. The bands corresponding to the signals observed on the far-western blot anti-VmpA were excised and digested with trypsin as previously described (Killiny 2006 Identification of a Spiroplasma citri hydrophilic protein associated with insect transmissibility. Microbiol. Read. Engl. 152, 1221–1230) (files fc220504). The resulting digestion were analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) coupled to a tribrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched by SEQUEST through Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) against a Swissprot protein database (version 2022-01; 478,954 entries) and a collection of peptide sequences originating from the conceptual translation of RNAseq data from E. variegatus. The dataset analyzed during the current study are available in the Transcriptome Shotgun Assembly database on NCBI: E. variegatus, transcriptome shotgun assembly repository, GenBank accession: GFTU00000000.1. Search parameters were as follows: mass accuracy of the monoisotopic peptide precursor and peptide fragments was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. Only b- and y-ions were considered for mass calculation. Oxidation of methionines (+16 Da), methionine loss (-131 Da), methionine loss with acetylation (-89 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42 Da) were considered as variable modifications while carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57 Da) was considered as fixed modification. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm (Käll et al., 2007) and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Positive Rate at peptide level. Spectra from peptides higher than 5000 Da or lower than 350 Da were rejected. Precursor Detector node was included.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Vmpa, Protein-protein interaction, Euscelidius variegatus, Phytoplasma

### Affiliations
Plateforme Proteome
Univ. Bordeaux, Bordeaux Proteome, Bordeaux, France.

### Submitter
Stephane Claverol

### Lab Head
Dr Stephane Claverol
Univ. Bordeaux, Bordeaux Proteome, Bordeaux, France.


