### Accession
PXD039436

### Title
Two elongasomes generate rod shape in a unicellular microorganism

### Description
Cell geometry is genetically inherited by all forms of life. In bacteria, shape is determined by the peptidoglycan and is nearly invariant during the metabolically active vegetative state. Essential morphogenetic complexes, the elongasome and divisome, expand the peptidoglycan along the major and minor axes, respectively, to generate a particular shape. Here, we provide evidence for the presence in Salmonella of two alternative elongasomes that generate a similar (rod) shape. One elongasome is directed by penicillin-binding protein 2 (PBP2) while the other is controlled by PBP2SAL, a pathogen-specific enzyme. In acidic niches, PBP2SAL replaces and renders dispensable PBP2. Our data also demonstrate distinct rates for the two identified elongasomes, with that directed by PBP2SAL exhibiting lower speed

### Sample Protocol
Once the presence of high-molecular weight cross-linked elongasome complexes was verified by immunoblotting, the samples were subjected to 10% SDS-PAGE and the gel stained with Coomassie Blue. The lanes containing blue stained proteins were cut and divided into ten individual bands. Only bands spanning from the top of the lane including stacking gel to the area of monomeric protein were chosen for in-gel trypsin digestion using an Opentrons OT2 robot . The resulting peptides from each band were pooled to have a single sample per lane, excepted for the first set of samples named M1-M2-M3, corresponding to anti-FLAG-directed pull down of elongasomes in wild type, DmrdA and DPBP2SALstrains, which were analyzed as sections A-B-C for each of them (see Supplementary Table S1). Each sample was analyzed in a Data dependent acquisition format, using a Thermo Ultimate 3000 liquid nanochromatograph coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris OE240 mass spectrometer; the gradient used was 90 min and a C18 column of 75 µm ID and 15 cm long.

### Data Protocol
The MS1 and MS2 spectra (~60,000-70,000 per sample) were used to launch a search against a database that included the proteome of the S. Typhimurium reference strain SL1344 (entry UP000008962, Uniprot database), and some typical laboratory contaminants reaching a total of made up of 4,775 entries. The search engine used was Peaks 7.5, and the results have been filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% at the PSM level. The software Skyline v22.2 (https://skyline.ms/project/home/software/Skyline/begin.view) was used to illustrate in graphics the relative abundance of the peptides identified in the different elongasome samples after pulling-down with either anti-PBP2 or anti-FLAG (anti-PBP2SAL-3xFLAG) antibodies. The Skyline software used the raw data generated from the MS1 and MS2 spectra.

### Publication Abstract
Cell shape is genetically inherited by all forms of life. Some unicellular microbes increase niche adaptation altering shape whereas most show invariant morphology. A universal system of peptidoglycan synthases guided by cytoskeletal scaffolds defines bacterial shape. In rod-shaped bacteria, this system consists of two supramolecular complexes, the elongasome and divisome, which insert cell wall material along major and minor axes. Microbes with invariant shape are thought to use a single morphogenetic system irrespective of the occupied niche. Here, we provide evidence for two elongasomes that generate (rod) shape in the same bacterium. This phenomenon was unveiled in Salmonella, a pathogen that switches between extra- and intracellular lifestyles. The two elongasomes can be purified independently, respond to different environmental cues, and are directed by distinct peptidoglycan synthases: the canonical PBP2 and the pathogen-specific homologue PBP2<sub>SAL</sub>. The PBP2-elongasome responds to neutral pH whereas that directed by PBP2<sub>SAL</sub> assembles in acidic conditions. Moreover, the PBP2<sub>SAL</sub>-elongasome moves at a lower speed. Besides Salmonella, other human, animal, and plant pathogens encode alternative PBPs with predicted morphogenetic functions. Therefore, contrasting the view of morphological plasticity facilitating niche adaptation, some pathogens may have acquired alternative systems to preserve their shape in the host.

### Keywords
Salmonella; peptidoglycan; elongasome; pbp2; pbp2sal

### Affiliations
DEPARTMENT OF MICROBIAL BIOTECHNOLOGY LABORATORY OF INTRACELLULAR BACTERIAL PATHOGENS NATIONAL CENTER FOR BIOTECHNOLOGY CSIC SPAIN
CNB-CSIC

### Submitter
Alberto Paradela

### Lab Head
Dr Francisco Garcia del Portillo
DEPARTMENT OF MICROBIAL BIOTECHNOLOGY LABORATORY OF INTRACELLULAR BACTERIAL PATHOGENS NATIONAL CENTER FOR BIOTECHNOLOGY CSIC SPAIN


