### Accession
PXD022556

### Title
Translatome and Translation Machinery Remodeling by eIF4A Inhibitors  Mediates Antitumor Potency.

### Description
Protein synthesis-targeting agents against eIF4A activity, including rocaglates, are actively pursued as anticancer and antiviral therapies. Yet, their full effect on the translational landscape is unknown, especially with regards to up-regulated proteins and drug-activated translation factors that mediate rocaglates’ remarkable anticancer potency. Here, we investigated rocaglate-driven global translational remodeling in cancer cells. Proteomic translatome analysis by TMT-pulse-SILAC revealed an extensive repertoire of rocaglate-inducible proteins that regulate hitherto unrecognized mechanisms of cytotoxicity. As proof-of-concept, we show that GEF-H1 induction activates anti-survival RHOA/JNK signaling. Intriguingly, rocaglate responses persist in eIF4A-depleted cells. Global MATRIX survey of translation machinery adaptations to rocaglates revealed augmented translational activities of the general translation factor eEF1ε1, and the DEAD-box RNA helicase DDX17, which drive rocaglate-specific protein induction and drug response. This original unbiased proteomic interrogation of rocaglate-driven translational reprogramming transforms the current definition of rocaglates as one-dimensional eIF4A inhibitors to comprehensive remodelers of the protein synthesis landscape.

### Sample Protocol
TMT pSILAC:  TMT labelling and fractionation: MS sample preparation and runs were performed at Bioinformatics Solutions Inc. (Waterloo, Ontario, Canada).  Samples were reduced, alkylated, digested, and TMT labeled using the TMT10plexTM Isobaric Label Reagent Set (ThermoFisher Scientific, #90110) according to manufacturer’s directions. Labeled peptides from all samples were combined and lyophilized. Peptides were then resuspended in 20 μl of ddH2O and subjected to high pH reversed-phase HPLC fractionation using a Waters XBridge C18 column. A linear gradient of Buffer A (ddH2O, pH = 10) to 40% Buffer B (80% acetonitrile, pH = 10) was used to fractionate peptides.  Fractions were collected starting 2 min into the 90 min gradient, in 2 min time intervals for a total of 44 fractions.     MATRIX: TMT labelling and fractionation: MS sample preparation and runs were performed at Bioinformatics Solutions Inc. (Waterloo, Ontario, Canada).  Samples were reduced, alkylated, digested, and TMT labeled using the TMT10plexTM Isobaric Label Reagent Set (ThermoFisher Scientific, #90110) according to manufacturer’s directions. Labeled peptides from all samples were combined and lyophilized. Peptides were then resuspended in 20 μl of ddH2O and subjected to high pH reversed-phase HPLC fractionation using a Waters XBridge C18 column. A linear gradient of Buffer A (ddH2O pH = 10) to 40% Buffer B (80% acetonitrile, pH = 10) was used to fractionate peptides.  Fractions were collected starting 2 min into the 90 min gradient, in 2 min time intervals for a total of 44 fractions.     MS: LC-MS/MS analysis: Each of the 44 high pH fractions were lyophilized, resuspended in 0.1% formic acid, and loaded onto a 96-well plate for injection into the mass spectrometer.  Samples were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion-Lumos Tribid Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA) outfitted with a nanospray source and Dionix Ultimate 1000 nano-LC system (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA) Peptide mixtures were loaded into a PEPMAP100 C18 5 μM trap column (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA) at a constant flow of 30 μL/min.  Peptides were eluted and focused using a PEPMAP C18 2 μM 15 cm column (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA) over the course of a 60 min gradient. 0 - 48 min :4% - 35% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid; 48 - 55 min of 90% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid for column cleaning, 55 - 60 min of 4% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid for column equilibration.  Peptides were introduced by nano-electrospray into the mass spectrometer.  Data was acquired using the MultiNotch MS3 acquisition with synchronous precursor selection (SPS) with a cycle time of 2 sec. MS1 acquisition was performed with a scan range of 550 m/z - 1800 m/z with resolution set to 120 000, maximum injection time of 50 ms and AGC target set to 4e5. Isolation for MS2 scans was performed in the quadrupole, with an isolation window of 0.7. MS2 scans were done in the linear ion trap with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a normalized collision energy of 35%. For MS3 scans, HCD was used, with a collision energy of 65% and scans were measured in the orbitrap with a resolution of 50000, a scan range of 100 m/z - 300 m/z, an AGC Target of 1e5, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was applied using a exclusion list of one repeat count with an exclusion duration of 30 sec. All LC-MS/MS was performed at Bioinformatics Solutions Inc. in Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.

### Data Protocol
pSILAC: MS data analysis: MS raw files were processed using PEAKS X+ (v10.5, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.).  The data was searched against the Human Uniprot database consisting of reviewed canonical sequences (total entry 20332).  Parent mass tolerance was set to 10ppm, with fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Semi-specific tryptic cleavage was selected with allows for a maximum of 2 missed cleavages.  For identification of all proteins, fixed modifications of TMT (229.16 Da) on peptide N-terminal and carbamidomethylation (57.02 Da) on cysteine residues were specified. Variable modifications of TMT on a “light” lysine (229.16 Da), TMT on a “heavy” lysine (237.18 Da), 13C(6)15N(2) SILAC Label on lysine, 13C(6)15N(4) SILAC label on arginine, as well as oxidation (15.99 Da) on methionine were specified.  For identification of only heavy labelled proteins, fixed modifications included carbamidomethylation (57.02 Da) on cysteine, TMT on a “heavy” lysine (237.18 Da), TMT (229.16 Da) on peptide N-terminal, and 13C(6)15N(4) SILAC label on arginine were selected, while a variable modification of Oxidation (15.99 Da) on Methionine was also included.  TMT quantification was also performed using the PEAKS X+ quantification module, allowing a mass tolerance of 20 ppm and quantifying all peptides that pass a 1% FDR threshold.   Matrix: MS data analysis: MS raw files were processed using PEAKS X+ (v10.5, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.).  The data was searched against the Human Uniprot database consisting of reviewed canonical and isoform sequences (total entry 42339).  Parent mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm, with fragment mass tolerance of 0.6Da. Semi-specific tryptic cleavage was selected with allows for a maximum of 2 missed cleavages.  Fixed modifications of TMT (229.16 Da) on lysine and peptide N-terminal and carbamidomethylation (57.02 Da) on cysteine residues were specified. Variable modifications of deamidation (0.98 Da) on asparagine and glutamine, as well as oxiation (15.99 Da) on methionine were specified.  TMT quantification was also performed using the PEAKS X+ quantification module, allowing a mass tolerance of 20 ppm and quantifying all peptides that pass a 1% FDR threshold.

### Publication Abstract
Tactical disruption of protein synthesis is an attractive therapeutic strategy, with the first-in-class eIF4A-targeting compound zotatifin in clinical evaluation for cancer and COVID-19. The full cellular impact and mechanisms of these potent molecules are undefined at a proteomic level. Here, we report mass spectrometry analysis of translational reprogramming by rocaglates, cap-dependent initiation disruptors that include zotatifin. We find effects to be far more complex than simple "translational inhibition" as currently defined. Translatome analysis by TMT-pSILAC (tandem mass tag-pulse stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture mass spectrometry) reveals myriad upregulated proteins that drive hitherto unrecognized cytotoxic mechanisms, including GEF-H1-mediated anti-survival RHOA/JNK activation. Surprisingly, these responses are not replicated by eIF4A silencing, indicating a broader translational adaptation than currently understood. Translation machinery analysis by MATRIX (mass spectrometry analysis of active translation factors using ribosome density fractionation and isotopic labeling experiments) identifies rocaglate-specific dependence on specific translation factors including eEF1&#x3b5;1 that drive translatome remodeling. Our proteome-level interrogation reveals that the complete cellular response to these historical "translation inhibitors" is mediated by comprehensive translational landscape remodeling.

### Keywords
Eiffa, Matrix, Translatome, Pulse silac, Rocaglate, Translate, Cancer

### Affiliations
Bioinformatics Solutions Inc
Department of Urology, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA

### Submitter
Jonathan Krieger

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan H. Schatz
Department of Urology, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA


