### Accession
PXD017979

### Title
Tauroursodeoxycholic acid-induced neural stem cell proliferation

### Description
Tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA), an endogenous neuroprotective bile acid and a metabolic regulator, stimulates NSC proliferation and enhances adult NSC pool in vitro and in vivo. In this study, we dissected the mechanism triggered by this proliferation-inducing molecule, namely in mediating metabolic reprogramming. Liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry based detection of differential proteomics revealed that TUDCA reduces the mitochondrial levels of the long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCAD), an enzyme crucial for β-oxidation of long-chain fatty acids (FA).

### Sample Protocol
NSC line NS-TGFP was expanded and induced to differentiate for 24 h with or without TUDCA. Mitochondrial protein enriched extracts were obtained by using Qproteome Mitochondria isolation kit (Qiagen) and resuspended in 6 M urea and 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate. Protein disulfide bonds were reduced by DTT and cysteine residues alkylated with iodoacetamide. Samples were digested with trypsin (Promega) and the reaction was stopped by addition of 0.5% formic acid. A total of 2 ug of each digest was first separated by a nano-HPLC system (Proxeon, Denmark) and then the peptide mass spectra acquired using a Maxis Impact Q-TOF spectrometer (Bruker, Bremen, Germany). The peptides were first concentrated on a 100 μm ID 2 cm nanotrapping column (Proxeon) and then loaded onto a 75 μm ID, 25 cm Acclaim PepMap nanoseparation column (Thermo). The chromatography run using a 0.1% formic acid - acetonitrile gradient (2-30% in 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min). The column was coupled to the mass spectrometer inlet through a Captive Spray ionization source (Bruker). MS acquisition was set to cycles of MS, each followed by 3 cycles of MS/MS, with an intensity threshold for fragmentation of 2000 counts, and using a dynamic exclusion time of 2 min, with an automated precursor re-selection when a 3-fold increase in intensity was observed. Spectra were acquired on the range of 150-2200 Da.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were pre-processed using the Data Analysis 4.2 software (Bruker). Data normalization, database searching and protein identification were performed using MaxQuant software (v1.5.2.8) and protein quantification was determinate by MaxLFQ algorithm. Searches on a mouse database retrieved from Uniprot/SwissProt or NCBI database (downloaded on 2016, containing 166 073 reviewed sequences) included trypsin as digesting enzyme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; cysteine carbamidomethylation set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modification. The peptide mass tolerances of the first search and main search (recalibrated) were <0,07 and 0,006 Da, respectively. The minimum peptide length was seven amino acids, and the maximum peptide mass was 4600 Da. Both peptides and proteins were filtered with a maximum false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01. The match between runs feature with a matching window of 0.7 min and an alignment window of 20 min, was activated. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) calculations were performed separately in each parameter group containing similar cell loadings. All peptides were selected for protein quantification. Other unmentioned parameters were the MaxQuant default settings. Potential contaminants and reverse sequences were filtered out.

### Publication Abstract
Recent evidence suggests that neural stem cell (NSC) fate is highly dependent on mitochondrial bioenergetics. Tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA), an endogenous neuroprotective bile acid and a metabolic regulator, stimulates NSC proliferation and enhances adult NSC pool <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i>. In this study, we dissected the mechanism triggered by this proliferation-inducing molecule, namely in mediating metabolic reprogramming. Liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry (LC-MS) based detection of differential proteomics revealed that TUDCA reduces the mitochondrial levels of the long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCAD), an enzyme crucial for &#x3b2;-oxidation of long-chain fatty acids (FA). TUDCA impact on NSC mitochondrial proteome was further confirmed, including in neurogenic regions of adult rats. We show that LCAD raises throughout NSC differentiation, while its silencing promotes NSC proliferation. In contrast, nuclear levels of sterol regulatory element-binding protein (SREBP-1), a major transcription factor of lipid biosynthesis, changes in the opposite manner of LCAD, being upregulated by TUDCA. In addition, alterations in some metabolic intermediates, such as palmitic acid, also supported the TUDCA-induced <i>de novo</i> lipogenesis. More interestingly, a metabolic shift from FA to glucose catabolism appears to occur in TUDCA-treated NSCs, since mitochondrial levels of pyruvate dehydrogenase E1-&#x3b1; (PDHE1-&#x3b1;) were significant enhanced by TUDCA. At last, the mitochondria-nucleus translocation of PDHE1-&#x3b1; was potentiated by TUDCA, associated with an increase of H3-histones and acetylated forms. In conclusion, TUDCA-induced proliferation of NSCs involves metabolic plasticity and mitochondria-nucleus crosstalk, in which nuclear PDHE1-&#x3b1; might be required to assure pyruvate-derived acetyl-CoA for histone acetylation and NSC cycle progression.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Neuronal stem cells

### Affiliations
ITQB NOVA
Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier, Universidade Nova de Lisboa - ITQB NOVA

### Submitter
Ana Varela Coelho

### Lab Head
Dr Ana Varela Coelho
Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier, Universidade Nova de Lisboa - ITQB NOVA


