### Accession
PXD009705

### Title
Evolutionary trade-offs associated with loss of PmrB function in host-adapted Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Description
Pseudomonas aeruginosa colonises the upper airway of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients, providing a reservoir of host-adapted genotypes that subsequently establish chronic lung infection. We previously experimentally-evolved P. aeruginosa in a murine model of respiratory tract infection and observed mutations in pmrB that promoted establishment and persistence of infection. Here we show that mutations in pmrB, which encodes the sensor kinase of the PmrAB two-component system, are acquired early in infection and increase resistance to the host antimicrobial lysozyme. Proteomic analysis of pmrB mutants reveal downregulation of proteins involved in LPS biosynthesis, antimicrobial resistance and phenazine production, and upregulation of proteins involved in adherence, lysozyme resistance and inhibition of the chloride ion channel CFTR, relative to wild-type strain LESB65. Accordingly, pmrB mutants show enhanced adherence to airway epithelial cells and downregulate host CFTR expression. P. aeruginosa pmrB mutations are found in CF patient isolates and are associated with the same phenotypes, but are subject to an evolutionary trade-off: enhanced colonisation potential, resistance to host defences and CFTR inhibition, but concomitant increased susceptibility to antibiotics.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for Proteomics Bacterial cell pellets were lysed by sonication in 1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were heated at 80°C for 15 min before centrifugation at 12, 000 x g to pellet debris. The supernatant was retained and proteins reduced with 3 mM DTT (Sigma) at 60°C for 10 min, cooled, then alkylated with 9 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) at RT for 30 min in the dark; all steps were performed with intermittent vortex-mixing. Proteomic-grade trypsin (Sigma) was added at a protein:trypsin ratio of 50:1 and incubated at 37°C overnight. SDC was removed by adding TFA to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v). Peptide samples were centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 30 min to remove precipitated SDC.  NanoLC MS ESI MS/MS analysis Peptides were analysed by on-line nanoflow LC using the Ultimate 3000 nano system (Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 cm × 75 μm inner diameter, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å) at 5 μl min−1 with an aqueous solution containing 0.1 %( v/v) TFA and 2%(v/v) acetonitrile. After 3 min, the trap column was set in-line an analytical column (Easy-Spray PepMap® RSLC 50 cm × 75 μm inner diameter, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) fused to a silica nano-electrospray emitter (Dionex).  The column was operated at a constant temperature of 30°C and the LC system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF (or Q-Exactive )  mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Chromatography was performed with a buffer system consisting of 0.1 % formic acid (buffer A) and 80 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid (buffer B). The peptides were separated by a linear gradient of 3.8 – 50 % buffer B over 90 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The Q-Exactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 60,000(Q-Exactive, 70,000). Up to the top 10 most abundant isotope patterns with charge states +2 to +5 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.0Th and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energies of 30. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 100 and 45ms (Q-Exactive, 250 and 100ms) respectively, and the ion target value was set to 3E6 (Q-Exactive,1E6) for survey scans and 1E5 for the MS/MS scans. MS/MS events were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 (Q-Exactive, 35,000). Repetitive sequencing of peptides was minimized through dynamic exclusion of the sequenced peptides for 20s.

### Data Protocol
Protein Identification and Quantification Thermo RAW files were imported into Progenesis QI for proteomics (version 4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics). Runs were time aligned using default settings and using an auto selected run as reference.  Peaks were picked by the software using default settings and filtered to include only peaks with a charge state between +2 and +7. Spectral data were converted into .mgf files with Progenesis QI for proteomics and exported for peptide identification using the Mascot (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science) search engine. Tandem MS data were searched against translated ORFs from Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain PAO1 (Uniprot reference proteome, UP000002438, December 2016) and a contaminant database (cRAP, GPMDB, 2012) (combined 5,733 sequences; 1,909,703 residues). The search parameters were as follows: precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set as 0.05Da. Two missed tryptic cleavages were permitted. Carbamidomethylation (cysteine) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (methionine) set as variable modification. Mascot search results were further validated using the machine learning algorithm Percolator embedded within Mascot. The Mascot decoy database function was utilised and the false discovery rate was <1%, while individual percolator ion scores >13 indicated identity or extensive homology (p <0.05). Mascot search results were imported into Progenesis QI for proteomics as XML files. Peptide intensities were normalised against the reference run by Progenesis QI for proteomics and these intensities were used to highlight relative differences in protein expression between sample groups. Only proteins with 2 or more identified peptides were included in the dataset. Statistical analysis (ANOVA) of the data was performed using Progenesis QI for proteomics to identify significantly (p<0.05, q ≤ 0.05, relative fold change ≥ 2) differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Pseudomonas aeruginosa colonises the upper airway of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients, providing a reservoir of host-adapted genotypes that subsequently establish chronic lung infection. We previously experimentally-evolved P. aeruginosa in a murine model of respiratory tract infection and observed early-acquired mutations in pmrB, encoding the sensor kinase of a two-component system that promoted establishment and persistence of infection. Here, using proteomics, we show downregulation of proteins involved in LPS biosynthesis, antimicrobial resistance and phenazine production in pmrB mutants, and upregulation of proteins involved in adherence, lysozyme resistance and inhibition of the chloride ion channel CFTR, relative to wild-type strain LESB65. Accordingly, pmrB mutants are susceptible to antibiotic treatment but show enhanced adherence to airway epithelial cells, resistance&#xa0;to lysozyme treatment, and downregulate host CFTR expression. We propose that P. aeruginosa pmrB mutations in CF patients are subject to an evolutionary trade-off, leading to enhanced colonisation potential, CFTR inhibition, and resistance to host defences, but also to increased susceptibility to antibiotics.

### Keywords
Label free quantification, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Pmrb

### Affiliations
Chair in Infection and Global Health, Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool,
Infection Biology

### Submitter
Stuart Armstrong

### Lab Head
Dr Julian A. Hiscox
Chair in Infection and Global Health, Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool,


