### Accession
PXD010314

### Title
Estrogen Receptor alpha and Histone Lysine Methyltransferase DOT1L chromatin bound interactome

### Description
Estrogen Receptor alpha (ERα) is a ligand-inducible transcription factor that mediates estrogen signaling in hormone-responsive breast cancer (BC) and is the primary target of specific anticancer therapies. Although ERα blockade with these drugs is effective, the development of a resistance to treatment represents the key problem in clinical management of patients affected by this disease. Understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying ERα action in BC cells may help the identification of new therapeutic targets for more effective pharmacological treatment of endocrine therapy-resistant tumors. We recently discovered the epigenetic enzyme DOT1L (DOT1 Like Histone Lysine Methyltransferase) as a novel nuclear partner of ERα in BC cells. To investigate the involvement of DOT1L in mediating ERα actions in hormone-responsive and endocrine-resistant BC, physical and functional interaction between these two molecules on chromatin was mapped by Chromatin Immunoprecipitation coupled to Mass Spectrometry (ChIP-MS).

### Sample Protocol
Chromatin Immunoprecipitation coupled to mass spectrometry was performed as described in Mohammed H et al, 2016 with some modifications. In details, first 100 µl of equilibrated Dynabeads M-280 Sheep Anti-Rabbit IgG (11203D, Thermo Fischer Scientific) were incubated overnight at 4°C with 20 µg of the antibodies chosen for immunoprecipitations: ERα (HC-20) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, SC-8002), DOT1L Antibody (Bethyl Laboratories, A300-954A) and Rabbit IgG Isotype Control (31235, Invitrogen, Thermo-Fisher) as a negative control. For each experimental point 6×107 MCF-7 cells were used. Media were then removed and replaced with media containing 1% formaldehyde and crosslinked for 10 min.  Crosslinking was quenched by adding Glycine to a final concentration of 0.1 M. The cells were washed with ice-cold PBS, harvested, and the cell pellets collected. The nuclear chromatin fraction was obtained by first resuspending the pellet: 1 ml of Lysis buffer 1 (LB1): 50 mM HEPES-KOH, (pH 7.5), 140 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10% (vol/vol) glycerol, 0.5% (vol/vol) NP-40/Igepal CA-630 and 0.25% (vol/vol) Triton X-100. Samples was rotated at 4 °C for 10 min and centrifugated at 2,000g for 5 min at 4 °C. 1 ml of Lysis buffer 2 (LB2): LB2 is 10 mM Tris-HCL (pH 8.0), 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA and 0.5 mM EGTA. Samples was rotated at 4 °C for 5 min and centrifugated at 2,000g for 5 min at 4 °C. 300 µl of Lysis buffer 3 (LB3): 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA, 0.1% (wt/vol) sodium deoxycholate and 0.5% (vol/vol) N-lauroylsarcosine. This mixture was sonicated on ice using a 30-s on/off cycle for 20 min and added to 100 μl of antibody pre bound beads and immunoprecipitation was conducted overnight at 4°C. Then beads were washed as reported in Ambrosino et al, 2010 and resuspended with 100µl of 100mM ammonium bicarbonate.  Three biological replicates for each condition were analysed. Tryptic digestion was done by adding 0.5ug trypsin (Promega) for each replicate at +37C overnight. Next day additional 0.2g trypsin were added and the samples were incubated in +37C for additional 2 hours. After that, the peptides were acidified with 1% TFA, desalted and concentrated with C18 ziptips (Pierce) before mass spectrometry. The peptides were eluted twice from the ziptips with 0.1 % TFA /50 % ACN, dried. and solubilized in 7 μL 0.1 % FA for LC-MS/MS analysis. with an Easy nLC1000 nano-LC system connected to a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive Plus, ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (EasySpray/Thermo). Liquid chromatography separation of the peptides was performed with an EasySpray capillary column of 50 cm bed length (C18, 2 μm beads, 100 Å, 75 μm inner diameter, Thermo) at 300 nL/min flow rate. Peptides were eluted with a 2-30 % gradient of solvent B in 60 minutes (solvent A: aqueous 0.1 % formic acid, solvent B: 100 % acetonitrile / 0.1 % formic acid). Data-dependent acquisition automatically switched between MS and MS/MS mode and survey full scan MS spectra were acquired from a mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) of 400 to 1,200 with the resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200, after accumulation to a target of 3,000,000 ions in the quadruple. For MS/MS, the ten most abundant multiple-charged ions were selected for fragmentation on the high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) cell at a target value of 100,000 charges or maximum acquisition time of 100 ms. The MS/MS scans were collected at a resolution of 17,500. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS files from the control IgG samples were submitted first for protein identification using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 interface with the Mascot 2.5 search engine. The search criteria for Mascot searches were: trypsin digestion with two missed cleavage allowed, Carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification and Acetyl (N-term), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Oxidation (M) as variable modifications. The parent mass tolerance was 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance 0.1 Da. The SwissProt human database was used (August 2016, with 154,660 entries) for the database searches. All of the reported protein identifications were statistically significant (p<0.05) in Mascot. Then, the all the MS raw files were analysed with MaxQuant software version 1.5.7.4 for protein identification and quantitation. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and protein N-acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. First search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and main search error 4.5 ppm were used. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. The minimal unique+razor peptides number was set to 1, and the allowed FDR was 0.01 (1 %) for peptide and protein identification. The SwissProt human database was used (August 2016, with 154,660 entries) for the database searches. Proteins identified in the decoy reverse database, or only by site, were not considered for data analysis. Also, known and potential contaminants provided by MaxQuant and present in the ERα and DOT1L samples were excluded from further analysis. The analysis followed two steps: first all proteins identified in the Mascot search for the combination of the three IgG control biological replicates were discarded to retrieve the list of ERα and DOT1L molecular partners (most robust interctors). Then, to recover additional potential ERα and DOT1L chromatin interactors, MaxQuant intensities were used and the proteins that showed a fold-change greater than 1.4 in ERα and DOT1L samples compared to IgG controls were included in the list (lenient interactors).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Estrogen signaling, Dot1l, Breast cancer chromatin interactome, Lc-ms/ms, Estrogen receptor alpha

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


