### Accession
PXD045908

### Title
Fatty acid synthesis suppresses dietary polyunsaturated fatty acid use

### Description
Metabolic diseases are closely linked to aberrant synthesis of endogenous fatty acids in the liver, called de novo lipogenesis (DNL), which is mediated by the enzyme fatty acid synthase (FASN). The composition of complex lipids consists of saturated or monosaturated fatty acids, which can be endogenously produced, and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA), which are strictly dietary. Compositional differences between individuals are insufficiently understood and may influence the onset and progression of metabolic and cardiovascular diseases. Here we show that DNL critically determines the use of dietary PUFA. A patient with a hypofunctional heterozygous de novo Arg2177Cys variant in FASN exhibited an elevated composition of PUFA, which was phenocopied by pharmacological inhibition of FASN with TVB-2640 in patients with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). In mice, the incorporation rate of supplemented omega-3 PUFA during an obesogenic diet was increased by genetic or pharmacologic reduction of DNL. Mechanistically, we show that the FASN variant exhibited a cysteine-dependent, non-enzymatic acetylation of FASN, which resulted in hyperubiquitinylation and decreased protein stability. Our study further reveals that PUFA storage is an active, enzymatic process controlled by FASN, diacylglycerol O-acyltransferase 2 (DGAT2) and MFSD2A, a membrane-transport protein, and that combining FASN inhibition and PUFA supplementation exerts additive beneficial metabolic effects. These findings provide evidence that the success of PUFA supplementation may depend on the rate of endogenous DNL and that combined PUFA supplementation and FASN inhibition may be a promising approach targeting metabolic disease.

### Sample Protocol
Acetyl-Proteomics  Identification of the proteins captured by the IP were performed by the following steps: The protein band of the SDS-PAGE of the IP eluate fraction was cut and proteins in the band digested with trypsin according to Shevchenko et al. 61. Briefly, the gel was shrinked and swelled with 100% acetonitrile (MeCN) and 100 mm NH4HCO3, respectively. Proteins in the gel were reduced with 10 mm dithiothreitol, dissolved in 100 mM NH4HCO3 and alkylated with 55 mM iodacetamide (dissolved in 100 mm NH4HCO3). Tryptic digestion was performed with 8 ng /μL sequencing-grade trypsin, dissolved in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and 10% MeCN at 37°C for 12 h. Peptide extraction was done with 5% formic acid and 50% MeCN in water and thereafter the peptides were dried. Next, the peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (20μL) and injected with a flow rate of 5 μL/min into a nano-LC system (Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Thermo Scientific) containing a trapping column (Acclaim PepMap μ-precolumn, C18, 300 μm x 5 mm, 5 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Scientific. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in H2O; buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in MeCN) coupled to an electrospray ionization (ESI) source, part of a tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with a quadrupole, a linear ion-trap, and an orbitrap (Orbitrap Fusion, Thermo Scientific). Salts and other hydrophilic compounds were washed from the trapping column with 2% buffer 5 min B using a flow rate of 5 μL/min. The desalted tryptic peptides were fractionated with a reversed-phase capillary column (Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 75 μm x 250 mm, 2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Scientific). The ESI spray was formed by a fused-silica emitter (I.D. :10 μm, New Objective, Woburn, USA) using a capillary voltage of 1650 V. The positive ion mode was used. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) / top speed mode. Further parameters were 28% HCD collision energy, intensity threshold of 2 x 105, and an isolation width of m/z = 1.6. For the MS scan a m/z 400–1500 range was chosen, performed every second, with resolution of 120000 full width at half maximum height (FWHM) at m/z 200, a transient length of 256 ms, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and an AGC target of 2 x 105. Fragment spectra were measured in the ion-trap with a scan rate: 66 kDa/s, a maximum injection time of 200 ms and a AGC target of 1 x 104.   LC-MS/MS-based analysis of the Ubiquitinylation  Directly prior to measurement, lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA to a final concentration of 1 mg/mL. 1 μg of protein was injected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system. For online desalting and purification, a peptide trap (Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm x 2 cm, 100 Angstrom pore size, 5 μm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany)) was installed in front of a 25 cm C18 reversed phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 μm x 50 cm, 100 Angstrom pore size, 2 μm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany)). Elution of the peptides occurred with an 80 min gradient with a linearly increasing concentration of buffer B from 2% to 30% in 60 min, rising to 90% for 5 min with equilibration for 10 min at 2% buffer B. Eluted peptides were ionized and desorbed via electrospray ionization, using a spray voltage of 1.8 kV, transferred into an Quadrupole orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (QExactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analyzed in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. For each MS1 scan, ions were accumulated for a maximum of 120 milliseconds or until a charge density of 2x105 ions (AGC Target) was reached. Fourier- transformation based mass analysis of the data from the orbitrap mass analyzer was performed covering a mass range of 400-1200 m/z with a resolution of 120000 at m/z = 200. The 15 Peptides most abundant peptides for each precursor scan (Top N mode) with charge states between 2+ - 5+, above an intensity threshold of 1000 were isolated within a 1.6 m/z isolation window and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 25 % using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD). MS2 scanning was performed, using an orbitrap mass analyzer, at an orbitrap resolution of 15000 at m/z = 200, covering a mass range of 350-1500 m/z. Ions were accumulated for 60ms or to an AGC target of 1x105. Already fragmented peptides were excluded for 15 seconds (Dynamic exclusion).

### Data Protocol
With Proteome Discoverer 3.0.0.757 (Thermo Scientific) LC-MSMS data were processed. Proteins were identified using the search engine Sequest HT and the human Swiss-Prot protein database (www.uniprot.org). As parameters for the searches a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, a fragment mass tolerance of 0.2 Da, and tryptic/semitryptic digestion were chosen. Two missed cleavages were allowed. As a fixed modification carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, as a variable modification oxidation of methionine residues and in addition acetylation were applied for the search. A false discovery rate of 1% by using Percolator was applied.   LC-MS/MS raw data were searched with the Sequest algorithm, integrated in the Proteome Discoverer software, (v 2.41.15), Thermo Fisher Scientific) 62 against a reviewed human Swissprot database, obtained in December 2021, containing 20365 entries. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification for cysteine residues. The oxidation of methionine, pyro-glutamate formation at glutamine residues as well as acetylation of the protein N-terminus and Lysine residues were allowed as variable modifications. For the targeted search of Ubiquitinylated Peptides, two Glycine residues, remaining at ubiquitinylated Lysine residues after tryptic digestion, were included as variable modifications. A maximum number of 2 missing tryptic cleavages was set. Peptides between 6 and 144 amino acids where considered. A strict cutoff (FDR<0.01) was set for Peptide and protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Dietary polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) are increasingly recognized for their health benefits, whereas a high production of endogenous fatty acids - a process called de novo lipogenesis (DNL) - is closely linked to metabolic diseases. Determinants of PUFA incorporation into complex lipids are insufficiently understood and may influence the onset and progression of metabolic diseases. Here we show that fatty acid synthase (FASN), the key enzyme of DNL, critically determines the use of dietary PUFA in mice and humans. Moreover, the combination of FASN inhibition and PUFA-supplementation decreases liver triacylglycerols (TAG) in mice fed with high-fat diet. Mechanistically, FASN inhibition causes higher PUFA uptake via the lysophosphatidylcholine transporter MFSD2A, and a diacylglycerol O-acyltransferase 2 (DGAT2)-dependent incorporation of PUFA into TAG. Overall, the outcome of PUFA supplementation may depend on the degree of endogenous DNL and combining PUFA supplementation and FASN inhibition might be a promising approach to target metabolic disease.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Diatary  polyunsatured fatty acids, Metabolic diseases, Fatty acid synthase, Me novo lipogenisis

### Affiliations
Section for Mass spectrometry and Proteomics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany

### Submitter
Bente Siebels

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Schlein
Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany


