### Accession
PXD029365

### Title
XL-MS data of trigger factor and GAPDH binding

### Description
We present XL-MS data of the trigger factor:GAPDH complex to define the interaction sites for GAPDH on trigger factor.

### Sample Protocol
The crosslinked complex was precipitated using chloroform–methanol, as previously described. Briefly, methanol (150 μl) and chloroform (50 μl) were added to a sample of the crosslinked proteins (50 μl, 6 μM). After vortexing to mix (30 s), water (100 μl) was added. The solution was mixed again (by vortexing for 30 s) before being centrifuged (10,000 g, 2 min). The upper layer of aqueous solvent was removed and methanol (150 μl) was added. The solution was mixed (by vortexing for 30 s) and centrifuged (10,000 g, 2 min), after which the supernatant was removed and the precipitate was air dried by placing in a laminar flow hood. The protein pellet was resuspended in 1 % (w/v) rapigest (Waters), 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 (10 μl). Dithiothreitol (50 mM in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8, 10 μl) was then added and the mixture was incubated at 37 ºC for 1 h. Iodoacetamide (100 mM in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8, 10 μl) was then added and the mixture was incubated at 37 ºC for a further 1 h. Subsequently, trypsin was added (1:50 w/w enzyme:protein, Promega) along with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 (70 μl) and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37 ºC. The resultant peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak tC18 cartridges (Waters), according to the manufacturers instructions. The desalted peptides were evaporated to dryness, and resuspended in 0.1 % trifluoroethanol (50 μl). The peptides were then analysed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) on an Orbitrap Exploris 240 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).  Peptides (3 μl) were injected onto a 30 cm capillary emitter column (inner diameter 75 μm, packed with 3-μm Reprosil-Pur 120 C18 media, Dr Maisch) prepared in-house, and separated by gradient elution of 2-30 % (v/v) solvent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile) in solvent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water) over 60 min at 300 nL.min−1. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition mode with precursor fragmentation performed by Higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD). Each high resolution scan (m/z range 500–1500, R = 60,000) was followed by 10 product ion scans (R = 15,000), using stepped normalised collision energies of 27, 30 and 33 %. Only precursor ions with charge states 3-7+ (inclusive) were selected for tandem MS. The dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Cross-link identification was performed using MeroX v2.0.1.4, considering Lys-Lys/Ser/Thr/Tyr cross-links. A maximum of 2 of the four marker ions, corresponding to fragmentation of the cross-linker, were allowed to be missing in the database search, the mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and the false disco rate (FDR) was set to 1 %. Manual verification of all spectra was performed to ensure correct assignment and that a significant degree of sequence coverage of each cross-linked peptide was present in the spectrum.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chaperone; trigger factor; gapdh; folding

### Affiliations
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, United Kingdom
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Leeds

### Submitter
Antonio Calabrese

### Lab Head
Dr Antonio Nickolas Calabrese
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, United Kingdom


