### Accession
PXD022678

### Title
The landscape of molecular chaperones across human tissues reveals a layered architecture of core-variable chaperones

### Description
The sensitivity of the protein-folding environment to chaperone disruption can be highly tissue-specific. Yet, the organization of the chaperone system across physiological human tissues has received little attention. Through computational analyses of large-scale tissue transcriptomes, we unveiled that the chaperone system is composed of core elements that are uniformly expressed across tissues, and variable elements that are differentially expressed to fit with tissue-specific requirements. We demonstrate via a proteomic analysis of a mouse myoblast cell line that the muscle-specific signature is functional and conserved. Core chaperones were significantly more abundant across tissues and more important for cell survival than variable chaperones. Together with variable chaperones, they formed tissue-specific functional networks. Analysis of human organ development and aging brain transcriptomes revealed that these functional networks were maintained in development and declined with age. Our findings expand the known functional organization of de novo versus stress-inducible eukaryotic chaperones into a layered core-variable architecture in multi-cellular organisms.

### Sample Protocol
Proteolysis  The protein were extracted from the cell pellets in 9M Urea, 400mM Ammonium bicarbonate and 10mM DTT and two cycles of sonication.  12ug protein from each sample were reduced with 2.8mM DTT (60ºC for 30 min), modified with  8.8mM iodoacetamide in 400mM ammonium bicarbonate (in the dark, room temperature for  30 min) and digested in 1M Urea, 50mM ammonium bicabonate with modified trypsin (Promega) at a 1:50 enzyme-to-substrate ratio, overnight at 37oC. An additional second trypsinization was done for 4 hours. Mass spectrometry analysis The tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 tips (Top tip, Glygen) dried and re-suspended in 0.1% Formic acid. The peptides were resolved by reverse-phase chromatography on 0.075 X 180-mm fused silica capillaries (J&W) packed with Reprosil reversed phase material (Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany). The peptides were eluted with linear 180 minutes gradient of 5 to 28% 15 minutes gradient of 28 to 95%  and 25 minutes at 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water at flow rates of 0.15 μl/min. Mass spectrometry was performed by Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo) in a positive mode using repetitively full MS scan followed by collision induces dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most dominant ions selected from the first MS scan.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data from three biological repeats was analyzed using the MaxQuant software 1.2.5.8 (Mathias Mann's group) vs. the Mus musculus section of the Uniprot database with 1% FDR. The data was quantified by label free analysis using the same software.

### Publication Abstract
The sensitivity of the protein-folding environment to chaperone disruption can be highly tissue-specific. Yet, the organization of the chaperone system across physiological human tissues has received little attention. Through computational analyses of large-scale tissue transcriptomes, we unveil that the chaperone system is composed of core elements that are uniformly expressed across tissues, and variable elements that are differentially expressed to fit with tissue-specific requirements. We demonstrate via a proteomic analysis that the muscle-specific signature is functional and conserved. Core chaperones are significantly more abundant across tissues and more important for cell survival than variable chaperones. Together with variable chaperones, they form tissue-specific functional networks. Analysis of human organ development and aging brain transcriptomes reveals that these functional networks are established in development and decline with age. In this work, we expand the known functional organization of de novo versus stress-inducible eukaryotic chaperones into a layered core-variable architecture in multi-cellular organisms.

### Keywords
Chaperones; aging; data integration; differentiation; protein quality control; protein misfolding diseases; proteostasis; systems biology; tissue specificity compression networks

### Affiliations
Technion
Ben-Gurion University

### Submitter
Keren Bendalak

### Lab Head
Dr Anat Ben-Zvi
Ben-Gurion University


