### Accession
PXD026348

### Title
TMT proteomic analysis the interaction mode of endophytic actinobacteria and host rice in against rice blast disease

### Description
Under disease stress, activation of defense response in plants often comes with the cost of a reduction in growth and yield, which is referred as the growth-defense trade-off. The microorganisms which can be recruited by plants to mitigate the growth-defense trade-off are of great value in crop breeding. The proteomic, physiological and transcriptional profiling data offer insights into the molecular basis underlying the balancing between defense and growth in endophyte-rice symbiont. The findings provide an example for the endophyte-mediated modulation of growth-defense trade-offs in plants and indicated the promising application of endophytic actinobacterial strains in agriculture to breed “microbe-optimized crops”.

### Sample Protocol
The leaves of rice seedlings in each treatment (0.1 g) were harvested. The total protein extraction and trypsin digestion was performed. After trypsin digestion, peptides were desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. For the identification of endogenous rice proteins, peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 12-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) kit. The tryptic peptides HPLC fractionation and LC-MS/MS analysis were performed. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Uniprot_OSjaponica 39947 database (63,195 sequences) concatenated with the Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) database for rice were performed.

### Data Protocol
The differently expressed proteins were identified only if the normalized fold change was higher than 1.3 (up-regulated) or lower than 1/1.3 (down-regulated), p-value < 0.05. The functions of the proteins were annotated based on gene ontology terms from the UniProt-GOA database.The pathway enrichment of the proteins was analyzed using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database.

### Publication Abstract
Plants fine-tune the growth-defense trade-off to survive when facing pathogens. Meanwhile, plant-associated microbes, such as the endophytes inside plant tissues, can benefit plant growth and stress resilience. However, the mechanisms for the beneficial microbes to increase stress resistance with little yield penalty in host plants remain poorly understood. In the present study, we report that endophytic Streptomyces hygroscopicus OsiSh-2 can form a sophisticated interaction with host rice, maintaining cellular homeostasis under pathogen-infection stress, and optimize plant growth and disease resistance in rice. Four-year field trials consistently showed that OsiSh-2 could boost host resistance to rice blast pathogen Magnaporthe oryzae while still maintaining a high yield. The integration of the proteomic, physiological, and transcriptional profiling analysis revealed that OsiSh-2 induced rice defense priming and controlled the expression of energy-consuming defense-related proteins, thus increasing the defense capability with the minimized costs of plant immunity. Meanwhile, OsiSh-2 improved the chloroplast development and optimally maintained the expression of proteins related to plant growth under pathogen stress, thus promoting the crop yield. Our results provided a representative example of an endophyte-mediated modulation of disease resistance and fitness in the host plant. The multilayer effects of OsiSh-2 implicate a promising future of using endophytic actinobacteria for disease control and crop yield promotion. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Under disease stress, activation of defense response in plants often comes with the cost of a reduction in growth and yield, which is referred as the growth-defense trade-off. The microorganisms which can be recruited by plants to mitigate the growth-defense trade-off are of great value in crop breeding. Here, we reported a rice endophytic actinomycetes Streptomyces hygroscopicus OsiSh-2, which can improve host performances on resistance to rice blast while still sustaining high yield in the 4-year field trials. The proteomic, physiological, and transcriptional profiling data offer insights into the molecular basis underlying the balancing between defense and growth in OsiSh-2-rice symbiont. The findings provide an example for the endophyte-mediated modulation of growth-defense trade-offs in plants and indicated the promising application of endophytic actinobacterial strains in agriculture to breed "microbe-optimized crops."

### Keywords
Disease resistance, Endophytic actinobacteria, Defense priming, Proteomic analysis, Fitness

### Affiliations
Hunan university
College of Biology, Hunan University

### Submitter
Yonghua Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Yonghua Zhu
College of Biology, Hunan University


