### Accession
PXD019825

### Title
Biophysical, proteomic, and lipidomic characterization of Streptococcus mutans extracellular membrane vesicles from wild-type, ΔsrtA, and Δsfp strains provides novel information regarding vesiculogenesis and its function

### Description
Extracellular membrane vesicles (EMVs) are produced by many Gram-positive organisms, but information regarding vesiculogenesis is largely unknown.  In this study, we isolated and characterized EMVs derived from the oral pathogen Streptococcus mutans and two deletion mutants, ΔsrtA and Δsfp.  ΔsrtA EMVs were notably enlarged, and the AtlA autolysin was unprocessed in this strain.  EMVs from all strains contained proteins involved in cell wall biogenesis and cell architecture, bacterial adhesion, biofilm cell density and matrix development, and intermolecular competition with other microorganisms.  Proteomic and lipidomic analyses showed that vesicular and cytoplasmic membranes are dissimilar in many respects.  A higher proportion of vesicular proteins are transported by the general secretion pathway, with SecA identified as a prominent EMV component.  In contrast, cytoplasmic membranes were over-represented in multi-pass transmembrane protein substrates of co-translational transport machineries.  EMVs from the wild-type (WT), but not the mutant strains, were enriched in cardiolipin compared to the cytoplasmic membrane, and all EMVs were over-represented in polyketides and flavonoids.  Both vesicular and cytoplasmic membranes were rich in long-chain fatty acids, including saturated, monounsaturated, and polyunsaturated, except for Δsfp EMVs that contained exclusively polyunsaturated fatty acids.  Lipoproteins were less prevalent in EMVs of all three strains compared to their cytoplasmic membranes.  This study provides insight into biophysical characteristics of S. mutans EMVs and indicates discrete partitioning of protein and lipid components between EMVs and corresponding cytoplasmic membranes of both WT and mutant strains.

### Sample Protocol
Streptococcus mutans cells were grown overnight at 37C in Terleckjy’s defined medium. Cultured were centrifuged for 30min to pellet cells. Supernantant was then filtered thorugh a 0.2uM membrane twice and concentrated ~50fold using a Stir Ultrafiltration Cell with a 100kDa cut off membrane. Concentrated supernatants were ultracentrifuged at 100,000xg for 1hr to obtain the crude vesicle pellet. Vesicle pellet was then resuspended in 35% OptiPrep and overlaid with 10-30% OptiPrep solution to create a density gradient. The density gradient was then ultracentrifuged at 140,000xg for 16 hrs. 1mL fractions were removed from the tube and vesicle-containing fractions pooled. ~20mL of PBS were added to vesicle containing fractions and ultracentrifuged at 100,000xg for 2hrs to separate the OptiPrep from pellet. Purified vesicle pellet was then resuspended with 0.5mL of PBS. Bacterial cells harvested from the same cultures were used to prepare cytoplasmic membrane (CM) as previously described in Mishra, S., et al. (2019). "Membrane proteomic analysis reveals overlapping and independent functions of Streptococcus mutans Ffh, YidC1, and YidC2." Molecular oral microbiology 34(4): 131-152. A Bligh & Dyer method was used for protein extraction in which proteins localize to the middle water layer, lipids to the bottom chloroform layer, and metabolites to the top methanol layer.  Briefly, 2 mL of cold chloroform/methanol (2:1) was added to 150 µL of each EMV or CM sample and vortexed for one minute. 500 µL of water was added, chilled at 4°C, then vortexed again.  Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 1,300xg, and the white protein “disc” in the water layer was carefully transferred to a tube and dried in a speed vac. Total protein was determined using Qubit 3 Fluorometer and the appropriate volume of each sample was taken to equal 10 µg total protein for digestion.  Samples were digested with trypsin/lys C rapid digestion kit from Promega (Madison WI) per manufacturer’s protocol.  Rapid digestion buffer (provided with the kit) was added to the sample three times the sample volume, and each sample was reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) (0.1 M in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 30 minutes at 56°C and then alkylated with Iodoacetamide (55mM in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 30 minutes in dark at room temperature.  The enzyme, trypsin/lys C was then added to the samples in 1:10 (enzyme to substrate) ratio and incubated at 70°C for 1 hour. The digestion was terminated by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (Nano-LC/MS/MS) was performed using a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY Spray nanospray source operated in positive ion mode. The LC system was an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano system from Thermo Scientific. The mobile phase A was water containing 0.1% formic acid and the mobile phase B was acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid.  Injection volume was calculated for each sample such that that 0.2 µg of sample was injected on to a Thermo Scientific Acclaim Trap Cartridge (C18 column, 75 um ID, 2 cm length, 3 mm 100 Å pore size) at a 5 µL/min flow rate. This was held for 10 minutes and washed with 2% mobile phase B to desalt and concentrate peptides. The injector port was programmed to switch to inject, and peptides were eluted off the trap onto the nanocolumn (Thermo Scientific, C18, 75 mm ID, 25 cm length, 3 mm, 100 Å pore size) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using the following gradient – 0-10 min: 2% B, 10-20 min: 2-7% B, 20-240 min: 7-45% B, 240-250 min: 45-80% B, 250-255 min: 80% B, 255-256 min: 80-2% B, 256-260 min: 2% B. Column temperature was maintained 35oC.    Total run time was 260 minutes. The MS/MS was acquired according to standard conditions established in the lab. The EASY Spray source operated with a spray voltage of 1.5 KV and a capillary temperature of 200oC.  The scan sequence of the mass spectrometer was based on the original TopTen™ method.  The analysis was programmed for a full scan recorded between 375 – 1575 Da at 60,000 resolution, and a MS/MS scan at resolution 15,000 to generate product ion spectra to determine amino acid sequence in consecutive instrument scans of the fifteen most abundant peaks in the spectrum. The AGC Target ion number was set at 3e6 ions for full scan and 2e5 ions for MS2 mode. Maximum ion injection time was set at 50 msec for full scan and 55 msec for MS2 mode.  Micro scan number was set at 1 for both full scan and MS2 scan. The HCD fragmentation energy (N)CE/stepped NCE was set to 28.  Singly charged ions were excluded from MS2.  Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 within 30 seconds and to exclude isotopes.  A Siloxane background peak at 445.12003 was used as the internal lock mass.

### Data Protocol
For proteomics, all MS/MS data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version IseNode in Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388) Sequest HT was used as the database search algorithm. Sequest (XCorr Only) was set up to search Streptococcus mutans NG8 assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Sequest (XCorr Only) was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Da and a precursor ion tolerance of 10.0 ppm. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Sequest (XCorr Only) as a fixed modification.  Deamidation of asparagine and oxidation of methionine were specified in Sequest (XCorr Only) as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular membrane vesicles (EMVs) are produced by many Gram-positive organisms, but information regarding vesiculogenesis is incomplete. We used single gene deletions to evaluate the impacts on <i>Streptococcus mutans</i> EMV biogenesis of Sortase A (SrtA), which affects <i>S. mutans</i> EMV composition, and Sfp, a 4'-phosphopantetheinyl transferase that affects <i>Bacillus subtilis</i> EMV stability. &#x394;<i>srtA</i> EMVs were notably larger than &#x394;<i>sfp</i> and wild-type (WT) EMVs. EMV proteins identified from all three strains are known to be involved in cell wall biogenesis and cell architecture, bacterial adhesion, biofilm cell density and matrix development, and microbial competition. Notably, the AtlA autolysin was not processed to its mature active form in the &#x394;<i>srtA</i> mutant. Proteomic and lipidomic analyses of all three strains revealed multiple dissimilarities between vesicular and corresponding cytoplasmic membranes (CMs). A higher proportion of EMV proteins are predicted substrates of the general secretion pathway (GSP). Accordingly, the GSP component SecA was identified as a prominent EMV-associated protein. In contrast, CMs contained more multi-pass transmembrane (TM) protein substrates of co-translational transport machineries than EMVs. EMVs from the WT, but not the mutant strains, were enriched in cardiolipin compared to CMs, and all EMVs were over-represented in polyketide flavonoids. EMVs and CMs were rich in long-chain saturated, monounsaturated, and polyunsaturated fatty acids, except for &#x394;<i>sfp</i> EMVs that contained exclusively polyunsaturated fatty acids. Lipoproteins were less prevalent in EMVs of all three strains compared to their CMs. This study provides insight into biophysical characteristics of <i>S. mutans</i> EMVs and indicates discrete partitioning of protein and lipid components between EMVs and corresponding CMs of WT, &#x394;<i>srtA</i>, and &#x394;<i>sfp</i> strains.

### Keywords
Vesicles, Lipidome, Proteome, Membrane, Streptococcus mutans

### Affiliations
University of Florida
University of Florida, Department of Oral Biology

### Submitter
Joyce Morales Aparicio

### Lab Head
Dr L. Jeannine Brady
University of Florida, Department of Oral Biology


