### Accession
PXD004332

### Title
Characterization of human pineal gland proteome

### Description
Pineal gland is a neuroendocrine gland located at the center of the brain. It protects the body  from the effect of toxic compounds and regulates sleep-wake cycle, body temperature and sexual  maturity through the secretion of melatonin. Abnormal functioning of pineal glands is known to  be associated with Smith-Magenis syndrome, autism spectrum disorder, sleep disorders and  Alzheimer’s disease. Characterization of pineal gland proteome will facilitate molecular level  investigations on pathophysiological conditions underlying these diseases. We aimed to  characterize the proteome of human pineal glands using a high resolution mass spectrometry-  based approach. A total of 5,752 proteins were identified from human pineal glands in this study.  Of these, 1,108 proteins contained signal peptide domain. We identified 2 novel proteins in this  study, which are predicted by computational methods. In addition, a large number of proteins  were uniquely identified in this study. A comprehensive list of proteins identified from human  pineal glands will aid in unraveling the role of pineal glands in sleep disorders, neuropsychiatric  and neurodegenerative diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Pineal glands were collected from the Human Brain Tissue Repository (National Research  Facility), NIMHANS, Bangalore, India. The tissues (n=10) were acquired from both male and  female victims of different age groups who met with road traffic accidents. Pineal glands were  individually subjected to homogenization in liquid nitrogen using mortar and pestle. Proteins  were extracted using urea lysis buffer (9 M urea, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM sodium  orthovanadate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate and 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0) and subjected to  centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C. Two hundred microgram of protein was pooled  from each of 10 pineal tissue lysates to obtain a final protein pool of 2 mg. Approximately, 300  μg aliquot from the protein pool was subjected to in-gel digestion while a 1.4 mg protein aliquot  was subjected to in-solution digestion using trypsin protease. Peptides from gel bands were  extracted and subjected to C18 stage tip clean up. bRPLC fractionation of 1 mg and 400 μg in-  solution digested peptides were carried out separately on XBridge (C 18 , 5 μm 250 × 4.6 mm  column) (Waters Corporation) that was coupled to an Agilent 1200 series HPLC system. A total  of 96 fractions collected from 1 mg of in-solution digested peptides were further pooled to obtain  a total of 24 fractions. Similarly the 96 fractions obtained from 400 μg of in-solution digested  peptides were pooled into 12 fractions. The 12 bRPLC fractions were subjected to LC-MS/MS  analysis on LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer while 24 bRPLC and 25 in-gel digested  fractions were analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was searched against NCBI Human RefSeq 70 database containing  35,295 unique protein sequences. The data was analyzed on Proteome Discoverer platform,  version 2.0 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) that is interfaced with SequestHT and  Mascot (Version 2.4) search algorithms. The search was carried out with precursor mass  tolerance of 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.1 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine  was set as static modification while oxidation of methionine was set as dynamic modifications.  Acetylation of protein N-terminus was also enabled as dynamic modification to capture N-  terminal peptides. Other search parameters included one missed cleavage by trypsin protease and  1% false discovery rate (FDR) at both PSM and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
The pineal gland is a neuroendocrine gland located at the center of the brain. It is known to regulate various physiological functions in the body through secretion of the neurohormone melatonin. Comprehensive characterization of the human pineal gland proteome has not been undertaken to date. We employed a high-resolution mass spectrometry-based approach to characterize the proteome of the human pineal gland. A total of 5874 proteins were identified from the human pineal gland in this study. Of these, 5820 proteins were identified from the human pineal gland for the first time. Interestingly, 1136 proteins from the human pineal gland were found to contain a signal peptide domain, which indicates the secretory nature of these proteins. An unbiased global proteomic profile of this biomedically important organ should benefit molecular research to unravel the role of the pineal gland in neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative diseases.

### Keywords
Human, Tissue, Pineal, Lc-ms/ms, Gland

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, International Technology Park, Bangalore 560 066, India
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr T. S. Keshava Prasad
Institute of Bioinformatics, International Technology Park, Bangalore 560 066, India


### SDRF
- organism: homo sapiens
- organism part: pineal gland
- cell type: not applicable
- disease: Normal
- label: NT=label free sample
- instrument: AC=MS:1000639;NT=Orbitrap Fusion
- modification parameters: NT=Carbamidomethyl;AC=UNIMOD:4;TA=C;MT=Fixed
- modification parameters.1: NT=Acetyl;AC=UNIMOD:1;PP=Protein N-Term;MT=Variable

