### Accession
PXD040232

### Title
Directed Differentiation of Human iPSCs into Mesenchymal Lineages by Optogenetic Control of TGF-β Signaling

### Description
For chondrogenic studies of optogenetically activated TGF-β signaling, optogenetic human iPSC-derived MSCs were encapsulated in hydrogels (20 million cells/mL of 2% agarose hydrogel). Groups received either no soluble TGF-β or optogenetic stimulation, or soluble TGF-β3 alone, or optogenetic stimulation alone. After 21 days of differentiation, we performed global quantitative proteomics on samples from two independent experiments, with n=3 replicates per group.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen for proteomics. For global quantitative proteomics, diaPASEF (data independent acquisition based proteomics) was used. In brief, hydrogel encapsulated cells were lysed in buffer (1% SDC, 100 mM TrisHCl pH 8.5, and protease inhibitors) and boiled for 10 min at 95°C, 1500 rpm. Protein reduction and alkylation of cysteines was performed with 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM CAA at 45°C for 10 min followed by sonication in a water bath, cooled down to room temperature. Protein digestion was processed overnight by adding LysC and trypsin in a 1:50 ratio (µg of enzyme to µg of protein) at 37° C and 1400 rpm. Peptides were acidified by adding 1% TFA, vortexed, and subjected to StageTip clean-up via SDB-RPS. Peptides were loaded on 14-gauge StageTip plugs. Peptides were washed two times with 200 µl 1% TFA 99% ethyl acetate followed 200 µl 0.2% TFA/5%ACN in centrifuge at 3000 rpm, followed by elution with 60 µl of 1% Ammonia, 50% ACN into Eppendorf tubes and dried at 45°C in a SpeedVac centrifuge. Samples were resuspended in 10 μl of LC buffer (3% ACN/0.1% FA). Peptide concentrations were determined using NanoDrop and 200 ng of each sample was used for diaPASEF analysis on timsTOFPro. Peptides were separated within 120 min at a flow rate of 400 nL/min on a reversed-phase C18 column with an integrated CaptiveSpray Emitter (25 cm x 75µm, 1.6 µm, IonOpticks). Mobile phases A and B were with 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in ACN. The fraction of B was linearly increased from 2 to 23% within 90 min, followed by an increase to 35% within 10 min and a further increase to 80% before re-equilibration. The timsTOF Pro was operated in diaPASEF mode and data was acquired at defined 32 × 25 Th isolation windows from m/z 400 to 1,200. To adapt the MS1 cycle time in diaPASEF, the repetitions were set to 2 in the 16-scan diaPASEF scheme. The collision energy was ramped linearly as a function of the mobility from 59 eV at 1/K0=1.6 Vs cm-2 to 20 eV at 1/K0=0.6 Vs cm-2.

### Data Protocol
The acquired diaPASEF raw files were searched at default settings for targeted analysis of DIA data against the human UniProt fasta database in Spectronaut. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated using the mProphet approach and set to 1% at peptide precursor level and at 1% at protein level. Results obtained from Spectronaut were further analyzed using the Spectronaut statistical package. Significantly changed protein abundance was determined by un-paired t-test with a threshold for significance of p < 0.05 (permutation-based FDR correction) and 0.58 log2FC.

### Publication Abstract
In tissue development and homeostasis, transforming growth factor (TGF)-&#x3b2; signaling is finely coordinated by latent forms and matrix sequestration. Optogenetics can offer precise and dynamic control of cell signaling. We report the development of an optogenetic human induced pluripotent stem cell system for TGF-&#x3b2; signaling and demonstrate its utility in directing differentiation into the smooth muscle, tenogenic, and chondrogenic lineages. Light-activated TGF-&#x3b2; signaling resulted in expression of differentiation markers at levels close to those in soluble factor-treated cultures, with minimal phototoxicity. In a cartilage-bone model, light-patterned TGF-&#x3b2; gradients allowed the establishment of hyaline-like layer of cartilage tissue at the articular surface while attenuating with depth to enable hypertrophic induction at the osteochondral interface. By selectively activating TGF-&#x3b2; signaling in co-cultures of light-responsive and non-responsive cells, undifferentiated and differentiated cells were simultaneously maintained in a single culture with shared medium. This platform can enable patient-specific and spatiotemporally precise studies of cellular decision making.

### Keywords
Human, Ipsc, Hydrogel, Chondrogenesis, Agarose

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA Department of Medicine, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA
Columbia University

### Submitter
Josephine Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Gordana Vunjak-Novakovic
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA Department of Medicine, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA


