### Accession
PXD013144

### Title
Structural basis for assembly of lamin at the molecular level

### Description
Nuclear structure and function are governed by lamins, which are intermediate filaments mostly consisting of alpha-helices. Different lamin assembly models have been proposed based on low resolution or fragmented structures. However, their assembly mechanisms at the molecular level are poorly understood. Here, we present a crystal structure of a long human lamin fragment at 3.2 Å resolution, which visualized the full-length features. The structure presented the anti-parallel arrangement of two coiled-coil dimers, which was important for the assembly process. We further discovered a new interaction between the lamin dimers by using chemical cross-linking and mass analysis. Based on these two interactions we proposed a molecular mechanism of lamin assembly, which agreed well with the recent model representing the native state, and could explain pathological mutations. Our findings provide the structural information to understand molecular mechanisms of assembly of intermediate filaments, and molecular insights into nuclear functions and aging process.

### Sample Protocol
Purified lamin coil 2 (286-400) R388C protein was incubated with 2 mM DTT and changed 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) buffer containing 50 mM NaCl, and 1 mM EDTA using a HiPrep 26/10 desalting columns (GE Healthcare). Sulfo-SMPB (100 mM stock solution) was added in 0, 2.5, 25, 125, and 250 μM to a mixture containing 20 μM lamin 300 and coil 2 (286-400) R388C proteins for 1 hour, and the reactions were stopped by a solution containing 40 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and 40 mM L-cysteine. The reaction mixture was subjected to SDS-PAGE, and the protein bands of coil 2 R3388C (14 kDa), lamin 300 (38 kDa), and their cross-linked structure (52 kDa) were further analyzed by the MS/MS spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The corresponding protein bands were excised from the SDS-polyacrylamide gel, and were digested in gel by chymotrypsin (Promega, USA) with a low specificity toward the C-termini of tyrosine, phenylalanine, tryptophan, and leucine according to the manufacturer’s manual. The digested peptides were extracted from the gel slices, as previously described48, and analyzed on a nLC-Velos Pro mass instrument equipped with a PicoFritTM column, 100 mm, packed with 5 μm Biobasic® C18 and an EASY-ColumnTM, 2 cm, packed with 5 μm C18 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The LC condition operated at 0.3 μL min-1 was a 45-min linear gradient from 5% to 40% ACN in a 0.1% formic acid buffer solution, followed by a 10 min column wash with 80% ACN and a 20 min re-equilibration to the initial buffer condition. Full mass (MS1) scan was performed in range of m/z 300 – 2000 in a positive ion mode. Data-dependent MS2 scans of the 7 most intense ions were performed from the full scan with scan options of 1.5 m/z isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy, and 30 s dynamic exclusion duration. The acquisitioned MS2 data were primarily analyzed by SEQUEST search with a maximum miscleavage of 2, precursor mass tolerance 1.5 Da, fragment mass tolerance 1.0 Da, dynamic modification of lysine either blocked with a cysteine-conjugate crosslinker (Cys~K, +m/z 362.4) or crosslinked with a Cys388-Leu389 dipeptide (CL~K, +m/z 475.5) of the coil 2 R388C fragment, and static modification of the Cys388 residue blocked with a Tris-conjugate crosslinker (Tris~C, m/z 362.4) in the coil 2 fragment band (14 kDa). After filtering out the peptide-to-spectrum matches (PSM) with peptide probability above 90%, the tandem mass spectra of the cross-linked peptides were manually assigned to the fragment ions generated from the collision-induced dissociation of the precursor ion.

### Publication Abstract
Nuclear structure and function are governed by lamins, which are intermediate filaments that mostly consist of &#x3b1;-helices. Different lamin assembly models have been proposed based on low resolution and fragmented structures. However, their assembly mechanisms are still poorly understood at the molecular level. Here, we present the crystal structure of a long human lamin fragment at 3.2&#x2009;&#xc5; resolution that allows the visualization of the features of the full-length protein. The structure shows an anti-parallel arrangement of the two coiled-coil dimers, which is important for the assembly process. We further discover an interaction between the lamin dimers by using chemical cross-linking and mass spectrometry analysis. Based on these two interactions, we propose a molecular mechanism for lamin assembly that is in agreement with a recent model representing the native state and could explain pathological mutations. Our findings also provide the molecular basis for assembly mechanisms of other intermediate filaments.

### Keywords
X-ray crystallography, Gel-based lc-msms, Nuclear lamin protein, Filament assembly structure, Chemical crosslinking

### Affiliations
Catholic University of Daegu School of Medicine
Daegu Catholic University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Yong-Hak Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Yong-Hak Kim
Daegu Catholic University School of Medicine


