### Accession
PXD042405

### Title
Insight into the dynamics of Ixodes ricinus nymphal midgut proteome

### Description
The midgut of the tick is the most important tissue for the storage and digestion of host blood, which serves as the sole source of energy and nutrients for all tick development and reproduction. During feeding at each developmental stage, dynamic changes in the tick midgut epithelium reflect changes in physiological processes in this tissue. In addition, the midgut serves as the primary interface between the tick and tick-borne pathogens, which determines the vector competence of the tick. Several transcriptome data from Ixodes ricinus have been published, but few studies have examined tick proteomes. In contrast to transcriptome data, proteomics provides a deeper understanding of key cellular processes occurring in the investigated tissues. In this work, we present for the first time insight into proteomics of the midgut of I. ricinus nymph. Label-free quantitative proteomics was used to elucidate changes during blood meal and development in I. ricinus. A total of 1 534 I. ricinus-specific proteins were identified, with only a few host proteins detected. In addition, the proteins involved in the specific physiological processes of the tick were studied in detail to gain better insight into the ontogeny of the midgut of the nymph.

### Sample Protocol
Nymphs of I. ricinus were collected around České Budějovice, the Czech Republic. Midguts from different feeding timepoints (unfed - UF, two days feeding - 2D, fully-fed - FF, fourteen days after detachment - 14AD, four weeks after detachment - 4wAD) were dissected and washed extensively. All samples were prepared in biological triplicates. Midgut tissues were homogenized in 200 microliters of ice-cold 50 mM Na-phosphate buffer, pH 7.5, supplemented with 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM EDTA, 2 % CHAPS and Halt Protease Inhibitors (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were sonicated (5 cycles, 15 s of sonication, 50 % amplitude) and the cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 15 000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. Proteins were subjected to acetone precipitation overnight at -20 °C and non-protein agents were removed by centrifugation at 15 000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. Proteins were dissolved in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate supplemented with 8 M urea. Protein solution was consequently diluted with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to the 2 M urea final concentration and heated at 37 °C for 30 min. BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to determine protein concentration. Additionally, non-dissolved pellets in urea (PU) were also subjected to in-solution digestion as described below. Ten micrograms of protein were used for in-solution digestion. Proteins were reduced with with 10 mM DTT (1,4-dithiothreitol) at 56 °C for 45 min and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in dark for 20 min. Subsequently, the alkylation was quenched with 50 mM DTT. Proteins were digested using trypsin (Pierce™ Trypsin Protease, MS Grade, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at ratio 50:1 (protein:trypsin) overnight at 37 °C. The digestion was terminated by addition of formic acid to a final concentration of 2.5%. Obtained peptides were purified using Stage tips solid phase C18 disc (Empore) as described (Rappsilber et al., 2007, Nature Protocol 2). Peptides were dissolved in 30 µl of 3% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. The analysis was carried out on an UltiMate 3000 RLSCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) coupled on-line to mass spectrometer timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) as described in Forinova et al. (2021, ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 13).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant software (version 1.6.14). Proteins from soluble fraction and digested proteins from PU pellet were set as fraction 1 and 2, respectively. Ixodes ricinus database available in Uniprot (08. 06. 2021) supplemented with sequences from our previously accomplished I. ricinus midgut transcriptomes (Kotsyfakis et al., 2015a;Perner et al., 2016a) (Bioproject Nos: PRJNA217984, PRJNA311553, and PRJNA685402), and the contaminant database included in the MaxQuant software to identify proteins were used. Additionaly, protein database of mice Mus musculus available in Uniprot (08. 06. 2021) was used for identification of proteins of host origin. The default parameters for TIMS-DDA search type and Bruker TIMS instrument were applied. Trypsin/P was set as enzyme allowing up to two missed cleavages; the carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as fixed modification; N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were applied as variable modifications; the minimum and maximum peptide length was set to 8 and 25 amino acids, respectively. Precursor ion tolerance was set at 20 and 10 ppm in the first and the main peptide search, respectively; whereas the mass tolerance for MS/MS fragment ions was set at 40ppm. Peptide Spectrum Match (PSM) and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) of proteins was done using the algorithm integrated into MaxQuant with minimum ratio count set at 2. Protein tables obtained from MaxQuant were analyzed using Perseus software (version 1.6.14.0). The data were filtered to eliminate hits to the reverse database, contaminants and proteins only identified with modified peptides. Proteins identified by only 1 peptide along with score lower than 40 were excluded from further analysis. In addition, only proteins observed in at least two replicate samples were subjected to data processing. LFQ intensity values were transformed by log2. Multiple-sample tests, post-hoc Tukey’s HSD test, principal component analysis, and hierarchical clustering were performed with algorithms integrated into Perseus. Mean values and standard deviations were counted in Perseus from LFQ values from triplicates for each investigated timepoint. Proteins were blasted using Blast2GO. Table, generated from Blast2GO was merged with table generated after MaxQuant and Perseus analysis. GO terms were generated and graphically visualized using Phython (version 3.8.10) and its packages including goatools (version 1.1.6).

### Publication Abstract
Ticks are ectoparasites that feed on blood and have an impressive ability to consume and process enormous amounts of host blood, allowing extremely long periods of starvation between blood meals. The central role in the parasitic lifestyle of ticks is played by the midgut. This organ efficiently stores and digests ingested blood and serves as the primary interface for the transmission of tick-borne pathogens. In this study, we used a label-free quantitative approach to perform a novel dynamic proteomic analysis of the midgut of Ixodesricinus nymphs, covering their development from unfed to pre-molt stages. We identified 1534 I.&#xa0;ricinus-specific proteins with a relatively low proportion of host proteins. This proteome dataset, which was carefully examined by manual scrutiny, allowed precise annotation of proteins important for blood meal processing and their dynamic changes during nymphal ontogeny. We focused on midgut molecules related to lipid hydrolysis, storage, and transport, opening a yet unexplored avenue for studying lipid metabolism in ticks. Further dynamic profiling of the tick's multi-enzyme digestive network, protease inhibitors, enzymes involved in redox homeostasis and detoxification, antimicrobial peptides, and proteins responsible for midgut colonization by Borrelia spirochetes promises to uncover new targets for targeting tick nymphs, the most critical life stage for transmission the pathogens that cause tick-borne diseases.

### Keywords
['Lc-msms', 'Midgut', 'Proteomics', 'Nymph', 'Tick', 'Ixodes ricinus']

### Affiliations
['University of South Bohemia in Ceske Budejovice\nFaculty of Science\nBranisovska 1760\nCeske Budejovice', 'Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Branisovska 1160/31, 37005 Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic']

### Submitter
['Filip Dyčka']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Branisovska 1160/31, 37005 Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic', 'email': 'kopajz@paru.cas.cz', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Petr Kopáček', 'id': '2581150'}]

### SDRF
characteristics[organism]: ['ixodes ricinus']
characteristics[organism part]: ['midgut']
characteristics[disease]: ['not available']
characteristics[cell type]: ['not available']
comment[label]: ['label free sample']
comment[instrument]: ['AC=MS:1003005;NT=timsTOF Pro']
comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=Carbamidomethyl;TA=C;MT=fixed;AC=UNIMOD:4']
comment[modification parameters].1: ['NT=Oxidation;TA=M;MT=variable;AC=UNIMOD:35']
comment[modification parameters].2: ['NT=Acetyl;MT=variable;PP=Protein N-term;AC=UNIMOD:67']

