### Accession
PXD000691

### Title
Human Breast Cell Index -  Molecular Portrait of Breast-Cancer-Derived Cell Lines Reveals Poor Similarity with Tumors

### Description
The project consists of an In-depth analysis of seven breast (cancer)-derived cell lines, which represent different tumour types plus fibroblasts and adipocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in-vitro. One of the cell lines was SILAC labelled and used as a standard reference for the relative quantitation of all other samples. Deep proteome coverage was obtained by extensive fractionation of each SILAC pools. First, proteins were divided into 10 fractions by SDS-PAGE, followed by in-gel trypsin digestion. Only of cancer-derived cell lines, peptides from each gel slice were further fractionated by SCX chromatography. The last fractionation step consisted of nano-RP-LC in line with the mass-spectrometer (Thermo Orbitrap XL).

### Data Protocol
Raw files from MS were submitted to MaxQuant (v. 1.2.0.13) and matched to the Uniprot human database. For identification FDR 0.01 was set both at peptide and protein level. Cyesteine carbamiomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable.

### Publication Abstract
Breast-cancer-derived cell lines are an important sample source for cancer proteomics and can be classified on the basis of transcriptomic analysis into subgroups corresponding to the molecular subtypes observed in mammary tumors. This study describes a tridimensional fractionation method that allows high sequence coverage and proteome-wide estimation of protein expression levels. This workflow has been used to conduct an in-depth quantitative proteomic survey of five breast cancer cell lines matching all major cancer subgroups and shows that despite their different classification, these cell lines display a very high level of similarity. A proteome-wide comparison with the RNA levels observed in the same samples showed very little to no correlation. Finally, we demonstrate that the proteomes of in vitro models of breast cancer display surprisingly little overlap with those of clinical samples.

### Keywords
Human cell-lines breast cancer silac

### Affiliations
Immunotechnology dept., Lund University, Sweden
Sloan Kettering Institute, Molecular Pharmacology Program 

### Submitter
Paolo Cifani

### Lab Head
Dr Peter James
Immunotechnology dept., Lund University, Sweden


