### Accession
PXD021375

### Title
Interactome of the -subunit of L-type voltage-gated calcium channels in adult cardiomyocytes

### Description
In cardiomyocytes, Ca2+ influx through L-type voltage-gated calcium channels (LTCCs) following membrane depolarization regulates crucial Ca2+-dependent processes including duration and amplitude of the action potentials and excitation-contraction coupling. LTCCs are heteromultimeric proteins composed of the Cav1, Cav, Cav2 and Cav subunits. Here, using ascorbate peroxidase (APEX)-mediated proximity labeling and quantitative proteomics, we identified 61 proteins in the nano-environments of Cav2 in cardiomyocytes. These proteins are involved in diverse cellular functions such as cellular trafficking, muscular contraction, sarcomere organization and excitation-contraction coupling. Moreover, pull-down assays, co-immunoprecipitation analyses and super-resolution imaging using direct stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy (dSTORM) revealed that Cav2 interacts with the ryanodine receptor 2 (RyR2) in adult cardiomyocytes, probably coupling LTCCs and the RyR2 into a supramolecular complex at the dyads. This interaction is mediated by the Src-homology 3 domain of Cav2 and is necessary for an effective pacing frequency‐dependent increase of the Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release mechanism in cardiomyocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Biotintin labeling and streptavidin bead enrichment of biotinylated proteins  The biotin labeling was performed as previously described49. ARCs (1x 105 cells) were transduced with Cav2b-V5-APEX adenovirus. Twenty-four hours after transduction, the cells were pre-incubated with 0.5 mM biotin-phenol in culture medium for 30 min at 37 ºC, followed by a 1-min incubation with H2O2 at a final concentration of 1 mM. Afterwards, 1 mM H2O2 was added at a final concentration of and incubated for 1 min. To stop the reaction, cells were washed with quenching solution (5 mM Trolox, 10 mM sodium azide and 10 mM sodium ascorbate in PBS). Cells were lysed on ice using CLB supplemented with 1x protease inhibitor cocktail and 1 mM EDTA and centrifuged at 16,000 g for 15 min at 4 ºC. From each reaction, 200 μg of protein were incubated with 50 μL of streptavidin-coated magnetic bead slurry for 3 h at 4 ºC. After washing the streptavidin beads with CLB, the biotinylated proteins were eluted with 2x Laemmli buffer and boiled for 5 min. Sample preparation and tryptic digestion for mass spectrometry The samples eluted from the streptavidin-coated beads after enrichment of biotinylated proteins were loaded on a 12% polyacrylamide Bis-Tris gel and the electrophoresis was performed at 25 V for 10 min. The protein bands were excised, hashed and destained by incubating the gel pieces three times with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 10 min, alternated with three 10 min incubations with a 1:1 (v/v) mixture of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 100% acetonitrile. Digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C with 30 µL of trypsin solution (0.006 µg/µL, Serva). The peptides were eluted by incubating two times during 10 min with 40 μL of a 1:1 (v/v) solution containing 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Samples were dried and resuspended in 15 μL of 0.1% (v/v) TFA. The peptide concentration was determined as previously described and 200 ng per sample were used for MS analysis.   Mass spectrometry Nano-HPLC-MS/MS was performed as previously described by means of LC-MS/MS on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled online to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Ionization was performed using a nanoelectrospray source with a spray voltage of 1500 V and capillary temperature of 275 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data dependent acquisition. Full MS spectra were scanned between 300 and 2000 m/z (resolution 60,000, AGC 1 × 106) to detect precursor ions. Lock mass polydimethylcyclosiloxane (m/z 445.120) was used for internal calibration. The m/z values initiating MS/MS were set on a dynamic exclusion list for 35 s and the 20 most intensive ions (charge >1) were selected for MS/MS-fragmentation. Fragments were generated by low-energy collision-induced dissociation with normalized collision energy of 35 % (isolation width 2, activation time 10 ms).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification via database searches, the raw files were analyzed with the Proteom Discoverer software (version. 1.4.1.14) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Mascot search algorithm (version 2.5) (Matrix Science Ltd.) and searching against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database using rat taxonomy (released 2018_11, 36075 sequences entries in the whole database). The database search was performed with the following parameters: mass tolerance 5 ppm for precursor and 0.4 Da for fragment ions; 1 missed cleavage; methionine oxidation and biotinylation as variable modifications; false discovery rate (FDR) < 1%. We accepted all proteins identified in MS analyses by more than two different peptides. Label-free quantification of proteins was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8, Max-Planck-Institute Martinsried) and the raw data processing as previously described. Only unique peptides were used for quantification.  The analysis of the label-free quantification (LFQ) data was performed using the Perseus software (version 1.6.5.0, Max-Planck-Institute Martinsried), as previously described53. The “proteingroups.txt” file generated by MaxQuant was loaded into Perseus and LFQ intensities were transformed to a logarithmic scale. Only the proteins containing LFQ intensity values in all the three replicates of the pull-down of Cavβ2b-V5-APEX-biotinylated proteins were used for the analysis. The resulting differences between the means of the logarithmized LFQ intensities for each protein in the samples from H2O2-treated and untreated Cavβ2b-V5-APEX-expressing cells [log2(+H2O2/-H2O2)] were plotted in a volcano plot against the negative logarithmized p values. The classification of proteins as constituents of the Cavβ2b nano-environments was based on a cutoff value separating enriched proteins from background binders. To determine the cutoff value, the standard deviation (SD) was calculated from the difference between the mean values of the samples from Cavβ2b-V5-APEX-expressing cells treated with H2O2 and those from untreated cells (negative control). Only proteins enriched by more than one SD of the distribution compared with the negative control were accepted at p ˂ 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dstorm, Ca2+ influx, Proteomics, L-type voltage-gated calcium channels (ltccs), Cardiomyocytes, Pull-down, Nano-environments of cav2

### Affiliations
Institut für Biologische Informationsprozesse Molekular- und Zellphysiologie (IBI-1) Forschungszentrum Jülich 52425 Jülich Germany
Ruhr University Bochum

### Submitter
Katalin Barkovits

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Erick Miranda Laferte
Institut für Biologische Informationsprozesse Molekular- und Zellphysiologie (IBI-1) Forschungszentrum Jülich 52425 Jülich Germany


