### Accession
PXD009015

### Title
NanoLC-MSMS Phosphoproteomics comparison of in vitro cultured/native reticulocytes and erythrocytes

### Description
Triplicate samples of donor-matched native reticulocytes (CD71+ cells), erythrocytes (CD71- cells) and in vitro culture-derived reticulocytes (derived from CD34+ cells) were analysed through qualitative phosphoproteomics to examine possible novel mechanisms underlying reticulocyte maturation.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were separated using SDS-PAGE, allowing the dye front to run approximately 1cm into the separating gel and the gel piece was then subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion using a DigestPro automated digestion unit (Intavis Ltd). The resulting peptides were then subjected to TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce).   Enriched phosphopeptides were fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, peptides in 1% (v/v) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (v/v) acetonitrile 0.1% (v/v) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7  gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1 min., 6-15% B over 58 min., 15-32%B over 58 min., 32-40%B over 5 min., 40-90%B over 1 min., held at 90%B for 6 min and then reduced to 1%B over 1 min.) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.2 kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 250°C.  All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.  FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120,000 over a scan range (m/z) of 350-1,550, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 400,000 and a max injection time of 100ms. The Data Dependent mode was set to Cycle Time with 3s between master scans.  Precursors were filtered according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic precursor selection. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (40s +/-10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.6m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 5,000, max injection time of 50ms and HCD collision energy of 35%.

### Data Protocol
The raw proteomic mass spectrometry data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer software v1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Human database (134,169 entries) using the SEQUEST algorithm.  Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6Da.  Search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.9949) and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (+79.966Da) as variable modifications.  Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 1 missed cleavage was allowed.  The reverse database search option was enabled and all peptide data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The process of maturation of reticulocytes into fully mature erythrocytes that occurs in the circulation is known to be characterized by a complex interplay between loss of cell surface area and volume, removal of remnant cell organelles and redundant proteins, and highly selective membrane and cytoskeletal remodeling. However, the mechanisms that underlie and drive these maturational processes <i>in vivo</i> are currently poorly understood and, at present, reticulocytes derived through <i>in vitro</i> culture fail to undergo the final transition to erythrocytes. Here, we used high-throughput proteomic methods to highlight differences between erythrocytes, cultured reticulocytes and endogenous reticulocytes. We identify a cytoskeletal protein, non-muscle myosin IIA (NMIIA) whose abundance and phosphorylation status differs between reticulocytes and erythrocytes and localized it in the proximity of autophagosomal vesicles. An <i>ex vivo</i> circulation system was developed to simulate the mechanical shear component of circulation and demonstrated that mechanical stimulus is necessary, but insufficient for reticulocyte maturation. Using this system in concurrence with non-muscle myosin II inhibition, we demonstrate the involvement of non-muscle myosin IIA in reticulocyte remodeling and propose a previously undescribed mechanism of shear stress-responsive vesicle clearance that is crucial for reticulocyte maturation.

### Keywords
Human, Erythrocyte, Erythropoiesis, Nanolc-msms, Phospho, Reticulocyte

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Biomedical Sciences Building, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom
Center for Hematology and Regenerative Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Department of Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital

### Submitter
Pedro Moura

### Lab Head
Dr Ashley Mark Toye
Department of Biochemistry, Biomedical Sciences Building, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom


