### Accession
PXD008761

### Title
S100A3 binds directly to RARα and the PML-RARα onco-protein modulating their stability and activit

### Description
We defined the RARα interactome in the MDA-MB453 breast cancer cell line genetically engineered to over-express an N-terminally tagged version of the nuclear retinoic acid receptor.  Twenty eight nuclear proteins which interact with RARα and whose interaction is stimulated or reduced by the pan-RAR ligand, all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) were identified.  Given the potential significance of the S100A3 calcium-binding protein in the control of tumor progression,  we focused our attention on this factor.  Using the two models represented by the ATRA-sensitive SKBR3 and MCF7 breast cancer cell lines characterized by constitutive expression of S100A3 and RARα, we demonstrate that the endogenous forms of S100A3 and RARα interact in physiological conditions.  The interaction of S100A3 with RARα is cell context independent and it is observed not only in breast cancer but also in acute promyelocytioc leukemia (APL) cells, characterized by expression of the RARα-derived PML-RARα oncogene, which is the product of the  t(15:17) chromosomal translocation.  S100A3 interacts directly and specifically with RARα and PML-RARα, being unable to bind other members of the RAR/RXR family of retinoid nuclear receptors.  The interaction surface maps to the carboxyl-terminal region of the RARα ligand binding domain.  Binding of S100A3 to RARα and PML-RARα controls the constitutive and ATRA-dependent degradation of the two receptors.  Silencing of the S100A3 gene decreases the amounts of RARα in breast SK-BR-3 and lung A549 cancer cells, rendering them more refractory to the anti-proliferative action of ATRA.  In SK-BR-3 cells, this effect is accompanied by a decrease in the lactogenic/differentiating action of ATRA.  In APL-derived NB4 cells,  S100A3 knock-down reduces the amounts of both RARα and PML-RARα.  Contemporaneous down-regulation of the two receptors is associated with an increase in the basal and ATRA-induced expression of many granulocytic differentiation markers.  Opposite on RARα and PML-RARα levels as well as ATRA induced differentiation markers are observed upon over-expression of S100A3 in NB4 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) was done on MDA-MB453 cell lines expressing 3xFLAG-RARA or 3xFLAG-conjugated RARA-antisense. Cells were grown in SILAC DMEM (Thermo Scientific) with 10% dialyzed FBS (Thermo Scientific) supplemented with 50mg L-arginine and 50mg L-Lysine (Thermo Scientific) for the light culture and with 50mg L-arginine (U-13C6) and 50mg L-lysine (U-13C6) for the heavy culture. Cells were maintained for six doublings in SILAC media to allow full amino acid incorporation. After the six doubling heavy labelled cell lines 3xFLAG-RARA or 3xFLAG-conjugated RARA-antisense were treated with xx ATRA, light counterpart were treated with vehicle (DMSO) for 1h. Cells were harvested and washed once in cold PBS solution. After centrifugation (250 × g, 5 min, 4 °C), nuclear and nucleic acid binding proteins were extracted using Qproteome Nuclear protein kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Equal amount of each nuclear enriched fractions (DNA binding proteins and histone fraction) for each heavy and light cell samples were precleared with A/G beads (Santa Cruz) for 3 h at 4 °C. Thirty microliters of EZview Red Anti-FLAG M2 Affinity Gel (Sigma) was added to each nuclear fractions before overnight incubation at 4 °C to immunoprecipitate the bait protein. The beads were washed once with the dilution buffer before being combined into a new tube. After the sample combination three more washes were performed. The beads were resuspended in SDS loading buffer for elution and incubated at 90 °C for 10 min. The eluate was separated on SDS/PAGE. An aliquot of each IP-nuclear extracts were submitted to western blot analysis to confirm the presence of RARA protein.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis, Protein identification and Quantification Nuclear eluted fractions or whole cell proteome were separated by 1D 4-12% Nupage Novex Bis Tris Gel (Invitrogen), stained with Bio-Safe coomassie (Bio-Rad Laboratories) and digested with trypsin by using a published procedure (ref1). 2microL of each samples were analysed on a Biobasic 18 column (150x0.18mm ID, particle size 5 µm, Thermo Scientific) coupled with an LTQ Orbitrap XL™ (Thermo Scientific). HPLC conditions were : column flow 2 µl/min; eluent A, H2O and 0.1% formic acid; eluent B, AcN and 0.1% formic acid; gradient program, from 2% of B to 60% of B in 240 min, then to 98% of B in 6 min for 4 min, and re-equilibration to 2% of B for 24 min. MS conditions were: source DESO Omni Spray (Prosolia, Indianapolis, IN) used in nanospray mode with positive ions; ion spray voltage, 2100 V; capillary temperature, 220 °C; capillary voltage, 42 V. MS spectra (m/z 400-2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer at 6o,ooo resolution, in parallel with the low-resolution MS/MS scans of the ten most abundant precursor ion being acquired in the LTQ, excluding singly charged ions. The lock-mass option was used to obtain the most accurate mass measurements in MS mode.  Mass spectra data processing was performed using Mascot Distiller (version 2.4.3.3, Matrix Science) with search and quantitation toolbox options. The generated de-isotoped peak list was submitted to an in-house Mascot server 2.3.02 for searching against the SwissProt database version 2016. Mascot search parameters were set as follows: species, Homo sapiens (20,160 sequences); enzyme, trypsin with maximal one missed cleavage; fixed modification: cysteine carbamidomethylation; variable modifications: methionine oxidation, label: 13C(6)15N(4) (R), and label:13C(6) (K);5 ppm mass tolerance for precursor peptide ions; 0.8 Da for MS/MS fragment ions; peptide charge: 2+, 3+. The default significance threshold (p<0.05) was set p< 0.01 in order to obtain for all searches a lower false discovery rate. The cut-off for peptide ion score was set to >30, a value ensuring an identification confidence > 99.9%. SILAC quantitation was performed in Mascot Distiller using SILAC K+6 R+10 quantitation method; To be accepted, peptides needed to pass the following quality thresholds: correlation threshold 0.95, fraction threshold 0.3 and standard error threshold 0.2. The median of the quantification values of all peptides belonging to the same protein determined the protein quantification value. For each experiment, the median value of heavy/light (H/L) ratio of quantified proteins were calculated. Quantified proteins with ≥ 1.5 and ≤ 1.5-H/L ratio were selected.

### Publication Abstract
All trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) is used in the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) and it is a promising agent also in solid tumors. The pharmacological activity of ATRA is mediated by the ligand-activated RAR and RXR transcription factors. In the present study, we define the basal and ATRA dependent RAR&#x3b1; interactome in a RAR&#x3b1;-overexpressing breast cancer cellular model, identifying 28 nuclear proteins. We focus our attention on the S100A3 calcium-binding protein, which interacts with RAR&#x3b1; constitutively. In ATRA-sensitive breast cancer cells, S100A3 binds to RAR&#x3b1; in basal conditions and binding is reduced by the retinoid. The interaction of S100A3 with RAR&#x3b1; is direct and in lung cancer, APL and acute-myeloid-leukemia (AML) cells. In APL, S100A3 interacts not only with RAR&#x3b1;, but also with PML-RAR&#x3b1;. The interaction surface maps to the RAR&#x3b1; ligand-binding domain, where the I396 residue plays a crucial role. Binding of S100A3 to RAR&#x3b1;/PML-RAR&#x3b1; controls the constitutive and ATRA-dependent degradation of these receptors. S100A3 knockdown decreases the amounts of RAR&#x3b1; in breast- and lung cancer cells, inducing resistance to ATRA-dependent anti-proliferative/differentiating effects. Conversely, S100A3 knockdown in PML-RAR&#x3b1;<sup>+</sup> APL and PML-RAR&#x3b1;<sup>-</sup> AML cells reduces the amounts of RAR&#x3b1;/PML-RAR&#x3b1; and increases basal and ATRA-induced differentiation. In this cellular context, opposite effects on RAR&#x3b1;/PML-RAR&#x3b1; levels and ATRA-induced differentiation are observed upon S100A3 overexpression. Our results provide new insights into the molecular mechanisms controlling RAR&#x3b1; activity and have practical implications, as S100A3 represents a novel target for rational drug combinations aimed at potentiating the activity of ATRA.

### Keywords
Raralpha, Interactome, Silac

### Affiliations
IRCCS Istituto Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri
Laboratory of mass spectrometry, IRCCS-Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri

### Submitter
Laura Brunelli

### Lab Head
Dr Roberta Pastorelli
Laboratory of mass spectrometry, IRCCS-Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri


