### Accession
PXD019238

### Title
Identification of ribosome proteins bound to IRES in hypoxia

### Description
Hypoxic conditions prompt internal ribosome entry site (IRES)-mediated translation of some of the hallmark cancer genes, such as VEGF. This translational switch is extremely vital for cell survival and tumor progression. Heterogeneity in ribosomes due to the diversity of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and protein composition has been postulated to generate ‘specialized ribosomes’ that differentially regulate translation. A VEGF IRES sequence was used as bait to identify unique proteins bound at the IRES in breast cancer cells grown in hypoxia.

### Sample Protocol
Analysis of ribosome protein components specific to sites of IRES-mediated translation was performed using bait RNA from the putative IRES RNA sequence in the 5’ UTR of VEGF-C. The RNA sequence was synthesized with a 3’ biotin label. To pulldown any ribosomes bound at the VEGF-C IRES site, cell lysates were prepared under RNase-free conditions. Cells were washed twice in DEPC-treated 1X PBS on ice, then lysed in 1ml lysis buffer (1% NP-40, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, HALT protease inhibitor cocktail, SUPERase·In RNase Inhibitor and incubated on ice for 20 minutes. After incubation, cells were scraped, passed through a 21-gauge needle, and incubated an additional 1 hour on ice. Cell lysates were spun at 13,000 RPM 10 minutes at 4°C. Pulldown of bound ribosomes to IRES sequences was done as follows: 1mg of M-280 Streptavidin-coated Dyna beads were washed 5 minutes at room temperature in 1 ml of binding and washing buffer (10mM Tris-HCl pH7.5, 1mM EDTA, 2M NaCl) two times. Beads were then washed twice in DEPC treated 0.1M NaOH, 0.05M NaCl solution 2 minutes each, followed by one wash in DEPC-treated 0.1M NaCl. After the final wash, beads were then coupled to 5µg biotin labeled RNA oligo per 1mg of beads in 400µl of binding and washing buffer and incubated at room temperature for 15 minutes. Beads were subsequently washed three times in binding and washing buffer and 1mg of lysate was added to beads with coupled oligo overnight at 4°C. Following incubation with lysate, beads were washed 5X in binding and washing buffer. Detailed analysis of proteins bound to beads was performed via LCMS by prepping beads as follows: Samples were eluted in 1x final LDS sample buffer at 96° C for 10min. The eluate was collected on a magnetic stand, reduced, and denatured further at 70°C for 10min. The sample was resolved using 10% Bis-tris gel and stained overnight with Colloidal Coomassie. Each sample lane was digested with trypsin overnight in 6 fractions prior to LCMS analysis using Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Velos Pro.

### Data Protocol
Data from duplicate runs were merged into single files and combined with data sets from multiple biological replicates. Data was analyzed using Scaffold 4 with the following parameters: for more stringent analysis, protein threshold was set to 99%, minimum peptides 2, and peptide threshold 80%. To reveal more hits, less stringent analysis was done with 80% protein threshold and peptide minimum set to 1.  Most proteins were ribosome-associated proteins or structural constituents of ribosomes as revealed by KEGG Analysis. A gene ontology search revealed that the most predominant proteins that were pulled down were ribosomal proteins involved in ribosomal subunit assembly, rRNA processing, splicing, and translational elongation, and proteins that were differentially associated at the IRES were identified by 2 fold change and p <.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Ribosome, Ires, Hypoxia, Cancer

### Affiliations
University of Alabama at Birmingham
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Department of Pathology, Division MCP, O'Neal Comprehensive Cancer Center

### Submitter
Brandon Metge

### Lab Head
Dr Rajeev Samant
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Department of Pathology, Division MCP, O'Neal Comprehensive Cancer Center


