### Accession
PXD018915

### Title
Heat-induced proteomes in tomato pollen mother cells

### Description
Tomato pollen production and viability is highly vulnerable to higher temperature.  Hot summers with temperature reaching above 32°C can disrupt production of viable pollens and fruit set, resulting in yield loss. In recent years, temperature above 35-38oC has become a norm during mid-summer with potential adverse impacts on the production of tomatoes and many other crop species.   Pollens are developed through the microsporogenesis and micro-gametogenesis stages. The most heat sensitive period is from the meiotic process of the microsporocytes, at the young microspore stage (uninucleate stage of microspore) to during late pollen development (pollen mitosis).  This project studied the heat-induced proteomes in microsporocyte, also called pollen mother cells (PMC). Homogenous PMC samples were collected  from cross-sectioned frozen fresh anther tissues of tomato ‘Maxifort’ using  laser capture microdissection (LCM).  Tandem mass tag (TMT) proteomics analysis was conducted to identify proteomics changes related to heat tolerance during pollen development.

### Sample Protocol
Tomato 'Maxifort' were grown in hoop house in the Agricultural Experimental Station, Tennessee State University,  Nashville, Tennessee, USA.  In July, 2018, the inside temperature were kept at 40-43 oC from 11:30 am to 3:30 pm, when the side curtain was closed. Flower buds taken at this time were considered as heat-treated samples. The control samples were taken when the inside temperature was chilled to below 30 oC when the side curtain was open.  Upon detaching from the plants, flower buds were placed in a prechilled fixative solution (75% ethanol + 25% acetic acid).  Tissues were infiltrated under vacuum each for 15 min in sequential order as: fixative solution, twice of PBS, pH 8.0 +10% sucrose + protease inhibitor, and twice of PBS, pH 8.0 +20% sucrose + protease inhibitor. Flower buds were imbedded in OCT compounds, and cut into 20 μm thickness cross sections using a LEICA CM 1950 cryostat. The pollen mother cells were harvested using a PALM MicroBeam laser microdissection microscope (LCM)  (ZEISS Microscopy, Jena, Germany).  Proteins were extracted  using a  PCT buffer  comprising of 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 4 M urea, 2% SDS, 2 mM EDTA  on  a Barocycler (2320 EXT, Pressure Biosciences Inc, South Easton, MA 02375).  Proteins (25 μg each sample) was  reduced with tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP ) and cysteines were blocked with methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS). After removal of sodium dodecyl sulfate  (SDS) and urea  using S-TRAP Micro kit (PROTIFI,Huntington, NY), on-column trypsin digestion was carried out using trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade modified trypsin,  #VS11A0) at  35 oC for 16 hr. Tryptic peptides were eluted subsequently by centrifugation  (10,000 rpm for 2 min) in 40 μL of 50 mM TEAB buffer, 40 μL of  0.2% formic acid (FA),  and finally  40 μL of  50% acetonitrile in water and 0.2% FA.The elutes were dried down under vacuum. The trypic peptides were labeled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 10-plex reagent set (ThermoFisher Scientfic, USA). The three replicates of heat-treated samples were labeled with tags of 129N,  127N, 130C  and the three replicates of control samples were labeled with 131, 127C, 128N.  Labeled peptides were pooled and cleaned using the Oasis MCX 1cc 30mg Extraction Cartridges 9 (Waters, P/N 186000252). Peptides were eluted twice in 75% acetonitrile (ACN)/10% NH4OH and dried-down under vacuum.  NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was carried out at the Functional & Comparative Proteomics Center, USDA-ARS, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, using an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer equipped with nano ion source using high energy collision dissociation (HCD) similar to previous reports. The Orbitrap is coupled with the UltiMate3000 RSLCnano (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA).  Each reconstituted fraction (8 L) was injected onto a PepMap C-18 RP nano trap column (3 µm, 75 µm  20 mm, Dionex) with nanoViper Fittings at 20 L/min flow rate for on-line desalting and then separated on a PepMap C-18 RP nano column (3 µm, 75µm x 15cm), and eluted in a 120 min gradient of 5% to 38% ACN in 0.1% formic acid at 300 nL/min., followed by a 7-min ramping to 95% ACN-0.1% FA and a 7-min hold at 95% ACN-0.1% FA. The column was re-equilibrated with 2% ACN-0.1% FA for 20 min prior to the next run. The Orbitrap Fusion is operated in positive ion mode with nano spray voltage set at 1.6 kV and source temperature at 275 °C. External calibration for FT, IT and quadrupole mass analyzers was performed. An internal calibration was performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.120025 as the celebrant. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using FT mass analyzer for one survey MS scan for selecting precursor ions followed by Top 3 second data-dependent HCD-MS/MS scans for precursor peptides with 2-7 charged ions above a threshold ion count of 10,000 with normalized collision energy of 37.5%.  MS survey scans at a resolving power of 120,000 (fwhm at m/z 200), for the mass range of m/z 400-1600 with AGC =3e5 and Max IT = 50 ms, and MS/MS scans at 50,000 resolution with AGC=1e5, Max IT = 120ms and with Q isolation window (m/z) at 1.6 for the mass range m/z 105-2000. Dynamic exclusion parameters were set at 1 within 50s exclusion duration with ±10 ppm exclusion mass width. All data was acquired under Xcalibur 3.0 operation software and Orbitrap Fusion Tune 2.0 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All MS and MS/MS raw spectra from each set of TMT 10-plex experiments were processed and database searched using Sequest HT software within Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (PD 2.2, Thermo) against tomato protein database version ITAG3.20. The default search settings used for 6-plex TMT quantitative processing and protein identification in PD 2.2 searching software were: two mis-cleavages for full trypsin with fixed Carbamidomethyl of cysteine, fixed 6-plex TMT modifications on lysine and N-terminal amines and variable modifications of methionine oxidation and deamidation on asparagine and glutamine residues. Identified peptides were filtered for a maximum 1% FDR using the Percolator algorithm in PD 2.2. Peptide confidence was set to high. The TMT 6-plex quantification method within PD 2.2 was used to calculate the reporter ratios with a mass tolerance ±10 ppm without applying isotopic correction factors. Only peptide spectra containing all reporter ions were designated as “quantifiable spectra” and used for peptide/protein quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pollen mother cells, Heat stress project description, Laser capture microdissection, Tmt proteomics

### Affiliations
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
Ted Thannhauser

### Lab Head
Dr Theodore Thannhauser
USDA-ARS


