### Accession
PXD001825

### Title
Aquired resistance mechanisms to EGFR-specific kinase inhibitors using chemical proteomics

### Description
Here we used kinase affinity enrichment (Kinobeads) and intensity-based mass spectrometry to elucidate aquired resistance mechanisms to EGFR inhibition in cancer cells. First, kinase expression differences between untreated control cells and long term treated resistant cells were investigated using Kinobeads and LC-MS/MS. Overexpressed Kinases were then further investigated by cellular assays to evaluate targets and development of combination treatment strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed and lysates were subjected to Kinobeads for affinity enrichment of kinases, Kinases were eluted from kinobeads with 2x NuPAGE LDS buffer containing 50mM DTT and alkylated in 55mM IAA for 30min, Samples were loaded onto a 4-12% Bis-Tris gel for in gel digestion.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant (v.1.4.0.5) raw data processing, Uniprot sequence database containing 88,354 sequences, Search parameters: ±20ppm for MS1 first search, ±4.5ppm MS1 main search and 0.5Da MS2 tolerance, Allowed moifications: carbamidometylation (fixed), methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation (variable), Protein and peptide FDR 1%

### Publication Abstract
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have become an important therapeutic option for treating several forms of cancer. Gefitinib, an inhibitor of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), is in clinical use for treating non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring activating EGFR mutations. However, despite high initial response rates, many patients develop resistance to gefitinib. The molecular mechanisms of TKI resistance often remain unclear. Here, we describe a chemical proteomic approach comprising kinase affinity purification (kinobeads) and quantitative mass spectrometry for the identification of kinase inhibitor resistance mechanisms in cancer cells. We identified the previously described amplification of MET and found EPHA2 to be more than 10-fold overexpressed (p &lt; 0.001) in gefitinib-resistant HCC827 cells suggesting a potential role in developing resistance. siRNA-mediated EPHA2 knock-down or treating cells with the multikinase inhibitor dasatinib restored sensitivity to gefitinib. Of all dasatinib targets, EPHA2 exhibited the most drastic effect (p &lt; 0.001). In addition, EPHA2 knockdown or ephrin-A1 treatment of resistant cells decreased FAK phosphorylation and cell migration. These findings confirm EPHA2 as an actionable drug target, provide a rational basis for drug combination approaches, and indicate that chemical proteomics is broadly applicable for the discovery of kinase inhibitor resistance.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Drug resistance, Kinase inhibitor, Cancer

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Germany
Technische Universitaet Muenchen

### Submitter
Heiner Koch

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Germany


