### Accession
PXD017508

### Title
The pan-Sirtuin inhibitor MC2494 regulates mitochondrial function in a leukemia cell line

### Description
The involvement of sirtuins (SIRTs) in modulating metabolic and stress response pathways is attracting growing scientific interest. Some SIRT family members are located in mitochondria, dynamic organelles that perform several crucial functions essential for eukaryotic life. Mitochondrial dysfunction has emerged as having a key role in a number of human diseases, including cancer. Here, we investigated mitochondrial damage resulting from treatment with a recently characterized pan-SIRT inhibitor, MC2494. MC2494 was able to block mitochondrial biogenesis and function in terms of ATP synthesis and energy metabolism, suggesting that it might orchestrate cell response to metabolic stress and thereby interfere with tumorigenesis. Targeting mitochondrial function could thus be considered a potential anticancer strategy for use in clinical therapy.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis, MC2494-treated and untreated U937 cells were lysed in ice-cold lysis buffer (100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate TEAB, 1% SDS) and disrupted by two cycles of sonication at 20% amplitude for 30 sec on ice. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C. Supernatants were transferred into new tubes and treated with 1 unit of RQ1 DNase (Promega) for 1 h at room temperature. Protein concentration was determined using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). For each condition, equal amounts of proteins (100 µg in 100 µLl of 100 mM TEAB) were reduced with 10 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TCEP) for 1 h at 55 °C and alkylated with 18 mM iodoacetamide by incubating samples for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were then precipitated overnight by adding 6 volumes of pre-chilled acetone. Following centrifugation at 8,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C, protein pellets were resuspended in 100 µLl of 100 mM TEAB, digested with trypsin, and labeled with the following tandem mass tag (TMT) isobaric tags as described elsewhere [Russo et al, 2019] using 126 and 127N tags for MC2494-treated and untreated U937 cells, respectively. TMT-labeled samples were then mixed and diluted in 2% TFA to a final concentration of 0.5 µg/µL for liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Aliquots of TMT-labeled peptides (2.5 µg) were analyzed by high-resolution nanoscale liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) using a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY-Spray nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific), as previously reported [Russo et al., 2019].  Reference R. Russo, N. Matrone, V. Belli, D. Ciardiello, M. Valletta, S. Esposito, P.V. Pedone, F. Ciardiello, T. Troiani, A. Chambery, Macrophage Migration Inhibitory Factor Is a Molecular Determinant of the Anti-EGFR Monoclonal Antibody Cetuximab Resistance in Human Colorectal Cancer Cells, Cancers, 11 (2019).

### Data Protocol
For data processing, the acquired raw files were analyzed with the Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the SEQUEST HT search engine. The HCD MS/MS spectra were searched against the Homo sapiens database (release 2019_11, 20380 entries) assuming trypsin (Full) as digestion enzyme and two allowed number of missed cleavage sites. Mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da) was set as dynamic modification. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) and the TMT label on lysines and the N-terminus (229.1629) were set as static modifications. False discovery rates (FDRs) for peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were calculated and filtered using the Percolator node in Proteome Discoverer that was run with the following settings: Maximum Delta Cn 0.05, a strict target FDR of 0.01, a relaxed target FDR of 0.05 and validation based on q-value. Protein identifications were accepted when the protein FDR was below 1 % and when present in at least two out of three replicate injections with at least two peptides. The list of U937 mitochondrial proteins identified by MS/MS was generated by including the subset of mitochondrial protein sequences from UniprotKB Swiss-prot database, selected based on the Mitochondrion term of the ‘Cellular component’ gene ontology category.

### Publication Abstract
The involvement of sirtuins (SIRTs) in modulating metabolic and stress response pathways is attracting growing scientific interest. Some SIRT family members are located in mitochondria, dynamic organelles that perform several crucial functions essential for eukaryotic life. Mitochondrial dysfunction has emerged as having a key role in a number of human diseases, including cancer. Here, we investigated mitochondrial damage resulting from treatment with a recently characterized pan-SIRT inhibitor, MC2494. MC2494 was able to block mitochondrial biogenesis and function in terms of ATP synthesis and energy metabolism, suggesting that it might orchestrate cell response to metabolic stress and thereby interfere with cancer promotion and progression. Targeting mitochondrial function could thus be considered a potential anticancer strategy for use in clinical therapy.

### Keywords
Sirtuins, Human, Orbitrap q-exactive, Mitochondria, Leukemia

### Affiliations
University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelly"
Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Ambientali Biologiche e Farmaceutiche Università degli Studi della Campania“Luigi Vanvitelli”

### Submitter
Angela Chambery

### Lab Head
Dr Angela Chambery
Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Ambientali Biologiche e Farmaceutiche Università degli Studi della Campania“Luigi Vanvitelli”


