### Accession
PXD012678

### Title
Effects of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi on Pteris cretica L var. nervosa fronds antimony enrichment, morphology and proteome changes during antimony phytoremediation

### Description
Pteris cretica L var. nervosa is one of the dominent fern species at antimony mining area where arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi can be found as a symbiosis. The effect of AMF on fern exposed to long-term excessive Sb was pooly understood. The project applied this fern co-cultivting with or withour AMF under different concentration of Sb in soil for charicterising Sb phytomediation ability of it along with the effect by AMF symbiosis.

### Sample Protocol
Fronds tissues from different treatments were harvested and frozen into liquid nitrogen. 1g fronds from each sample were used and ground into powder and vortexed with pre-cooled buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH6.8), 5 mM DTT, and 1 mM PMSF, for 10min.  Equal volume Tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0) were then added and mixed for 10min at room temperature. The samples were centrifuged (Eppendorf) at 4℃，15000g for 15min. The supernatant was transferred into a new tube and 5ml Ammonium Sulfate was added for protein participation at -20℃ overnight. Afterwards the samples were centrifuged (Eppendorf) at 4℃，15000g for 15min and all the supernatant were discarded. Cold methanol and acetone was sequentially used for wash the protein pellet. Dry the protein pellet at room temperature. Then the UTU (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, pH 8) buffer was used for resuspending protein. After 4-fold dilution with 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8), samples were digested with 4 µl sequencing-grade modified trypsin (0.5 0.5 µg/µl; Promega) overnight at 37 °C. After overnight digestion, trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added (until the pH was 3 or less) to stop digestion. Digested peptides were desalted over a C18 tip; Tryptic peptide mixtures were analyzed via LC-MS/MS using nanoflow Easy-nLC (Thermo Scientific) as an HPLC system and an Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Q-exactive, Thermo Scientific) as a mass analyzer. Peptides were eluted from Thermo EASY column SC200 150μm*20mm column (RP-C18) (Thermo Scientific) on a linear gradient running: 0% to 80% acetonitrile over 120 min and sprayed directly into the Q-exactive mass spectrometer. Proteins were identified via MS/MS based on the information-dependent acquisition of fragmentation spectra of multiple charged peptides. Up to ten data-dependent MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap for each full-scan spectrum acquired at 70,000 full-width half-maximum resolution and fragment spectra at resolution of 17,500 full-width half-maximum.

### Data Protocol
18 raw datasets were plot into Maxquant version (1.5.3.8) 41. Spectra were matched against the proteome NCBI-moniliformopses sequence.fasta (NCBI, 67162 entries). Protein quantification was performed in MaxQuant using the label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm. The following parameters were applied: trypsin as cleaving enzyme; minimum peptide length of seven amino acids; maximal two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification; N-terminal protein acetylation, oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. For phosphopeptide identification also the phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine was included as variable modifications. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da was used as MS/MS tolerance. Further settings were: “label-free quantification” marked, multiplicity set to 1; “match between runs” marked with time window 2 min; peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDR) set to 0.01; common contaminants (trypsin, keratin, etc.) excluded.

### Publication Abstract
Pteris cretica var. nervosa is a dominant fern species found in antimony (Sb) mining areas, capable of forming symbiosis with arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF), especially with those members of the Glomus genus. Despite this fern's relevance and the potential contribution of mycorrhizal symbiosis to phytoremediation, the AMF's impact on P. var. nervosa phytoremediation of Sb remains unknown. Here, we exposed P. var. nervosa to different concentrations of Sb for 6&#xa0;months. Our results showed that Sb reduced shoot biomass, enlarged the root/shoot ratio, and disrupted the fronds' intracellular structure. AMF inoculation, however, was able to moderate these phenotypic changes and increased the accumulation level of Sb in plants. From a proteomics analysis of this plant's fronds, a total of 283 proteins were identified. Notably, those proteins with catalytic function, carbon fixing and ATP metabolic function were highly enriched. K-means clustering demonstrated protein-changing patterns involved in multiple metabolic pathways during exposure to Sb. Further, these patterns can be moderated by AMF inoculation. Pearson correlations were used to assess the plant biomarkers-soil Sb relationships; This revealed a strong correlation between ribosome alteration and the root/shoot ratio when inoculated with AMF, and a positive correlation between photosynthesis proteins and chlorophyll (SPAD value). Our results indicate AMF could moderate the fronds impairment by maintaining the sufficient protein levels for ribosomal functioning, photosynthesis activity and to counter ROS production. We demonstrate the effective use of AMF associated with P. cretica var. nervosa for Sb phytoremediation and the potential of applying proteomics to better understand the mechanism behind this symbiotic plant physiological response.

### Keywords
Pteris cretica l var. nervosa, Long-term exposure, Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi, Fronds proteomic identification, Antimony phytoremediation

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Systems Biology, University of Hohenheim, 70593 Stuttgart, Germany
University of Hohenheim

### Submitter
Lin Xi

### Lab Head
Dr Lin Xi
Department of Plant Systems Biology, University of Hohenheim, 70593 Stuttgart, Germany


