### Accession
PXD027748

### Title
The transient Spt4-Spt5 complex as an upstream regulator of non-coding RNAs during development

### Description
The Spt4-Spt5 complex is conserved and essential RNA polymerase elongation factor. To investigate the role of the Spt4-Spt5 complex in non-coding transcription during development, we used the unicellular model Paramecium tetraurelia. In this organism harboring both germline (micronucleus - MIC) and somatic nuclei (macronucleus - MAC), massive transcription of the entire germline genome takes place during meiosis. This phenomenon starts a series of events mediated by different classes of non-coding RNAs that control developmentally programmed DNA elimination. We focused our study on Spt4, a small zinc-finger protein encoded in P. tetraurelia by two genes expressed constitutively and two genes expressed during meiosis. SPT4 genes are not essential in vegetative growth, but they are indispensable for sexual reproduction, even though genes from both expression families show functional redundancy. As we were mostly interested in transcription of the germline genome in the MIC during meiosis, we decided to probe the composition of the Spt5-Spt4 complex characteristic to this nucleus. Experiments in which Spt4mB-3xFLAG was used as bait demonstrated its interaction with either Spt5m or Spt5v, which is consistent with the Spt4mB-GFP localization pattern. Interestingly, mass spectrometry revealed that Spt5m-3xFLAG (which is present only in the MIC at the analyzed stage) interacts either with the meiotic Spt4mB or with Spt4vA. Silencing of the SPT4 genes resulted in the absence of double-stranded ncRNAs and reduced levels of scnRNAs – 25 nt-long sRNAs produced from these double-stranded precursors in the germline nucleus. Moreover, we observed that the presence of a germline-specific Spt4-Spt5m complex is necessary for transfer of the scnRNA-binding PIWI protein between the germline and somatic nucleus. Our study establishes that Spt4, together with Spt5m, is essential for expression of the germline genome and necessary for developmental genome rearrangements.

### Sample Protocol
In order to identify the interacting partner proteins, we used cell lines transformed with a transgene expressing either SPT5m or SPT4mB fused at its C-termini with the 3xFLAG tag. The control cells and transformed cells were grown in 1xWGP and starved and then harvested at the beginning of the sexual cycle (30% meiosis and 20% fragmented MAC), when Spt5m and Spt4m are expressed. 200 ml of culture was spun, washed in 10 mM Tris pH 7.4 and quick-frozen in a final volume of 200 µl. Subsequently, 3 volumes of lysis buffer (350 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCL pH 7.4, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, protease inhibitor EDTA-free (Pierce)) were added to each sample and samples were thawed on ice by careful up and down pipetting. For complete lysis, cells were subjected to the freeze/thaw procedure three more times and the obtained whole cell extracts were centrifuged at 14000 rpm for 30 min, 4ºC. In the next step supernatants were incubated with 30 µl of anti-FLAG M2 agarose resin (Merck) for 2 hours at 4ºC. The washing step was conducted in the following order: 1 wash using 1 ml of lysis buffer, 2 washes with 1 ml of washing buffer containing 0.2% NP-40, 350 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4 and 2 washes with 1 ml of 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 7.4. Elution was performed with 100 µl of 0.1 M glycine or with a 3xFLAG competitive peptide.  Eluates validated by immunobloting analysis were subjected to the standard procedure of trypsin digestion, during which proteins were reduced with 0.5 M (5 mM f.c.) TCEP for 1 h at 60°C, blocked with 200 mM MMTS (10 mM f.c.) for 10 min at RT and digested overnight with 10 ng/ul trypsin. The resulting peptide mixtures were applied to a RP-18 pre-column (Waters, Milford, MA) using water containing 0.1% FA as mobile phase and then transferred to a nano-HPLC RP-18 column (internal diameter 75 µM, Waters, Milford MA) of a nanoACQUITY UPCA system (Waters) using an ACN gradient (0 – 35% ACN in 160 min) in the presence of 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column outlet was coupled directly to the ion source of a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron Corp., San Jose, CA) working in the regime of data-dependent MS to MS/MS switch. A blank run ensuring the absence of cross-contamination from previous samples preceded each analysis.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS data were preprocessed with Mascot Distiller software (v. 2.5/2.6, MatrixScience, London, UK) and a search was performed with the Mascot Search Engine (MatrixScience, London, UK, Mascot Server 2.5/2.6) against the Paramecium protein (40460 sequences; 17901632 residues) database. To reduce mass errors, the peptide and fragment mass tolerance settings were established separately for individual LC-MS/MS runs after a measured mass recalibration. The Mascot search parameters were as follows: mass tolerance for peptides: typically 5 ppm, mass tolerance for fragments: typically 0.01 Da, enzyme, Trypsin; missed cleavages, 1; fixed modifications, Methylthio (C); variable modifications, Oxidation (M); instrument, HCD. The FDR was calculated and results were filtered to acquire 1% false positive identifications.

### Publication Abstract
The Spt4-Spt5 complex is conserved and essential RNA polymerase elongation factor. To investigate the role of the Spt4-Spt5 complex in non-coding transcription during development, we used the unicellular model Paramecium tetraurelia. In this organism harboring both germline and somatic nuclei, massive transcription of the entire germline genome takes place during meiosis. This phenomenon starts a series of events mediated by different classes of non-coding RNAs that control developmentally programmed DNA elimination. We focused our study on Spt4, a small zinc-finger protein encoded in P. tetraurelia by two genes expressed constitutively and two genes expressed during meiosis. SPT4 genes are not essential in vegetative growth, but they are indispensable for sexual reproduction, even though genes from both expression families show functional redundancy. Silencing of the SPT4 genes resulted in the absence of double-stranded ncRNAs and reduced levels of scnRNAs - 25 nt-long sRNAs produced from these double-stranded precursors in the germline nucleus. Moreover, we observed that the presence of a germline-specific Spt4-Spt5m complex is necessary for transfer of the scnRNA-binding PIWI protein between the germline and somatic nucleus. Our study establishes that Spt4, together with Spt5m, is essential for expression of the germline genome and necessary for developmental genome rearrangements.

### Keywords
Interactomics, Spt4, Meiosis

### Affiliations
IBB PAS
Laboratory of Non-coding RNA and Genome Rearrangements, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, PAS

### Submitter
Agata Malinowska

### Lab Head
Dr Jacek K. Nowak
Laboratory of Non-coding RNA and Genome Rearrangements, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, PAS


