### Accession
PXD007532

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of human thyroid cystic fluid and thyroid cancer cell secreted proteins

### Description
Thyroid ultrasound and ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (USG/FNA) biopsy are currently used for diagnosing papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC), but their detection limit could be improved by combining other biomarkers. To discover novel PTC biomarkers, we herein applied a GeLC-MS/MS strategy to analyze the proteome profiles of serum-abundant-protein-depleted FNA cystic fluid from benign and PTC patients, as well as two PTC cell line secretomes. From them, we identified 346, 488, and 2105 proteins, respectively. Comparative analysis revealed that 191 proteins were detected in the PTC but not the benign cystic fluid samples, and thus may represent potential PTC biomarkers. Among these proteins, 101 were detected in the PTC cell line secretomes, and seven of them (NPC2, CTSC, AGRN, GPNMB, DPP4, ERAP2, and SH3BGRL3) were reported in public PTC transcriptome datasets as having 4681 elevated mRNA expression in PTC. Immunoblot analysis confirmed the elevated expression levels of five proteins (NPC2, CTSC, GPNMB, DPP4, and ERAP2) in PTC versus benign cystic fluids. Immunohistochemical studies from near 100 pairs of PTC tissue and their adjacent non-tumor counterparts further showed that AGRN (n = 98), CTSC (n = 99), ERAP2 (n = 98) and GPNMB (n = 100) were significantly (p<0.05) overexpressed in PTC and higher expression levels of AGRN and CTSC were also significantly associated with metastasis and poor prognosis of PTC patients. Collectively, our results indicate that an integrated analysis of FNA cystic fluid proteome, cancer cell secretome and tissue transcriptome datasets represents a useful strategy for efficiently discovering novel PTC biomarker candidates.

### Sample Protocol
The FNA cystic fluid samples which were combined into malignant (3 individuals) and benign (7 individuals) poolswere subjected to depletion of 14 highly abundant proteins using Agilent Human 14 Multiple Affinity Removal System (MARS) columns (4.6 X 100 mm; Agilent, Palo Alto, CA, USA), which harbor antibodies raised against human albumin, IgG, antitrypsin, IgA, transferrin, haptoglobin, fibrinogen, alpha2-macroglobulin, alpha1-acid glycoprotein, IgM, apolipoprotein A1, apolipoprotein A11, complement C3, and transthyretin. The depleted and bound fractions were desalted and concentrated with Amicon Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter Devices (MW cutoff, 3000 Da; Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). The proteins were then suspended in ddH2O, quantified using a Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, Hudson, NH, USA), and stored at -80oC for further study. The PTC cell lines, CGTH W3 and BHP7-13 cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 100 units/mL of penicillin/streptomycin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere at 37oC. Cells were grown to approximately 80% confluence in 15-mm culture dishes, washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and once with serum-free medium, and then incubated in serum-free medium at 37oC for 24 h. The conditioned media were harvested and centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 10 minutes to eliminate the suspended cells. A proteinase inhibitor cocktail was added to the supernatants (final concentrations: 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride [PMSF], 1 mM benzamidine, 0.5 ug/ml leupeptin), which were then concentrated and desalted in Amicon Ultra-15 tubes. The BCA protein assay reagent was used to determine the protein concentrations of conditioned media, which were then stored at -80oC for further use. The abundant-protein-depleted thyroid FNA samples (60 ug each) or the conditioned media of the PTC cell lines (50 ug each) were separated by 8-14% large-gradient SDS-PAGE (gel dimensions: 0.15 x 12.5 x 14 cm) and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. The gel-separated proteins were processed for MS analysis using in-gel tryptic digestion. Briefly, each gel lane was cut into 60 (for FNA cystic fluid samples) or 40 (for conditioned media of PTC cells) pieces, destained three times (15 min each time) with 30 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 40% acetonitrile, dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile, and dried in a laminar flow hood. The proteins were then reduced with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 10 mM dithiothreitol at 60oC for 1 h and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Sequencing-grade modified porcine trypsin (20 ug/ml in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate; Promega, Fitchburg, WI, USA) was used for protein digestion at 37oC for 18 h, and the tryptic peptides were extracted with 100% acetonitrile containing 1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the peptides were concentrated and dried by lyophilization. For LC-MS/MS analysis, peptide samples were reconstituted in HPLC buffer A (0.1% formic acid), loaded across a reversed-phase trapping column (Zorbax 300SB-C18, 0.3 x 5 mm; Agilent Technologies, Wilmington, DE, USA) at a flow rate of 0.2 ul/min in buffer A, and separated on a 10-cm analytical C18 column (inner diameter, 75 um; New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) using a 15-um tip (New Objective). The peptides were eluted using a linear gradient of 0-10% HPLC buffer B (99.9% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid) for 3 min, 10-30% buffer B for 35 min, 30-35% buffer B for 4 min, 35-50% buffer B for 1 min, 50-95% buffer B for 1 min, and 95% buffer B for 8 min, all at a flow rate of 0.25 ul/min. The LC device was on-line coupled with a two-dimensional linear ion-trap mass spectrometer LTQ-Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA, USA) operated with the Xcalibur 2.0.7 software (Thermo Fisher). The MS full-scan was set to the 350-2000 Da range and the intact peptides were detected at a resolution of 30,000. The ion signal of (Si(CH3)2O)6H+ at m/z 445.120025 was used as a lock mass for internal calibration. The utilized data-dependent analytical mode alternated between one full-scan MS and six MS/MS scans for the six most abundant precursor ions in the MS survey scan. The m/z values selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 40 s. The voltage of the electrospray ionization was 1.8 kV. The MS and MS/MS spectra were both obtained using one microscan with maximum full times of 1000 and 100 ms for MS and MS/MS, respectively. Automatic gain control was performed to prevent the ion trap from becoming overfilled; 5 × 103 ions were collected in the ion trap for the generation of MS/MS spectra.

### Data Protocol
The RAW files of the spectra obtained from the LTQ-Orbitrap were searched against 20,367 Homo sapiens entries in the SwissProt-human_56.0 database, with trypsin assumed as the digestive enzyme. The MASCOT Daemon algorithm (version 2.2.03; Matrix Science, London, UK) was used for data processing, and one missed cleavage was allowed. The MS tolerance for the monoisotopic peptide window was set to 10 ppm, and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethyl cysteines (+57 Da) and oxidation of methionine residues (+16 Da) was set as a variable modification. The charge states of the peptides were set to +2 and +3. All DAT files produced by MASCOT Daemon were combined using the Scaffold software (version 2.06.00; Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) to evaluate the MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. The probabilistic threshold of protein identification was set at > 95% and the peptide probability was set at > 95%. The confidence of protein identification was based on the assignment of at least two identified unique peptides. The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated by decoy database that the spectra assigned to a random database versus those assigned to a normal database.

### Publication Abstract
Thyroid ultrasound and ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (USG/FNA) biopsy are currently used for diagnosing papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC), but their detection limit could be improved by combining other biomarkers. To discover novel PTC biomarkers, we herein applied a GeLC-MS/MS strategy to analyze the proteome profiles of serum-abundant-protein-depleted FNA cystic fluid from benign and PTC patients, as well as two PTC cell line secretomes. From them, we identified 346, 488, and 2105 proteins, respectively. Comparative analysis revealed that 191 proteins were detected in the PTC but not the benign cystic fluid samples, and thus may represent potential PTC biomarkers. Among these proteins, 101 were detected in the PTC cell line secretomes, and seven of them (NPC2, CTSC, AGRN, GPNMB, DPP4, ERAP2, and SH3BGRL3) were reported in public PTC transcriptome datasets as having 4681 elevated mRNA expression in PTC. Immunoblot analysis confirmed the elevated expression levels of five proteins (NPC2, CTSC, GPNMB, DPP4, and ERAP2) in PTC versus benign cystic fluids. Immunohistochemical studies from near 100 pairs of PTC tissue and their adjacent non-tumor counterparts further showed that AGRN (<i>n =</i> 98), CTSC (<i>n =</i> 99), ERAP2 (<i>n =</i> 98) and GPNMB (<i>n =</i> 100) were significantly (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05) overexpressed in PTC and higher expression levels of AGRN and CTSC were also significantly associated with metastasis and poor prognosis of PTC patients. Collectively, our results indicate that an integrated analysis of FNA cystic fluid proteome, cancer cell secretome and tissue transcriptome datasets represents a useful strategy for efficiently discovering novel PTC biomarker candidates.

### Keywords
Human, Thyroid cancer cell, Lc-ms/ms, Thyroid cystic fluid

### Affiliations
Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, department of Cell and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, and Molecular Medicine Research Center, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan 33302, Taiwan. Liver Research Center, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University, Taoyuan 33302, Taiwan.
Molecular Medicine Research Center, Chang Gung University

### Submitter
Chia-Chun Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Jau Song Yu
Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, department of Cell and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, and Molecular Medicine Research Center, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan 33302, Taiwan. Liver Research Center, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University, Taoyuan 33302, Taiwan.


