### Accession
PXD002885

### Title
Histone datasets for evaluation of histone extraction protocols

### Description
Extracting histones from cells is a routine operation for studies that aim to characterize histones and their post-translational modifications (hPTMs). However, label-free quantitative mass spectrometry (MS) approaches, both data-dependent (DDA) and data-independent (DIA), require streamlined protocols that are highly reproducible even at the peptide level, to enable simultaneous accurate quantification of dozens to hundreds of these hPTMs. We present a step-by-step comparison of different histone extraction protocols based on literature and evaluate their suitability for label-free MS purposes using a nanoESI label-free MS1 intensity-based DDA MS experiment. We evaluate the data both using a targeted and an untargeted (Progenesis QI) approach.

### Sample Protocol
Histones were acid-extracted using different protocols based on literature. Next, they were subjected to a double round of propionylation pre- and post-digestion and proteolysis was performed using trypsin. Prior to MS analysis, propionylated histones were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water. Liquid Chromatography was performed using a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters).First, samples were delivered to a trap column (180 µm x 20 mm nanoACQUITY UPLC 2G-V/MTrap 5 µm Symmetry C18, Waters) at a flow rate of 8 µL/min for 2 min in 99.5% buffer A. Subsequently, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (100 µm x 100 mm nanoACQUITY UPLC 1.7 µm Peptide BEH, Waters) and separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a gradient of 60 min going from 1% to 40% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). A Q-TOF SYNAPT G2-Si instrument (Waters) was operated in positive mode for High Definition-DDA (HD-DDA), using a nano-ESI source, acquiring full scan MS and MS/MS spectra (m/z 50-5000) in resolution mode. Survey MS scans were acquired using a fixed scan time of 400 ms. Tandem mass spectra of up to eight precursors with charge state 2+ to 5+ were generated using CID in the trapping region with intensity threshold set at 2000 cps, using a collision energy ramp from 6/9 V (low mass, start/end) up to 147/183 V (high mass, start/end). MS/MS scan time was set to 100 ms with an accumulated ion count ‘TIC stop parameter’ of 350,000 cps allowing a maximum accumulation time of 200 ms. Dynamic exclusion of fragmented precursor ions was set to 10 s. IMS wave velocity was ramped from 2500 m/s to 400 m/s. Wideband enhancement was used to obtain a near-100% duty cycle on singly charged fragment ions. LockSpray of Glufibrinopeptide-B (m/z 785.8427) was acquired at a scan frequency of 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis QI for Proteomics (Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters) was used to process the raw MS data. One QC run served as alignment template. MS precursors were filtered based on charge state (2+ to 6+) and the data were normalized to all MS precursors. A multivariate statistical analysis was performed on all 6539 MS precursors, without any prior peptide identification. Using MS precursor abundance levels across runs, the principal component analysis (PCA) in Progenesis QI determines the principle axes of abundance variation, and transforms and plots the abundance data in the principle component space, separating the samples according to abundance variation.  For the untargeted analysis, the MS/MS spectra of the differential MS precursors were exported as an *.mgf peaklist for database searching using a Mascot 2.5 in-house server (Matrix Science). An error tolerant search against a human database containing internal standards and prevalent contaminants was performed, with propionylation of lysine (K) and the N-terminus as variable modifications. Mass error tolerance for the precursor ions was set at 15 ppm and for the fragment ions at 0.3 Da. Enzyme specificity was set to Arg-C (because Ks are blocked by propionylation), allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Results were filtered for confident hits using an 0.01 expectancy cut-off.  To create our own protein database, an *.mgf peaklist containing all MS/MS spectra was exported from Progenesis QI and searchedagainst the Swissprot Human database (20,210  sequences, version 2014_7) with the following search parameters: Arg-C specificity, up to one missed cleavage; propionylation of the N-terminus was set as fixed modification; propionylation of K residues and amidation (in vitro modification) of the C-terminus, aspartic acid residues and glutamic acid residues were set as variable modifications. Mass error tolerances for the precursor ions and its fragment ions were set at 20 ppm and 0.3 Da, respectively. A decoy search was included and Mascot scores were adjusted by the Percolator algorithm, resulting in a decoy search FDR 0.19%. For the subsequent targeted analysis, a final search was performed in a reduced search space with the following search parameters: enzyme specificity was set to Arg-C, tolerating up to two missed cleavages with a peptide tolerance of 15 ppm and an MS/MS tolerance of 0.3 Da. As variable modifications propionylation, butyrylation, acetylation (ac), dimethylation (me2) and trimethylation (me3) on K, monomethylation (me1) and me2 on arginine (R), ac and phosphorylation (ph) on serine (S) and ac and ph on threonine (T) were selected. Propionylation of the N-terminus was set as a fixed modification. Monomethylation K was searched as butyrylation, which equals the sum of the masses for propionylation and monomethylation, because the Ɛ-amino group of monomethylated Ks will be propionylated. A decoy search was included and Mascot scores were adjusted by the Percolator algorithm, resulting in a decoy search FDR of 0.07%.

### Publication Abstract
Extracting histones from cells is the first step in studies that aim to characterize histones and their post-translational modifications (hPTMs) with MS. In the last decade, label-free quantification is more frequently being used for MS-based histone characterization. However, many histone extraction protocols were not specifically designed for label-free MS. While label-free quantification has its advantages, it is also very susceptible to technical variation. Here, we adjust an established histone extraction protocol according to general label-free MS guidelines with a specific focus on minimizing sample handling. These protocols are first evaluated using SDS-PAGE. Hereafter, a selection of extraction protocols was used in a complete histone workflow for label-free MS. All protocols display nearly identical relative quantification of hPTMs. We thus show that, depending on the cell type under investigation and at the cost of some additional contaminating proteins, minimizing sample handling can be done during histone isolation. This allows analyzing bigger sample batches, leads to reduced technical variation and minimizes the chance of in vitro alterations to the hPTM snapshot. Overall, these results allow researchers to determine the best protocol depending on the resources and goal of their specific study. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002885.

### Keywords
Label-free ms, Extraction protocols, Histone, Targeted and untargeted analysis

### Affiliations
Ghent University
Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Department of Pharmaceutics, Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent University, Belgium

### Submitter
Elisabeth Govaert

### Lab Head
Dr Dieter Deforce
Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Department of Pharmaceutics, Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent University, Belgium


