### Accession
PXD032669

### Title
Endothelial protein interaction partners of the lncRNA PCAT19

### Description
PCAT19 is an endothelial-enriched lncRNA that contributes to the proliferation-quiescence switch in a cell density-dependent manner. Here we performed an antisense-oligonucleotide pulldown of the PCAT19 lncRNA followed by mass spectrometry to identify protein interaction partners of PCAT19. Interaction partners were further analysed for their potential role with PCAT19.

### Sample Protocol
Beads were supplemented with 6M GdmCl, 50mM Tris/HCl, 10 mM TCEP and incubated at 95°C for 5 min. Reduced thiols were alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamid and sample were diluted with 25 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, 10% acetonitrile to obtain a final GdmCl concentration of 0.6 M. Proteins were digested with 1 µg Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) overnight at 37°C under gentle agitation. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5 %. Peptides were loaded on multi-stop-and-go tips (StageTips) containing three  C18-disks and 3 SCX-disks. Purification and elution of peptides was performed as described in Rappsilber et al. (2007). Peptides  were eluted in wells of microtiter plates and peptides were dried and resolved in 1% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid.   Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm long from New Objectives) using an gradient from mobile phase A (4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 30 % mobile phase B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 90 min followed by an additional gradient to 60% B for 15 min with a flow rate 300 nl/min.  MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3*10E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to 10E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis MaxQuant 1.6.1.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008, Nat. Biotechnology) was used. N-terminal acetylation (+42.01) and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) on cysteines as a fixed modification. The human reference proteome set (Uniprot, February 2018, 71785 entries) was used to identify peptides and proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%. Minimal ratio count for label-free quantification (LFQ) was 1.   Rappsilber J, Mann M, Ishihama Y. (2007) Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc. 2:1896-906.  Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell cycle, Endothelial, Proteome, Lncrna, Pcat19

### Affiliations
Institute for Cardiovascular Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe-University; Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias S. Leisegang
Institute for Cardiovascular Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe-University; Frankfurt am Main, Germany


