### Accession
PXD018651

### Title
The UBA-domain of Ubc1/Ube2K Facilitates the Assembly of K48-/K63-Branched Ubiquitin Chains

### Description
Assembly of polymeric ubiquitin (Ub) chains is an essential posttranslational protein modification that regulates widespread intracellular processes in eukaryotic cells. Factors and mechanisms that regulate the formation of Ub chains are key to the understanding of many cellular processes. The E2 enzyme Ubc1 (Ube2K) exclusively targets K48 in Ub for chain formation and has been linked to cell-cycle progression and proteostasis. Uniquely among E2 enzymes, it harbors a Ub binding UBA domain, which has been implicated in Ub chain formation but its function remained elusive. Through in vitro binding experiments, we unexpectedly found that the UBA domain enables preferential binding of K63-linked Ub chains. Based on structural modeling, extensive in vitro ubiquitination experiments and NMR binding studies, we propose a mechanism through which Ubc1 selectively forms K48/K63 branched Ub chains – an usual chain architecture, about whose prevalence and function little is known to date. Ultimately, we link UBA dependent activity of Ubc1 to its role in proteostasis through genetic experiments.

### Sample Protocol
To investigate the abundance of K48/K63 branched chains in S. cerevisiae, yeasts strains were transformed with expression plasmids for 10xHis-Ub(R54A) and grown in either unlabeled or Lys8-labelled minimal media. Equal amounts of cells (400 ml at 0.6 OD600/ml) from different conditions and with different labels were combined, mixed and centrifuged. Pellets of the combined cells were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C overnight. Pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (6M GdmCl, 100mM HEPES pH 7.5, 300mM NaCl, 10mM chloroacetamide, 1mM PMSF) for mechanical lysis with glass beads. Additional lysis buffer containing Triton-X 100 was added to a final concentration of 0.2% TX-100 for solubilization at 4 °C for 30 min. The lysate was cleared by centrifugation and incubated with Ni-NTA resin. After 2.5 h, the resin was washed twice with buffer 1 (8M urea, 100mM HEPES pH7.5, 300mM NaCl, 0.2% Triton-X-100, 10mM Chloroacetamide) and twice with wash buffer 2 (8M urea, 100mM HEPES pH7.5, 300mM NaCl, 0.2% Triton-X-100, 0.2% SDS, 10mM Chloroacetamide). Finally, protein was eluted using elution buffer (8M urea, 100mM HEPES pH7.5, 300mM NaCl, 350mM Imidazole, 0.2% Triton-X-100, 0.2% SDS, 10mM Chloroacetamide) and subjected to methanol/chloroform extraction. The protein pellet was resuspended in denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0). 0.5 μg LysC protease was added and incubated for 3h at RT while shaking. The sample was diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer before adding 0.5 μg trypsin for digest at RT overnight. Peptides were separated by reverse phase chromatography on an effective 80 min gradient (0,10, 60, 70, 80 min with 0, 4, 20, 30, 50 % of 90 % acetonitrile) and analyzed on a Q-Exactive HFx (Thermo Fisher). The PRM settings were: 30 000 resolution; 2e5 AGC target; 1.6 m/z isolation window; 100 ms max ion injection time. In addition, a Top-2 method was integrated into the same run with the following settings: MS1: 15 000 resolution; AGC target 3e6; Max IT 10 ms; MS2: 7 500 resolution; AGC target 1e5; MaxIT 12 ms; Isolation window 1.3 m/z; Minimum AGC target 1e4; Dynamic exclusion 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Traces of all fragments from precursors in the spectral library were extracted from all rawfiles using the Thermo MSFileReader and the MSFileReader.py bindings written by François Allen. For each scan the normalized spectral contrast angle (SCN) was calculated (Toprak et al., 2014). Peaks were manually selected with an unpublished inhouse PRM-data visualization tool. Ratios were extracted from the slope of a linear model on extracted intensity pairs of the heavy and light channel for each peak across all fragments. The data was analyzed in parallel with MaxQuant 1.6.3.4 (Cox et al., 2008) against the uniprot yeast protein sequence database from 2014. MaxQuant settings were: multiplicity 2 with Lys8 as a heavy label; fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C); Protease: Trypsin with allowed cleavages after proline; variable modifications: acetylation (nterm), oxidation (M); PSM FDR 0.01; Protein FDR 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
The assembly of a specific polymeric ubiquitin chain on a target protein is a key event in the regulation of numerous cellular processes. Yet, the mechanisms that govern the selective synthesis of particular polyubiquitin signals remain enigmatic. The homologous ubiquitin-conjugating (E2) enzymes Ubc1 (budding yeast) and Ube2K (mammals) exclusively generate polyubiquitin linked through lysine 48 (K48). Uniquely among E2 enzymes, Ubc1 and Ube2K harbor a ubiquitin-binding UBA domain with unknown function. We found that this UBA domain preferentially interacts with ubiquitin chains linked through lysine 63 (K63). Based on structural modeling, in vitro ubiquitination experiments, and NMR studies, we propose that the UBA domain aligns Ubc1 with K63-linked polyubiquitin and facilitates the selective assembly of K48/K63-branched ubiquitin conjugates. Genetic and proteomics experiments link the activity of the UBA domain, and hence the formation of this unusual ubiquitin chain topology, to the maintenance of cellular proteostasis.

### Keywords
Ubc1/ube2k;ubiquitin;k48-/k63-branched ubiquitin;prm

### Affiliations
MDC Berlin-Buch
MDC Berlin-Buch Germany

### Submitter
Henrik Zauber

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
MDC Berlin-Buch Germany


