### Accession
PXD035246

### Title
Local depletion of proteoglycans mediates cartilage tissue repair in an ex vivo integration model

### Description
Successfully replacing damaged cartilage with tissue-engineered constructs requires integration with the host tissue and could benefit from leveraging the native tissue's intrinsic healing capacity; however, efforts are limited by a poor understanding of how cartilage repairs minor defects. Here, we investigated the conditions that foster natural cartilage tissue repair to identify strategies that might be exploited to enhance the integration of engineered/ grafted cartilage with host tissue. We damaged porcine articular cartilage explants and using a combination of pulsed SILAC-based proteomics, ultrastructural imaging, and catabolic enzyme blocking strategies reveal that integration of damaged cartilage surfaces is not driven by neo-matrix synthesis, but rather local depletion of proteoglycans. ADAMTS4 expression and activity are upregulated in injured cartilage explants, but integration could be reduced by inhibiting metalloproteinase activity with TIMP3. These observations suggest that catabolic enzyme-mediated proteoglycan depletion likely allows existing collagen fibrils to undergo cross-linking, fibrillogenesis, or entanglement, driving integration. Catabolic enzymes are often considered pathophysiological markers of osteoarthritis. Our findings suggest that damage-induced upregulation of metalloproteinase activity may be a part of a healing response that tips towards tissue destruction under pathological conditions and in osteoarthritis, but could also be harnessed in tissue engineering strategies to mediate repair. Statement of significance: Cartilage tissue engineering strategies require graft integration with the surrounding tissue; however, how the native tissue repairs minor injuries is poorly understood. We applied pulsed SILACbased proteomics, ultrastructural imaging, and catabolic enzyme blocking strategies to a porcine cartilage explant model and found that integration of damaged cartilage surfaces is driven by catabolic enzyme-mediated local depletion of proteoglycans. Although catabolic enzymes have been implicated in cartilage destruction in osteoarthritis, our findings suggest that damage-induced upregulation of metalloproteinase activity may be a part of a healing response that tips towards tissue destruction under pathological conditions. They also suggest that this natural cartilage tissue repair process could be harnessed in tissue engineering strategies to enhance the integration of engineered cartilage with host tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of articular cartilage samples for explant culture. 8-week-old female pigs (∼25 kg) were euthanized following the requirements of the Royal Veterinary College Ethics Committee. Femoral condyles were exposed and cartilage (excluding the calcified cartilage layer) were removed from the load-bearing areas of the lateral and medial femoral condyles using a razor blade, and placed in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Medium (DMEM). A 6mm diameter biopsy punch was used to cut discs from condylar cartilage, which were placed in chondrogenic media (DMEM with 4500mg/L glucose supplemented with 10% (v/v) foetal bovine serum (FBS) (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 2mM L-glutamine, 1% (v/v) antibiotic antimycotic (ABAM) (Sigma-Aldrich), and 50μg/mL L-ascorbic acid). Cartilage discs were pre-cultured for 7 days under standard conditions with media changes every 2 days, allowing for lactate dehydrogenase activity to stabilize. pSILAC labelling of newly synthesized proteins. Cartilage explants were pre-cultured for 7 days in “light” medium consisting of SILAC DMEM Flex Media without glucose or phenol red (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 10% (v/v) dialyzed FBS (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 0.1mg/mL L-arginine and 0.1mg/mL L-lysine monohydrochloride. Sheathed Cut or uninjured explants were then placed in “heavy” medium, as above except that L-arginine and L-lysine monohydrochloride were replaced with L-arginine:HCl (13C6, 99%; 15N4, 99%) and L-lysine:2HCl (13C6, 99%; 15N2, 99%) (both from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). Explants were cultured for 7 days, with media changes every 48h. Protein extraction and MS sample preparation. Explants were dissected using two parallel blades glued to either side of a microscope slide. Injured samples were aligned so that the integration area was equidistant between the two parallel blades to isolate the integration tissue. After dissection, tissue was snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C. Cartilage explants were placed in homogenization tubes containing 0.4M Tris buffer (pH 8) containing phosphatase inhibitors (PhosSTOP, Sigma) and protease inhibitor cocktail (cOmplete Mini, EDTA-free, Roche). Explants were then homogenized on a Precellys Evolution/Cryolys, cycling 7 times for 20s at 6800 rpm followed by a 30s pause at 0 °C. 5μL of 100mM dithiothreitol (DTT) was then added and the resulting solution heated to 65 °C for 15min before being allowed to cool to RT. 20μL 200mM of Iodoacetamide (Sigma) was then added and incubated at RT for 30min before 50μL of DTT was added to quench at RT for 30min. The resulting pellet was then resuspended in 50μL of 4M GuHCL buffer (in 0.1M Tris buffer, pH 5.8) on an IKA mixer (2000rpm) for 2h at RT. Proteins were then digested in Trypsin (Promega, 1:50 ratio trypsin:protein (w/w)) overnight at 37 °C. Digestion was terminated by acidifying the solution with trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5% and particulates were removed by centrifugation at 4 °C at 14,000-16,000g for 10min. Peptides were then purified on SOLA C18 solid phase extraction cartridges (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and dried in a SpeedVac. Peptides were then dissolved in 20μL loading buffer before being loaded for mass spectrometry analysis. Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Samples were analyzed on a LC-MS/MS platform consisting of Orbitrap Fusion Lumos coupled to an UPLC ultimate 3000 RSLCnano (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded in 1% acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and eluted with a gradient from 2 to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and 5% (v/v) DMSO in 60min with a flow rate of 250nL/min on a 50cm EASY-Spray column (ES803, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The survey scan was acquired at a resolution of 120,000 between 400-1500m/z and an AGC target of 4E5. Selected precursor ions were isolated in the quadrupole with a mass isolation window of 1.6 Th and analyzed after CID fragmentation at 35% normalized collision energy in the linear ion trap in rapid scan mode. The duty cycle was fixed at 3s with a maximum injection time of 35ms with AGC target of 4000 and parallelization enabled. Selected precursor masses were excluded for the following 27s.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (V1.6.7.0) was used to search the raw mass spectral data files. SILAC (Lys8Arg10) was set for quantitation. Fixed modification was carbamidomethylation of cysteine; and variable modifications were oxidized methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and hydroxylation of proline. The data was searched against the porcine canonical Uniprot database (14/03/2021). A false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide and protein level were set to 1%. All other parameters were left at default settings. Perseus v1.6.14.0 was used to perform data analyses and statistical testing using the MaxQuant proteingroups.txt file as input. Only proteins with valid H/L ratio values in all replicates were used for analyses. H/L ratios were log2 transformed then normalized within each replicate by median subtraction. p-values and q-values were produced using a two-sided Student’s t-test and a permutation-based FDR (0.05, 250 randomizations).

### Publication Abstract
Successfully replacing damaged cartilage with tissue-engineered constructs requires integration with the host tissue and could benefit from leveraging the native tissue's intrinsic healing capacity; however, efforts are limited by a poor understanding of how cartilage repairs minor defects. Here, we investigated the conditions that foster natural cartilage tissue repair to identify strategies that might be exploited to enhance the integration of engineered/grafted cartilage with host tissue. We damaged porcine articular cartilage explants and using a combination of pulsed SILAC-based proteomics, ultrastructural imaging, and catabolic enzyme blocking strategies reveal that integration of damaged cartilage surfaces is not driven by neo-matrix synthesis, but rather local depletion of proteoglycans. ADAMTS4 expression and activity are upregulated in injured cartilage explants, but integration could be reduced by inhibiting metalloproteinase activity with TIMP3. These observations suggest that catabolic enzyme-mediated proteoglycan depletion likely allows existing collagen fibrils to undergo cross-linking, fibrillogenesis, or entanglement, driving integration. Catabolic enzymes are often considered pathophysiological markers of osteoarthritis. Our findings suggest that damage-induced upregulation of metalloproteinase activity may be a part of a healing response that tips towards tissue destruction under pathological conditions and in osteoarthritis, but could also be harnessed in tissue engineering strategies to mediate repair. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE: Cartilage tissue engineering strategies require graft integration with the surrounding tissue; however, how the native tissue repairs minor injuries is poorly understood. We applied pulsed SILAC-based proteomics, ultrastructural imaging, and catabolic enzyme blocking strategies to a porcine cartilage explant model and found that integration of damaged cartilage surfaces is driven by catabolic enzyme-mediated local depletion of proteoglycans. Although catabolic enzymes have been implicated in cartilage destruction in osteoarthritis, our findings suggest that damage-induced upregulation of metalloproteinase activity may be a part of a healing response that tips towards tissue destruction under pathological conditions. They also suggest that this natural cartilage tissue repair process could be harnessed in tissue engineering strategies to enhance the integration of engineered cartilage with host tissue.

### Keywords
Cartilage repair, Proteoglycan depletion, Tissue engineering, Catabolic enzyme

### Affiliations
The University of Texas at Austin
Centre for Craniofacial and Regenerative Biology, King's College London, Guy's Hospital, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Peter Faull

### Lab Head
Dr Eileen Gentleman
Centre for Craniofacial and Regenerative Biology, King's College London, Guy's Hospital, United Kingdom


