### Accession
PXD003284

### Title
In-depth proteomics identifies a role for autophagy in controlling ROS-mediated endothelial barrier permeability

### Description
We have used in-depth quantitative proteomics to identify processes required for the formation/maintenance of a stable new vessel. To do that we have used SILAC-based proteomics and a simple in vitro humam endothelial cell model that recapitulates vessel formation in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Sample lysate in 2% SDS in 0.1 M Tris HCl buffer pH 7.4 was mixed with an equal protein amount (125 µg for the confluency experiment, 5 µg for the bafilomycin experiment, 65 µg for the si-ATG5 experiment) of SILAC internal standard. For the confluency and si-ATG5 experiment (triplicate experiments were performed), the proteins were trypsin (sequencing grade modified, Promega) digested using the filter-aided sample preparation protocol and peptides fractionated into six fractions using pipet tip strong anion exchange separation microcolumn. For the bafilomycin experiment (triplicate experiments were performed), proteins were precipitated in methanol-chloroform, resuspended in urea buffer (8M urea, 75mM NaCl, 50mM Tris), reduced with dithiothreitol, and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Endoproteinase Lys-C (Waco) followed by trypsin were used to digest the proteins (enzyme to protein ratio = 1:50).  Peptides were desalted by using C18 StageTips and eluted in 80% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid and stroed at -20 °C until analyzed at the MS.

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform (version 1.3.6.0 for the cell confluency proteomes and 1.3.8.2 for the autophagy-inhibited proteomes) and searched with Andromeda search engine against the human UniProt database (release-2012 01, 81,213 entries). The ‘match between runs’ option was enabled. An initial maximal mass deviation of 7 ppm and 20 ppm was required to search for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Trypsin with full enzyme specificity and peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids were selected, and two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation (Met) and N-acetylation were set as variable modifications, whereas Carbamidomethylation (Cys) as fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was used for peptides and proteins identification. Only proteins identified with minimum one unique peptide and quantified with a minimum of two ratio counts were used for the analysis. Proteins were quantified based on unique peptides only.

### Publication Abstract
Endothelial cells (ECs) form the inner layer of blood vessels and physically separate the blood from the surrounding tissue. To support tissues with nutrients and oxygen, the endothelial monolayer is semipermeable. When EC permeability is altered, blood vessels are not functional, and this is associated with disease. A comprehensive knowledge of the mechanisms regulating EC permeability is key in developing strategies to target this mechanism in pathologies. Here we have used an in vitro model of human umbilical vein endothelial cells mimicking the formation of a physiologically permeable vessel and performed time-resolved in-depth molecular profiling using stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture mass spectrometry (MS)-proteomics. Autophagy is induced when ECs are assembled into a physiologically permeable monolayer. By using siRNA and drug treatment to block autophagy in combination with functional assays and MS proteomics, we show that ECs require autophagy flux to maintain intracellular reactive oxygen species levels, and this is required to maintain the physiological permeability of the cells.

### Keywords
Silac, Permeability, Autophagy, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute
Tumour Microenvironment & Proteomics

### Submitter
Sara Zanivan

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Zanivan
CRUK Beatson Institute


