### Accession
PXD029143

### Title
Noninvasive Nasopharyngeal Proteomics Identify Coagulation Abnormalities in SARS-CoV-2

### Description
Vaccines/drugs that could utilize the mucosal immune system to produce antibodies in the nose should help stop the coronavirus at the point of entry. Therefore, Identification of biomarkers in nasal microenvironment associated with viral clearance, vaccine implementation, and easily measurable correlates of protection, can allow monitoring of infection-induced immunity and facilitate novel drug/vaccine development. Our study proposes to use mass spectrometry-based proteomics to reflect the host response to COVID-19 infection in the nasopharyngeal environment and to identify any new biomarkers that can be used for designing non-invasive prognostic tools and treatments at the point of entry of the virus.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from nasopharyngeal swabs was based on a published protocol (Bankar et al., 2021) and improved based on the specific mass spectrometry instrument on-site.  Virus and proteins in 200 uL of samples in VTM were heat denatured at 65C for 45 mins and then precipitated with 600 ul of 50/50 (v/v) acetone/methanol in -20C overnight. Samples were then centrifuged at 15,000g for 20 min at 4C, then precipitated proteins were reconstituted with 75 uL of 8M Urea lysis buffer (8M Urea, 75mM NaCl, 1mM MgCl2, Tris-HCl 50 mM). Unless otherwise noted, chemicals were purchased from Millipore sigma (MO, USA). After ensuring pellets are completely dissolved, protein quantification was conducted using BCA assay (Thermofisher Scientific, MA). A total of 30 ug of proteins in each sample was reduced in 30 ul of Urea lysis buffer with 10 mM Dithiothreitol at 95C for 10 min and alkylated with 15 mM of Iodoacetamide at room temperature in dark for 30 min. Processed samples were diluted 8-fold with a trypsin dilution buffer (1mM CaCl2 in 25 mM Tris-HCl, pH=8) and then digested with mass spectrometry grade trypsin (Promega, WI) (1:50 w/w, 37C overnight). Digested peptides were desalted using Pierce C18 centrifugal columns (Thermofisher Scientific, MA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The desalted peptides were dried in a centrifugal evaporator and reconstitute with 0.1% formic acid (FA) in H2O with 3% acetonitrile (ACN) for a bottom-up LC-MS/MS mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were processed in duplicated and injected in duplicate (n=4 in total).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (PD) (Thermofisher Scientific, MA) was employed for a label-free quantification using SequestHT against human proteome (26152582 sequences) and SARS-CoV-2 virus database (14230) downloaded from Uniprot (Mar 15th, 2021). Fixed modification included carbamidomethylation, and up to three dynamic modifications were allowed including methionine oxidation and asparagine/glutamine deamidation. The precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was 0.02 Da. Trypsin cleavage (KR/not P) was set as enzyme cleavage with a maximum missed cleavage of 2. For precursor ion label-free quantification, a Minora Feature Detector was used in the processing workflow. Both unique and razor peptides were used for quantification and results were normalized based on total peptides amount. Data were analyzed using PD in nine different batches and from then incorporated in one csv. and further normalized using Normalizer (Välikangas et al.,2018; Chawade et al., 2014) to choose a proper normalization method).  The pathway analysis was conducted using GO-based and KEGG-based enrichment analysis with R (R Core Team, Vienna, Austria).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Complement and coagulation cascade, Nasopharyngeal swabs, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Ayass Bioscience, LLC, 8501 Wade Blvd, Ste 750, Building 9
Vice President Principal Scientist Ayass BioScience LLC

### Submitter
Wanying Cao

### Lab Head
Dr Lina Abi Mosleh
Vice President Principal Scientist Ayass BioScience LLC


