### Accession
PXD037294

### Title
sevoflurane exposures on neonatal and adult mice,LC-MSMS

### Description
Sevoflurane is the most commonly used general anesthetic in pediatric surgery, but it has the potential to be neurotoxic. Previous research found that long-term or multiple sevoflurane exposures could cause cognitive deficits in newborn mice but not adult mice, whereas short-term or single inhalations had little effect on cognitive function at both ages. The mechanisms behind these effects, however, are unclear. In the current study, 6- and 60-day-old C57bl mice in the sevoflurane groups were given 3% sevoflurane plus 60% oxygen for three consecutive days, each lasting 2 hours, while those in the control group only got 60% oxygen. The cortex tissues were harvested on the 8th or 62nd day. The tandem mass tags (TMT)pro-based quantitative proteomics combined with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysi were applied to analyze the influences of multiple sevoflurane anesthesia on the cerebral cortex in mice with various ages. A total of 6247 proteins were measured using the combined quantitative proteomics methods of TMTpro-labeled and LC-MS/MS, 443 of which were associated to the age-dependent neurotoxic mechanism of repeated sevoflurane anesthesia. Our findings would help to further the mechanistic study of age-dependent anesthetic neurotoxicity and contribute to seek for effective protection in the developing brain under general anesthesia.

### Sample Protocol
6-day old, or 60-day old C57BL/6J mice were chosen. Postnatal day (P) 6 + Control, P6 + Sevoflurane, P60 + Control, and P60 + Sevoflurane were allocated to mice at random.Mice in the sevoflurane group were subjected to anesthesia with 3% sevoflurane and 60% oxygen at a flow rate of 2 L/min for 2h per day for three consecutive days while the control group inhaled 60% O2. SDT(4%SDS，100mM Tris-HCl，1mM DTT，pH7.6) buffer was used for sample lysis and protein extraction. The amount of protein was quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA). Protein digestion by trypsin was performed according to filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure described by Matthias Mann. Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP Digestion) procedure：200 μg of proteins for each sample were incorporated into 30 μl SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0). The detergent, DTT and other low-molecular-weight components were removed using UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) by repeated ultrafiltration (Microcon units, 10 kD). Then 100 μl iodoacetamide (100 mM IAA in UA buffer) was added to block reduced cysteine residues and the samples were incubated for 30 min in darkness. The filters were washed with 100 μl UA buffer three times and then 100 μl 25mM NH4HCO3 buffer twice. Finally, the protein suspensions were digested with 4 μg trypsin (Promega) in 40 μl 25mM NH4HCO3 buffer overnight at 37 °C, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. The peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma), concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm using an extinctions coefficient of 1.1 of 0.1% (g/l) solution that was calculated on the basis of the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data for each sample were searched using the MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software for identification and quantitation analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sevoflurane, Lc-msms, Cortex, Mice

### Affiliations
Tianjin Medical University General Hospital

### Submitter
Yang Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Yonghao Yu
Tianjin Medical University General Hospital


