### Accession
PXD011367

### Title
Burkholderia Proteomics -  Proteogenomic Analysis of Burkholderia Species Strains 25 and 46 Isolated from Uraniferous Soils Reveals Multiple Mechanisms to Cope with Uranium Stress

### Description
Comparative proteogenomics analysis of Burkholderia species isolated from uraniferous Soils

### Sample Protocol
Burkholderia sp. strain 25 and 46 were isolated from uraniferous SRS soils

### Data Protocol
Cells (50) mg were collected from treated (with Uranyl nitrate) and untreated microcosms and resuspended in 500 µl of SDT lysis buffer (4% SDS, 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.6), 50 mM DTT, protease inhibitor tablets (ThermoFisher, Scientific), and MS grade water). Suspended cells were frozen  and thawed three times in liquid nitrogen and at 95̊ C hot bath respectively for 15 minutes. Approximtely 50 mg of glass beads (G8772-Sigma 425-600 µm) were added to the cell suspension and subjected to 10 cycles of bead beating for each 45 seconds cycle and 3 mins ice interval between every cycle. Lysed cells were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 15 mins and supernatant was collected in the fresh tube. The total protein was quantified by PierceTM BCA Protein Assay kit –Thermo Scientific and NanoDrop- Spectrophotometer.

### Publication Abstract
Two <i>Burkholderia</i> spp. (strains SRS-25 and SRS-46) were isolated from high concentrations of uranium (U) from the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE)-managed Savannah River Site (SRS). SRS contains soil gradients that remain co-contaminated by heavy metals from previous nuclear weapons production activities. Uranium (U) is one of the dominant contaminants within the SRS impacted soils, which can be microbially transformed into less toxic forms. We established microcosms containing strains SRS-25 and SRS-46 spiked with U and evaluated the microbially-mediated depletion with concomitant genomic and proteomic analysis. Both strains showed a rapid depletion of U; draft genome sequences revealed SRS-25 genome to be of approximately 8,152,324 bp, a G + C content of 66.5, containing a total 7604 coding sequences with 77 total RNA genes. Similarly, strain SRS-46 contained a genome size of 8,587,429 bp with a G + C content of 67.1, 7895 coding sequences, with 73 total RNA genes, respectively. An in-depth, genome-wide comparisons between strains 25, 46 and a previously isolated strain from our research (<i>Burkholderia</i> sp. strain SRS-W-2-2016), revealed a common pool of 3128 genes; many were found to be homologues to previously characterized metal resistance genes (e.g., for cadmium, cobalt, and zinc), as well as for transporter, stress/detoxification, cytochromes, and drug resistance functions. Furthermore, proteomic analysis of strains with or without U stress, revealed the increased expression of 34 proteins from strain SRS-25 and 52 proteins from strain SRS-46; similar to the genomic analyses, many of these proteins have previously been shown to function in stress response, DNA repair, protein biosynthesis and metabolism. Overall, this comparative proteogenomics study confirms the repertoire of metabolic and stress response functions likely rendering the ecological competitiveness to the isolated strains for colonization and survival in the heavy metals contaminated SRS soil habitat.

### Keywords
Uranium, Genomics, Proteomics, Burkholderia, Remediation

### Affiliations
Florida A&M University 
1Environmental Biotechnology and Genomics Laboratory, School of the Environment, Florida A&M University, Tallahassee, FL- 32307, USA

### Submitter
Ashvini  Chauhan 

### Lab Head
Dr Ashvini Chauhan
1Environmental Biotechnology and Genomics Laboratory, School of the Environment, Florida A&M University, Tallahassee, FL- 32307, USA


