### Accession
PXD001598

### Title
Elevated gpNMB in type 1 Gaucher disease patients

### Description
Gaucher disease (GD) is characterized by the presence of glucosylceramide-laden macrophages (Gaucher cells) as the result of deficiency in the lysosomal hydrolase glucocerebrosidase (GBA). Non-neuronopathic type 1 GD is effectively treated by infusions with macrophage-targeted recombinant glucocerebrosidase. We here report how LC-MSE analysis of the proteome of laser-dissected splenic Gaucher cells revealed high expression of several proteins amongst which was gpNMB. This was confirmed by histochemistry and RNA quantification.  Macrophages produce gpNMB as membrane protein but release soluble fragments. In plasma of symptomatic Gaucher patients (n=59) soluble gpNMB was next found to be on average 25-fold increased prior to treatment, without overlap with control values, (control mean: 20 ng/ml; range 11-34 ng/ml vs. GD mean: 495 ng/ml; range: 137-1283 ng/ml).

### Sample Protocol
Laser microdissection of Gaucher cells. From frozen spleen stored at -80°C, 10 μm cryostat sections were prepared. One section was stained with hematoxylin and examined microscopically in order to detect tissue areas of interest for microdissection. Corresponding consecutive tissue sections were mounted on a microscope slide coated with a membrane (polyethylene naphtalate (PEN) Zeiss/Palm, Bernried, Germany) and stored at -80°C. Comparison of stained and unstained tissue sections revealed that hematoxylin staining had no influence on the quantitative protein measurements and identification using LC-MSe. Tissue areas were cut using a Veritas™ Microdissection System (Arcturus Molecular Devices, CA, USA), as described earlier [21]. Slides were stained for 1 minute with hematoxylin. The dissected tissue samples contained at least 90% macrophages, about 100,000 cells from each sample.   Proteome analysis. Cells were denatured in 20 μl 0,1% RapiGest detergent solution (Waters Corp., Milford, MA) and heated at 80°C for 15 minutes. After centrifugation at 1750 x g for 10 min, the supernatants were collected. Several tests were performed to determine optimal lysis conditions. In addition a small piece of frozen Gaucher or control spleen was homogenized in 30 µl water (HPLC-grade, Biosolve, the Netherlands) and debris was removed by centrifugation. The protein concentration of the different homogenates was determined by BCA-assay according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo-scientific, the Netherlands). Subsequently Rapigest-SF was added to the whole-spleen homogenates to a final concentration of 0.1% and ammonium bicarbonate to all homogenates to a final concentration of 50 mM. Protein disulfide bridges were reduced and alkylated by subsequent incubation with 10 mM dithiothreitol and 25 mM iodoaceteamide. Tryptic digestion was initiated by the addition of trypsin (gold mass spectrometry grade, Promega) in a ratio by weight of 1:100 (protease: protein) and overnight incubation at 37°. Following digestion breakdown of the acid-labile Rapigest SF was achieved by addition of trifluoroaceticacid according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The protein composition was analysed by LC-MSE, a mass spectrometric procedure allowing identification and quantification of proteins without the need of labeling [22]. For this purpose, samples were centrifuged for 10 minutes at 14000xg and ~0.5 µg was loaded onto a NanoAcquity system (Waters Corporation) equipped with a Bridged Ethyl Hybrid C18 1.7 µm, 15-cm x 150-µm analytical reversed phase column (Waters Corporation) and operated at a column flow rate of 1 µl/min and separated by gradient conditions as described before [22]. Analysis of tryptic peptides was performed using a Synapt MS mass spectrometer (Waters Corporation, Manchester, UK) with the operating and experimental conditions as previously described [22]. Accurate mass precursor and fragment ion LC-MS data were collected in data independent LC-MSE mode of acquisition [23, 24].

### Data Protocol
Continuum LC-MS data were processed and searched using Protein Lynx Global SERVER version 2.3 (Waters Corporation) with search parameters as described before [22]. Briefly, tryptic cleavage rules were applied, allowing for 1 missed cleavage, in addition carbomidomethylation was set as fixed modification of cysteine residues while methionine oxidation was set as variable modification. Protein identifications were obtained searching the human SwissProt entries of an UniProt database (release 13.2) that was modified to include N-terminal processing of proteins using the protein maturation device software [25] while estimations of false positive rates of protein identifications were obtained by simultaneous searches in a reversed version of the same database generated by ProteinLynx GlobalSERVER. Absolute amounts (ng) of proteins were estimated using the combined intensity of the 3 best ionizing peptides and the universal response factor of the mass spectrometer supplied by the manufacturer [26].  Data was exported as a csv-file for further analysis. Robust criteria were applied for quantification. Patient and control samples were run in triplicate and only proteins that were identified in more than one run were reported. False positive identification rates per protein were calculated taking into account the criteria mentioned above and were ~0.38%. In order to normalize for differences in protein concentration between samples loaded each run was normalized on total protein amount based on the BCA-assay performed on each homogenate. The resulting value reported is ng of protein per µg of total protein (ng/µg). Proteins that were only identified in either Gaucher or control samples were required to be detected in all three replicate runs, and to be at least ten times above the signal intensity of  least abundant protein detected in order to be reported.

### Publication Abstract
Gaucher disease is caused by inherited deficiency of lysosomal glucocerebrosidase. Proteome analysis of laser-dissected splenic Gaucher cells revealed increased amounts of glycoprotein nonmetastatic melanoma protein B (gpNMB). Plasma gpNMB was also elevated, correlating with chitotriosidase and CCL18, which are established markers for human Gaucher cells. In Gaucher mice, gpNMB is also produced by Gaucher cells. Correction of glucocerebrosidase deficiency in mice by gene transfer or pharmacological substrate reduction reverses gpNMB abnormalities. In conclusion, gpNMB acts as a marker for glucosylceramide-laden macrophages in man and mouse and gpNMB should be considered as candidate biomarker for Gaucher disease in treatment monitoring.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Gaucher disease, Lcmse, Gpnmb, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer.
University Clinic Heidelberg.
German Cancer Research Center.
Im Neuenheimer Feld 581
Heidelberg, Germany.
Clinical Proteomics Facility, Medical Biochemistry, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam

### Submitter
Gertjan Kramer

### Lab Head
Dr J.M.F.G. Aerts
Clinical Proteomics Facility, Medical Biochemistry, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam


