### Accession
PXD033711

### Title
TAG-TMTpro, a hyperplexing quantitative approach for high-throughput proteomic studies

### Description
Isobaric labeling is the most widely used multiplexing quantitative approach in proteomic studies, enabling the comparison of up to 18 samples in a single MS analysis. Expanding the multiplexing capacity is of great necessity for high-throughput proteomic studies. Herein, we establish a novel TAG-TMTpro approach by introducing Ala or Gly residues to peptides prior to TMTpro labeling, which is able to triple the quantitative capacity of TMTpro. We systematically evaluated the Boc-Ala-OSu and Boc-Gly-OSu reaction and optimized the conditions for labeling, side-product elimination and Boc deprotection. We validated the identification and quantification performance using E. coli and HeLa cell lysates. We demonstrated that the TAG-TMTpro approach resulted in good identification reproducibility and reliable quantitative accuracy. The TAG-TMTpro is able to triple the multiplexing capacity of TMTpro reagents, and is a versatile quantitative approach for high-throughput proteomic studies.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction, Reduction and Alkylation. The harvested cell pellets were resuspended with lysis buffer (8 M guanidine hydrochloride, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), and 10 mM DTT). The slurry solution was boiled at 95 °C for 10 min and then sonicated for 5 min (5 s sonication and 2 s intervals) in ice incubation. After sonication, the sample was centrifuged at 20,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C, and the supernatant was collected. The protein concentration was determined by the Bradford protein assay. The cell lysates were incubated for 5 min at 95 °C for reduction and then for 45 min at 25 °C with 100 mM acrylamide for alkylation.  Protein Digestion.  The FASP method was adopted for protein digestion as previous described. The protein samples were trans-ferred to Amicon Ultra-4 filters and centrifuge at 4,800 g for three-time buffer displacement, and then dissolved with digestion buffer (10 mM TEAB, pH 8.0). Trypsin was added at a ratio of enzyme/protein (w/w) as 1:50 and the solutions were incubated at 37 °C for overnight digestion. After digestion, the solution was collected by centrifugation and the filter was washed twice with 15% ACN. Finally, the filtrates were pooled and vacuum-dried in a SpeedVac.  Boc-Ala-OSu and Boc-Gly-OSu Reaction.  The vacuum-dried peptides were dissolved using 200 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) (pH 9.0) to reach a final concentration of 5 µg/µL. Then the peptides solution was incubated with 25 mM Boc-Ala-OSu or Boc-Gly-OSu reagents (dissolved using anhydrous ACN) at 25 °C for 2 h. After incubating with 2 M hydroxylamine at 25 °C for 1 h, the Boc group was removed by 2 M HCl at 25 °C for 2 h. The product solutions were vacuum-dried to remove ACN, and then desalted using home-made C18 micro-columns and vacuum-dried.  TMTpro Labeling Reaction.  The peptide samples were labeled with TMTpro reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) as previ-ous described with several modification. The TMTpro reagents (dissolved using anhydrous ACN) were added to the peptide solu-tions (dissolved using 200 mM HEPES, pH 8.5) to reach a ratio of peptide/reagent as 1:2 (w/w), and the solutions were incubated at 25 °C for 1 h. The excess TMTpro reagents were quenched with 0.5% hydroxylamine at 25 °C for 15 min. The solutions were vacu-um-dried to remove ACN, and then desalted using home-made C18 micro-columns and vacuum-dried.  Basic pH Reverse-phase Liquid Chromatography (bRPLC) Fractionation.  bRPLC fractionation was carried out on a Gemini NX-C18 column (3 μm, 110 Å, 2.0 mm i.d. ×150 mm, Phenomenex, USA) using Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The bRPLC solvent A was 10 mM NH4HCO3, solvent B was 80% ACN containing 10 mM NH4HCO3. A total of 550 μg of the dried peptides were dissolved using bRPLC solvent A and then loaded onto the column. The flow rate was set as 150 μL/min. The gradient was set as follows: 0% B for 5 min, 0-40% B in 80 min, 40-100% B in 5 min, 100% B for 5 min, 100-0% B in 5 min, and 0% B for 7 min. Eluates from 7.0 to 95.0 min were mixed into 40 fractions, and completely vacuum-dried. The dried samples were stored at -20 °C.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an in-house Mascot Server (version 2.7, Matrix Science). Human da-tabase (20200321, 20365 sequences) and E. coli database (20200904, 4391 sequences) was downloaded from Uni-Prot. Data were searched using the following parameters: trypsin/P as the enzyme; up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed; 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS and 0.6 Da for MS/MS fragment ions; propionamidation on cysteine as fixed modification; oxidation on methionine as variable modification. Sample-specific parameters were set as fol-lows: for TMTpro, A-TMTpro, and G-TMTpro labeled samples, the TMTpro, A-TMTpro, and G-TMTpro modifi-cation on N-term and lysine were set as fixed modification, respectively. As for reporter ion quantification, the intensi-ties were extracted using TMTpro/A-TMTpro/G-TMTpro 18-plex quantification method (most confident centroid peak integration with a tolerance of 20 ppm, mass analyze of FTMS, MS order of MS3, activation type of HCD, and collision energy of 0-1000). The incorporated Percolator in Proteome Discoverer was used to validate the search results and only the hits with FDR ≤ 0.01 were accepted for dis-cussion.

### Publication Abstract
Isobaric labeling is the most widely used multiplexing quantitative approach in proteomic studies, enabling the comparison of up to 18 samples in a single MS analysis. Expanding the multiplexing capacity is of great necessity for high-throughput proteomic studies. Herein, we establish a novel TAG-TMTpro approach by introducing Ala or Gly residues to peptides prior to TMTpro labeling, which is able to triple the quantitative capacity of TMTpro. We systematically evaluated the Boc-Ala-OSu and Boc-Gly-OSu reaction and optimized the conditions for labeling, side-product elimination, and Boc deprotection. We validated the identification and quantification performance using <i>E. coli</i> and HeLa cell lysates. We demonstrated that the TAG-TMTpro approach resulted in good identification reproducibility and reliable quantitative accuracy. The TAG-TMTpro is able to triple the multiplexing capacity of TMTpro reagents and is a versatile quantitative approach for high-throughput proteomic studies. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD033711.

### Keywords
Tmtpro labeling, Proteomics, Multiplexing quantitative approach

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China

### Submitter
Zhen Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Xumin Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China


