### Accession
PXD013718

### Title
Degradome of soluble ADAM10 and ADAM17 metalloproteases

### Description
Disintegrin and metalloproteinases ADAM10 and ADAM17 can release the extracellular region of a variety of membrane-bound proteins including cytokines, adhesion molecules, growth factors and receptors, important for many biological functions (ectodomain shedding).. So far, substrate identification for ADAM10 and ADAM17 focused exclusively on their membrane-anchored forms and their function as sheddases.  With ADAM8 we now  describe the first protease capable of releasing the ADAM17 ectodomain. Based on these findings, we investigated whether the soluble ectodomains of ADAM10 and ADAM17 still exhibit shedding activity and to determine their soluble protein substrate pool . To address this, a mass spectrometry-based N-terminomics approach (TAILS) was used to identify potential targets of soluble ADAM10 and ADAM17 (sADAM10/17) within the secretome of the murine cardiomyocyte cell line HL-1. We identified almost 140 protein cleavage events in total and 45 common substrates for both sADAM10 and sADAM17.  Further in-vitro studies confirmed fibronectin, cystatin C, sN-cadherin, PCPE-1 as well as sAPP as direct substrates of soluble ADAM10 and/or ADAM17. Overall, we present the first degradome study for sADAM10 and sADAM17, thereby introducing a new regulation mode of the proteolytic activity of these essential proteases within the protease web.

### Sample Protocol
a) TMT 6-plex labeling of protein termini Proteins were denatured by the addition of 8M guanidinium hydrochloride to a final concentration of 2M and following incubation at 65°C for 15min. Proteins were subsequently reduced using 1mM TCEP for 45min and alkylated using 5mM iodoacetamide for 30min in the dark. Next 200ug of proteins from each sample was subjected to TMT labeling using 1.6mg of TMT reagent per channel in 50% DMSO (final concentration) for 30min at room temperature. The labeling strategy was set up as follows: control_1(126), control_2(127), ADAM10_1(128), ADAM10_2(129), ADAM17_1(130), ADAM17_2(131). The reaction was quenched with 100mM ammonium bicarbonate for 15min and the samples were combined. Next a protein precipitation using ice-cold acetone/methanol (8:1) was performed at -80°C overnight. Precipitated proteins were pelleted at 4°C at 14000g for 30min. The pellet was washed twice with ice-cold methanol and air-dried for 20min. Proteins were resuspended in 8M guanidinium hydrochloride and 100mM HEPES and subsequently diluted to 0.5M guanidinium hydrochloride for tryptic digestion.  b) Tryptic digestion 20ug of trypsin in 100mM HEPES were added to the combined sample (1.2mg of total protein) and digestion was performed at 37°C overnight. Next, the solution was acidified using formic acid and peptides were bound on a C18 Sep Pak column. After washing with 5% formic acid, elution was performed using 50% acetonitrile (100ul) followed by two times 100% acetonitrile (100ul). Peptides were then lyophilized in a vacuum centrifuge. An aliquot of the sample was checked at this point to ensure equal protein input and labeling efficiency.    c) Elimination of tryptic N-termini Peptides were reconstituted in 1ml 100mM HEPES pH 7 and N-terminal peptides were enriched by the addition of a dendritic polyglycerol aldehyde polymer that reacts with free N-termini generated by the previous tryptic digestion. The 6mg of the dialyzed polymer were added to the sample and the coupling reaction was started by the addition of 30mM sodium cyanoborohydride (final concentration). The sample was incubated at 37°C overnight. The reaction was quenched by the addition of 100mM ammonium bicarbonate. Separation of the N-terminal peptides from the polymer was achieved by filtration using 3kDa cut-off ultrafiltration tubes. The retained polymer was washed once with 100mM ammonium bicarbonate and the filtrates were combined. The filtrate was acidified using 10% TFA to pH2 and purification of the peptides was performed using the C18 Sep Pak column system (see above).       d) LC-MS/MS analysis  On two technical replicates, LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Dionex U3000 nanoHPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (both from Thermo Scientific). Briefly, the LC-MS/MS parameters were as follows: 5 µL were injected and loaded on a trap column (Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18, 10 mm × 300 µm, 3 µm, 100 Å, Dionex). Trapping and desalting was performed for 3 min with 3% ACN/0.1% TFA at a flow-rate of 30 µL/min. separation was performed using an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 analytical column (15 cm × 75 µm, 3 µm, 100 Å, Dionex) with a flow-rate of 300 nL/min and following eluents: A (0.05% FA) and B (80% ACN/0.04% FA); linear gradient 5-50% B in 180 min, 40-95% B in 5 min, 95% B for 10 min, 95-5% B in 1 min and equilibrating at 5% B for 11 min. Ionization was performed with 1.5 kV spray voltage applied on a liquid junction emitter (10 µm tip size, New Objective, Woburn, MA) with the source temperature set to 250°C. MS data were acquired from 5 to 205 min with MS full scans between 300 and 1,800 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400. The 15 most intense precursors with charge states ≥2+ were subjected to fragmentation with HCD with NCE of 32.5; isolation width of 2 m/z. Dynamic exclusion for 90 s was applied with a precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm. Lock mass correction was performed based on the polysiloxane contaminant signal of 445.120025 m/z.  Additional wash runs were performed between samples from gel bands to reduce carry over while cytochrome C was used to monitor mass accuracy and LC quality control.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS-spectra were searched with SequestHT against a database using Proteome Discoverer containing the proteins of interest as well as common contaminants. Static modifications applied for searches were carbamidomethylation on cysteins. Dimethylation of lysines and peptide N-termini, oxidation on methionines and 18O C-terminal labeling were set as variable modifications. Spectra were searched with semi-enzyme specificity for trypsin and full enzyme specificity for chymotrypsin. A MS mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a MS/MS tolerance of 0.04 Da was used.  Peptide grouping was applied to group Peptides Spectrum Matches (PSMs) with the same modification under the same peptide. Peptides were identified using a false discovery rate ≤ 0.01 (high). Ion intensities, as well as peptide spectral match counts, for all identified peptides were extracted from the data and N-terminally dimethylated as well as peptides lacking the C-terminal 18O label were considered to indicate a possible sADAM10 or sADAM17 non-prime cleavage site if they displayed a strongly higher abundance in the sADAM10/17 treated samples (>8 fold change).

### Publication Abstract
Disintegrin and metalloproteinases (ADAMs) 10 and 17 can release the extracellular part of a variety of membrane-bound proteins via ectodomain shedding important for many biological functions. So far, substrate identification focused exclusively on membrane-anchored ADAM10 and ADAM17. However, besides known shedding of ADAM10, we identified ADAM8 as a protease capable of releasing the ADAM17 ectodomain. Therefore, we investigated whether the soluble ectodomains of ADAM10/17 (sADAM10/17) exhibit an altered substrate spectrum compared to their membrane-bound counterparts. A mass spectrometry-based N-terminomics approach identified 134 protein cleavage events in total and 45 common substrates for sADAM10/17 within the secretome of murine cardiomyocytes. Analysis of these cleavage sites confirmed previously identified amino acid preferences. Further in vitro studies verified fibronectin, cystatin C, sN-cadherin, PCPE-1 as well as sAPP as direct substrates of sADAM10 and/or sADAM17. Overall, we present the first degradome study for sADAM10/17, thereby introducing a new mode of proteolytic activity within the protease web.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Metalloproteases, Tails

### Affiliations
Systematic Proteomics & Bioanalytics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, University of Kiel, Kiel,   Germany
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Andreas Tholey
Systematic Proteomics & Bioanalytics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, University of Kiel, Kiel,   Germany


