### Accession
PXD035236

### Title
NUPR1 inhibits hyperPARylation-associated cell death

### Description
Nuclear Protein 1 (NUPR1) is a nuclear intrinsically disordered protein of 82 amino acids that plays an important role in stress response and in cancer development. The project was aimed at identifying binding partners of NUPR1 in MiaPaCa-2 cells, in control and after stress condition: glucose starvation during 24h. Lysates from MiaPaCa-2 cells (transfected with NUPR1-Flag or NUPR1-GFP) were used for immunoprecipitation, performed with agarose beads coated with anti-Flag or anti-GFP antibodies. After immunoprecipitation, the eluted proteins were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
MiaPaCa-2 cells, expressing Flag-NUPR1 or GFP-NUPR1 or their controls, were plated in 10 cm2 dishes. When MiaPaCa-2 cells expressing Flag-NUPR1 or GFP-NUPR1 reached 70% confluence, they were treated for 24 hours (with or without glucose starvation) and lysed. Equal amounts of total protein were used to incubate with 30 μL of anti-Flag M2-coated beads (MilliporeSigma, F3165) or GFP-Trap Agarose (Chromotek, GTA-10). Beads were then washed 3 times, and proteins were eluted using ammonium hydrogen carbonate buffer containing 0.1 μg/μL of Flag peptide (MilliporeSigma, F3290). Eluted proteins were collected and loaded on NuPAGE™ 4–12% Bis–tris acrylamide gels according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen, Life Technologies). Running of samples was stopped as soon as proteins stacked as a single band. Protein containing bands were stained with Thermo Scientific Imperial Blue, cut from the gel, and following reduction and iodoacetamide alkylation, digested with high sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Extracted peptides were concentrated before mass spectrometry analysis.  Mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were reconstituted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 2% acetonitrile and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem MS (MS/MS) using a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap online with a nanoLC Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific™, San Jose, CA). For each biological sample, 5 microliters corresponding to 33 % of digested sample were injected in triplicate on the system. After pre-concentration and washing of the sample on a Acclaim PepMap 100 column (C18, 2 cm × 100 μm i.d. 100 A pore size, 5 μm particle size), peptides were separated on a LC EASY-Spray column (C18, 50 cm × 75 μm i.d., 100 A, 2 µm, 100A particle size) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a two steps linear gradient (2-22% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 100 min and 22-32% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 20 min). For peptides ionization in the EASYSpray source, spray voltage was set at 1.9 kV and the capillary temperature at 250 °C. All samples were measured in a data dependent acquisition mode. Each run was preceded by a blank MS run in order to monitor system background. The peptide masses were measured in a survey full scan (scan range 375-1500 m/z, with 70 K FWHM resolution at m/z=400, target AGC value of 3.00×106 and maximum injection time of 100 ms). Following the high-resolution full scan in the Orbitrap, the 10 most intense data-dependent precursor ions were successively fragmented in HCD cell and measured in Orbitrap (normalized collision energy of 25 %, activation time of 10 ms, target AGC value of 1.00×105, intensity threshold 1.00×104 maximum injection time 100 ms, isolation window 2 m/z, 17.5 K FWHM resolution, scan range 200 to 2000 m/z). Dynamic exclusion was implemented with a repeat count of 1 and exclusion duration of 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files generated from mass spectrometry analysis were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 (Thermo fisher Scientific) to search against the human protein proteome of the swissprot database (20,259 entries, extracted from Uniprot on January 2018). Database search with Mascot were done using the following settings: a maximum of two trypsin miss cleavage allowed, methionine oxidation and protein N-terminus acetylation as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. A peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da were allowed for search analysis. Only peptides with high stringency Mascot scores were selected for protein identification. False discovery rate was set to 1% for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic, cellular and biochemical analysis of the stress protein NUPR1 reveals that it binds to PARP1 into the nucleus and inhibits PARP1 activity in vitro. Mutations on residues Ala33 or Thr68 of NUPR1 or treatment with its inhibitor ZZW-115 inhibits this effect. PARylation induced by 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) treatment is strongly enhanced by ZZW-115 and associated with a decrease of NAD<sup>+</sup>/NADH ratio and rescued by the PARP inhibitor olaparib. Cell death induced by ZZW-115 treatment of pancreas cancer-derived cells is rescued by olaparib and improved with PARG inhibitor PDD00017273. The mitochondrial catastrophe induced by ZZW-115 treatment or by genetic inactivation of NUPR1 is associated to a hyperPARylation of the mitochondria, disorganization of the mitochondrial network, mitochondrial membrane potential decrease, and with increase of superoxide production, intracellular level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and cytosolic levels of Ca<sup>2+</sup>. These features are rescued by olaparib or NAD<sup>+</sup> precursor nicotinamide mononucleotide in a dose-dependent manner and partially by antioxidants treatments. In conclusion, inactivation of NUPR1 induces a hyperPARylation, which in turn, induces a mitochondrial catastrophe and consequently a cell death through a non-canonical Parthanatos, since apoptosis inducing-factor (AIF) is not translocated out of the mitochondria.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Interactome, Pancreatic cancer, Nupr1

### Affiliations
Marseille Proteomic, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes, 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France 
Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, CRCM INSERM U1068 - Equipe de J.L. Iovanna 163 avenue de Luminy, Parc scientifique de Luminy, Case 915 13288 Marseille Cedex 9 FRANCE Tel : (+33) 4 91 82 88 31

### Submitter
AUDEBERT Stephane

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Santofimia Patricia
Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, CRCM INSERM U1068 - Equipe de J.L. Iovanna 163 avenue de Luminy, Parc scientifique de Luminy, Case 915 13288 Marseille Cedex 9 FRANCE Tel : (+33) 4 91 82 88 31


