### Accession
PXD035204

### Title
R. etli CFN42 proteomes showed isoenzymes in free-living and symbiosis with a different transcriptional regulation inferred from a transcriptional regulatory network

### Description
Abstract A comparative proteomic study at 6 h of growth in minimal medium (MM) and bacteroids at 18 days of symbiosis of Rhizobium etli CFN42 with the Phaseolus vulgaris leguminous plant was performed. A gene ontology classification of proteins in MM and bacteroid, showed 31 and 10 pathways with higher or equal than 30% and 20% of proteins with respect to genome content per pathway, respectively. These pathways were for energy and environmental compound metabolism, contributing to understand how Rhizobium is adapted to the different conditions. Metabolic maps based on orthology of the protein profiles, showed 101 and 74 functional homologous proteins in the MM and bacteroid profiles, respectively, which were grouped in 34 different isoenzymes showing a great impact in metabolism by covering 60 metabolic pathways in MM and symbiosis. Taking advantage of coexpression of transcriptional regulators (TF´s) in the profiles, by selection of genes whose matrices were clustered with matrices of TF´s, TRN´s were deduced by the first time for these metabolic stages. In these clustered TF-MM and clustered TF-bacteroid networks, containing 654 and 246 proteins, including 93 and 46 TFs, respectively,  showing valuable information of the TF´s and their regulated genes with high stringency. Isoenzymes were specific for adaptation to the different conditions and a different transcriptional regulation for MM and bacteroid was deduced. The parameters of the TRNs of these expected biological networks and biological networks of E. coli and B. subtilis segregate from the random theoretical networks. These are useful data to design experiments on TF gene–target relationships for bases to construct a TRN.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation The cell pellets from both free-living bacteria and bacteroid were lysed in a solution containing 7 M urea, 2% CHAPS, 1 mM DTT in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. Cells were resuspended in the lysis buffer and sonicated on the ice during 15 microns. Samples were incubated with an additional 20 mM DTT for 30 min at 40 ºC to completely reduce disulfide bridges. Cysteine residues were alkylated with 50 mM IAA for 30 min at room temperature in darkness. After centrifugation, the proteins were collected in the supernatant. Proteins were precipitated overnight with cold ethanol (9 volumes) and washed with a 90% ethanol solution.  The precipitate was dissolved in sodium deoxycholate SDC 0.5%, SDS 0.5%, in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB). Proteins were submitted to a chemical acetylation reaction of all lysine residues as previously described (Gil et al., 2017; Gil and Encarnación-Guevara, 2022). Fully acetylated proteins were dissolved in AmBiC 50 mM, SDC 0.5%, and digested by adding trypsin to a ratio of 1:50 (enzyme:protein), and the reaction was incubated for 16 h at 37 ºC. SDC was removed with ethyl acetate acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) as previously reported (Gil et al., 2017; Gil and Encarnación-Guevara, 2022). The peptide mixture was dried on a Speed-Vac and stored at -80 ºC until MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS and data analysis Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA in water and loaded on an RSLC nano UPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex) coupled to a Q-Exactive high-resolution mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The chromatographic conditions, as well as the MS acquisition parameters, were as previously described (Gil et al., 2017). The analysis was performed at the Proteomics Core Facility, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne in Switzerland.  Raw data were processed for peptide and protein identification/quantification using the MaxQuant platform. The database search parameters were as follows: Trypsin/R was selected as the digestion enzyme, up to two missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethylcysteine and acetylated lysine were set as fix modifications, oxidized methionine was considered variable. The database used for protein identification was released in 2006 (González et al., 2006) and is publicly available through the UniProt repository. Three biological replicates of each condition were included in the study. Proteins and peptides were identified with an FDR of 1% based on the target-decoy strategy integrated in the software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Transcriptional, Network, Lc-ms/ms, Rhizobium, Regulation

### Affiliations
Associated Researcher
Academic

### Submitter
Hermenegildo  Taboada

### Lab Head
Dr Sergio Manuel Encarnación Guevara
Associated Researcher


