### Accession
PXD030407

### Title
Proteomic characterisation of triple negative breast cancer cells following CDK4/6 inhibition

### Description
CDK4/6 inhibitor, Palbociclib, has shown a high success in breast cancer subtypes however it is often accompanied by a dependency on mutation status of cell lines. Consequently, there has been speculation on the breast cancer subtypes which should be offered treatment with specific CDK4/6 inhibitors and the response that can be expected. A common observation has been the induction of a cell programme known as "senescence" whereby cells experience a complete halt in mitosis, however, remaining metabolically active. Therapy-induced senescence markers and its effect on the tumour microenvironment as well as the diversity of this cell state remain unappreciated. In the following proteomics, phosphoproteomics and secretome datasets we focus on MDA-MB-231 cells, a triple negative cell line, to better understand the senescence-like cell state which arises after treatment. Ultimately, the dataset encompasses the population that arises upon Palbociclib treatment and highlights potential signatures and biomarkers of the cell state which could provide information on the use of CDK4/6 inhibitors in triple negative breast cancer subtypes.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomics analysis of cell lines and secretome Cell pellets were lysed in 150 uL lysis buffer of 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 10% isopropanol, 50 mM NaCl and Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (100X) (Thermo, 78442) on ice, assisted with pulsed probe sonication for 15 sec and followed by heating at 90 °C for 5 min and re-sonicated for 5 sec. Protein concentration was measured with the Quick Start™ Bradford Protein Assay (Bio-Rad) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Protein aliquots of 60 g were reduced with 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP) for 1 h at 60 °C and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in dark. Proteins were digested overnight with trypsin at final concentration 75ng/uL (Pierce) and peptides were labelled with the TMTpro reagents (Thermo) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The pooled sample was acidified with 1% formic acid to remove precipitated SDC by centrifugation and supernatant was SpeedVac dried. For the secretome analysis, the collected culture media were concentrated with the Amicon Ultra 15mL 3K MWCO  ultrafiltration devices, the proteins were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and washed with cold acetone. Protein pellets were solubilized in lysis buffer and processed as above but using the TMT10plex reagents.  High-pH Reversed-Phase peptide fractionation and phosphopeptide enrichment For the analysis of cell pellets and secretome, the TMT labelled peptides were fractionated with high-pH Reversed-Phase (RP) chromatography using the XBridge C18 column (2.1 x 150 mm, 3.5 m, Waters) on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC system. Mobile phase A was 0.1% v/v ammonium hydroxide and mobile phase B was acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v ammonium hydroxide. The peptides were fractionated at 0.2 mL/min with the following gradient: 5 mins at 5% B, up to 12% B in 3 min, for 32 min gradient to 35% B, gradient to 80% B in 5 min, isocratic for 5 mins and re-equilibration to 5% B. Fractions were collected every 42 sec, combined in 30 (cell pellets) and 12 (secretome) fractions and SpeedVac dried. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed for 24 fractions (cell pellets) with the High-Select™ Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo) using a customized protocol in a well plate array format. A volume of 50 uL resin/buffer was transferred on top of 10 uL filter tips that were fitted on a 96-well plate using a tip rack adapter. The resin was washed three times with 40 uL wash/binding solution and centrifugation at 500 g for 1 min. Peptides were reconstituted in 30 uL wash/binding solution and were loaded onto the tip-columns with the resin. After 30 min, the flow-through from three washes with wash/binding solution were collected in a clean 96-well plate with centrifugation at 500 g for 1 min each time. Phosphopeptides were eluted twice with 40 uL elution buffer in a clean 96-well plate with centrifugation at 500 g for 1 min, transferred in glass vials (Waters, P/N 186005669CV) and SpeedVac dried. The flow-through solutions were dried and kept for total proteome analysis.  LC-MS analysis LC-MS analysis was performed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the Orbitrap Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 m × 2 cm C18, 5 m, trapping column at flow rate 10 uL/min. Samples were analysed with the EASY-Spray C18 capillary column (75 m × 50 cm, 2 m) at 50 °C. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The separation method was: for 90 min gradient 5%-38% B, for 10 min up to 95% B, for 5 min isocratic at 95% B, re-equilibration to 5% B in 5 min, for 10 min isocratic at 5% B at flow rate 300 nL/min. MS scans were acquired in the range of 375-1,500 m/z with mass resolution of 120 k, AGC 4×105 and max IT 50 ms. Precursors were selected with the top speed mode in 3 sec cycles and isolated for HCD fragmentation with quadrupole isolation width 0.7 Th. Collision energy was 36% (TMTpro) or 38% (TMT10plex) with AGC 1×105 and max IT 86 ms at 50 k resolution. Targeted precursors were dynamically excluded for further fragmentation for 45 seconds with 7 ppm mass tolerance. The phosphopeptide enriched samples were analysed as above with the following differences: 60 min gradient 5%-38% B, HCD MS2 with max IT 100 ms and 30 sec dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Database search and quantification The mass spectra were analysed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) with the SequestHT search engine for peptide identification and quantification. The precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were 20 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum 2 miss-cleavages. TMTpro (cell pellets) or TMT6plex (secretome) at N-terminus/K and Carbamidomethyl at C were selected as static modifications. Oxidation of M, Deamidation of N/Q as well as Phosphorylation of S/T/Y for the IMAC samples only were selected as dynamic modifications. Spectra were searched against reviewed UniProt human protein entries, peptide confidence was estimated with the Percolator node and peptides were filtered at q-value<0.01 based on decoy database search. The reporter ion quantifier node included a TMT quantification method with an integration window tolerance of 15 ppm. Only peptides with average reporter signal-to-noise>3 were used and phosphorylation localization probabilities were estimated with the IMP-ptmRS node.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phopho, Tmt, Secretome, Ms/ms

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Jyoti Choudhary
The Institute of Cancer Research


