### Accession
PXD016457

### Title
Role of CHR4 during floral transition

### Description
Several pathways conferring environmental flowering responses in Arabidopsis converge on developmental processes that mediate floral transition in the shoot apical meristem. Many characterized mutations disrupt these environmental responses, but downstream developmental processes have been more refractory to mutagenesis. We constructed a quintuple mutant impaired in several environmental pathways and showed that it possesses severely reduced flowering responses to changes in photoperiod and ambient temperature. RNA-seq analysis of the quintuple mutant showed that the expression of genes encoding gibberellin biosynthesis enzymes and transcription factors involved in the age pathway correlates with flowering. Mutagenesis of the quintuple mutant generated two late-flowering mutants, quintuple ems 1 (qem1) and qem2. The mutated genes were identified by isogenic mapping and transgenic complementation. The qem1 mutant was an allele of ga20ox2, confirming the importance of gibberellin for flowering in the absence of environmental responses. By contrast, the qem2 mutation is in CHROMATIN REMODELING 4 (CHR4), which has not been genetically implicated in floral induction. Using co-immunoprecipitation, RNA-seq and ChIP-seq, we show that CHR4 interacts with transcription factors involved in floral meristem identity and affects expression of key floral regulators. We conclude that CHR4 mediates the response to endogenous flowering pathways in the inflorescence meristem to promote floral identity.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and LC-MS/MS data acquisition.  Three independent biological replicates for each genotype (gCHR4-Venus and p35S-YFP) were generated. For each sample, 1 g of plant material was used per biological replicate. For inflorescence tissue, plants were grown in LD condition at 21°C while for obtain SAM-enriched tissue samples material was collected from plants growing in SD at 21 °C for 5 weeks (5–6 h after lights on). Using jeweler’s forceps, leaves with elongated petiole were removed to obtain SAM-enriched tissue. Nuclei were isolated following a previously published protocol (Kaufmann et al., 2010). Samples were sonicated in water bath Bioruptor (Diagenode) fourth time, 5 min each of 15 sec on and 15s off, with a 1 min incubation once between each sonication treatment. Sonicated samples were centrifuge twice at 4 °C for 10 minutes. Supernatant was transferred to a clean tube. 40 µL of GFP-trap Agarose beads from Chromotek (gta-20) and 10 µL of Benzonase were added. Samples were incubated at 4 °C for 2 hours. After incubation GFP-trap beads were washed 4 times with 1 ml of Wash buffer (750 of 5M NaCl, 1.25 mL of Tris-HCl ph 7.4 in 25 mL of H2O). Immunoprecipitated samples enriched with GFP-trap beads were submitted to an on-bead digestion. In brief, dry beads were re-dissolved in 25 µL digestion buffer 1 (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 2M urea, 1mM DTT, 5 µg/µL trypsin) and incubated for 30 min at 30 °C in a Thermomixer with 400 rpm. Next, beads were pelleted and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube. Digestion buffer 2 (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 2M urea, 5 mM CAA) was added to the beads, after mixing the beads were pelleted, the supernatant was collected and combined with the previous one. The combined supernatants were then incubated o/n at 32 °C in a Thermomixer with 400 rpm; samples were protected from light during incubation. The digestion was stopped by adding 1 µL TFA and samples were desalted with C18 Empore disk membranes according to the StageTip protocol (Rappsilber et al., 2003).  Dried peptides were re-dissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA (10 µL) for analysis and measured without dilution. Samples were analyzed using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on 16 cm frit-less silica emitters (New Objective, 0.75 µm inner diameter), packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). Peptides (0.5 µg) were loaded on the column and eluted for 115 min using a segmented linear gradient of 5% to 95% solvent B (0 min : 5%B; 0-5 min -> 5%B; 5-65 min -> 20%B; 65-90 min ->35%B; 90-100 min -> 55%; 100-105 min ->95%, 105-115 min ->95%) (solvent A 0% ACN, 0.1% FA; solvent B 80% ACN, 0.1%FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with a TOP15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300–1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM and a target value of 3×106 ions. Precursors were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 25. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 105 ions at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM, a maximum injection time of 55 ms and a fixed first mass of m/z 100. Peptides with a charge of +1, greater than 6, or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2, dynamic exclusion for 30s prevented repeated selection of precursors.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.7.4, http://www.maxquant.org/) (Cox and Mann, 2008) with label-free quantification (LFQ) and iBAQ enabled (Tyanova et al., 2016). MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against a combined database containing the sequences from A. thaliana (TAIR10_pep_20101214; ftp://ftp.arabidopsis.org/home/tair/Proteins/TAIR10_protein_lists/) and sequences of 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%. Statistical analysis of the MaxLFQ values was carried out using Perseus (version 1.5.8.5, http://www.maxquant.org/). Quantified proteins were filtered for reverse hits and hits “identified by site” and MaxLFQ values were log2 transformed. After grouping samples by condition only those proteins were retained for the subsequent analysis that had two valid values in one of the conditions. Two-sample t-tests were performed with a permutation-based FDR of 5%. Alternatively, quantified proteins were grouped by condition and only those hits were retained that had 3 valid values in one of the conditions. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (0.3 width, 2.0 downshift, separately for each column). Volcano plots were generated in Perseus using an FDR of 1% and an S0=1. The Perseus output was exported and further processed using Excel.

### Publication Abstract
Several pathways conferring environmental flowering responses in Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>) converge on developmental processes that mediate the floral transition in the shoot apical meristem. Many characterized mutations disrupt these environmental responses, but downstream developmental processes have been more refractory to mutagenesis. Here, we constructed a quintuple mutant impaired in several environmental pathways and showed that it possesses severely reduced flowering responses to changes in photoperiod and ambient temperature. RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis of the quintuple mutant showed that the expression of genes encoding gibberellin biosynthesis enzymes and transcription factors involved in the age pathway correlates with flowering. Mutagenesis of the quintuple mutant generated two late-flowering mutants, <i>quintuple ems1</i> (<i>qem1</i>) and <i>qem2</i> The mutated genes were identified by isogenic mapping and transgenic complementation. The <i>qem1</i> mutant is an allele of the gibberellin 20-oxidase gene <i>ga20ox2</i>, confirming the importance of gibberellin for flowering in the absence of environmental responses. By contrast, <i>qem2</i> is impaired in <i>CHROMATIN REMODELING4</i> (<i>CHR4</i>), which has not been genetically implicated in floral induction. Using co-immunoprecipitation, RNA-seq, and chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing, we show that CHR4 interacts with transcription factors involved in floral meristem identity and affects the expression of key floral regulators. Therefore, CHR4 mediates the response to endogenous flowering pathways in the inflorescence meristem to promote floral identity.

### Keywords
Squamosa promoter binding protein-like family, Flowering-time, Apetala1 (ap1), Arabidopsis, Chromatin remodeling 4 (chr4), Mads-box transcription factors

### Affiliations
Plant Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Group
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research
Carl-von-Linné Weg 10
50829 Cologne
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Sara Christina Stolze

### Lab Head
Dr Hirofumi Nakagami
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany


