### Accession
PXD027463

### Title
Proteomic landscapes of inherited platelet disorders with different etiologies

### Description
Background: Inherited Platelet Disorders (IPDs) are a heterogeneous group of rare diseases that are caused by defects in early megakaryopoiesis, pro-platelet formation and/or mature platelet function. Although genomic sequencing is increasingly used to identify genetic variants underlying IPD, this technique does not disclose resulting molecular changes that impact platelet function. Proteins are the functional units that shape platelet function, however insights into how variants that cause IPDs impact platelet proteomes is limited. Objectives: To profile the platelet proteomics signatures of inherited platelet disorders.  Methods: We performed unbiased label free quantitative mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteome profiling on platelets of 34 IPD patients with variants in 13 ISTH TIER1 genes that affect different stages of platelet development. Results: In line with the phenotypical heterogeneity between IPDs, proteomes were diverse between IPDs. We observed extensive proteomic alterations in patients with a GFI1B variant and for genetic variants in genes encoding proteins that impact cytoskeletal processes (MYH9, TUBB1 and WAS). Utilizing the diversity between IPDs, we clustered protein dynamics, revealing disrupted protein-protein-complexes. This analysis furthermore grouped proteins with similar cellular- function and location, classifying mitochondrial protein constituents and identifying both known and putative novel alpha granule associated proteins. Conclusions: With this study we demonstrate a MS-based proteomics perspective to IPDs. By integrating the effects of IPDs that impact different aspects of platelet function, we dissected the biological contexts of protein alterations to gain further insights into the biology of platelet (dys)function.

### Sample Protocol
EDTA-blood was centrifuged two times for 20 min at 120g to obtain platelet-rich plasma within 24 hours of the blood draw. Next, platelets were isolated by centrifuging for 10 min at 2,000g. Platelets were washed three times with platelet wash buffer (36 mM citric acid, 103 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 5 mM EDTA, 5.6 mM D-glucose, 10% (v/v) acid-citrate-dextrose-A (Becton Dickinson, Plymouth, UK), pH 6.5) and aliquots of 1×108 platelets in 25 μl  were stored at -80°C until further processing. One aliquot of platelets was lysed in 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8). The protein concentration was determined and 5 μg of protein was used for sample preparation for mass spectrometry. Disulphide bonds were reduced with 10 mM dithiotreitol (DTT, Thermo Fisher) for 60 minutes at 20 °C, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAM, Thermo Fisher) for 45 minutes at 20 °C, and samples were  digested overnight at 20°C with MS-grade trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, US) (in a protein: trypsin ratio of 20:1).  Tryptic peptides were desalted and concentrated using Empore-C18 StageTips and eluted with 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile. Samples were dried by SpeedVac and dissolved in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Tryptic peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse phase chromatography coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nano electrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex Ion Source, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a 20 cm 75 µm-360 µm inner-outer diameter fused silica emitter (New Objective, Bremen, Germany) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The column was installed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoSystem (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) using a MicroTee union formatted for 360 μm outer diameter columns (IDEX) and a liquid junction. The spray voltage was set to 2.15 kV. Buffer A was composed of 0.5% acetic acid and buffer B of 0.5% acetic acid, 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were loaded for 17 min at 300 nl/min at 5% buffer B, equilibrated for 5 minutes at 5% buffer B (17-22 min) and eluted by increasing buffer B from 5 to 15% (22-87 min) and 15 to 38% (87-147 min), followed by a 10 min wash to 90% and a 5 min regeneration to 5%. Survey scans of peptide precursors from 400 to 1500 m/z were performed in the orbitrap at 120K resolution with a 4×105 ion count target. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed by isolation with a quadrupole with isolation window 1.6, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan mass spectrometry analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to1.5×104 and the max injection time was 35 ms. Precursors with charge state 2–7 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3s-cycles.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were acquired with XCalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and processed with MaxQuant 1.6.2.10 software. Peptides were searched against the homo sapiens Uniprot database (downloaded March 2019, 73,932 entries). An additional database sequence was added to allow for detection of a C-terminal extension event (NP_001447.2.p.Ter26487Serext101) in FLNA.11 Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was used as fixed modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was 0.01 for peptide and protein levels with a minimum length of 7 amino acids. The peptide precursor MS tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance at 0.6 Dalton. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was performed with a minimum ratio count of 2 based on unique peptides for quantification. Absolute protein abundances were estimated using intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ). MaxQuant output files were loaded in R 4.1.2 for further analysis. Proteins were filtered by “reverse” and “only identified by side” and LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and iBAQ values were log10 transformed. Proteins were considered quantified based on the presence of 100% valid values in at least one condition. Missing values were imputed by normal distribution (width = 0.3, shift = 1.8). Statistical significance was determined using moderated t-tests using the limma package.To limit potential false positives due to the applied imputation strategy, results were censored for comparisons in which all conditions contained imputed values. Gene ontology and pathway overrepresentation analyses were performed using the clusterprofilerpackage. All p-values were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. An adjusted P value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant, for proteomic analyses, a adjusted P value < 0.05 and absolute log fold change of >1 was considered statistically significant and relevant. Protein dynamics were evaluated by means of weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) using a soft-power of 7 signed network, modules were defined by dynamic tree cut. Correlation between data and disorder specific theoretical protein profiles was performed using Pearson correlation applying a coefficient threshold of 0.7

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Platelets, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Hematology, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam
Department of Molecular Hematology, Sanquin Research

### Submitter
Arie Hoogendijk

### Lab Head
Dr M. van den Biggelaar
Department of Molecular Hematology, Sanquin Research


