### Accession
PXD006410

### Title
Affinity chromatography-based identification of sRNA protein partners in Rhizobia

### Description
This project aims to identify novel protein partners of conserved trans-sRNAs in the α-proteobacterium Sinorhizobium meliloti. Trans-sRNAs (AbcR2, NfeR1 and EcpR1) were tagged at their 5’ ends with the MS2 aptamer. To identify the proteins associated with the trans-sRNAs we: i) expressed and purified the MS2 coat protein fused to maltose-binding protein (MS2-MBP); ii) purified MS2 tagged sRNAs conjugated with MS2-MBP via amylase column; and iii) subjected retained proteins to mass spectrometry analysis. To discard unspecific interactions we also analysed several control samples: i) samples expressing untagged trans-sRNAs; ii) samples expressing an MS2 tagged Rho-independent transcriptional terminator.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria were grown in complex tryptone yeast (TY) media and harvested at OD600 ~ 2.0 for AbcR2 and EcpR1 samples an OD600 ~ 0.6 for NfeR1 sample. Cells equivalent to 240 OD600 (e.g. 120 ml of a culture with OD600 ~ 2.0) were harvested by centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min at 6,000 r.p.m. Cells were then washed once with 0.1% sarcosyl in TE Buffer and once in Buffer A (20 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT), spin for 5 min at 6,000 r.p.m. (4 °C) and stored at -80 °C. Pellets were thawed and resuspend in Buffer A and disrupted by sonication in three cycles of 10 s bursts at 32 W with a microprobe. The lysate was then centrifuged (15 min, 16,000 xg, 4 °C) to remove cell debris and the soluble cell fraction was incubated with 200 pmol of MS2-MBP bait protein for 5 min. The column was prepared for affinity purification by 3 washes with Buffer A, loading of 100 µl amylose resin (NEB) and then immobilization of 200 pmol of MS2-MBP diluted in Buffer A. The mixture of cell lysate and half of the bait protein, that binds the MS2-tagged sRNAs, was then loaded into the amylose column, which interacts non-covalently with the MBP moiety. After unspecific-bound was removed by 3 column washes, 600 µL Buffer A containing 12 mM maltose were added to disrupt the interactions between the MBP and the amylose from the column, facilitating the elution of both the aptamer-tagged sRNAs and the sRNA binding proteins. RNA and proteins contained in the eluted fractions were separated by phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol [25:24:1 (v/v)] extraction. The organic lower phase containing the proteins was precipitated with acetone (3V) overnight at -20 °C. Proteins were washed with acetone, dissolved in 50 µl of 1× protein loading buffer, denatured by heating for 5 min at 95 °C, and stored at −20 °C. In total, we subjected 7 samples for MS analysis: one biological replicate of each MS2-tagged sRNA, one biological replicate of the corresponding untagged sRNAs and one biological replicate of the MS2-tagged Rho-independent transcriptional terminator. Protein samples equivalent to 120 OD600 were run 10 min in a 4% SDS-PAGE. The gel lane was cut into 10 slices and all the pieces were subjected to in-gel tryptic manual digestion. The resulting peptides were fractionated using an Easy n-LC II chromatography system (Proxeon) in line with an Amazon Speed ETD mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics).  In brief, peptides in 0.1% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile were injected onto an EASY trap column (2 cm, ID100um, 5µm, C18; Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid peptides were resolved on a Acclaim PepMap100, 15 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm, 100 A, C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 120 min organic gradients, using 6 gradient segments (5-40% solvent B over 120 min, 40-90% B over 5 min, 90-100% B over 2 min, held at 100% B for 10 min and then reduced to 0% B over 1 min and held at 0% for 2 min) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water and Solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile.  Peptides were ionized by a CaptiveSpray Ion Source (Bruker Daltonics) at 1300 V. Tandem mass spectra were acquired using an Amazon Speed ETD Ion Trap mass spectrometer controlled by TrapControl software v7.2 (Bruker-Daltonics) and operated in AutoMS(2) acquisition mode. The Ion Trap was set to analyze the survey scans in the mass range m/z 400 to 1400 in Enhanced Resolution MS mode and the top ten multiply charged ions in each duty cycle selected for MS/MS in UltraScan MS/MS mode. Fragmentation conditions in the Amazon were as follows: exclusion of simply charged ions, active exclusion after 2 spectra and active release of 0.5 min, threshold Absolute 20000 and MS/MS. Fragmentation amplitude was 60%.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed using DataAnalysis software v4.3 (Bruker-Daltonics) and searched against the UniProtTrembl database using Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science) integrated together with ProteinScape v4.0 (Bruker-Daltonics).  Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.5 Da. Search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02 Da) as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.99 Da) as a variable modification.  Searches were performed with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage for tryptic digestion.  The reverse database search option was enabled and all peptide data were filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 2%. After excluding duplicates 198 proteins were identified across all samples. We consider only those proteins that were not present in the negative controls as protein partners of the trans-sRNAs (106 proteins).

### Publication Abstract
Function of bacterial small non-coding RNAs (sRNAs) and overall RNA metabolism is largely shaped by a vast diversity of RNA-protein interactions. However, in non-model bacteria with defined non-coding transcriptomes the sRNA interactome remains almost unexplored. We used affinity chromatography to capture proteins associated <i>in vivo</i> with MS2-tagged <i>trans</i>-sRNAs that regulate nutrient uptake (AbcR2 and NfeR1) and cell cycle (EcpR1) mRNAs by antisense-based translational inhibition in the nitrogen-fixing &#x3b1;-rhizobia <i>Sinorhizobium meliloti</i>. The three proteomes were rather distinct, with that of EcpR1 particularly enriched in cell cycle-related enzymes, whilst sharing several transcription/translation-related proteins recurrently identified associated with sRNAs. Strikingly, MetK, the synthetase of the major methyl donor S-adenosylmethionine, was reliably recovered as a binding partner of the three sRNAs, which reciprocally co-immunoprecipitated with a FLAG-tagged MetK variant. Induced (over)expression of the <i>trans</i>-sRNAs and MetK depletion did not influence canonical riboregulatory traits, `for example, protein titration or sRNA stability, respectively. An <i>in vitro</i> filter assay confirmed binding of AbcR2, NfeR1 and EcpR1 to MetK and further revealed interaction of the protein with other non-coding and coding transcripts but not with the 5S rRNA. These findings uncover a broad specificity for RNA binding as an unprecedented feature of this housekeeping prokaryotic enzyme.

### Keywords
Trans-srnas, Lc-ms/ms, Ms2 aptamer, Sinorhizobium meliloti

### Affiliations
University of Surrey
Dpt. Microbiología del Suelo y Sistemas Simbióticos Estación Experimental del Zaidín, CSIC Profesor Albareda, 1 18008 Granada (Spain) Tlf. +34 958181600 Ext. 176

### Submitter
Ana Matia Gonzalez

### Lab Head
Dr José Ignacio Jiménez Zurdo
Dpt. Microbiología del Suelo y Sistemas Simbióticos Estación Experimental del Zaidín, CSIC Profesor Albareda, 1 18008 Granada (Spain) Tlf. +34 958181600 Ext. 176


