### Accession
PXD042749

### Title
Maximizing Heterologous Expression of Engineered Type I Polyketide Synthases: Investigating Codon Optimization Strategies

### Description
Type I polyketide synthases (T1PKSs) hold an enormous potential as a rational production platform for the biosynthesis of speciality chemicals. However, despite the great progress in this field, the heterologous expression of PKSs remains a major challenge. One of the first measures to improve heterologous gene expression can be codon optimization. Although controversial, choosing the wrong codon optimization strategy can have detrimental effects on protein and product levels. In this study, we analyzed 11 different codon variants of an engineered T1PKS and investigated in a systematic approach their influence on heterologous expression in  Corynebacterium glutamicum, Escherichia coli, and Pseudomonas putida. Our best performing codon variants exhibited a minimum 50-fold increase in PKS protein levels, which also enables the production of an unnatural polyketide in each of the hosts. Furthermore, we developed a free online tool (https://basebuddy.lbl.gov) that offers transparent and highly customizable codon optimization with up-to-date codon usage tables. Here, we not only highlight the significance of codon optimization but also establish the groundwork for high-throughput assembly and characterization of PKS pathways in alternative hosts.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from all samples were extracted using a previously described chloroform/methanol precipitation method (https://dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bfx6jpre). Extracted proteins were resuspended in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer supplemented with 20% methanol, and protein concentration was determined by the DC assay (BioRad). Protein reduction was accomplished using 5 mM tris 2-(carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 30 min at room temperature, and alkylation was performed with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAM; final concentration) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Overnight digestion with trypsin was accomplished with a 1:50 trypsin:total protein ratio. The resulting peptide samples were analyzed on an Agilent 1290 UHPLC system coupled to a Thermo scientific Obitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer for discovery proteomics (https://dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.buthnwj6).

### Data Protocol
DIA raw data files were analyzed by an integrated software suite DIA-NN. the database used in the DIA-NN search (library-free mode) is the latest Uniprot S. albus proteome FASTA sequence plus the protein sequences of the identified azaserine gene cluster and common proteomic contaminants. DIA-NN determines mass tolerances automatically based on first pass analysis of the samples with automated determination of optimal mass accuracies. The retention time extraction window was determined individually for all MS runs analyzed via the automated optimization procedure implemented in DIA-NN. Protein inference was enabled, and the quantification strategy was set to Robust LC = High Accuracy. Output main DIA-NN reports were filtered with a global FDR = 0.01 on both the precursor level and protein group level. The Top3 method, which is the average MS signal response of the three most intense tryptic peptides of each identified proteins, was used to plot the quantity of the azaserine gene cluster proteins in the samples

### Publication Abstract
Maximizing the production of heterologous biomolecules is a complex problem that can be addressed with a systems-level understanding of cellular metabolism and regulation. Specifically, growth-coupling approaches can increase product titers and yields and also enhance production rates. However, implementing these methods for non-canonical carbon streams is challenging due to gaps in metabolic models. Over four design-build-test-learn cycles, we rewire Pseudomonas putida KT2440 for growth-coupled production of indigoidine from para-coumarate. We explore 4,114 potential growth-coupling solutions and refine one design through laboratory evolution and ensemble data-driven methods. The final growth-coupled strain produces 7.3 g/L indigoidine at 77% maximum theoretical yield in para-coumarate minimal medium. The iterative use of growth-coupling designs and functional genomics with experimental validation was highly effective and agnostic to specific hosts, carbon streams, and final products and thus generalizable across many systems.

### Keywords
Polyketide synthases, Codon optimization, Heterologous expression

### Affiliations
Staff Scientist Biological Systems & Engineering Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Berkeley CA 94720
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

### Submitter
Christopher Petzold

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher J. Petzold
Staff Scientist Biological Systems & Engineering Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Berkeley CA 94720


