### Accession
PXD018702

### Title
Characterization of protein dynamics after alpha-amanitin exposure in hepatoma cells

### Description
Alpha-amanitin (α-AMA) is a cyclic peptide and is one of the most lethal mushroom amatoxins found in Amanita phalloides. α-AMA is known to cause hepatotoxicity through RNA polymerase II inhibition, which acts in RNA and DNA translocation. To investigate the toxic signature of α-AMA beyond known mechanisms, we used quantitative nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis coupled with tandem mass tag labeling to examine proteome dynamics in Huh-7 human hepatoma cells treated with toxic concentrations of α-AMA. We identified 1,828 proteins, quantified 1,563 proteins, and found a decrease of four subunits in T-complex protein 1-ring complex protein that was dependent on the α-AMA concentration. We conducted bioinformatics analyses of the quantified proteins to characterize the toxic signature of α-AMA in hepatoma cells. This is the first report of global proteome abundance changes according to α-AMA concentration variations and suggests a possible novel molecular regulation mechanism for hepatotoxicity.

### Sample Protocol
The cytotoxicity of α-AMA was checked using Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) reagent (Dojindo Molecular Technologies, Kumamoto, Japan) to determine the inhibition concentration of α-AMA prior to comparative proteomic analysis in Huh-7 cells. The Huh-7 cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (Hyclone Laboratories Inc., UT, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Hyclone Laboratories Inc.) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Gibco, MA, USA) to a concentration of 1 × 105/mL and incubated for 24 hr. Next, the cell medium was removed using a suction pump, washed with 1 × phosphate-buffered saline (Gibco, MA, USA), and changed with fresh cell media mixed with 1% penicillin-streptomycin and α-AMA (Tocris Bioscience, Bristol, UK) at a concentration of 2, 5, and 10 μM, respectively, and then incubated for 24 hr. At the same time, 50 μM isoliquiritigenin treatment was used as a positive control to induce cytotoxicity. Thereafter, the cell medium was removed, and fresh cell media mixed with cytotoxicity-checking reagent CCK-8 was added. The absorbance was measured at 450 nm by spectrophotometer. After checking for cytotoxicity, Huh-7 cells were incubated in 100 mm Ø dishes under the same conditions as described above. Then, the α-AMA-treated Huh-7 cells were harvested and directly added to 500 μL of 8 M urea (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) in 100 mM Tris (VWR International, PA, USA) containing protease inhibitors (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). The collected cells were sonicated for 1 min (output 30%, 5-sec on and off intervals) on ice and centrifuged at 4°C at 16,000 × g for 10 min to separate the soluble proteins from the cell debris. The upper fraction was removed and placed in new sample tubes, and the protein concentration was determined using a BCA kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Biologically duplicated samples were harvested, and proteins were extracted from each treatment group. We placed 100 μg of the protein samples in new sample tubes and added 5 mM of dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich) for cysteine residue reduction at 56°C for 30 min followed by treatment with 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for cysteine residue alkylation in the dark for 30 min. Then, a two-fold volume dilution was performed for trypsin digestion (<2 M urea). After a pH check, trypsin (2 μg) was directly added to the sample and left to digest for 18 hr at 37°C. Finally, 1% triﬂuoroacetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to complete the digestion step. The peptides were dried in speed vac dryer at low temperature and directly dissolved in 50 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 4-plex TMT reagent labeling (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After checking the peptide concentration using a Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equal amounts of peptides from each group were labeled and placed in one sample tube. The pooled peptide samples were fractionated using a Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The fractionated samples were dissolved in 10 μL of solution A (2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid), and 500 ng of each fraction was loaded onto a nanoLC 1D plus system (Eksigent, MA, USA) consisting of an in-house C12 resin (4 µm Proteo 90 Å; Phenomenex Inc., CA, USA) and a capillary column (ID 75 µm, OD 150 µm; Molex, IL, USA). Elution was conducted using a gradient liquid chromatography method (0%–25% acetonitrile for 90 min) and analyzed with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in positive ion mode at the Mass Spectrometry Convergence Research Center. The m/z data collection range was set at 300–1800 m/z, and higher-energy collisional dissociation collision mode was used for fragmentation. The quantitative mass spectrometry analyses were technically duplicated for each of the pooled peptide samples (n = 4).

### Data Protocol
All mass spectra data were input to MaxQuant 1.5.1.0 to obtain bioinformatics information, and the human proteome database (updated 12/13/2018) was downloaded from Uniprot (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640). GO, InterPro, and KEGG pathways were analyzed using DAVID Functional Annotation Bioinformatics Microarray Analysis (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/). Perseus 1.6.0.7 was used for clustering protein groups depending on the protein regulation patterns. The STRING analytical tool (https://string-db.org/) was used to search specific protein networks according to regulation differences resulting from the α-AMA treatments at different concentrations.

### Publication Abstract
Alpha-amanitin (&#x3b1;-AMA) is a cyclic peptide and one of the most lethal mushroom amatoxins found in <i>Amanita phalloides</i>. &#x3b1;-AMA is known to cause hepatotoxicity through RNA polymerase II inhibition, which acts in RNA and DNA translocation. To investigate the toxic signature of &#x3b1;-AMA beyond known mechanisms, we used quantitative nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis coupled with tandem mass tag labeling to examine proteome dynamics in Huh-7 human hepatoma cells treated with toxic concentrations of &#x3b1;-AMA. Among the 1828 proteins identified, we quantified 1563 proteins, which revealed that four subunits in the T-complex protein 1-ring complex protein decreased depending on the &#x3b1;-AMA concentration. We conducted bioinformatics analyses of the quantified proteins to characterize the toxic signature of &#x3b1;-AMA in hepatoma cells. This is the first report of global changes in proteome abundance with variations in &#x3b1;-AMA concentration, and our findings suggest a novel molecular regulation mechanism for hepatotoxicity.

### Keywords
Alpha-amanitin, Comparative quantitative proteomics, Hepatotoxicity, Tric

### Affiliations
College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 41566, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Doeun Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sangkyu Lee
College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 41566, Republic of Korea


