### Accession
PXD023487

### Title
Targeted in situ cross-linking for determination of structure and interactions of SARS-CoV-2 proteins in the cellular context

### Description
Cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) has progressed from studying purified protein assemblies in-vitro towards investigating the same assemblies in intact cells, tissues, and even whole organisms (so called “in situ XL-MS”). In situ XL-MS offers the great advantage of reporting on the architectures of protein complexes as they occur inside cells and tissues. Here we developed a complete workflow of in-situ XL-MS followed by purification, and employ it to investigate SARS-CoV2 protein inside the host cell. We focused on three Sars-Cov-2 proteins for which the structural information is either missing or incomplete: NSP1, NSP2, and the Nucleocapsid protein (N protein). Relatively little is known about the structures of these specific proteins, which was our motivation for choosing them.  We were able to identify considerable cross-link sets, of in-situ origin. Integration of the cross-links with additional structural information allowed us to build almost complete models for NSP2 and the N protein.

### Sample Protocol
We engineer a plasmid for constitutive expression of the protein with a Strep tag fused at one of the termini. We transfect human cells in culture with the plasmid, and allow 48 hours of expression. The cells are then cross-linked in situ by a membrane permeable reagent (DSS or Formaldehyde). We washed out the cross-linker and lysed the cells. The proteins of interest were purified from the lysate by StrepTactin beads then processed in standard XL-MS preparation. Mass spectrometry analyses of the purified proteins reveal the protein composition and identify cross-links.

### Data Protocol
The crosslinks were identified using the FindXL software, in house analysis application.

### Publication Abstract
Atomic structures of several proteins from the coronavirus family are still partial or unavailable. A possible reason for this gap is the instability of these proteins outside of the cellular context, thereby prompting the use of in-cell approaches. In situ cross-linking and mass spectrometry (in situ CLMS) can provide information on the structures of such proteins as they occur in the intact cell. Here, we applied targeted in situ CLMS to structurally probe Nsp1, Nsp2, and nucleocapsid (N) proteins from severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and obtained cross-link sets with an average density of one cross-link per 20 residues. We then employed integrative modeling that computationally combined the cross-linking data with domain structures to determine full-length atomic models. For the Nsp2, the cross-links report on a complex topology with long-range interactions. Integrative modeling with structural prediction of individual domains by the AlphaFold2 system allowed us to generate a single consistent all-atom model of the full-length Nsp2. The model reveals three putative metal binding sites and suggests a role for Nsp2 in zinc regulation within the replication-transcription complex. For the N protein, we identified multiple intra- and interdomain cross-links. Our integrative model of the N dimer demonstrates that it can accommodate three single RNA strands simultaneously, both stereochemically and electrostatically. For the Nsp1, cross-links with the 40S ribosome were highly consistent with recent cryogenic electron microscopy structures. These results highlight the importance of cellular context for the structural probing of recalcitrant proteins and demonstrate the effectiveness of targeted in situ CLMS and integrative modeling.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Nsp2, Xlms, Hek293, Nsp1, Lc-msms, Nucleocapsid protein, Mass-spectrometry, Clms

### Affiliations
Dept. of Biological Chemistry, Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
Biochemistry department in the Hebrew University

### Submitter
Moriya Slavin

### Lab Head
Dr Nir Kalisman
Dept. of Biological Chemistry, Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel


