### Accession
PXD015114

### Title
Emerging connectivity patterns of protein-protein interaction networks in melanoma secretome: insights into the cancer interactome

### Description
Cellular communication strongly relies on the secretion of soluble mediators that, in general, interact with cell surface receptors and enable biological responses in a proper timescale for signaling processes to occur. Therefore, the study of secreted proteins (the secretome) from normal cells and tumoral counterparts allows a comprehensive portrait of the so-called ‘effectors’ in many biological circuits, including those related to tumor development. Cell homeostasis is disrupted in many ways during oncogenesis; the main biological implications are derived from a wide range of factors, including somatic mutations, epigenetic modifications and post-transcriptional/translational modifications, which ultimately results in the modulation of the gene expression. Collectively, these factors often result in rewiring connections in signaling networks in malignant cells. Since protein-protein interactions may eventually enable transformed cells to grow, proliferate and invade neighboring tissues, a comprehensive view of the imbalance caused by the oncogenic processes requires the understanding of the interplay of interactors in altered biological circuits. Pathway and network analysis are analytic approaches that reduce the data involving thousands of altered genes/proteins in complex biological systems to smaller datasets which, in turn, enable the detection and interpretation of specific biological questions such as cancer-related processes, clinically distinct outcomes and drug targets, for example. In this respect, protein-protein interaction networks (PPINs) are static representations of protein connections in biological systems. Although this simplification lacks the dynamic nature of the real protein world, it allows the identification of specific topologies related to the patterns of connectivity of a given PPIN. Moreover, some additional network features may be observed, such as the identification of subgraphs (communities), which contain proteins that may be functionally related, revealing an additional layer of complexity among protein-protein interactions within the network. Kaushik and coworkers used network analysis and to study melanoma stage progression and found that melanoma-related genes can modulate their activities by rewiring network connections, independent of altered gene expression. A recent work with DNA methylation, gene expression and corresponding clinical data from breast invasive carcinoma, skin cutaneous melanoma and uterine corpus endometrial carcinoma underscored gene co-methylation networks, resulting in the identification of core gene modules which allowed the molecular typing of cancer and the prognosis of patients. Such network-based approach revealed that gene modules were more reliable in cancer prognosis than gene expression profiles. Systems-level analysis of signaling networks, gene expression profiles and cell phenotyping, in combination with mathematical modeling, helped to understand the interface between growth factor and DNA signaling pathways in breast cancer9. According to the authors, the identification of rewiring patterns in apoptotic signaling pathways may have main implications for combined therapies in the treatment of breast cancer. In this context, the main goal of this work was to profile the secretome composition of a murine cellular melanoma model composed by a normal melanocyte cell line, Melan-a, and its tumoral phenotype, Tm1, using the proteomic data to build interactomes for both secretomes. Our data revealed an expressive rewiring in the tumoral interactome of secreted proteins, with important biological roles in malignant transformation including the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) signaling pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and secretome harvesting  Cell lines were cultured as described previously16. Briefly, Melan-a, a murine melanocyte and Tm1, its transformed-phenotype 20, were cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) medium (pH 7.0; ThermoFisher, USA), containing 2.0 g/L of sodium bicarbonate, 100 mg/L streptomycin, 25 mg/L ampicillin, 2 mM Glutamine, 10% of Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) and 200 nM 12-o-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate (PMA; Sigma, USA). Cell cultures were maintained at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 and 95% air. Sub confluent cell cultures were washed three-times with warm buffered phosphate-saline (without Ca2+ and Mg2+) and, after culturing the cells in T175 cm2 flasks for 24 h under phenol red-free, FBS-free RPMI medium, the conditioned media was harvested and centrifuged (2,200 x g, 10 min, 4 ºC) for removing any remaining cell. Protease inhibitor cocktail (SIGMAFASTTM, Sigma, USA) was added to each sample and the secretomes were filtered (0.22 m; Millipore, USA) and concentrated (5,000 x g; 4 °C) using ultrafiltration devices (Vivaspin 20, 3 kDa cutoff, GE Healthcare,USA). Protein contents were measured by the Bradford method21. Secretomes were independently obtained from two biological replicates derived from each cell line. At the time of each secretome collection cell viability was measured by dye-exclusion analysis (trypan blue).  In-solution trypsin digestion The in-solution trypsin digestion was performed according to the protocol described by Kleifeld et al.22 with slight modifications. Briefly, a solution of 6 M guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl) was added to a sample of 100 μg of protein from each secretome to a final concentration of 3 M GuHCl, followed by the addition of 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (final concentration). The mixture was incubated at 65 °C for 60 min. Iodoacetamide (IAA) was then added to a final concentration of 15 mM and the samples were incubated for 60 min at room temperature, in the dark. To quench the excess of IAA, DTT was added to a final concentration of 15 mM. Clean-up of samples was performed by the addition of ice-cold acetone (8 volumes) and methanol (1 volume), followed by the incubation of samples for 3 h at -80° C. After centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 10 min, protein pellets were washed twice with one volume of ice cold methanol and then resolubilized with NaOH solution (final concentration of 2.5 mM), followed by the addition of 50 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.5, to a final volume of 100 L. Trypsin (Proteomics grade; Sigma, USA) was added at 1:100 ratio (enzyme/substrate) and protein samples were incubated at 37 °C for 18 h. Tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 StageTips, dried in a SpeedVac and redissolved in 50 L of 0.1% formic acid prior to nanoflow liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC−MS/MS) analysis.  Mass spectrometric analysis An aliquot (5 μL) of the resulting peptide mixture was injected into a trap column packed with C18 (100 μm i.d. × 2 cm) for desalting with 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid). Peptides were then eluted onto an analytical column (75 μm i.d. × 100 mm) packed in house with Aqua® C-18 5 m beads (Phenomenex, USA). Nanoflow liquid chromatography was performed on an Easy nanoLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Peptides were loaded onto the column with solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and eluted with a 120 min linear gradient from 3 to 30% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Spray voltage was set at 2.1 kV, 200 °C and the mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode, in which one full MS scan was acquired in the m/z range of 400-1800 followed by MS/MS acquisition using Collisional Induced Dissociation (CID) of the twelve most intense ions from the MS scan. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer at 60,000 resolution (at 400 m/z). Dynamic exclusion was defined by a list size of 500 features and exclusion duration of 60 s. For the survey (MS) scan AGC target value of 1,000,000 was set whereas the AGC target value for the fragment ion (MS/MS) spectra was set to 10,000 ions. The lower threshold for targeting precursor ions in the MS scans was 3,000 counts.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric (RAW) data were analyzed with MaxQuant software23 (version 1.6.2.3). A False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 1% was required for both protein and peptide-to-spectrum match identifications. LTQ-Orbitrap Velos raw data were searched against a target database restricted to the taxonomy ‘Homo sapiens’ (UniProt/SwissProt release 2018_06; 25,190 entries). This database was also combined with the sequences of 245 common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and at least two missed cleavages were allowed; cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as fixed modification whereas methionine oxidation, glutamine/asparagine deamidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications. Peptide identification was based on a search with an initial mass deviation of the precursor ion of 7 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Label-free quantitation was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm24, with the ‘Re-quantify’ and ‘match between runs’ functions of MaxQuant software enabled. As is observed from complex proteomes such as vertebrates, peptides can be shared between homologous proteins or splice variants, leading to “protein groups”. For each protein group in the MaxQuant’s ‘proteinGroups.txt’ file, the first protein entry was selected as representative.

### Publication Abstract
Protein-protein interaction networks (PPINs) are static representations of protein connections in which topological features such as subgraphs (communities) may contain proteins functionally related, revealing an additional layer of interactome complexity. We created two PPINs from the secretomes of a paired set of murine melanocytes (a normal melanocyte and its transformed phenotype). Community structures, identified by a graph clustering algorithm, resulted in the identification of subgraphs in both networks. Interestingly, the underlying structure of such communities revealed shared and exclusive proteins (core and exclusive nodes, respectively), in addition to proteins that changed their location within each community (rewired nodes). Functional enrichment analysis of core nodes revealed conserved biological functions in both networks whereas exclusive and rewired nodes in the tumoral phenotype network were enriched in cancer-related processes, including TGF&#x3b2; signaling. We found a remarkable shift in the tumoral interactome, resulting in an emerging pattern which was driven by the presence of exclusive nodes and may represent functional network motifs. Our findings suggest that the rearrangement in the tumoral interactome may be correlated with the malignant transformation of melanocytes associated with substrate adhesion impediment. The interactions found in core and new/rewired nodes might potentially be targeted for therapeutic intervention in melanoma treatment. SIGNIFICANCE: Malignant transformation is a result of synergistic action of multiple molecular factors in which genetic alterations as well as protein expression play paramount roles. During oncogenesis, cellular crosstalk through the secretion of soluble mediators modulates the phenotype of transformed cells which ultimately enables them to successfully disrupt important signaling pathways, including those related to cell growth and proliferation. Therefore, in this work we profiled the secretomes of a paired set of normal and transformed phenotypes of a murine melanocyte. After assembling the two interactomes, clusters of functionally related proteins (network communities) were observed as well as emerging patterns of network rewiring which may represent an interactome signature of transformed cells. In summary, the significance of this study relies on the understanding of the repertoire of 'normal' and 'tumoral' secretomes and, more importantly, the set of interacting proteins (the interactome) in both of these conditions, which may reveal key components that might be potentially targeted for therapeutic intervention.

### Keywords
Interactome, Melanoma, Complex network analysis, Tgf beta., Secretome

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Functional Proteomics  -

Department of Science and Technology -
Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Jose dos Campos-SP, Brazil
Functional Proteomics Laboratory, Department of Science and Technology, Federal University of Sao Paulo, UNIFESP, Sao Jose dos Campos, Sao Paulo, Brazil

### Submitter
Andre Zelanis

### Lab Head
Dr André Zelanis
Functional Proteomics Laboratory, Department of Science and Technology, Federal University of Sao Paulo, UNIFESP, Sao Jose dos Campos, Sao Paulo, Brazil


