### Accession
PXD041824

### Title
ALK signalling primes the DNA damage response sensitizing ALK-driven neuroblastoma to therapeutic ATR inhibition

### Description
High-risk neuroblastoma (NB) currently presents significant clinical challenges. MYCN and ALK, which are often involved in high-risk NB, lead to increased replication stress in cancer cells, providing options for therapeutic exploitation. We previously identified an ATR/ALK inhibitor combination as an effective therapeutic approach in two independent genetically modified mouse NB models. Here, we identify an underlying molecular mechanism, in which ALK signalling leads to phosphorylation of ATR and CHK1, supporting an effective DNA damage response. The importance of ALK inhibition is supported by mouse data, in which monotreatment with ATRi resulted in a robust initial response, but subsequent relapse, in contrast to a 14-day ALKi/ATRi combination treatment that resulted in robust and sustained responses. Finally, we show that the remarkable response to the 14-day combined ATR/ALK inhibition protocol reflects a robust differentiation response in the tumour, reprogramming tumour cells to a neuronal/Schwann cell lineage identity. Our results identify a unique ability of ATR inhibition to trigger neuroblastoma differentiation and underscore the importance of further exploring combined ALK/ATR inhibition in NB, particularly in high-risk patient groups with oncogene-induced replication stress.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were homogenized in lysis buffer containing 2 % sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and centrifuged at 8000 xg for 20 min. Protein concentrations of supernatants were determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Benchmark™ Plus microplate reader (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) with bovine serum albumin (BSA) solutions as standards. Aliquots containing 600 µg of protein from each sample were incubated at room temperature for 60 min in the lysis buffer with DL-dithiothreitol (DTT) at 100 mM final concentration. The reduced samples were split into two aliquots and processed using the modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. Briefly, the samples were transferred to 30 kDa Microcon Centrifugal Filter Units (catalogue no. MRCF0R030, Merck), washed repeatedly with 8 M urea and once with digestion buffer prior (0.5 % sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in 50 mM TEAB) to alkylation with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate in digestion buffer for 30 min. Double digestion was performed in digestion buffer by addition of Pierce MS grade Trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific), in an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:100 at 37°C overnight. Peptides were collected by centrifugation and the two aliquots per sample were pooled again.  Isobaric labeling was performed using Tandem Mass Tag (TMTpro 16plex) reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The labelled samples were combined and concentrated using vacuum centrifugation, and SDC was removed by acidification with 10 % TFA and subsequent centrifugation. The peptide samples were purified using Pierce peptide desalting spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  The 9,600 µg peptides in the pooled sample were split into 540 µg for whole proteomics and two equal aliquots for phosphopeptide enrichment. The first aliquot was subjected to High-Select TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit, whereas the second aliquot was enriched by High-Select Fe-NTA Enrichment Kit (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) in parallel. The eluted phosphopeptide samples from both enrichments were pooled and fractionated into 14 fractions by increasing ACN concentration from 7 % to 50 % using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separations of the whole proteome sample was performed using basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) on a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation); using a gradient from 3 % to 55 % solvent B over 45 min. Solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.00 and solvent B was 90 % acetonitrile, 10 % 10 mM ammonium formate at pH 10.00. The initial 50 fractions were pooled into 20 fractions, dried and reconstituted in 3 % acetonitrile, 0.2 % formic acid.  The fractions of the whole proteome sample were analyzed on an Orbitrap Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy-nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm x 35 cm, particle size 3 μm, Reprosil-Pur C18, Dr. Maisch). The whole proteomics fractions were separated using a gradient from 5 % to 35 % B over 77 min at a flow of 300 nL/min. Solvent A was 0.2 % formic acid and solvent B was 80 % acetonitrile, 0.2 % formic acid. MS scans for whole proteomics were performed at a resolution of 120,000, and an m/z range of 375-1500. MS/MS analysis was performed in a data-dependent, with top speed cycle of 3 s for the most intense >2 charged precursor ions. Precursor ions were isolated in the quadrupole with an isolation window of 0.7 m/z, with dynamic exclusion on 10 ppm and duration of 45 s. Isolated precursor ions were subjected to collision induced dissociation (CID) at a collision energy of 30 % (max. injection time 60 ms). Produced MS2 fragment ions were detected in the ion trap followed by multinotch isolation of the top 10 most abundant fragment ions for further fragmentation (MS3) by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 55 % and detection in the Orbitrap (resolution 50,000, m/z range 100-500).  The phosphoproteomics samples were separated using a linear gradient from 7 % to 35 % B over 47 min. Analysis was performed as above, besides that the MS2 analyses were split depending on mass and charge: MS2 scans of precursors 375-1375 m/z were assigned priority 1 (375-900 m/z and 3-6 charges, and 900-1375 m/z and charges 2-6). Priority 2 were MS2 scans of 600-900 m/z and charge state 2. MS2 scans of 500-600 m/z and charge 2 precursors were assigned priority 3. Isolated precursors were fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) using a collision energy of 38 % each. MS2 spectra were detected in the Orbitrap (fixed first m/z 100).

### Data Protocol
Proteomic Data Analysis  The data files of the fractions from each set were merged for identification and relative quantification using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Identification was performed using Mascot version 2.5.1 (Matrix Science) as a search engine by matching against the Homo sapiens database from Swiss-Prot (from January 2022). The precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.6 Da (total proteome) or 30 mmu (phosphoproteome). Tryptic peptides were accepted with zero missed cleavages for whole proteomics, and variable modifications of methionine oxidation; fixed cysteine alkylation, and TMTpro-label modifications of N-terminus and lysine were selected for both. For the phosphoproteomics samples, variable modification of serine, threonine, or tyrosine phosphorylation was added. Phosphopeptides were identified in three subsequent steps: one missed cleavage, two missed cleavages, one missed cleavage and deamidation of asparagine or glutamine with 2 ppm precursor mass tolerance. Percolator was used for the validation of identified proteins.  For quantification, TMTpro reporter ions were identified with 3 mmu mass tolerance in the MS2 HCD spectra for the phosphoproteome or in the MS3 HCD spectra for the total proteome. The S/N values of the TMTpro reporters for each sample were normalized within Proteome Discoverer 2.4 on the total peptide amount. Only unique peptides, and those with a S/N ratio above 10, were considered for the protein quantification (whole proteome with minimum SPS match of 40 %). Peptides were filtered for high confidence and resulting identified proteins for medium confidence.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alk, Ddr, Lorlatinib, Elimusertib, Neuroblastoma, Ceralasertib, Alkal, Atr

### Affiliations
University of Gothenburg
Proteomics Core Facility University of Gothenburg Sweden

### Submitter
Evelin Berger

### Lab Head
Dr Carina Sihlbom
Proteomics Core Facility University of Gothenburg Sweden


