### Accession
PXD020770

### Title
Proteome and Phosphoproteome of AhR-dependent non-genomic signaling in endotoxin-activated macrophages

### Description
Emerging studies revealed an immunomodulatory role of the Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a receptor sensing environmental contaminants, and involved in their detoxification. Besides its function as a transcription factor, AhR can participate in non-genomic signaling through ubiquitination and phosphorylation-dependent processes. In this study, a multi-PTM-omics approach, including proteome, ubiquitome, and phosphoproteome, was utilized to examine mechanisms of non-genomic AhR-signaling in endotoxin-activated monocyte-derived macrophages. This dataset entails proteome and phosphoproteome data.

### Sample Protocol
Monocyte-derived macrophages were treated with the AhR ligands BaP and FICZ in the absence and presence of LPS. After 2h, the cells were lysed with urea lysis buffer (9M) in 20mM HEPES pH 8.0 supplemented with 1mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1mM b-glycerol-phosphate. Proteome samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and cut in 5 fractions. Phosphopeptides were enriched from tryptic peptides generated utilizing a paramagnetic bead approach. Two sequential enrichment steps utilizing the High-SelectTM TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment and High-SelectTM Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit were conducted. LC-MS/MS analysis of samples was performed on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system, online coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer by a chip-based electrospray ionization source. For proteome analysis, a bipartite linear 55 min gradient starting from 4 % eluent B (0.1 % FA in 80 % ACN) in eluent A (0.1 % FA in water) to 55 % eluent B via 30 % eluent B after 47.5 min was used for each of the five fractions. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner. The top 10 most abundant ions were selected for MS2 acquisition. Fragmented ions were dynamically excluded for 20 s. For phosphopeptide analysis, a tripartite linear 145 min gradient starting from 4 % eluent B (0.1 % FA in 80 % ACN) in eluent A (0.1 % FA in water) to 55 % eluent B via 18 % eluent B after 77.5 min and 30 % eluent B after 115 min was used. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner. The top 15 most abundant ions were selected for MS2 acquisition. Fragmented ions were dynamically excluded for 45 s.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS raw data for proteome and phosphoproteome were examined by MaxQuant (Version 1.6.7.0) (Cox et al., 2014). Database search was performed against the Uniprot Homo Sapiens RefSet (09/2019, 74349 entries) and a list of common contaminants provided by MaxQuant (07/2019, 245 entries) (UniProt, 2019). Search parameters were set as follows: Maximum missed cleavages = 2, minimal peptide length of 6 amino acids, first search peptide tolerance = 20 ppm, main search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm, FTMS MS/MS match tolerance = 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine, and, for phosphopeptide enriched samples, phosphorylation of Serin, Threonine, and Tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Peptides, proteins, and sites were filtered by a target-decoy approach to an FDR <0.01 using a reversed decoy database. Match between runs was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and alignment time window of 20 min. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was used for relative protein quantification based on an LFQ ratio count ≥2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Proteome, Ahr, Phosphoproteome, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ,Leipzig, Germany
Molecular Systems Biology
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ
Leipzig, Germany

### Submitter
Henning Großkopf

### Lab Head
Dr Martin von Bergen
Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ,Leipzig, Germany


