### Accession
PXD029737

### Title
Paracrine Interleukin 6 induces cerebral remodeling at early stages after unilateral common carotid artery occlusion in mice

### Description
Carotid artery disease is frequent and can result in chronic modest hypoperfusion of the brain causing cognitive impairments even if classified asymptomatic without a transient ischemic attack or stroke. Paracrine Interleukin 6 (IL 6) improves functional outcome after stroke. However, in carotid artery disease it might have adverse long-term effects. With this exploratory study, we investigated the effect of paracrine IL 6 on cerebral remodeling in early stages after asymptomatic carotid artery occlusion. Therewith we aimed to distinguish IL 6 dependent targets with beneficial effects for long-term outcome from factors causing the detrimental long-term effects of IL 6. To mimic a human asymptomatic carotid artery disease, we used a mouse model of unilateral common carotid artery (CCA) occlusion. We developed a mouse model for inducible paracrine cerebral IL 6 expression (Cx30-Cre-ERT2;FLEX IL6) and induced IL 6 two days after CCA occlusion. We studied the effects of paracrine IL 6 after CCA occlusion on neuronal connectivity using diffusion tensor imaging and on local proteome regulations of the hypo-perfused striatum and contralateral motor cortex using mass spectrometry of laser capture micro-dissected tissues. Paracrine IL-6 induced cerebral remodeling leading to increased inter-hemispheric connectivity and changes in motor system connectivity. We identified changes in local protein abundance which might have adverse effects on functional outcome such as upregulation of Synuclein gamma (Sncg) or downregulation of Proline Dehydrogenase 1 (Prodh). However, we also identified changes in local protein abundance having potentially beneficial effects such as upregulation of Caprin1 or downregulation of GABA transporter 1 (Gat1).

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tissue was sectioned using a Cryostat into 20 µm thin sections and mounted on PEN membrane slides. After drying at RT, tissue was fixed for 10 min in 1:1 methanol/acetone solution, left to dry and then stored on dry ice until further processing. Tissue sections were cut using a laser capture microscope (Arcturus XT LCM instrument, Thermo Fisher Scientific) by selecting the desired areas in the ipsilateral striatum and the contralateral motor cortex.    Dissected areas were collected in 30µl 6M Guanidinium Hydrochloride buffer and heated for 10minutes at 95C. Samples were reduced in 1mM DTT for 30min and alkylated in 5mM Chloroacetamide for 30min. The samples were first digested with 0.5µg endopeptidase LysC (Wako, Osaka, Japan) for 4 hours, followed by a 1:4 dilution in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH = 8.5) and digestion with 1µg sequence-grade trypsin (Promega) for 16h. The digestion was stopped by acidifying each sample to pH < 2.5 with 10% trifluoroacetic acid solution. Resulting peptides were purified and stored on stage tips  Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase column (20 cm fritless silica microcolumns with an inner diameter of 75 µm, packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH)) using a 90 min gradient with a 250 nl/min flow rate on a High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) system (ThermoScientific). Peptides were ionized using an electrospray ionization (ESI) source (ThermoScientific) and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo). The mass spectrometer was run in data dependent mode selecting the top 20 most intense ions in the MS full scans, selecting ions from 350 to 2000 m/z, using 60K resolution with a 4x105 ion count target and 50 ms injection time. Tandem MS was performed by quadrupole isolation at 0.7 m/z, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 32 and resolution of 15K. The MS2 ion count target was set to 5x104 with an maximum injection time of 250 ms. Only precursors with charge state 2-7 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using MaxQuant software package (v1.6.0.1) and a decoy mouse UniProt database (MOUSE.2017-01) containing forward and reverse sequences. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, deamidation (N and Q) and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. The FDR (false discovery rate) was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications. Unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification. MS2 identifications were transferred between runs with the ÒMatch between runsÓ option. Protein intensities were normalized using the in-built LFQ (label-free quantification) algorithm. Output data were filtered to exclude reverse database hits and potential contaminants. Statistical data analysis was performed using Perseus software (v1.6.2.1). Biological replicates for each condition were defined as groups and intensity values were filtered for Òminimum value of 3Ó in at least one group. After log2 transformation missing values were imputed with random noise simulating the detection limit of the mass spectrometer. Differences in protein abundance between the experimental groups were calculated using two-sample Student t test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Vascular disease, Proteomics, Stenosis, Inflammation

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform, BIH@Charite
Core Unit Proteomics, Berlin Institute of Health at Charite - Universitaetsmedizin Berlin and Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Marieluise Kirchner

### Lab Head
Dr Philipp Mertins
Core Unit Proteomics, Berlin Institute of Health at Charite - Universitaetsmedizin Berlin and Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany


