### Accession
PXD009210

### Title
Identification of a S. aureus virulence factor by activity-based protein profiling (ABPP)

### Description
Serine hydrolases play diverse roles in regulating host-pathogen interactions in a number of organisms, yet few have been characterized in the human pathogen Staphylococcus aureus. Here, we describe a chemical proteomic screen that identified 10 previously uncharacterized S. aureus serine hydrolases that mostly lack human homologues. We termed these enzymes Fluorophosphonate-binding hydrolases (FphA-J). One hydrolase, FphB, can process short fatty acid esters, exhibits increased activity in response to host cell factors, is located predominantly on the bacterial cell surface in a subset of cells, and is concentrated in the division septum. Genetic disruption of the fphB gene confirms that the enzyme is dispensable for bacterial growth in culture but crucial for establishing infection in distinct sites in vivo. A selective small molecule inhibitor of FphB effectively reduces infectivity in vivo, suggesting that it may be a viable therapeutic target for the treatment or management of Staphylococcus infections.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were treated with the serine hydrolase ABP, FP-biotin. All FP-biotin labeled proteins were enriched on streptavidin beads, subjected to on-bead trypsin digestion and analyzed by LC/LC-MS/MS using a standard MudPIT protocol.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched using SEQUEST and the S. aureus UniProt protein database. Hits were filtered with DTASelect using a false positive rate of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
Serine hydrolases play diverse roles in regulating host-pathogen interactions in a number of organisms, yet few have been characterized in the human pathogen Staphylococcus aureus. Here we describe a chemical proteomic screen that identified ten previously uncharacterized S. aureus serine hydrolases that mostly lack human homologs. We termed these enzymes fluorophosphonate-binding hydrolases (FphA-J). One hydrolase, FphB, can process short fatty acid esters, exhibits increased activity in response to host cell factors, is located predominantly on the bacterial cell surface in a subset of cells, and is concentrated in the division septum. Genetic disruption of fphB confirmed that the enzyme is dispensable for bacterial growth in culture but crucial for establishing infection in distinct sites in vivo. A selective small molecule inhibitor of FphB effectively reduced infectivity in vivo, suggesting that it may be a viable therapeutic target for the treatment or management of Staphylococcus infections.

### Keywords
S. aureus, Serine hydrolase, Abpp

### Affiliations
Boston College

### Submitter
Eranthie Weerapana

### Lab Head
Dr Eranthie Weerapana
Boston College


