### Accession
PXD002920

### Title
Early events on compatible and incompatible grapevine interaction with Plasmopara viticola: a proteomic perspective of cultivar specific behavior

### Description
Grapevine downy mildew is an important disease affecting crop production and causing severe losses. To identify genotype-dependent responses towards this pathogen and to explore the molecular mechanisms involved in grapevine-P. viticola resistance, we have conducted a proteomic analysis of leaf samples from resistant and susceptible grapevine genotypes prior and post-inoculation with the pathogen. Proteins were analyzed by quantitative two-dimensional differential gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE). The analysis able to identified 50 unique proteins. Functional analysis showed that photosynthesis and metabolism were the main categories differentiating genotypes at 0h and that P. viticola-responsive proteins were mainly involved in photosynthesis, carbohydrate metabolism, stress and defense responses and redox homeostasis. ROS production, total antioxidant capacity and lipid peroxidation on both genotypes were determined and together with the proteome data suggest that Regent presents a strict balance between ROS control and signaling leading to plant cell death activation. Our data reveals the genotype-dependent modulation of plant metabolism and defense responses providing new insights into underlying molecular processes of grapevine resistance against the downy mildew fungus.

### Sample Protocol
Plasmopara viticola inoculum was collected after an overnight incubation of symptomatic leaves from greenhouse infected plants. Four independent biological replicates were collected. Total protein was extracted by fenolic extraction and protein concentration was determined by 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare). The samples were covalently labeled with a fluorophore, either Cy3 or Cy5. Cy2 was used for label internal standard samples and proteins were separated by 2D-DIGE. Gels images were analysed and differentially expressed spots were excised from 2-DE gels loaded with 600 µg of protein. Peptide mass spectra were acquired using a MALDI-TOF/TOF 4800 plus MS/MS. Biological process and molecular function was obtained by GO (Gene Ontology) annotated, Mempype and PlantLoc. Intracellular ROS was determined spectrophotometrically by recording the increase in the absorbance at 405 nm promoted by the ABTS oxidation product, and the antioxidant assay kit (Sigma-Aldrich) was used to measure total antioxidant capacity of Regent and Trincadeira, prior and after inoculation with P. viticola. At the end Lipid peroxidation was measured following the thiobarbituric acid (TBA) reacting substance (TBARS).

### Data Protocol
Gel analysis - Progenesis SameSpot V3.31 image analysis system (Nonlinear Dynamics) Blast2Go v3.1.3; Mempype; PlantLoc - Functional Analysis MASCOT (Matrix Science, version 2.2.07) - Acquistion, processing and interpretation MS spectra GPS explorer software (Applied Biosystems 4700 Proteomics Analyzer) - protein identification

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Grapevine; downy mildew; resistance; 2d-dige; plant cell death

### Affiliations
ITQB-UNL
Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica. Lab of Proteomic of Non-model Organism

### Submitter
Joana Martins

### Lab Head
Dr Ana Varela Coelho
Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica. Lab of Proteomic of Non-model Organism


