### Accession
PXD039652

### Title
Mesenchymal Stromal Cell secretome is affected by tissue source and donor age.

### Description
Variation in Mesenchymal Stromal Cell (MSC) function depending on their origin is problematic, as it may confound clinical outcomes of MSC therapy. Current evidence suggests that the therapeutic benefits of MSCs is primarily attributed to secretion of various biologically active factors (secretome). However, the effect of donor characteristics on the MSC secretome composition remains largely unknown. Here, we examined the influence of donor age, sex and tissue source, on the protein profile of the equine MSC secretome. Initially, we used dynamic metabolic labelling with stable isotopes combined with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to identify secreted proteins in MSC conditioned media (CM). Seventy proteins were classified as classically-secreted based on the rate of isotope label incorporation into newly synthesised proteins released into the extracellular space. Next, we analysed CM of bone marrow- (n = 14) and adipose-derived MSCs (n = 16) with label-free LC-MS/MS proteomics. Clustering analysis of 314 proteins detected across all samples identified tissue source as the main factor driving variability in MSC CM proteomes. Linear modelling applied to the subset of 70 secreted proteins identified tissue-related difference in the abundance of 23 proteins. There was an age-related decrease in the abundance of two proteins (CTHRC1, LOX), which has been validated with western blot and enzymatic activity assay. There was limited evidence of sex-related differences in protein abundance. In conclusion, this study provides evidence that tissue source and donor age contribute to heterogeneity in the protein composition of MSC secretomes which may influence the effects of MSC-based cell therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Stable Isotope Dynamic Labelling of Secretomes (SIDLS) To distinguish proteins secreted by MSCs from the structural proteins released into culture media through cell damage, we used dynamic labelling with stable isotopes.45 This method used the incorporation of stable isotope-labelled amino acids into newly-made proteins released from cells over time, to infer their rate of synthesis and subsequent secretion. For this experiment, one sample of BMSCs at passage four was seeded in four T25 flasks at 5,000 cells/cm2. At 80-90% confluence, expansion media was removed, cells washed 3 times with PBS and 5ml of serum-free DMEM deficient in lysine and arginine (Gibco) with (13C6)-labelled L-lysine (CK Isotopes Ltd, UK) and (13C6/15N4)-labelled arginine (CK Isotopes Ltd, UK) was added to each flask. Conditioned media (CM) was collected after 1h, 2h, 6h or 24h incubation (one flask per time point), centrifuged at 800 x g for 7 min to remove cell debris, flash frozen and stored at -80◦C prior to mass spectrometry analysis. Protein concentration with StrataClean Isotope labelled and label-free media were analysed in two separate mass spectrometry experiments following the protocol described below, unless stated otherwise. Protein concentration in CM samples was measured with Pierce 660nm assay (Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Protein was concentrated using the StrataClean resin (Agilent Technologies).45 CM volume for StrataClean binding was adjusted to obtain 100µg of total protein. In samples with lower protein concentrations, the whole volume of 5ml CM was used. Each CM sample was mixed with 12 µl of StrataClean resin, vortexed for 1 min, then mixed by inverting for 10 min. Samples were centrifuged at 295 x g for 1 min and protein-depleted supernatants discarded. StrataClean resin was washed with LC-MS grade water (Thermo Scientific) and centrifuged at 295 x g for 1 min, twice, followed by on-bead protein digestion.45 Protein digestion for LC-MS/MS Protein-bound StrataClean resin was re-suspended in 160 µl of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ambic, Fluka Chemicals, UK). To enhance protein solubilisation, 1% (w/v) RapiGest (Waters, UK) in 25 mM ambic was added and sample heated at 80 °C for 10 min. Proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (3 mM final, Sigma-Aldrich) for 10 min at 60 °C, followed by alkylation for 30 min in the dark using iodoacetamide (9 mM final, Sigma-Aldrich). For the first protease digestion, trypsin/LysC (MS grade trypsin/LysC Mix, Promega) was added and samples incubated at 37 °C for 16 h on a rotary mixer, followed by second digestion at 37 °C for 2 h. Trypsin/Lys-C were used at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w). Peptide digests were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich) at a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) and incubated at 37 °C for 45 min. Samples were centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 15 min, supernatants separated from the StrataClean resin and centrifuged again for 10 min to remove any residual insoluble material. LC-MS/MS spectral acquisition Mass spectrometry analysis of the secretome samples was undertaken in the Centre for Proteome Research at the University of Liverpool. Protein digest samples were analysed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC™ nano-system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  The sample was loaded onto the trapping column (Thermo Scientific, PepMap100, C18, 300 μm x 5 mm), using partial loop injection, for seven minutes at a flow rate of 12 μL/min with 0.1% (v/v) FA.  The sample was resolved on the analytical column (Easy-Spray C18 75 µm x 500 mm 2 µm column) using a gradient of 96.2% A (0.1% formic acid) 3.8% B (79.95% acetonitrile, 19.95% water, 0.1% formic acid) to 50% A 50% B over 90 minutes at a flow rate of 0.3 nL/min (2-hour gradient), interspersed with 30min blanks between the samples. The data-dependent program used for data acquisition consisted of a 60,000-resolution full-scan MS scan in the orbitrap (AGC set to 3e6 ions with a maximum fill time of 100ms). The 16 most abundant peaks per full scan were selected for HCD MS/MS (30,000 resolution, AGC set to 1e5 ions with a maximum fill time of 45 ms) with an ion selection window of 2 m/z and normalised collision energy of 30 %.  Ion selection excluded singularly charged ions and ions with equal to or a greater than +6 charge state.  To avoid repeated selection of peptides for fragmentation the program used a 60-second dynamic exclusion window. All samples were analysed in random order.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification Mass spectrometry data from two experiments were analysed separately using MaxQuant software (v1.6.17.0 [SIDLS] and v2.0.3.0 [label-free], Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry).46–48 Proteins were identified using UniProt reference proteome for E. caballus (9796, accessed 11.05.2021 and 10.05.2022, 20,861 entries) and Andromeda search engine.48 MaxQuant default search parameters were used: identification based on minimum one peptide, the minimum peptide length of seven amino acids, trypsin/P as proteolytic enzyme, single missed cleavage, ‘match between runs’ function enabled. Mass deviations were set to 20 ppm on the precursor ion and 0.5 Da on the fragment ions. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and acetylation at the protein N-terminus was allowed as a variable modification. Peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) were set to 1% for reporting of peptide spectrum matches (PSM) and protein groups. Additionally, in analysis of SIDLS data, labels Lys8 and Arg10 were selected to enable identification of labelled peptides. In analysis of label-free data, label-free quantification (LFQ), a MaxQuant intensity determination and normalization algorithm, was enabled.46 Kinetic analysis of secreted proteins identified with SIDLS Data from SIDLS experiment was analysed following the previously published method45 using the R (v4.1.0) programming language environment unless stated otherwise. MaxQuant ‘evidence.txt’ search results file was used as input data. First, reverse and contaminant peptides were removed. For each identified peptide, at each time point, the relative isotope abundance (RIA) was calculated by dividing abundance of the isotope-labelled (heavy) peptide by summed abundance of labelled and non-labelled (light) peptide (RIA = H/[H+L]). To model protein labelling over time (RIA trajectory), we used only peptides identified and quantified in at least three of the four time points. To obtain protein-level kinetic data, we grouped RIA data for peptides assigned to the same protein (‘Leading razor protein’). For each peptide subset, we used the nls() function in R to model changes of RIA with time, as described previously.45 Next, we calculated the difference in the total mean abundance of peptides (H + L), for each protein, between 24h and 6h time point (P) and used this to calculate protein flux from the cell to extracellular space, by multiplying this with the first-order rate constant (k) at which each protein acquired isotopic label. To differentiate secreted from intracellular proteins, we plotted the rate of label incorporation (k) against log10 flux for each protein and empirically selected a cut-off value of k to separate and classify proteins with distinct kinetic properties.  Validation of kinetic protein classification  To validate protein classification based on k and their flux through the protein pool, we cross-annotated the protein list with UniProt Gene Ontology (GO) terms for cellular component and undertook GO enrichment analysis of the secreted and intracellular protein subsets using the R package clusterProfiler (function enrichGO(), v.4.2.2).49,50 The list of all proteins identified across all four time points (271) was used as a background for over-representation analyses. Gene symbols were used as an input and searched against human gene annotation database (‘org.Hs.eg.db’) due to lack of species-specific database supported by R.

### Publication Abstract
Variation in mesenchymal stromal cell (MSC) function depending on their origin is problematic, as it may confound clinical outcomes of MSC therapy. Current evidence suggests that the therapeutic benefits of MSCs are attributed to secretion of biologically active factors (secretome). However, the effect of donor characteristics on the MSC secretome remains largely unknown. Here, we examined the influence of donor age, sex, and tissue source, on the protein profile of the equine MSC secretome. We used dynamic metabolic labeling with stable isotopes combined with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to identify secreted proteins in MSC conditioned media (CM). Seventy proteins were classified as classically secreted based on the rate of label incorporation into newly synthesized proteins released into the extracellular space. Next, we analyzed CM of bone marrow- (n&#x2005;=&#x2005;14) and adipose-derived MSCs (n&#x2005;=&#x2005;16) with label-free LC-MS/MS. Clustering analysis of 314 proteins detected across all samples identified tissue source as the main factor driving variability in MSC CM proteomes. Linear modelling applied to the subset of 70 secreted proteins identified tissue-related difference in the abundance of 23 proteins. There was an age-related decrease in the abundance of CTHRC1 and LOX, further validated with orthogonal techniques. Due to the lack of flow cytometry characterization of MSC surface markers, the analysis could not account for the potential effect of cell population heterogeneity. This study provides evidence that tissue source and donor age contribute to differences in the protein composition of MSC secretomes which may influence the effects of MSC therapy.

### Keywords
Donor, Proteomics, Mesenchymal stromal cells, Equine, Secretome, Age

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Department of Musculoskeletal and Ageing Science, Institute of Life Course and Medical Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK

### Submitter
Philip Brownridge

### Lab Head
Dr Agnieszka Turlo
Department of Musculoskeletal and Ageing Science, Institute of Life Course and Medical Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK


