### Accession
PXD027565

### Title
K562 cell line LC-MSMS,Quantitative measurement of hydrophobicity dependent LLPS property of chromatin condensate

### Description
K562 cell line treated with 2,5-HD and proteins were captured via cross-linking. We quantified chromatin structure changes and chromatin binding proteins in K562 cell before and after 2,5-hexanediol treatment by Hi-C and Hi-MS, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
For isotonic condition，1,6-Hexanediol was dissolved in RPMI 1640 medium containing 10% FBS to a concentration of 10% to make a storage solution. The working solution was made by dilution using RPMI 1640 medium containing 10% FBS immediately before use. For hypotonic condition, 1,6-Hexanediol was dissolved in H2O to a concentration of 30% to make a storage solution. The working solution was made by 1:2 mix of 30% storage solution and RPMI 1640 medium containing 10% FBS immediately before use. cells were treated at a concentration of 10% for the time indicated. Hi-MS The Hi-MS sample was prepared based on BL-Hi-C protocol to extract chromatin associated proteins. Briefly, 107 K562 cells were incubated with 1% formaldehyde in PBS to crosslink protein–DNA in the cells, then, the cells were suspended using 1% SDS lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES-KOH, 150mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, and 1% SDS). After wash cells with cutsmart buffer with 1%TX-100, the genome was then digested by HaeIII into fragments with blunt-ends. The DNA fragments were treated with adenine and ligated with bridge linker with biotin for 4h at RT. Then, the cells were washed by 0.2%SDS nucleus lysis buffer(20mM Tris-HCl, 50mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 0.2% SDS, 1×protease inhibitor) once, then incubate in 0.2%SDS nucleus lysis buffer at 4°C overnight. The next morning, the cells were washed once again and resuspended in 0.2%SDS nucleus lysis buffer. Cells were sonicated using Digital Sonifier Cell Disruptor at 40% output for 24 cycles, each 5s ON and 5s OFF. After sonication, 2x volumes of IP dilution buffer (20mM Tris pH8, 2mM EDTA, 450mM NaCl, 2% Triton X-100, protease inhibitors) was added and incubate for 1hrs at 4C with rotation. The biotinylated linker/DNA/protein complex in supernatant was then incubated with 1ml M280 magnet beads slurry for 2hrs at 4°C with rotation. Beads were then washed 3 times with cold IP wash buffer 1 (20mM Tris pH8, 2mM EDTA, 50mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS), once with cold TE buffer (1mM Tris pH8, 1mM EDTA). The complex were eluted twice for 5min at 100 °C in 60ul H2O each time and sent for label-free quantitative mass spectrometry (MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
All the MS data were processed in the Firmiana database (Feng et al., 2017). Raw files were searched against the human National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Refseq protein database (updated on 07-04-2013, 32015 entries) by Mascot 2.3 (Matrix Science Inc). The mass tolerances were 20 ppm for precursor and 0.5 Da for product ions for Fusion. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The data were also searched against a decoy database so that peptide identifications were accepted at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Proteins with at least 1 unique peptide with Mascot ion score greater than 20 or 2 peptides with Mascot ion score greater than 20 were remained. Label-free protein quantifications were calculated using a label-free, intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) approach (Schwanhausser et al., 2011). The fraction of total (FOT) was used to represent the normalized abundance of a particular protein/peptide across control and treated samples. FOT of protein was defined as a protein’s iBAQ divided by the total iBAQ of all identified proteins within one sample. The FOT was multiplied by 106 for the ease of presentation. The missing data were imputed with the minimum values. After missing value imputation, phosphorylation sites were quantile normalized.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, K562. llps

### Affiliations
School of Basic Medical Science, Peking University, China
School of Basic Medical Science, Peking University

### Submitter
Kaiqiang You

### Lab Head
Dr Tingting Li
School of Basic Medical Science, Peking University, China


