### Accession
PXD003500

### Title
Proteogenomic analysis of Mycobacterium smegmatis using high resolution mass spectrometry

### Description
Biochemical evidence is vital for accurate genome annotation. The integration of experimental data collected at the proteome level using high resolution mass spectrometry allows for  improvements in genome annotation by providing evidence for novel gene models, while validating or modifying others. Here we report the results of a proteogenomic analysis of a reference strain of Mycobacterium smegmatis (mc2155), a fast growing model organism for the pathogenic Mycobacterium tuberculosis,  the causative agent for Tuberculosis. By integrating high throughput LC/MS/MS proteomic data with genomic six frame translation and ab initio gene prediction databases, a total of 2887 ORFs were identified, including 2810 ORFs annotated to a Reference protein, and 63 ORFs not previously annotated to a Reference protein. Further, the translational start site (TSS) was validated for 558 Reference proteome gene models, while upstream translational evidence was identified for 81. In addition, N-terminus derived peptide identifications allowed for downstream TSS modification of a further 24 gene models. We validated the existence of 6 previously described interrupted coding sequences at the peptide level, and provide evidence for 4 novel frameshift positions. Analysis of peptide posterior error probability (PEP) scores indicate high-confidence novel peptide identifications and indicate that the genome of M. smegmatis is not yet fully annotated.

### Sample Protocol
BACTERIAL CULTURES   Wild type strain of M. smegmatis mc2155 were grown in 7H9 Middlebrook (BD, Maryland, USA) broth supplemented with 0.05% Tween 80, OADC (Becton Dickinson) and 0.2% glycerol (v/v). Cells were grown at 37°C with continuous agitation (120 rpm).  PROTEIN EXTRACTION Cells were harvested from 3 biological replicates each during the exponential and early stationary phase (OD600 ~1.2 and 1.8 respectively) by centrifugation at 4000 g for 15 min at 4°C, they were then washed with PBS pH 7.5. Cells were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. Pellets were suspended in lysis buffer [500 mM Tris-HCl, 0.1% (w/v) SDS, 0.15% sodium deoxycolate, 1× protease inhibitor cocktail, 1× phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Mannheim Germany) and 50 μg/ml lysozyme (Repaske, 1956) and disrupted by sonication at maximum power for six cycles of 30 s, with 1 min cooling on ice between cycles. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 4000 g for 5 min and the lysate filtered through 20 μm pore size low-protein binding filters (Merck, NJ, USA). Proteins were precipitated using the chloroform-methanol precipitation method as previously described (Wessel and Flügge, 1984). The pellet was re-suspended in urea buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8). Protein concentration was determined using a modified Bradford assay as described by Ramagli (1999).  IN-SOLUTION TRYPSIN DIGESTION Fifty micrograms of total protein was reduced with 1 mM DTT for 1 hour with agitation and then alkylated with 5.5 mM IAA for 1 h in the dark. Pre-digestion was with Lysyl Endopeptidase LysC (Waco, Neuss, Germany) at room temperature for 3 hours and diluted 4× 20mM with ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) before adding sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) (1:50 w/w). Digestion was carried out at room temperature for 14 h with agitation and stopped by lowering pH to 2-3 with formic acid (FA) (Sigma Aldrich, St Louis, USA).  10 µg of peptides were cleaned up firstly by activating in-house packed C18 stage tip with solvent B - 80% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1%FA - then washed with solvent A (2% ACN, 0.1%FA). Peptides were eluted with solvent C (60% ACN, 0.1% FA).  LC/MS/MS ANALYSIS Data acquisition was performed on the Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) in a data-dependent manner, coupled to the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific).  1µg peptides were loaded on to an inhouse packed pre-column (100 μm ID × 20 mm) connected to an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm × 400 mm) both packed with C18 Luna 5 μm 100 Å beads (phenomenex 04A-5452) for liquid chromatography separation.  The flow rate was set to 300nl/min with the gradient of 2% ACN to 25% ACN for 125 min, then up to 35% in 5min, to wash the column ACN was increased to  80% ACN for 20min  followed by a column equilibration at 2% ACN for 10 min. A top 10 method with 30s dynamic exclusion was used to acquire mass spectra with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans. The LC/MS/MS methods used has been described previously (Nakedi, et al., 2015). REFERENCES: Nakedi, Kehilwe C., Andrew J. M. Nel, Shaun Garnett, Jonathan M. Blackburn, and Nelson C. Soares. “Comparative Ser/Thr/Tyr Phosphoproteomics between Two Mycobacterial Species: The Fast Growing Mycobacterium Smegmatis and the Slow Growing Mycobacterium Bovis BCG.” Frontiers in Microbiology 6 (2015): 237. doi:10.3389/fmicb.2015.00237. Ramagli, L. S. “Quantifying Protein in 2-D PAGE Solubilization Buffers.” Methods in Molecular Biology (Clifton, N.J.) 112 (1999): 99–103. Repaske, R. “Lysis of Gram-Negative Bacteria by Lysozyme.” Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta 22, no. 1 (October 1956): 189–91. Wessel, D., and U. I. Flügge. “A Method for the Quantitative Recovery of Protein in Dilute Solution in the Presence of Detergents and Lipids.” Analytical Biochemistry 138, no. 1 (April 1984): 141–43.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software package (version 1.5.0.30) was used to search the raw MS spectra using the Andromeda search engine separately against each of a GeneMarkS gene prediction database, six frame, and Reference proteome  -  using reverse decoy databases and a selection of known contaminants provided by MaxQuant. Trypsin and LysC were selected as enzymes, and a maximum of three missed cleavages were allowed. Specific enzyme mode was selected. Carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification and Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications. A minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids, and a minimum of one unique peptide identification per protein group, was required. The default MaxQuant false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 0.01 (1%) was used at the PSM, peptide and protein group levels.

### Publication Abstract
Biochemical evidence is vital for accurate genome annotation. The integration of experimental data collected at the proteome level using high resolution mass spectrometry allows for improvements in genome annotation by providing evidence for novel gene models, while validating or modifying others. Here, we report the results of a proteogenomic analysis of a reference strain of Mycobacterium smegmatis (mc(2)155), a fast growing model organism for the pathogenic Mycobacterium tuberculosis-the causative agent for Tuberculosis. By integrating high throughput LC/MS/MS proteomic data with genomic six frame translation and ab initio gene prediction databases, a total of 2887 ORFs were identified, including 2810 ORFs annotated to a Reference protein, and 63 ORFs not previously annotated to a Reference protein. Further, the translational start site (TSS) was validated for 558 Reference proteome gene models, while upstream translational evidence was identified for 81. In addition, N-terminus derived peptide identifications allowed for downstream TSS modification of a further 24 gene models. We validated the existence of six previously described interrupted coding sequences at the peptide level, and provide evidence for four novel frameshift positions. Analysis of peptide posterior error probability (PEP) scores indicates high-confidence novel peptide identifications and shows that the genome of M. smegmatis mc(2)155 is not yet fully annotated. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003500.

### Keywords
Proteogenomics, Proteomics, Mycobacterium smegmatis, Genome annotation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Computational Biology Division, Department of Integrative Biomedical Sciences, IDM, University of Cape Town, South Africa

### Submitter
Matthys  Potgieter

### Lab Head
Dr Nicola Mulder
Computational Biology Division, Department of Integrative Biomedical Sciences, IDM, University of Cape Town, South Africa


