### Accession
PXD014076

### Title
The phosphoproteome of the coral model system Aiptasia

### Description
The endosymbiotic interaction established by cnidarians and photosynthetic dinoflagellate algae is the foundation of coral reef ecosystems. This essential interaction is globally threatened to breakdown by anthropogenic disturbance. As such, it is compelling to understand the molecular mechanisms underpinning the cnidarian-algal association. We investigated phosphorylation-mediated protein signaling as a mechanism of regulation of the cnidarian-algal interaction, and we report on the generation of the first phosphoproteome for the coral model system Aiptasia. Using mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics in data-independent acquisition (DIA) allowed consistent quantification of over 3,000 phosphopeptides totaling more than 1,600 phosphoproteins across aposymbiotic (symbiont-free) and symbiotic anemones. Additionally, to allow for discrimination between translational regulation and post-translational phosphorylation, we generated a total proteome dataset from the same anemones and used it for phosphopeptide normalization against protein amount. While quantification of protein phosphorylation relied upon the generation of a spectrum library generated by data-dependent acquisition (DDA), total protein quantification in DIA was conducted "library-free" (directDIA) in SpectronautX. DirectDIA allowed consistent quantification of 20,215 peptides, totaling 4,121 proteins (3,518 protein groups) across biological samples.

### Sample Protocol
The detailed protocol describing sample preparation and data acquisition for both phosphopeptide spectral library generation and phosphopeptide quantification in Aiptasia is publicly available on protocols.io(dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.txuepnw). Briefly, for the spectral library, a pool of 20 small-sized (2 mm basal disc) anemones per experimental condition (aposymbiotic and symbiotic) was collected and separately processed throughout the entire protocol. For quantification, each biological replicate per condition (5 aposymbiotic, 5 symbiotic) was constituted by a pool of 10 small-sized anemones. Samples were lysed in 8 M urea buffer supplemented with protease (Cat. 4693159001; Roche Applied Science) and phosphatase (Cat. 04906845001; Roche Applied Science) inhibitors, using a Tenbroeck Tissue Grinder (Cat. 357421; Wheaton) and an Ultrasonic Processor (Thomas Scientific). Proteins were extracted by methanol-chloroform precipitation and measured by Pierce Micro BCA Protein Assay (Cat. 23235; Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. For the spectral library 1.5 mg of total protein extract per experimental condition were used, while for quantification 750 μg of total protein extract per biological replicate were sufficient. Protein digestion was performed by Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP), which improved the purity of the eluted peptides (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). Briefly, the protein extract was loaded in a 10 KDa filter unit (Cat. 42407; Millipore), reduced in 10 mM of dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated in 50 mM of iodoacetamide (IAA), and digested with a Trypsin/Lys-C mix (Cat. V5071; Promega Corp.) at a 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio (w/w), at 37°C overnight. The peptide elute was acidified for desalting in a reversed-phase C18 Sep-Pak cartridge (Cat. WAT023590; Waters Corp.), containing an oligo R3 reversed-phase resin (Cat. 1133903; Applied Biosystems). For spectral library generation, peptide elution from the Sep-Pak cartridge was performed in 75% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), a solution compatible with the following chromatographic fractionation. For quantification by DIA/SWATH-MS, peptides were eluted in a solution containing 80% ACN, 5% TFA, and 1 M of freshly added glycolic acid that allowed direct phosphopeptide enrichment. Deep coverage of the phosphopeptide spectral library was obtained by high pH reversed-phase fractionation according to the protocol of Batth and Olsen (Batth and Olsen, 2016). Briefly, an XBridge Peptide BEH C18 column (Cat. 186003570; Waters Corp.) was connected to a Surveyor Plus high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a 120-min gradient of buffer B (90% ACN, 5 mM ammonium hydroxide) in buffer A (5 mM ammonium hydroxide) was designed as follows: from 0-5% to 25% of buffer B within 60-90 min, from 25 to 40% of buffer B within 5-10 min, ramp up to 60-70% of buffer B within 5 min, maintain at 70% for 5 min before ramping down to 0-5% of buffer B. A total of 110 fractions were collected and re-concatenated orthogonally (by mixing different parts of the gradient) into 25 fractions, and their volume was reduced to ~ 50 μl with a SpeedVac system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The TiO2 bead-based phosphopeptide enrichment was performed according to the protocol of Engholm-Keller et al. (Engholm-Keller et al., 2012). First, desalted and/or fractionated peptides were brought to a volume of 1 ml with 80% ACN, 5% TFA, and 1 M of freshly added glycolic acid. Then, peptides and TiO2 beads (Cat. 502075000; GL Sciences) were incubated at a 1:6 ratio (w/w), shaking for 10 min in a vortex mixer. After supernatant removal, the TiO2-bound phosphopeptides were washed in 80% ACN, 1% TFA followed by 20% ACN, 0.5% TFA. After complete evaporation of the solvent, the phosphopeptides were eluted from the dry TiO2 beads by incubation in 4% ammonia solution in water, pH 11 (32% ammonia stock solution, Cat. 21192.323, VWR), rocking for 10 min. The phosphopeptide-rich supernatant was acidified with formic acid (FA) (14% by volume) and TFA (4% by volume) and transferred on top of a homemade C18 STAGE tip assembled and pre-conditioned according to the protocol developed by Rappsilber and colleagues (Rappsilber et al., 2007). After two washes with 0.1% TFA in water, phosphopeptides were eluted twice in 75% ACN 0.1% TFA and completely dried by SpeedVac. Prior to LC-MS/MS injection, phosphopeptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA, 0.1% ACN, LC-MS grade water solution and sonicated in an ultrasonic cleaner. Phosphopeptides were measured at A280 by NanoDrop (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and concentrations were normalized across samples for quantitative DIA/SWATH-MS analysis. Indexed retention time (iRT) standards (Cat. Ki30021; Biognosys) were added to the ready-to-inject phosphopeptide mixture at a 1:10 ratio (v/w) for DDA MS (shotgun proteomics), and at a 3:10 ratio (v/w) for multiplexed analysis in DIA/SWATH-MS.

### Data Protocol
Phosphopeptide spectral library generation from DDA data DDA raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v1.6.2.10) using the integrated Andromeda engine for phosphopeptide search (Figure 1B). A false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 0.01 was applied at peptide, protein, and modification level. The search included carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification, and phosphorylation (STY), oxidation (M), and acetylation (N-term) as variable modifications. Peptides with a minimum length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of 5 modifications were considered. Trypsin/P was selected as the digestion enzyme, allowing a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Phosphopeptide identity retrieval was done by sequence alignment against the Aiptasia FASTA database v1.0 (Baumgarten et al., 2015), containing 29,269 entries. The MaxQuant search output was imported in Spectronaut X (Cat. Sw-3001; Biognosys) for spectral library generation using default settings: minimum fragment ions length of 3 amino acids, fragment ions m/z range of 300-1800, minimum relative intensity of 5%, and 3 to 6 fragment ions per precursor peptide.  DIA data processing DIA raw data files were imported in Spectronaut X and the generated spectral library was assigned for identity retrieval of the quantified phosphopeptides, using default settings. Extraction and scoring of MS1 and MS2 mass tolerance as well as the retention time (RT) for the extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) were set to dynamic and correction factors of 1 were applied. Calibration of iRT standards was done automatically by local (non-linear) regression. Mutated decoys (1 to 3 random amino acids swap) were generated at a library size fraction of 0.1, Q value cutoff (FDR) for precursor and protein identification was set at 0.01, and single protein hits were defined by stripped peptide sequences. Interference correction was applied so that the least interfering 3 fragment ions and 2 precursor ions were kept. All fragment ions not removed during interference correction were used for quantification, calculated from the area under the curve between the XIC boundaries of each targeted ion. Based on the assumption that the majority of the peptides were not regulated (stable background), cross run normalization was performed by Q value sparse, so all precursors that were identified at least once were used for normalization. Upon analysis completion, peptide precursor quantities (Fragment Group or FG) were exported, and a data matrix containing non-redundant phosphopeptide precursors quantified across all samples (5 aposymbiotic, 5 symbiotic) was generated for downstream analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The endosymbiotic relationship between cnidarians and photosynthetic dinoflagellate algae provides the foundation of coral reef ecosystems. This essential interaction is globally threatened by anthropogenic disturbance. As such, it is important to understand the molecular mechanisms underpinning the cnidarian-algal association. Here we investigated phosphorylation-mediated protein signalling as a mechanism of regulation of the cnidarian-algal interaction, and we report on the generation of the first phosphoproteome for the coral model system Aiptasia. Mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics&#xa0;using data-independent acquisition allowed consistent quantification of over 3,000 phosphopeptides totalling more than 1,600 phosphoproteins across aposymbiotic (symbiont-free) and symbiotic anemones. Comparison of the symbiotic states showed distinct phosphoproteomic profiles attributable to the differential phosphorylation of 539 proteins that cover a broad range of functions, from receptors to structural and signal transduction proteins. A subsequent pathway enrichment analysis identified the processes of "protein digestion and absorption," "carbohydrate metabolism," and "protein folding, sorting and degradation," and highlighted differential phosphorylation of the "phospholipase D signalling pathway" and "protein processing in the endoplasmic reticulum." Targeted phosphorylation of the phospholipase D signalling pathway suggests control of glutamate vesicle trafficking across symbiotic compartments, and phosphorylation of the endoplasmic reticulum machinery suggests recycling of symbiosome-associated proteins. Our study shows for the first time that changes in the phosphorylation status of proteins between aposymbiotic and symbiotic Aiptasia anemones&#xa0;may play a role in the&#xa0;regulation of the cnidarian-algal symbiosis. This is the first phosphoproteomic study of a cnidarian-algal symbiotic association as well as the first application of quantification by data-independent acquisition in the coral field.

### Keywords
Coral-model, Dda, Spectral library, Dia/swath-ms, Quantification, Cnidarian, Aiptasia

### Affiliations
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
Professor of Genetics of Adaptation in Aquatic Systems Department of Biology University of Konstanz Germany

### Submitter
Fabia Simona

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Robert Voolstra
Professor of Genetics of Adaptation in Aquatic Systems Department of Biology University of Konstanz Germany


