### Accession
PXD026315

### Title
Gestational chronodisruption throughout pregnancy impairs adipose tissue physiology in the offspring

### Description
Compelling evidence supports that gestational chronodisruption induces major changes in maternal circadian rhythms, fetal development and that these changes impact adult life at many physiological levels. Using a rat model of chronic photoperiod shifting throughout gestation (CPS), we investigated the detrimental effects of gestational CPS on glucose homeostasis, adipose tissue physiology and metabolism in the adult male offspring. At proteomic level, in CPS adipose tissue, 275 proteins displayed differential expression, compared with LD animals fed with a standard diet. Interestingly, CPS offspring and LD fed with HFD showed 20 proteins in common (2 upregulated 18 downregulated). Based on these common proteins, the IPA analysis found that 2 functional pathways were significantly altered; the network 1 (AKT/ERK) and the network 2 (TNF/IL4).

### Sample Protocol
10mg tissue was homogenized in 50µl 8 M urea using a glass potter and subjected to an ultrasonic bath (0°C, on ice) for 60 min. 150µl 50mM sodium hydrogen carbonate buffer (pH 8.0), 1% Triton X-100 were added and cell lysis was supported by an ultrasonic disruption for 30 min. Lysates were centrifuged at 21.000 x g for 15 min at 4°C. Aqueous lysate fraction was collected by a syringe below the layer of fat.   For normalization aliquots of each sample were subjected to SDS-PAGE, stained with colloidal coomassie and the protein amount was calculated by the optical density of the whole sample lanes. The adjusted samples were heated in SDS-sample buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE (3% stacking gel, 12% separation gel) in a Mini PROTEAN System (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). Every lane was cut in three fractions and in-gel digestion was performed according to Kolodziej A et. al., J Vis Exp. 2016 Dec 15;(118):54992. Protein identification was performed by high-resolution mass spectrometry on a hybrid dual-pressure linear ion trap/orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) equipped with an EASY-nLC Ultra HPLC (Thermo Scientific). For analysis, peptide samples were adjusted to 10 μl 1% ACN/0.1% TFA and fractionated on a 75 μm (ID), 25 cm PepMap C18-column, packed with 2 μm resin (Dionex/Thermo Scientific). The separation was achieved through applying a gradient from 2 to 35% ACN in 0.1% formic acid over 150 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. An Orbitrap full MS scan was followed by up to 20 LTQ MS/MS runs using collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation of the most abundantly detected peptide ions. Essential MS settings were as follows: full MS (FTMS; resolution 60,000; m/z range 400-2000); MS/MS (Linear Trap; minimum signal threshold 500; isolation width 2 Da; dynamic exclusion time setting 30 s; singly charged ions were excluded from selection). The normalized collision energy was set to 35%, and activation time to 10 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw proteomics data processing and protein identification were performed using PEAKS Studio V.8.0 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada). False discovery rate was set to < 1%. Label-free quantification was performed using Progenesis QI for proteomics (Nonlinear Dynamics/Waters). Proteins with abundance ratios of >1.5 or <1/1.5 at p<0.05 were considered as significantly regulated.

### Publication Abstract
Compelling evidence in rats support the idea that gestational chronodisruption induces major changes in maternal circadian rhythms and fetal development and that these changes impact adult life at many physiological levels. Using a model of chronic photoperiod shifting throughout gestation (CPS), in which pregnant female rats (Sprague-Dawley strain; <i>n</i> = 16 per group) were exposed to lighting schedule manipulation every 3-4 days reversing the photoperiod completely or light/dark photoperiod (12/12; LD), we explored in the adult rat male offspring body weight gain, glucose homeostasis, adipose tissue content, adipose tissue response to norepinephrine (NE), and adipose tissue proteomic in the basal condition with standard diet (SD) and in response to high-fat diet (HFD). In adult CPS male (100-200 days old; <i>n</i> = 8 per group), we found increasing body weight, under SD and adiposity. Also, we found an increased response to intraperitoneal glucose (IGTT). After 12 weeks of HFD, white adipose tissue depots in CPS offspring were increased further, and higher IGTT and lower intraperitoneal insulin tolerance response were found, despite the lack of changes in food intake. In <i>in vitro</i> experiments, we observed that adipose tissue (WAT and BAT) glycerol response to NE from CPS offspring was decreased, and it was completely abolished by HFD. At the proteomic level, in CPS adipose tissue, 275 proteins displayed differential expression, compared with LD animals fed with a standard diet. Interestingly, CPS offspring and LD fed with HFD showed 20 proteins in common (2 upregulated and 18 downregulated). Based on these common proteins, the IPA analysis found that two functional pathways were significantly altered by CPS: network 1 (AKT/ERK) and network 2 (TNF/IL4; data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD026315). The present data show that gestational chronodisruption induced deleterious effects in adipose tissue recruitment and function, supporting the idea that adipose tissue function was programmed <i>in utero</i> by gestational chronodisruption, inducing deficient metabolic responses that persist into adulthood.

### Keywords
Adipose tissue physiology, Lfq mass süectrometry, Chronodisruption

### Affiliations
University Magdeburg, Medical School Institute of Exptl. Internal Medicine Leipziger STr. 44 39120 Magdeburg, Germany
University Magdeburg

### Submitter
Thilo Kaehne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Thilo Kaehne
University Magdeburg, Medical School Institute of Exptl. Internal Medicine Leipziger STr. 44 39120 Magdeburg, Germany


