### Accession
PXD006240

### Title
Mass spectrometry identification of proteins of isolated auditory and vestibular hair cells using data-independent and data-dependent acquisition

### Description
Hair cells undergo postnatal development that leads to formation of their sensory organelles, synaptic machinery, and in the case of cochlear outer hair cells, their electromotile mechanism. To examine the proteome changes over development, we isolated pools of 5000 Pou4f3-Gfp positive or negative cells from the cochlea or utricles; these cell pools were analyzed by data-dependent and data-independent acquisition (DDA and DIA) mass spectrometry. DDA data were used to generate spectral libraries, which enabled identification and accurate quantitation of specific proteins using the DIA datasets. We also isolated and pooled individual inner and outer hair cells from adult cochlea and compared their proteomes to those of developing hair cells. The DDA and DIA datasets will be valuable for accurately quantifying proteins in hair cells and non-hair cells over this developmental window.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were isolated from postnatal day 0 (P0), P4, or P7 cochleas and utricles of Pou4f3-Gfp mice using fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). The cells with the brightest signal in the GFP channel were sorted into the GFP+ pool and the cells with the lowest signal in the GFP channel were sorted into the GFP- pools. Details of cell isolation and sorting are described elsewhere (Scheffer et al., J. Neurosci 35, 6366-6380; 2015). Individual sorting runs generated from 100-15,000 cells, which were frozen as individual pools. In addition, samples of whole cochlea or whole utricle were isolated. After pooling samples appropriately, they were processed for mass spectrometry using the enhanced FASP method (Erde et al., J. Proteome Res. 13, 1885-1895). Samples were then subjected to liquid-chromatography mass spectrometry using data-dependent or data-independent acquisition settings.

### Data Protocol
For DDA data, we used MaxQuant, with its built-in Andromeda search engine, to match peptides to mouse protein database entries, to assemble peptides into proteins, and the quantify those proteins. We also searched the DDA with the SEQUEST search engine, using the Proteome Discoverer package. DIA data were all analyzed using Skyline.

### Publication Abstract
Control of the dimensions of actin-rich processes like filopodia, lamellipodia, microvilli, and stereocilia requires the coordinated activity of many proteins. Each of these actin structures relies on heterodimeric capping protein (CAPZ), which blocks actin polymerization at barbed ends. Because dimension control of the inner ear's stereocilia is particularly precise, we studied the CAPZB subunit in hair cells. CAPZB, present at &#x223c;100 copies per stereocilium, concentrated at stereocilia tips as hair cell development progressed, similar to the CAPZB-interacting protein TWF2. We deleted <i>Capzb</i> specifically in hair cells using <i>Atoh1-Cre</i>, which eliminated auditory and vestibular function. <i>Capzb</i>-null stereocilia initially developed normally but later shortened and disappeared; surprisingly, stereocilia width decreased concomitantly with length. CAPZB2 expressed by in utero electroporation prevented normal elongation of vestibular stereocilia and irregularly widened them. Together, these results suggest that capping protein participates in stereocilia widening by preventing newly elongating actin filaments from depolymerizing.

### Keywords
Supporting cells, Hair cells, Cochlea, Utricle

### Affiliations
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland  OR  97239
Oregon Hearing Research Center

### Submitter
Peter Barr-Gillespie

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Barr-Gillespie
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland  OR  97239


