### Accession
PXD014195

### Title
Fibro-adipogenic progenitors of dystrophic mice are insensitive to NOTCH regulation of adipogenesis

### Description
Fibro adipogenic progenitors (FAPs) promote satellite cell differentiation in adult skeletal muscle regeneration. However, in pathological conditions, FAPs are responsible for fibrosis and fatty infiltrations. Here we show that the NOTCH pathway negatively modulates FAP differentiation both in vitro and in vivo. However, FAPs isolated from young dystrophin- deficient mdx mice are insensitive to this control mechanism. An unbiased mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis of FAPs from muscles of wild type and mdx mice, suggest that the synergistic cooperation between NOTCH and inflammatory signals controls FAP differentiation. Remarkably, we demonstrated that factors released by hematopoietic cells restore the sensitivity to NOTCH adipogenic inhibition in mdx FAPs. These results offer a basis for rationalizing pathological ectopic fat infiltrations in skeletal muscle and may suggest new therapeutic strategies to mitigate the detrimental effects of fat depositions in muscles of dystrophic patients.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were lysed in GdmCl buffer, boiled and sonicated, as previously described. Proteins were digested using LysC and trypsin (1:100), overnight at 37°C, in digestion buffer (20mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, and 10% acetonitrile). The obtained peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.15 (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011) with an FDR < 0.01 at the level of proteins, peptides and modifications. Searches were performed against the Mouse UniProtKb FASTA database (2015). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, and the search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein, oxidation of methionine, as variable modifications. Up to three missed cleavages were allowed for protease digestion, and peptides had to be fully tryptic. Quantification was performed by MaxQuant, ‘match between runs’ was enabled, with a matching time window of 1 min. Bioinformatic analyses were performed with Perseus (www.perseus-framework.org). Significance was assessed using two-sample student’s t-test, for which replicates were grouped, and statistical tests performed with permutation-based FDR correction for multiple hypothesis testing. Proteomics raw data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier.

### Publication Abstract
Fibro-adipogenic progenitors (FAPs) promote satellite cell differentiation in adult skeletal muscle regeneration. However, in pathological conditions, FAPs are responsible for fibrosis and fatty infiltrations. Here we show that the NOTCH pathway negatively modulates FAP differentiation both in vitro and in vivo. However, FAPs isolated from young dystrophin-deficient <i>mdx</i> mice are insensitive to this control mechanism. An unbiased mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis of FAPs from muscles of wild-type and <i>mdx</i> mice suggested that the synergistic cooperation between NOTCH and inflammatory signals controls FAP differentiation. Remarkably, we demonstrated that factors released by hematopoietic cells restore the sensitivity to NOTCH adipogenic inhibition in <i>mdx</i> FAPs. These results offer a basis for rationalizing pathological ectopic fat infiltrations in skeletal muscle and may suggest new therapeutic strategies to mitigate the detrimental effects of fat depositions in muscles of dystrophic patients.

### Keywords
Mass cytometry, Fibro adipogenic progenitors, Notch, Skeletal muscle regeneration, Proteome, Inflammation, Myopathies, Muscular dystrophy, Adipogenesis

### Affiliations
University of Rome Tor Vergata

### Submitter
Francesca Sacco

### Lab Head
Dr Gianni Cesareni
University of Rome Tor Vergata


