### Accession
PXD023182

### Title
N-terminal VP1 truncation favor T=1 norovirus-like particles

### Description
Noroviruses cause immense sporadic gastroenteritis outbreaks worldwide. Upcoming genotypes, which are divided based on VP1 sequence, further enhance this public thread regularly. Self-assembling properties of the human norovirus major capsid protein VP1 are crucial for using virus-like particles (VLPs) for vaccine development. However, there is no vaccine available yet. Here, VLPs from different variants produced in insect cells are characterized in detail using a set of biophysical and structural tools.

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin digestion. For tryptic digestion followed by proteomic analysis, VLP samples in PBS at 15 µM VP1 were separated via sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). After staining with a solution containing 0.5% Coomassie brilliant blue R250, 50% ethanol and 7% acetic acid, respective gel bands were cut into small pieces and further processed according to Shevchenko et al. After digestion, the samples were dried and thereafter dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and transferred into the autosampler.  Pepsin digestion. VLP samples were mixed 1:1 with denaturing buffer (300 mM phosphate buffer, pH 2.3, 6 M urea). Pepsin digestion of 100 pmol VP1 was performed online on a home packed pepsin column with Porozyme immobilized pepsin beads, Thermo Scientific.

### Data Protocol
Trypsin digestion. MS/MS-spectra were searched with the Sequest algorithm integrated in the Proteome Discoverer software version 2.0, against Norovirus strain sequences AY502016.1, AB447457.1, AF504671.2, AF504671, LC037415.1, AII73747 and a common contaminant protein database. Precursor ion and fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da (Fusion) or 0.02 Da (QExactive), respectively. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification on cysteine residues. Acetylation of the protein N terminus, N-terminal methionine loss, the oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and glutamine to pyroglutamate on the peptide N-Terminus were set as variable modifications. Only peptides with a high confidence (FDR of <1%) using a decoy database approach were accepted as identified. Pepsin digestion. Precursor and fragment ions were searched and matched against a local protein database containing the proteins of interest in MaxQuant (version 1.5.7.0) using the Andromeda search engine. The digestion mode was set to “unspecific” and N-terminal acetylation, deamidation, oxidation and disulfide bond formation were included as variable modifications with a maximum number of 5 modifications per peptide. Peptides between 5 and 30 amino acids length were accepted. The MaxQuant default mass tolerances for precursor (4.5 ppm) and fragment (20 ppm) ions defined for the Thermo Orbitrap instrument were used for data search. The minimum score for successful identifications was set to 20 for unmodified and 40 for modified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Noroviruses cause immense sporadic gastroenteritis outbreaks worldwide. Emerging genotypes, which are divided based on the sequence of the major capsid protein VP1, further enhance this public threat. Self-assembling properties of the human norovirus major capsid protein VP1 are crucial for using virus-like particles (VLPs) for vaccine development. However, there is no vaccine available yet. Here, VLPs from different variants produced in insect cells were characterized in detail using a set of biophysical and structural tools. We used native mass spectrometry, gas-phase electrophoretic mobility molecular analysis, and proteomics to get clear insights into particle size, structure, and composition, as well as stability. Generally, noroviruses have been known to form mainly <i>T</i> = 3 particles. Importantly, we identified a major truncation in the capsid proteins as a likely cause for the formation of <i>T</i> = 1 particles. For vaccine development, particle production needs to be a reproducible, reliable process. Understanding the underlying processes in capsid size variation will help to produce particles of a defined capsid size presenting antigens consistent with intact virions. Next to vaccine production itself, this would be immensely beneficial for bio-/nano-technological approaches using viral particles as carriers or triggers for immunological reactions.

### Keywords
Vp1 truncation, Norovirus, Capsid assembly

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine
Mass Spectrometric Proteomics
Heinrich Pette Institute Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology Hamburg, Germany

### Submitter
Christoph Krisp

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Charlotte Uetrecht
Heinrich Pette Institute Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology Hamburg, Germany


