### Accession
PXD032075

### Title
A CRISPR-engineered Isogenic Model Reveals Altered Neuronal Phenotypes of the 22q11.2 A-B Syndromic Deletion

### Description
The 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS) is the most common copy number variant (CNV)-associated syndrome, leading to congenital and neuropsychiatric anomalies. Patient-derived, induced pluripotent stem cell (iPS) models have provided important insight into the mechanisms of phenotypic features of this condition. However, patient-derived iPSC models may harbor underlying genetic heterogeneity that can confound analysis of pathogenic CNV effects. Furthermore, the ~1.5 Mb “A-B” deletion at this locus is inherited at higher frequency than the more common ~2.7 Mb “A-D” deletion, but remains under-studied due to lack of relevant models. To address these issues, here we leveraged a CRISPR-based strategy in Cas9-expressing iPS cells to engineer novel isogenic models of the 22q11.2 “A-B” deletion. After in vitro differentiation to excitatory neurons, integrated transcriptomic and cell surface proteomics identified deletion-associated alterations in surface adhesion markers. Furthermore, implantation of iPS-derived neuronal progenitor cells into the cortex of neonatal mice found decreased proliferation and accelerated neuronal maturation within a relevant microenvironment. Taken together, our results suggest potential pathogenic mechanisms of the 22q11.2 “A-B” deletion in driving neuronal and neurodevelopmental phenotypes. We further propose that the isogenic models generated here will provide a unique resource to study this less-common variant of the 22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome.

### Sample Protocol
1 - 3e^06 cells (NPCs and 3 week neurons) were scraped and washed twice with cold PBS, and then re-suspended in 990 μL cold D-PBS and transferred to a 1.5-mL amber tube. Next, they were oxidized using 10 μL 160mM NaIO4 (Thermo 1379822) and incubated at 4°C for 20 minutes. The cells were washed twice with cold D-PBS to remove the oxidizing reagent. For chemical labeling, cell pellets were re-suspended in 1 mL cold D-PBS followed by the addition of 1 μL aniline (Sigma-Aldrich 242284) and 10 μL biocytin hydrazide (Biotium 90060). Samples were incubated at 4°C for 60 minutes on a rotisserie followed by three more spin washes with cold D-PBS. After the final wash, supernatant was removed, and cell pellet were snap frozen and stored in -80°C until further processing for mass spectrometry. All experiments were performed in triplicates.  The labeled cell pellets were thawed on ice and lysed in 500 μL 2X RIPA buffer (Millipore 20- 188) containing 1X HALT protease inhibitor (Thermo 78430) and 2 mM EDTA. Lysates were sonicated in pulses for ~30 seconds with a probe sonicator and incubated on ice for 10 minutes. Samples were spun at 17,000g for 10 minutes at 4°C to remove cell debris. To enrich for the biotinylated surface proteins, the clarified lysates were incubated with washed Neutravidin beads (Thermo 29200) a 2-mL chromatography column at 4°C for 120 minutes. After incubation, the beads with captured biotinylated surface proteins were washed with 5 mls of 1X RIPA + 1mM EDTA, followed by 5mls of PBS + 1M NaCl, and finally 5mls of 50mM ABC + 2M Urea buffer to remove unbound proteins. For the miniaturized cell surface capture protocol, P200 tips were packed with four C18 disks (3M 14-386-2) to create stage tips and activated with 60 μL methanol, 60 μL 80% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% formic acid (FA), and twice with 60 μL 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) prior to transferring the beads to the tip using 100 μL of the 2M Urea digestion buffer. For protein digestion, 2 ug trypsin (Pierce, 90057) was added to each sample and incubated at RT for overnight digestion. After digestion (18 – 20 hours), the pH was dropped to ~2 with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma, T6508-10AMP) and the peptides were allowed to bind the stage tip by gravity flow or spin filtration. The peptide mixture was desalted on the C18 stage tip by washing thrice with 0.1%TFA. Desalted peptides were eluted with 50% acetonitrile (ACN, Sigma, 34998-4L) and 0.1% TFA in LC/MS grade water and dried down completely in a speedvac. Dried peptides were resuspended in LC/MS grade water (Fisher, W64) with 2% 10 ACN and 0.1% formic acid (FA, Honeywell, 94318-250ML-F). Peptide concentration was measured using a Nanodrop (Thermo), and the peptide concentration was adjusted to 0.2ug/ul for mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
1ug of peptide for each replicate was injected onto a Dionex Ultimate 3000 NanoRSLC instrument and the eluted peptides were analyzed with a Thermo Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. Raw spectral data was analyzed using MaxQuant v1.5.1.2 to identify and quantify peptide abundance and searched against the human Swiss-Prot annotated human proteome from Uniprot (Swiss-Prot reviewed downloaded in 2018). The “match-between-runs” option was selected to increase peptide identifications while the “fast LFQ” option was selected to calculate label-free quantification values (LFQ) of identified proteins. All other settings were left to the default MaxQuant values. The MaxQuant output data was analyzed using Perseus and the R program (version 3.4.0) in R-Studio. Proteins annotated as “reverse”, “only identified by site”, and “potential contaminant” were filtered out as well as proteins that were quantified in less than 2 out of 3 biological replicates in at least one experimental group. Proteins were further filtered to include only membrane-proteins or membrane-associated proteins using a manually curated list of surfaceome proteins. Missing values were imputed based on the normal distribution of the dataset as implemented by Perseus. Volcano plots were generated using output from a two-sample T-test comparing the log-2 transformed LFQ protein abundance values from different samples and P-value cut-off set to 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Isogenic, Neurons, Ipsc, Xenotransplant, Proteomics, Crispr, Cnv, 22q11.2ds

### Affiliations
University of California, San Francisco
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Wiita Lab, University of California, San Francisco, USA

### Submitter
Yu-Hsiu Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Arun P. Wiita
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Wiita Lab, University of California, San Francisco, USA


