### Accession
PXD003151

### Title
Protein expression patterns associated with sucrose-induced dysbiosis are conserved across taxonomically diverse oral microcosm biofilm models of dental caries.

### Description
The lesions of enamel caries can be considered as the outcome of dysbiotic changes in the biofilm community of supragingival dental plaque. Demineralization occurs as the cumulative outcome of repeated shifts towards a less diverse microbiota that produces and tolerates a low pH environment in tooth sites that are sheltered from protective factors in host saliva. Although the etiology of caries is multifactorial, frequent consumption of foods rich in fermentable carbohydrates, notably sucrose, appears to be one of the major factors driving the microbiota in the direction of dysbiosis, particularly in the case of otherwise healthy children with normal salivary flow. Streptococcus mutans and closely related species (such as Streptococcus sobrinus) have long been considered to play a primary etiological role in dental caries. S. mutans responds to sucrose by producing large quantities of lactic acid. It is very tolerant of low pH, and produces an insoluble extracellular polysaccharide that may sequester acid at tooth surfaces. The mechanisms behind those putative virulence factors have been intensively studied in monoculture, and recently in simple multi-species consortia. Much less is known of other species that may also contribute to or protect against dysbiosis driven by dietary carbohydrates. Some strains of “non-mutans” streptococci produce and tolerate acid at levels comparable to S. mutans, while others show increased ariginolytic capabilities, which may act to raise pH within the biofilm matrix. S. mutans tends to be a minority species even in caries-active children, and carious lesions likewise can occur in children with no detectable S. mutans. 16S rDNA-based metagenomic comparisons of caries-active and caries-free subjects have detected associations between caries and a variety of oral species, including not only non-mutans streptococci, but also members of other genera, such as Scardovia and Bifidobacterium. Caries associations have not been consistent between studies. Moreover, different taxonomic clusters have been defined as subgroups within the same study. This raises an important point. Although caries-associated communities are typically less diverse than healthy supragingival plaque overall, those dysbiotic communities still display considerable taxonomic diversity between affected individuals. That in turn raises the question of whether it is desirable to define biomarkers of dysbiosis that are less dependent on taxonomy. The Human Microbiome project generated comprehensive metagenomic data for a wide variety of body sites in healthy subjects, including supragingival plaque. Although most of that data was based on 16S rDNA sequencing, shotgun metagenomics was also used to catalog the functional potential of all microbial genes within a smaller subset of subjects. One of the key findings was that healthy sites from different people were broadly similar with respect to their functional profiles, even though there was extensive individual variation in their taxonomic profiles. It is possible that the “conservation of function” concept may also extend to dysbiotic communities. This would explain why microbial communities associated with caries still show considerable taxonomic variation. In that case, differential patterns of community-wide gene and/or protein expression might provide a more accurate indicator of dysbiosis than can be achieved by counting caries-associated species. Metatranscriptomic or metaproteomic approaches can be used to provide information on function. A recent metatranscriptomic comparison of subgingival plaque from healthy and periodontally diseased sites in three subjects has provided data that support the “conservation of function” concept. They observed that taxonomically diverse diseased sites shared conserved gene expression profiles [20]. By the same token, a recent metaproteomic comparison of gut microbiotas from healthy controls to Crohn’s disease patients found that major shifts in protein expression by function did not always correlate with changes in taxon relative abundance [21]. In this metaproteomic study, we found that sucrose–induced changes in protein expression patterns for pathways involving glycolysis, lactate production, aciduricity and ammonia/glutamate metabolism were likewise conserved in taxonomically diverse dysbiotic oral microcosm biofilm communities.

### Sample Protocol
Direct collection of supragingival plaque requires pooling to obtain adequate amounts of protein for deep shotgun metaproteomics. In our experience, pooling plaque from all sites within a single individual typically yielded only about 1 mg of total plaque by wet weight. Pooling samples from multiple subjects was not a desirable option, since it would have obscured taxonomic diversity between subjects. Accordingly, a previously validated oral microcosm biofilm model was used to scale up protein yields. Microcosms are grown using plaque from a single site as an inoculum, and 16S rDNA studies by members of our group have previously shown that samples taken from the same subjects at different times yield microcosms that are more similar within subjects than between subjects. The oral microcosm approach retains much of the taxonomic variation between individual subjects. Moreover, it simulates many aspects of the caries process. Samples of expectorated whole saliva and plaque were collected from each of 12 children at high risk for caries. Each saliva sample was sterilized, and used to coat hydroxyapatite disks, which were then inoculated with plaque from the corresponding subject. Inoculated disks were placed into paired CDC biofilm reactors containing Basal Mucin Medium (BMM), and both reactors were incubated at 37° C under constant shear for 24 hr.  BMM was then flowed through the NS reactor for 48 h (temperature and shear were held constant).  The WS reactor was run in the same way at the same time, but it additionally was sucrose-pulsed five times per day, analogous to three meals and two snacks, for the 2nd and 3rd days.  Sucrose pulsing was discontinued at night. Real-time pH was recorded every 15 min, throughout the 72-hr incubation. All 12 WS microcosms dropped rapidly below the critical pH for enamel demineralization (pH 5.5) on each day of sucrose pulsing, and then rebounded each night. By contrast, none of their corresponding NS microcosms dropped below critical pH at any time. The WS pH curves showed a cyclical pattern of sucrose-induced acidification similar to those observed in studies of plaque pH in human subjects. This suggested that the microcosm system effectively modeled sucrose-induced dysbiosis.

### Data Protocol
Briefly, mass spectra obtained by a separate 2-D MSMS analysis of each microcosm were searched against the Human Oral Microbiome Database (HOMD) genomic dataset, using our published two-step strategy. Peptide-spectral matches at  a 5% target-decoy search local False Discovery Rate (FDR) were used for further analysis. All instances of the spectrum for a given peptide were retained, to allow for spectral counting. Those peptides were searched against the BLAST-NR database, using BLAST-P. The BLAST-P output for each microcosm was parsed using MEGAN5 software, to generate taxonomic assignments and functional analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dental caries, Metaproteomics, Oral microbiome, Galaxy-p, Dysbiosis

### Affiliations
Pratik Jagtap, Managing Director,  Center for Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, 43 Gortner Laboratory,  1479 Gortner Avenue,  St. Paul, MN 55108       Phone: 612-624-9275
Center for Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics

### Submitter
Pratik Jagtap

### Lab Head
Dr Pratik Jagtap
Pratik Jagtap, Managing Director,  Center for Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, 43 Gortner Laboratory,  1479 Gortner Avenue,  St. Paul, MN 55108       Phone: 612-624-9275


