### Accession
PXD019814

### Title
Accurate MS-based Rab10 phosphorylation stoichiometry determination as readout for LRRK2 activity in Parkinson’s disease

### Description
Pathogenic mutations in the Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the predominant genetic cause of Parkinson’s disease (PD). They increase its activity, resulting in augmented Rab10-Thr73 phosphorylation and conversely, LRRK2 inhibition decreases pRab10 levels. Currently, there is no assay to quantify pRab10 levels for drug target engagement or patient stratification. To meet this challenge, we developed an high accuracy and sensitivity targeted mass spectrometry (MS)-based assay for determining Rab10-Thr73 phosphorylation stoichiometry in human samples. It uses synthetic stable isotope-labeled (SIL) analogues for both phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated tryptic peptides surrounding Rab10-Thr73 to directly derive the percentage of Rab10 phosphorylation from attomole amounts of the endogenous phosphopeptide. The SIL and the endogenous phosphopeptides are separately admitted into an Orbitrap analyzer with the appropriate injection times. We test the reproducibility of our assay by determining Rab10-Thr73 phosphorylation stoichiometry in neutrophils of LRRK2 mutation carriers before and after LRRK2 inhibition. Compared to healthy controls, the PD predisposing mutation carriers LRRK2 G2019S and VPS35 D620N display 1.9-fold and 3.7-fold increased pRab10 levels, respectively. Our generic MS-based assay further establishes the relevance of pRab10 as a prognostic PD marker and is a powerful tool for determining LRRK2 inhibitor efficacy and for stratifying PD patients for LRRK2 inhibitor treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were loaded on a 20 or 50 cm reversed phase column (75 µm inner diameter, packed in house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH)). Column temperature was maintained at 60°C using a homemade column oven. An EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was directly coupled online with the mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF-X, Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nano-electrospray source, and peptides were separated with a binary buffer system of buffer A (0.1% formic acid (FA)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile plus 0.1% FA), at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides were eluted with a 45 min gradient of 5-60% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) FA, 80% (v/v) ACN). After each gradient, the column was washed with 95% buffer B for 5 min.  The mass spectrometer was programmed to acquire in targeted scan mode in which every full scan with resolution 60,000 at 200 m/z (3 x 106 ions accumulated with a maximum injection time of 20 ms) was followed by two multiplexed selected ion monitoring (mxSIM) scans employing multiplexing degree of two to record both light (endogenous) and heavy counterpart simultaneously for either phosphorylated or non-phosphorylated Rab10-pT73 tryptic peptides. Each SIM scan covered a range of m/z 150–2000 with resolution 120,000 (105 ions accumulated with a maximum injection time of 230 ms for both light and heavy counterparts, 1.4 m/z isolation window and 0.4 m/z isolation offset). m/z values of doubly-charged Rab10-pT73 tryptic (FHpTITTSYYR) light and heavy peptides (arginine labeled (13C, 15N)) were defined as follows: 684.8028 and 689.8070 whereas doubly-charged Rab10 non-phosphorylated tryptic (FHTITTSYYR) light and heavy peptides (arginine labeled (13C, 15N)) were targeted at m/z of 644.8197 and 649.8238.                  For the LOD experiment (Figure 1), the mass spectrometer was programmed to acquire in either full scan mode alone or SIM or PRM combined with a full scan. Full scan acquisition was performed with a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z (3 x 106 ions accumulated with a maximum injection time of 230 ms) to cover the scan range of 350-1,650 m/z. SIM acquisition was performed using a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z, isolation windows of 1.4 m/z with 0.4 m/z offset, target AGC values of 2 x 105, and a maximum injection time of 230 ms. PRM acquisition was performed using a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z, isolation windows of 1.4 m/z with 0.4 m/z offset, target AGC values of 2 x 105, and a maximum injection time of 130 ms. Fragmentation was performed with a normalized collision energy of 27. The neutrophil proteomes were analyzed using an LC-MS instrumentation consisting of an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) combined with a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The purified peptides were separated on a 50 cm HPLC column (75 µm inner diameter, in-house packed into the tip with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH)). Of each of the 24 fractions around 0.5 µg peptides were analyzed with a 45 min gradient. Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO (v/v)) and eluted with a linear 35 min gradient of 3-30% of buffer B (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO, 80% (v/v) ACN), followed by a 7 min increase to 75% of buffer B and a 1 min increase to 98% of buffer B, and a 2 min wash of 98% buffer B at a flow rate of 450 nl/min. Column temperature was kept at 60°C by a Peltier element containing in-house developed oven. MS data were acquired with a Top15 data-dependent MS/MS scan method (topN method). Target values for the full scan MS spectra was 3 x 106 charges in the 300-1,650 m/z range with a maximum injection time of 55 ms and a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200. Fragmentation of precursor ions was performed by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27. MS/MS scans were performed at a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200 with an ion target value of 5 x 104 and a maximum injection time of 25 ms.

### Data Protocol
For the calculation of absolute Rab10-pThr73 occupancies, raw MS data were processed using Skyline 4.2 (0.19072) 41 which is an open source software project and can be freely installed. Raw files were directly imported into Skyline in their native file format. After data import, graphical displays of chromatographic traces were manually inspected for proper peak picking of MS1 filtered endogenous peptides based on co-eluting stable isotope-labeled peptides. All quantitation performed for phosphorylation occupancy calculations in this study were done on the precursor ion level.Only the most abundant first two peaks of the isotope cluster were used for quantitation. Peptide areas (AUCs) for the non-phosphorylated tryptic Rab10 peptide (FHTITTSYYR, m/z 644.8197++) and the phosphorylated tryptic Rab10 peptide (FHpTITTSYYR, m/z 684.8028++) with their R=13C615N4 heavy analogues were extracted to derive light-to-heavy ratios. The absolute quantification was determined by comparing the abundance of the known SIL internal standard peptides with the native peptides. The phosphorylation stoichiometry/occupancy is calculated by taking the ratio of the total amount of phosphorylated fraction to the total amount of both phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated forms, which is always represented as percentage (%). When using mxPRM method, the median ratio of all unique y ions that belong to the phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated tryptic Rab10 peptides was used to calculate occupancy. All details for occupancy calculations in this study are provided in the Table S3.  For the deep proteome of human neutrophils, raw MS data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.6.8 41,42 against the Human UniProt FASTA database containing 21,052 entries (UniProt, release 2017) and a list of 245 potential contaminants. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, and the search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed for protease digestion, and peptides had to be fully tryptic. MaxQuant uses individual mass tolerances for each peptide, whereas the initial maximum precursor mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm in the first search and 4.5 ppm in the main search, and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. The false discovery rate was controlled with a target-decoy approach at less than 1% for peptide spectrum matches and less than 1% for protein group identifications. Bioinformatic analyses in this study were performed with Perseus (www.perseus-framework.org) 43, Microsoft Excel and data visualized using GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software) or RStudio (https://www.rstudio.com/).

### Publication Abstract
Pathogenic mutations in the Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the predominant genetic cause of Parkinson's disease (PD). They increase its activity, resulting in augmented Rab10-Thr73 phosphorylation and conversely, LRRK2 inhibition decreases pRab10 levels. Currently, there is no assay to quantify pRab10 levels for drug target engagement or patient stratification. To meet this challenge, we developed an high accuracy and sensitivity targeted mass spectrometry (MS)-based assay for determining Rab10-Thr73 phosphorylation stoichiometry in human samples. It uses synthetic stable isotope-labeled (SIL) analogues for both phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated tryptic peptides surrounding Rab10-Thr73 to directly derive the percentage of Rab10 phosphorylation from attomole amounts of the endogenous phosphopeptide. The SIL and the endogenous phosphopeptides are separately admitted into an Orbitrap analyzer with the appropriate injection times. We test the reproducibility of our assay by determining Rab10-Thr73 phosphorylation stoichiometry in neutrophils of LRRK2 mutation carriers before and after LRRK2 inhibition. Compared with healthy controls, the PD predisposing mutation carriers LRRK2 G2019S and VPS35 D620N display 1.9-fold and 3.7-fold increased pRab10 levels, respectively. Our generic MS-based assay further establishes the relevance of pRab10 as a prognostic PD marker and is a powerful tool for determining LRRK2 inhibitor efficacy and for stratifying PD patients for LRRK2 inhibitor treatment.

### Keywords
Targeted mass spectrometry, Phosphorylation stoichiometry, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
Head of Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Head of Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


