### Accession
PXD007862

### Title
BIOSITe: A novel method for direct detection of site specific biotinylation

### Description
Proximity-dependent biotinylation methods, such as those mediated by BioID and APEX, are being widely adopted for studying in vivo protein-protein interaction dynamics and subcellular structures. However, these along with other biotin-based technologies are severely dependent on avidin family proteins for the capture of biotinylated proteins. While the extremely high affinity of the avidin-biotin interaction nearly guarantees the capture of biotinylated proteins from a sample, it also results in an inability to recover the key species of interest: the biotin-modified peptide. To overcome this limitation, we have developed a novel strategy that instead relies on an immunoaffinity-based capture of biotinylated peptides for downstream LC-MS/MS analysis. We refer to this approach as Biotinylation Site Identification Technology (BioSITe), since it enables the direct detection of site-specific biotinylation, which substantially increases the sensitivity and specificity of data offered by proximity-dependent biotinylation methods. Using isotopically labeled biotin, we also demonstrate that this method can be used for differential analysis. Overall, we anticipate this method to replace the current methods used for detection of biotinylation sites and other applications including those employing any molecule probe for enrichment of specific classes of proteins or post-translational modifications.

### Sample Protocol
BioID and APEX preparation. BioID was performed as described by Roux et al (24510646) with a few minor changes. 10 mg of protein per replicate was incubated with 200 μL of high capacity Neutravidin for overnight at 4 °C. After incubation, the bead slurry was further sequentially washed with 2% SDS three times, BioID lysis buffer three times, 50 mM Tris three times and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC). APEX was performed as described by Hung et al (26866790)  BioSITe. Biotin specific antibodies (100 μg) were coupled with 120 μL of protein G bead for overnight at 4 °C. Per each replicate, 10 mg of peptide generated from BioID-BCR-ABL p190 was dissolved in 1ml of RIPA buffer (50mM Tris, 150mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton X-100) and subsequently incubated with biotin antibody coupled protein G bead for 2 hr at 4°C. For APEX samples, 8 mg of peptides were used per each replicate. The bead slurry was sequentially washed with RIPA buffer two times, 50 mL Tris two times and ultrapure water two times. Biotinylated peptides were eluted four times using elution buffer (80% acetonitrile and 0.2% trifluoroacetic in water).  BioSITe for quantitative proteomics. Cells expressing BirA*-p190 and BirA*-p210 were incubated with heavy and normal biotin respective for overnight. After cell lysis as described above, equal amount of protein (5 mg) from each lysates was combined and processed to the peptide generation step. Peptides from the combined sample were subjected to BioSITe analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v 2.1; Thermo Scientific) suite was used for quantitation and identification. During MS/MS preprocessing, the top 10 peaks in each window of 100 m/z were selected for database search. The tandem mass spectrometry data were then searched using SEQUEST algorithms against a protein databases (For BioID experiments; mouse NCBI RefSeq 73 with the addition of fasta file enteries for BCR-ABL p190 and the DH and PH domain of BCR-ABL p210, for APEX experiments; human NCBI RefSeq 73 with the additions of fasta file entries of IMS-APEX2 and NES-APEX2 constructs) with common contaminant proteins. The search parameters for the identification of biotinylated peptides were as follows: a) trypsin as a proteolytic enzyme (with up to three missed cleavages); b) peptide mass error tolerance of 10 ppm; c) fragment mass error tolerance of 0.02 Da; and d) carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146 Da) as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.99492 Da) and biotinylation of lysine (+226.07759 Da) as a variable modification. The search parameters for the identification of biotin-phenol modified peptides were as follows: a) trypsin as a proteolytic enzyme (with up to two missed cleavages); b) peptide mass error tolerance of 10 ppm; c) fragment mass error tolerance of 0.02 Da; and d) carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146 Da) as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.99492 Da).   Biotinylation of lysine (+226.07759 Da), biotin-phenol modification of tyrosine (+361.14601 Da), and oxidized-biotin-phenol modification of tyrosine (+377.141) were all used as variable modifications. The search parameters for the identification of either light or heavy biotinylated peptides were as follows: a) trypsin as a proteolytic enzyme (with up to three missed cleavages); b) peptide mass error tolerance of 10 ppm; c) fragment mass error tolerance of 0.02 Da; and d) carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146 Da) as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.99492 Da), light biotinylation of lysine (+226.07759 Da) and heavy biotinylation of lysine (+230.103 Da) as a variable modification. The minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. Peptides and proteins were filtered at a 1 % false-discovery rate (FDR) at the PSM level using percolator node and at the protein level using protein FDR validator node, respectively. The protein quantification was performed with following parameters and methods. Unique and razor peptides both were used for peptide quantification while protein groups were considered for peptide uniqueness. Precursor ion abundance was computed based on intensity and the missing intensity values were replaced with the minimum value. Protein grouping was performed with strict parsimony principle to generate the final protein groups. All proteins sharing the same set or subset of identified peptides were grouped while protein groups with no unique peptides were filtered out. The Proteome Discoverer iterated through all spectra and selected PSM with the highest number of unambiguous and unique peptides. Identified protein and peptide spectral match (PSM) level data were exported as tabular files from Proteome Discoverer 2.1. We used an in-house Python script to compile the peptide level site information mapped to UniProt or RefSeq databases.  The summary count on number of supported peptides and PSMs are then calculated at protein level. In case of the heavy-biotin experiment, the ratios are calculated from total channel intensities of identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Biotin-based labeling strategies are widely employed to study protein-protein interactions, subcellular proteomes and post-translational modifications, as well as, used in drug discovery. While the high affinity of streptavidin for biotin greatly facilitates the capture of biotinylated proteins, it still presents a challenge, as currently employed, for the recovery of biotinylated peptides. Here we describe a strategy designated Biotinylation Site Identification Technology (BioSITe) for the capture of biotinylated peptides for LC-MS/MS analyses. We demonstrate the utility of BioSITe when applied to proximity-dependent labeling methods, APEX and BioID, as well as biotin-based click chemistry strategies for identifying O-GlcNAc-modified sites. We demonstrate the use of isotopically labeled biotin for quantitative BioSITe experiments that simplify differential interactome analysis and obviate the need for metabolic labeling strategies such as SILAC. Our data also highlight the potential value of site-specific biotinylation in providing spatial and topological information about proteins and protein complexes. Overall, we anticipate that BioSITe will replace the conventional methods in studies where detection of biotinylation sites is important.

### Keywords
Bioid, Proximity dependent biotinylation, Biotinylation, Biosite, Ip, Bcr abl, Mass spectrometry, Peptide

### Affiliations
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA


