### Accession
PXD009182

### Title
ATIP3-interacting partners

### Description
ATIP3 is a Microtubule-Associated-Protein with potent anti-tumoral effects in breast cancer. To investigate the mechanisms of action of ATIP3, we have undertaken proteomic analyses to identify ATIP3-interacting partners

### Sample Protocol
Breast cancer MCF-7 cells were transfected with GFP-ATIP3 cDNA or GFP cDNA as control. Immunoprecipitations anti-GFP were performed on protein lysates with GFP-trap magnetic beads. Captured proteins were digested directly on the beads before being analyzed by mass spectrometry. Five independent samples were analyzed for each condition.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software and the resulting spectra were interrogated by Sequest through Proteome Discoverer (v 2.1.0.81, Thermo Scientific) with the SwissProt Homo Sapiens database. Carbamidomethyl cysteine, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. We set specificity of trypsin digestion and allowed 2 missed cleavage sites and we set the mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Maintaining the integrity of the mitotic spindle in metaphase is essential to ensure normal cell division. We show here that depletion of microtubule-associated protein ATIP3 reduces metaphase spindle length. Mass spectrometry analyses identified the microtubule minus-end depolymerizing kinesin Kif2A as an ATIP3 binding protein. We show that ATIP3 controls metaphase spindle length by interacting with Kif2A and its partner Dda3 in an Aurora kinase A-dependent manner. In the absence of ATIP3, Kif2A and Dda3 accumulate at spindle poles, which is consistent with reduced poleward microtubule flux and shortening of the spindle. ATIP3 silencing also limits Aurora A localization to the poles. Transfection of GFP-Aurora A, but not kinase-dead mutant, rescues the phenotype, indicating that ATIP3 maintains Aurora A activity on the poles to control Kif2A targeting and spindle size. Collectively, these data emphasize the pivotal role of Aurora kinase A and its mutual regulation with ATIP3 in controlling spindle length.

### Keywords
Gfp, Immunoprecipitation, Breast cancer, Mcf-7 cell line, Gfp-atip3

### Affiliations
Institut Curie
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique Institut Curie

### Submitter
Guillaume Arras

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique Institut Curie


