### Accession
PXD022498

### Title
Meta-proteomics analysis of microbial ecosystem during the anaerobic digestion of chicken manure in biogas production farm

### Description
Meta-proteomics analysis approach in the application of biogas production from anaerobic digestion has many advantages that has not been fully uncovered yet. This study aims to investigate biogas production from a stable 2-stage chicken manure fermentation system in chemical and biological perspective. The diversity and functional protein changes from the 1st stage to 2nd stage is a good indication to expose the differential metabolic processes in anaerobic digestion. The highlight of identified functional proteins explain the causation of accumulated ammonia and carbon sources for methane production. Due to the ammonia stress and nutrient limitation, the hydrogenotrophic methanogenic pathway is adopted as indicative of meta-proteomics data involving the key methanogenic substrates (formate and acetate). Unlike traditional meta-genomic analysis, this study could provide both species names of microorganism and enzymes to directly point the generation pathway of methane and carbon dioxide in investigating biogas production of chicken manure.

### Sample Protocol
1.Protein Extraction and Peptide Extraction For protein and peptides extraction, in-gel digestion was performed as described by Shevchenko et al. (2006). The samples (30 ml of liquid samples (HC, N1, N2 and PD) and 5 g of solid sample (CM) mixed in 30 ml of mixture of Protease Inhibitor solution and PBS buffer saline solution) individually were subjected to a centrifugation speed of 4000 rpm at 4oC for 30 min to obtain supernatant and pellet component of the samples (Speda et al., 2017). In order to retrieve maximum quantity of proteins, the supernatant of the original sample were also kept for direct in-gel digestion while the pellets of the original sample were further processed separately. The bacterial cell pellets containing all the debris of the manure with the majority of the intracellular component of the samples are processed as followed: 1 mg of lysozyme (MERCK) is added with incubation at 37oC for 30 min followed by dissolvation with 6 M urea (AMRESCO) for sonication to release and obtain total proteins (Balasundaram et al., 2009). Centrifugation speed of 4000 rpm at 4oC for 30 min is done after sonication to separate the solids and liquid portion and the supernatant containing the majority of the released proteins is retrieved. Final concentration of 10% of the detergent DDM (Dodecyl b-D-maltopyranoside (Carbosynth)) is further added into the supernatant of the released proteins for better release of the membrane proteins. For each sample, 0.20 mg of protein were fixed in SDS-PAGE (T-Pro EZ Gel Solution 10%, Omics Bio) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The gel is then cut into 1 mm3 pieces each to increase the surface area of contact for better trypsin activity. The cut gel pieces are soaked in 50% ACN (Acetonitrile, HPLC- Grade (J.T. Baker)) overnight to remove any dye or impurities; the supernatant containing the impurities is discarded and a further wash and discarded procedure with 50% ACN is repeated before the next step of reduction. Reduction is performed by adding 10 mM DTT (BioShop® Dithiothreitol, Electrophoresis Grade) (2 hour at 37oC); followed by alkylation with 50 mM IAA (Iodoacetamide, BioUltra) solution (4 hours at room temperature in the dark). Gel slices are then washed with 50% ACN, and DDH2O (Double Deionized water) 2~3 times to remove any remaining salts and impurities. The gel pieces were dried by adding 100% ACN and then lyophilized to remove any excess ACN which will interfere with further reaction. Total proteins were digested with Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega) (in a ratio of 200 μl of trypsin for digestion of 2 mg of protein) in 20 mM of Ammonium Bicarbonate buffer (Showa Chemical), pH 8.5 by incubation at 37oC for at least 16 hrs. (Gundry et al., 2009). Sonication is performed to extract out the peptides from the gel in a solution of 50% ACN and 5% TFA (Trifluroaceatic Acid, HPLC, >99.0% (Sigma-Aldrich)). The final tryptic peptides are then fixed and desalted by zip-tip (Millipore® Ziptips C18) as per manufacturer’s instructions and finally lyophilized to concentrate the peptides in powder form for LC-MS/MS analysis. 2. LC-ESI-MS Analysis LC-ESI-MS was performed based on the protocol built by the Mass Core Facility, Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica. The digested peptides in the samples were dissolved in 0.1% FA (Formic Acid) and were injected onto a self-packed precolumn (150 µm I.D. x 30 mm, 5 µm, 200 Å) and 75μm × 25-cm fused silica capillary column packed with 1.9-dμm C18 beads; Reprosil-Pur Basic, Dr. Maisch), in a 250 μL/min gradient mixture of 10% ACN and 0.1% FA to 40% ACN and 0.1% FA over the course of 40 min, with a total run length of 120 min and a flow rate of 600 nL/min. Full MS survey scans from m/z of 375 to 2000 were carried out on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) at a resolution of 60,000. The MS/MS was run in top speed mode with 3s cycles; while the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 90 s with a 25 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor ion selection was enabled and 1+ charge states were rejected from MS/MS. The analysis was carried out with higher collision energy dissociation and collision induced dissociation fragmentation modes. Automatic gain control was employed and set to 4x105 for MS. The maximum allowed ionization time was 200 ms.

### Data Protocol
Database Searching All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.7.0). Mascot was searched against EnsemblBacteria database (retrieved date: 8th Mar, 2019, 36048065 entries) from Uniprot with tryptic digestion. The database search parameters for Mascot were as followings: fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da, parent ion tolerance of 500 PPM, and carboxymethyl of cysteine as fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Meta-proteomics analysis; chicken manure; metabolic pathway; 2-stage fermentation system; ammonia inhibition

### Affiliations
128, Academia Road Sec. 2, Nankang, Taipei 115, Taiwan, IBC R712
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Tze-Kang Lam

### Lab Head
Dr Shih-Hsiung Wu
128, Academia Road Sec. 2, Nankang, Taipei 115, Taiwan, IBC R712


