### Accession
PXD028034

### Title
Interactome of POU5F1B detected by LC-MSMS in HT29 and LS1034 CRC cells overexpressing POU5F1B-HA

### Description
The treatment of colorectal cancer (CRC) is an unmet medical need in absence of early diagnosis. Here, upon characterizing cancer-specific transposable element-driven transpochimeric gene transcripts (TcGTs) produced by this tumor, we found that expression of the hominid-restricted retrogene POU5F1B through aberrant activation of a primate-specific endogenous retroviral promoter is a strong negative prognostic CRC biomarker. Correlating this observation, we could demonstrate that POU5F1B fosters the proliferation and metastatic potential of CRC cells. We further determined that POU5F1B, in spite of its phylogenetic relationship with the POU5F1/OCT4 transcription factor, is a membrane-enriched protein that associates with protein kinases and known targets or interactors as well as with cytoskeleton-related molecules, and induces intracellular signaling events and the release of trans-acting factors involved in cell growth and cell adhesion. As POU5F1B is an apparently non-essential gene only lowly expressed in normal tissues, and as POU5F1B-containing TcGTs are detected in other tumors besides CRC, our data provide interesting leads for the development of cancer therapies.

### Sample Protocol
Interactome of POU5F1B. Three technical replicates of 80 million HA-tagged POU5F1B and GFP overexpressing LS1034 and HT29 cells were used in this experiment (a total of 12 samples). Prior to affinity purification, protein expression was induced with 500 ng ml-1 of doxycycline for three days. Once sub-confluent, cells were harvested in PBS 1 mM EDTA. Dry pellets were lysed in HNN lysis buffer (0.5% NP40, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF, 200 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM EDTA, supplemented with 1 mM PMSF, and protease inhibitors) and fixed with 3 mM DSP for 40 min. Reactive DSP was quenched with 100 mM Tris pH 7.5. The lysates were subjected to 250 U ml-1 benzonase (Merck, 71205) for 30 min at 37°C. Lysate was then centrifuged for 15 min at 17,000 rcf in order to remove insoluble material. Supernatant was then incubated with 100 µl of pre-washed anti-HA agarose beads (Sigma, A2095) for 2 h on a rotating wheel at 4°C. Immunoprecipitates were washed three times with 2 ml and twice 1 ml HNN lysis buffer, and three times with 2 ml and twice 1 ml HNN buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF). Proteins were then eluted with 3 × 100 µl of 0.2 M glycine pH 2.5. Samples were neutralized and denatured with 550 µl 0.5 M NH4HCO3 pH 8.8, 6M urea, reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 20 min at 37°C and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetic acid for 20 min at room temperature in the dark. Urea concentration was diluted to 1.5 M with 50 mM NH4HCO3 solution. Samples were then digested with 1 µg trypsin (Promega, V5113) overnight at 37°C in the dark. The next day, trypsin digestion was stopped by lowering the pH with the addition of 50 µl of formic acid (AppliChem, A3858.0500) and peptides were purified and prepared for mass spectrometry injection at the EPFL proteomics facility as previously described (Helleboid, P.Y. et al. EMBO J. 2019).

### Data Protocol
All samples selected for further analyses had to display more than 10 bait POU5F1B spectral count in the three technical replicates in order to ensure proper bait protein levels. Only proteotypic, unique spectral counts were used. The CRAPome (Mellacheruvu, D. et al. Nat. Methods. 2013) matrix reduced list of proteins was used to subtract unspecific protein-protein interactions. Significance between bait-prey interactions was computed with the R package lsmeans. For each gene, we fitted a linear additive model with poisson residues and the cell line information as a covariate. The contrast function was then used to compute p-values for differences in means. P-values were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg’s method (Benjamini, Y & Hochberg, Y. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. B Methodol. 1995). The most significant interactions were defined as having an adjusted p value lower than 0.01 and fold change enrichment over control bigger than 5. A POU5F1B interactome was established with Cytoscape software, using the fold change to draw force-directed edges between proteins. Previously described protein-protein interactions amongst some detected preys were found in the BioGRID website or the literature.

### Publication Abstract
The treatment of colorectal cancer (CRC) is an unmet medical need in absence of early diagnosis. Here, upon characterizing cancer-specific transposable element-driven transpochimeric gene transcripts (TcGTs) produced by this tumor in the SYSCOL cohort, we find that expression of the hominid-restricted retrogene POU5F1B through aberrant activation of a primate-specific endogenous retroviral promoter is a strong negative prognostic biomarker. Correlating this observation, we demonstrate that POU5F1B fosters the proliferation and metastatic potential of CRC cells. We further determine that POU5F1B, in spite of its phylogenetic relationship with the POU5F1/OCT4 transcription factor, is a membrane-enriched protein that associates with protein kinases and known targets or interactors as well as with cytoskeleton-related molecules, and induces intracellular signaling events and the release of trans-acting factors involved in cell growth and cell adhesion. As POU5F1B is an apparently non-essential gene only lowly expressed in normal tissues, and as POU5F1B-containing TcGTs are detected in other tumors besides CRC, our data provide interesting leads for the development of cancer therapies.

### Keywords
Human, Ht29, Overexpression, Lc-msms, Colorectal cancer, Ls1034, Pou5f1b

### Affiliations
EPFL

### Submitter
Julien Duc

### Lab Head
Dr Didier Trono
EPFL


