### Accession
PXD018777

### Title
TMT-based proteomics analysis of GV, GVBD and MII oocytes

### Description
Two replicates of GV, GVBD, and MII oocytes were subjected to the 6-plex TMT labeling, HP-RP fractionation, and LC-MS/MS analysis. Two labeling experiments were performed for the total four replicates of each stage of oocytes.

### Sample Protocol
GV, GVBD, and MII oocytes collected from normal mice were lysed in urea lysis buffer (8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.2, 1% (v/v) EDTA-free protease inhibitor, 1 mM NaF, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1 mM sodiumorthovanadate, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM PMSF) and subjected to centrifugation at 40,000g for 1h. Proteins were prepared and trypsin digested as we described before (PMID: 31406667). Following digestion, the purified peptides were subjected to the 6-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling. Peptides from two replicates of three stages of oocytes were labeled with respective isobaric tags and mixed together. Two labeling experiments were performed for the total four replicates of each stage of oocytes. To improve the coverage of protein identification and quantification, the mixed TMT-labeled peptides were separated by the high-pH reversed phase (HP-RP) fractionation technology based on the ACQUITY® UPLC M-class system (Waters) with an BEH C18 Column (300μm×150 mm, 1.7 μm; Waters), and a total of 30 fractions were collected and lyophilized for each experiment.  All fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system coupled through a nanoelectrospray source to LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Peptides were separated with a trap column (75μm×2cm, Acclaim® PepMap100 C18 column, 3μm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an analytical column (75μm×25cm, Acclaim® PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2μm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 300nl/min using a 194-min gradient (3% to 5% buffer B for 3 min, 5% to 30% buffer B for 167min, 30% to 45% buffer B for 15 min, 45% to 99% buffer B for 1 min, 99% buffer B for 8min).

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software was used for searching the raw files against UniProt mouse proteome database. The FDR of identified peptides and proteins was set to 1%. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20ppm and product ions were searched with a mass tolerance 0.5 Da. Searches were performed using Trypsin/P enzyme specificity while allowing up to two missed cleavages. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+229.1629Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215Da) were set as fixed modifications. Variable modifications included oxidation of methionines and acetylation of protein N termini.

### Publication Abstract
Well-balanced and timed metabolism is essential for making a high-quality egg. However, the metabolic framework that supports oocyte development remains poorly understood. Here, we obtained the temporal metabolome profiles of mouse oocytes during in&#xa0;vivo maturation by isolating large number of cells at key stages. In parallel, quantitative proteomic analyses were conducted to bolster the metabolomic data, synergistically depicting the global metabolic patterns in oocytes. In particular, we discovered the metabolic features during meiotic maturation, such as the fall in polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) level and the active serine-glycine-one-carbon (SGOC) pathway. Using functional approaches, we further identified the key targets mediating the action of PUFA arachidonic acid (ARA) on meiotic maturation and demonstrated the control of epigenetic marks in maturing oocytes by SGOC network. Our data serve as a broad resource on the dynamics occurring in metabolome and proteome during oocyte maturation.

### Keywords
Gvbd, Lc-msms, Mouse, Mii, Oocytes, Gv

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University

### Submitter
Xuejiang Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Xuejiang Guo
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University


