### Accession
PXD013931

### Title
Prognostic value of biomarkers EpCAM and B-crystallin is associated with lymphatic metastasis in breast cancer by iTRAQ analysis

### Description
Metastasis is responsible for the majority of deaths in a variety of cancer types, including breast cancer. Although several factors or biomarkers have been identified to predict the outcome of patients with breast cancer, few studies have been conducted to identify metastasis-associated biomarkers. Quantitative iTRAQ proteomics analysis was used to detect differentially expressed proteins between lymph node metastases and their paired primary tumor tissues from 23 patients with metastatic breast cancer. Immunohistochemistry was performed to validate the expression of two upregulated (EpCAM, FADD) and two downregulated (NDRG1, αB-crystallin) proteins in 190 paraffin-embedded tissue samples. These four proteins were further analyzed for their correlation with clinicopathological features in 190 breast cancer patients. We identified 637 differentially regulated proteins (397 upregulated and 240 downregulated) in lymph node metastases compared with their paired primary tumor tissues. Furthermore, bioinformatics analysis using GEO profiling confirmed the difference in the expression of EpCAM between metastases and primary tumors tissues. Two upregulated (EpCAM, FADD) and two downregulated (NDRG1, αB-crystallin) proteins were associated with the progression of breast cancer. Obviously, EpCAM plays a role in the metastasis of breast cancer cells to the lymph node. We further identified αB-crystallin as an independent biomarker to predict lymph node metastasis and the outcome of breast cancer patients.

### Sample Protocol
Mass collection methods for breast cancer: Select the cases with large lesions (> 1.5 cm  1.5 cm  1 cm) which were diagnosed as breast cancer by frozen section. Tissue samples were cut the tumors (> 0.5 cm  0.5 cm  0.5 cm) and preserved them in liquid nitrogen. We then decided whether to join the group according to routine diagnosis and lymph node metastasis. Methods for collecting lymph node metastases: The lymph nodes with the largest diameter ( > 1 cm) were selected, the adipose tissue around the lymph nodes was removed, the lymph nodes were cut along the largest diameter, and the color of the section was observed by naked eyes. The selected lymph nodes were divided into two parts, half of which were stored in liquid nitrogen, and the other half were stained with H&E and observed under a microscope to determine whether the lymph nodes really existed. In breast cancer metastasis, the criterion for admission was that metastatic cancer accounted for more than 90% of lymph nodes. The collected breast cancer tissues and matched metastatic lymph nodes were preserved in liquid nitrogen.

### Data Protocol
Twenty-three paired fresh primary tumors and metastatic axillary LNs were collected from Hunan Cancer Hospital between November 2013 and March 2014. Each collected tissue sample was divided into two parts; one part was used for routine pathological examination, and the other part was stored in liquid nitrogen for the proteomic study. To minimize the influence of residual lymphoid tissues on protein identification, only the axillary LNs with > 95% neoplastic cells according to H&E examination were used for the proteomic study. Relative quantitative proteomics was performed using the Fitgene iTRAQ Proteomics Platform (http://www.fitgene.com) according to the standard procedure [28, 30]. Briefly, the prepared lysates (200 µg) were treated with 4 µL of reducing reagent for 1 h at 60°C and then blocked with 2 µL of cysteine blocking reagent for 10 min at room temperature. After centrifugation, the supernatant was collected and incubated with trypsin and TEAB overnight at 37 °C. The samples were then mixed with the iTRAQ reagents and subjected to two-dimensional LC-MS/MS analysis and a database search. An expression change greater than 1.5-fold was considered a difference between the primary tumor tissues and the paired metastatic LN tissues.   The raw data acquired from LC-MS/MS was processed with AB Sciex ProteinPilot 4.0 (AB Sciex, Concord, Ontario, Canada), and protein identification and quantification were achieved by searching the UniProt database (Release 2014.5.14). Proteomics profiling and database searching based on the TripleTOF® 5600+ System (AB Sciex) and ProteinPilot 4.0 (AB Sciex) were performed following the manufacturer’s recommendations. The parameters were set as follows: Unused ≥ 1.3; Credibility ≥ 95%; C.V. ≤ 0.5; AVG. ≥ 1.5 or ≤ 0.67; T.TEST < 0.05; Peptides (95%) ≥ 4. To ensure the reliability and stability of the reported data, we performed the following steps for data quality control. First, before database searching, we selected “Run False Discovery Rate Analysis” in the software AB Sciex ProteinPilot for FDR control. Second, we removed the results identified by the reverse database. Third, we removed those proteins with extremely high or low ratios. Finally, we removed those proteins with abnormal quantification between technical repetition and biological repetition.  The coefficients of variation (CV) of biological repetition were analyzed for data from different groups of samples. By observing the experimental data, when the coefficient of variation is within (+50%), 60% of the identified proteins can be covered. Most of the data exceeding the coefficient of variation are caused by individual differences of organisms. In subsequent analysis, this part of data will be excluded from the scope of analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Breast cancer; metastasis; epcam; fadd; ndrg1; αb-crystallin; biomarker; itraq proteomic analysis

### Affiliations
Guangzhou women and children medical center
Department of Pathology, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China  Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion, Ministry of Education, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis, Ministry of Health, Cancer Research Institute, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, 410078, Hunan China

### Submitter
Zeng  Liang

### Lab Head
Dr Liang Zeng, Yongguang Tao
Department of Pathology, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China  Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion, Ministry of Education, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis, Ministry of Health, Cancer Research Institute, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, 410078, Hunan China


