### Accession
PXD017482

### Title
A High Resolution Mass Spectrometry Study Reveals the Potential of Disulfide Formation in Human Mitochondrial Voltage-Dependent Anion Selective Channel Isoforms (hVDACs)

### Description
The voltage-dependent anion-selective channels (VDACs), also known as eukaryotic porins, are pore-forming proteins which allow the passage of ions and small molecules across the outer mitochondrial membrane (OMM). They are involved in complex interactions regulating organelle and cellular metabolism. We have recently reported about the post-translational modifications (PTMs) of the three VDAC isoforms purified from rat liver mitochondria (rVDACs), showing for the first time the over-oxidation of the cysteine residues as an exclusive feature of VDACs. Noteworthy, this peculiar PTM is not detectable in other integral membrane mitochondrial proteins, as defined by their elution at low salt concentration by a hydroxyapatite column. In this study, the association of tryptic and chymotryptic proteolysis with UHPLC/High Resolution nESI-MS/MS, allowed us to extend the investigation to the human VDACs. Over-oxidation of the cysteine residues, essentially irreversible in cell conditions, was as certained also in VDAC isoforms from human cells. In human VDAC2 and 3 isoforms the permanently reduced state of a cluster of close cysteines indicates the possibility that disulfide bridges are formed in the proteins. Importantly, the detailed oxidative PTMs found in human VDACs confirm and sustain our previous findings in rat tissues, claiming for a predictable characterization that has to be conveyed in the functional role of VDAC proteins within the cell.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Collection and preparation for proteomics analyses  HAP1 cells were cultured using IMDM, 10% FBS and 1% P/S. The total cell pellet obtained, after centrifugation, was resuspended in 1 ml of hypotonic buffer (HB) (200 mM mannitol, 70 mM sucrose, 10 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 1 mM EGTA pH 8.0), incubated in ice for 10 min and then lysed. The lysate obtained was centrifuged (700xg for 25 min, 4 °C). To have a better yield, after recovering the supernatant, the pellet containing the mitochondria, was again suspended in HB. Again, the suspension was lysed and centrifuged (700xg for 25 min, 4 °C). The resulting supernatants were centrifuged (7,000xg for 15 min, 4 °C). The supernatant was removed while the pellet was washed with HB. The suspension was then centrifuged (7,000xg for 15 min, 4 °C) and the pellet containing the mitochondria, was resuspended in 500 μl of HB.  The total yield was determined by micro-Lowry method, resulting 3.65 g/l. The HB was removed. Reduction/alkylation was carried on before VDACs purification in order to avoid any possible artefact. 1.83 mg of intact mitochondria were incubated for 3 h at 4 °C in 1 ml of Tris-HCl 10mM (pH 8.3) containing 0.037 mmol of DTT, which corresponds to an excess of 50:1 (mol/mol) over the estimated protein thiol groups. The temperature was kept at 4 °C in order to unactivate the sulfoxide reductase. After centrifugation (10,000×g for 30 min, 4 °C), alkylation was performed by IAA at the 2:1 M ratio over DTT for 1 h in the dark at 25 °C. Mixture was centrifuged (10,000×g for 30 min, 4 °C). Mitochondria were lysed in buffer A (10mM TrisHCl, 1mM EDTA, 3% Triton X-100, pH 7.0) in ratio 5:1 (mitochondria mg/buffer volume mL) for 30 min on ice and centrifuged (17,400×g for 30 min, 4 °C). The supernatant with mitochondrial proteins was loaded onto a homemade glass column 5×80 mm, packed with 0.6 g of dry hydroxyapatite. Column was eluted with buffer A at 4 °C and fractions of 500 μL were collected, tested for protein content by a fluorometer assay and dried under vacuum. The HTP eluate was divided in two aliquots, which were reduced to less than 100 µL and purified from contaminating molecules. Protein pellet was suspended in 100 μL of 50mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.3) and incubated at 4 °C for 15 min. Next, 100 μL of 0.2% RapiGest SF in 50mM NH4HCO3 were added and the samples were kept at 4 °C for 30 min. Another aliquot of pellet was suspended in 100 μL of 100 mM Tris-HCl, 10mM CaCl2 (pH 8.0) and incubated at 4 °C for 15 min. Next, 100 μL of 0.2% RapiGest SF in 100 mM Tris-HCl, 10mM CaCl2, were added and the samples were kept at 4 °C for 30 min. For each fraction, protein amount was determined in 40 μg by a fluorometer assay. Proteins were then subjected separately to digestion using trypsin and chymotrypsin, respectively.   Mass spectrometry analysis MS data were acquired on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Q-OT-qIT) mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a ThermoFisher Scientific Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Sunnyvale, CA). Samples were reconstituted in 100 μL of 5% FA aqueous solution and 1 μL was loaded onto an Acclaim®Nano Trap C18 column (100 μm i.d.×2 cm, 5 μm particle size, 100 Å). After washing the trapping column with solvent A (H2O+0.1% FA) for 3 min at a flow rate of 7 μL/min, the peptides were eluted from the trapping column onto a PepMap® RSLC C18 EASYSpray, 75 μm×50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å column and were separated by elution at a flow rate of 0.250 μL/min, at 40 °C, with a linear gradient of solvent B (CH3CN+0.1% FA) in A from 5% to 20% in 32 min, followed by 20% to 40% in 30 min, and 40% to 60% in 20 min. Eluted peptides were ionized by a nanospray (Easy-spray ion source, Thermo Scientific) using a spray voltage of 1.7 kV and introduced into the mass spectrometer through a heated ion transfer tube (275 °C). Survey scans of peptide precursors in the m/z range 400–1600 were performed at resolution of 120,000 (@ 200 m/z) with a AGC target for Orbitrap survey of 4.0×105 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.6 Th with the quadrupole, and high energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was performed in the Ion Routing Multipole (IRM), using a normalized collision energy of 35 and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. Only those precursors with charge state 1–3 and an intensity above the threshold of 5•103 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. AGC target and maximum injection time (ms) for MS/MS spectra were 1.0×104 and 100, respectively. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles, meaning the instrument would continuously perform MS2 events until the list of non-excluded precursors diminishes to zero or 3 s, whichever is shorter. MS/MS spectral quality was enhanced enabling the parallelizable time option.

### Data Protocol
Database Search and protein identification LC–MS/MS data were processed by PEAKS software v. 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada). The data were searched against the 49,544 entries “Human” SwissProt database (release June 2019) Full tryptic or chymotrypsin peptides with a maximum of 3 missed cleavage sites were subjected to bioinformatic search. Cysteine carboxyamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, whereas acetylation of protein N-terminal, trioxidation of cysteine, oxidation of methionine, and transformation of N-terminal glutamine and N-terminal glutamic acid residue in the pyroglutamic acid form were included as variable modifications. The precursor mass tolerance threshold was 10 ppm and the max fragment mass error was set to 0.6 Da.Finally, all the protein hits obtained were processed by using the inChorus function of PEAKS. This tool combines the database search results of PEAKS software with those obtained by the Mascot search engine with the aim not only to increase the coverage, but also the confidence since the engines using independent algorithms and therefore confirm each other’s' results. Peptide spectral matches (PSM) were validated using Target Decoy PSM Validator node based on q-values at a 0.1% False Discovery Rate (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
The voltage-dependent anion-selective channels (VDACs), which are also known as eukaryotic porins, are pore-forming proteins, which allow for the passage of ions and small molecules across the outer mitochondrial membrane (OMM). They are involved in complex interactions that regulate organelle and cellular metabolism. We have recently reported the post-translational modifications (PTMs) of the three VDAC isoforms purified from rat liver mitochondria (rVDACs), showing, for the first time, the over-oxidation of the cysteine residues as an exclusive feature of VDACs. Noteworthy, this peculiar PTM is not detectable in other integral membrane mitochondrial proteins, as defined by their elution at low salt concentration by a hydroxyapatite column. In this study, the association of tryptic and chymotryptic proteolysis with UHPLC/High Resolution nESI-MS/MS, allowed for us to extend the investigation to the human VDACs. The over-oxidation of the cysteine residues, essentially irreversible in cell conditions, was as also certained in VDAC isoforms from human cells. In human VDAC2 and 3 isoforms the permanently reduced state of a cluster of close cysteines indicates the possibility that disulfide bridges are formed in the proteins. Importantly, the detailed oxidative PTMs that are found in human VDACs confirm and sustain our previous findings in rat tissues, claiming for a predictable characterization that has to be conveyed in the functional role of VDAC proteins within the cell. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD017482.

### Keywords
Cysteine over-oxidation; mitochondria; orbitrap fusion tribrid; hydroxyapatite; mitochondrial intermembrane space; outer mitochondrial membrane; post-translational modification

### Affiliations
University of Catania
Organic Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Catania

### Submitter
Rosaria Saletti

### Lab Head
Dr Salvatore Foti
Organic Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Catania


