### Accession
PXD013530

### Title
Rotary substates of mitochondrial ATP synthase reveal the basis of flexible F1-FO coupling

### Description
F1FO-ATP synthases play a central role in cellular metabolism, making the energy of the protonmotive force across a membrane available for a large number of energy-consuming processes. We determined the single-particle cryo-EM structure of active dimeric ATP synthase from mitochondria of Polytomella sp. at 2.7- 2.8 Å resolution. Separation of 13 well-defined rotary substates by 3D classification provides a detailed picture of the molecular motions that accompany c-ring rotation and result in ATP synthesis. Crucially, the F1 head rotates along with the central stalk and c-ring rotor for the first ~30° of each 120° primary rotary step. The joint movement facilitates flexible coupling of the stoichiometrically mismatched F1 and FO subcomplexes. Flexibility is mediated primarily by the interdomain hinge of the conserved OSCP subunit, a well-established target of physiologically important inhibitors. Our maps provide atomic detail of the c-ring/a-subunit interface in the membrane, where protonation and deprotonation of c-ring cGlu111 drives rotary catalysis. An essential histidine residue in the lumenal proton access channel binds a strong non-peptide density assigned to a metal ion that may facilitate c-ring protonation, as its coordination geometry changes with c-ring rotation. We resolve ordered water molecules in the proton access and release channels and at the gating aArg239 that is critical in all rotary ATPases. We identify the previously unknown ASA10 subunit and present complete de novo atomic models of subunits ASA1-10, which make up the two interlinked peripheral stalks that stabilize the Polytomella ATP synthase dimer.

### Sample Protocol
ATP synthase from Polytomella sp. was purified as described previously with slight modifications. Mitochondrial membranes (175mg) were solubilized for 30min at 4°C in a volume of 12ml buffer containing 30 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.8, 2 mM MgCl2, 50 mM NaCl and 2.9% (w/v) n-dodecyl-β-D-maltoside (DDM) to a final detergent:protein weight ratio of 2:1. After centrifugation (20,000 x g, 15 min, 4°C) to remove unsolubilized material, the filtered supernatant was loaded onto a POROS GoPure HQ column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) equilibrated in buffer A (30 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.8, 2 mM MgCl2, 50 mM NaCl and 0.015% (w/v) DDM) on an Äkta purifier (GE Healthcare). After washing the column with 100mM NaCl in buffer A, ATP synthase dimers were eluted with a linear 100 mM to 300 mM NaCl gradient in buffer A. For the final purification step, fractions containing ATP synthase dimers were concentrated in Vivaspin 500 columns with 100,000 molecular mass cutoff and then loaded onto a Superose6 Increase 3.2/30 size exclusion column (GE Healthcare, USA) equilibrated in buffer B (30 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.8, 2 mM MgCl2, 40 mM NaCl, 0.05% (w/v) DDM) on an Ettan purifier (GE Healthcare, USA). Fractions of pure and active ATP synthase dimers were collected on ice and used directly for cryo-EM specimen preparation or mass spectrometry. Tryptic digestion of proteins in solution or excised from 2D gels was performed according to published procedures (52). Proteolytic digests were loaded by nano-HPLC (Dionex RSLCnano) on reverse-phase columns (trapping column: Acclaim PepMap c18, particle size 2μm, L=20mm; analytical column: Acclaim PepMap c18, particle size 2 μm, L=50 cm;Thermo Fisher Scientific) and eluted in organic phase gradients (Buffer A: 95% H2O, 5% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 80% acetonitrile, 15% H2O, 0.1% formic acid). Typically, gradients were ramped from 4% to 48% buffer B in 80 minutes at a 300nl/min flow rate. Peptides eluting from the column were ionised online using a Nanospray Flex Ion source and analysed in an Orbitrap Elite or Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were acquired over the 350-1,600 m/z range at a resolution of 120,000, and sequence information was acquired by computer-controlled, data-dependent automated switching to MS/MS mode in response to collision energies based on mass and charge state of the candidate ions.

### Data Protocol
Data sets were processed with the Proteome Discoverer software package (version 2.1.0.81). Spectra were internally recalibrated on autoproteolytic trypsin fragments when applicable. Proteins were identified by matching the derived mass lists against a customized Polytomella database (combination of NCBI nr Polytomella, a full six-frame translation of a data set acquired by whole-genome shotgun sequencing (Microsynth AG, Balgach, CH) and a list of common contaminants with the program Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen). In general, a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for parent ion spectra and 0.6 Da for fragment ion spectra, two missed cleavages, oxidation of Met (dynamic modification), acetylation of the protein N-terminus (dynamic modification) and carbamidomethyl-cysteine (fixed modification) were selected as matching parameters in the search program. Results were evaluated using a percolator node (high confidence q-value, FDR < 0.01) to exclude false positives. Proteome data have been uploaded to the PRIDE online repository (37).

### Publication Abstract
F<sub>1</sub>F<sub>o</sub>-adenosine triphosphate (ATP) synthases make the energy of the proton-motive force available for energy-consuming processes in the cell. We determined the single-particle cryo-electron microscopy structure of active dimeric ATP synthase from mitochondria of <i>Polytomella</i> sp. at a resolution of 2.7 to 2.8 angstroms. Separation of 13 well-defined rotary substates by three-dimensional classification provides a detailed picture of the molecular motions that accompany <i>c</i>-ring rotation and result in ATP synthesis. Crucially, the F<sub>1</sub> head rotates along with the central stalk and <i>c</i>-ring rotor for the first ~30&#xb0; of each 120&#xb0; primary rotary step to facilitate flexible coupling of the stoichiometrically mismatched F<sub>1</sub> and F<sub>o</sub> subcomplexes. Flexibility is mediated primarily by the interdomain hinge of the conserved OSCP subunit. A conserved metal ion in the proton access channel may synchronize <i>c</i>-ring protonation with rotation.

### Keywords
Atp synthase, Proteomics, Polytomella, Electron microscopy

### Affiliations
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research
MPI of Biophysics and Brain Research

### Submitter
Julian Langer

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Langer
MPI of Biophysics and Brain Research


