### Accession
PXD038944

### Title
Mouse embryonic stem cells LCMS-MS

### Description
We hypothesized that uncovering interactions between Pfkp and other proteins could help resolve the mechanism whereby Pfkp regulates germ layer differentiation. Towards this, Pfkp was immunoprecipitated from mESCs and mass spectrometry analysis used to identify a number of potential Pfkp-interacting proteins

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates were collected and incubated with control immunoglobulin G (IgG) or Pfkp pre-conjugated to A/G beads as described in immunoprecipitation. Samples were loaded onto SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) and stained using Commassie blue staining solution, and bands of interest were cut from gel and subjected to LC-MS/MS sequencing.

### Data Protocol
The original mass spectrum files were processed and converted by MM File Conversion software to obtain MGF format files, and then MASCOT was used to search the uniprot database

### Publication Abstract
Unveiling the principles governing embryonic stem cell (ESC) differentiation into specific lineages is critical for understanding embryonic development and for stem cell applications in regenerative medicine. Here, we establish an intersection between LIF-Stat3 signaling that is essential for maintaining murine (m) ESCs pluripotency, and the glycolytic enzyme, the platelet isoform of phosphofructokinase (Pfkp). In the pluripotent state, Stat3 transcriptionally suppresses Pfkp in mESCs while manipulating the cells to lift this repression results in differentiation towards the ectodermal lineage. Pfkp exhibits substrate specificity changes to act as a protein kinase, catalyzing serine phosphorylation of the developmental regulator Lin41. Such phosphorylation stabilizes Lin41 by impeding its autoubiquitination and proteasomal degradation, permitting Lin41-mediated binding and destabilization of mRNAs encoding ectodermal specification markers to favor the expression of endodermal specification genes. This provides new insights into the wiring of pluripotency-differentiation circuitry where Pfkp plays a role in germ layer specification during mESC differentiation.

### Keywords
Mouse, Lcms-ms, Embryonic stem cells

### Affiliations
Translational Research Institute, Henan Provincial People’s Hospital, Academy of Medical Science, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China
Zhengzhou University

### Submitter
ruijie wang

### Lab Head
Dr Mian Wu
Translational Research Institute, Henan Provincial People’s Hospital, Academy of Medical Science, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China


