### Accession
PXD025886

### Title
Site-specific N- and O-glycosylation Analysis of Human Plasma Fibronectin

### Description
Human plasma fibronectin is an adhesive protein that plays a crucial role in wound healing. Many studies had indicated that glycans may mediate the expression and functions of fibronectin, yet a comprehensive understanding of its glycosylation is still missing. Here, we performed a comprehensive N- and O-glycosylation mapping of human plasma fibronectin, and quantified the occurrence of each glycoform in a site-specific manner. Intact N-glycopeptides were enriched by zwitterionic hydrophilic interaction chromatography, and N-glycosites sites were localized by the 18O-labeling method. O-glycopeptide enrichment and O-glycosite identification were achieved by an enzyme-assisted site-specific extraction method. An RP–LC–MS/MS system functionalized with Collision-Induced Dissociation and stepped normalized collision energy (sNCE)-HCD tandem mass was applied to analyze the glycoforms of fibronectin. A total of 6 N-glycosites and 53 O-glycosites were identified, which were occupied by 3842 N-glycoforms and 16 O-glycoforms, respectively. Furthermore, 81.4% of N-glycans were either fucosylated, sialylated, or with both modifications77.31% of N-glycans were sialylated, while O-glycosylation was dominated by the sialyl-T antigen. These site-specific glycosylation patterns on human fibronectin can facilitate functional analyses of fibronectin and therapeutics development.

### Sample Protocol
Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) was used to prepare samples for MS analysis. N-Glycopeptides were enriched by in-house packed ZIC-HILIC micro-tip as previously described.(Ma et al., 2020) The HILIC micro-tip was washed with 500 L of ACN, water, and binding buffer (80 % ACN/1 % TFA) twice sequentially. For sample loading, the dried fibronectin peptides were dissolved in 500 L of binding buffer and loaded onto the tip three times. The tip was then washed with 1.5 mL of binding buffer, and glycopeptides were eluted with 1 mL of elution buffer (0.1% TFA). The eluted solution was lyophilized and stored at -20 °C until use. Enriched glycopeptides were directly injected into LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (MS) for intact glycopeptide analysis. For N-glycosite analysis, HILIC enriched N-glycopeptides were incubated with PNGase F in 20 L of 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 7.5) in H218O at 37°C overnight. Deglycosylated peptides were desalted, dried, and stored at -20 °C for mass spectrometry analysis. The EXoO method was used to identify O-glycoforms and O-glycosites as previously reported.(Yang et al., 2020) Briefly, 200 L of Aminolink resin (Pierce, Rockford, IL) was incubated with 500 g of digested peptides in 50 mM NaCNBH3 and 50 mM NaH2PO4 (pH 7.5) overnight at room temperature. The resin was then washed in a spin column and blocked by 1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) and 50 mM NaCNBH3 at room temperature for 30 mins. After washing, the O-glycopeptides were released from the resin by the O-glycan-specific protease OpeRATOR (1 unit per 1 g peptides) in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8) at 37°C for 15 h. The released O-glycopeptides were desalted and dried for MS analysis. For O-glycosite analysis, sialidase was added together with OpeRATOR, O-glycoforms would be unified and thus enhance the signal of O-glycopeptides.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis of N-glycosite mapping was performed by pFind 3.0.(Chi et al., 2018) Peptide fragments were matched against the fibronectin protein sequence (UniProtKB entry P02751), where iodoacetamide on Cys was set as static modification, oxidation of Met and 18O-labeling of Asn (m = 2.9848) were set as a dynamic modification. The mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for precursor ions and 50 ppm for product ions. Trypsin and Glu-C were chosen as the enzyme, and two missed cleavages were allowed. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was estimated and applied at the peptide level. P-glyco 2.0 was applied for intact N-glycopeptide analysis.(Liu et al., 2017) O-glycosylation results were manually interpreted with the assistance of GPQuest.,(Toghi Eshghi et al., 2015) . Briefly, the MS/MS spectra containing at least two of the oxonium ions of HexNAc, including m/z =126.05, 138.05, 144.06, 168.06, 186.08, 204.08, were selected as glycopeptide spectra. The presence of at least 30% of b or y ion and 3 intact-glycopeptide ion were required.(Toghi Eshghi et al., 2015) Ttheoretical peptide database was constructed by using Lys/Arg on the C-terminal side (trypsin digestion) followed by Ser/Thr (OpeRATOR digestion) on the N-terminal side with four miss-cleavage sites allowed. In all analysis, tThe mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for precursor ions and 50 ppm for product ions.  Relative quantitative analysis was performed by comparing the peak area of ion chromatograms extracted from Xcalibur.

### Publication Abstract
Human plasma fibronectin is an adhesive protein that plays a crucial role in wound healing. Many studies had indicated that glycans might mediate the expression and functions of fibronectin, yet a comprehensive understanding of its glycosylation is still missing. Here, we performed a comprehensive N- and O-glycosylation mapping of human plasma fibronectin and quantified the occurrence of each glycoform in a site-specific manner. Intact N-glycopeptides were enriched by zwitterionic hydrophilic interaction chromatography, and N-glycosite sites were localized by the <sup>18</sup>O-labeling method. O-glycopeptide enrichment and O-glycosite identification were achieved by an enzyme-assisted site-specific extraction method. An RP-LC-MS/MS system functionalized with collision-induced dissociation and stepped normalized collision energy (sNCE)-HCD tandem mass was applied to analyze the glycoforms of fibronectin. A total of 6 N-glycosites and 53 O-glycosites were identified, which were occupied by 38 N-glycoforms and 16 O-glycoforms, respectively. Furthermore, 77.31% of N-glycans were sialylated, and O-glycosylation was dominated by the sialyl-T antigen. These site-specific glycosylation patterns on human fibronectin can facilitate functional analyses of fibronectin and therapeutics development.

### Keywords
Operator, Glycosylation, Mass spectrometer, Stepped normalized collision energy, Fibronectin

### Affiliations
1Department of Chemistry, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA
Georgia State University

### Submitter
Ding Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Lei Li
1Department of Chemistry, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA


