### Accession
PXD016494

### Title
plasma membrane anchored NAA60 N-terminal acetylation profiling in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
N-terminal acetylation (NTA) is one of the most abundant protein modifications in eukaryotes and is catalysed in humans by seven N-acetyltransferases. AtNAA60 localizes to the plasma membrane in vivo by an α-helical membrane anchor at its C-terminus. In this study, we investigated the Arabidopsis thaliana N-terminal acetylome in leaf cells of naa60-1 to identify AtNAA60 substrates in vivo using the SILProNAQ approach.

### Sample Protocol
Soluble leaf proteins from soil-grown wild-type and the NAA60 depleted mutants were extracted for protein N-terminal characterisation and quantification of N-terminal acetylation. The extracted proteins were processed and enriched by an SCX approach for quantification of N-terminal peptides using mass spectrometry as described in Bienvenut et al. (Methods Mol Biol; 2017, 1574:17-34). 1 mg of material was subjected to chemical acetylation of the free N-terminus amino groups with N-acetoxy-[2H3]-succinimide. After a desalting step, the samples were subjected to protein digestion with trypsin. Then, N-terminal peptides were enriched using strong cation exchange-LC (SCX-LC) and collected every 2 min on 40 min separation gradients. Fractions eluted from SCX chromatography with retention time between 2 to 10 min (fractions 2-5) and 10 to 22 min (Fraction 6-11) were resuspended in 25 µl and 30 µl respectively (nLC Buffer A: 0.1% FA, 5% ACN). Each fraction was analysed individually (1 hour cycle acquisition method) and 10 µl were loaded onto a pre-column (NS-MP-10, Nanoseparation, Nieuwkoop, Netherland) at a maximum pressure of 200 bars of nLC buffer A followed by a separation using a Nikkyo Technos capillary column (NTCC-360/100-5-153, Nikkyo Technos Co., Tokyo, Japan) over a 42 min gradient (nLC buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in AcN; 5-35% B in 42 min) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The previous fractions 2-5, 6-8 and 9-11 were combined together and 10 µl of this mixture was analysed twice on a 2 hours cycle acquisition (5-35% nLC buffer B in 90 min). The first acquisition includes all precursor ion charges whereas the second acquisition reject singly charged precursors. The nano-LC is coupled to an Orbitrap™ Velos (Thermo scientific). The survey scan was acquired by Fourier-Transform MS scanning 400-2000 Da at 30,000 resolution using internal calibration. The 20 most intense ions were subject to high collision dissociation MS with 20 seconds exclusion time for the selected precursor.

### Data Protocol
SILProNAQ processing was applied to determine proteins N-terminus and N-terminus acetylation quantitation using Mascot Distiller (Ver. 2.5.1, Matrix Science) and the EnCOUNTer script (Ver. 1b7). Extraction parameters were optimized for the OrbiTrap acquisition files with a minimum S/N of 1, precursor charges considered 1-5, Corr. Thr. > 0.7 and no grouping assignments. Protein identification were performed using the Mascot identification tool against the Araport11 database. Trypsin/P rule was used with parent and fragment mass tolerance defined as 10 ppm and 0.7 respectively. Carbamidomethylcysteine and d3-acetyl on Lys were considered as fix modifications whereas Met-oxidation, protein NTA and d3-NTA were considered as variable modifications. All data were filtered at 1% protein false discovery rate and only peptides with score higher than 30 were retained for the final data processing.

### Publication Abstract
In humans and plants, N-terminal acetylation plays a central role in protein homeostasis, affects 80% of proteins in the cytoplasm and is catalyzed by five ribosome-associated N-acetyltransferases (NatA-E). Humans also possess a Golgi-associated NatF (HsNAA60) that is essential for Golgi integrity. Remarkably, NAA60 is absent in fungi and has not been identified in plants. Here we identify and characterize the first plasma membrane-anchored post-translationally acting N-acetyltransferase AtNAA60 in the reference plant Arabidopsis thaliana by the combined application of reverse genetics, global proteomics, live-cell imaging, microscale thermophoresis, circular dichroism spectroscopy, nano-differential scanning fluorometry, intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence and X-ray crystallography. We demonstrate that AtNAA60, like HsNAA60, is membrane-localized in vivo by an &#x3b1;-helical membrane anchor at its C-terminus, but in contrast to HsNAA60, AtNAA60 localizes to the plasma membrane. The AtNAA60 crystal structure provides insights into substrate-binding, the broad substrate specificity and the catalytic mechanism probed by structure-based mutagenesis. Characterization of the NAA60 loss-of-function mutants (naa60-1 and naa60-2) uncovers a plasma membrane-localized substrate of AtNAA60 and the importance of NAA60 during high salt stress. Our findings provide evidence for the plant-specific evolution of a plasma membrane-anchored N-acetyltransferase that is vital for adaptation to stress.

### Keywords
Silpronaq, Quantitative proteomics, N-terminal acetylation, N-acetylome, Acetyltransferase

### Affiliations
CNRS
Génétique Quantitative et Évolution - Le Moulon INRA - Univ. Paris Sud - CNRS - AgroParisTech Ferme du Moulon 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France

### Submitter
Willy Bienvenut

### Lab Head
Dr Willy Bienvenut
Génétique Quantitative et Évolution - Le Moulon INRA - Univ. Paris Sud - CNRS - AgroParisTech Ferme du Moulon 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France


