### Accession
PXD010254

### Title
Regulation of SCD and fatty acid saturation by MITF controls melanoma phenotypic plasticity

### Description
The ability of cancer cells to switch phenotype in response to a dynamic intra-tumor microenvironment is a major barrier to effective therapy. In melanoma, down-regulation of the lineage addiction oncogene MITF (Microphthalmia-associated transcription factor) is a hallmark of the proliferative-to-invasive phenotype switch. Yet how MITF promotes proliferation and suppresses invasion is poorly understood. Here we show that expression of the key lipogenic enzyme stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD) is activated by MITF, but suppressed by the stress-responsive transcription factor ATF4. SCD expression is required for MITF-positive melanoma cell proliferation,. By contrast, MITF-low cells express reduced levels of SCD and are insensitive to its inhibition, indicating that cell phenotype dictates response to drugs targeting lipid metabolism. Since SCD suppresses inflammatory signalling and ATF4 expression, the results identify a positive feedback-loop that can maintain an invasive phenotype, uncover a key role for MITF and ATF4 in metabolic reprograming, and reveal fatty acid composition as a driver of melanoma phenotype-switching.

### Sample Protocol
The IGR37 melanoma cell lines were grown in SILAC DMEM (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% dialysed FBS (Biosera), 1000 mg/ml Glucose (Sigma), Glutamine 4mM (Thermo), 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Sigma). 73 mg/l of Lysine and 126 mg/l Arginine were added to the medium to prepare 2 different populations of labelled cells: Medium R6K4 and Heavy R10K8. Specifically, R6K4 medium was supplemented with K4 (L-Lysine-4,4,5,5-d4 hydrochloride) and R6 (L-Arginine-13C6 hydrochloride) and R10K8 Heavy medium was supplemented with  K8 (L-Lysine-13C6,15N2 hydrochloride) and R10 (L-Arginine-13C6,15N4 hydrochloride). All amino acids were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. The two cell populations were grown in corresponding culture medium for 15 cell doublings by changing medium every 2 days. The glutamine starvation experiment was performed in a biological triplicate with labels switched. Each population of cells, R6K4 Medium and R10K8 Heavy, was plated in 2 sub-confluent T175 flasks and starved for glutamine for either 4 h and 24 h or not starved. Glutamine starvation medium was prepared as described for the stable isotope labelling without the addition of Glutamine which was normally present at 4 mM. The 6 samples obtained were lysed in RIPA Lysis Buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EGTA 1% NP-40 1% sodium dehoxycholate, protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche), protein concentration was measured with bicinchoninic acid (BCA) according to standard protocols and Trypsin digested. After protein concentration normalization, samples were mixed to obtain three batches containing the 3 different times of glutamine starvation in all the labelling combinations: Batch 1: R6K4 4 h Q starved, R10K8 24 h Q starved; Batch 2: R6K4 not starved, R10K8-4 h Q starved; Batch 3: R6K4 24 h Q starved, R10K8 not starved. The 3 batches were analyzed by LC-MS/MS at the Target Discovery Institute (Oxford). Tandem mass spectra were extracted, and analyzed using Perseus.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were analysed in MaxQuant using default parameters and the "match between runs" setting activated. Quantitative data was analysed in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Phenotypic and metabolic heterogeneity within tumors is a major barrier to effective cancer therapy. How metabolism is implicated in specific phenotypes and whether lineage-restricted mechanisms control key metabolic vulnerabilities remain poorly understood. In melanoma, downregulation of the lineage addiction oncogene microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) is a hallmark of the proliferative-to-invasive phenotype switch, although how MITF promotes proliferation and suppresses invasion is poorly defined. Here, we show that MITF is a lineage-restricted activator of the key lipogenic enzyme stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD) and that SCD is required for MITF<sup>High</sup> melanoma cell proliferation. By contrast MITF<sup>Low</sup> cells are insensitive to SCD inhibition. Significantly, the MITF-SCD axis suppresses metastasis, inflammatory signaling, and an ATF4-mediated feedback loop that maintains de-differentiation. Our results reveal that MITF is a lineage-specific regulator of metabolic reprogramming, whereby fatty acid composition is a driver of melanoma phenotype switching, and highlight that cell phenotype dictates the response to drugs targeting lipid metabolism.

### Keywords
Mitf/atf4/stearoyl coa desaturase/melanoma/phenotype-switching/fatty acid saturation

### Affiliations
Discovery Proteomics Facility, Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Discovery Proteomics Facility, Oxford


