### Accession
PXD033512

### Title
Engineered synthetic eukaryotic vesicles as anti-inflammatory drug delivery system to target Myd88

### Description
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) secrete naturally extracellular vesicles (EV) with a regenerative profile, and an increasing number of studies have focused on the employment of EV for therapeutic drug delivery. However, EV are usually produced by the cells at low quantities and packed with unnecessary cytoplasmic components that are unfavorable for further drug loading. In this study, we developed a simple vesicle generation process from the cell membranes directly, after which they are called synthetic eukaryotic vesicles (SyEV or reNV). We hypothesized that MSC-derived SyEV can be efficiently loaded with an anti-inflammatory drug and the loaded vesicles can strongly suppress bacterial outer membrane vesicle (OMV)-induced sepsis. SyEV were generated from MSC membranes through serial extrusion, ionic stress and subsequent revesiculation, leading to high yield and purity with very few cytosolic contaminants. When these SyEV were given to macrophages and mice exposed to OMV, the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines was significantly inhibited comparable to natural EV. Then, we encapsulated SyEV with a peptide targeting Myd88 and showed the enhanced therapeutic potential of the loaded vesicles in OMV-induced macrophages. Further, in vivo study indicated that the peptide-encapsulated SyEV could dramatically suppress cytokine release into the systemic circulation via a synergistic way. Taken together, these data suggest that SyEV-based therapeutics is a highly interesting platform to deliver an advanced therapeutic drug for the treatment of inflammatory diseases without severe side effects.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Digestion and Labeling Aliquots containing approximately 30 μg of each sample were digested with trypsin using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method ((Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May;6(5):359-62)). Briefly, the 20% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 1M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) solutions were added to the final concentrations of 2% SDS and 50 mM TEAB, and the samples were incubated with 100 mM dithiothreitol at 60°C for 30 min. The reduced samples were transferred onto the 30 kDa MWCO Nanosep centrifugal filters (Pall Life Sciences, Ann Arbor, USA), washed with 8M urea solution and alkylated with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate in 50 mM TEAB and 1% sodium deoxycholate. Digestion was performed in 50 mM TEAB, 1% sodium deoxycholate at 37°C in two stages: the samples were incubated with 300 ng of Pierce MS-grade trypsin (Thermo Scientific) for 3h (trypsin:protein ratio 1:100), then 300 ng more of trypsin was added and the digestion was performed overnight. The peptides were collected by centrifugation, labelled using TMT 10-plex isobaric mass tagging reagents (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions. The labeled samples were mixed, sodium deoxycholate was removed by acidification with 10% TFA. The combined labeled sample was pre-fractionated on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using the Waters XBridge BEH C18 column (3.0x150 mm, 3.5µm, Waters Corporation, Milford, USA) and the gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B over 17 min, from 40% to 100% B over 5 min, 100% B for 5 min, all at the flowrate of 0.4 ml/min; solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate in water at pH 10.0, solvent B was 90% acetonitrile, 10% 10 mM ammonium formate in water at pH 10.0. The 40 primary fractions were combined into 20 pooled fractions in the following manner: 1+21, 2+22, 3+23 etc. The combined fractions number 14, 15, 16 and 17 were treated using the HiPPR Detergent removal spin columns (Thermo Scientific) with 20 mM TEAB as an equilibration buffer. All fractions were dried on Speedvac and reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for analysis. LC-MS/MS Analysis Each fraction was analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy-nLC 1200 nanoflow liquid chromatography system (both - Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on the Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm X 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on the in-house packed C18 analytical column (75 μm X 30 cm, particle size 3 μm) using the gradient from 5% to 32% B in 75 min, from 32% to 100% B in 5 min, solvent A was 0.2% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid. Precursor ion mass spectra were recorded at 120 000 resolution, the most intense precursor ions were selected (‘top speed’ setting with a duty cycle of 3s), fragmented using CID at collision energy setting of 35, spectra and the MS/MS spectra were recorded in ion trap with the maximum injection time of 40 ms and the isolation window of 0.7 Da. Charge states 2 to 7 were selected for fragmentation, dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s with 10 ppm tolerance. MS3 spectra for reporter ion quantitation were recorded at 50 000 resolution with HCD fragmentation at collision energy of 60 using the synchronous precursor selection of the 7 most abundant MS/MS fragments, with the maximum injection time of 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
Database Search and Quantification  Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The database search was performed against the Swissprot Homo sapiens database (May 2018), Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science) was used as a search engine with precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da; one missed cleavage was accepted, mono-oxidation on methionine was set as a variable modification, methylthiolation on cysteine and TMT-6 reagent modification on lysine and peptide N-terminus were set as a fixed modification. Percolator was used for the validation of identification results with the strict target false discovery rate of 1%. Reporter ion intensities were quantified in MS3 spectra at 0.003 Da mass tolerance using the S/N values as abundances and normalized on the total protein abundance within the Proteome Discoverer 2.2 workflow. Only the values for the unique peptides were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) secrete extracellular vesicles (EV) with a regenerative profile, and an increasing number of studies have focused on the utilization of MSC-EV for therapeutic drug delivery. However, EV are usually produced by cells in low quantities and are packed with numerous cytoplasmic components, which may be unfavorable for further drug loading. In this study, we developed a simple process for generating membrane vesicles directly from the cells, which we refer to as synthetic eukaryotic vesicles (SyEV). We hypothesized that MSC-derived SyEV can be efficiently loaded with an anti-inflammatory drug and the loaded vesicles can strongly suppress the systemic inflammation induced by bacterial outer membrane vesicles (OMV). SyEV were generated from MSC membranes through serial extrusion of the cells, ionic stress, and subsequent vesiculation of the membrane sheets, leading to high yield and purity of the SyEV with few cytosolic components remaining. When these SyEV were given to macrophages or mice exposed to OMV, the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines was similarly attenuated comparable to treatment with natural EV. We then loaded the SyEV with large numbers of peptides targeting Myd88 and observed enhanced therapeutic potential of the loaded vesicles in OMV-induced macrophages. Further, in vivo experiments showed that the peptide-encapsulated MSC-SyEV suppressed cytokine production synergistically. Taken together, these findings suggest that SyEV-based therapeutics is a highly interesting platform for delivering an advanced therapeutic drug for the treatment of systemic inflammation without severe side effects.

### Keywords
Human, Therapeutic drug delivery, Quantitative proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Mesenchymal stem cells

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden
University of Gothenburg

### Submitter
Evelin Berger

### Lab Head
Dr Carina Sihlbom
Proteomics Core facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden


