### Accession
PXD014748

### Title
Effects of simulated space radiations on the tomato root proteome

### Description
Plant cultivation on spacecraft or planetary outposts is a promising and actual perspective both for food and bioactive molecules production. To this aim, plants response to ionizing radiations, as an important component of space radiation, must be assessed through on-ground experiments due to the potentially fatal effects on living systems. Hereby we investigated the effects of X-rays and -rays exposure on tomato ‘hairy root’ cultures (HRCs), which represent a solid platform for the production of pharmaceutically relevant molecules, including metabolites and recombinant proteins. In a space application perspective, we used a HRC system previously fortified through the accumulation of anthocyanins, which are known for their anti-oxidant properties. Roots were independently exposed to different photon radiations, namely X-rays (250 kV) and -rays (Co60, 1.25 MeV), both at the intensity of 0.5, 5 and 10 Gy. Molecular changes induced in the proteome of HRCs were investigated by a comparative approach based on Two-Dimensional Difference In-Gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) technology and mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was obtained using a trichloroacetic acid (TCA)-acetone precipitation protocol combined with a second precipitation step in ammonium acetate. The protein pellet was resuspended in lysis buffer and precipitated again in 0.1 M ammonium acetate in cold methanol. The protein extract was purified using Clean Up kit (GE Healthcare) and quantified using the DC Protein Assay (BioRad), according to manufacturer’s instructions. Protein were covalently labeled using the CyDyes DIGE Fluors and samples analysed by 2DE according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Protein 2DE maps obtained were visualized with a Typhoon 9410 and then exported to the Batch Processor of DeCyder 2D Software v 7.2 (GE Healthcare) and statistically elaborated by Biological Variation Analysis module. Univariate analysis one way-ANOVA was performed and protein spots with statistically significant variation (p ≤ 0.05, fold change over 1.5, filtered for false discovery rate) were detected as differentially represented and automatically isolated from gel by the Ettan Spot Picker System (GE Healthcare). Multivariate analysis, consisting of hierarchical clustering analysis (HCA) and principal component analysis (PCA), was performed using the DeCyder-EDA (Extended Data Analysis) module. Spots from 2D-DIGE were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. Protein digests were desalted on μZipTipC18 pipette tips (Millipore) and then analyzed by nLC-MS/MS using LTQ XL and Q Exactive Plus instruments both equipped with UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nano system (Thermo Fischer Scientific, USA).

### Data Protocol
Raw data from nLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis were searched by MASCOT v2.6.2, (Matrix Science, UK) within Proteome Discoverer v2.1, against a Solanum lycopersicum protein sequence database retrieved from UniProt repository. The following parameters were used for protein identification: a mass tolerance value of 2 Da for precursor ion and 0.8 Da for MS/MS fragments, trypsin as proteolytic enzyme, a missed-cleavages maximum value of 2, Cys carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, Met oxidation and Gln->PyroGlu formation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Plant cultivation on spacecraft or planetary outposts is a promising and actual perspective both for food and bioactive molecules production. To this aim, plant response to ionizing radiations, as an important component of space radiation, must be assessed through on-ground experiments due to the potentially fatal effects on living systems. Hereby, we investigated the effects of X-rays and &#x3b3;-rays exposure on tomato "hairy root" cultures (HRCs), which represent a solid platform for the production of pharmaceutically relevant molecules, including metabolites and recombinant proteins. In a space application perspective, we used an HRC system previously fortified through the accumulation of anthocyanins, which are known for their anti-oxidant properties. Roots were independently exposed to different photon radiations, namely X-rays (250 kV) and &#x3b3;-rays (Co<sup>60</sup>, 1.25 MeV), both at the absorbed dose levels of 0.5, 5, and 10 Gy. Molecular changes induced in the proteome of HRCs were investigated by a comparative approach based on two-dimensional difference in-gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) technology, which allowed to highlight dynamic processes activated by these environmental stresses. Results revealed a comparable response to both photon treatments. In particular, the presence of differentially represented proteins were observed only when roots were exposed to 5 or 10 Gy of X-rays or &#x3b3;-rays, while no variations were appreciated at 0.5 Gy of both radiations, when compared with unexposed control. Differentially represented proteins were identified by mass spectrometry procedures and their functional interactions were analyzed, revealing variations in the activation of stress response integrated mechanisms as well as in carbon/energy and protein metabolism. Specific results from above-mentioned procedures were validated by immunoblotting. Finally, a morphometric analysis verified the absence of significant alterations in the development of HRCs, allowing to ascribe the observed variations of protein expression to processes of acclimation to ionizing radiations. Overall results contribute to a meaningful risk evaluation for biological systems exposed to extra-terrestrial environments, in the perspective of manned interplanetary missions planned for the near future.

### Keywords
Space, Radiation, 2dige, Tomato

### Affiliations
CNR ISPAAM
Istituto per il Sistema Produzione Animale in Ambiente (ISPAAM) , Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche ITALY

### Submitter
anna maria salzano

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Scaloni
Istituto per il Sistema Produzione Animale in Ambiente (ISPAAM) , Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche ITALY


