### Accession
PXD030417

### Title
Molecular mechanism of Engineered Zymomonas mobilis response to furfural and acetic acid stress

### Description
This study investigated the responses of ZM532 and wild-type ZM4 to acetic acid and furfural using genomics, transcriptomics and label free quantitative proteome. By Sanger sequencing technology we re-verified of previously identified 19 mutations in ZM532, but we found a total of 23 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the coding sequence (CDS; 4) and intergenic region (19) in ZM532. Six SNPs were however novel in this study. We also identified a total of 1865 and 14 novel differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in ZM532 and wild-type ZM4. Further we identified 1,532 proteins by label free proteome. These proteins and genes are involved in amino acid biosynthesis, macromolecules repair, glycolysis, flagella assembly, ABC transporter, fermentation, and ATP synthesis pathways and stress response. The exclusively found genes and proteins in ZM532 confirmed and help to unravel the acetic acid and furfural tolerance mechanism between ZM532 and wild-type ZM4. May be these proteins and genes play key roles in ZM532 regulation with strong expressions under acids stress conditions. Furthermore, we knocked-out and overexpressed two differentially expressed genes (DEGs), ZMO_RS02740 up-regulated and ZMO_RS06525 down-regulated to investigate their roles in acetic acid and furfural tolerance. Our knockout and complementary experiments revealed that up-regulated expression gene ZMO RS02740 and the down-regulated expression gene ZMO-RS06525 play important roles in dealing with Furfural and acetic acid stress. ZM532 can be used to substitute ZM4 as a biocatalyst for bioethanol under acetic acid and furfural condition, with a shorter fermentation time and higher productivity.

### Sample Protocol
Samples (2 strains ×? 2 conditions ×? 3 replications) were independently ground in liquid nitrogen and lysed with a lysis buffer (consisting of 6 M Urea and 0.2 % SDS, 100 mM NH4HCO3,pH 8.0), accompanied by 5 min of ice ultrasound. At 12000 g for 15 min at 4°?C, the lysate was centrifuged and the supernatants transmitted to a clean tube. The extracts from each sample were reduced to 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56 °?C and alkylated with iodoacetamide under dark room temperature for 1 hour. Samples were thoroughly vortexed with 4x the volume of precooled acetone and incubated at -20 °?C for at least 2 hours. Samples were then centrifuged and precipitated. They were washed twice with cold acetone and pellets were dissolved with a dissolution buffer of 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 8.5) and 6 M urea

### Data Protocol
The result of each fractions were searched separately by the search engines for Z.-mobilis-NCBI databases: Proteome Discoverer 2.2. (PD 2.2, Thermo). The search parameters were set as follows: the tolerance of precursor ion mass was 10 ppm, and the tolerance of product ion mass was 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl was mentioned in PD 2.2 as a fixed amendment. Oxidation of methionine (M) and acetylation of N-terminus were identified in PD 2.2 as variable modifications. A maximum of 2 missing cleavage sites were allowed. At least 1 distinct peptide with no more than 1.0 % FDR contains the protein identified. Related peptides that could not be identified by an MS/MS analysis were categorized in the same category of proteins. Based on the intensity used for label-free quantification, precursor ions were quantified using a label-free method. The Mann-Whitney Test for proteins whose quantitation differs significantly between experimental and control groups (p < 0.05 and log2FC > 1.5) known as were evaluated as the differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Acetic acid and furfural (AF) are two major inhibitors of microorganisms during lignocellulosic ethanol production. In our previous study, we successfully engineered Zymomonas mobilis 532 (ZM532) strain by genome shuffling, but the molecular mechanisms of tolerance to inhibitors were still unknown. Therefore, this study investigated the responses of ZM532 and its wild-type Z. mobilis (ZM4) to AF using multi-omics approaches (transcriptomics, genomics, and label free quantitative proteomics). Based on RNA-Seq data, two differentially expressed genes, ZMO_RS02740 (up-regulated) and ZMO_RS06525 (down-regulated) were knocked out and over-expressed through CRISPR-Cas technology to investigate their roles in AF tolerance. Overall, we identified 1865 and 14 novel DEGs in ZM532 and wild-type ZM4. In contrast, 1532 proteins were identified in ZM532 and wild-type ZM4. Among these, we found 96 important genes in ZM532 involving acid resistance mechanisms and survival rates against stressors. Furthermore, our knockout results demonstrated that growth activity and glucose consumption of mutant strains ZM532&#x2206;ZMO_RS02740 and ZM4&#x2206;ZMO_RS02740 decreased with increased fermentation time from 42 to 55&#xa0;h and ethanol production up to 58% in ZM532 than that in ZM532&#x2206;ZMO_RS02740. Hence, these findings suggest ZMO_RS02740 as a protective strategy for ZM ethanol production under stressful conditions.

### Keywords
Furfural, Rna-seq, Proteome, Acetic acid, Lignocellulosic biomass, Zymomonas mobilis

### Affiliations
Renmin South Rd. 4-13, Chengdu 610041, China
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Xiangxu Gongye

### Lab Head
Dr Mingxiong He
Renmin South Rd. 4-13, Chengdu 610041, China


