### Accession
PXD026866

### Title
A molecular network of conserved factors keeps ribosomes dormant in the egg

### Description
Ribosomes are produced in large quantities during oogenesis and stored in the egg. However, the egg and early embryo are translationally inactive. How translation is activated during embryogenesis is poorly understood. Using mass-spectrometry and cryo-EM analyses of ribosomes isolated from zebrafish and Xenopus eggs and embryos, we find that ribosomes transition from a dormant to an active state during the first hours of embryogenesis. Dormant ribosomes are associated with four factors that form two modules: a Habp4-eEF2 module that stabilizes ribosome levels and a Dap1b/Dapl1-eIF-5a module that represses translation. Dap/Dap1b is a newly discovered translational inhibitor that stably inserts into the polypeptide exit tunnel. Thus, a developmentally programmed, unique ribosome state plays a key role in ribosome storage and translational repression in the egg.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection for ribosome isolation The evening prior to the zebrafish egg collections, male and female zebrafish were separated in breeding cages. To collect mature, un-activated eggs, female zebrafish were anesthetized using 0.1 % (w/v) Tricaine (25x stock solution in dH2O, buffered to pH 7-7.5 with 1 M Tris pH 9.0). Eggs were carefully expelled from the female by applying mild pressure on the fish belly with a finger and stroking from anterior to posterior. To prevent activation, eggs were kept in sorting medium (Leibovitz’s medium, 0.5 % BSA, pH 9) at room temperature (RT). In the case of zebrafish embryos, eggs were collected in Petri dishes with blue water, which consist of fish water, 0.025 % (v/v) Instant Ocean salts (Aquarium Systems, 218035), and 0.0001 % (v/v) methylene blue (Sigma-Aldrich, M9140), pH 7. Embryos were incubated at 28 °C, collected at the desired time points (1h and 6 h post-fertilization), and incubated with 1 mg/mL of pronase for 5 min at RT for dechorionation. To obtain samples from Xenopus, sexually matured wild-type females were primed with 50 IU of pregnant mare serum gonadotropin (PMSG, ProSpec, HOR-272) one week before the experiments. At the evening before egg collection, PMSG-primed females were injected with 500 IU of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG, Sigma-Aldrich, CG10). Freshly laid eggs were collected and chemically dejellied in 2 % (w/v) L-cysteine/1xMMR (Marc’s Modified Ringer) (pH 7.8) before ribosome extraction. For the 24-hours sample, freshly laid eggs were in vitro fertilized with wild-type sperm and dejellied in 2 % (w/v) L-cysteine/0.1xMMR (pH 7.8) at 1-cell stage. Embryos were allowed to develop in room temperature (RT) for 24 h before ribosome extraction. Samples were washed in 2 volumes of lysis buffer, containing 20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM DTT, rRNasin (Promega), RNaseOUT (ThermoFisher), SUPERaseIN (ThermoFisher), 0.25% Igepal, and cOmpleteTM-EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche). Embryos were lysed in lysis buffer using a precooled Dounce homogenizer. 100 μg mL−1 of cycloheximide was added during lysis. Following incubation on ice for 5 min, the supernatant was cleared by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 min at 4◦C. For ribosome isolation, the clarified supernatant was loaded onto a 30 % sucrose cushion prepared in buffer A (20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 2 mM Mg(OAc)2, and 150 mM KCl) and centrifuged at 116,000 g for 5 h at 4◦C in a TL100.3 rotor (Beckman). The ribosome pellet was resuspended by orbital shaking (1 h at 4◦C) in buffer B, consisting of 20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 6 mM Mg(OAc)2, 150 mM KCl, 6.8% sucrose, 1 mM DTT, RNasin Plus (ThermoFisher), and RNase Inhibitor (Promega). Resuspended ribosomes were loaded onto a 15-30 % sucrose gradient prepared in buffer C (100 mM KCl, 5 mM Mg(OAc)2, 20 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 1 mM DTT, and 10 mM NH4Cl) and centrifuged for 16 h at 4 ◦C with 18,000 rpm in an SW60Ti rotor (Beckman). Gradients were hand-fractionated and ribosome concentrations were determined by A260 and SDS-PAGE. To isolate ribosomes from rabbit reticulocyte lysates (RRL), a one-step centrifugation of 1 mL of in vitro translation reaction was performed over 3 mL of a 30 % sucrose cushion prepared in RNC buffer (50 mM Hepes pH 7.4, 100 mM KOAc, 5 mM Mg(OAc)2, and 1 mM DTT) in a TLA100.3 rotor (Beckman) at 116,000 g for 5h. The ribosome pellet was resuspended in 120 mL of RNC buffer. For MS and cryo-EM, sucrose was omitted from the gradient fractions by loading the resuspended ribosome solution on a Zeba™ Spin Desalting Columns (7K MWCO). For elution of ribosome fractions used in crosslinking-MS experiments, buffer C was adjusted to 20 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 100 mM KCl, and 5 mM Mg(OAc)2. 0.5 mM of disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO) from a 5 mM stock solution (in dimethyl sulfoxide, DMSO) was added to 10 µL of 500 nM ribosomes and incubated for 45 min at RT. The reaction was quenched by adding Tris pH 7.5 to a final concentration of 100 mM, and incubation for 15 min at RT. The band pattern of the crosslinking reaction was analyzed by SDS-PAGE. Samples were denatured in 8 M urea in 100 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC) buffer or acetone precipitated before being dissolved in 8 M urea in 100 mM ABC. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 10 mM and the sample was incubated 1 hour at 37°C. The alkylation was performed by adding Iodoacetamide (IAA) to a final concentration of 20 mM and incubating for 30 minutes at RT in the dark. The reaction was quenched by addition of DTT to 5 mM and incubated again 30 minutes at RT. Samples were diluted to 6 M urea with 100 mM ABC followed by addition Lys-C (FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation) at a ratio of 1:100 and incubation at 37°C for 2 hours. The samples were diluted to 2 M urea with 100 mM ABC, trypsin (Promega, Trypsin Gold) was added at a ratio of 1:100 and incubated at 37°C over night.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, the RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5.0.402, Thermo Fisher Scientific). All hereby created MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda version 2.5.0.16129, Engine version 2.0.0.16129. For the 1st step search the RAW-files were searched against a combined zebrafish sequence database Danio_rerio GRCz11, Uniprot downloaded on 21th March 2019 (58,524 sequences; 34,079,443 residues), supplemented with common contaminants, using the following search parameters: The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to ±8ppm. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2, using tryptic enzymatic specificity. The result was filtered to 1 % FDR on protein level using Percolator algorithm integrated in Proteome Discoverer. A sub-database was generated for further processing. For the 2nd step the RAW-files were searched against the created sub-database using the following search parameters: Oxidation on methionine, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine, iodoacetamide derivative on cysteine, beta-methylthiolation on cysteine, carbamylation on lysine were set as variable modifications. Monoisotopic masses were searched within unrestricted protein masses for tryptic enzymatic specificity. The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to ±8 ppm. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2. The result was filtered to 1 % FDR on peptide level using Percolator algorithm integrated in Proteome Discoverer. The localization of the post-translational modification sites within the peptides was performed with the tool ptmRS, based on the tool phosphoRS. Peptide areas have been quantified using in-house-developed tool apQuant. Proteins were quantified by summing unique and razor peptides. Protein-abundances-normalization was done using sum normalization. Statistical significance of differentially expressed proteins was determined using limma. Data Analysis XL-MS Data analysis was performed within Proteome Discoverer v2.5.0.402 using MS Annika (v1.0.18345). The workflow tree consisted of the MS Annika Detector node (MS tolerance 10 ppm, cross-link modification: DSSO +185.004 Da at lysine and at protein N-termini, diagnostic ions: 138.0911; 155.179; 170.0634; 187.0900, crosslink modification addition: 18.010565, doublet pair selection in combined mode) followed by MS Annika Search (full tryptic digest, 5/10 ppm peptide/fragment mass tolerance, max 3 missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl +57.021 Da at cysteine as static and oxidation +15.995 Da at methionine as dynamic modification) and completed with MS Annika Validator (1 % FDR cutoff at CSM and XL level, separate Intra/Inter-link FDR set to false). The search was performed against a database generated from a MS analysis of a digested non-cross-linked Zebrafish (containing 1092 proteins) or Xenopus (containing 1173 proteins) ribosome sample, respectively. To generate these specific databases the two non-cross-linked samples were searched using MS Amanda against the Zebrafish uniprot reference proteome UP000000437 (downloaded 2020-09-15, 46847 sequences, 24556292 residues) or Xenopus laevis uniprot proteome UP000186698 (downloaded 2020-01-07, 43235 sequences, 19251456 residues), both supplemented with common contaminants. Search parameters were set as described for time course experiments but using 5/10 ppm peptide/fragment mass tolerance, max 3 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation on methionine, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine and acetylation on the protein N-terminus were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Ribosomes are produced in large quantities during oogenesis and are stored in the egg. However, the egg and early embryo are translationally repressed<sup>1-4</sup>. Here, using mass spectrometry and cryo-electron microscopy analyses of ribosomes isolated from zebrafish (Danio rerio) and Xenopus laevis eggs and embryos, we provide molecular evidence that ribosomes transition from a dormant state to an active state during the first hours of embryogenesis. Dormant ribosomes are associated with four conserved factors that form two modules, consisting of Habp4-eEF2 and death associated protein 1b (Dap1b) or Dap in complex with eIF5a. Both modules occupy functionally important sites and act together to stabilize ribosomes and repress translation. Dap1b (also known as Dapl1&#xa0;in mammals) is a newly discovered translational inhibitor that stably inserts into the polypeptide exit tunnel. Addition of recombinant zebrafish Dap1b protein is sufficient to block translation and reconstitute the dormant egg ribosome state in a mammalian translation extract in vitro. Thus, a developmentally programmed, conserved ribosome state has a key role in ribosome storage and translational repression in the egg.

### Keywords
Xenopus, Ribosome, Cross-linking, Cryo-em, Zebrafish, Mass-spectrometry

### Affiliations
IMP / University of Vienna
Institure of Molecular Pathology

### Submitter
Manuel Matzinger

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Pauli
Institure of Molecular Pathology


