### Accession
PXD031866

### Title
Stomatin modulates adipogenesis through ERK pathway and regulates fatty acid uptake and lipid droplet growth

### Description
Controlling fatty acid uptake, lipid production and storage, and metabolism of lipid droplets (LDs), is closely related to lipid homeostasis, adipocyte hypertrophy and obesity. We report here that stomatin, a major constituent of lipid rafts, participates in adipogenesis and adipocyte maturation by modulating related signaling pathways. In adipocyte-like cells, increased stomatin promotes LD growth or enlargements by facilitating LD-LD fusion, as well as fatty acid uptake from extracellular environment by recruiting effector molecules, such as FAT/CD36 translocase, to lipid rafts to promote internalization of fatty acids. Stomatin transgenic mice fed with high-fat diets exhibit obesity, insulin resistance and hepatic impairments; however, such phenotypes are not seen if feeding the transgenic animals with regular diets. Inhibitions of stomatin by gene knockdown or OB-1 pharmacological treatments inhibit adipogenic differentiation and LD growth through downregulation of PPARγ pathway. Effects of stomatin on PPARγ involve ERK signaling; however, an alternate pathway may also exist.

### Sample Protocol
After immunoprecipitation, the eluted proteins were separated by gradient SDS-gel. After stained with R250 for 4 hours, the gel was de-stained by the solution of 50 % ACN (50% of ACN in ddH2O) and cut into 6 segments. Each of the segments was conducted with in-gel digestion. The gel was washed with 100% NH4CO3 for 10 mins and was washed with 50% NH4CO3 in ACN for 20 mins. The gel was dried in speed Vac (Thermo, SAVANT, RVT5105). After that, the gel was incubated in beta-mercaptoethanol and 4-vinylpyridine for 20 mins at dark, respectively. And dried the gel in speed Vac. Further, after washing with NH4CO3, the protein was then digested with trypsin (100 µL of 0.1% trypsin) for 20 mins at 4 °C and incubated at 37°C for overnight. The supernatant was collected and added by 100% NH4CO3 and 50% NH4CO3 in ACN, respectively. Finally, the gel was dried in speed Vac, and protein peptides were then sent to Academia Sinica for mass spectrometry (LTQ-VELOS) analysis. The data was collected and analyzed by Dr.Liao, Chen-Chung’s lab (Proteomic Research Center, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University).

### Data Protocol
After protein digestion, samples were introduced into LTQ-VELOS mass spectrometer with a nanoelectrospray ionization source (Thermo Electron, MA, USA). Protein peptides were loaded into UPLC, then were captured and desalted on a C18 trap column (2 cm × 180 µm, Symmetry C18, Waters, MA, USA). After that, protein peptides were separated by a 25 cm × 75 µm BEH130 C18 column (Waters, MA), and the mobile phases are prepared as solution A (0.1% formic acid in ddH¬2O) and solution B (0.1% formic acid solution in acetonitrile). The eluted protein peptides were ionized and delivered into LTQ-VELOS mass spectrometer. Finally, the mass spectra data were obtained by a full MS survey scan (m/z range of 350–1600) of 30000. The MS/MS data were then analyzed with a UniProt mouse protein database with PEAKS Studio 7.5 (Bioinformatic Solution, Ontario, CA). A protein was identified as at least one unique peptide was matched. Moreover, spectra counts were normalized with the total identified spectra per biological sample and the proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Erk pathway, 3t3-l1 adipocyte-like cell, Adipogenesis

### Affiliations
Metabolomics-Proteomics Research Center, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei 11221, Taiwan
Proteomics Research Center,National Yang-Ming University

### Submitter
Chen-Chung Liao

### Lab Head
Dr Chen-Chung Liao
Metabolomics-Proteomics Research Center, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei 11221, Taiwan


