### Accession
PXD020499

### Title
CSF extracellular vesicle proteomics demonstrates altered protein homeostasis in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are released by neurons and glia reach the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Studying the proteome of CSF-derived EVs offers a novel perspective on the key intracellular processes associated with the pathogenesis of the neurodegenerative disease amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and a potential source from which to develop biomarkers. CSF EVs were extracted using ultrafiltration liquid chromatography from ALS patients and controls.  EV size distribution and concentration was measured using nanoparticle tracking analysis and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry proteomic analysis performed. CSF EV concentration and size distribution did not differ between ALS and control groups, nor between a sub-group of ALS patients with or without an associated hexanucleotide repeat expansion (HRE) in C9orf72.  Univariate proteomic analysis identified downregulation of the pentameric proteasome-like protein Bleomycin hydrolase in ALS patients, whilst Gene Ontology enrichment analysis demonstrated downregulation of proteasome core complex proteins (8/8 proteins, normalized enrichment ratio -1.77, FDR-adjusted p = 0.057) in the ALS group.  The sub-group of ALS patients associated with the C9orf72 HRE showed upregulation in Ubiquitin-like modifying-activating protein 1 (UBA1) compared to non-C9orf72 cases. Proteomic analysis of CSF EVs in ALS detects intracellular alterations in protein homeostatic mechanisms, previously only identified in pathological tissues.  This supports the wider use of CSF EVs as a source of novel biomarkers reflecting key and potentially druggable pathological intracellular pathway alterations in ALS.

### Sample Protocol
CSF samples were obtained by lumbar puncture directly into polypropylene collection tubes. Samples were centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C within 1 hour of sampling and stored at −80°C until EV extraction.  CSF samples were excluded if they had a red blood cell count >200/mm3 or visible blood staining.  Sample order was randomised prior to EV extraction. EVs were isolated from 7.2mL CSF.  CSF EV extraction and EV characterisation was performed as previously described (5). CSF underwent centrifugation at 1200 × g for 10 min then filtered through a 0.22 μm Millex 33 mm polyetherosulfone syringe‐driven filter (Merck Millipore). Samples were filtered using Amicon Ultra‐15 100 kDa molecular weight cut-off (MWCO) centrifugal filters (Merck Millipore) at 3500 × g for 8 min, washed with 4 mL PBS and centrifuged at 3500 × g for 4 min. Retentate volume was adjusted to 800 μL with PBS, injected into a 24 mL size exclusion column packed with sepharose 4 fast flow (mean particle size 90 μm, exclusion limit Mr 3 × 107) and eluted with 40 mL PBS at 0.5 mL/min using an ÄKTA pure chromatography system (GE Life Sciences). Two mL fractions were collected from 6 to 40 mL elution volume. EV‐containing fractions (2–3) were concentrated for further analysis using Amicon 10 kDa MWCO 4 mL centrifugal filters. Following UFLC, samples were concentrated using Amicon® Ultra-4 10kDa MWCO centrifugal filters (Merck Millipore) at 3500g to a retentate volume of <400 μL. EV size distribution and concentration was ascertained in fractions 2 and 3 by Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA) using a NanoSight NS500 (Malvern Panalytical, UK) and NTA 2.3 software. Where necessary, samples were diluted in PBS to achieve a concentration of 2x108-2x109 particles per mL. The camera level was set to 14 and detection threshold 5. Three recordings of 30-60 seconds were obtained for each sample and estimations of size distribution were averaged across recordings.  EV marker and contaminating proteins were selected according to the 2018 International Society for Extracellular Vesicles position paper (15). Samples were reduced in 5mM DTT for 30 minutes at room temperature followed by alkylation with 20mM IAA for 30 minutes at room temperature. Samples were subsequently precipitated using chloroform-methanol precipitation.  Precipitated protein was resuspended in 50mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) with vortexing and sonication for 2 minutes. Samples were digested overnight at 37°C at 300 rpm using 400ng of trypsin. Peptide digests were acidified with 1% formic acid and desalted using SOLA SPE cartridges (Thermofisher Scientific, UK) and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptide samples were resuspended in 10μL of buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water). The entire sample of extracted EV peptide was injected for analysis by LC-MS/MS. Sample order was randomised prior to MS analysis and a sample produced by pooling an equal volume of peptide from each sample was run after every 10 samples. Peptides were analysed by nUHPLC LC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoUPLC, (Thermofisher Scientific, Germany) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany). Samples of peptide digest were loaded onto an EASY-Spray column (75 mÅ~500 mm, 2 μm particle size, ThermoFisher Scientific, Germany) and eluted using a 60-minute gradient starting with 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO and increasing to 35% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO at a flow rate of 250nL/min. The data were acquired in data dependent mode with a resolution of 120,000 full-width half maximum at m/z 200 in the survey scan (375-1500 m/z) and with EASY-IC using the reagent ion source (202 m/z) for internal calibration. MS/MS spectra were acquired after precursor isolation in the quadrupole with an isolation window of 1.2 Th, dynamic precursor selection (top speed mode) with a fixed duty cycle time of 3 seconds and dynamic precursor exclusion of 60 seconds. Isolated precursor ions were fragmented by CID with a normalised Collision Energy of 35%. Parallelization was enabled and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap for up to 250 ms with an ion target of 4000 in rapid scan mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were analysed using Progenesis QI for Proteomics software v3.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics). MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swiss-Prot Homo Sapiens Reference proteome (retrieved 15/11/2016) using Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Science) allowing for a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethylation on Cysteines was defined as fixed modification and variable modifications included Deamidation on Asparagine and Glutamine, and Oxidation on Methionine. The peptide FDR was set at 1% and all peptides with an ion score higher than 20 were imported into Progenesis QIP. Proteins that were defined with at least one unique peptide and UniProt protein existence 1 were included in the protein data set for further analysis. Protein abundance values were normalised by centring on the median abundance of the 90% of proteins with the lowest variance across all runs and scaled by median absolute deviation (16). Missing values were imputed using k-nearest neighbours with k = 3. Since the normalised log abundance values followed a normal distribution, comparisons of abundance were performed using a Welch’s t-test with FDR correction using the Benjamini-Hochberg step-up procedure.  Longitudinal analysis was performed using linear mixed-effects models with a fixed slope, random intercept model, unstructured covariance structure and degrees of freedom as described by Pinheiro and Bates, for both total EV number and individual proteins identified in proteomic analysis, anchored to the first visit (17).  Variables with a slope estimation that differed from zero p < 0.05 (total EV number) or FDR-adjusted ¬p < 0.1 (proteomic data) were considered significant. Principal components analysis (PCA) was performed using normalised, imputed abundance and hierarchical clustering using Euclidian distance. Comparisons of modal EV size and total number were performed using a Mann-Whitney U test or Kruskal-Wallis H test, since the distribution of values was non-normal.  Gene Ontology (GO) analysis was performed using WebGestalt in R (18). Overrepresentation analysis was performed using with a foreground-background approach algorithm to identify enriched component terms in the proteomic dataset when compared with a comprehensive dataset of the CSF proteome (19).  GO analysis comparing healthy control and ALS samples, and comparing ALS associated and not associated with C9orf72 hexanucleotide repeat expansion, was performed in two ways: overrepresentation analysis comparing proteins with unadjusted ¬p¬-value < 0.05 and log2 fold change either > 0.5 or < -0.5 as the foreground and a background of all proteins identified in this dataset combined with CSF EV proteins identified in two large proteomic datasets (5,20); and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis using all proteins identified, ranked by the product of fold change and -log10 p-value with 1000 permutations.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Csf, Als

### Affiliations
Target Discovery Institute
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Target Discovery Institute


