### Accession
PXD001511

### Title
Comparison of different sample preparation protocols reveals lysis buffer specific extraction biases in gram-negative bacteria and human cells

### Description
We evaluated different in-solution and FASP-based sample preparation strategies for absolute protein quantification. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was employed to compare different sample preparation strategies in the bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa and human embryonic kidney cells (HEK) and noted organismal specific differences in general performance and enrichment of specific protein classes. The original FASP protocol globally enriched for most proteins on the bacterial sample whereas the Sodium deoxycholate in-solution strategy was more efficient on HEK cells. Although detergents were found highly suited for global proteome analysis higher intensities were obtained for high abundant nucleic acid associated protein complexes, like the ribosome and histone proteins using guanidine hydrochloride. Importantly, we show for the first time that the observable total proteome mass of a sample strongly depends on the sample preparation protocol with some protocols resulting in significant underestimation of protein mass due to incomplete protein extraction of biased protein groups

### Sample Protocol
For protein digestion frozen cell pellets were resuspended in 8M urea, 6M Gua, 6M urea/2M Gua, 1% RG, 2% SDC and 0.5% RG/0.5% SDC (all in 100 mM NH4HCO3) in the presence of 5mM TCEP in triplicate experiments. Following sonication, all urea containing samples were incubated for 1h at 37°C, while all other samples were incubated at 60°C for 30 min. After the extraction and reducing step, all samples were incubated with 10 mM Iodoacetamide at 25°C for 30min. Following BCA measurement the protein samples were quenched using 20 mM N-Acetylcysteine and 50 µg of total protein was used for protein digestion. 0.5 µg LysC was added to the protein samples after diluting chaotropic salt concentrations to 6 M and SDC to 1% using 100 mM NH4HCO3. LysC was allowed to cleave for 4 h at 37°C, followed by overnight digestion at 37°C using 1 µg of trypsin.  For the second digestion step the LysC digested samples were further diluted to a chaotropic salt end concentration of 1.6M. Before LC-MS analysis SDC and RG were precipitated using 1% TFA and all samples were desalted using C18 microspincolumns (Harvard Apparatus) according to the manufacturers instructions. For digestion see Glatter et al., 2012. For the FASP experiments cells were reconstituted in 5% SDC and 4% SDS, respectively, sonicated and incubated for 15min at 95°C in the presence of 5mM TCEP. Following an additional sonication step the samples were allowed to cool down and further incubated with 10 mM Iodoacetamide at 25°C for 30min. 50 µg cleared protein isolate was then transferred into spin filters (Microcon YM-30, Millipore). SDS containing samples were mixed with 8M urea and centrifuged for 15min at 14.000g. Two additional urea wash/centrifugation-cycles were performed. Then tandem digest was performed as described earlier in this manuscript. Upon protein digestion the filter was rinsed twice with 0.1% TFA, flowthroughs were collected in the same tube. For SDC-FASP, the protein isolate was washed once with 1% SDC prior to tandem digest. Post-digest SDC was precipitated using 1% TFA. LC-MS/MS analysis of digested lysates was performed on a dual pressure LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron), which was connected to an electrospray ionsoure (Proxeon Biosystems). Peptide separation was carried out using an easy nano-LC 1000 system (Proxeon Biosystems/Thermo Scientific) equipped with a RP-HPLC column (75 μm x 15 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (Magic C18 AQ 1.9 μm; Dr. Maisch) using a linear gradient from 96% solvent A (0.15% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and 4% solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 0.15% formic acid) to 35% solvent B over 180 minutes at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The data acquisition mode for the initial LFQ study was set to obtain one high resolution MS scan in the FT part of the mass spectrometer at a resolution of 60,000 full width at half maximum (at m/z 400) followed by MS/MS scans in the linear ion trap of the 20 most intense ions. To increase the efficiency of MS/MS attempts, the charged state screening modus was enabled to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions. Collision induced dissociation (CID) was triggered when the precursor exceeded 100 ion counts. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60s. The ion accumulation time was set to 300ms (MS) and 50ms (MS/MS). The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 1x106 for MS survey sscand and 1x105 for MS/MS scans. Following an instrumentation upgrade the FASP-ISD comparisons and Gua-LFQ experiments were carried at a precursor resolution of 240,000. MS/MS spectra were acquired using rapid scans for the acquisition of MS/MS spectra.

### Data Protocol
For label-free quantification MS raw files were imported into Progenesis software (Nonlinear Dynamics, Version 4.0) for label-free quantification. Data in mgf format were exported directly from Progenesis and MS/MS spectra were searched using the MASCOT against a decoy database of the predicted proteome from Homo sapiens and Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA01 downloaded from EBI homepage (www.ebi.ac.uk). The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues); 2 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) as variable modification. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da and 0.01 Da for fragment ions for CID and HCD, respectively. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% on the peptide level and validated using the number of reverse protein sequence hits in the datasets. Results from the database search were imported into Progenesis, mapping peptide identifications to MS1 features. The peak-heights of all MS1 features annotated with the same peptide sequence were summed, per LC-MS run and protein abundance was calculated in Progenesis. Next, we evaluated the data obtained by Progenesis and calculated q-values by our in-house developed SafeQuant R-script. To process the outputs of the the new Progenesis version 2.0 an updated SafeQuant package was uploaded to github (https://github.com/eahrne/SafeQuant/tree/v.2.01-pack). The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD001511. For all ID based experiments the MS raw data was converted into MASCOT compatible mgf files using either MM conversion (MassMatrix) or MS convert43. ID-based data was evaluated with regard to False Discovery Rate adjustment using Scaffold 4 (Proteome Software).

### Publication Abstract
We evaluated different in-solution and FASP-based sample preparation strategies for absolute protein quantification. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was employed to compare different sample preparation strategies in the bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa and human embryonic kidney cells (HEK), and organismal-specific differences in general performance and enrichment of specific protein classes were noted. The original FASP protocol globally enriched for most proteins in the bacterial sample, whereas the sodium deoxycholate in-solution strategy was more efficient with HEK cells. Although detergents were found to be highly suited for global proteome analysis, higher intensities were obtained for high-abundant nucleic acid-associated protein complexes, like the ribosome and histone proteins, using guanidine hydrochloride. Importantly, we show for the first time that the observable total proteome mass of a sample strongly depends on the sample preparation protocol, with some protocols resulting in a significant underestimation of protein mass due to incomplete protein extraction of biased protein groups. Furthermore, we demonstrate that some of the observed abundance biases can be overcome by incorporating a nuclease treatment step or, alternatively, a correction factor for complementary sample preparation approaches.

### Keywords
Hek293, Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Affiliations
Biozentrum Basel
Proteomics Core Facility Biozentrum University of Basel

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Proteomics Core Facility Biozentrum University of Basel


