### Accession
PXD041913

### Title
A Peptidisc-based Survey of the Plasma Membrane Proteome of a Mammalian Cell

### Description
The low abundance and hydrophobicity of plasma membrane proteome relative to soluble proteins makes it difficult to characterize. Here, we apply the peptidisc membrane mimetic to purify the cell membrane proteome. We used HeLa cells as a reference to establish the method, and compared the plasma membrane proteomes between Pancreatic cancer cell Panc-1 and hPSC.

### Sample Protocol
Crude membrane was isolated after cell lysis and solubilized with mild detergent DDM, followed by peptidisc reconstitution. The reconstituted membrane proteome was then purified over Ni-NTA, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
All raw MS data were processed using MaxQuant v2.0.3.0. MaxQuant integrated Andromeda search engine was used against the UniProt Homo sapiens (modified 7th of March, 2021—78,120 entries, unreviewed) protein database. A threshold FDR of 1% was applied at the peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein level. For relative quantification, the MaxQuant label-free quantification function – LFQ and iBAQ - were enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Membrane proteins play critical roles at the cell surface and their misfunction is a hallmark of many human diseases. A precise evaluation of the plasma membrane proteome is therefore essential for cell biology and for discovering novel biomarkers and therapeutic targets. However, the low abundance of this proteome relative to soluble proteins makes it difficult to characterize, even with the most advanced proteomics technologies. Here, we apply the peptidisc membrane mimetic to purify the cell membrane proteome. Using the HeLa cell line as a reference, we capture 500 different integral membrane proteins, with half annotated to the plasma membrane. Notably, the peptidisc library is enriched with several ABC, SLC, GPCR, CD, and cell adhesion molecules that generally exist at low to very low copy numbers in the cell. We extend the method to compare two pancreatic cell lines, Panc-1 and hPSC. Here we observe a striking difference in the relative abundance of the cell surface cancer markers L1CAM, ANPEP, ITGB4, and CD70. We also identify two novel SLC transporters, SLC30A1 and SLC12A7, that are highly present in the Panc-1&#xa0;cell only. The peptidisc library thus emerges as an effective way to survey and compare the membrane proteome of mammalian cells. Furthermore, since the method stabilizes membrane proteins in a water-soluble state, members of the library, here SLC12A7, can be specifically isolated.

### Keywords
Hela, Peptidiscs, Lc-ms/ms, Hpsc, Membrane proteins, Panc-1 cells

### Affiliations
Biochemistry and molecular biology, Duong lab, University of British Columbia
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Zhiyu Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Franck Duong
Biochemistry and molecular biology, Duong lab, University of British Columbia


