### Accession
PXD014172

### Title
Mapping proteome of seminal plasma and spermatozoa of Indian Indigenous Malnad Gidda (Bos indicus) cattle

### Description
Malnad Gidda is one among the 43 registered cattle breeds of India with unique traits and spread over Western Ghats and coastal regions of Karnataka state in India. Selection of highly elite fertile bulls for the breeding purpose is a critical control point in animal breeding programmes. Therefore, to characterize the semen proteome and to understand the semen biology of this breed, a comprehensive proteomic analysis of spermatozoa and seminal plasma has been carried out by employing SCX and bRPLC fractionation strategies in a mass-spectrometry platform. The semen samples from three Malnad Gidda bulls maintained at Southern Regional Station of ICAR-NDRI under standard managemental conditions were used in the study. The proteomic characterisation of semen from Malnad Gidda breed resulted in the identification of 5, 84,520 PSMs, from 24,467 peptides from 2,815 proteins in spermatozoa and identification of 2, 77,583 PSMs from 12,047 peptides, which resulted in 1,974 proteins from seminal plasma. Out of 2,815 proteins in spermatozoa and 1,974 proteins from seminal plasma, 969 proteins were common to both seminal plasma and spermatozoa. The biological processes and cellular localization of spermatozoa proteins were studied using DAVID tool and were further enriched the identical GO terms using REVIGO online tool. The functional enrichment analysis of identified proteins indicated their roles in the biological processes like sperm motility, spermatid development, spermatogenesis, and so on. GO studies showed the commonalities and differences in the molecular functions of the proteins exclusively identified in spermatozoa, seminal plasma and common proteins. This is the first proteomic investigation conducted on the semen samples of an Indian indigenous breed; therefore, we believe that our preliminary data should significantly advance our understanding of semen proteome of Indian cattle.

### Sample Protocol
The semen ejaculates of the bulls were collected using sterilized bovine artificial vagina method over a male dummy bull. The routine semen examinations were conducted as soon as the samples were collected, which include the semen volume and concentration, sperm motility, percentage of viable and dead sperm cells and so on. The collected semen were centrifuged (4700 RPM, 10 min, 40C) to separate sperm cells from seminal plasma. Protein extraction from spermatozoa cells were carried out using sonication (20 second pulses, 5 cycles, 40 % amplitude) after heating for 20 min at 90oC. Later the protein lysate was carefully collected after centrifugation of cell lysate (10,000 x g, 10 min). Seminal plasma samples were directly taken for the proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
To deal with the issue of non-availability of Bos indicus genome database, the protein database of taxonomically related species, Bos taurus was used  for homology-based search of peptides. The mass spectrometry data was searched using Sequest HT and Mascot (Version 2.2) search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software suite (Thermo Scientific, Breman Germany) against CowRefseq database (Version 81, NCBI release 105, containing 64,659 protein entries along with common contaminants). The search parameters used were as follows; trypsin was specified as digestive enzyme with 2 missed cleavages allowed; oxidation of methionine was given as dynamic modification whereas, iodoacetamide derivation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. We have set the precursor ion mass tolerance to 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance as 0.05 Da. The peptides identified were filtered using 1% false discovery rate (FDR) estimated by searching the target database against the decoy database.

### Publication Abstract
Malnad Gidda is a dwarf indigenous cattle breed of India, which is known for its uniqueness of calving every year under a low input grazing system of rearing. Bulls of Malnad Gidda are known to be highly fertile even in stress conditions. However, the proteomic profiling of semen of this breed has not been investigated so far, which might provide a platform for a better understanding of its semen quality and male fertility. Therefore, we made an effort to characterize and quantify the proteome of seminal plasma and spermatozoa components of Malnad Gidda semen using a high-resolution mass spectrometry platform. We identified 2814 proteins from spermatozoa and 1974 proteins from the seminal plasma of this breed. Furthermore, &gt;90% of proteins from each fraction were quantified using the intensity-based absolute quantification. We observed signal peptides in 33% of seminal plasma proteins, indicating their secretory nature. Gene Ontology analysis revealed their involvement in cytoskeletal assembly associated with sperm head, sperm motility, acrosome reaction, seminal plasma binding, and spermatogenesis-associated protein. An in-depth proteome profiling of semen of a unique indigenous cattle breed of India was carried out. Our findings could provide a reference for further studies on sperm functions, semen quality, and reproductive health of <i>Bos indicus</i> cattle. Mass spectrometry data generated in this study is deposited and publicly made available through ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD014172.

### Keywords
Brplc, Spermatozoa, Protein profiling, Scx, Malnad gidda, Seminal plasma

### Affiliations
M.V.Sc., PG Diploma in IPR, Master of IP Law, Ph.D, ARS Head, Southern Campus of ICAR-National Dairy Research Institute, Adugodi, Bangalore, India, 560030
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. K.P Ramesha
M.V.Sc., PG Diploma in IPR, Master of IP Law, Ph.D, ARS Head, Southern Campus of ICAR-National Dairy Research Institute, Adugodi, Bangalore, India, 560030


