### Accession
PXD039208

### Title
Label-Free Single Cell Proteomics Utilizing Ultrafast LC and MS Instrumentation: A Valuable Complementary Technique to Multiplexing.

### Description
In recent years, single cell proteomics became one of the hottest topics within the field of proteomics. The potential ability to map the proteomic fingerprint to transcriptomic data would master the understanding of how gene expression translates into actual phenotypes and cellular functions. In contrast to nucleic acid sequencing, in vitro amplification of proteins is impossible to date and no single cell proteomic workflow has been established as gold standard yet. Lots of advances in microfluidic sample preparation, multi-dimensional sample separation, sophisticated data acquisition strategies and intelligent data analysis algorithms already brought major improvements to successfully analyze such tiny sample amounts with steadily boosted performance. However, among the broad variation of published approaches, its commonly accepted, that highest possible sensitivity, robustness and throughput are still the most urgent needs for the field. While many labs have focused on multiplexing to achieve these goals, label-free single cell proteomics is a highly promising strategy as well whenever high dynamic range and unbiased accurate quantification are needed. We here focus on recent advances of label-free single-cell mass spectrometry workflows and try to guide our readers to choose the best method or method combinations for their specific application. We further highlight which techniques are most propitious in the future and which applications but also limitations we foresee for the field.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa (Thermo Scientific, Pierce™ HeLa Protein Digest Standard, 88328) was dissolved in 0.1% TFA at 2 ng/µL within a glass-vial. The equivalent of 250 pg was injected for each run, in repetition from the same vial. All samples were analyzed using a Vanquish Neo UHPLC operated in direct injection mode and coupled to the Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMS Pro interface (ThermoFisher Scientific). Analyte separation was performed using a prototype 5.5 cm brick shape pillar column prototype (Thermo Fisher) operated at 50°C and connected to an EASY-Spray™ bullet emitter (10 µm ID, ES993; Thermo Fisher Scientific) An electrospray voltage of 2.4 kV was applied at the integrated liquid junction of EASY-Spray™ emitter. To avoid electric current from affecting the upstream separation column, a stainless steel 50 µm internal bore reducing union (VICI; C360RU.5S62) was electrically connected to the grounding pin at the pump module.

### Data Protocol
For DDA MS/MS spectra from raw data were imported to Proteome Discoverer (PD) (version 3.0.0.757, Thermo Scientific). Database search was performed using CHIMERYS™ against a human database (version: 20.08.2021 UP000005640, 20300 sequences, 11359367 residues) Trypsin was specified as proteolytic enzyme, cleaving after lysine (K) and arginine (R) except when followed by proline (P) and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Fragment mass tolerance was limited to 20 ppm and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (C) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (M) as a variable modification. Identified spectra were rescored using Percolator and results were filtered for 1% FDR on peptide and protein level. Abundance of identified peptides was determined by label-free quantification (LFQ) using IMP-apQuant with match between runs (MBR). For DIA data processing, Spectronaut™ (Version 16.1.220730.53000, Biognosys AG) was used in the directDIA mode using the same database as for DDA and standard search settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Label-free-proteomics, Data-completness, Dia

### Affiliations
IMP / University of Vienna
Research Institute for Molecular Pathology

### Submitter
Manuel Matzinger

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Mechtler
Research Institute for Molecular Pathology


