### Accession
PXD010776

### Title
Mass spectrometry evaluation of a neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cell culture protocol

### Description
Cell line-based proteomics studies are susceptible to intrinsic biological variation that contributes to increasing false positive claims; most of the methods that follow these changes offer a limited understanding of the biological system. We applied a quantitative proteomic strategy (iTRAQ) to detect intrinsic protein variation across SH-SY5Y cell culture replicates. More than 95% of the quantified proteins presented a coefficient of variation (CV) <20% between biological replicates and the variable proteins, which included cytoskeleton, cytoplasmic and housekeeping proteins, are widely reported in proteomic studies. We recommend this approach as an additional quality control before starting any proteomic experiment.

### Sample Protocol
In this workflow, four independent biological replicates of neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells cultured at the same time in DMEM F12 and 15% fetal bovine serum were used. Proteins were extracted from each replicate and digested with trypsin and the resulted peptides were modified with iTRAQ 4-plex reagent (114, 115, 116 and 117 Da; e.g. one reagent for each biological replicate). All samples were mixed in a 1:1:1:1 ratio in a single tube and pre-fractioned offline by hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC). Eight fractions were obtain and each fraction was analyzed in triplicate by LC-MS/MS in a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The protein search was performed against the revised Homo sapiens database from Uniprot (2016-06 version; http://www.uniprot.org/) in Proteome Discoverer 2.1. The statistical analysis was carried out using the log transformed and median normalized iTRAQ reporter ion ratios obtained from MS/MS spectra, where the proteins that were quantified in all iTRAQ channels and in all technical replicates were selected for statistical analysis. The coefficient of variation (CV) was calculated for each protein and an ANOVA analysis was performed.

### Publication Abstract
Cell line-based proteomics studies are susceptible to intrinsic biological variation that contributes to increasing false positive claims; most of the methods that follow these changes offer a limited understanding of the biological system. We applied a quantitative proteomic strategy (iTRAQ) to detect intrinsic protein variation across SH-SY5Y cell culture replicates. More than 95% of the quantified proteins presented a coefficient of variation (CV)&#x202f;&lt;&#x202f;20% between biological replicates and the variable proteins, which included cytoskeleton, cytoplasmic and housekeeping proteins, are widely reported in proteomic studies. We recommend this approach as an additional quality control before starting any proteomic experiment.

### Keywords
Cell culture, Biological variation, Quantitative proteomics, Itraq

### Affiliations
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Proteomics Unit, Chemistry Institute, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro - RJ, Brazil

### Submitter
JIMMY RODRIGUEZ

### Lab Head
Dr Magno Junqueira
Proteomics Unit, Chemistry Institute, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro - RJ, Brazil


