### Accession
PXD029701

### Title
IP-MS of GFP tagged MRV μ2 protein

### Description
To determine which cellular proteins interacts with the viral MRV protein μ2 and its mutant μ2-P208S, GFP-tagged constructions of μ2 and μ2-P208S in both C- and N- terminus were transfected in 293T cells alongside control GFP alone for 24h, and submitted to GFP pulldown before IP were prepared for MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
293T cells were seeded at 6x106 cells/100mm dish and transfected on the following morning with 10 μg of plasmid DNA and Lipofectamine2000 (ThermoFisher) as per the manufacturer’s protocol. After 24h incubation, cells were washed with PBS and 1 ml lysis buffer (1% Triton X-100; 150 mM NaCl; 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5; 0.1 mg/ml PMSF) and incubated 5 min on ice. Petri dishes were scraped, and protein lysis was completed by a couple up and down. Lysate were sonicated on ice at 25% amplitude, 5 sec for four times. Debris were then pelleted at 13 000 RPM, 4°C, 10 min. Lysates were dosed for total protein in triplicate using standard Bradford assay (Thermo Scientific Coomassie Protein Assay). 1 mg of lysate was DNAse and RNAse treated using 5 μg of DNAse I (Sigma) and 5 μg of RNAse A (Bio Basic), 10 minutes at room temperature. GFP-trap beads (Chromotek) were washed twice in lysis buffer; 20 μL were added per IP and IP reactions were completed at 1 ml with lysis buffer. IP was performed for 4h at 4°C on a tube rotator. Tubes were then spinned at 2000 rpm, the supernatant was removed, and beads were washed three times with lysis buffer and two times with PBS. Beads were then washed five times with 20mM ammonium bicarbonate in LoBind eppendorfs. Proteins were then reduced in 10 mM DTT in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 minutes with shaking at 1250 rpm, 60°C. Proteins were then alkylated by adding an equal volume of 15 mM chloroacetamide in 20 mM 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate in the dark with shaking at 1250 rpm for 1 hour. Proteins were digested with 1 μg of trypsin at 37°C overnight with shaking at 1250 rpm. Trypsin digestion was stopped by acidifying to a final concentration of 1% formic acid (FA) and supernatant was harvested upon centrifugation at 2,000g for 3 min. Beads were washed again in 100 μl of a 60% acetonitrile/1% formic acid solution for 5 min with shaking at 1250 rpm at room temperature and centrifuged at 2,000g for 3 min. This second supernatant was pooled with the first and dried in a speed vac. The peptides were resuspended in 30 μl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to desalt on ZipTip. Desalted peptides were dried again with a speed vac and resuspended in 30 ul of 1% formic acid. Peptides were quantify using a nanodrop at 205 nm and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis on a Bruker timsTOF MS/MS. All solutions were prepared in MS-grade H2O

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant was used to identify peptide-spectrum match (PSM) against Uniprot Homo Sapiens database supplemented with the μ2 and μ2-P208S sequences.

### Publication Abstract
Mammalian orthoreovirus (MRV) is a double-stranded RNA virus from the Reoviridae family presenting a promising activity as an oncolytic virus. Recent studies have underlined MRV's ability to alter cellular alternative splicing (AS) during infection, with a limited understanding of the mechanisms at play. In this study, we investigated how MRV modulates AS. Using a combination of cell biology and reverse genetics experiments, we demonstrated that the M1 gene segment, encoding the &#x3bc;2 protein, is the primary determinant of MRV's ability to alter AS, and that the amino acid at position 208 in &#x3bc;2 is critical to induce these changes. Moreover, we showed that the expression of &#x3bc;2 by itself is sufficient to trigger AS changes, and its ability to enter the nucleus is not required for all these changes. Moreover, we identified core components of the U5 snRNP (i.e.&#xa0;EFTUD2, PRPF8, and SNRNP200) as interactors of &#x3bc;2 that are required for MRV modulation of AS. Finally, these U5 snRNP components are reduced at the protein level by both MRV infection and &#x3bc;2 expression. Our findings identify the reduction of U5 snRNP components levels as a new mechanism by which viruses alter cellular AS.

### Keywords
Virus ip-ms ap-ms gfp mrv reovirus μ2

### Affiliations
Département de biochimie et de génomique fonctionnelle, Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke
Université de Sherbrooke

### Submitter
Simon Boudreault

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Bisaillon
Département de biochimie et de génomique fonctionnelle, Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke


