### Accession
PXD029806

### Title
Effects of neck-arm restraint suspension of beef carcasses on meat quality and proteome of different muscles during post-mortem aging

### Description
Beef quality is the first deciding factor for consumers to consider before purchasing. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of suspension and aging time on beef quality. We compared the differences in pH, drip loss, cooking loss, color, shear force, myofibril fragmentation index (MFI) and electron microscope of three muscle tissues between Achilles tendon (AT) and neck-arm restraint (NR) suspensions during seven aging periods (day 0, 1, 2, 3, 7, 14 and 21) after slaughter using the carcasses of six Xinjiang brown cattle. We found that NR suspension could significantly increase water loss rate and MFI, as well as reduce shear force compared to AT suspension. The muscle fiber structure with NR suspension was more severely damaged. The proteomics of longissimus dorsi were checked for the post-mortem day 1, 7 and 14. We detected 50, 26, and 29 differential expressed proteins (DEPs) between NR and AT suspension at post-mortem day 1, 7 and 14, respectively. These proteins were involved in metabolic and muscle structure associated pathways, and contributed to a comprehensive understanding of suspension-dependent meat quality regulation by proteins in beef cattle. To conclude, NR suspension can accelerate the aging time of beef carcasses, which will reduce the cost of carcass suspension and bring more benefits in beef industry.

### Sample Protocol
The 36 LD samples were collected from six AT suspension right carcasses and six NR suspension left carcasses at post-mortem day 1, 7 and 14. After grinding the tissues by liquid nitrogen, two samples were randomly selected for pooling together in each suspended group, which generated 18 samples for six groups and each group contained three biological replications. Protein was extracted as follows: (1) Each sample was homogenized in extraction sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) buffer including 4% SDS, 1 mM dithiothreitol and 150 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). (2) The homogenate was sonicated 2 min after 5 min incubation in boiling water. (3) The crude extract was incubated in boiling water 5 min again and then clarified by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 min at 25 °C. (4) The concentrations of proteins were quantified by BCA protein assay reagent (SHANGHAI BIOPROFILE TECHNOLOGY, Shanghai, China). (5) The integrities of samples were measured with electrophoresis on 8-16% SDS-polyacrylamide gels and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. For the protein digestion, 300 µg of protein isolated from each sample was mixed with dithiothreitol to 100 mM. After 5 min incubation in boiling water, the protein solution was cooled to room temperature, and then was mixed with 200 µL UA buffer (8M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) to centrifuge at 12,000 g for 15 min. After discarding the filtrate, 100 µL IAA (50 mM IAA in UA) was added into the sediment, and the mixture was vibrated for one min, kept away from light for 30 min, and centrifuged for 10 min at 12,000 g. Processes adding 100 µL UA buffer and centrifuging the mixture for 10 min at 12,000 g were performed twice. And then, processes adding 100 µL NH4HCO3 buffer and centrifuging the mixture for 10 min at 14,000 g were also performed twice. Finally, 40 µL trypsin buffer (6 µg Trypsin in 40 µL NH4HCO3 buffer) was added into the precipitate to obtain the filtrate via vibrating for 1 min, keeping 37 °C for 16-18h, and centrifugation for 10 min at 12,000 g. The peptide was quantified by the C18 cartridge desalination. Peptide mixture from each filter was labeled using TMT reagents (Thermo Fisher, MA, USA) to quantify simultaneously up to 18 samples. For each TMT set, six isobaric compounds were used to label different samples of the study group according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, the labeled peptides of each group were mixed equally, and separated by the High-pH (Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation kit, Thermo Fisher, MA, USA) after drying the peptides. Finally, a total of 45 components were obtained by three labeling, and the peptides of each component were dried and redissolved with 0.1% FA.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant software (v1.6.0.16) was used to identify and quantify the peptide against UniPort Proteomes-Bos taurus-46707-20190911.fasta with the following parameters: type ~ reporter ion MS2, isobaric labels ~ TMT 6plex, enzyme ~ trypsin, reporter mass tolerance ~ 0.005 Da, max missed cleavages ~ 2, main search peptide tolerance ~ 4.5 ppm, first search peptide tolerance ~ 20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance ~ 20 ppm, fixed modifications ~ carbamidomethyl, variable modifications ~ oxidation and acetyl, database pattern ~ target-reverse, PSM-FDR ~ < 0.01, and protein FDR ~ < 0.01. The proteins were quantified by razor and unique peptides. The differentially expressed protein (DEP) analysis was performed with one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) using anova function of R Stats Package (version 3.4.3). The proteins with P-value < 0.05 and fold change >1.2 or <0.83 were considered as DEPs.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Beef quality, Tmt, Neck-arm restraint suspension, Carcass

### Affiliations
Institute of Animal Science of Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Wentao Cai

### Lab Head
Dr Wentao Cai
Institute of Animal Science of Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences


