### Accession
PXD018621

### Title
Identification of ubiquitination sites of purified histone H3

### Description
Histones modulate gene expression by chromatin compaction, regulating numerous processes such as differentiation. However, the mechanisms underlying histone degradation remain elusive. When compared with their differentiated counterparts, immortal human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) have a unique chromatin architecture and low levels of trimethylated histone H3 at lysine 9 (H3K9me3), a heterochromatin-associated modification. Here we assess a link between the intrinsic epigenetic landscape and ubiquitin-proteasome system of hESCs. We find that hESCs exhibit high expression of UBE2K, a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme. Loss of UBE2K increases the levels of H3K9 trimethyltransferase SETDB1, resulting in H3K9 trimethylation and repression of neurogenic genes during differentiation. Concomitantly, loss of UBE2K impairs the ability of hESCs to differentiate into neural progenitors with neurogenic properties. Besides H3K9 trimethylation, we find that UBE2K binds histone H3 to induce its polyubiquitination and degradation by the proteasome. Notably, ubc-20, the worm orthologue of UBE2K, also regulates both histone H3 levels and H3K9 trimethylation in C. elegans germline. Thus, our results indicate that UBE2K crosses evolutionary boundaries to promote histone H3 degradation and reduce H3K9me3 repressive marks in immortal cells.

### Sample Protocol
Histones were purified using a method that combines sulfuric acid extraction with ion exchange chromatography. Briefly, HEK293 cells were treated with 5 µM MG-132 overnight to avoid proteasomal degradation, washed twice with ice-cold PBS and lysed by rotation in 6ml of 0.1 M H2SO4 at 4°C for 2 h. The lysate was centrifuged at 2,200g at 4°C for 20 min. The pellet with non-soluble proteins and cell debris was discarded. The supernatant was neutralized in 1 M Tris-Hcl pH 8.0 buffer. Volume of lysate was made up to 15 ml by adding binding buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 0.5 M NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.25 mM PMSF, 1 mM DTT). Sulfopropyl (SP)-Sepharose resin (S1799, Sigma) was packed into a column and pre-equilibrated with 10 volumes of binding buffer. 15 ml of lysate was passed through the column.  The column was then washed with 10 volumes of binding buffer and 30 volumes of washing buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 0.6 M NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.25mM PMSF, 1 mM DTT). Proteins were eluted with elution buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 2 M NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.25 mM PMSF 1 mM DTT) in ten fractions. Eluted proteins were precipitated overnight in 4% (vol/vol) PCA at 4 °C. The fractions were then centrifuged at 21,000g at 4°C for 45 min, and the resulting pellets were washed twice with 4% PCA, twice with 0.2% HCl in acetone and twice with acetone.  The protein pellets were finally dissolved in milliQ water and protein concentration was determined by standard BCA method. Then, 500 μg histone proteins were denatured by diluting in 8 M Urea (in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) in a final volume of 200 μl.  Additionally, 2 μl of 1 M TCEP (final 10 mM) and 8 μl 0.5 M CAA (final 20 mM) were added and transferred to a Vivacon® 500 10 kDa cut-off filter and centrifuged at 14,000 g at 20°C for 15 min.  200 μl of 50 mM ABC was then added and centrifuged again until half wet. This step was repeated twice.  Partial digestion was then performed by adding 50 μl of 50 mM ABC with trypsin 1:2000 (trypsin: histone ratio) for 20 minutes at room temperature. Flow-through and retent were collected by centrifuging the filter units at 14,000 g at 20 °C for 10 min. Filters were then washed with 50 ul of 50 mM ABC and flow through was collected.  The partially digested protein samples were later stage-tipped for label-free quantitative proteomics.  All samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC 1200 UPLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm × 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nl min−1 using 150 min method: 5–30% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) within 119 min, 30–50% solvent B within 19 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300 to 1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were subjected to higher collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC (automatic gain control) target was set to 5e5 charges. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the human Uniprot database with human histone sequences, including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates (FDRs) on protein and peptide–spectrum match (PSM) level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 0.01% (Protein FDR) and 0.01% (PSM FDR), respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. The maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 6. Variable modifications included oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term and K), methylation (KR) and diglycine (signature of ubiquitination) (K).

### Publication Abstract
Histones modulate gene expression by chromatin compaction, regulating numerous processes such as differentiation. However, the mechanisms underlying histone degradation remain elusive. Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) have a unique chromatin architecture characterized by low levels of trimethylated histone H3 at lysine 9 (H3K9me3), a heterochromatin-associated modification. Here we assess the link between the intrinsic epigenetic landscape and ubiquitin-proteasome system of hESCs. We find that hESCs exhibit high expression of the ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme UBE2K. Loss of UBE2K upregulates the trimethyltransferase SETDB1, resulting in H3K9 trimethylation and repression of neurogenic genes during differentiation. Besides H3K9 trimethylation, UBE2K binds histone H3 to induce its polyubiquitination and degradation by the proteasome. Notably, ubc-20, the worm orthologue of UBE2K, also regulates histone H3 levels and H3K9 trimethylation in Caenorhabditis elegans germ cells. Thus, our results indicate that UBE2K crosses evolutionary boundaries to promote histone H3 degradation and reduce H3K9me3 repressive marks in immortal cells.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Epigenetics, Histone h3

### Affiliations
CECAD Cluster of Excellence, University of Cologne
University of Cologne

### Submitter
David Vilchez

### Lab Head
Dr David Vilchez
CECAD Cluster of Excellence, University of Cologne


