### Accession
PXD023186

### Title
LC-MS/MS of autotrophic culture KS, that performs nitrate reduction coupled to iron(II) oxidation (NDFO)

### Description
Nitrate-reducing iron(II)-oxidizing bacteria are widespread in the environment contribute to nitrate removal and influence the fate of the greenhouse gases nitrous oxide and carbon dioxide. The autotrophic growth of nitrate-reducing iron(II)-oxidizing bacteria is rarely investigated and poorly understood. The most prominent model system for this type of studies is enrichment culture KS, which originates from a freshwater sediment in Bremen, Germany. To gain insights in the metabolism of nitrate reduction coupled to iron(II) oxidation under in the absence of organic carbon and oxygen limited conditions, we performed metagenomic, metatranscriptomic and metaproteomic analyses of culture KS. Raw sequencing data of 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing, shotgun metagenomics (short reads: Illumina; long reads: Oxford Nanopore Technologies), metagenome assembly, raw sequencing data of shotgun metatranscriptomes (2 conditions, triplicates) can be found at SRA in https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/PRJNA682552. This dataset contains proteomics data for 2 conditions (heterotrophic and autotrophic growth conditions) in triplicates.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was performed according to the “Protein extraction method B” from Spaet et al. 2015 (Spaet et al., 2015) with the following modifications: 5 mL and 2 mL lysis buffer were added to the samples from autotrophic and heterotrophic conditions, respectively, to dissolve cell pellets. The samples were incubated for 10 minutes at 95°C in a water bath, vortexed briefly and chilled on ice with 2 minute-intervals in total 5 times and, subsequently, sonicated on ice for 30 seconds with an ultrasonic homogenizer (Bandelin Sonopuls) at output control 4 and 40% duty cycle. The lysate was centrifuged at 7,197 ×g for 1 minute at RT and the supernatant was then transferred into several 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes and centrifuged at 20,817 ×g (Eppendorf Centrifuge 5430 with Rotor 30x1,5/2,0 mL) for 10 minutes at RT. Samples were pooled again into sterile 50 mL solvent-resistant tubes. After the 8:1 acetone: methanol precipitation and incubation step, the precipitate was washed with 5 mL ice-cold 80% (v/v) acetone in water and centrifuged at 7,197 ×g for 5 minutes at 4°C. The protein pellets were air-dried at RT and later dissolved in urea buffer and stored at -20°C. The metaproteome analysis was conducted by the Quantitative Proteomics & Proteome Center, Tuebingen (PCT) (Schmitt et al., 2019). Protein concentrations were determined via the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad) according to the user's manual. SDS PAGE short gel purification (Invitrogen) was run and in-gel digestion with Trypsin was conducted as described previously (Borchert et al., 2010). Extracted peptides were desalted using C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007) and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Easy-nLC 1200 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an QExactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described elsewhere (Schmitt et al., 2019). Peptides were eluted with a 127min segmented gradient at a flow rate of 200nl/min, selecting 12 most intensive peaks for fragmentation with HCD.

### Data Protocol
The MS data was processed with MaxQuant software suite 1.6.7.0 (Cox & Mann, 2008). The iBAQ and LFQ algorithms were enabled, samples of the same treatment were matched. Database search against protein sequences predicted by IMGAP on the metagenome assembly was performed using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Iron oxidation, Culture ks, Heterotrophic, Ndfo, Autotrohpic, Nitrate reduction

### Affiliations
Microbial Ecology, Center for Applied Geoscience, University of Tuebingen, Germany
University of Tübingen

### Submitter
Daniel Straub

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Kleindienst
Microbial Ecology, Center for Applied Geoscience, University of Tuebingen, Germany


