### Accession
PXD007762

### Title
Dynamic proteomics reveals unexpected plasticity of cellular proteome: growth-related and drug-induced changes in cancer cells are comparable

### Description
In proteomics, the changes occurring in cellular proteomes upon drug treatment are used to identify the drug targets and the mechanism of action. However, proteomes of cultured cells undergo also natural alteration associated with changes in the media, attaining a degree of confluence as well as due to cell division, metabolic and circadian cycles. These changes are implicitly assumed to be smaller in magnitude than the drug-induced changes that ultimately lead to cell demise.  In this study, we tested this assumption experimentally by comparing the proteome dynamics of cancer cells during the first 48 h after treatment with methotrexate, paclitaxel or vehicle (equivalent to untreated control). Time series revealed considerable growth-related proteome changes in the control group, comparable in magnitude to drug-induced changes. The magnitude of these variations reveals an unexpected plasticity of the cellular proteome and reinforces the need, generally accepted in theory but not always followed in practice, to use a time-matched control when measuring drug-induced proteome changes.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analyses, HCT116 and A375 cells were seeded into 6-well plates at a density of 200,000 cells per well. 24 h later, HCT116 cells’ medium was replaced with fresh medium containing 25 nM of PCTL, 45 nM of MTX or 4.5 ppm of DMSO (vehicle) corresponding to the maximum concentration used in the experiment. The A375 cells’ medium was replaced either by fresh medium or by medium containing 4.5 ppm of DMSO. The cultures were then further incubated and for HCT116 cells, two replicate samples were collected every 6 h for each treatment and control. For A375 cells, three replicates were collected every 12 h both for DMSO treated and untreated samples. Samples corresponding to cells without any treatment (T0) were also collected in the beginning of the experiment. Before collection, cells were washed twice with PBS and subsequently, lysis buffer (3% SDC and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added to each well. Cells were then collected into microtubes, heated at 80 °C for 10 min before being sonicated using a Branson probe sonicator (3 s on, 3 s off pulses, 45 s, 30% amplitude). Protein concentration was measured using Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Subsequently, 100 µg of proteins were reduced by adding dithiothreitol to a final concentration of 15 mM and incubated at 60 °C for 30 min, followed by alkylation using a final concentration of 20 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in the dark. SDC concentration was reduced to 1.5% and lysyl endopeptidase (LysC) (Wako Pure Chemical Industries) was added at a 1 : 100 ratio (LysC/protein, w/w), and the samples were incubated at room temperature overnight. SDC concentration was reduced further to 0.5% and modified sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added at a 1 : 100 ratio (trypsin/protein, w/w) and incubated for 6 h. Acetic acid (5% v/v) was then added to precipitate SDC and quench the reaction by incubating at room temperature for 30 min. The samples were centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 15 min and the supernatant was collected. Finally, the samples were cleaned using StageTip (Thermo) according to manufacturer’s protocol, dried using SpeedVac and resuspended into 0.1% formic acid (FA) (Fluka) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were separated on a 50 cm EASY-spray column, with a 75 µm internal diameter, packed with 2 µm PepMap C18 beads, having 100 Å pores (Thermo Fischer Scientific). An Easy-nLC-1000 system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) was used programmed to a 2 h optimized [4] LC gradient. The two mobile phases consisted of buffer A (98% milliQ water, 2% ACN and 0.1% FA) and buffer B (98% ACN, 2% milliQ water and 0.1% FA). The gradient started with 2% B for 1 min, increased to 5% B in 7 min, 17% B in 65 min, 30% B in 20 min, and then to 95% B in 10 min, stayed at 95% B for 5 min and finally decreased in 2 min to 2% B that stayed for 10 mins. The same LC system, column and buffers were used to analyze samples from the A375 cell line, with a gradient duration of 3 h. The injection was set to 5 µL corresponding to approximately 1 µg of peptides and the samples were analyzed in a random order. Mass spectra were acquired on a Fusion Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) for HCT116 cells and an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Fischer Scientific) for A375 cells. The Fusion acquisition was performed in a data dependent manner with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS modes using the maximum speed of the instrument, fragmenting up to 20 peptides per cycle starting from the most abundant ion (top-20 method). MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 with a target value of 1.105 or maximum integration time of 50 ms. The m/z range was from 350 to 1500. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD), and the energy was set at 28%. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 with the target value of 5.104 ions and a maximum integration time of 50 ms. Isolation window and first fixed mass were set at 1.6 m/z units and m/z 120, respectively. On the Q-Exactive Plus instrument, the acquisition was performed in a data dependent manner using a top-10 method. The MS spectra resolution was set at 70,000 and the target value of 1.106 and maximum integration time of 250 ms, while the m/z range was from 300 to 1750. Peptide fragmentation was performed using HCD set at 25%. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35,000 with a target value of 2.105 ions and a maximum integration time of 120 ms. The isolation window was set at 3.0 m/z units and the first fixed mass was set at m/z 100.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30). Acetylation of N-terminal, oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were selected as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of the cysteine was selected as fixed modification. The Andromeda search engine was using the International Protein Index (human version 2014_02, 89054 entries) with the precursor mass tolerance for the first searches and the main search set to 20 and 4.5 ppm, respectively.  Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with up to two missed cleavages allowed; the peptide minimal length was set to seven amino acid.  Default parameters were used for the instrument setting. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides and proteins.  LFQ was chosen as a quantification parameter with a minimum ratio count of 2. “Match between runs” option was used with a time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fitexp; mass spectrometry; proteomics; principal component analysis; time series

### Affiliations
Roman A. Zubarev, PhD, professor Division of Chemistry I, Head Department of Medical Biochemistry & Biophysics Karolinska Institutet Scheelesväg 2, SE 17177 Stockholm, Sweden
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Pierre Sabatier

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Zubarev
Roman A. Zubarev, PhD, professor Division of Chemistry I, Head Department of Medical Biochemistry & Biophysics Karolinska Institutet Scheelesväg 2, SE 17177 Stockholm, Sweden


