### Accession
PXD029240

### Title
Proteogenomic analysis of Human acute myeloid leukemia

### Description
Here, we used OpenCustomDB, a web-based tool that uses both sample-specific RNAseq data to identify genomic variants and the OpenProt resource that annotates alternative proteins in addition to canonical proteins. We tested OpenCustomDB with a cohort of 17 patients with acute myeloid leukemia and detected 3026 peptides from alternative proteins, including 208 variants in LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in 50mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 2% SDS, 10% glycerol then sonicated 5 s three times at  12 % (Sonic Dismembrator FB-120). BCA dosage was done following by reduction in 10 mm DTT and alkylation in  50 mM iodoacetamide. SDS-Page, in-gel digestion, peptide extraction and desalting were performed as previously described (Chauvin et al.) with minor modifications. Mini-PROTEAN® TGX™ Precast Gels were used, and a ratio of 1:10 (w/w) of Trypsin Gold (Promega) were used for tryptic digestion. Peptides were separated with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system. Ten μl of sample (1.5 μg) in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were loaded with a constant flow of 4 μl/min onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column (0.3 mm id x 5 mm, Dionex Corporation). After trap enrichment, peptides were eluted onto an EasySpray PepMap C18 nano column (75 μm x 50 cm, Dionex Corporation) with a linear gradient of 5-35% solvent B (90% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) with a constant flow of 200 nl/min during 240 minutes. The HPLC system was coupled to an OrbiTrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc) via an EasySpray source. The spray voltage was set to 2.0 kV and the temperature of the column set to 40°C. Full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 350-1600) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 after accumulation of 1,000,000 ions. The ten most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy 25% and resolution of 17,500) after the accumulation of 50,000 ions. Maximal filling times were 250 ms for the full scans and 60 ms for the MS/MS scans. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled and all unassigned charge states as well as singly, 7 and 8 charged species were rejected. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to a maximum of 500 entries with a maximum retention period of 40 seconds and a relative mass window of 10 ppm. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy. Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against sample-specific customized databases using MaxQuant v1.6.14.0 without FDR filtering. All other parameters were set by default. All psm were rescored using a combination of the spectral intensity predictor MS2PIP (PMID: 31077310) and the postprocessing tool Percolator (27572102) as previously described (PMID:  33823297). Percolator was run on ms2pip output for distinguish true from false psm (PMID: 17952086, PMID: 27572102). PSMs with an FDR < 1% were selected and unicity of non-variant and variant peptides from novel isoforms and altProts were checked against Ensembl and UniProt.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic diversity in biological samples can be characterized by mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics using customized protein databases generated from sets of transcripts previously detected by RNA-seq. This diversity has only been increased by the recent discovery that many translated alternative open reading frames rest unannotated at unsuspected locations of mRNAs and ncRNAs. These novel protein products, termed alternative proteins, have been left out of all previous custom database generation tools. Consequently, genetic variations that impact alternative open reading frames and variant peptides from their translated proteins are not detectable with current computational workflows. To fill this gap, we present OpenCustomDB, a bioinformatics tool that uses sample-specific RNaseq data to identify genomic variants in canonical and alternative open reading frames, allowing for more than one coding region per transcript. In a test reanalysis of a cohort of 16 patients with acute myeloid leukemia, 5666 peptides from alternative proteins were detected, including 201 variant peptides. We also observed that a significant fraction of peptide-spectrum matches previously assigned to peptides from canonical proteins got better scores when reassigned to peptides from alternative proteins. Custom protein libraries that include sample-specific sequence variations of all possible open reading frames are promising contributions to the development of proteomics and precision medicine. The raw and processed proteomics data presented in this study can be found in PRIDE repository with accession number PXD029240.

### Keywords
Human, Aml, Proteogenomics, Altprot

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Genomics, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada

### Submitter
Noé Guilloy

### Lab Head
Dr Xavier Roucou
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Genomics, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada


