### Accession
PXD006867

### Title
Modulation of intestinal proteome of juvenile common carp (Cyprinus carpio L.) after dietary exposure to ZnO nanoparticles

### Description
ZnO nanoparticles (NPs) are widely used in industrial and consumer products. Thus, understanding their interaction with biological systems is the key for their safe application. The aim of present study was to evaluate the toxicological effects on the intestine of common carp, Cyprinus carpio, after dietary exposure to ZnO NPs. To assess the toxicity of ZnO NPs and of their toxic mechanism to gastrointestinal tract, we applied label free protein quantification on carp intestine considering the fact that fish are on the top of food chain in aquatic ecosystems. Even though carp and zebrafish do not have five intestinal segments like mammals (Brugman, 2016), previous studies have revealed that intestinal anatomy and architecture in cyprinid teleost fish is closely related to mammals with functional homology (Curry, 1939). Therefore, the findings can also provide beneficial information to understand the mechanisms underlying NPs toxicity in mammals.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were thawed on ice and the muscular and the intestinal folds were separated and analyzed individually. A detailed protocol for protein sample preparation is provided (Supplementary File 1). In brief, protein extraction was performed in lysis buffer (1% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCL, pH 7.5, 0.1% PMSF). Protein pellets were dissolved in 30 µL SDS sample buffer (2% SDS, 2 mM beta-mercaptoethanol, 4% glycerol, 40 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 0.01% bromophenolblue), heated to 90°C for 5 min and separated on a 1D SDS gel. Each gel lane was cut into five gel pieces, destained and subsequently proteolytically cleaved overnight at 37°C using trypsin (Sigma, Munich, Germany). Peptide lysates were desalted using C18 purification (Shevchenko et al., 2006). Peptide concentration in each sample was determined using a NanoDrop at 280 nm (NanoDrop2000, Thermo Scientific, USA) prior mass spectrometric analysis. Five µL of the peptide lysates were separated and measured on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system (Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific, Idstein, Germany) coupled to a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) mass spectrometer. TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, Ltd., Harlow, UK) is used as ion source.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS spectra were searched against a database containing the Uniprot sequences of the all the Bacterial genera identified by 16S rRNA gene sequencing analysis in the same study, common carp (Cyprinus carpio), and zebrafish (Danio rerio) using the SEQUEST algorithm. Enzyme specificity was selected to trypsin with up to two missed cleavages allowed using 5 ppm MS tolerance and 0.1 Da MS/MS tolerances. Oxidation (methionine) and acetylation (lysine) were set as dynamic modifications, carbamidomethlyation (cysteine) was selected as fixed modification. Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were validated using percolator with a false discover rate (FDR) less than 1% and quality filtered for only rank 1 peptides with XCorr ≥2.25 [+2] and ≥2.5 [+3]. Protein quantification was carried out using the precursor ion area detector (2 ppm mass precision) of Proteome Discoverer. Identified bacteria proteins were excluded from final results.  List of raw files and their related names: 2016-01-19_LC_EC1: Intestinal folds_Control 1; 2016-01-19_LC_EC2: Intestinal folds_Control 2; 2016-01-19_LC_EC3: Intestinal folds_Control 3; 2016-01-19_LC_EC4: Intestinal folds_Control 4; 2016-01-19_LC_EC5: Intestinal folds_Control 5; 2016-01-19_LC_EC6: Intestinal folds_Control 6; 2016-01-19_LC_EC7: Intestinal folds_Control 7; 2016-01-19_LC_ET1: Intestinal folds_Treatment 1; 2016-01-19_LC_ET2: Intestinal folds_Treatment 2; 2016-01-19_LC_ET3: Intestinal folds_Treatment 3; 2016-01-19_LC_ET4: Intestinal folds_Treatment 4; 2016-01-19_LC_ET5: Intestinal folds_Treatment 5; 2016-01-19_LC_ET6: Intestinal folds_Treatment 6; 2016-01-19_LC_ET7: Intestinal folds_Treatment 7; ///////////// 2016-01-19_LC_MC1: Muscular layer_Control 1; 2016-01-19_LC_MC2: Muscular layer_Control 2; 2016-01-19_LC_MC3: Muscular layer_Control 3; 2016-01-19_LC_MC4: Muscular layer_Control 4; 2016-01-19_LC_MC5: Muscular layer_Control 5; 2016-01-19_LC_MC6: Muscular layer_Control 6; 2016-01-19_LC_MC7: Muscular layer_Control 7; 2016-01-19_LC_MT1: Muscular layer_Treatment 1; 2016-01-19_LC_MT2: Muscular layer_Treatment 2; 2016-01-19_LC_MT3: Muscular layer_Treatment 3; 2016-01-19_LC_MT4: Muscular layer_Treatment 4; 2016-01-19_LC_MT5: Muscular layer_Treatment 5; 2016-01-19_LC_MT6: Muscular layer_Treatment 6; 2016-01-19_LC_MT7: Muscular layer_Treatment 7; ///////// List of search files and their related names: 2016-01-15_LC_MC-(01).prot.prot.XML:  Muscular layer; 2016-01-19_LC_EC.prot.prot.XML: Intestinal folds

### Publication Abstract
ZnO nanoparticles (NPs) are widely used in industrial and consumer products. Therefore understanding their interaction with biological systems is key to their safe application. Proteomics was applied to assess the sub-lethal effects of dietary ZnO NPs on two parts of carp intestine, the intestinal folds and the muscular parts. A commercial carp feed containing 500mgkg<sup>-1</sup> of ZnO NPs was fed to fish for six weeks. The abundances of 32 proteins in the treated intestinal folds were significantly changed and in addition, 28 proteins were significantly changed in the muscular parts. Pathways analysis revealed downregulation of pathways attributed to protein synthesis in both parts of the treated intestine. Remodelling of actin cytoskeleton pathways were regulated positively and negatively in intestinal folds and muscular parts, respectively, albeit via different mechanisms. Apoptosis response was indicated in exposed intestinal folds, whereas elevated levels of protein associated with cancerous cell survival were observed in the muscular parts. Results showed that ZnO NPs affected the protein abundances associated with cell motility, immune system response, oxidative stress response, as well as cell metabolism. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006867.

### Keywords
Apoptosis; common carp; intestine; proteomics; zno nanoparticles

### Affiliations
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Leipzig, Germany
University of South Bohemia in České Budějovice, Faculty of Fisheries and Protection of Waters, South Bohemian Research Centre of Aquaculture and Biodiversity of Hydrocenoses, Research Institute of Fish Culture and Hydrobiology, Vodňany, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Latifeh Chupani

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Nico Jehmlich
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Leipzig, Germany


