### Accession
PXD015932

### Title
Effect of cadmium in the microalga Chlorella sorokiniana: A proteomic study

### Description
Effect of cadmium in the microalga Chlorella sorokiniana

### Sample Protocol
C. sorokiniana 211-32 was obtained from the culture collection of the Institute of Vegetal Biochemistry and Photosynthesis (IBVF; Seville, Spain) and grown mixotrophically in liquid TAP (Tris-Acetate-Phospate) media (Harris, 1989), optimized for this microalga (León-Vaz et al. 2019). The microalgae were cultured at 27 ± 1 ºC, under an agitation of 150 rpm and continuous white light irradiation of 150 mE m-2s-1. Light intensity was measured by a Delta OHM quantum photo radiometer HD 9021, equipped with a LP 9021 PAR sensor (Delta OHM, Italy). Pre-inocula were incubated for 3 d before the experiments and inoculated to obtain an initial concentration of 1.2 ± 0.2 g L-1 of dry weight (DW). The addition of cadmium, as CdCl2, was done before sterilization until a concentration of 250 μM. After that addition, pH was carried out to 6.7-7.  C. sorokiniana cells were harvested by centrifugation at the middle of the exponential phase of growth (40 h) and washed three times with Milli-Q water. The cells were resuspended in Tris-HCl 50 mM pH 8.0 buffer at approximately 1 mL of buffer per g of fresh weight and disrupted by sonication at 4 ºC (80 W during 10 times of 15 s). The cell debris was centrifuged twice at 14000 x g for 20 min. The supernatant obtained was used as crude extract source. Finally, proteins were precipited using TRizol method (Jaipal Reddy et al., 2013) and resuspended in ammonium bicarbonate 50 mM/0.2 % Rapidgest (Waters). Protein in crude extract was determined by the Qubit system. Protein samples from C. sorokiniana 211-32 for SWATH-MS measurements were alkylated and trypsin-digested as described (Vowinckel et al., 2013; Garcia et al., 2019), and performed at the Proteomic Facility of the Institute of Plant Biochemistry and Photosynthesis, Seville, Spain.  A data-dependent acquisition (DDA) approach using nano-LC-MS/MS was first performed to generate the SWATH-MS spectral library as described (Garcia et al., 2019).  The peptide and protein identifications were performed using Protein Pilot software (version 5.0.1, Sciex) with the Paragon algorithm. The searching was conducted against with a Uniprot proteome_Chlorella sorokiniana protein database (January 2019), specifying iodoacetamide with other possible Cys modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for both peptides and proteins. The MS/MS spectra of the identified peptides were then used to generate the spectral library for SWATH peak extraction using the add-in for PeakView Software (version 2.1, Sciex) MS/MSALL with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (version 2.0, Sciex). Peptides with a confidence score above 99% (as obtained from the Protein Pilot database search) were included in the spectral library. For relative quantitation using SWATH analysis, the same samples used to generate the spectral library were analyzed using a data-independent acquisition (DIA) method. Each sample (2 μL) was analyzed using the LC-MS equipment and LC gradient described above to build the spectral library but instead used the SWATH-MS acquisition method. The method consisted of repeating a cycle that consisted of the acquisition of 34 TOF MS/MS scans (230 to 1500 m/z, 100 ms acquisition time) of overlapping sequential precursor isolation windows of 25 m/z width (1 m/z overlap) covering the 400 to 1250 m/z mass range with a previous TOF MS scan (400 to 1250 m/z, 50 ms acquisition time) for each cycle. The total cycle time was 3.5 s.

### Data Protocol
The targeted data extraction of the fragment ion chromatogram traces from the SWATH runs was performed by PeakView (version 2.1) with the MS/MSALL with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (version 2.0). This application processed the data using the spectral library created from the shotgun data. Up to 10 peptides per protein and 7 fragments per peptide were selected, based on signal intensity. Any shared and modified peptides were excluded from the processing. Windows of 12 min and 20 ppm width were used to extract the ion chromatograms. SWATH quantitation was attempted for all proteins in the ion library that were identified by ProteinPilot with an FDR below 1%. The extracted ion chromatograms were then generated for each selected fragment ion. The peak areas for the peptides were obtained by summing the peak areas from the corresponding fragment ions. PeakView computed an FDR and a score for each assigned peptide according to the chromatographic and spectra components. Only peptides with an FDR below 5% were used for protein quantitation. Protein quantitation was calculated by adding the peak areas of the corresponding peptides. To test for differential protein abundance between the two groups, MarkerView (version 1.2.1, Sciex) was used for signal normalization.

### Publication Abstract
Cadmium is one of the most common heavy metals in contaminated aquatic environments and one of the most toxic contaminants for phytoplankton. Nevertheless, there are not enough studies focused on the effect of this metal in algae. Through a proteomic approach, this work shows how Cd can alter the growth, cell morphology and metabolism of the microalga Chlorella sorokiniana. Using the sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra mass spectrometry (SWATH-MS), we concluded that exposure of Chlorella sorokiniana to 250&#xa0;&#x3bc;M Cd<sup>2+</sup> for 40&#xa0;h caused downregulation of different metabolic pathways, such as photosynthesis, oxidative phosphorylation, glycolysis, TCA cycle and ribosomal proteins biosynthesis. However, photorespiration, antioxidant enzymes, gluconeogenesis, starch catabolism, and biosynthesis of glutamate, cysteine, glycine and serine were upregulated, under the same conditions. Finally, exposure to Cd also led to changes in the metabolism of carotenoids and lipids. In addition, the high tolerance of Chlorella sorokiniana to Cd points to this microalga as a potential microorganism to be used in bioremediation processes.

### Keywords
Cadmium, Chlorella, Microalga, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Instituto Bioquimica Vegetal y Fotosintesis-CSIC
Instituto de Bioquimica Vegetal y Fotosintesis CSIC

### Submitter
Luis C. Romero

### Lab Head
Dr Romero, LC
Instituto de Bioquimica Vegetal y Fotosintesis CSIC


