### Accession
PXD017065

### Title
Tau posttranslational modifications

### Description
Human tauopathies including Alzheimer's disease are characterized by alterations in the post-translational modification (PTM) pattern of Tau, leading to the formation of insoluble aggregates, neuronal dysfunction and degeneration. We immunoprecipitated Tau from post-mortem brain tissue of early stage Alzheimer's disease patients and age-matched controls, and analyzed PTMs on this soluble pool of Tau protein. In addition to known serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation events, we identified a number of previously unknown monomethylation events on lysines in both control and Alzheimer's patient tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Anonymized human post-mortem tissue was obtained from the London Neurodegenerative Diseases Brain Bank and the Southwest Dementia Brain Bank, members of the Brains for Dementia Research Network. Entorhinal cortex samples were homogenized in Triton lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris pH7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1 % Triton-X100 and protease, phosphatase, demethylase (500 µM IOX1, 2 µM Daminozide, 10 µM Paragyline Hydrochloride), deacetylase (10 µM Trichostatin A, 5 mM Nicotinamide), O-GlcNAcase (1 µM Thiamet-G) inhibitors) with a Dounce homogenizer (Carl Roth). The tubes were twice scraped over a hard surface with in-between incubation on ice for 10 min. Samples were centrifuged for 20 min at 16 000x g at 4°C, and the protein concentration in the supernatant was determined with a BCA assay (BioRad, cat. No. 5000112). 250 µg protein from each human brain sample lysate was used for immunoprecipitation (IP) with a combination of Tau12 (Biolegend, cat. no. 806501), Tau 5 (Abcam, cat. no. ab80579) and HT7 (Thermo Fisher, cat. no. MN1000) as described previously (Behrendt et al., 2019). Briefly, immunoprecipitated samples were eluted with 50 mM glycine HCl pH 2.8, separated by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie-stained bands were excised. Samples were subjected to either an in-gel tryptic- or to an in-gel AspN digest, and peptides were separated using nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters) with a nanoAcquity trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7µm, 75µm x 200mm), which was coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher) using the Proxeon nanospray source as previously described (Behrendt et al., 2019).

### Data Protocol
Acquired LC-MS/MS data were processed using IsobarQuant (Franken, Mathieson et al., 2015) and Mascot (v2.2.07) with a reversed Uniprot homo sapiens database (UP000005640) including common contaminants. The following modifications were taken into account: Carbamidomethyl (C) (fixed modification), as well as Methyl (K), Dimethyl (K), Acetyl (K), Acetyl (N-term), Phospho (ST), Phospho (Y) and Oxidation (M) (variable modifications). The mass error tolerance for full scan MS spectra was set to 10 ppm and for MS/MS spectra to 0.5 Da. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. A minimum of 2 unique peptides with a peptide length of at least seven amino acids and a false discovery rate below 0.01 were required on the peptide and protein level. Peptides with a MASCOT Score ≥ 32 were determined as reliable detected peptides (Morris, Knudsen et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lysine methylation, Ptm, Tau, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
AbbVie Germany
Neuroscience Discovery AbbVie Deutschland GmbH&Co. KG Knollstr. 50 67061 Ludwigshafen am Rhein Germany

### Submitter
Dagmar Ehrnhoefer

### Lab Head
Dr Dagmar E. Ehrnhoefer
Neuroscience Discovery AbbVie Deutschland GmbH&Co. KG Knollstr. 50 67061 Ludwigshafen am Rhein Germany


