### Accession
PXD030125

### Title
Campylobacter jejuni virulence factors identified by modulating their sCampylobacter jejuni virulence factors identified by modulating their synthesis on ribosomes with altered rRNA methylationynthesis on ribosomes with altered rRNA methylation

### Description
Campylobacter jejuni is a major cause of food poisoning worldwide, and remains the main infective agent in gastroenteritis and related intestinal disorders in Europe and the USA.  As with all bacterial infections, the stages of adhesion to host tissue, survival in the host and eliciting disease all require the synthesis of proteinaceous virulence factors on the ribosomes of the pathogen. Here, we describe how C. jejuni virulence is attenuated by altering the methylation of its ribosomes to disrupt the composition of its proteome, and how this in turn provides a means of identifying factors that are essential for infection and pathogenesis. Specifically, inactivation of the C. jejuni Cj0588/TlyA methyltransferase prevents methylation of nucleotide C1920 in the 23S rRNA of its ribosomes and reduces the pathogen’s ability to form biofilms, to attach, invade and survive in host cells, and to provoke the innate immune response. Mass spectrometric analyses of C. jejuni TlyA-minus strains revealed an array of subtle changes in the proteome composition. These included reduced amounts of the cytolethal distending toxin (CdtC) and the MlaEFD proteins connected with outer membrane vesicle (OMV) production. Inactivation of the cdtC and mlaEFD genes confirms the importance of the toxin and OMVs in establishing infection. Collectively, the data identify a collection of genes required for the onset of human campylobacteriosis, and serve as a proof of principle for use of this approach in detecting proteins involved in bacterial pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
The peptides were labelled with isobaric tags (iTRAQ 8-plexTM, AB SCIEX) according to the supplier’s recommendations; equal amounts of the samples were pooled and acidified prior to desalting on reverse-phase columns. Peptides derived from wild-type cells were tagged with iTRAQ-114 and iTRAQ-117; ΔtlyA peptides with iTRAQ-115 and iTRAQ-118; ΔtlyA::tlyA with iTRAQ-116 and iTRAQ-119; and ΔtlyA::tlyAK188A with iTRAQ-117 and iTRAQ-121. Three biological replicates were done. MS analyses were performed in data-dependent acquisition mode at a resolution of 120,000 (m/z 200) with the mass range of 350-1600 m/z. The target values were set to 3.00E+06 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. The fifteen most abundant ions were selected from the MS with an isolation width of 1.2 m/z for fragmentation in the HCD collision cell using a collision energy of 34 %. Fragmentation was at a resolution of 30,000 (m/z 200) for a target value of 1.00E+05 with a maximum injection time of 120 ms (Thingholm et al., 2010).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed by Thermo Proteome Discoverer software v 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein identification was made from the C. jejuni 81-176 genome sequence (Uniprot databases) using the Sequest search engine. For the search parameters: precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, with a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da; carbamidomethylation of cysteine, iTRAQ modification of N-termini and of lysine residues were added to dynamic modifications, while acetylation was set to variable modifications; two missed cleavage sites per protein were allowed. For reporter ion quantification, the co-isolation threshold was set to 50, and average reporter ion S/N threshold to 10. Data from Proteome Discoverer was processed using Excel (Microsoft).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Campylobacter jejuni</i> is a major cause of food poisoning worldwide, and remains the main infective agent in gastroenteritis and related intestinal disorders in Europe and the USA. As with all bacterial infections, the stages of adhesion to host tissue, survival in the host and eliciting disease all require the synthesis of proteinaceous virulence factors on the ribosomes of the pathogen. Here, we describe how <i>C. jejuni</i> virulence is attenuated by altering the methylation of its ribosomes to disrupt the composition of its proteome, and how this in turn provides a means of identifying factors that are essential for infection and pathogenesis. Specifically, inactivation of the <i>C. jejuni</i> Cj0588/TlyA methyltransferase prevents methylation of nucleotide C1920 in the 23S rRNA of its ribosomes and reduces the pathogen's ability to form biofilms, to attach, invade and survive in host cells, and to provoke the innate immune response. Mass spectrometric analyses of <i>C. jejuni</i> TlyA-minus strains revealed an array of subtle changes in the proteome composition. These included reduced amounts of the cytolethal distending toxin (CdtC) and the MlaEFD proteins connected with outer membrane vesicle (OMV) production. Inactivation of the <i>cdtC</i> and <i>mlaEFD</i> genes confirmed the importance of their encoded proteins in establishing infection. Collectively, the data identify a subset of genes required for the onset of human campylobacteriosis, and serve as a proof of principle for use of this approach in detecting proteins involved in bacterial pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Campylobacter

### Affiliations
Department of Pre-Clinical Sciences,  Institute of Veterinary Medicine,  Warsaw University of Live Sciences – SGGW Poland
Institute of Veterinary Medicine, Warsaw University of Live Sciences – SGGW

### Submitter
Agnieszka Sałamaszyńska-Guz

### Lab Head
Dr Agnieszka Sałamaszyńska-Guz
Department of Pre-Clinical Sciences,  Institute of Veterinary Medicine,  Warsaw University of Live Sciences – SGGW Poland


