### Accession
PXD031046

### Title
Tgfbr2 in dental pulp cells guides neurite outgrowth in developing teeth

### Description
Transforming growth factor  (TGF) plays an important role in tooth morphogenesis and mineralization. During postnatal development, the dental pulp (DP) mesenchyme secretes neurotrophic factors that guide trigeminal nerve fibers into and throughout the DP. This process is tightly linked with dentin formation and mineralization. Our laboratory established a mouse model in which Tgfbr2 was conditionally deleted in DP mesenchyme using an Osterix promoter-driven Cre recombinase (Tgfbr2cko). These mice survived postnatally with significant defects in bones and teeth, including reduced mineralization and short roots. Hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed reduced axon-like structures in the mutant mice. Reporter imaging demonstrated that Osterix-Cre activity within the tooth was active in the DP and derivatives, but not in neurons. Immunofluorescence staining for 3 tubulin (neuronal marker) was performed on serial cryosections from control and mutant molars on postnatal days 7 and 24 (P7, P24). Confocal imaging and pixel quantification demonstrated reduced innervation in Tgfbr2cko first molars at both stages compared to controls, indicating that signals necessary to promote neurite outgrowth were disrupted by Tgfbr2 deletion. We performed mRNA-Sequence (RNA-Seq) and gene onotology analyses using RNA from the DP of P7 control and mutant mice to investigate the pathways involved in Tgfbr2-mediated tooth development. These analyses identified downregulation of several mineralization-related and neuronal genes in the Tgfbr2cko DP compared to controls. Select gene expression patterns were confirmed by quantitative real-time PCR and immunofluorescence imaging. Lastly, trigeminal neurons were co-cultured atop Transwell filters overlying primary Tgfbr2f/f DP cells. Tgfbr2 in the DP was deleted via adenovirus-expressed Cre recombinase. Confocal imaging of axons through the filter pores showed increased axonal sprouting from neurons cultured with Tgfbr2-positive DP cells compared to neurons cultured alone. Axon sprouting was reduced when Tgfbr2 was knocked down in the DP cells. Immunofluorescence of dentin sialophosphoprotein in co-cultured DP cells confirmed reduced mineralization potential in cells with Tgfbr2 deletion. Both our proteomics and RNA-Seq analyses indicate that axonal guidance cues, particularly semaphorin signaling, were disrupted by Tgfbr2 deletion. Thus, Tgfbr2 in the DP mesenchyme appears to regulate differentiation and the cells’ ability to guide neurite outgrowth during tooth mineralization and innervation.

### Sample Protocol
The global proteomic analysis was carried out as previously reported in (Ludwig et al., 2016). In brief, cell culture media was collected at the end of the 5 day assay. A 100 l aliquot was passed through a bone serum albumin depletion column (Genway, GWB-BSAIGY) and 40 g of post-depleted protein was subsequently used for each GelC run. Protein samples were reduced with DTT and denatured at 70°C for 10 minutes prior to loading onto 10% Bis-Tris Protein gels and being fully separated. The gels were stained overnight with colloidal Coomassie for visualization purposes, then each lane was cut into 4-MW fractions and equilibrated in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBc). Each gel plug was digested overnight with mass spectrometry-grade Trypsin Gold (Promega, V5280) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptide extracts were reconstituted in 0.1% Formic Acid/ ddH2O at 0.1 µg/µL. Mass spectrometry was carried out, and the data were processed, searched, filtered, grouped, and quantified as previously reported (Ludwig et al., 2016).

### Data Protocol
Sample Preparation: Proteomics analysis carried out as previously referenced with minor changes (Ludwig et. al, under section 2.5 nLC-ESI-MS2 under Protein IDs for GeLC). All proteins extracts in these studies will be attained using M-PER™ Mammalian Protein Extraction Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat.# 78501), and quantified using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat.# PI23225). As will be experimentally determined, a set amount of protein per sample will be diluted to 35µL using NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (1x final conc., Invitrogen, Cat.# NP0007). Proteins will then be reduced with DTT and denatured at 70°C for 10min prior to loading everything onto Novex NuPAGE 10% Bis-Tris Protein gels (Invitrogen, Cat.# NP0315BOX) and separated (35 min at 200 constant V). The gels will be stained overnight with Novex Colloidal Blue Staining kit (Invitrogen, Cat.# LC6025). Following de-staining, each entire lane will be cut into multiple MW fractions (3-8 fractions, as is experimentally determined to be optimal) and equilibrated in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBc), each gel plug will then be digested overnight with Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade (Promega, Cat.# V5280) following manufacturer’s instruction. Peptide extracts will be reconstituted in 0.1% Formic Acid/ ddH2O at 0.1µg/µL. Mass Spectrometry: Peptide digests (8µL each) will be injected onto a 1260 Infinity nHPLC stack (Agilent Technologies), and separated using a 75 micron I.D. x 15 cm pulled tip C-18 column (Jupiter C-18 300 Å, 5 micron, Phenomenex). This system runs in-line with a Thermo Orbitrap Velos Pro hybrid mass spectrometer, equipped with a Nanospray FlexTM ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and all data will be collected in CID mode. The nHPLC is configured with binary mobile phases that includes solvent A (0.1%FA in ddH2O), and solvent B (0.1%FA in 15% ddH2O / 85% ACN), programmed as follows; 10min @ 5%B (2µL/ min, load), 90min @ 5%-40%B (linear: 0.5nL/ min, analyze), 5min @ 70%B (2µL/ min, wash), 10min @ 0%B (2µL/ min, equilibrate). Following each parent ion scan (300-1200m/z @ 60k resolution), fragmentation data (MS2) will be collected on the top most intense 15 ions. For data dependent scans, charge state screening and dynamic exclusion will be enabled with a repeat count of 2, repeat duration of 30s, and exclusion duration of 90s. MS Data Conversion and Searches: The XCalibur RAW files will be collected in profile mode, centroided and converted to MzXML using ReAdW v. 3.5.1. The mgf files will then be created using MzXML2Search (included in TPP v. 3.5) for all scans. The data will then be searched using SEQUEST (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which is set for three maximum missed cleavages, a precursor mass window of 20ppm, trypsin digestion, variable modification C @ 57.0293, and M @ 15.9949 as a base setting, with additional PTM’s (ex: Phos, Ox, GlcNAc, etc.) that may be applied at a later time as determined to be of importance experimentally. Searches will be performed with a species specific subset of the UniProtKB database.  Peptide Filtering, Grouping, and Quantification: The list of peptide IDs generated based on SEQUEST search results will be filtered using Scaffold (Protein Sciences, Portland Oregon). Scaffold filters and groups all peptides to generate and retain only high confidence IDs while also generating normalized spectral counts (N-SC’s) across all samples for the purpose of relative quantification. The filter cut-off values will be set with minimum peptide length of >5 AA’s, with no MH+1 charge states, with peptide probabilities of >80% C.I., and with the number of peptides per protein ≥2. The protein probabilities will be set to a >99.0% C.I., and an FDR<1.0. Scaffold incorporates the two most common methods for statistical validation of large proteome datasets, the false discovery rate (FDR) and protein probability (Keller, Nesvizhskii, Weatherly). Relative quantification across experiments will then be performed via spectral counting (Old, Liu), and when relevant, spectral count abundances will then be normalized between samples (Hyde).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tooth development, Semaphorins, Sensory innervation, Tgfbeta, Neurotrophins, Tgfbeta signaling, Neurite outgrowth, Trigeminal, Dental pulp

### Affiliations
University of Alabama at Birmingham
Primary Investigator, Assistant Professor, Division of Biosciences, College of Dentistry, Ohio State University

### Submitter
james mobley

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah B. Peters
Primary Investigator, Assistant Professor, Division of Biosciences, College of Dentistry, Ohio State University


