### Accession
PXD004163

### Title
Proteomics of U1810 cells upon treatment with microRNAs with an AAGUGC seed motif.

### Description
microRNA dysregulation is a common feature of cancer cells, but the complex roles of microRNAs in cancer are not fully elucidated. Here we used functional genomics to identify oncogenic microRNAs in non-small cell lung cancer and to evaluate their impact on response to EGFR targeting therapy. Our data demonstrate that microRNAs with an AAGUGC-motif in their seed-sequence increase both cancer cell proliferation and sensitivity to EGFR inhibitors. Global transcriptomics, proteomics and target prediction resulted in the identification of several tumor suppressors involved in the G1/S transition as targets of AAGUGC-microRNAs. The clinical implications of our findings were evaluated by analysis of public domain data supporting the link between this microRNA seed-family, their tumor suppressor targets and cancer cell proliferation. In conclusion we propose that AAGUGC-microRNAs are an integral part of an oncogenic signaling network, and that these findings have potential therapeutic implications, especially in selecting patients for EGFR-targeting therapy.

### Sample Protocol
For the proteomics part, samples of the non-small cell lung cancer cell line U1810 was subjected to several different microRNA treatments, namely, either (i) non-targeting control siRNA, or (ii) miR-372-3p mimic, or (iii) miR-191-5p mimic, or (iv) miR-519c-3p mimic. Proteins from all samples were extracted and digested with trypsin following the FASP protocol. The resulting peptides from each sample were then labeled with TMT. TMT channel to sample map as follows: 126 - siCtrl A, 127N - miR 191 B, 127C - miR 372 A, 128N - miR 519c A, 128C - siCtrl B, 129N - miR372 B, 129C - miR 519c B, 130N - siCtrl C, 130C - miR 191 A, 131 - miR 372 C. After sample pooling and SCX-SPE cleanup, two sample aliquots were subjected to HiRIEF separation using GE Healthcare IPG strip of pI range 3-10 and an IPG strip of pI range 3.7-4.9, resulting in 2x72 fractions. Each fraction was run in LC-MS using a C18 guard desalting column (Acclaim pepmap 100, 75µm x 2cm, nanoViper, Thermo) and a nano EASY-Spray analytical column (pepmap RSLC, C18, 2µm bead size, 100Å, 75µm internal diameter, 50cm long, Thermo) online with a hybrid Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). FTMS master scans with 70,000 resolution (and mass range 300-1700 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (35,000 resolution) on the top 5 ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2m/z window. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1e6 for MS1 and 1e5 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100ms for MS1 and 150ms for MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~1.5s. Dynamic exclusion was used with 60s duration. Precursors with unassigned charge state or charge state 1 were excluded. An underfill ratio of 1% was used.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS files were converted to mzML format using msconvert from the ProteoWizard tool suite (PMID 23051804). Spectra were then searched using MSGF+ (v10072, PMID 25358478) and Percolator (v2.08, PMID 17952086), where 8 subsequent search results were grouped for Percolator target/decoy analysis. The reference database used was the human protein subset of ENSEMBL 79. MSGF+ settings included precursor mass tolerance of 10ppm, fully-tryptic peptides, maximum peptide length of 50 amino acids and a maximum charge of 6. Fixed modifications were TMT-10plex on lysines and N-termini, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues, a variable modification was used for oxidation on methionine residues. Quantification of TMT-10plex reporter ions was done using OpenMS project's IsobaricAnalyzer (v2.0, PMID 18366760). PSMs found at 1% FDR (false discovery rate) were used to infer gene identities, which were quantified using the medians of PSM quantification ratios.

### Publication Abstract
microRNA (miRNA) dysregulation is a common feature of cancer cells, but the complex roles of miRNAs in cancer are not fully elucidated. Here, we used functional genomics to identify oncogenic miRNAs in non-small cell lung cancer and evaluate their impact on response to epidermal growth factor (EGFR)-targeting therapy. Our data demonstrate that miRNAs with an AAGUGC motif in their seed sequence increase both cancer cell proliferation and sensitivity to EGFR inhibitors. Global transcriptomics, proteomics and target prediction resulted in the identification of several tumor suppressors involved in the G1/S transition as AAGUGC-miRNA targets. The clinical implications of our findings were evaluated by analysis of AAGUGC-miRNA expression in multiple cancer types, supporting the link between this miRNA seed family, their tumor suppressor targets and cancer cell proliferation. In conclusion, we propose the AAGUGC seed motif as an oncomotif and that oncomotif-miRNAs promote cancer cell proliferation. These findings have potential therapeutic implications, especially in selecting patients for EGFR-targeting therapy.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Hirief, Microrna, Mirna, U1810

### Affiliations
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, and Scilifelab, Stockholm, Sweden
Clinical Proteomics Unit, Dep. of Oncology-Pathology

### Submitter
Rui Branca

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, and Scilifelab, Stockholm, Sweden


