### Accession
PXD012963

### Title
Divergent polypharmacology-driven cellular activity of structurally similar multi-kinase inhibitors through cumulative differential effects on individual targets: IMAC Phosphoproteomics

### Description
Despite recent successes of precision and immunotherapies there is a persisting need for novel targeted or multi-targeted approaches in complex diseases. Through a systems pharmacology approach including phenotypic screening, chemical and phosphoproteomics and RNA-Seq, we elucidated the targets and mechanisms underlying the differential anticancer activity of two structurally related multi-kinase inhibitors, foretinib and cabozantinib, in lung cancer cells. Biochemical and cellular target validation using probe molecules and RNA interference revealed a polypharmacology mechanism involving MEK1/2, FER and AURKB, which were each more potently inhibited by foretinib than cabozantinib. Based on this, we developed a synergistic combination of foretinib with barasertib, a more potent AURKB inhibitor, for MYC-amplified small cell lung cancer. This systems pharmacology approach showed that small structural changes of drugs can cumulatively, through multiple targets, result in pronounced anticancer activity differences and that detailed mechanistic understanding of polypharmacology can enable repurposing opportunities for cancers with unmet medical need.

### Sample Protocol
For each of the six samples (foretinib, cabozantinib and DMSO – in duplicate), eleven 150 mm dishes were plated with 1.5 x 107 H1155 cells. After 24 hours, plates were treated with 1 µM of foretinib or cabozantinib for 3 hours; DMSO was used as control. Cells were harvested, washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and pellets from each treatment were combined. Phosphoproteomics was performed as previously described (Ctortecka et al., 2018). Global phosphoproteomics (pSTY) samples were labeled using TMT 6-plex reagents according to manufacturer’s instructions. Two channels were used for each type of sample (126 and 127 – DMSO1/2; 128 and 129 – foretinib1/2; 130 and 131 – cabozantinib1/2) and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. Label efficiency was confirmed by injecting approximately 1 µg of peptides for LC-MS/MS; all samples showed more than 99.4% labelling efficiency by spectral counting. Reactions were quenched with 5% hydroxylamine for 15 minutes. Samples were combined and lyophilized overnight. Samples were re-dissolved with 350 µl of 20 mM of ammonium formate (pH 10.0), vortexed for 10 minutes and separated with basic pH reversed phase LC into 12 concatenated fractions using a Waters Xbridge C18 column (4.6 x 100 mm). Peptides were lyophilized and pSTY peptides were enriched using an IMAC enrichment kit (Sigma I1408). All samples were evaporated using a speed vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 2% ACN / 0.1% FA, which contained 50 fmol/µl of PRTC (Thermo Scientific Pierce Retention Time Calibration Mixture, PIERCE) to confirm consistent performance of the analyses. A nanoflow ultra high performance liquid chromatograph (RSLC, Dionex) coupled to a nanoelectrospray benchtop Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive Plus, Thermo) was used to acquire MS/MS peptide sequences. The samples were loaded onto a pre-column (2 cm x 100 µm ID packed with C18 PepMap100 reversed-phase resin, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) and washed for 8 minutes with aqueous 2% ACN and 0.04% TFA. The captured peptides were eluted onto the analytical column, (C18 PepMap100, 75 µm ID x 50 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Dionex). A 120-minute gradient was programmed as: 95% solvent A (2% ACN + 0.1% FA) for 8 minutes, solvent B (90% ACN + 0.1% FA) from 5% to 38.5% in 90 minutes, then solvent B from 50% to 90% B in 7 minutes and held at 90% for 5 minutes, followed by solvent B from 90% to 5% in 1 minute and re-equilibration for 10 minutes. The flow rate on the analytical column was 300 nl/min. Sixteen tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner following each survey scan. 60 second dynamic exclusion was used for previously sampled peptide peaks.

### Data Protocol
IMAC data were queried using MaxQuant  1.5.2.8. The fragment tolerance for MS/MS scans was set to 20 ppm. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the protein N-terminus and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.05. The intensities of label-free phosphopeptides with PEP scores < 0.05 were manually validated. For this upload, data were searched against human entries in the UniProt database using Mascot.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cabozantinib, Phosphoproteomics, Imac, Lung cancer, Foretinib, Polypharmacology

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
Drug Discovery Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Rix, PhD
Drug Discovery Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


