### Accession
PXD009175

### Title
Klebsiella pneumoniae protomic response to antibiotics

### Description
Bacteria can circumvent the effect of antibiotics by transitioning to a poorly understood physiological state that does not involve conventional genetic elements of resistance. Here we examine antibiotic susceptibility with a Class A β-lactamase+ invasive strain of Klebsiella pneumoniae that was isolated from a lethal outbreak within laboratory colonies of Chlorocebus aethiops sabaeus monkeys. Bacterial responses to the ribosomal synthesis inhibitors streptomycin and doxycycline resulted in distinct proteomic adjustments that facilitated decreased susceptibility to each antibiotic.

### Sample Protocol
KpV513 cell pellets were suspended and sonicated for 200s (10s on, 10s off, 10 runs at 20W) in an ice bath of 1 ml ice-cold 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4, added lysozyme, DNAse I, Protease Inhibitor). Sonicated bacterial suspensions were centrifuged at 5000×g at 10°C for 20 minutes. Supernatants were analyzed by SDS-PAGE (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) followed by Coomassie stain, and total protein concentration was determined using the Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). 100 µg of total cell lysate was used to generate tryptic digest using the ‘filter-aided sample preparation’ (FASP) protein digestion method. KpV513 proteins in buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 8 M urea) were reduced by dithiothretiol and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 1 hr. After diluting into 1 M urea, alkylated proteins were digested with trypsin (1:100 w/w, Promega, Madison, WI) at 37 °C for 12 h and cleaned with Stage-Tip prior to 1D-LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files acquired by the MS system were processed using the Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2, Thermo Scientific). A workflow using the algorithms Sequest HT was employed. The search database was encompassing the comprehensive KP bacteria protein sequences (downloaded on 9 July 2016, 5126 proteins, Taxonomy 272620) combined with common contaminants proteins. Also, raw data files were loaded into the 1.5.2 version of the MaxQuant software in combination with the Andromeda search engine with the MaxQuant default parameters for database search. For LFQ analysis, “multiplicity” was set to one. Feature matching between raw files was enabled, using a retention time window of 2 min.  The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for proteins and peptides, which had to have a minimum length of 6 amino acids. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The search results from the two technical replicates of each biological replicate were combined and analyzed together.

### Publication Abstract
Bacteria can circumvent the effect of antibiotics by transitioning to a poorly understood physiological state that does not involve conventional genetic elements of resistance. Here we examine antibiotic susceptibility with a Class A &#x3b2;-lactamase+ invasive strain of <i>Klebsiella pneumoniae</i> that was isolated from a lethal outbreak within laboratory colonies of <i>Chlorocebus aethiops sabaeus</i> monkeys. Bacterial responses to the ribosomal synthesis inhibitors streptomycin and doxycycline resulted in distinct proteomic adjustments that facilitated decreased susceptibility to each antibiotic. Drug-specific changes to proteomes included proteins for receptor-mediated membrane transport and sugar utilization, central metabolism, and capsule production, whereas mechanisms common to both antibiotics included elevated scavenging of reactive oxygen species and turnover of misfolded proteins. Resistance to combined antibiotics presented integrated adjustments to protein levels as well as unique drug-specific proteomic features. Our results demonstrate that dampening of <i>Klebsiella pneumoniae</i> susceptibility involves global remodeling of the bacterial proteome to counter the effects of antibiotics and stabilize growth.

### Keywords
Streptomycin, Doxycycline, Lc-ms/ms, Klebsiella pneumoniae

### Affiliations
U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases, Frederick, Maryland, USA
USAMRIID

### Submitter
Moo-Jin Suh

### Lab Head
Dr Moojin Suh
U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases, Frederick, Maryland, USA


