### Accession
PXD048093

### Title
The proteome sequencing of ectopic and paired eutopic endometria

### Description
This study aimed to screen candidate genes regulating EMs using a combination of whole transcriptome and proteomics analyses and provide a theoretical basis for further study of the pathogenesis of EMs.

### Sample Protocol
2.2 Experimental procedure 2.2.1 Sample preparation Sample pretreatment included protein extraction, denaturation, reductive alkylation, enzymatic hydrolysis and peptide desalting. In this project, iST sample pretreatment kit (PreOmics, Germany) was used to preprocess tissue samples. After grinding in liquid nitrogen, an appropriate amount of sample was taken, 50ul of the lysate was added and heated at 1000 rpm for 10 min at 95°C. Samples were cooled to room temperature, trypsin digestion buffer was added and incubated for 2 h at 37 ° C with 500 rpm shaking. Termination buffer was added to terminate the enzymatic hydrolysis reaction. The peptide was desalted using the iST cartridge in the kit, eluted with 2 × 100 µl elution buffer, and eluted peptides were vacuum-drained and stored at -80 ° C.  2.2.2 Establishment of spectrogram database 1) reversed-phase separation at high PH  All sample peptide mixtures were incubated in buffer A (buffer A: 20mM ammonium formate aqueous solution, adjusted to pH10.0 with ammonia) was redissolved and connected with an Ultimate 3000 system (ThermoFisher scientific, MA, USA) to a reverse column (XBridge C18 column, 4.6mm x 250 mm, 5μm, (Waters Corporation, MA, USA) for high pH separation using a linear gradient, 5% B to 45% B in 40 min (B: 20mM ammonium formate was added to 80% ACN, and ammonia water was adjusted to pH 10.0). The column was equilibrated under initial conditions for 15min, the column flow rate was maintained at 1mL/min, and the column temperature was maintained at 30 ° C. Six fractions were collected and each fraction was dried in a vacuum concentrator until use.  2) Low PH nano-HPLC-MS/MS analysis (DDA qualitative library building)  The desalted and lyophilized peptides were redissolved in solvent A (A: 0.1% aqueous formic acid) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS equipped with an online nanospray ion source. The complete system was an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) with an EASY-nLC 1200 system in series. A total of 3 μL of samples (analytical column Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 μm x 25 cm) were loaded and separated in a 120-min gradient: 5% B to 35% B (B: 0.1% formic acid ACN solution). The column flow rate was controlled at 200 nL/min and the electrospray voltage was 2 kV.  The Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer operates in data-dependent acquisition mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition. The MS parameters were set as follows: (1) MS: scanning range (m/z) : 350-1500; Resolution: 120,000; AGC target: 4e5; The maximum injection time was 50 ms; Dynamic exclusion time: 30 s; (2)HCD-MS/MS: resolution: 15,000; AGC target=5e4;  Maximum injection time: 35ms; Collision energy: 32.  3) Search the library  The original data were merged and analyzed by Spectronaut X (Biognosys AG), and the database was searched using Uniprot or the provided database. In addition, the contaminated sequence library was searched at the same time to determine whether the sample was contaminated, and Trypsin digestion was set. Library search parameters: fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), variable modification: methionine oxidation. The false positive rate (FDR) was set to 1% at both the parent ion and peptide levels.  2.2.3 DIA data collection Each sample was added with 30 μL solvent A (A: 0.1% formic acid aqueous solution) to make a suspension, 9 μL was removed and 1 μL of 10×iRT peptide was added to the suspension, then mixed and separated by nano-LC, and analyzed by online electrospray tandem mass spectrometry. The complete experimental system was Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer with EASY-nLC 1200 system in series (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). A total of 3 μL of samples (analytical column Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 μm x 25 cm) were loaded and separated in a 120-min gradient: 5% B to 35% B (B: 0.1% formic acid ACN solution). The column flow rate was controlled at 200 nL/min and the electrospray voltage was 2 kV.  The MS parameters were set as follows: (1) MS: scanning range (m/z) : 350-1500; Resolution: 120,000; AGC target: 4e6; The maximum injection time was 50 ms; (2) HCD-MS/MS: resolution: 30,000; AGC target: 1e6; Collision energy: 32; Energy increase: 5%. (3) Variable window acquisition, 60 Windows were set, overlapping serial ports were set, and each window overlapped by 1m/z.

### Data Protocol
Ectopic and paired eutopic endometria were collected from three patients with EMs. None of the patients had taken any hormonal medication in the 6 months prior to study participation. Different analysis of proteins was based on the quantitative results of proteins to screen out proteins with considerable changes in abundance between groups. DESeq216 software was used for differential gene expression analysis. On the basis of the results of differential analysis, we identified RNAs with a false discovery rate <0.05 and |log2FC|>1 to screen significantly different genes, and heat maps were drawn. The differentially expressed proteins or genes were derived from the Gene Ontology (GO) mapping database (http://www.geneontology.org/). Pathway significance enrichment analysis using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) Pathway as a unit: hypergeometric test was applied to determine the pathway of significant enrichment in differentially expressed proteins or genes compared with background proteins or genes. The results were screened according to the false discovery rate (≤0.05). Using Venn diagram analysis, nine-quadrant diagram analysis, and pathway association analysis, genes expressed at both the transcriptional and protein levels were screened to determine the interactions between target genes and proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Endometriosis

### Affiliations
School of Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China

### Submitter
Jiarong Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Jiarong Chen
School of Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China


