### Accession
PXD047564

### Title
NOC1 is a Direct MYC Target, and Its Protein Interactome Dissects Its Activity in Controlling Nucleolar Function

### Description
The nucleolus is a subnuclear compartment with a key role in ribosome biogenesis and cellular stress responses. These mechanisms are governed by a complex interaction of proteins, including the NOC1 network. This study reveals a novel relationship between NOC1 and MYC transcription factor, known for its key role in controlling ribosomal biogenesis and cell growth and proliferation. Here, we demonstrate that NOC1 functions as a direct target of MYC, as it is transcriptionally induced through a functional MYC-binding E-box sequence in the NOC1 promoter region. Furthermore, interactome analysis reveals that NOC1-complex includes the nucleolar proteins NOC2 and NOC3 and other nucleolar components such as Nucleostemin1 Ns1 and mainly components for the transport of ribosomal subunits and maturation and with components for rRNA processing. In response to MYC, NOC1 expression and localization within the nucleolus significantly increase, suggesting a direct functional link between MYC activity and NOC1 function. Notably, NOC1 over-expression leads to the formation of large nuclear granules and enlarged nucleoli, which co-localize with nucleolar fibrillarin and Ns1. Additionally, we demonstrate that NOC1 expression is necessary for Ns1 nucleolar localization, suggesting a role for NOC1 in maintaining nucleolar structure. Finally, the co-expression of NOC1 and MYC enhances the formation of abnormal structures formed by NOC1 within the nucleolus, outlining another aspect of NOC1 and MYC cooperation in nucleolar dynamics.  This study reveals NOC1's interactions with proteins involved in RNA processing, modification, and splicing, such as Ythdc1, Flacc, and spenito. These proteins play key roles in mediating N6-methyladenosine (m6A) methylation of mRNAs. NOC1's potential involvement in coordinating RNA splicing and nuclear mRNA export highlights its significance in regulating gene expression.  In summary, our study uncovers novel roles for NOC1 in nucleolar homeostasis and establishes its direct connection with MYC in the network governing nucleolar structure and function. These findings also highlight NOC1's interaction with proteins relevant for RNA processing, modification, and splicing, suggesting a broader role in addition to its control of nucleolar homeostasis, providing new insight into NOC1 function that can be further investigated into its function in regulating cellular growth and proliferation.

### Sample Protocol
Hsp70 (hs)-Gal4> NOC1 larvae or control hs-Gal4> w1118 were heat-shocked at 37 °C for one hour and left to recover for two hours at room temperature. 20 larvae from each genotype were washed in PBS and lysed with 750 µl of immunoprecipitation buffer (100mM HEPES, 100mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton, 10mM MgCl) containing proteases and phosphatases inhibitors. Protein lysates were incubated for 20 minutes in ice and centrifuged at 13.000 rpm for 30 minutes a 4 °C. 500 µl of lysates were incubated with 50 µl of Sepharose-beads-Protein-G (Invitrogen) previously incubated with 4 µl anti-HA antibodies. Incubation was performed for 2 hours at room temperature, and beads were washed extensively with ice cold lysing buffer. After centrifugation, bound proteins were eluted with 100 µl of SDS-loading buffer LDS Sample Buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing 5% Bolt Sample reducing agent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 80°C for 5 min. 20 µl of the sample was run on a Western blot and 80 µl were used for the MS analysis. Experiments were repeated twice. Immunoprecipitated samples were loaded on 10% SDS-PAGE and run for about 1 cm. Gels were then stained with Coomassie and the entire stained area was excised as one sample. Excised gel bands were cut into small plugs (~1mm3), rinsed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and acetonitrile (ACN) solution, and vacuum dried. Dried gel pieces were then reduced using 10mM DTT (56°C for 30 min) and alkylated using 55mM iodoacetamide (room temperature for 30 min, in the dark). After sequential washing with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and ACN, gel pieces were dried and rehydrated with 12.5 ng/mL trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) solution in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate on ice for 30 min. The digestion was continued at 37°C overnight. The tryptic peptides were sequentially extracted from the gels with 30% ACN/3% TFA and 100% ACN. All of the supernatants were combined and dried in a SpeedVac. The tryptic peptides were then resuspended in 0.1% TFA, desalted on C18 stage tips, and resuspended in 20 μl of 0.1% formic acid buffer. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the peptides were separated on an Easy-nLC 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an 85-minute gradient on a 25 cm long column (75 µm inner diameter) filled in-house with C18-AQ ReproSil-Pur material (3 µm particle size, Dr. Maisch, GmbH). The gradient was set as follows: from 5% to 25% in 52 minutes, from 25% to 40% in 8 minutes, and from 40% to 98% in 10 minutes, with a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The buffers used were 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B). The peptides were analyzed with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) in data-dependent mode. Full scans were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolving power of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) in the mass range of 350-1100 m/z, with a target value of 1x10^6 ions and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Each full scan was followed by a series of MS/MS scans (collision-induced dissociation) over a cycle time of 3 seconds, with a maximum injection time of 150 ms (ion trap) and a target of 5x10^3 ions. The ion source voltage was set at +2100V and the ion transfer tube was warmed up to 275°C. Data was acquired using Xcalibur 4.3 and Tune 3.3 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). QCloud was used for all acquisitions to control instrumental performance during the project, using quality control standards (Chiva et al., 2018).  For data and computational analysis, the raw files were searched in Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide searches were performed using the UniProt Drosophila melanogaster (fruit-fly) database digested in silico (downloaded in July 2022) and a database containing common contaminants. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme with 5 missed cleavages. The static modification of carbamidomethylation (C) was incorporated in the search, with variable modifications of oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term). The MASCOT search engine (v.2.2 Matrix Science) was used to identify the proteins, using a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a product mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. False discovery rate was filtered for <0.01 at PSM, at peptide and protein levels. Results were filtered to exclude potential contaminants and proteins with less than two peptides.

### Data Protocol
MS downstream analysis was performed using the ProTN proteomics pipeline (www.github.com/TebaldiLab/ProTN and www.rdds.it/ProTN) (manuscript in preparation). Peptide intensities were log2 transformed, normalized (median normalization), and summarized into proteins (median sweeping) with functions in the DEqMS Bioconductor package (Zhu et al., 2020). Imputation of the missing intensities was executed by PhosR package (Kim et al., 2021). Differential analysis was performed with the DEqMS package, proteins with absolute log2 FC > 0.75 and p-value < 0.05 were considered significant. Protein-protein interaction network was constructed using STRING interaction database, version 12.0 (https://string-db.org/) (von Mering et al., 2003). Medium confidence interactions (score>0.4) were accepted as determined by the STRING database. The PPI network was grouped into relevant protein clusters using the Markov Cluster Algorithm (inflation parameter, 3) clustering option provided by STRING.

### Publication Abstract
The nucleolus is a subnuclear compartment critical in ribosome biogenesis and cellular stress responses. These mechanisms are governed by a complex interplay of proteins, including NOC1, a member of the NOC family of nucleolar proteins responsible for controlling rRNA processing and ribosomal maturation. This study reveals a novel relationship between NOC1 and MYC transcription factor, known for its crucial role in controlling ribosomal biogenesis, cell growth, and proliferation. Here, we demonstrate that NOC1 functions as a direct target of MYC, as it is transcriptionally induced through a functional MYC-binding E-box sequence in the NOC1 promoter region. Furthermore, protein interactome analysis reveals that NOC1-complex includes the nucleolar proteins NOC2 and NOC3 and other nucleolar components such as Nucleostemin1 Ns1 transporters of ribosomal subunits and components involved in rRNA processing and maturation. In response to MYC, NOC1 expression and localization within the nucleolus significantly increase, suggesting a direct functional link between MYC activity and NOC1 function. Notably, NOC1 over-expression leads to the formation of large nuclear granules and enlarged nucleoli, which co-localize with nucleolar fibrillarin and Ns1. Additionally, we demonstrate that NOC1 expression is necessary for Ns1 nucleolar localization, suggesting a role for NOC1 in maintaining nucleolar structure. Finally, the co-expression of NOC1 and MYC enhances nucleolus size and maintains their co-localization, outlining another aspect of the cooperation between NOC1 and MYC in nucleolar dynamics. This study also reveals an enrichment with NOC1 with few proteins involved in RNA processing, modification, and splicing. Moreover, proteins such as Ythdc1, Flacc, and splenito are known to mediate N6-methyladenosine (m6A) methylation of mRNAs in nuclear export, revealing NOC1's potential involvement in coordinating RNA splicing and nuclear mRNA export. In summary, we uncovered novel roles for NOC1 in nucleolar homeostasis and established its direct connection with MYC in the network governing nucleolar structure and function. These findings also highlight NOC1's interaction with proteins relevant to specific RNA functions, suggesting a broader role in addition to its control of nucleolar homeostasis and providing new insight that can be further investigated.

### Keywords
E-box, Interactome, Myc, Noc1, Nucleolus, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Trento
Department of Computational, Cellular, Integrative Biology (DeCIBIO), University of Trento 38123, TN, Italy

### Submitter
Romina Belli

### Lab Head
Dr Paola Bellosta
Department of Computational, Cellular, Integrative Biology (DeCIBIO), University of Trento 38123, TN, Italy


