### Accession
PXD038159

### Title
Cerebrospinal Fluid Proteomics of Aging Rats with Depression

### Description
Based on the proteomics of cerebrospinal fluid, this study aimed to explore the core pathway and potential targets of luteolin treatment on late-onset depression.

### Sample Protocol
Immediately after the rats were anesthetized (10% chloral hydrate, 3.5 ml/kg, intraperitoneally), their heads were fixed and the skin and muscles were clipped to expose the foramen magnum. CSF was extracted via medullary cavity puncture using a 1 mL syringe attached to a 0.45-gauge needle. The acquired cerebrospinal fluid was placed on ice for 20 min, then centrifuged at 4 ℃ for 15 min at 3000 rpm, and the supernatant was gathered and preserved at -80 ℃.

### Data Protocol
Total protein was isolated from CSF samples and protein quantification was performed in the BCA method. 20 µg of protein from an individual sample was added with 6 × loading buffer, proceeded to SDS-PAGE electrophoresis, and stained with Kaomas Brilliant Blue. Peptides were fractionated and quantified from 200 µg of protein solution by FASP enzymatic digestion protocol. All peptide mixtures were classified by Agilent 1260 infinity II HPLC system. 1µg of peptide was taken from each Fraction, mixed with iRT peptide, then separated by nano-LC. The raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed by Spectronaut Pulsar X (Biognosys AG) and a spectral database was developed. To ensure the accuracy of quantification, the DIA results were processed with a normalization strategy. Data with at least half of the nonsense values within either group were selected for significant difference analysis. Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were proteins whose fold change was more than 1.2-fold and p value was less than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Cognitive deficiency is one of the fundamental characteristics of late-onset depression (LOD). Luteolin (LUT) possesses antidepressant, anti-aging, and neuroprotective properties, which can dramatically enhance cognition. The altered composition of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), which is involved in neuronal plasticity and neurogenesis, directly reflects the physio-pathological status of the central nervous system. It is not well known whether the effect of LUT on LOD is in association with a changed CSF composition. Therefore, this study first established a rat model of LOD and then tested the therapeutic effects of LUT using several behavioral approaches. A gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was used to evaluate the CSF proteomics data for KEGG pathway enrichment and Gene Ontology annotation. We combined network pharmacology and differentially expressed proteins to screen for key GSEA-KEGG pathways as well as potential targets for LUT therapy for LOD. Molecular docking was adopted to verify the affinity and binding activity of LUT to these potential targets. The outcomes demonstrated that LUT improved the cognitive and depression-like behaviors in LOD rats. LUT may exert therapeutic effects on LOD through the axon guidance pathway. Five axon guidance molecules-<i>EFNA5</i>, <i>EPHB4</i>, <i>EPHA4</i>, <i>SEMA7A</i>, and <i>NTNG</i>-as well as <i>UNC5B</i>, <i>L1CAM</i>, and <i>DCC</i>, may be candidates for the LUT treatment of LOD.

### Keywords
Late-onset depression; luteolin; cerebrospinal fluid; proteomics; axon guidance; gsea; aging; ephs; ephrin; semaphorin; netrin; unc5

### Affiliations
Research Center of Basic Integrative Medicine, School of Basic Medical Science, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, 510006, China
Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
Li-Li Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Can Yan
Research Center of Basic Integrative Medicine, School of Basic Medical Science, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, 510006, China


