### Accession
PXD010174

### Title
An Outer Membrane Protein-Targeting Antibiotic Against Resistant Gram-Negative Bacterial Pathogens

### Description
There is an urgent need for novel antibiotics against carbapenem and 3rd generation cephalosporin-resistant Gram-negative pathogens, for which the last-resort antibiotics have lost most of their efficacy. We describe here a novel class of synthetic antibiotics that was inspired from natural product-derived scaffolds. The antibiotics have an unprecedented mechanism of action, which targets the main component (BamA) of the Bam folding machinery required for folding and insertion of ß-barrel proteins into the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria. This OMPTA (outer membrane protein-targeting antibiotic) class shows potent activity against multidrug-resistant Gram-negative ESKAPE pathogens and overcomes colistin-resistance both in vitro and in vivo. A clinical candidate has the potential to address life threatening Gram-negative infections with high unmet medical need.

### Sample Protocol
E.coli (ATCC25922) cells photolabeled with either PAL-3, PAL-4 or PAL-7 (n=3) or treated the same way with either 3, 4 or 7 (n=3-4) were PBS-washed and lysed in ice-cold 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, cat: 11704900) and 0.1 % RapiGest (Waters, cat: 186002122) by four intervals of 15 seconds ultrasound sonication in a vial tweeter (Hielscher Ultrasonics GmbH) at a power of 170 W and 80% cycle time. Protein concentration was determined using a Nanodrop 2000 Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) and 15 mg protein of each sample was subjected to automated purification and processing of biotinylated proteins. For this, in-house packed tips containing 80 ul Streptavidin Plus UltraLink resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) were hooked to a Versette liquid handling robotic system (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) and incubated with the cell lysate for 2.5 h at room temperature by pipetting up-and-down. In an automated fashion, bead-bound proteins were subsequently washed with 5 M NaCl, StimLys Buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.8, 137 mM NaCl, 150 mM Glycerol, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0,1 % Triton X-100), 100 mM NaHCO3 and AmBic, reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) in 3 M Urea / AmBic for 30 min at 37°C and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide in 3 M Urea / AmBic for 30 min at 37°C. Bead-bound proteins were proteolytically digested with 0.5 μg Lysyl Endopeptidase Lys-C (Wako, cat: 125-05061) in 3 M Urea / AmBic for 2 h at 37°C before diluting to 1.5 M Urea / AmBic and adding 0.8 μg Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin for 14 h at 37°C. Eluted peptides were acidified to pH < 3 by the addition of formic acid and subjected to C18 purification using 5–60 μg UltraMicroSpin Columns (The Nest Group, cat: SEM SS18V) according to manufacturer's instructions. Peptide samples were separated by reversed-phase chromatography on a high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) column (75-μm inner diameter, New Objective) that was packed in-house with a 15 cm stationary phase (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 micrometer) and connected to a nano-flow HPLC with an autosampler (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific). The HPLC was coupled to a Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nano electrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto the column with 100% buffer A (99.9% H2O, 0.1% FA) and eluted at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a 70 min linear gradient from 6–28% buffer B (99.9% MeCN, 0.1% FA) followed by a 4 min transition from 28 to 50% buffer B. After the gradient, the column was washed 10 min with 98%, 4 min with 10% and again 8 min with 98% buffer B. Electrospray voltage was set to 2.2 kV and capillary temperature to 250°C. In data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode the mass spectrometer automatically switched between precursor and fragment ion detection. Following a high-resolution survey mass spectrum (from 300 to 1,700 m/z) acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200 (automatic gain control target value 3*106), the 15 most abundant peptide ions with a minimum intensity of 2.5*104 were selected for subsequent HCD fragmentation with an isolation window of 1.4 Da and fragments were detected by MS/MS acquisition in the Orbitrap at resolution R = 35,000 (automatic gain control target value 1*106). Target ions already selected for fragmentation were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw files were subjected to protein identification using Comet (v.2015.01) and Trans Proteomic Pipeline v.4.7 (SPC/ISB Seattle) by matching ion spectra acquired in DDA mode against a SwissProt (UniProt consortium) reviewed E. coli protein database (downloaded Nov. 2016) containing common contaminants. Peptides were required to be fully tryptic with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites, carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as a dynamic modification. The precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 20 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Identified proteins were quantified by integration of chromatographic traces of peptides using Progenesis QI v.4.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics, UK). Contaminant hits were removed and proteins filtered to obtain a false discovery rate of < 1%. Raw protein abundances based on non-conflicting peptides were exported and differential abundance testing was performed using R-package MSstats v3.5.3. Subcellular localization annotation was retrieved from UniProt database using R-package UniProt.ws v.2.14.0 and Volcano plots created using R. Significantly enriched “outer membrane” annotated E. coli proteins (abundance fold change  1.5 and adjusted p-value ≤ 0.05) were considered as bona fide PAL-3, PAL-4 or PAL-7 interacting candidates.

### Publication Abstract
There is an urgent need for new antibiotics against Gram-negative pathogens that are resistant to carbapenem and third-generation cephalosporins, against which antibiotics of last resort have lost most of their efficacy. Here we describe a class of synthetic antibiotics inspired by scaffolds derived from natural products. These chimeric antibiotics contain a &#x3b2;-hairpin peptide macrocycle linked to the macrocycle found in the polymyxin and colistin family of natural products. They are bactericidal and have a mechanism of action that involves binding to both lipopolysaccharide and the main component (BamA) of the &#x3b2;-barrel folding complex (BAM) that is required for the folding and insertion of &#x3b2;-barrel proteins into the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria. Extensively optimized derivatives show potent activity against multidrug-resistant pathogens, including all of the Gram-negative members of the ESKAPE pathogens<sup>1</sup>. These derivatives also show favourable drug properties and overcome colistin resistance, both in vitro and in vivo. The lead candidate is currently in preclinical toxicology studies that-if successful-will allow progress into clinical studies that have&#xa0;the potential to address life-threatening infections by the Gram-negative pathogens, and thus to resolve a considerable unmet medical need.

### Keywords
Dda, Thermo q-exactive plus, Photoaffinity labeling, Bam complex, E.coli, Gram-negative eskape pathogens, Ompta (outer membrane-targeting antibiotics), Interaction mapping, Photo crosslinking, Novel molecular mode of action, Macrocyclic peptidomimetic antibiotics, Lpt complex, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology & Department of Health Sciences and Technology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Maik Müller

### Lab Head
Dr Bernd Wollscheid
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology & Department of Health Sciences and Technology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland


