### Accession
PXD029707

### Title
Splice-Switching Oligonucleotide-mediated Correction of a Deep Intronic Splice-variant in TIMMDC1 in Cells of Patients with Severe Early Onset Neurodegenerative Disorder.

### Description
TIMMDC1 encodes the Translocase of Inner Mitochondrial Membrane Domain-Containing protein 1 (TIMMDC1) subunit of complex I of the electron transport chain responsible for ATP production. We studied a consanguineous family with two affected children, now deceased, who presented with failure to thrive in the early postnatal period, poor feeding, hypotonia, peripheral neuropathy and drug resistant epilepsy. Genome sequencing data revealed a known, deep intronic pathogenic variant TIMMDC1 c.597-1340A>G, also present in gnomAD (~1/5000 frequency), that enhances aberrant splicing. Using RNA and protein analysis we show almost complete loss of TIMMDC1 protein and compromised mitochondrial complex I function. We have designed and applied two different splice- switching antisense oligonucleotides (SSO) to restore normal TIMMDC1 mRNA processing and protein levels in patients’ cells. Quantitative proteomics and real-time metabolic analysis of mitochondrial function on patient fibroblasts treated with SSOs showed restoration of complex I subunit abundance and function. SSO-mediated therapy of this inevitably fatal TIMMDC1 neurologic disorder is an attractive possibility.

### Sample Protocol
Fibroblasts cell pellets were solubilised in 5% SDS, 50mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and quantified using PierceTM BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific). A total of 20 µg of protein from two experiments: (1) TIMMDC1 patient (FS in triplicate and 5 independent controls) and (2) TIMMDC1 patients subjected to SSO treatment (NS and FS patients treated with SSO1 or NC5, all in triplicate) were prepared using S-trapTM micro spin column protocol as per manufacturer’s instructions. Proteins were digested at 1:25 trypsin to protein ratio overnight. Peptides were eluted over three elution steps as the protocol and samples were dried down using a CentriVap Benchtop Vacuum Concentrator (Labconco) and reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile (ACN) 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm). The tryptic peptides were injected to the enrichment column at an isocratic flow of 5 µL/min of 2% v/v ACN containing 0.1% v/v formic acid for 5 min applied before the enrichment column was switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents were 5% DMSO in 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent A) and 5% DMSO in 100% v/v ACN and 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent B). The flow gradient was (i) 0-6min at 3% B, ii) 6-7min, 3-4% (ii) 7-82 min, 4-25% B (iii) 82-86min 25-40% B (iv) 86-87min, 40-80% B (v) 87-90min, 80-80% B (vi) 90-91min, 80-3% and equilibrated at 3% B for 10 minutes before the next sample injection  For DIA experiments full MS resolutions were set to 120,000 at m/z 200 and scanning from 350-1400m/z in the profile mode. Full MS AGC target was 250% with an IT of 50 ms. AGC target value for fragment spectra was set at 2000%. 50 windows of 13.7 Da were used with an overlap of 1 Da. Resolution was set to 30,000 and maximum IT to 55 ms. Normalized collision energy was set at 30%. All data were acquired in centroid mode using positive polarity.  DIA files were processed with Spectronaut (v.115.2.210819.50606, Rubin) against a DDA library containing 124,887 precursors from deeply fractionated fibroblasts samples. Default BSG Factory search parameters were used with a few modifications. “Exclude single hit proteins” option was selected, “Major Group Top N” and “Minor Group Top N” was unselected to allow all peptides to be considered for quantitation, “Data filtering option” was set to “Q-value sparse” and “Imputing strategy” was set to “no imputing”. Protein search was done using UniProt reviewed human canonical and isoform (42,386 entries). Data processing and statistical analysis were performed in Perseus (v.1.6.14.0) (PMID: 27348712). MS2 quantities were log2-transformed and samples were labelled into their respective groups (TIMMDC1 and Controls; TIMMDC1_FS SSO1 and TIMMDC1_NS NC5; TIMMDC1_NS SSO1 and TIMMDC1_NS NC5). The TIMMDC1 and Controls samples were normalized using “subtract” option selection “columns” and “mean” as parameters. MitoCarta 3.0 (PMID: 33174596). database was used to annotate the entries using the UniProt IDs. Groups were filtered to have least two valid-values for the two-sample t-test. Volcano plots were generated using scatter-plot function in Perseus and significance lines were set to p-value = 0.05 (log10 = 1.301) and fold-change +/- 1.5 (log2 +/- 0.585). Complex I subunits were coloured to blue using the MitoCarta 3.0 annotation “CI subunits”.

### Publication Abstract
TIMMDC1 encodes the Translocase of Inner Mitochondrial Membrane Domain-Containing protein 1 (TIMMDC1) subunit of complex I of the electron transport chain responsible for ATP production. We studied a consanguineous family with two affected children, now deceased, who presented with failure to thrive in the early postnatal period, poor feeding, hypotonia, peripheral neuropathy and drug-resistant epilepsy. Genome sequencing data revealed a known, deep intronic pathogenic variant TIMMDC1 c.597-1340A&gt;G, also present in gnomAD (~1/5000 frequency), that enhances aberrant splicing. Using RNA and protein analysis we show almost complete loss of TIMMDC1 protein and compromised mitochondrial complex I function. We have designed and applied two different splice-switching antisense oligonucleotides (SSO) to restore normal TIMMDC1 mRNA processing and protein levels in patients' cells. Quantitative proteomics and real-time metabolic analysis of mitochondrial function on patient fibroblasts treated with SSOs showed restoration of complex I subunit abundance and function. SSO-mediated therapy of this inevitably fatal TIMMDC1 neurologic disorder is an attractive possibility.

### Keywords
Human, Timmdc1, Dia, Mitochondrial disease, Sso

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry & Pharmacology, Bio21 Institute, University of Melbourne
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
David Stroud

### Lab Head
Dr David Stroud
Department of Biochemistry & Pharmacology, Bio21 Institute, University of Melbourne


