### Accession
PXD034532

### Title
Genetically encoded photocatalytic protein labeling enables spatially-resolved profiling of intracellular proteome

### Description
Mapping the subcellular organization of proteins is crucial for understanding their biological functions. Herein, we report a reactive oxygen species induced protein labeling and identification (RinID) method for profiling subcellular proteome in the context of living cells. Our method capitalizes on a genetically encoded photocatalyst, miniSOG, to locally generate singlet oxygen that reacts with proximal proteins. Labeled proteins are conjugated in situ with an exogenously supplied nucleophilic probe, which serves as a functional handle for subsequent affinity enrichment and mass spectrometry-based protein identification. From a panel of nucleophilic compounds, we identify biotin-conjugated aniline and propargyl amine as highly reactive probes. As a demonstration of the spatial specificity and depth of coverage in mammalian cells, we apply RinID in the mitochondrial matrix, capturing 394 mitochondrial proteins with 97% specificity. We further demonstrate the broad applicability of RinID in various subcellular compartments, including the nucleus and the endoplasmic reticulum.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells stably expressing mito-V5-miniSOG (or V5-miniSOG-sec61b, or V5-H2B-miniSOG) were cultured into 10 cm dishes. After reaching 90% confluence, DMEM and 10% FBS was discarded and cells were incubated with 20 mM PA probe in HBSS for 5 min at 37oC Labeling was triggered by 30 mW·cm-2 blue light for 15 min at room temperature. Then the cells were scraped and collected by centrifugation at 300 g and 4oC for 5 min. The pellet was lysed on ice using 600 μL RIPA lysis buffer supplemented for 15 min. Lysate was centrifuged at 15,000 g at 4oC for 10 min. Excess small molecules were removed by protein precipitation in cold methanol at -80oC overnight. The protein samples were centrifuged at 3,000 g at 4oC for 10 min, and then discard the supernatant. The protein pellet was washed with cold methanol (-80oC) twice and then dissolved by 600 μL 0.5% SDS aqueous solution. 300 μL of click reaction reagents were added to each tube (final concentration: 100 μM N3-biotin, 667 μM CuSO4, 1.3 mM BTTAA and 2.5 mM sodium ascorbate) and incubated at room temperature for 1 h.  10 μL the protein sample mentioned in previous step of miniSOG labeling and click reaction section was added to 30 μL ddH2O and 10 μL 5× protein loading buffer, then boiled at 95oC for 10 min. Loading repeated for three times and the labeled protein was separated by 12% SDS-PAGE. Simultaneously, the remained samples was precipitated with cold methanol at -80oC overnight. The protein pellet was washed with cold methanol (-80oC) twice and then dissolved by 800 μL 0.5% SDS aqueous solution. The protein concentration was measured with BCA protein assay with PierceTM BCA Protein Assay kit (Thermo, 23227) before enrichment. After adjusting the concentration, 40 μL of the protein sample was taken as ‘input’. Thereafter, 50 μL streptavidin agarose resin (Thermo，20347) was washed by 1 mL PBS buffer once, and was incubated with the protein solution at 25oC for 3 h with gentle rotation. The agarose beads were centrifuged at 3000 g for 2 min. 40 μL of supernatant was taken as ‘supernatant’ before discarding the supernatant. Then beads were washed once with 1 mL 0.5% SDS in PBS for 10 min with gentle rotation and six times with 1 mL PBS successively. 40 μL of 0.5% SDS washed supernatant was taken as ‘Wash 1’. Thereafter, the beads were centrifuged at 3000 g for 2 min before discarding the supernatant, and then were resuspended in 50 μL PBS and taken 20 μL as ‘elute’. After discarding the supernatant, the beads were resuspended by 500 μL 6 M urea in PBS buffer. 25 μL 200 mM dithiothreitol (sigma, D9163-5G) aqueous solution was added and incubated at 60oC for 15 min. The beads were cooled to 25oC. Then, 25 μL 400 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma, I6125-5G) aqueous solution was added and incubate at 30oC for 30 min in the dark. Beads were washed twice with 1 mL 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (Sigma, T7408-100mL) and resuspended in 200 μL triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer. 1 μg sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, V5111) was added in each tube for the on-beads digestion by shaking at 1200 rpm and 37oC for 16 h. Thereafter, released peptides were collected from the supernatant by centrifugation at 15,000 g for 10 min, the pellet was discarded.  For dimethylation labeling, each peptide sample (200 mL) was mixed with 12 μL 4% (v/v) CH2O (Sigma, 252549-25ml) or 12 μL 4% (v/v) 13CD2O (Sigma, 596388-1g) respectively, and 12 μL 39.68 mg/mL NaBH3CN (sigma, 156159-10G) was added. The solution was incubated at room temperature for 1 h with 1200 rpm shaking. The reaction is stopped by adding 48 μL 1% (v/v) ammonia solution (Aladdin, A112079) and 24 μL formic acid (Fluka, 94318-50ml), the light and heavy isotopically labeled samples were mixed and dried by rotary evaporator (1300rpm, 45oC, 4-6 h). Thereafter, the peptide sample was fractionized by Pierce High pH Reverse Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo, 84868). Then the samples were combined as ‘1+5’, ‘2+6’, ‘3+7’ and ‘4+8’. Combined samples were dried again by rotary evaporator (1300 rpm, 45oC, 4-6 h), and then identified by liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
All MS data were interpreted using MaxQuant v1.6.10 software (samples of BSA in vitro labeling and the condition selection experiments of mitochondria proteomes didn’t have biological replicates and were not pre-fractionized; Other biological replicates: 2 of mito-miniSOG HEK293T cell lines with no blue LED irradiation as negative control, 2 of mito-miniSOG HEK293T cell lines with wild type HEK293T cells as negative control, 2 of miniSOG-sec61b HEK293T cell lines with no blue LED irradiation as negative control, 2 of V5-H2B-miniSOG HEK293T cell lines with no blue LED irradiation as negative control), each biological replicate contains four peptide samples pre-fractionized by Pierce® High pH Reverse Phase Peptide Fractionation kit (Thermo, 84868). The quantification of light/heavy ratios was calculated with precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm. For protein ID identification, MS/MS spectra were searched against UP000005640 proteome database from uniprot (79052 human proteins in total). Half-tryptic termini and up to 1 missing trypsin cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation at cysteine (+57.0215 Da) and isotopic modifications (+28.0313 and +34.0631 Da for light and heavy labeling, respectively) at lysine/N-terminal were set as fixed modifications. Oxidation at methionine (+15.9949 Da) and acetylation of N-terminal (+42.0106 Da) were set as variable modifications. Each of the biologically replicates was analyzed separately. Contaminants and proteins identified as reverse hits were removed. Proteins with unique peptides less than 2 or H/L ratio ‘NaN’ were also removed. For the mitochondria proteome, we took ROC analysis to determine the cut off ratios. 878 proteins in human MitoCarta 3.0 were defined as ‘true positive’, 109 proteins with ‘mitochondrial outer membrane’ annotation in MitoCarta 3.0, as well as a manually curated list of 389 cytoplasmic proteins were defined as ‘true negative’. The 389 proteins are generated from a list of ribosome interactomes from an unpublished work of our group by proximity labeling with high confidence and nearly no mitochondria related GOCC annotations. For the data derived from the two replicates with omitting blue LED irradiation or miniSOG as negative controls, the proteins are ranked by their averaged H/L ratio and taken for the ROC analysis. Of the 1634 and 1882 proteins, 486 and 495 of them passed the cut off with H/L ratio over 2.95 and 2.93. The overlap of them gave 395 proteins, which is the mitochondria proteome identified by RinID. The 495, 314, and 258 proteins identified by APEX, TurboID, and CAT-Prox are compared with human mitocarta 3.0 and giving 92%, 60%, and 70% mitochondria specificity, respectively. For the nucleus proteome, we use the following 7 GO terms to define ‘true positives’: GO:0016604, GO:0031965, GO:0016607, GO:0005730, GO:0001650, GO:0005654, GO:0005634. For the data derived from the two replicates (labeled by 20 mM and 10mM PA, respectively) with omitting blue LED irradiation as negative control , the overlap of the 710 and 1850 proteins is 660 proteins. The log2 H/L of the 660 proteins in each condition was normalized by minus the median of the dataset (0.278 and 0.196 for each). The proteins with normalized log2 H/L ratio over 0 in both replicates are remained as the nucleus proteome identified by RinID. Among the 268 proteins remained, 219 of them are ‘true nucleus protein’, giving a 82% nucleus specificity. The same specificity analysis was applied for the 1422 nucleus proteins identified by TurboID and giving a 79% nucleus specificity. For the ERM proteome, we use search the Uniprot GOCC terms containing the following words to define ‘secretory pathway protein’: ‘endoplasmic reticulum’, ‘Golgi’, ‘plasma membrane’, ‘extracellular’, ‘endosom’, ‘lysosom’, ‘nuclear envelope’, ‘nuclear membrane’, ‘perinuclear region of cytoplasm’, and ‘vesicle’ . For the data derived from the two replicates with omitting blue LED irradiation as negative control, the overlap of the 1575 and 1035 proteins is 943 proteins. The log2 H/L of the 943 proteins in each condition was normalized by minus the median of the dataset (1.908 and 0.681 for each). The proteins with normalized log2 H/L ratio over 0 in both replicates are remained as the ERM proteome identified by RinID. Among the 369 proteomes remained, 318 of them are ‘secretory pathway protein’, giving a 86% secretory pathway specificity. The same specificity analysis was applied for the 783 nucleus proteins identified by TurboID and 634 proteins identified by APEX2 and giving 72% and 70% secretory pathway specificity, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Mapping the subcellular organization of proteins is crucial for understanding their biological functions. Herein, we report a reactive oxygen species induced protein labeling and identification (RinID) method for profiling subcellular proteome in the context of living cells. Our method capitalizes on a genetically encoded photocatalyst, miniSOG, to locally generate singlet oxygen that reacts with proximal proteins. Labeled proteins are conjugated in situ with an exogenously supplied nucleophilic probe, which serves as a functional handle for subsequent affinity enrichment and mass spectrometry-based protein identification. From a panel of nucleophilic compounds, we identify biotin-conjugated aniline and propargyl amine as highly reactive probes. As a demonstration of the spatial specificity and depth of coverage in mammalian cells, we apply RinID in the mitochondrial matrix, capturing 477 mitochondrial proteins with 94% specificity. We further demonstrate the broad applicability of RinID in various subcellular compartments, including the nucleus and the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The temporal control of RinID enables pulse-chase labeling of ER proteome in HeLa cells, which reveals substantially higher clearance rate for secreted proteins than ER resident proteins.

### Keywords
Minisog; proximity labeling; photocatalytic; lc-msms

### Affiliations
College of chemistry and molecular engineering, Peking University
Peking University

### Submitter
Zheng Fu

### Lab Head
Dr Peng Zou
College of chemistry and molecular engineering, Peking University


