### Accession
PXD013782

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of DNA repair in Saccharomyces cerevisisae

### Description
The role of Rad53 in response to a DNA lesion is central for the accurate orchestration of the DNA damage response. Rad53 activation relies on its phosphorylation by the Mec1 kinase and its own autophosphorylation in a manner dependent on the adaptor Rad9. While the mechanism behind Rad53 phosphorylation and activation has been well documented, less is known about the processes that counteract its kinase activity during the response to a DNA break. Here, we describe that PP4 dephosphorylates Rad53 during the repair of a DNA lesion, a process that affects the phosphorylation status of multiple factors involved in the DNA damage response. PP4-dependent Rad53 dephosphorylation stimulates DNA end resection in a process that relies mainly on Sgs1/Dna2. Consequently, elimination of PP4 activity affects DNA resection and repair by single-strand annealing, defects that are bypassed by reducing the hyper-phosphorylation state of Rad53 observed in the absence of the phosphatase. These results confirms that Rad53 is one of the principal targets of PP4 during the repair of a DNA lesion and demonstrate that the attenuation of its kinase activity during the initial steps of the repair process is essential to efficiently enhance recombinational repair pathways that depend on long-range resection for its execution.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing Lysates containing 550µg of protein in 8M urea, 20mM HEPES buffer (pH8.0) were reduced and alkylated sequentially with 10mM dithiothreitol and 50mM 2-chloroacetamide respectively. Samples were then diluted with 20mM HEPES buffer (pH 8.0) to 4M Urea and sufficient LysC protease (Wako, 125-05061) was added for a protease to protein ratio of 1:250, followed by incubation (37oC, 5 hours). Samples were then diluted to 1M urea and trypsin (Promega, V5280) was added to an approximate 1:50 ratio for overnight incubation at 37oC. Samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5%. For total protein analysis, volumes equivalent to 50µg of protein were desalted using C18 spin tips (Glygen Corp, TT2C18.96) and peptides eluted with 60% ACN + 0.1% formic acid (FA). Eluents were then dried using a centrifugal vacuum drier. The remaining sample volumes were de-salted using solid phase extraction with OASIS HLB 10mg cartridges (Waters, 186000383) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Peptides were eluted with 1M glycolic acid in 80% acetonitrile (ACN), 5% TFA and phospho-enriched using a TiO2 based method (Casado et al., 2014). Briefly, eluents were adjusted to 1mL with 1M glycolic acid solution and were then incubated with 25mg of TiO2 (50% slurry in 1% TFA) for 5 minutes at room temperature. After 5 minutes of incubation with mixing, the TiO2/peptide mixture was packed into empty spin tips by centrifugation. The TiO2 layer was then sequentially washed with 1M glycolic acid solution, 100mM ammonium acetate in 25% ACN and 10% ACN. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 4 sequential additions of a 5% NH4OH solution. Eluents were clarified with centrifugation at 13000rpm for 2 minutes and clear supernatant transferred to new tubes. Samples were snap frozen on dry ice and then dried by vacuum centrifugation. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis Phospho-enriched samples and desalted total protein digests were redissolved in 0.1% TFA by shaking (1200rpm) for 30min and sonication on an ultrasonic water bath for 10min, followed by centrifugation (14,000rpm, 5°C) for 10min. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out in technical duplicates (1µg on column for total protein samples) and separation was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a Dionex nano-electrospray source. For LC-MS/MS analysis phosphopeptide solutions were injected and loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 100μm × 2cm) for desalting and concentration at 8μL/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. Peptides were then eluted on-line to an analytical column (Acclaim Pepmap RSLC C18, 75μm × 50cm) at a flow rate of 250nL/min. Peptides were separated using a 120 minute gradient, 4-25% of buffer B for 90 minutes followed by 25-45% buffer B for another 30 minutes (composition of buffer B – 75% acetonitrile, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA) and subsequent column conditioning and equilibration. Eluted peptides were analysed by the mass spectrometer operating in positive polarity using a data-dependent acquisition mode. Ions for fragmentation were determined from an initial MS1 survey scan at 30,000 resolution, followed by CID (Collision Induced Dissociation) of the top 10 most abundant ions. MS1 and MS2 scan AGC targets were set to 1e6 and 3e4 for maximum injection times of 500ms and 100ms respectively. A survey scan m/z range of 350 – 1500 was used, with multistage activation (MSA) enabled, normalised collision energy set to 35%, charge state screening enabled with +1 charge states rejected and minimal fragmentation trigger signal threshold of 500 counts.  References Casado, P., Bilanges, B., Rajeeve, V., Vanhaesebroeck, B., and Cutillas, P.R. (2014). Environmental stress affects the activity of metabolic and growth factor signaling networks and induces autophagy markers in mcf7 breast cancer cells. Molecular and Cellular Proteomics 13, 836-848.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing Data was processed using the MaxQuant software platform (v1.6.1.0), with database searches carried out by the in-built Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot S.Cerevisiae database (version 20180305, number of entries: 6729). A reverse decoy database approach was used at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectrum matches. Search parameters included: maximum missed cleavages set to 2, fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and serine, threonine, tyrosine phosphorylation. Label-free quantification was enabled with an LFQ minimum ratio count of 2. ‘Match between runs’ function was used with match and alignment time limits of 1 and 20 minutes respectively.  For total protein samples, search parameters as above with variable modifications of methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, asparagine deamidation and cyclization of N-terminal glutamine to pyroglutamate.

### Publication Abstract
The role of Rad53 in response to a DNA lesion is central for the accurate orchestration of the DNA damage response. Rad53 activation relies on its phosphorylation by Mec1 and its own autophosphorylation in a manner dependent on the adaptor Rad9. While the mechanism behind Rad53 activation has been well documented, less is known about the processes that counteract its activity along the repair of a DNA adduct. Here, we describe that PP4 phosphatase is required to avoid Rad53 hyper-phosphorylation during the repair of a double-strand break, a process that impacts on the phosphorylation status of multiple factors involved in the DNA damage response. PP4-dependent Rad53 dephosphorylation stimulates DNA end resection by relieving the negative effect that Rad9 exerts over the Sgs1/Dna2 exonuclease complex. Consequently, elimination of PP4 activity affects resection and repair by single-strand annealing, defects that are bypassed by reducing Rad53 hyperphosphorylation. These results confirm that Rad53 phosphorylation is controlled by PP4 during the repair of a DNA lesion and demonstrate that the attenuation of its kinase activity during the initial steps of the repair process is essential to efficiently enhance recombinational DNA repair pathways that depend on long-range resection for their success.

### Keywords
Dna repair/double-strand break; homologous recombination; pp4; resection; phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
Cell Cycle and Genome Stability Group. Institute of Functional Biology and Genomics (IBFG). Spanish National Research Council (CSIC). University of Salamanca (USAL). C/ Zacarías González 2. Salamanca 37007. SPAIN
MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Holger Kramer

### Lab Head
Dr Andrés Clemente Blanco
Cell Cycle and Genome Stability Group. Institute of Functional Biology and Genomics (IBFG). Spanish National Research Council (CSIC). University of Salamanca (USAL). C/ Zacarías González 2. Salamanca 37007. SPAIN


