### Accession
PXD043965

### Title
Infection by wMel Wolbachia alters female post-mating behaviors and physiology in the dengue vector mosquito Aedes aegypti

### Description
Globally invasive Aedes aegypti mosquitoes disseminate numerous arboviruses that impact human health. One promising method to control Ae. aegypti populations is transinfection with the intracellular bacterium Wolbachia pipientis, a symbiont that naturally infects ~40-52% of insects but is normally absent from Ae. aegypti. Transinfection of Ae. aegypti with the wMel Wolbachia strain induces cytoplasmic incompatibility (CI), allowing infected individuals to rapidly invade native populations. Further, wMel Wolbachia-infected females display refractoriness to medically relevant arboviruses. Thus, wMel Wolbachia-infected Ae. aegypti are being released in several areas to replace native populations, thereby suppressing disease transmission by this species. Wolbachia is reported to have minimal effects on Ae. aegypti fertility, but its influence on other reproductive processes is unknown. Female insects undergo several post-mating physiological and behavioral changes required for optimal fertility. Post-mating responses (PMRs) in female insects are typically elicited by receipt of male seminal fluid proteins (SFPs) transferred with sperm during mating, but can be modified by other factors, such as adult age, nutritional status, and microbiome composition. To assess how Wolbachia infection influences Ae. aegypti female PMRs, we collected wMel Wolbachia-infected Ae. aegypti from the field in Medellín, Colombia and introduced the bacterium into our laboratory strain. We found that Wolbachia influences female fecundity, fertility, and re-mating incidence. Further, we observed that Wolbachia significantly extends longevity of virgin females. Changes in female PMRs are not due to defects in sperm transfer by infected males, or sperm storage by infected females. Using proteomic methods to examine the seminal proteome of infected males, we found that Wolbachia infection has a moderate effect on SFP composition. However, we identified 125 Wolbachia proteins that are paternally transferred to females by infected males. Surprisingly, the CI factor proteins (Cifs), were not detected in the ejaculates of Wolbachia-infected males. Our findings indicate that Wolbachia infection of Ae. aegypti alters female post-mating responses, potentially influencing control programs that utilize Wolbachia-infected individuals.

### Sample Protocol
15N-labeled females were mated to unlabeled, normally reared ThaiWolb or Thai males. A single male and female were placed into an 8 L cage until a copulation occurred. Mated females were flash frozen on dry ice immediately after uncoupling and stored at -80°C until dissections commenced. Bursae from experimental (mated to ThaiWolb males) and control females (mated to Thai males) were dissected in 1X PBS with protease inhibitors (cOmplete Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail; Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Twenty bursae were collected from control and experimental females (three biological replicates each). After dissection, an equal volume of 2X Laemmli buffer + 5% β-mercaptoethanol was added to each sample. Proteins were solubilized by sonicating with a Elmasonic S30H sonicator (Elam, Singhem, Germany) for 30 sec, heated to 95°C for 15 min, and sonicated again for 30 sec. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 10,000 x g at 4°C, and the supernatant was placed into a fresh tube and stored at -80°C.    Solubilized samples were separated by 1D SDS-PAGE to generate six fractions per sample, digested with trypsin, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded onto a PepMap 100 C18 pre-column (5 µm particle, 100 Å pore, 300 µm × 5 mm, Thermo Scientific) at 10 µL/min for 3 min with 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were separated on a reverse-phase nano EASY-spray C18 analytical column (2 µm particle, 100 Å pore, 75 µm × 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) with a gradient of 1.6% to 32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 120 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. All m/z values of eluting ions (range between 375-1500 Da) were measured at a resolution of 120,000. The MS1 scan was followed by data-dependent MS2 scans (3 second cycle time) to isolate and fragment the most abundant precursor ions at 35% NCE. Fragment ions were measured at a resolution of 15,000. Ions with +1 or unassigned charge were excluded from the analysis, and dynamic exclusion of previously interrogated precursor ions was 70s.    Replicate information:  Young/Wolbachia-free (J1-J3); Young/Wolbachia-infected (W1-W3)

### Data Protocol
Raw spectral data were searched against the Ae. aegypti protein database (assembly AaegL5.0), appended with the cRAP v1.0 contaminant database (thegpm.org), using the standard workflow in PEAKS X+ (de novo + PEAKS DB + PEAKS PTM + SPIDER; Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). Spectral data from all six samples (three control with Thai males and three with ThaiWolb males) were run together in a combined analysis using the following search parameters: mass tolerance of 15 ppm for parent ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions, carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification, oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) as variable modifications, and up to three missed tryptic cleavages. Peptide identifications were filtered to a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% based on the decoy-fusion approach.

### Publication Abstract
Globally invasive Aedes aegypti disseminate numerous arboviruses that impact human health. One promising method to control Ae. aegypti populations is transinfection with Wolbachia pipientis, which naturally infects ~40-52% of insects but not Ae. aegypti. Transinfection of Ae. aegypti with the wMel Wolbachia strain induces cytoplasmic incompatibility (CI), allows infected individuals to invade native populations, and inhibits transmission of medically relevant arboviruses by females. Female insects undergo post-mating physiological and behavioral changes-referred to as the female post-mating response (PMR)-required for optimal fertility. PMRs are typically elicited by male seminal fluid proteins (SFPs) transferred with sperm during mating but can be modified by other factors, including microbiome composition. Wolbachia has modest effects on Ae. aegypti fertility, but its influence on other PMRs is unknown. Here, we show that Wolbachia influences female fecundity, fertility, and re-mating incidence and significantly extends the longevity of virgin females. Using proteomic methods to examine the seminal proteome of infected males, we found that Wolbachia moderately affects SFP composition. However, we identified 125 paternally transferred Wolbachia proteins, but the CI factor proteins (Cifs) were not among them. Our findings indicate that Wolbachia infection of Ae. aegypti alters female PMRs, potentially influencing control programs that utilize Wolbachia-infected individuals.

### Keywords
Reproduction, Seminal fluid, Female reproductive tract, Sperm

### Affiliations
Syracuse University
Center for Reproductive Evolution Syracuse University

### Submitter
steve dorus

### Lab Head
Dr Steve Dorus
Center for Reproductive Evolution Syracuse University


