### Accession
PXD029511

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis reveals the different hepatotoxic mechanisms of human hepatocytes exposed to silver nanoparticles

### Description
Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs), which have been used extensively in consuming products and eventually released into the natural environment, have aroused concerns recently because of their potentially harmful effects on human beings following various routes of exposure. As the liver is one of the largest accumulation and deposition sites of circulatory AgNPs, it is important to evaluate the hepatotoxicity induced by AgNPs. However, the acting mechanisms of AgNPs-induced hepatotoxicity are still elusive to a great extent. Herein, we investigated the hepatotoxic effects of AgNPs using a comparative proteomics approach. First, we evaluated the cytotoxicity of different-sized AgNPs and found that the cancerous liver cells were generally more sensitive than the normal liver cells. Next, proteomics results suggested that HepG2 and L02 cells showed distinct adaptive responses upon AgNPs exposure. HepG2 cells respond to stresses by adapting energy metabolism, upregulating metallothionein expression and increasing the expression of antioxidants, while L02 cells protect themselves by increasing DNA repair and macro-autophagy. Besides, mitochondrial ROS has been identified as one of the causes of AgNPs-induced hepatotoxicity. Collectively, our results revealed that hepatic cancer cells and normal cells cope with AgNPs in notably different pathways, providing new insights into mechanisms underlying AgNPs-induced hepatotoxicity.

### Sample Protocol
For proteome analysis, both cell lines were culture to reach confluency at 90% in 100 mm cell culture dishes and treated with 2.5 ug/mL AgNPs for 24 h. The media were then removed at the end of exposure. Cells were washed with cold 1X PBS and then trypsinized. The collected cells were harvested at 5000 × g by centrifugation and washed with cold PBS buffer for three times. The collected cell pellets were then suspended in 300 μL of lysis buffer (8M urea) and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen for 1 min, followed by sonication for 15 min on ice. The cell lysate was centrifuged at 16000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C. Then, supernatant obtained was mixed with four-volume of cold acetone and put in -20 °C overnight. Precipitated proteins were collected by centrifuging at 16000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C and washed with 80% acetone. The remaining solvents were allowed to evaporate and then the precipitated proteins were reconstituted in a buffer of 4M urea in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate. The concentration of protein in the samples were determined by Bradford assay using the Bio-Rad Protein Assay Kit. The protein solution was incubated with 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37°C for 1h to reduce the disulfide bonds. Iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to a final concentration of 20mM and the treated samples were incubated at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. DTT solution with a final concentration of 10mM was then added to quench the alkylation reaction and the samples were diluted with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate solution to decrease the concentration of urea to 1M. The reduced and alkylated proteins were digested with sequencing grade-modified trypsin (1:50 w/w, Promega, Madison, WI) at 37 °C for 10h.The digestion was acidified by 10% formic acid to a final concentration of 0.1% (v/v) and desalted and purified by a ZipTipC18 (C18-resin packed pipette tip). Finally, the purified samples were dried with a SpeedVac (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and stored at -20 °C prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw data acquired were first converted to mgf files by msconvert of the ProteoWizard (version 3.0.11676 64-bit) and then converted to mzXML. The mzXML files were searched using Comet (version 2019.04 rev.0) against the human protein sequence database obtained from UniProt (Swissprot). The decoy sequences generated by shuffling amino acid sequences between tryptic cleavage sites were added to the database. The decoy sequence in the database is used for the false discovery rate (FDR) estimation of the identified peptides. The search parameters used in Comet search were set as follows: 3 amu peptide mass tolerance, monoisotopic mass type, fully digested enzyme termini, 1.005 amu fragment bin tolerance, 0.4 amu fragment bin offset, carbamidomethylated cysteine, and oxidated methionine as the fixed and variable modifications, respectively. The search results from Comet were subsequently processed by PeptideProphet, iProphet, and ProteinProphet of the Trans-Proteomics Pipeline (TPP) in the decoy-assisted nonparametric mode. Every mzXML run was analyzed independently. Protein identifications were filtered at FDR 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs), which have been used extensively in consuming products and eventually released into the natural environment, have aroused concerns recently because of their potentially harmful effects on human beings following various routes of exposure. As the liver is one of the largest accumulation and deposition sites of circulatory AgNPs, it is important to evaluate the hepatotoxicity induced by AgNPs. However, the acting mechanisms of AgNPs-induced hepatotoxicity are still elusive to a great extent. Herein, we investigated the hepatotoxic effects of AgNPs using a comparative proteomics approach. First, we evaluated the cytotoxicity of different-sized AgNPs and found that the cancerous liver cells were generally more sensitive than the normal liver cells. Next, proteomics results suggested that HepG2 and L02 cells showed distinct adaptive responses upon AgNPs exposure. HepG2 cells respond to stresses by adapting energy metabolism, upregulating metallothionein expression and increasing the expression of antioxidants, while L02 cells protect themselves by increasing DNA repair and macro-autophagy. Besides, mitochondrial ROS has been identified as one of the causes of AgNPs-induced hepatotoxicity. Collectively, our results revealed that hepatic cancer cells and normal cells cope with AgNPs in notably different pathways, providing new insights into mechanisms underlying AgNPs-induced hepatotoxicity. DATA AVAILABILITY: The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (Deutsch et al. (2020)) via the PRIDE (Perez-Riverol et al. (2019)) partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD029511.

### Keywords
Human hepatocytes, Silver nanoparticles

### Affiliations
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
HKUST

### Submitter
Tin Yan Wong

### Lab Head
Dr Henry Lam
HKUST


