### Accession
PXD016647

### Title
Combining Precursor and Fragment Information for Improved Detection of Differential Abundance in Data Independent Acquisition

### Description
In data independent acquisition, consistent, comprehensive MS1 and MS2 can be recorded. This enables statistical comparison based on the two quantitative levels.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of PSS2 dataset Twenty-five mouse cerebellum samples were ordered from AMS Biotechnology (Abingdon, UK). For tissue lysis, half of a cerebellum was lysed in lysis buffer (8M urea, 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate, 10 mM TCEP) in a bead mill (3x 30 beats per s for 30 s, TissueLyser II, Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) . To shear the DNA, lysates were sonicated in a Bioruptor (Diagenode, Seraing, Belgium) for 5 cycles at high intensity (30s ON, 30s OFF). The lysates were cleared by centrifugation (20 min, 16,000 x g). Sixty µl of the lysate was used for digestion. For reduction and alkylation of the samples 60 µl of alkylation buffer (8 M urea, 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, 40 mM CAA) was added and the samples were incubated for 1 h at 37°C. Afterwards samples were diluted with 600 µl of 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate buffer including 5 µg of trypsin. Digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C and constant shaking at 500 rpm. To stop the digestion samples were acidified with 20% TFA. Peptide mixtures were purified using 96 well plate clean-up plates (NEST group, Southborough, MA) following the manufacturer's protocol. The samples were completely dried by vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in solvent A (1% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water) including iRT peptides (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland).  The UPS2 standard (Sigma, St Louis, MO) was digested separately using the same protocol, but MicroSpin columns were used for the clean-up (NEST group).  The concentrations of the cerebellum samples were adjusted to 1 µg/µl. We spiked 5 different concentrations of UPS2 standard into the samples, each in 5 different cerebellum samples (in total 25). Based on the lowest abundant UPS2 proteins, the spike-in concentrations were (assuming no losses during UPS2 sample preparation): S1: 0.75 amol/ul, S2: 0.83 amol/ul, S3: 1.07 amol/ul, S4: 2.04 amol/ul and S5: 7.54 amol/ul. For library generation, aliquots from all spiked samples were pooled and basified using ammonium hydroxide. The peptide pool was separated by high pH reverse phase chromatography on a 2.1*150mm Acquity CSH 1.7 um column (Waters, MA) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 LC (Thermo Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA) by a 30 min non-linear gradient from 1% buffer B (100% acetonitrile) / 99% buffer A (20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) to 40% buffer B. A fraction was taken every 45 s and pooled into 10 final fractions.   Preparation of the biological data set A lung cancer set comprising 12 non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and 12 matching normal adjacent tissue (NAT) was purchased from Proteogenex (Culver City, CA). Around 30 mg per tissue was cut and lysed in lysis buffer (8M urea, 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate) in a bead mill (3x 30 beats per s for 30s, TissueLyser II, Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). DNA was removed by benzonase (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO) treatment according to manufacturer's instructions. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation (20 min, 16,000 x g). Eighty µl of the lysate was used for digestion. For reduction and alkylation of the samples 80 µl of reduction/alkylation buffer (8 M urea, 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, 40 mM CAA) was added and the samples were incubated for 1 h at 37°C. Afterwards samples were diluted with 500 µl of 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate buffer including 10 µg of trypsin. Digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C and constant shaking at 500 rpm. To stop the digestion samples were acidified with 20% TFA. Peptide mixtures were purified using 96 well plate clean-up plates (NEST group, Southborough, MA) following the manufacturer's protocol. The samples were completely dried by vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in solvent A (1% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water) including iRT peptides (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland). Prior LC-MS analysis peptide concentrations were adjusted to 1 µg/µl.  For library generation, aliquots from all samples were pooled (in total 200 µg) and basified using ammonium hydroxide. The peptide pool was separated by high pH reverse phase chromatography on a 2.1*150mm Acquity CSH 1.7 um column (Waters, MA) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 LC (Thermo Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA) by a 30 min non-linear gradient from 1% buffer B (100% acetonitrile) / 99% buffer A (20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) to 40% buffer B. A fraction was taken every 45 s and pooled into 10 final fractions.  Pooled fractions were completely dried by vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in solvent A (1% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water) including iRT peptides (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric acquisition For DDA and DIA, 2µg of each sample was separated using a self-packed analytical PicoFrit column (75µm x 50cm length) (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) packed with ReproSil-Pur 120A C18-AQ 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) with a 2h segmented gradient using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Scientific) (segments. The PSS2 was acquired on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) modified from (Bruderer et al 2015 MCP). The Biological data set was acquired on a Q Exactive HF-X  mass spectrometer. The DIA method contained 43 DIA segments of 30,000 resolution with IT set to auto and AGC of 3*106. and a survey scan of 120,000 resolution with 60ms max IT  and AGC of 3*106. The mass range was from 350-1650 m/z. The default charge state was set to 3. Loop count 1 and  normalized collision energy stepped at 25.5, 27, 30. (MS-Methods.xlsx) Mass spectrometric data analysis DIA data were analyzed with Spectronaut Pulsar X 12.0.20491.6, from Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland (Bruderer 2015). The default settings were used for targeted analysis of DIA data in Spectronaut. The DDA spectra were analyzed with the MaxQuant (Version 1.6.0.1) analysis software using default settings (Trypsin/P, two missed cleavages). Search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and acetyl (protein N-terminus) as variable modifications. The initial mass tolerance for the precursor was 4.5ppm and for the fragment ions was 20ppm. The PSS2 DDA were searched against the mouse isoform UniProt fasta database (state 11.12.2014, 24,723 entries), and the Biognosys iRT peptides fasta database (uploaded to the public repository) The DDA from the biological data set were searched against the UniProt fasta database (state 11.12.2014, 20,215 entries) and iRT fasta. To generate the spectral libraries, the search results from the DDA were used to generate a spectral library using Spectronaut with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
In bottom-up, label-free discovery proteomics, biological samples are acquired in a data-dependent (DDA) or data-independent (DIA) manner, with peptide signals recorded in an intact (MS1) and fragmented (MS2) form. While DDA has only the MS1 space for quantification, DIA contains both MS1 and MS2 at high quantitative quality. DIA profiles of complex biological matrices such as tissues or cells can contain quantitative interferences, and the interferences at the MS1 and the MS2 signals are often independent. When comparing biological conditions, the interferences can compromise the detection of differential peptide or protein abundance and lead to false positive or false negative conclusions.We hypothesized that the combined use of MS1 and MS2 quantitative signals could improve our ability to detect differentially abundant proteins. Therefore, we developed a statistical procedure incorporating both MS1 and MS2 quantitative information of DIA. We benchmarked the performance of the MS1-MS2-combined method to the individual use of MS1 or MS2 in DIA using four previously published controlled mixtures, as well as in two previously unpublished controlled mixtures. In the majority of the comparisons, the combined method outperformed the individual use of MS1 or MS2. This was particularly true for comparisons with low fold changes, few replicates, and situations where MS1 and MS2 were of similar quality. When applied to a previously unpublished investigation of lung cancer, the MS1-MS2-combined method increased the coverage of known activated pathways.Since recent technological developments continue to increase the quality of MS1 signals (<i>e.g.</i> using the BoxCar scan mode for Orbitrap instruments), the combination of the MS1 and MS2 information has a high potential for future statistical analysis of DIA data.

### Keywords
Ms1 ms2 quantification, Controlled data sets, Dia

### Affiliations
Biognosys AG
Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland

### Submitter
Roland Bruderer

### Lab Head
Dr Lukas Reiter
Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland


