### Accession
PXD030816

### Title
The ubiquitin landscape of the Influenza A Virus polymerase

### Description
During influenza A virus (IAV) infections, viral proteins are targeted by cellular E3 ligases for modification with ubiquitin. Here, we decipher and functionally explore the ubiquitin landscape of the IAV polymerase during infection of human alveolar epithelial cells by applying mass spectrometry analysis of immuno-purified K-ε-GG- (di-glycyl)-remnant-bearing peptides. We identified 59 modified lysines across all three subunits of the viral polymerase of which 17 distinctively affected mRNA transcription, vRNA replication and the generation of recombinant viruses via non-proteolytic mechanisms. Moreover, our results demonstrate that the ubiquitinated residue K578 in the PB1 thumb domain is crucial for the dynamic structural transitions of the viral polymerase that are required for vRNA replication. Mutations K578A and K578R impeded the steps of cRNA stabilization and vRNA transcription, respectively, and affected NP binding as well as polymerase dimerization. Collectively, our results indicate that ubiquitin-mediated disruption of the charge-dependent interaction between PB1-K578 and PB2-E72 is required to coordinate polymerase dimerization and facilitate vRNA replication, which demonstrates that IAV exploit the cellular ubiquitin system to modulate the activity of the viral polymerase for the regulation of viral replication.

### Sample Protocol
Infection was carried out by incubating 10E8 A549 cells with IAV WSN in infection PBS (PBS supplemented with 0.7% BSA and 1% CaCl2 and MgCl2) at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 20 for 30 min at 4°C and subsequently for additional 30 min at 37°C. For the detection of the ubiquitin remnant motif (K-ε-GG) on the IAV polymerase subunits, the PTMScan®-Kit (Cell Signaling Technology, USA) was applied according to manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, 5 h p.i. cells were lysed using Urea lysis buffer (supplemented with Protease cocktail), followed by sonication. Clarified lysates were reduced and alkylated using dithiothreitol (DTT) and chloroacetamide, respectively, and diluted 3-fold with 20 mM HEPES (pH=8.0). Lysates were trypsin digested by incubation with 1% TPCK-Trypsin (v/v) over night at 25°C, desalted using Sep-Pak® C18 cartridges and immunoaffinity purification (IAP) using the anti-(K-ε-GG) motif antibody of the kit. Final purification was performed on Stage tips. Peptides enriched for the ubiquitin remnant motif (K-ε-GG) were dissolved in either 0.5% acetic acid or 0.1% formic acid prior to LC-MSMS analysis using a LTQ Velos Orbitrap (n=1) or Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (n=3; Thermo Scientific, USA), respectively. Each MS instrument was online coupled to an EASY nLC nanoflow HPLC system via a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific, USA), harboring in-house packed fused silica capillary column (length 15cm; ID 75 µm; ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 µm). Following loading, bound peptides were eluted using a linear 240 min gradient from 3 – 40% B (80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) followed by a short gradient from 35 – 98% B in 10 min at a flow rate of 300 or 250 nl/min. After washing at 98% B the column was re-equilibrated at starting conditions. The Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ion mode, switching in a data-dependent fashion between survey scans in the orbitrap (mass range m/z = 300-1650; resolution R=60000; target value = 1e6; lockmass set to 445.120025) and collision induced fragmentation and MS/MS acquisition in the LTQ part. MS/MS spectra of the 15 most intense ion peaks detected in the MS were recorded. Conditions for the analysis using the Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer were kept similar (Top17 DDA; Full MS R = 60000; AGC target = 3e6; Maximum IT = 100 ms; scan range 300 – 1750 m/z; ddMS2 R = 15000; max IT = 50 ms; NCE = 27 V). Dynamic exclusion was enabled on both MS systems.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed using MaxQuant (v. 2.0.1.0) with the built-in Andromeda search engine. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Influenza A virus (strain A/Wilson-Smith/1933 H1N1; UP000000834.fasta; version from 10/2016) as well as against the human UniprotKB database (UP000005640_9606.fasta; version from 04/2019) concatenated with reversed sequence versions of all entries and also containing common lab contaminants. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was set as fixed modification for the search in the database, while oxidation at methionine and acetylation of the protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. For the identification of ubiquitination sites, modification of lysine residues with the remnant diglycyl motif was allowed as additional variable modification. Trypsin was defined as the digesting enzyme, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages and requiring a minimum length of 7 amino acids. The maximum allowed mass deviation was 20 ppm for MS and 0.5 Da for MS/MS scans. Common lab contaminants and proteins containing reverse sequences that were derived from the decoy database were filtered out from the dataset prior to any further analysis. Protein groups were regarded as being unequivocally identified with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for both the peptide and protein identifications. Ubiquitination sites were accepted when they were identified with a localization probability of >0.75 (class I sites).

### Publication Abstract
During influenza A virus (IAV) infections, viral proteins are targeted by cellular E3 ligases for modification with ubiquitin. Here, we decipher and functionally explore the ubiquitination landscape of the IAV polymerase proteins during infection of human alveolar epithelial cells by applying mass spectrometry analysis of immuno-purified K-&#x3b5;-GG (di-glycyl)-remnant-bearing peptides. We have identified 59 modified lysines across the three subunits, PB2, PB1&#xa0;and PA of the viral polymerase of which 17 distinctively affect mRNA transcription, vRNA replication and the generation of recombinant viruses via non-proteolytic mechanisms. Moreover, further functional and in silico analysis indicate that ubiquitination at K578 in the PB1 thumb domain is mechanistically linked to dynamic structural transitions of the viral polymerase that are required for vRNA replication. Mutations K578A and K578R differentially affect the generation of recombinant viruses by impeding cRNA and vRNA synthesis, NP binding as well as polymerase dimerization. Collectively, our results demonstrate that the ubiquitin-mediated charge neutralization at PB1-K578 disrupts the interaction to an unstructured loop in the PB2 N-terminus that is required to coordinate polymerase dimerization and facilitate vRNA replication. This provides evidence that IAV exploits the cellular ubiquitin system to modulate the activity of the viral polymerase for viral replication.

### Keywords
Pa, Pb2, Ubiquitination, Lc-msms, Viral rna-dependent rna polymerase, Affinity enrichment, K-ε-gg motif, Influenza a virus, Pb1

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster  Germany
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry, Max Planck Insitute for Molecular Biomedicine, Roentgenstr. 20, 48149 Münster, Germany

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster  Germany


