### Accession
PXD032168

### Title
The pseudokinase NRBP1 activates Rac/Cdc42 via P-Rex1 to drive oncogenic signalling in triple negative breast cancer

### Description
In an effort to identify oncogenic protein kinase drivers in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), we undertook mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic profiling across a large panel of TNBC cell lines. This revealed marked variation in expression of the multidomain pseudokinase Nuclear Receptor Binding Protein 1 (NRBP1). Interrogation of publicly-available data determined that NRBP1 gene expression is higher in TNBC than in luminal breast cancers and positively associates with poor prognosis in TNBC patients. Gain and loss of function experiments characterized NRBP1 as a positive regulator of TNBC cell migration and invasion. In addition, NRBP1 knockdown reduced colony formation in vitro and moreover, markedly impaired growth of TNBC orthotopic xenografts as well as lung colonization in an experimental metastasis model. To interrogate the signalling mechanism of NRBP1, we applied BioID/MS profiling, identifying P-Rex1, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Rac1 and Cdc42, as a NRBP1 binding partner. Importantly, NRBP1 overexpression enhanced levels of GTP-bound Rac1 and Cdc42 in a P-Rex1-dependent manner, while NRBP1 knockdown reduced their activation. In addition, NRBP1 associated with P-Rex1, Rac1 and Cdc42, suggesting a scaffolding function for this pseudokinase. NRBP1-mediated promotion of cell migration and invasion was P-Rex1-dependent, while constitutively-active Cdc42 wholly/or partially rescued the effect of NRBP1 knockdown on cell migration/invasion and colony formation, respectively.  Generation of reactive oxygen species via a NRBP1/P-Rex1 pathway was implicated in these oncogenic roles of NRBP1. Overall, these findings define a new function for NRBP1 and a novel oncogenic signalling pathway in TNBC that may be amenable to therapeutic intervention.

### Sample Protocol
MDA-MB-231_EcoR stably expressing mycBioID2-pBabe-puro or mycBioID2-pBabe-NRBP1 were plated in growth medium in 15cm dishes. When cells reached 70% confluency, 50µM biotin (Sigma, cat. B4501) was added to the medium and the cells incubated for 20 h at 37oC, after which protein were extracted using modified RIPA lysis buffer. Then the cell lysates were transferred to 15ml conical tubes, followed by sonication for two sessions with 30 pulses. Finally, lysates were centrifuged and supernatants were collected. Protein concentrations were quantified by BCA assay. Protein samples were incubated with Streptavidin agarose beads (GE Healthcare) at 4oC for 22 h. Beads were then subject to extensive washing with modified RIPA buffer then 50mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8. For 100µg peptides, 1µg trypsin was added to samples, followed by incubation at 37°C overnight with agitation. After overnight digestion, beads were pelleted and the supernatants transferred to a fresh Eppendorf (EP) tube. The beads were then rinsed with mass spec-grade H2O, and these rinses were combined with the original supernatant. Following that, the pooled fractions were centrifuged at 16,000x g for 10 min and supernatants were transferred to a new EP tube and lyophilized in a speed-vac. Then samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and the peptide concentration measured using a Nanodrop. Finally, the concentrations of all samples were normalized and analysed by Mass Spectrometry (MS; Q-Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap from Thermo Scientific) in the Monash Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility (MPMF).

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed using MaxQuant to obtain protein identifications and their respective label-free quantification (LFQ) values using in-house standard parameters. Statistical analysis was performed using an in-house generated R script. A cutoff of the adjusted p-value of 0.05 (Benjamini-Hochberg method) along with a log2 fold change of 1 was applied to determine significantly enriched proteins.

### Publication Abstract
We have determined that expression of the pseudokinase NRBP1 positively associates with poor prognosis in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) and is required for efficient migration, invasion and proliferation of TNBC cells in culture as well as growth of TNBC orthotopic xenografts and experimental metastasis. Application of BioID/MS profiling identified P-Rex1, a known guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Rac1, as a NRBP1 binding partner. Importantly, NRBP1 overexpression enhanced levels of GTP-bound Rac1 and Cdc42 in a P-Rex1-dependent manner, while NRBP1 knockdown reduced their activation. In addition, NRBP1 associated with P-Rex1, Rac1 and Cdc42, suggesting a scaffolding function for this pseudokinase. NRBP1-mediated promotion of cell migration and invasion was P-Rex1-dependent, while constitutively-active Rac1 rescued the effect of NRBP1 knockdown on cell proliferation and invasion. Generation of reactive oxygen species via a NRBP1/P-Rex1 pathway was implicated in these oncogenic roles of NRBP1. Overall, these findings define a new function for NRBP1 and a novel oncogenic signalling pathway in TNBC that may be amenable to therapeutic intervention.

### Keywords
Signal transduction, Scaffold proteins, Proteomics, G proteins

### Affiliations
Monash University
Cancer Program, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, 3800, Australia

### Submitter
Ralf Schittenhelm

### Lab Head
Dr Roger Daly
Cancer Program, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, 3800, Australia


