### Accession
PXD008661

### Title
Ruegeria pomeroyi growth curve

### Description
The ubiquitous heterotrophic marine bacterium, Rugeria pomeroyi, was experimentally cultured under both environmentally realistic carbon conditions and with a tracer-level addition of 13C-labeled leucine. Bacterial protein biosynthesis was tracked through exponential and stationary growth phases. This combination of methods allowed for observation of real-time bacterial protein production of an environmentally relevant marine bacterium under low-carbon conditions to understand metabolic priorities during different growth phases.

### Sample Protocol
At different stages of bacterial culture growth, samples of bacterial culture were filtered, killed and frozen for proteomics analysis. Filters were sonicated in urea and supernatant was used for protein digestions. To each 300 ul of suspended proteins, 1.5 M tris buffer (19.8 ul, pH 8.8) and 7.5 ul of 200 mM TCEP was added, then samples were incubated at 37C for 1 hour. Next, 60 ul of 200 mM iodoacetamide was added to each sample and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 1 hour. This was followed by the addition of 60 ul of 200 mM diothiothreiotol and incubated for 1 hour. Urea was diluted with 2.5 mL 25 mM NH4HCO3 and 600 ul methanol for trypsin digestion overnight at 37C with an enzyme:protein of 1:50. Peptides were analyzed on a Q-Exactive after separation on a 20 cm long column packed with 5 um C18 powder and a similar pre-column of 2 cm. Peptides were eluted with an acidified water-acetonitrile gradient (5-35% ACN) over 90 minutes.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were searched against the R. pomeroyi proteome with Comet. Samples from the 13C experiment had the leucine modification included in the parameters file.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ruegeria pomeroyi, 13c leucine, Bacteria, Growth curve

### Affiliations
University of Washington
University of Washington, Genome Sciences

### Submitter
Emma Timmins-Schiffman

### Lab Head
Dr Brook L. Nunn
University of Washington, Genome Sciences


