### Accession
PXD021405

### Title
Schlafen family member 5 (SLFN5) regulates LAT1-mediated mTOR activation in castration-resistant prostate cancer (PART 2)

### Description
Androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT) is the standard of care for the treatment of non-resectable prostate cancer (PCa). Despite high treatment efficiency, most patients ultimately develop lethal castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). In this study, we perform a comparative proteomic analysis of three in vivo, androgen receptor (AR)–driven, orthograft models of CRPC. Differential proteomic analysis reveals that distinct molecular mechanisms, including amino acid (AA) and fatty acid (FA) metabolism, are involved in the response to ADT between the different models. Despite this heterogeneity, we identify SLFN5 as an AR-regulated biomarker in CRPC. SLFN5 expression is high in CRPC tumours and correlates with poor patient outcome. In vivo, SLFN5 depletion strongly impairs tumour growth in castrated condition. Mechanistically, SLFN5 interacts with ATF4 and regulates the expression of LAT1, an essential AA transporter. Consequently, SLFN5 depletion in CRPC cells decreases intracellular levels of essential AA and impairs mTORC1 signalling in a LAT1-dependent manner.

### Sample Protocol
2-5 mg of tumour powder were resuspended in 150 μl of 4% SDS containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Samples were then sonicated and centrifuged at 16000 × g for 10 minutes. Supernatant was collected and quantified using the BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). To prepare the super-SILAC standard, equal amounts of SILAC-labelled cell lysates from CWR22res, LNCAP, LNCAPAI, and VCAP cell lines were mixed together. The lysate obtained from each tumour sample was mixed at 1:1 ratio with the super-SILAC standard prior to FASP digestion41 with Endoproteinase Lys-C (Alpha Laboratories, UK) and trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Approximately 500 μg of SILAC-labelled protein digests were fractionated using high pH reverse phase chromatography. A C18 column (250 × 4.6 mm i.d. – Durashell RP (5 μm, 150Å)) was used with an HPLC system (Ultimate LPG-3000 binary pump and UVD170U Ultraviolet detector, Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Modules were controlled by Chromeleon v. 6.7. Solvent A (98% water, 2% acetonitrile) and solvent B (90% acetonitrile and 10% water) were adjusted to pH 10 using ammonium hydroxide. Samples were injected manually through a Rheodyne valve onto the RP-HPLC column equilibrated with 4% solvent B and kept at this percentage for 6 minutes. A two-step gradient was applied at a flow-rate of 1 ml/min (from 4–28% B in 36 minutes, then from 28-50% B in 8 minutes) followed by a 5-minutes washing step at 80% solvent B and a 10-minutes re-equilibration step, for a total run time of 65 minutes. Column eluate was monitored at 220 and 280 nm and collected using a Foxy Jr. FC144 fraction collector (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Collection was allowed from 8 to 50 minutes for 85 seconds per vial for a total of 30 fractions. The first 4 and the last 5 fractions were pooled resulting in 21 fractions in total. Each of the 21 fractions was dried down and then re-suspended in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA acid in water and separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography performed on an EASY-nLC II (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to a Linear Trap Quadrupole Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Elution was carried out using a binary gradient with buffer A (2% acetonitrile) and B (80% acetonitrile), both containing 0.1% of formic acid. Peptides were subsequently eluted into a 20 cm fused silica emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). The emitter was kept at 35°C by means of a column oven integrated into the nanoelectrospray ion source (Sonation, Germany). Peptides separation was performed using 3 different gradients optimised for different set of fractions as described previously42. Eluting peptides were electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer using a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). An Active Background Ion Reduction Device (ABIRD, ESI source solutions, Woburn, MA, USA) was used to decrease air contaminants signal level. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and used in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA). A full scan was acquired at a target value of 1,000,000 ions with resolution R = 60,000 over mass range of 350-1600 amu. The top ten most intense ions were selected for fragmentation in the linear ion trap using Collision Induced Dissociation (CID) using a maximum injection time of 25 ms or a target value of 4000 ions.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data (378 raw data files) were processed with MaxQuant v. 1.5.2.843 and searched with Andromeda search engine44, querying two different UniProt databases45: Homo sapiens (09/07/2016; 92,939 entries) and Mus musculus (20/06/2016; 57,258 entries). Protein hits coming from individual database were separated using “Split protein groups by taxonomy ID” option in MaxQuant. The “Re-quantify” and “Match between runs” options were also enabled. For quantitation, multiplicity was set to 2 and Arg0 and Lys0, and Lys8 and Arg10 were used for ratio calculation of SILAC labelled peptides. Only unique peptides were used for protein group quantification. Digestion mode was set to “Specific” using the digestion enzyme trypsin and allowing maximum two miscleavages. Iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine and acetylation of proteins N-terminus were specified as variable modifications. First and main searches were carried out with precursor mass tolerances of 20 and 4.5 ppm respectively, and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for the CID data. The FDR for peptide and protein identification was set to 1%; peptides with less than seven amino acid residues were excluded from processing. Only protein groups identified with at least one unique peptide were used for quantitation. The proteingroups.txt output file was analysed in Perseus46 v. 1.5.2.4. Reverse and contaminants hits (as defined in MaxQuant output), were removed from the list of identified proteins and only proteins quantified in at least 2 of 3 biological replicates in at least one tumour type were kept for further analysis. A median normalisation was performed on all samples before a Welch’s t-test with permutation based FDR set at 1% was used to identify significantly regulated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is the standard of care for treatment of nonresectable prostate cancer. Despite high treatment efficiency, most patients ultimately develop lethal castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). In this study, we performed a comparative proteomic analysis of three <i>in vivo</i>, androgen receptor (AR)-responsive orthograft models of matched hormone-na&#xef;ve prostate cancer and CRPC. Differential proteomic analysis revealed that distinct molecular mechanisms, including amino acid (AA) and fatty acid metabolism, are involved in the response to ADT in the different models. Despite this heterogeneity, Schlafen family member 5 (SLFN5) was identified as an AR-regulated protein in CRPC. SLFN5 expression was high in CRPC tumors and correlated with poor patient outcome. <i>In vivo, SLFN5</i> depletion strongly impaired tumor growth in castrated conditions. Mechanistically, SLFN5 interacted with ATF4 and regulated the expression of LAT1, an essential AA transporter. Consequently, <i>SLFN5</i> depletion in CRPC cells decreased intracellular levels of essential AA and impaired mTORC1 signaling in a LAT1-dependent manner. These results confirm that these orthograft models recapitulate the high degree of heterogeneity observed in patients with CRPC and further highlight SLFN5 as a clinically relevant target for CRPC. SIGNIFICANCE: This study identifies SLFN5 as a novel regulator of the LAT1 amino acid transporter and an essential contributor to mTORC1 activity in castration-resistant prostate cancer.

### Keywords
Castration-resistant prostate cancer, Cancer metabolism, Proteomics, Lat1/mtor signalling

### Affiliations
Proteomics
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom


