### Accession
PXD002125

### Title
Label free quantitative proteomics reveals survival mechanisms developed by Hypertrophic chondrocytes under ER stress

### Description
Emerging evidence implicates ER stress caused by unfolded mutant proteins in chondrocytes as the underlying pathology of chondrodysplasias. ER stress is triggered in hypertrophic chondrocytes (HCs) in a mouse model (13del)  of metaphyseal chondrodysplasia type Schmid (MCDS) caused by misfolded mutant collagen X proteins, but the HCs do not undergo apoptosis, rather chondrocyte differentiation is altered causing skeletal abnormality. How 13del HCs can escape from apoptosis and survive ER stress is not understood. We compared using label-free quantitative mass spectrometry approach the proteomes of HCs isolated from 13del growth plates with normal HCs. In this paper we reveal significant changes in levels of proteins involved in in actin remodeling, glycolysis and ER-mitochondria communication in 13del HCs chondrocytes. Previous in vitro studies of chronic ER stress showed down-regulation of glycolysis and disrupted mitochondrial function leading to cell death. Our data showed that glucose uptake was maintained in ATDC5 chondrocytic cell lines expressing 13del collagen X. Furthermore expression of mitochondrial calcium channels was reduced while mitochondrial membrane polarity was maintained in in vivo 13del chondrocytes. Thus we propose that 13del HCs survive by a mechanism whereby changes in ER-mitochondria communication reduce import of calcium coupled with maintenance of mitochondrial membrane polarity.

### Sample Protocol
HCs from proximal and distal tibia were obtained from P10 wt-Col10a1-eGFP and 13del;Col10a1-eGFP mice. The P10 HCs were obtained by dissecting the green fluorescent zone from tibia and removing the perichondrium under fluorescent microscope. We used five biological replicates per genotype, where each replicate sample comprised HCs from proximal and distal tibia pooled from either three or four P10 mice. Protein samples from all biological replicates from each condition were quantified using bradford assay followed by alkylation and reduction and overnight trypsin digestion.  Each sample was analyzed in triplicate by LC-MS/MS using an HPLC system connected online with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos was controlled using Xcalibur 2.0 software (Thermo Electron) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode whereby the survey scan was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolving power set to 60,000 (at 400 m/z). MS/MS fragment ions were detected in LTQ mass analyzer for each duty cycle 20 most intense precursor ions from a survey scan were selected for MS/MS. Fragmentation was carried out using CID mode with 35% normalized collision energy, with activation of 0.25 and 10 ms activation time. Ions selected for fragmentation were dynamically excluded for a period of 30s from MS/MS analysis. For MS/MS analysis, nonisotopic precursor mass and rejection of single charge criteria was selected. For accurate mass measurements, the lock mass option was enabled.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS data were analyzed using Mascot version 2.2.06 (Matrix Science) and X! Tandem (version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)).  Proteome Discoverer version 1.2 (Thermo Scientific) was used to extract tandem mass spectra from Xcalibur raw files and submit searches to an in-house Mascot server according to the parameters: Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot and X! Tandem as a fixed modification. Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus and oxidation of methionine were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications. Oxidation of methionine was specified in Mascot as a variable modification.. Parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerances of 0.5 Da were used and enzyme cleavage was set to trypsin, allowing for a maximum of two missed cleavages. The database searched consisted of 50697 protein sequences, comprising the UniProt complete proteome set for Mus musculus. The automatic Mascot decoy database search was performed for all datasets. . Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.4.3) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability. Peptide Probabilities from Mascot were assigned by the Peptide Prophet algorithm  with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Peptide Probabilities from X! Tandem were assigned by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony

### Publication Abstract
Emerging evidence implicates ER stress caused by unfolded mutant proteins in chondrocytes as the underlying pathology of chondrodysplasias. ER stress is triggered in hypertrophic chondrocytes (HCs) in a mouse model (13del) of metaphyseal chondrodysplasia type Schmid (MCDS) caused by misfolded mutant collagen X proteins, but the HCs do not undergo apoptosis; rather chondrocyte differentiation is altered, causing skeletal abnormality. How 13del HCs can escape from apoptosis and survive ER stress is not understood. Here we compared the proteomes of HCs isolated from 13del growth plates with normal HCs using a label-free quantitative mass spectrometry approach. Pathway enrichment analyses of differentially expressed proteins showed significant changes in glycolysis and ER-mitochondria pathways in 13del HCs as well as in ATDC5 cell lines expressing wt and 13del collagen X. In vivo, we showed expression of mitochondrial calcium channels was reduced while mitochondrial membrane polarity was maintained in 13del chondrocytes, while in vitro, glucose uptake was maintained. We propose 13del HCs survive by a mechanism whereby changes in ER-mitochondria communication reduce import of calcium coupled to maintenance of mitochondrial membrane polarity. These findings provide the initial insights into our understanding of growth plate changes caused by protein misfolding in the pathogenesis of chondrodysplasias.

### Keywords
Calcium signaling, Metaphyseal chondrodysplasia type schmid, Mitochondrial membrane polarity, Glycolysis

### Affiliations
HKU Biochemistry
Professor and Assistant Dean

### Submitter
MATEUSZ KUDELKO

### Lab Head
Dr Danny Chan
Professor and Assistant Dean


