### Accession
PXD018190

### Title
BRAF mutations disrupt the hypothalamo-pituitary axis leading to hypopituitarism in mouse and humans

### Description
Germline mutations in BRAF and other components of the Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) pathway are associated with the congenital syndromes collectively known as RASopathies. Here, we report the association of Septo-Optic Dysplasia (SOD) including hypopituitarism and Cardio-Facio-Cutaneous (CFC) syndrome in patients harboring mutations in BRAF. Phosphoproteomic analyses demonstrate that these genetic variants are gain-of-function mutations leading to activation of the MAPK pathway. Activation of the MAPK pathway by conditional expression of the BrafV600E/+ allele, or the knock-in BrafQ241R/+ allele (corresponding to the most frequent human CFC-causing mutation, BRAFp.Q257R), leads to abnormal cell lineage determination and terminal differentiation of hormone-producing cells, causing hypopituitarism. Expression of the BrafV600E/+ allele in embryonic pituitary progenitors leads to an increased expression in cell cycle inhibitors, cell growth arrest and apoptosis but not tumour formation. Our findings show a critical role for BRAF in hypothalamo-pituitary-axis development both in mouse and human and implicate mutations found in RASopathies as a cause of endocrine deficiencies in humans

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed twice with PBS supplemented with 1mM Na3VO4 and 1 mM NaF, lysed in urea buffer (8M urea in 20 mM in HEPES pH 8.0 supplemented with 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM NaF, 1mM Na 4P2O7 and 1 mM sodium β-glycerophosphate) and stored at -80C. Cell lysates were further homogenized by sonication, insoluble material was removed by centrifugation and protein in cell extracts was quantified. 250 µg of protein was reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. Peptide solutions were desalted with Oasis cartridges and phosphopeptides enriched using TiO2. For phosphoenrichment, sample volumes were normalized to 1 mL using glycolic acid buffer 2 (1 M glycolic acid, 80% ACN, 5% TFA), 50 µL of TiO2 beads (50% slurry in 1% TFA) were added to the peptide mixture, incubated for 5 min at room temperature with agitation and centrifuged for 30s at 1500xg. For each sample, 80% of the supernatant was transfer to fresh tubes and stored in ice and the remaining 20% used to resuspend the bead pellets that were loaded into an empty prewashed PE-filtered spin-tips (Glygen, MD, USA) and packed by centrifugation at 1500 x g for 3 min. After loading the remaining volume of the supernatant by centrifugation at 1500xg for 3 mim, spin tips were sequentially washed with 100 µL of glycolic acid buffer 2, ammonium acetate buffer (100 mM ammonium acetate in 25% ACN) and 10% ACN by RT centrifugation for 3 min at 1500xg. For phosphopeptide recovery, the addition 50 µL of 5% ammonium water followed by centrifugation for 5 min at 1500 x g was repeated 4 times. Eluents were snap frozen in dry ice, dried in a speed vac and peptide pellets stored at -80C. Phosphopeptide pellets were re-suspended in reconstitution buffer (20 fmol/µl enolase in 3% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and loaded onto an LC-MS/MS system consisting of an Ultimate nanoflow ultrahigh pressure liquid chromatograph connected to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated with the following parameter setting. The LC system used mobile phases A (3% ACN: 0.1% FA) and B (100% ACN; 0.1% FA). Peptides were trap in a μ-pre-column (catalog no 160454) and separated in an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100 ;catalog no 164569). The following parameters were used: 3% to 23% B gradient for 120 min and a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min. Samples were run in the LC-MS/MS system in a randomized manner by shuffling samples before loading. As they eluted from the nano-LC system, peptides were infused into the online connected Q-Exactive Plus system operating with a 2.1s duty cycle. Acquisition of full scan survey spectra (m/z 375-1,500) with a 70,000 FWHM resolution was followed by, data-dependent acquisition in which the 20 most intense ions were selected for HCD (higher energy collisional dissociation) and MS/MS scanning (200-2,000 m/z) with a resolution of 17,500 FWHM. A 30 s dynamic exclusion period was enabled with an exclusion list with 10 ppm mass window. Overall duty cycle generated chromatographic peaks of approximately 30 s at the base, which allowed the construction of extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) with at least 10 data points. Spectra were acquired and analysed using XCalibur (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification from MS data was automated with Mascot Daemon 2.5.0. Searches were performed against the SwissProt Database (uniprot_sprot_2014_08.fasta) using the Mascot search engine (v2.5) and the parameters described in ref 86. The in house developed software Pescal was used for label-free peptide quantification 85, Pescal constructed extracted ion chromatograms (XIC) for each identified peptide and measured the area of the XICs for all the peptides identified across all samples. Thresholds for XIC generation were ±7 ppm and ±2 min m/z and retention time windows, respectively, undetectable peptides were assigned a value equal to the lowest detected intensity across sample divided by 10. Pescal outputs were exported to XLS files and further processed with Microsoft Excel 2016. Values of 2 technical replicates per sample were averaged and intensity values for each peptide were normalized to total sample intensity. Differences in peptide phosphorylation between Wt and BRAF variants were reported as fold over Wt and statistical significance for those changes was assessed using unpaired two tailed t-test. Kinase activities from phosphoproteomics data were inferred by KSEA. The calculation of KSEA values for each kinase was automated using a VBA script written in house.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Phosphoproteomics, Ksea, Lcms, Label free, Braf, Rasopathies

### Affiliations
Centre for Haemato Oncology
Reader in Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology  Barts Cancer Institute  Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ Tel: +44 (0)20 7882 8266 | Fax: +44 (0)20 7882 3891 | Email: p.cutillas@qmul.ac.uk www.bci.qmul.ac.uk/research/centre-profiles/haemato-oncology.html https://www.bci.qmul.ac.uk/en/staff/item/pedro-cutillas

### Submitter
Vinothini Rajeeve

### Lab Head
Dr Vinothini Rajeeve, Pedro Maria Casado-Izquierdo, Pedro Cutillas
Reader in Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology  Barts Cancer Institute  Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ Tel: +44 (0)20 7882 8266 | Fax: +44 (0)20 7882 3891 | Email: p.cutillas@qmul.ac.uk www.bci.qmul.ac.uk/research/centre-profiles/haemato-oncology.html https://www.bci.qmul.ac.uk/en/staff/item/pedro-cutillas


