### Accession
PXD045671

### Title
Parkinson’s VPS35[D620N] mutation induces LRRK2 mediated lysosomal association of RILPL1 and TMEM55B

### Description
The Parkinson’s VPS35[D620N] mutation causes lysosome dysfunction enhancing LRRK2 kinase activity. We find the VPS35[D620N] mutation alters expression of ~350 lysosomal proteins and stimulates LRRK2 recruitment and phosphorylation of Rab proteins at the lysosome. This recruits the phosphoRab effector protein RILPL1 to the lysosome where it binds to the lysosomal integral membrane protein TMEM55B. We identify highly conserved regions of RILPL1 and TMEM55B that interact and design mutations that block binding. In mouse fibroblasts, brain, and lung, we demonstrate that the VPS35 [D620N] mutation reduces RILPL1 levels, in a manner reversed by LRRK2 inhibition. Knock-out of RILPL1 enhances phosphorylation of Rab substrates and knock-out of TMEM55B increases RILPL1 levels. The lysosomotropic agent LLOMe, also induced LRRK2 kinase mediated association of RILPL1 to the lysosome, but to a lower extent than the D620N mutation. Our study uncovers a pathway through which dysfunctional lysosomes resulting from the VPS35[D620N] mutation recruit and activate LRRK2 on the lysosomal surface, driving assembly of the RILPL1-TMEM55B complex.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells were purchased from ATCC and maintained in DMEM containing 10% (v/v) FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 µg/ml streptomyci All cells were grown at 37°C temperature with 5% CO2 in a humidified atmosphere and regularly tested for mycoplasma contamination. Transient transfections were performed in HEK293 cells 24h prior to cell lysis using PEI at around 60-70% confluency. Transfections for co-immunoprecipitation assays were done in 10 cm cell culture dishes using 3 µg of Flag-LRRK2 Y1699C 1 µg HA-Rab8A Q67L and 2 µg of RILPL1-GFP construct per dish diluted in 1 ml of Opti-MEM and 20 µg of PEI mixture and incubated for 30 min before being added to the media. Cells were lysed in an ice-cold lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1% (v/v) NP-40 alternative or 1% (v/v) Triton-X100, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 50 mM sodium fluoride, 10 mM sodium β-glycerophosphate, 5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 0.1 µg/ml microcystin-LR, and 1 tablet of cOmplete Mini (EDTA-free) protease inhibitor (Merck, 11836170001). Protein lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 17,000 x g for 10 min and were quantified by Bradford assay. GFP or Halo immunoprecipitation were performed according to the manufacturer's Briefly, lysates were incubated with either GFP-Trap agarose beads (Chromotek) or HaloLink Resin (Promega) for 1-2 h (20 µl of packed resin/ 1 mg of lysate). Immunoprecipitates were washed three times with wash-buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl) and eluted by adding 2x NuPAGE LDS sample buffer. The mixture was then incubated at 95°C for 10 min and the eluent was collected by centrifugation through a 0.22 µm Spin-X column (CLS8161, Sigma). Eluted samples were supplemented with 1% (by volume) β-mercaptoethanol and denatured at 70°C for 10 min before being subjected to immunoblot analysis.   The washed GFP immunoprecipitation beads were dissolved in a 100 µl buffer containing 2 M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) incubated on a Thermomixer at 32 °C for 30 minutes and then supplemented with final 20 mM Iodoacetamide(IAA) for another 30 minutes in dark. 250 ng of Sequencing grade trypsin was added to the samples and incubated on a Thermomixer at 1200 rpm agitation for 2Hrs and the supernatant was transferred to new 15.ml Eppendorf tubes and the tryptic digestion was continued for 12h. The reaction was quenched by adding final 1% (v/v)Trifluoroacetic acid and peptides were purified using in-house prepared strong cation exchange stage-tips. Eluted peptides were vacuum dried and tandem mass tags labeling was performed (11-plex TMT, Thermo Scientific) by following manufacturer instructions. Post labeling verification, samples were pooled to equal volumes and vacuum dried. To improve the coverage pooled TMT labeled mix was subjected to mini-basic reversed-phase liquid chromatography fractionation and generated a total of four fractions which are vacuum dried and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Each fraction was analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer in a data dependent (DDA) MS3 mode. The peptides were loaded on a 2 cm pre-column and resolved on a 50 cm analytical column at 300 nl/min flow rate. The full scan was acquired at 120,000 m/z resolution in the mass range of 375-1500 m/z and measured using Orbitrap mass analyzer. The top 10 data dependent MS2 scans were isolated by setting quadrupole mass filter at 0.7 Da and fragmented using 35% collisional induced dissociation. The fragment ions were measured using Ion-trap in a rapid scan mode. Synchronous precursor selection (MS3) for top 10 fragment ions in the mass range of 400 - 1200 m/z were isolated and fragmented using 65% Higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and measured at 50,000 m/z 200 resolution using Orbitrap mass analyzer. The Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were set at 2E5, 2E4 and 5E4 for MS1, MS2 and MS3 scans respectively with an ion injection times set at 50 ms for MS1 and MS2 and 120 ms for MS3 scans. The raw MS data was processed using MaxQuant software. The data type was set as a reporter ion MS3. The data was searched against Human Uniprot (version 2017) by selecting the default contaminants. Carbamdiomethlation of Cys was used as a static modification and Oxidation (M);Acetyl (Protein N-term);Deamidation (NQ); Phosphorylation (STY) were set as variable modifications. 1% FDR was applied at PSM and protein levels. The protein group.txt files were then further processed using Perseus software suite.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Parkinson's disease, Lrrk2, Lysosome, Proteomics

### Affiliations
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, University of Dundee, DUNDEE, DD1 5EH, United Kingdom
MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit, university of Dundee

### Submitter
Raja Sekhar Nirujogi

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dario R. Alessi
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, University of Dundee, DUNDEE, DD1 5EH, United Kingdom


