### Accession
PXD013755

### Title
Identification of NOS3 interacting proteins

### Description
The endothelial nitric oxide (NO) synthase (eNOS, or NOS3) can be activated in response to fluid shear stress and numerous agonists via cellular events such as increased intracellular Ca2+, interaction with substrate, co-factors as well as adaptor and regulatory proteins, protein phosphorylation and S-glutathionylation in addition to shuttling between distinct sub-cellular domains. While some protein interactors modulate enzymatic activity, others can be S-nitrosation targets, which are brought in close proximity to the NO source under specific conditions. The identification of proteins interacting with eNOS in human endothelial cells stimulated with serum and growth factors may provide new insight into the regulation of eNOS activity as well as NO signaling via S-nitrosation.

### Sample Protocol
Confluent monolayers of HUVEC expressing FLAG-tagged wild-type eNOS or GFP were serum starved overnight in MCDB131 containing 0.1% BSA and sepiapterin (10 µmol/L) and then treated with 10% heat inactivated FCS, VEGF (20 ng/mL), bFGF (1 ng/mL) and EGF (0.1 ng/mL) for 5 minutes to induce formation of eNOS complexes. Cells were washed twice with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and then collected in lysis buffer containing Tris HCl pH 7.5 (50 mmol/L), NaCl (150 mmol/L), NP-40 (1%), NaPPi (10 mmol/L), 10% glycerol (v/v), CaCl2 (1 mmol/L), NaF (20 mmol/L), orthovanadate (2 mmol/L), okadaic acid (10 nmol/L), β-glycerophosphate (50 mmol/L), PMSF (230 µmol/L) and EDTA-free protease inhibitors mix (AppliChem GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany) with the aid of a cell scraper and incubated for 30 to 45 minutes on an end-over-end rocker at 4°C, followed by centrifugation at 6000 rpm for 10 minutes at 4°C. All steps were performed at 4°C. FLAG-tagged eNOS was immunoprecipitated from 8 mg of cell lysate using 30 µl of packed Anti-FLAG M2 Affinity Gel/mg protein (Sigma-Aldrich, Munich, Germany) which was washed twice with lysis buffer before incubation with the whole cell lysate overnight on an end-over-end rocker. Immunoprecipitated proteins were recovered by centrifugation of the resins at 3000 rpm for 2 minutes at 4°C, followed by two washes with a buffer containing the same components as the lysis buffer described above, but without NP-40 and protease inhibitors. Two additional washes were done with a buffer containing only Tris HCl pH 7.5 (50 mmol/L) and NaCl (150 mmol/L). the washed and pelleted Anti-FLAG M2 Affinity Gel was processed directly for LC-MS/MS. Beads were resuspended in 50 µl 6M guanidine hydrochloride (GdmCl), 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5 and incubated at 95°C for 5 min. Sample were diluted with 25 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, 10% acetonitrile to obtain a final GdmCl concentration of 0.6 M. Proteins were digested with 1 µg Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) overnight at 37°C under gentle agitation. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5 %. Peptides were loaded on multi-stop-and-go tip (StageTip) containing a stack of six C18-disks. Peptide purification on StageTips was performed as described in Rappsilber et al. (Nat Protoc. 2007;2(8):1896-906.). Each sample was eluted in wells of microtiter plates and peptides were dried and resolved in 1% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid. Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm long from New Objectives) using an gradient from mobile phase A (4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 40 % mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 60 min followed by a second step to 80% B for 30 min. MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition Top10 method for HCD fragmentation in positive mode. Lock mass option was enabled to ensure high mass accuracy between multiple runs. The Full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3*106 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to 105 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. Selected ions were excluded in a time frame of 20s. Fullscan data were acquired in profile and fragments in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 (Cox and Mann, 2008, Nat. Biotechnology), Perseus 1.5.6.0 (Tyranova et al 2016) and Excel (Microsoft Office 2013) were used. N-terminal acetylation (+42.01), oxidation of methionine (+15.99), deamidation on asparagine and glutamine (+.98), phosphorylation (STY, +79.9663) and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) on cysteines were selected as modifications The reviewed human reference proteome set (Uniprot, August 2014, 20203 entries) was used to identify peptides and proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%. Minimal ratio count for label-free quantification (LFQ) was 1. Reverse identifications, only identified by site and common contaminants were removed and the data-set was reduced to proteins that were identified in all samples in one experimental groups. Missing values were replaced by a background value from the normal distribution. Significant interacting proteins were determined by permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR) calculation.

### Publication Abstract
Decreased nitric oxide (NO) bioavailability and oxidative stress are hallmarks of endothelial dysfunction and cardiovascular diseases. Although numerous proteins are S-nitrosated, whether and how changes in protein S-nitrosation influence endothelial function under pathophysiological conditions remains unknown. We report that active endothelial NO synthase (eNOS) interacts with and S-nitrosates pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2), which reduces PKM2 activity. PKM2 inhibition increases substrate flux through the pentose phosphate pathway to generate reducing equivalents (NADPH and GSH) and protect against oxidative stress. In mice, the Tyr656 to Phe mutation renders eNOS insensitive to inactivation by oxidative stress and prevents the decrease in PKM2 S-nitrosation and reducing equivalents, thereby delaying cardiovascular disease development. These findings highlight a novel mechanism linking NO bioavailability to antioxidant responses in endothelial cells through S-nitrosation and inhibition of PKM2.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Proteome, Enos, Vascular biology

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
Institute for Vascular Signalling, Centre for Molecular Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Ingrid Fleming
Institute for Vascular Signalling, Centre for Molecular Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


