### Accession
PXD016357

### Title
Identification of ELC interacting proteins in zebrafish heart

### Description
The essential myosin light chain (ELC) is part of the cardiac myosin motor regulating the contractility of the heart. Recently, we have demonstrated ELC phosphorylation to be responsible not only for basal maintenance of cardiac contractility, but also for the adaptation of sarcomere function to increased demands in adult zebrafish (Scheid et al. Cardiovascular Research, 2016). However, the direct interacting kinases, phosphatases as well as the signaling pathway mediating the ELC phosphorylation are mostly unknown. Here, we aim to identify ELC interacting proteins in zebrafish heart tissue using an ELC-specific precipitation assay followed by mass spectrometry. In brief, ELC specific co-immunoprecipitation was performed by using the Dynabeads Co-immunoprecipitation Kit (Invitrogen, #14321D). Custom-specific polyclonal ELC antibodies (Eurogentec, peptide for immunization: NH2-CAPVPETPKEPEVDLK-CONH2) against zebrafish ELC were covalently coupled to DynabeadsTM M-270 Epoxy (Invitrogen, #14302D) and whole zebrafish heart protein was used as input. All steps were carried out according to the manufacturer's instructions.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel tryptic digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis After SDS-PAGE coomassie stained lanes were cut into three pieces. Gel slices were transferred to a 96-well plate and reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin (1). Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces with 50% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA, concentrated nearly to dryness in a speedVac vacuum centrifuge and diluted to a total volume of 30ul with 0.1% TFA. 25ul of the sample was analysed by a nanoHPLC system (Eksigent, Axel Semrau) coupled to an ESI LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Sample was loaded on a C18 trapping column (Inertsil, LC Packings) with a flow rate of 10ul/min 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted and separated on an analytical column (75um x 150mm) packed with Inertsil 3um C18 material (LC Packings) with a flow rate of 200nl/min in a gradient of buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid, acetonitrile): 0-6min: 3% B; 6-60min: 3-40% B; 60-65min: 60-90% B. One survey scan (res: 60000) was followed by 6 information dependent product ion scans in the Orbitrap (res: 7500). 2+, 3+ and 4+ charged ions were selected for fragmentation.   1. The centriolar satellite protein SSX2IP promotes centrosome maturation. Bärenz F, Inoue D, Yokoyama H, Tegha-Dunghu J, Freiss S, Draeger S, Mayilo D, Cado I, Merker S, Klinger M, Hoeckendorf B, Pilz S, Hupfeld K, Steinbeisser H, Lorenz H, Ruppert T, Wittbrodt J, Gruss OJ. J Cell Biol. 2013 Jul 8;202(1):81-95. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201302122. Epub 2013 Jul 1.

### Data Protocol
DATABASE SEARCHING-- Tandem mass spectra were extracted by [unknown] version [unknown]. Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4.1). Mascot was set up to search the NCBInr_2014_11_12 database (selected for Danio rerio, unknown version, 55203 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0,50 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 100 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Deamidated of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications.   CRITERIA FOR PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION-- Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90,0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90,0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Co-immunoprecipitation, Elc, Myosin light chain

### Affiliations
ZMBH, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69122 Heidelberg
Centre of Molecular Biology University Heidelberg Im Neuenheimer Feld 282 D-69120 Heidelberg Germany

### Submitter
Thomas Ruppert

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Ruppert
Centre of Molecular Biology University Heidelberg Im Neuenheimer Feld 282 D-69120 Heidelberg Germany


