### Accession
PXD003914

### Title
Identification of Proteins Sensitive to Thermal Stress in Human Neuroblastoma and Glioma Cell Lines

### Description
Heat-shock is an acute insult to the mammalian proteome. The sudden elevation in temperature has far-reaching effects on protein metabolism, leads to a rapid inhibition of most protein synthesis, and the induction of protein chaperones. Using heat-shock in cells of neuronal (SH-SY5Y) and glial (CCF-STTG1) lineage, in conjunction with detergent extraction and sedimentation followed by LC-MS/MS proteomic approaches, we sought to identify human proteins that lose solubility upon heat-shock.

### Sample Protocol
SH-SY5Y and CCF-STTG1 cell lines were used in this study. SH-SY5Y cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 4 mM L-glutamine at 37°C in 100 mm dishes in a 5% CO2 incubator. CCF-STTG1 cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 with 10% FBS and 4 mM L-glutamine under the same conditions as SH-SY5Y cells. Each experiment involved 8 dishes per cell line. At 70–80% confluence, 4 dishes were moved to a 42°C incubator with 5% CO2 1 hour before harvesting while 4 dishes were kept at the original 37°C incubator as controls.   After the treatments, the cells were harvested by scraping in PBS, and then sequential detergent extraction was used to fractionate the proteins according to their solubility .  Step 1) The fresh cell pellet (cells from multiple dishes were combined to produce one cell pellet) was resuspended in 5 ml of PBS with 50 µl protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) before sonication on ice for 5–10 seconds to lyse the cells. The lysate was then centrifuged at 100,000×g for 30 minutes before the supernatant was collected and saved as the PBS-soluble (PBS-S) fraction. The pellet was washed by resuspension in 5 ml PBS (no protease inhibitor was used from this step forward) by brief sonication, followed by centrifugation at 100,000×g for 30 minutes at 4°C. The resultant supernatant was discarded.  Step 2) The pellet was resuspended in 5 ml of TEN buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.5, 1 mM EDTA and 100 mM NaCl) with 0.5% Nonidet-P40 (NP40) by brief sonication. An aliquot of this suspension was removed and saved as the PBS-insoluble (PBS-P) fraction. The remainder of the re-solubilized PBS-P fraction was centrifuged at 100,000×g for 30 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was collected aliquoted and saved as the NP40-soluble fraction (NP40-S). The pellet was washed by resuspension in 5 ml of the same buffer by brief sonication before centrifugation at 100,000×g for 30 minutes. The resultant supernatant was discarded.  Step 3) The pellet was resuspended in 5 ml TEN buffer with 2% sodium deoxycholate (DOC) by brief sonication. A aliquot of this suspension was removed and saved as the NP40-insoluble fraction (NP40-P) before the remaining suspension was centrifuged at 100,000×g for 30 minutes at room temperature. The supernatant was collected, aliquoted, and saved as the DOC-soluble (DOC-S) fraction. The pellet was washed by resuspension in 5 ml of the same buffer by brief sonication before centrifugation at 100,000×g for 30 minutes. The resultant supernatant was discarded.  Step 4) The pellet was resuspended in 1 ml of TEN buffer with 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) by brief sonication and 100–200 µl was removed and saved as the DOC-insoluble (DOC-P) fraction. To the remaining fraction, 4 ml of TEN with 1% SDS was added, mixed well, followed by centrifugation at 100,000×g for 30 minutes. The supernatant was collected as the SDS-soluble (SDS-S) fraction. The pellet after this extraction was very small.  This sequential extraction procedure produced 9 samples: Total crude cell lysate, PBS-S (PBS soluble), NP40-S (NP-40 soluble), DOC-S (deoxycholate soluble), SDS-S (SDS soluble); PBS-P (PBS insoluble fraction), NP40-P (NP-40 insoluble fraction), DOC-P (deoxycholate insoluble fraction) and SDS-P (SDS insoluble). Proteins from different fractions (45ul each) were separated by 4–20% Tris-Glycine sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), and visualized by Coomassie blue staining. From the Coomassie blue stained SDS-PAGE gel, each lane was separated out and then subsequently cut into 5–9 pieces, from the lowest to highest molecular weight. Standard in-gel trypsin digestion was used prior to LC-MS/MS protein identification following a protocol used by the Protein Chemistry Core (ICBR, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL).

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted by Analyst QS (version 1.1). Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2.0) to search IPI databases [IPI HUMAN (version 3.32, 67524 entries)] assuming digestion with trypsin. For bioinformatic analysis, we used X! Tandem (version 2007.01.01.1) to search a subset of the IPI HUMAN database (version 3.80, 556 entries). Both Mascot and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.30 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 0.30 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified in Mascot and X! Tandem as a fixed modification. S-carbamoylmethylcysteine cyclization of the N-terminus, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine, and ubiquitination of lysine were specified in Mascot and X! Tandem as variable modifications. Scaffold (version 2_01_02, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Later, data were converted and modified with a new version Scaffold (version 3_00_07).

### Publication Abstract
Heat-shock is an acute insult to the mammalian proteome. The sudden elevation in temperature has far-reaching effects on protein metabolism, leads to a rapid inhibition of most protein synthesis, and the induction of protein chaperones. Using heat-shock in cells of neuronal (SH-SY5Y) and glial (CCF-STTG1) lineage, in conjunction with detergent extraction and sedimentation followed by LC-MS/MS proteomic approaches, we sought to identify human proteins that lose solubility upon heat-shock. The two cell lines showed largely overlapping profiles of proteins detected by LC-MS/MS. We identified 58 proteins in detergent insoluble fractions as losing solubility in after heat shock; 10 were common between the 2 cell lines. A subset of the proteins identified by LC-MS/MS was validated by immunoblotting of similarly prepared fractions. Ultimately, we were able to definitively identify 3 proteins as putatively metastable neural proteins; FEN1, CDK1, and TDP-43. We also determined that after heat-shock these cells accumulate insoluble polyubiquitin chains largely linked via lysine 48 (K-48) residues. Collectively, this study identifies human neural proteins that lose solubility upon heat-shock. These proteins may represent components of the human proteome that are vulnerable to misfolding in settings of proteostasis stress.

### Keywords
Heatshock, Ccf-sttg1, Cultured cell, Detergent insoluble, Sh-sy5y

### Affiliations
Neuroscience
Department of Neuroscience, University of Florida

### Submitter
Guilian Xu

### Lab Head
Dr David R. Borchelt
Department of Neuroscience, University of Florida


