### Accession
PXD023358

### Title
Comprehensive Analysis of Tryptic Peptides Arising from Disulfide Linkages in NISTmAb

### Description
This work presents methods for identifying and then creating a mass spectral library for disulfide-linked peptides originating from the NISTmAb, a reference material of humanized IgG1k monoclonal antibody (RM 8671). Analyses involved both partially-reduced and non-reduced samples under neutral and weakly basic conditions, followed by nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
General experimental conditions (pH=8). NISTmAb (500 μg) was denatured at room temperature for 10 min using guanidine hydrochloride (6M) in 50 μL of 100 mmol/L Tris HCI (Tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane hydrochloride) buffer (pH=8). Reduction and alkylation were varied as follows: (a) the sample was neither reduced nor alkylated, or (b) the sample was partially reduced by adding 5 μL of 200 mmol/L TCEP to the above denatured mixture and incubating at room temperature for 1 h, followed by alkylation with 10 μL of 200 mmol/L IAM at room temperature in the dark for 1 h. The alkylated protein solution was desalted with a Zeba spin column (7K MWCO) prior to adding 10 μg of Promega trypsin. The resulting mixture was subjected to digestion by sequencing-grade trypsin at 37oC for (0.25, 2 and 18) h.   Controlled experimental conditions (pH=7). No reduction. 58 mg of guanidine in the 50 ul of tris buffer (pH=7) was added to 500 ug of NISTmAb solution(50ul). The solution was stirred at room temperature for 10 minutes. Alkylation was performed by adding 10 uL of 200 mmol/L NEM to the above denatured mixture and incubating at room temperature in dark for 1 h. Then the alkylated protein solution was subjected to desalting by Zeba spin column (7K MWCO). 10 ug of trypsin was added to digest the above solution at 37˚C for 15min, 2h and 18 h. The reaction was quenched by formic acid (50 %).  Reduction with TCEP and alkylation with NEM. 500 ug of NISTmAb (50ul) was denatured using 29 mg of guanidine, reduction was performed by adding 5 uL of 200 mmol/L TCEP to the above denatured mixture and incubating at room temperature for 1 h, followed by alkylation with 20 uL of 200 mmol/L NEM at room temperature in the dark for 1 h. Then the alkylated protein solution was subjected to desalting by Zeba spin column (7K MWCO). 10 ug of trypsin was added to digest the above protein solution at 37˚C for 15min, 2h and 18 h. The reaction was quenched by formic acid (50 %).

### Data Protocol
We used a previously-developed alternative workflow for characterizing hard-to-identify peptides and modifications derived from the NISTmAb in a LC-MS/MS analysis.5 Our method starts with searching MS1 ion clusters to find all candidates of interest from each individual run, and then assigning the MS2 spectra of these candidates based on the known structures of the precursor protein to validate their identities.

### Publication Abstract
This work presents methods for identifying and then creating a mass spectral library for disulfide-linked peptides originating from the NISTmAb, a reference material of the humanized IgG1k monoclonal antibody (RM 8671). Analyses involved both partially reduced and non-reduced samples under neutral and weakly basic conditions followed by nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Spectra of peptides containing disulfide bonds are identified by both MS1 ion and MS2 fragment ion data in order to completely map all the disulfide linkages in the NISTmAb. This led to the detection of 383 distinct disulfide-linked peptide ions, arising from fully tryptic cleavage, missed cleavage, irregular cleavage, complex Met/Trp oxidation mixtures, and metal adducts. Fragmentation features of disulfide bonds under low-energy collision dissociation were examined. These include (1) peptide bond cleavage leaving disulfide bonds intact; (2) disulfide bond cleavage, often leading to extensive fragmentation; and (3) double cleavage products resulting from breakages of two peptide bonds or both peptide and disulfide bonds. Automated annotation of various complex MS/MS fragments enabled the identification of disulfide-linked peptides with high confidence. Peptides containing each of the nine native disulfide bonds were identified along with 86 additional disulfide linkages arising from disulfide bond shuffling. The presence of shuffled disulfides was nearly completely abrogated by refining digest conditions. A curated spectral library of 702 disulfide-linked peptide spectra was created from this analysis and is publicly available for free download. Since all IgG1 antibodies have the same constant regions, the resulting library can be used as a tool for facile identification of "hard-to-find" disulfide-bonded peptides. Moreover, we show that one may identify such peptides originating from IgG1 proteins in human serum, thereby serving as a means of monitoring the completeness of protein reduction in proteomics studies. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD023358.

### Keywords
Mass spectral library, Cysteine, Disulfide-linked peptides, Disulfide bond, Disulfide, Nistmab

### Affiliations
NIST
Biomolecular Measurement Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)

### Submitter
Qian Dong

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen E. Stein
Biomolecular Measurement Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)


