### Accession
PXD033952

### Title
Proteomics coupled with in vitro model to study the early crosstalk occurring between newly excysted juveniles of Fasciola hepatica and host intestinal cells

### Description
Here, we develop a new in vitro model replicating the first interaction of FhNEJ with mouse primary small intestinal epithelial cells (MPSIEC). FhNEJ and MPSIEC were incubated for 3 hours and protein extracts (tegument and soma for FhNEJ and membrane and cytosol for MPSIEC) were subjected to quantitative SWATH-MS proteomics compared with respective controls to evaluate the changes in both the parasite and the host.

### Sample Protocol
20 µg of each sample were dissolved in 20 µl of Laemmli Sample Buffer (Bio-Rad) supplemented with β-mercaptoethanol and heated for 5 min at 95°C, after which they were loaded onto an Any kD precast 1D PAGE gel (Bio-Rad) and run at 200 V for 5 min. After separation, samples were treated with a fixing solution consisting of 40% ethanol/10% acetic acid, and stained with colloidal Coomasie. Gel bands were cut into pieces and treated with dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide, after which protein digestion was performed with 700 ng of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) overnight. The reaction was stopped with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and two successive extractions with acetonitrile (ACN) were applied to recover the resulting peptides. Finally, each sample was dried on a rotary evaporator and resuspended in 20 µl of 2% ACN; 0.1% TFA. For library construction, all F. hepatica samples were pooled together and loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, 3 µ C18-CL, Nikkyo) equilibrated in 5% ACN 0.1% formic acid. Elution was performed in a linear gradient of 5-35% solvent B (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) at 300 nl/min flow rate over 120 min and analysed in a mass spectrometer nanoESI qQTOF (5600 TripleTOF, ABSCIEX). Analysis was carried out in a data-dependent mode (DDA). Survey MS1 scans were acquired from 350–1250 m/z for 250 ms, whereas the quadrupole resolution was set to ‘UNIT’ for MS2 experiments, which were acquired 100–1500 m/z for 150 ms in high sensitivity mode. Mus musculus samples were treated using the same workflow, in order to generate a mouse-specific peptide library. Individual samples were acquired with the tripleTOF operating in SWATH mode (DIA), in which a 0.050-s TOF MS scan from 350–1250 m/z was performed, followed by 0.080-s product ion scans from 350–1250 m/z on the 32 defined windows (3.05 sec/cycle).

### Data Protocol
The .wiff files corresponding to the peptide libraries were processed via Protein Pilot v5.0 (SCIEX) to generate a peak list used as reference for individual sample quantitation. The Paragon algorithm was applied to reference databases with the following parameters: trypsin specificity, IAM cys-alkylation, taxonomy no restricted. Only proteins with at least 2 identified peptides and < 1% FDR were considered for subsequent analysis. Databases used contained the predicted proteome of F. hepatica (PRJEB25283), appended to the cRAP contaminant database in the case of F. hepatica samples, or the Mus musculus proteome combined with the same contaminant database. The .wiff files obtained from SWATH individual acquisitions were analysed using PeakView 2.1 (SCIEX) and MarkerView 3.0 (SCIEX). Protein areas calculated were normalized by the total sum of the areas of all the quantified proteins, and proteins identified within the contaminant database were removed from the dataset prior to the differential expression analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Fasciolosis caused by the trematode Fasciola hepatica is a zoonotic neglected disease affecting animals and humans worldwide. Infection occurs upon ingestion of aquatic plants or water contaminated with metacercariae. These release the newly excysted juveniles (FhNEJ) in the host duodenum, where they establish contact with the epithelium and cross the intestinal barrier to reach the peritoneum within 2-3 h after infection. Juveniles crawl up the peritoneum towards the liver, and migrate through the hepatic tissue before reaching their definitive location inside the major biliary ducts, where they mature into adult worms. Fasciolosis is treated with triclabendazole, although resistant isolates of the parasite are increasingly being reported. This, together with the limited efficacy of the assayed vaccines against this infection, poses fasciolosis as a veterinary and human health problem of growing concern. In this context, the study of early host-parasite interactions is of paramount importance for the definition of new targets for the treatment and prevention of fasciolosis. Here, we develop a new in vitro model that replicates the first interaction between FhNEJ and mouse primary small intestinal epithelial cells (MPSIEC). FhNEJ and MPSIEC were co-incubated for 3 h and protein extracts (tegument and soma of FhNEJ and membrane and cytosol of MPSIEC) were subjected to quantitative SWATH-MS proteomics and compared to respective controls (MPSIEC and FhNEJ left alone for 3h in culture medium) to evaluate protein expression changes in both the parasite and the host. Results show that the interaction between FhNEJ and MPSIEC triggers a rapid protein expression change of FhNEJ in response to the host epithelial barrier, including cathepsins L3 and L4 and several immunoregulatory proteins. Regarding MPSIEC, stimulation with FhNEJ results in alterations in the protein profile related to immunomodulation and cell-cell interactions, together with a drastic reduction in the expression of proteins linked with ribosome function. The molecules identified in this model of early host-parasite interactions could help define new tools against fasciolosis.

### Keywords
Fasciola hepatica; newly excysted juveniles;  swath-ms; quantitative proteomics; differential expression; host-parasite interaction

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Parasitology, Institute of Natural Resources and Agrobiology of Salamanca (IRNASA-CSIC), C/Cordel de Merinas 40-52, 37008 Salamanca, Spain
CSIC

### Submitter
David Becerro Recio

### Lab Head
Dr Mar Siles-Lucas
Laboratory of Parasitology, Institute of Natural Resources and Agrobiology of Salamanca (IRNASA-CSIC), C/Cordel de Merinas 40-52, 37008 Salamanca, Spain


