### Accession
PXD022105

### Title
Dimerisation of the PICTS complex via LC8/Cut-up drives co-transcriptional transposon silencing in Drosophila

### Description
In animal gonads, the PIWI-interacting RNA (piRNA) pathway guards genome integrity in part through the co-transcriptional gene silencing of transposon insertions. In Drosophila ovaries, piRNA-loaded Piwi detects nascent transposon transcripts and instructs heterochromatin formation through the Panoramix-induced co-transcriptional silencing (PICTS) complex, containing Panoramix, Nxf2 and Nxt1. Here, we report that the highly conserved dynein light chain LC8/Cut-up (Ctp) is an essential component of the PICTS complex. Loss of Ctp results in transposon de-repression and a reduction in repressive chromatin marks specifically at transposon loci. In turn, Ctp can enforce transcriptional silencing when artificially recruited to RNA and DNA reporters. We show that Ctp drives dimerisation of the PICTS complex through its interaction with conserved motifs within Panoramix. Artificial dimerisation of Panoramix bypasses the necessity for its interaction with Ctp, demonstrating that conscription of a protein from a ubiquitous cellular machinery has fulfilled a fundamental requirement for a transposon silencing complex.

### Sample Protocol
For the 3xFLAG-Panx IP-MS, 1 x 107 OSCs were nucleofected with 5 µg 3xFLAG- fusion expression plus 2 µl siRNA against endogenous Panx. Cells were harvested 48 hours post transfection and fractionated according to the following protocol. The subcellular fractionation protocol was adapted from Batki et al., 2019. Cell pellets resuspended in LB1 (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 2 mM MgCl2, 3 mM CaCl2 supplemented with protease inhibitors (Roche)) for 5 minutes at 4 °C followed by centrifugation (1,000g, 5 minutes, 4 °C). The cell pellet was resuspended and incubated in LB2 (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 2 mM MgCl2, 3 mM CaCl2 0.5% Nonidet P-40 and 10% glycerol, supplemented with protease inhibitors (Roche)) for 5 minutes at 4 °C followed by another centrifugation step (1,000g, 5 minutes, 4 °C). The nuclei pellet was resuspended in LB3 (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.5% Triton X-100, 0.25% Nonidet P-40 and 10% glycerol, supplemented with protease inhibitors (Roche)). After a 10 minute incubation on ice, the nuclear lysate was sonicated for 3 cycles of 30 seconds ON / 30 seconds OFF using a Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode) to ensure solubilisation of chromatin. After sonication, the nuclear fraction was additionally treated for 30 minutes with Benzonase (50 U/ml) at 4 °C followed by centrifugation. Nuclear lysate was incubated with 50 µl anti-FLAG M2 magnetic agarose beads (Sigma M8823) overnight at 4°C, washed three times for 15 minutes in LB3, twice in ice-cold TBS (pH 8.0) and twice in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate before being submitted for mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were digested with trypsin and analysed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Spectral .raw files were processed with the SequestHT search engine on Thermo ScientificTM Proteome Discoverer™ 2.2. Data was searched against a custom database derived from FlyBase (“dmel-all-translation-r6.24”) at a 1% spectrum level FDR criteria using Percolator (University of Washington). The node for SequestHT included the following parameters: Precursor Mass Tolerance 20 ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance 0.02 Da, Dynamic Modifications were methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da), asparagine and glutamine deamination (+0.984 Da). The Precursor Ion Quantifier node (Minora Feature Detector) included a Minimum Trace Length of 5, Max. ΔRT of Isotope Pattern 0.2 minutes. The consensus workflow included peptide validator, protein filter and scorer. For calculation of Precursor ion intensities, Feature mapper was set True for RT alignment, with the mass tolerance of 10ppm. Precursor abundance was quantified based on intensity and the level of confidence for peptide identifications was estimated using the Percolator node with a Strict FDR at q-value < 0.01. Analysis of label-free quantification protein intensity data was carried out in R (version 3.5.1) using the qPLEXanalyzer package (version 1.0.3) (Papachristou et al., 2018). Only unique peptides identified with high confidence (peptide FDR < 1%) and mapping to a single protein were used for analysis. Peptide intensities were normalised between samples by median scaling within sample groups. Peptides for which all control samples lacked measurements or for which more than 1 target protein sample lacked measurements were discarded. Remaining missing values were then imputed using the nearest neighbour averaging (knn) imputation method provided in the R package MSnbase (version 2.8.3) (Gatto L & Lilley K 2012). Peptide data was summarised to protein level by summing intensities for all peptides. Differential analysis was then carried out by linear modelling using the limma based methods provided by the qPLEXanalyzer package. Multiple testing correction of p-values was applied using the Benjamini & Yekutieli method to control FDR (Benjamini et al., 2001).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pirna, Drosophila

### Affiliations
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute 
University of Cambridge
Cancer Research UK- Cambridge Institute Li Ka Shing Centre Robinson way Cambridge CB2 0RE UK

### Submitter
Evelyn Eastwood

### Lab Head
Dr Gregory Hannon
Cancer Research UK- Cambridge Institute Li Ka Shing Centre Robinson way Cambridge CB2 0RE UK


