### Accession
PXD008741

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the cell cycle of procylic form Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
We describe a single-step centrifugal elutriation method to produce synchronous G1-phase procyclic trypanosomes at a scale amenable for proteomic analysis of the cell cycle. Using ten-plex tandem mass tag technology, we quantified 5,325 proteins across the cell cycle in this parasite, providing a useful resource for the scientific community. Of these, 384 proteins were classified as cell cycle regulated and these were subdivided into nine distinct clusters of temporal regulation. A number of known cell cycle regulators in trypanosomes were detected in these groups, validating our approach, as well as forty novel and essential cell cycle regulated proteins that could be considered as future drug targets. Through cross-comparison to the TrypTag microscopy database, we were able to validate the cell cycle regulated patterns of expression for many of these proteins of unknown function. A convenient interface to access and interrogate these data is also presented.

### Sample Protocol
A population of G1-phase enriched procyclic form Trypanosoma brucei was prepared utilising single-cut elutriation. Samples were harvested at 0.5, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 h after the initiation of cell cultures. Cells were lysed in 4% SDS, 10 mM sodium phosphate (pH 6.0), 100 mM NaCl, 25 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride and 50 mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM), then sonicated in a Bioruptor Pico, heated to 65°C for 10 min, followed by chloroform-methanol precipitation. Precipitated protein pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea, 1 mM CaCl2 in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and digested overnight with LysC, at a 1:100 ratio of protein to protease, at 37°C. Samples were then diluted to 1 M urea with 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and 1 mM CaCl2 and trypsin added at the same ratio. Digestion proceeded for 6 h prior to acidification of samples with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 1%. Each time-point was seprately loaded onto a 500 mg SepPak cartridge, washed with 0.1% TFA and eluted in 50% AcN and 0.1% TFA, dehydrated and resuspended in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5). Samples were labelled separately using TMT ten-plex reagents, mixed together, and purified on a SepPak column as described. Dehydrated TMT labelled peptides were resuspended in 2% AcN 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 9.0) and fractionated into 24 fractions using high-pH reverse phase chromatography on an Xbridge BEH C18 column (130 Å, 3.5 µm, 4.6 x 150 mm). Three biological replicates were performed. The 24 fractions from three biological replicates were dehydrated and resuspended in 5% formic acid.  A total of 1 μg of peptide for each of the 24 samples was injected onto a C18 nano-trap using a Thermo Scientific Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system. Peptides were washed with 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and resolved on a 150 mm x 75 μm C18 reverse phase analytical column over a gradient from 2% to 28% acetonitrile over 120 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Peptides were ionised by nano-electrospray ionisation at 2.5 kV. Data was acquired for each sample in triplicate. Survey scans carried out on the Fusion mass spectrometer were carried out on the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 over a range of 350-1400 m/z with an AGC target of 2x105 and a maxIT of 300 ms. Monoisotopic ion precursor selection was turned on, and only ions with a charge state between 2-7 and a minimum intensity of 5x103 were selected for fragmentation. Ions selected were excluded from further selection for 40 s. A 1.6 m/z isolation width was used to select ions from the MS1 survey scan for Collision Induced Dissociation fragmentation at a normalised collision energy of 30%. Scans of fragment ions were acquired on the ion trap in Rapid Scan mode with an AGC target of 1x104 and a 70 ms maxIT. Fragment ions were selected for further fragmentation using Synchronous Precursor Selection. Fragment ions were selected from 400-1200 m/z and excluded ions 20 m/z below or 5 m/z above the precursor ion mass, and m/z ratios correlating to the loss of TMT from the precursor ion. The top 10 most intense fragment ions were selected for HCD fragmentation with a 55% normalised collision energy and an isolation width of 2 m/z. MS3 scans were acquired on the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 from 100-500 m/z, an AGC target of 1x105 and a maxIT of 150 ms. The cycle time between MS1 survey scans was set to 2 seconds.

### Data Protocol
RAW data files were analysed using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8, with the in-built Andromeda search engine, supplied with the T. brucei brucei 927 annotated protein database from TriTrypDB release 26.0. The mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and MS/MS mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm. The enzyme was set to trypsin and endopeptidase LysC, allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. NEM on cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Acetylation of protein N termini, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, pyro-glutamate (with N-terminal glutamine), oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. The false-discovery rate for protein and peptide level identifications was set at 1%, using a target-decoy based strategy. Only unique peptides were utilised for quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
We describe a single-step centrifugal elutriation method to produce synchronous Gap1 (G1)-phase procyclic trypanosomes at a scale amenable for proteomic analysis of the cell cycle. Using ten-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling and mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics technology, the expression levels of 5325 proteins were quantified across the cell cycle in this parasite. Of these, 384 proteins were classified as cell-cycle regulated and subdivided into nine clusters with distinct temporal regulation. These groups included many known cell cycle regulators in trypanosomes, which validates the approach. In addition, we identify 40 novel cell cycle regulated proteins that are essential for trypanosome survival and thus represent potential future drug targets for the prevention of trypanosomiasis. Through cross-comparison to the TrypTag endogenous tagging microscopy database, we were able to validate the cell-cycle regulated patterns of expression for many of the proteins of unknown function detected in our proteomic analysis. A convenient interface to access and interrogate these data is also presented, providing a useful resource for the scientific community. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD008741 (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/).

### Keywords
Procyclic, Cell cycle, Proteomics, Tmt, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
Gene Regulation & Expression, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, UK.
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Thomas Crozier

### Lab Head
Dr Angus Lamond
Gene Regulation & Expression, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, UK.


