### Accession
PXD030664

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Masson pine with high resistance to pine wood nematode

### Description
Pine wilt disease is a worldwide dangerous pine disease. We used Masson pine (Pinus massoniana) clones, selected through traditional breeding and testing for 20 years, with high resistance to study the molecular mechanism of resistance to pine wood nematode (PWN, Bursaphelenchus xylophilus). A total of 3491 proteins were identified from seedling tissue, among which 2783 proteins contained quantitative information.  Total 42 proteins were up-regulated and 96 proteins were down-regulated in resistant lines. Of them, function enrichment analysis found that significant differences in proteins with pectin esterase activity or peroxidase activity. Proteins participating in salicylic acid metabolism, antioxidant stress reaction, polysaccharide degradation, glucose acid ester sheath lipid biosynthesis, sugar glycosaminoglycans degradation pathway also changed significantly. PRM results showed that pectin acetyl esterase, carbonic anhydrase, peroxidase and chitinase were significantly down-regulated, while aspartic protease was significantly up-regulated, which was consistent with proteomic data.These results suggested that Masson pine could degrade nematode-related proteins by increasing protease to inhibit their infestation, and enhance the resistance of Masson pine to PWN by down-regulating the carbon metabolism to limit available carbon to PWN or to be involved in cell wall components or tissue softening. Most downregulated proteins seem to take back seats prior to pathogen attacks. The highly resistant Masson pine, very likely, has evolved multiple pathways, both the passive and active, to defense against PWN infestation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and trypsin digestion The samples were first grinded with liquid nitrogen, then the powder was transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (including 1% TritonX-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 50 μM PR-619, 3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM, 2 mM EDTA, and 1% phosphatase inhibitor for phosphorylation). An equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0) was added. The mixture was further vortexed for 5 min. After centrifugation (4°C, 10 min, 5 000g), the upper phenol phase was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. Proteins were precipitated by adding at least four volumes of ammonium sulfate-saturated methanol and incubated at -20°C for at least 6 h. After centrifugation at 4°C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with ice-cold methanol, followed by ice-cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The sample was trypsinized according to the instruction from Jingjie PTM BioLab (Hangzhou) Co. Ltd. Finally, the peptides were desalted by C18 SPE column.  TMT labeling Tryptic peptides were firstly dissolved in 0.5 M TEAB. Each channel of peptide was labeled with their respective TMT reagent (based on manufacturer’s protocol, Thermo Scientific), and incubated for 2 hours at room temperature. Five microliters of each sample were pooled, desalted and analyzed by MS to check labeling efficiency. After labeling efficiency check, samples were quenched by adding 5% hydroxylamine. The pooled samples were then desalted with Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  HPLC fractionation  The sample was fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 9 over 64 min into 54 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 9 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging.   LC-MS/MS analysis  After the peptides were dissolved in the mobile phase A of liquid chromatograph and then separated using the EASY-nLC 1200 ultra-high performance liquid system. The whole procedure was guided by Jingjie PTM BioLab (Hangzhou) Co. Ltd. The data acquisition mode uses the data-dependent scanning (DDA) program. In order to improve the effective utilization of the mass spectrometer, the automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 5E4, the signal threshold was set to 2.5 E5 ions/s, the maximum injection time was set to 40 ms, and the dynamic rejection time of the tandem mass spectrometry scanning was set to 30 s to avoid repeated scanning of precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative verification of targeted proteome based on mass spectrometry (PRM)   LS-MS analysis After the peptides were separated by the ultra-high performance liquid system, they were injected into the NSI ion source for ionization and then entered the Q ExactiveTM Plus mass spectrometer for analysis. The ion source voltage was set to 2.1 kV, and both the peptide precursor ions and their secondary fragments were detected and analyzed using the high-resolution Orbitrap (Jingjie PTM BioLab (Hangzhou) Co. Ltd).  Statistical analysis of data  First, the average value of the quantitative values of each sample in multiple repetitions was calculated, and then the ratio of the average values between the two samples was calculated, which is taken as the final differential expression of the control group. The second step was to calculate the significance p-value of the differential expression of the protein in the two samples. Take the log2 for the relative quantitative value of each sample (to make the data conform to the normal distribution), and then use the two-sample two-tailed T test method to calculate p-value. When p-value<0.05, the change in differential expression exceeding 1.3 was used as the change threshold for a significant up-regulation, and the change less than 0.7 was used as the change threshold for a significant down-regulation.

### Publication Abstract
Pine wilt disease is a dangerous pine disease globally. We used Masson pine (Pinus massoniana) clones, selected through traditional breeding and testing for 20 years, to study the molecular mechanism of their high resistance to pine wood nematodes (PWN,Bursaphelenchus xylophilus). Nine strains of seedlings of genetically stable Masson pine screened from different families with high resistance to PWN were used. The same number of sensitive clones were used as susceptible controls. Total proteins were extracted for tandem mass tag (TMT) quantitative proteomic analysis. The key proteins were verified by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). A threshold of upregulation greater than 1.3-fold or downregulation greater than 0.3-fold was considered significant in highly resistant strains versus sensitive strains. A total of 3491 proteins were identified from the seedling tissues, among which 2783 proteins contained quantitative information. A total of 42 proteins were upregulated and 96 proteins were downregulated in the resistant strains. Functional enrichment analysis found significant differences in the proteins with pectin esterase activity or peroxidase activity. The proteins participating in salicylic acid metabolism, antioxidant stress reaction, polysaccharide degradation, glucose acid ester sheath lipid biosynthesis, and the sugar glycosaminoglycan degradation pathway were also changed significantly. The PRM results showed that pectin acetyl esterase, carbonic anhydrase, peroxidase, and chitinase were significantly downregulated, while aspartic protease was significantly upregulated, which was consistent with the proteomic data. These results suggest that Masson pine can degrade nematode-related proteins by increasing protease to inhibit their infestation, and can enhance the resistance of Masson pine to PWN by downregulating carbon metabolism to limit the carbon available to PWN or for involvement in cell wall components or tissue softening. Most of the downregulated proteins are supposed to act as an alternative mechanism for latter enhancement after pathogen attacks. The highly resistant Masson pine, very likely, harbors multiple pathways, both passive and active, to defend against PWN infestation.

### Keywords
Masson pine; pine wood nematode; resistant proteins; proteomic analysis

### Affiliations
Anhui Vocational and Technical College of Forestry
State Key Laboratory of the National Forestry and Grassland Administration for Pine Wood Nematode Disease Prevention and Control Technology, Anhui Academy of Forestry, Hefei 230001, China

### Submitter
Jingbin Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Jingbin Gao
State Key Laboratory of the National Forestry and Grassland Administration for Pine Wood Nematode Disease Prevention and Control Technology, Anhui Academy of Forestry, Hefei 230001, China


