### Accession
PXD020846

### Title
Mass spectrometric characterization of HSV-1 L-particles from human dendritic cells and BHK21 cells and analysis of their functional role Part B

### Description
Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) is a very common human pathogenic virus among the world’s 12 population. The lytic replication cycle of HSV-1 is, amongst others, characterized by a tripartite viral 13 gene expression cascade, the assembly of nucleocapsids involving their subsequent nuclear egress, 14 tegumentation, re-envelopment and the final release of progeny viral particles. During productive 15 infection of a multitude of different cell types, HSV-1 generates not only infectious heavy (H-) 16 particles, but also non-infectious light (L-) particles, lacking the capsid. In monocyte-derived mature 17 dendritic cells (mDCs), HSV-1 causes a non-productive infection with the predominant release of L-18 particles. Until now, the generation and function of L-particles is not well understood, however, they 19 are described as factors transferring viral components to the cellular microenvironment. To obtain 20 deeper insights into the L-particle composition, we performed a mass-spectrometry-based analysis of 21 L-particles derived from HSV-1-infected mDCs or BHK21 cells and H-particles from the latter one. 22 In total, we detected 63 viral proteins in both H- and L-particle preparations derived from HSV-1-23 infected BHK21 cells. In L-particles from HSV-1-infected mDCs we identified 41 viral proteins 24 which are differentially distributed compared to L-particles from BHK21 cells. In this study, we 25 present data suggesting that L-particles modify mDCs and suppress their T cell stimulatory capacity. 26 Due to the plethora of specific viral proteins incorporated into and transmitted by L-particles, it is 27 tempting to speculate that L-particles manipulate non-infected bystander cells for the benefit of the 28 virus.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometric analyses, the L- and H-particle preparations from HSV-1-infected BHK21 187 cells and mDCs were lysed in 4x Roti-Load 1 (Carl Roth GmbH, Germany; final concentration: 1x) 188 and subsequently denatured at 95°C for 10 minutes. Samples were processed by a modified filter-189 aided sample preparation method (Wiśniewski et al., 2009; Lamm et al., 2017). The 10 kD cutoff 190 filter (Microcon YM-10, Vivacon 500; Sartorius) was washed once with 8 M Urea supplemented 191 with 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0; washing buffer). After each loading or washing step, the filter was 192 centrifuged at 12.000 xg until dryness. Approximately 3.5 μg (mDC particles) or 20 μg (BHK21 193 particles) of sample preparation was mixed with 200 μL washing buffer and a maximum of 300 μL 194 of the sample solution was loaded onto the filter unit. If the sample volume exceeded the maximal 195 volume, sample loading was repeated until the entire sample was loaded. The filter unit was washed 196 three times with washing buffer. Subsequently, samples were reduced using 25 mM DTT in washing 197 buffer at 37°C for 30 min at 600 rpm. Afterwards, samples were alkylated with 25 mM 198 chloroacetamide present in the washing buffer at RT for 30 min in the dark. Filter units were washed 199 with washing buffer until foam formation in the flow through disappeared. Protein-loaded filter units 200 were washed with 6 M Urea supplemented with 50 mM Tris (buffer B) and afterwards incubated 201 with buffer B supplemented with 50 μL of 0.5 μg Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) at 37°C for 3h at 600 202 rpm. Subsequently, a final concentration of 1 M urea was adjusted using 50 mM Tris buffer 203 (=dilution buffer) and protein samples were trypsinized using 1 μg trypsin at 37°C and 600 rpm 204 overnight. The filter units were washed with 100 μL washing buffer and the flow through was 205 collected in low binding tubes after centrifugation. The peptides were acidified up to a final 206 concentration of 0.5 % TFA. Subsequently, peptide samples were desalted using C18 membrane 207 stage tips, which were activated using 100 % acetonitrile (ACN). After a two minute centrifugation 208 step at 800 xg, peptide samples were loaded onto the columns. The columns were washed with 1 % 209 ACN supplemented with 0.1 % TFA and a defined amount of peptides was eluted into fresh 1.5 mL 210 low binding tubes, using 50 % ACN containing 0.1 % TFA. Afterwards, peptides were vacuum 211 concentrated and resuspended in 1 % ACN supplemented with 0.1 % TFA. All peptide samples were 212 separated by reverse phase chromatography with a linear increase of acetonitrile on a nano flow 213 Ultimated 3000 HPLC (Dionex) with a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Separated peptides were ionized by 214 an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 2.0 kV and 275°C of the transfer 215 capillary. All samples were analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion tribrid (Thermo Scientific) working in a 216 positive polarity mode. Detailed mass spectrometry scan settings were previously described (Kraner 217 et al., 2017).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using PEAKS Studio 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo,Ontario, Canada; (Zhang et al., 2012)) against a combined host-viral database using the HHV1 219 uniprot.org database (downloaded in November 2018 (BHK21 cell-derived particles) and July 2019 220 (mDC-derived particles)), Homo sapiens uniprot.org database (downloaded in July 2019, mDC-221 derived particles) or Mesocricetus auratus uniprot.org database (downloaded in May 2020, BHK21 222 cell-derived particles). Oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethylation of cysteines were set as 223 dynamic and static modifications, respectively. Proteins included into data interpretation must exhibit 224 a false discovery rate of <1 %. For evaluation of the data we normalized the intensity of each protein 225 to the mean of all glycoproteins detected in three mDC or four BHK21 particle preparations. The 226 analyzed data sets represent three or four replicates for mDC- or BHK21 cell-derived HSV-1 227 particles, respectively.Data evaluation was based on the “intensity” which is the sum of the ion peak intensities of unique 229 peptides, which are used for relative quantification within samples. The unique peptides in this case 230 mean the ones which are used for the MS1-based label free quantification between the samples. 231 Therefore, only one number is provided.

### Publication Abstract
Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) is a very common human pathogenic virus among the world's population. The lytic replication cycle of HSV-1 is, amongst others, characterized by a tripartite viral gene expression cascade, the assembly of nucleocapsids involving their subsequent nuclear egress, tegumentation, re-envelopment and the final release of progeny viral particles. During productive infection of a multitude of different cell types, HSV-1 generates not only infectious heavy (H-) particles, but also non-infectious light (L-) particles, lacking the capsid. In monocyte-derived mature dendritic cells (mDCs), HSV-1 causes a non-productive infection with the predominant release of L-particles. Until now, the generation and function of L-particles is not well understood, however, they are described as factors transferring viral components to the cellular microenvironment. To obtain deeper insights into the L-particle composition, we performed a mass-spectrometry-based analysis of L-particles derived from HSV-1-infected mDCs or BHK21 cells and H-particles from the latter one. In total, we detected 63 viral proteins in both H- and L-particle preparations derived from HSV-1-infected BHK21 cells. In L-particles from HSV-1-infected mDCs we identified 41 viral proteins which are differentially distributed compared to L-particles from BHK21 cells. In this study, we present data suggesting that L-particles modify mDCs and suppress their T cell stimulatory capacity. Due to the plethora of specific viral proteins incorporated into and transmitted by L-particles, it is tempting to speculate that L-particles manipulate non-infected bystander cells for the benefit of the virus.

### Keywords
Heavy particles, Hsv-1, Immunomodulatory effect, Dendritic cells, Bhk21 cells, 9 t cell stimulation, Light particles, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Immune Modulation, Universitaetsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany
FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg

### Submitter
Joerg Hofmann

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Steinkasserer
Department of Immune Modulation, Universitaetsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany


