### Accession
PXD012292

### Title
SDG2 and S2Lb affinity purification and mass spectrometry

### Description
The functional determinants of histone H3 Lys-4 trimethylation (H3K4me3), their potential dependency on histone H2B monoubiquitination (H2Bub) and their contribution to defining transcriptional regimes are poorly defined in plant systems. Unlike in S. cerevisiae, where a single SET1 protein catalyzes H3 Lys-4 trimethylation as part of COMPASS (COMPlex of proteins ASsociated with Set1), in Arabidopsis thaliana this activity involves multiple histone methyltransferases (HMTs). Among these, the plant-specific SDG2 (SET DOMAIN GROUP2) has a prominent role. We report that SDG2 co-regulates hundreds of genes with SWD2-like b (S2Lb), a plant ortholog of the Swd2 axillary subunit of yeast COMPASS. S2Lb co-purifies with the AtCOMPASS core subunit WDR5 from a high-molecular weight complex, and both S2Lb and SDG2 directly influence H3K4me3 enrichment over highly transcribed genes. S2Lb knockout triggers pleiotropic developmental phenotypes at the vegetative and reproductive stages, including reduced fertility and seed dormancy. Notwithstanding, s2lb seedlings display little transcriptomic defects as compared to the large repertoire of genes targeted by S2Lb, SDG2 or H3 Lys-4 trimethylation, suggesting that H3K4me3 enrichment is important for optimal gene induction during cellular transitions rather than for determining on/off transcriptional status. Moreover, unlike in budding yeast, most of the S2Lb and H3K4me3 genomic distribution does not rely on a trans-histone crosstalk with histone H2B monoubiquitination. Collectively, this study unveils that the evolutionarily conserved COMPASS-like complex has been coopted by the plant-specific SDG2 HMT and mediates H3K4me3 deposition through an H2Bub-independent pathway in Arabidopsis.

### Sample Protocol
For each biological replicate, protein samples were immuno-isolated from 2g of either wild-type, pSDG2::myc-SDG2, or pS2Lb::S2Lb-GFP 10-day-old seedlings as described above using either GFP-or MYC-TRAP slurries (Chromotek # gtma-20 and #yta-20, respectively) in modified RIPA buffer to allow for SDG2 affinity purification. For mass spectrometry, SDS/PAGE was used without separation as a clean-up step, and only one gel slice was excised. Gel slices were washed and proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT before alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide. After washing and shrinking the gel pieces with 100% (vol/vol) MeCN, in-gel digestion was performed using trypsin/LysC (Promega) overnight in 25 mM NH4HCO3 at 30 °C. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a C18-reversed phase column (75-μm inner diameter × 2 cm; nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM 100, Thermo Scientific), separated and MS data acquired using Xcalibur software. Peptides separation was performed over a linear gradient of 100 min from 5% to 30% (vol/vol) acetonitrile (75-μm inner diameter × 50 cm; nanoViper C18, 2 μm, 100Å, Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC, Thermo Scientific). Full-scan MS was acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution set to 120,000 and ions from each full scan were HCD fragmented and analyzed in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
data were searched against the Arabidopsis thaliana TAIR10 database (2016 12 08, 35386 sequences) using Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavage site were allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation, and carbamidomethyl cysteine were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.4 Da for MS/MS peaks.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chromatin, Ap-ms, Arabidopsis, Histone methyltransferase

### Affiliations
Institut Curie
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique Institut Curie PSL Research University

### Submitter
Guillaume Arras

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique Institut Curie PSL Research University


