### Accession
PXD036675

### Title
A degradation motif in STAU1 defines a novel family of proteins involved in inflammation

### Description
Cancer development is regulated by inflammation. Staufen 1 (STAU1) is an RNA-binding protein whose expression level is critical in cancer cells as it is related to cell proliferation or cell death. STAU1 expression levels are downregulated during mitosis due to its degradation by the E3 ubiquitin ligase anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C). In this paper, we map the molecular determinant involved in STAU1 degradation in mitosis to amino acids 38-50 and, by alanine scanning, we shorten the motif to F39PxPxxLxxxxL50 (FPL-motif). Mutation of the FPL-motif prevents STAU1 degradation by APC/C. Interestingly, a search in databases reveals that the FPL-motif is shared by 15 additional proteins most of them being involved in inflammation. We show that one of these proteins, MAP4K1, is indeed degraded via the FPL-motif; however, it is not a target of APC/C. Using proximity labeling with STAU1, we identify TRIM25, an E3-ubiquitin ligase involved in the innate immune response and interferon production, as responsible for STAU1 and MAP4K1 degradation, dependent on the FPL-motif. These results are consistent with previous studies that linked STAU1 to cancer-induced inflammation and identify a novel degradation motif that likely coordinates a novel family of proteins involved in inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
hTERT-RPE1 cells were used to generate a stable cell line expressing Stau155-HA3-BioID2 or STAU155-HA3-TurboID by retroviral infection. After puromycin selection, cells were incubated in the presence of 50 μM biotin for either 16 h (BioID2) or 3 h (TurboID). For the TurboID assay, cells were first synchronized either in mitosis with nocodazole (50 ng/ml for 18 h) before incubation with biotin. Biotinylated proteins were pulled down with 250 μL of pre-washed streptavidin-coated magnetic beads (Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin T1). Beads were then washed six times with RIPA lysis buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 1X protease inhibitor cocktail, 1X PhosStop), once with 1 M KCl, once with 8 M urea in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), three times with modified RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 0.02% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate and 0.2% Triton X-100) and once with 0.1 M Na2CO3. Beads were then resuspended in 100 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution. Proteins on beads were digested overnight with 1 μg of Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega). Resulting peptides were reduced in 9 mM dithiothreitol for 30 minutes at 37˚C and alkylated with 17 mM iodoacetamide for 20 minutes at room temperature. Peptides were then desalted and eluted in 10% ammonium hydroxide/ 90% methanol and resuspended in 5% feluric acid. Peptides were injected in the Easy-nLC II system (Proxeon Biosystems) for chromatography using two buffers, 0.2% formic acid and 0.2% formic acid plus 90% acetonitrile. Peptides were sent to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) through a Nanospray Flex Ion Source set to 1.3-1.8kV for the Nanospray and to 50V for the S-lens at a capillary temperature of 225˚C. The MS survey spectra was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000. The most intense peptide ions were fragmented, and the MS/MS was also analysed in the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed with Scaffold_4.8.9. Protein threshold at 95%. Minimum number of peptides at 1.  Peptide threshold 80%. We kept proteins with total spectrum enriched at least four times compared to controls for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer development is regulated by inflammation. Staufen1 (STAU1) is an RNA-binding protein whose expression level is critical in cancer cells as it is related to cell proliferation or cell death. STAU1 protein levels are downregulated during mitosis due to its degradation by the E3 ubiquitin ligase anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C). In this paper, we map the molecular determinant involved in STAU1 degradation to amino acids 38-50, and by alanine scanning, we shorten the motif to F<sup>39</sup>PxPxxLxxxxL<sup>50</sup> (FPL-motif). Mutation of the FPL-motif prevents STAU1 degradation by APC/C. Interestingly, a search in databases reveals that the FPL-motif is shared by 15 additional proteins, most of them being involved in inflammation. We show that one of these proteins, MAP4K1, is indeed degraded via the FPL-motif; however, it is not a target of APC/C. Using proximity labeling with STAU1, we identify TRIM25, an E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in the innate immune response and interferon production, as responsible for STAU1 and MAP4K1 degradation, dependent on the FPL-motif. These results are consistent with previous studies that linked STAU1 to cancer-induced inflammation and identified a novel degradation motif that likely coordinates a novel family of proteins involved in inflammation. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD036675.

### Keywords
Staufen 1; human; inflammation; protein degradation; e3-ubiquitin ligase; degron; trim25

### Affiliations
Department de biochimie et medecine moleculaire, Universite de Montreal
Universite de Montreal

### Submitter
Luc DesGroseillers

### Lab Head
Dr Luc DesGroseillers
Department de biochimie et medecine moleculaire, Universite de Montreal


