### Accession
PXD018416

### Title
Global Proteomic Profiling in Chronic Iron-Exposed Fallopian Tube Secretory Epithelial Cells

### Description
We previously published (Oncogenesis, Rockfield et al., 2019) that chronic iron exposure (with ferric ammonium citrate, FAC) in immortalized fallopian tube secretory epithelial cells resulted in increased growth and migratory propensity. Our focused analyses identified a subset of oncogenic markers, including EVI1 (amplified at 3q26.2 in high grade serous epithelial ovarian tumors), that were altered following long term iron treatment. Herein, we have extended these studies to global proteomics analyses via a mass spectrometry (MS)-based approach.

### Sample Protocol
Suspension trap (S-trap) sample processing of each experimental group (U, F, CV, OCV) was performed using an approximate 500K cell count for each group. LC-MS/MS analysis of the cell lysate digests was performed using a hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap instrument (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Digested samples were first concentrated on a 2 cm x 75 µm ID PepMap C18 trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by separation on a 55°C-heated, 75 cm x 75 µm ID C18 PepMap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A 120-minute gradient from 2-28% B, where B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile:20% water was used to separate peptides. For mass spectrometric analysis, data-dependent acquisition (DDA) with a top-10 method was utilized. The full MS spectra were acquired in the m/z range of 375-1200 at 70,000 resolution followed by MS/MS scans at 17,500 resolution.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0) was used to search raw files against the Uniprot protein database for Homo sapiens (version UP000005640, 71607 entries). Search parameters included the variable modifications of N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as well as the constant modification of cysteine by carbamidomethylation. An additional database of known contaminants provided with MaxQuant was utilized where the first search tolerance was set to 20 ppm followed by a main search tolerance of 4.5 ppm. Furthermore, a search strategy using reversed sequences in a decoy database was employed to achieve protein and peptide FDR values of less than 1%. LFQ-based quantitation was enabled, with a minimum ratio count of 1, and the “match-between-runs” feature using default settings was employed to increase proteomic identification.  The resulting proteinGroups text file generated by MaxQuant was edited by removing the reverse and contaminant sequences as well as proteins only identified by modification. The file was then uploaded into Perseus (version 1.6.1.1) twice for separate analysis of F vs. U and OCV vs. CV. Each file was then analyzed whereby LFQ values were log2-transformed and proteins were removed that had missing values in more than just 2 out of the 5 replicates. The imputation function was utilized where missing values were replaced using width parameters of 0.3 for both and downshift parameters set to 1.8 and 1.75 for F vs. U and OCV vs. CV, respectively. The average ratio of treatment over control was then calculated in Excel along with a Welch’s t-test (p-value < 0.05) and z-score (z-value > 1).

### Publication Abstract
Malignant transformation of fallopian tube secretory epithelial cells (FTSECs) is a key contributing event to the development of high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC). Our recent findings implicate oncogenic transformative events in chronic iron-exposed FTSECs, including increased expression of oncogenic mediators, increased telomerase transcripts, and increased growth/migratory potential. Herein, we extend these studies by implementing an integrated transcriptomic and mass spectrometry-based proteomics approach to identify global miRNA and protein alterations, for which we also investigate a subset of these targets to iron-induced functional alterations. Proteomic analysis identified &gt;&#x2009;4500 proteins, of which 243 targets were differentially expressed. Sixty-five differentially expressed miRNAs were identified, of which 35 were associated with the "top" proteomic molecules (&gt;&#x2009;fourfold change) identified by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. Twenty of these 35 miRNAs are at the 14q32 locus (encoding a cluster of 54 miRNAs) with potential to be regulated by DNA methylation and histone deacetylation. At 14q32, miR-432-5p and miR-127-3p were ~&#x2009;100-fold downregulated whereas miR-138-5p was 16-fold downregulated at 3p21 in chronic iron-exposed FTSECs. Combinatorial treatment with methyltransferase and deacetylation inhibitors reversed expression of these miRNAs, suggesting chronic iron exposure alters miRNA expression via epigenetic alterations. In addition, PAX8, an important target in HGSOC and a potential miRNA target (from IPA) was epigenetically deregulated in iron-exposed FTSECs. However, both PAX8 and ALDH1A2 (another IPA-predicted target) were experimentally identified to be independently regulated by these miRNAs although TERT RNA was partially regulated by miR-138-5p. Interestingly, overexpression of miR-432-5p diminished cell numbers induced by long-term iron exposure in FTSECs. Collectively, our global profiling approaches uncovered patterns of miRNA and proteomic alterations that may be regulated by genome-wide epigenetic alterations and contribute to functional alterations induced by chronic iron exposure in FTSECs. This study may provide a platform to identify future biomarkers for early ovarian cancer detection and new targets for therapy.

### Keywords
Proteomic profiling, Ferric ammonium citrate, Fallopian tube secretory epithelial cells, Initiation events, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Albany College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences
Department of Cell Biology, Microbiology, and Molecular Biology  University of South Florida  Tampa, FL, USA 33620

### Submitter
Stanley Stevens

### Lab Head
Dr Meera Nanjundan
Department of Cell Biology, Microbiology, and Molecular Biology  University of South Florida  Tampa, FL, USA 33620


