### Accession
PXD018528

### Title
Proteomic changes of Klebsiella pneumoniae in response to colistin treatment  and crrB mutation-mediated colistin resistance

### Description
Polymyxins are increasingly used as the critical last-resort therapeutic options for multidrug-resistant gram-negative bacteria. Unfortunately, polymyxin resistance has increased gradually for the last few years. Although studies on mechanisms of polymyxin are expanding, system-wide analyses of the underlying mechanism for polymyxin resistance and stress response are still lacking. To understand how Klebsiella pneumoniae adapt to colistin (polymyxin E) pressure, we carried out proteomic analysis of Klebsiella pneumoniae strain cultured with different concentrations of colistin. Our results showed that the proteomic responses to colistin treatment in Klebsiella pneumoniae involving several pathways, including (i) gluconeogenesis and TCA cycle; (ii) arginine biosynthesis; (iii) porphyrin and chlorophyll metabolism; and (iv) enterobactin biosynthesis. Interestingly, decreased abundance of class A β-lactamases including TEM, SHV-11, SHV-4 were observed in cells treated with colistin. Moreover, we also present comprehensive proteome atlases of paired polymyxin-susceptible and -resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae strains. The polymyxin-resistant strain Ci, a mutant of Klebsiella pneumoniae ATCC BAA 2146, showed missense mutation in crrB. The crrB mutant Ci, which displayed lipid A modification with 4-amino-4-deoxy-L-arabinose (L-Ara4N) and palmitoylation, showed striking increases of CrrAB, PmrAB, PhoPQ, ArnBCADT and PagP. We hypothesize that crrB mutations induce elevated expression of the arnBCADTEF operon and pagP via PmrAB and PhoPQ. Moreover, multidrug efflux pump KexD, which was induced by crrB mutation, also contributed to colistin resistance. Overall, our results demonstrated proteomic responses to colistin treatment and the mechanism of CrrB-mediate colistin resistance, which may further offer valuable information to manage polymyxin resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were collected and resuspended in lysis buffer, followed by disruption on Fastpre (6s / sec, 40s). Cell lysates were then reduced with dithiothretiol and alkylated with dithiothretiol, then digested with Lys-C and Trypsin. After desalting, the digested peptides of each group were labeled with 8-plex iTRAQ, followed by high-pH prefractionation. 20 fractions were collected and analyzed on Easy-nLC system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The processing of the individual raw MS data files was conducted with the commercially available software Proteome Discoverer v. 2.2.0.388 (Thermo fisher scientific). Database search was carried out against Klebsiella pneumoniae Swiss-Prot Database containing 1,706 entries and KLEP7 in Uniprot containing 5,127 entries (download on 24 September 2018) using the Sequest search engine. The following parameters were used: (1) the mass tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.2 Da for product ions; (2) up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed; (3) Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and iTRAQ modification of N-terminus and lysine residues were added to fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionine (M) and acetylation were considered variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Multidrug efflux pump kexd, Β-lactamase, Polymyxin resistance, Proteomics, Crrb mutation, Lipid a modification, Klebsiella pneumoniae

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Protein and Peptide Pharmaceuticals & Laboratory of Proteomics, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Lang Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Fuquan Yang
Key Laboratory of Protein and Peptide Pharmaceuticals & Laboratory of Proteomics, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.


