### Accession
PXD008808

### Title
Proteomic analysis of six different tissues from the Atlantic bottlenose dolphin (Tursiops truncatus)

### Description
Proteomic analysis of six tissues (liver, kidney, blubber, brain, muscle, skin) provided experimental confirmation of 10,402 proteins from 4,711 protein groups, almost 1/3 of the possible predicted proteins in the Atlantic bottlenose dolphin (Tursiops truncatus) NCBI annotation (release 101), which is based on the recently completed NIST Tur_tru v1 genome assembly.

### Sample Protocol
Bottlenose dolphin tissues were collected from animals under appropriate permits (see Sample Table) and stored at liquid nitrogen temperatures (-150 to -180 °C) until cryohomogenization in the National Institute of Science and Technology’s Marine Environmental Specimen Bank. From the resulting fine powder, 5 mg was subsampled and the proteins were extracted using RapiGest (Waters, Milford MA). Briefly, 150 µL of 0.1 % (w/v) RapiGest (in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added, resulting in a solution of 33 µg/µL tissue. The extraction mixture was shaken at 600 rpm for 25 min at room temperature followed by removal of large debris using a benchtop microcentrifuge. From this solution, a 5 µL aliquot was removed and suspended in 35 µL of 0.1 % (w/v) RapiGest (in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate), followed by the addition of 40 uL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Next, the sample was reduced with 10 µL of 45 mM DTT (final concentration of 5 mM) and incubated at 60 °C for 30 min, then allowed to cool to room temperature. The mixture was alkylated using 3.75 µL of 375 mM iodoacetamide (Pierce, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA; final concentration of 15 mM) and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 20 min. Prior to addition of trypsin, 100 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added. A 3.3 µL aliquot of trypsin (MS-Grade; 1 µg/µl in 50 mM acetic acid) was added (1:50 trypsin:protein) and samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C. The digestion was halted and RapiGest cleaved with the addition of 100 µL of 3 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (1% final concentration) and incubated at 37 °C for 30 min before centrifugation and removal of the supernatant. Samples were processed using Pierce C18 spin columns (8 mg of C18 resin; Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Each sample was processed in duplicate yielding at maximum of 60 µg peptides. These solutions were evaporated to dryness in a vacufuge then reconstituted in 150 µL of 5 % acetonitrile in water.  Mass Spectrometry Samples were analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 Nano LC coupled to a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Resulting peptide mixtures (10 µl) were loaded onto a PepMap 100 C18 trap column (75 µm id x 2 cm length; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 3 µL/min for 10 min with 2 % (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.05 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid followed by separation on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 2 µm C18 column (75µm id x 25 cm length; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 40 °C. Peptides were separated along a 130 min gradient of 5 % to 27.5 % mobile phase B [80 % (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.08 % (v/v) formic acid] over 105 min followed by a ramp to 40 % mobile phase B over 15 min and lastly to 95 % mobile phase B over 10 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive polarity and data dependent mode (topN, 3 s cycle time) with a dynamic exclusion of 60 s (with 10 ppm error). The RF lens was set at 30 %. Full scan resolution using the orbitrap was set at 120 000 and the mass range was set to m/z 375 to1500. Full scan ion target value was 4.0e5 allowing a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Monoisotopic peak determination was used, specifying peptides and an intensity threshold of 1.0e4 was used for precursor selection. Data-dependent fragmentation was performed using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 32 with quadrupole isolation at m/z 0.7 width. The fragment scan resolution using the orbitrap was set at 30 000, m/z 110 as the first mass, ion target value of 2.0e5 and a 60 ms maximum injection time.

### Data Protocol
Resulting raw files from the analysis of six different T. truncatus tissues were processed to mgfs using Proteome Discoverer (v.2.0.0.802). For these uploaded results only Mascot (v2.6.0; Matrix Science) was used. The protein.faa fasta file was retrieved from NCBI RefSeq via ftp (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/refseq/). For searches described in the paper the prior T. truncatus annotation, GCF_000151865.2_Ttru_1.4 was used, while the searches uploaded here were performed with the current T. truncatus annotation, GCF_001922835.1_NIST_Tur_tru_v1 (also available with this submission). These correspond to release 100 and 101 for this organism on NCBI. The whole-genome sequencing projects can be found in GenBank under entries ABRN00000000.2 (Ttru_1.4) and MRVK00000000.1 (NIST_Tur_tru_v1). The T. truncatus searches also used the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins database (cRAP; 2012.01.01; the Global Proteome Machine). The following search parameters were used: trypsin was specified as the enzyme allowing for two mis-cleavages; carbamidomethyl (C) was fixed and acetylation (protein n-term), deamidated (NQ), pyro-Glu (n-term Q), and oxidation (M) were variable modifications; 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment ion tolerance.

### Publication Abstract
The last decade has witnessed dramatic improvements in whole-genome sequencing capabilities coupled to drastically decreased costs, leading to an inundation of high-quality de novo genomes. For this reason, the continued development of genome quality metrics is imperative. Using the 2016 Atlantic bottlenose dolphin NCBI RefSeq annotation and mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis of six tissues, we confirmed 10,402 proteins from 4711 protein groups, constituting nearly one-third of the possible predicted proteins. Since the identification of larger proteins with more identified peptides implies reduced database fragmentation and improved gene annotation accuracy, we propose the metric NP<sub>10</sub>, which attempts to capture this quality improvement. The NP<sub>10</sub> metric is calculated by first stratifying proteomic results by identifying the top decile (or 10th 10-quantile) of identified proteins based on the number of peptides per protein and then returns the median molecular weight of the resulting proteins. When using the 2016 versus 2012 <i>Tursiops truncatus</i> genome annotation to search this proteomic data set, there was a 21% improvement in NP<sub>10</sub>. This metric was further demonstrated by using a publicly available proteomic data set to compare human genome annotations from 2004, 2013 and 2016, which showed a 33% improvement in NP<sub>10</sub>. These results demonstrate that proteomics may be a useful metrological tool to benchmark genome accuracy, though there is a need for reference proteomic datasets across species to facilitate the evaluation of new de novo and existing genome.

### Keywords
Brain, Liver, Atlantic bottlenose dolphin, Skin, Muscle, Blubber, Kidney, Tursiops truncatus

### Affiliations
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Marine Biochemical Sciences Group Chemical Sciences Division Material Measurement Laboratory National Institute of Standards and Technology Hollings Marine Laboratory Charleston, South Carolina USA

### Submitter
Benjamin Neely

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Adam Neely
Marine Biochemical Sciences Group Chemical Sciences Division Material Measurement Laboratory National Institute of Standards and Technology Hollings Marine Laboratory Charleston, South Carolina USA


