### Accession
PXD003685

### Title
The adaptive metabolic response involves specific protein glutathionylation during the filamentation process in the pathogen Candida albicans

### Description
Candida albicans is an opportunist pathogen responsible for a large spectrum of infections, from superficial mycosis to the systemic disease candidiasis. Its ability to adopt various morphological forms, such as unicellular yeasts, filamentous pseudohyphae and hyphae, contributes to its ability to survive within the host. It has been suggested that the antioxidant glutathione is involved in the filamentation process. We investigated S-glutathionylation, the reversible binding of glutathione to proteins, and the functional consequences on C. albicans metabolic remodeling during the yeast-to-hyphae transition.  Our work provided evidence for the specific glutathionylation of mitochondrial proteins involved in bioenergetics pathways in filamentous forms and a regulation of the main enzyme of the glyoxylate cycle, isocitrate lyase, by glutathionylation. Our proteomic data demonstrate that the binding of one glutathione molecule to isocitrate lyase in the hyphal forms leads to enzyme inactivation which was reversed by glutaredoxin treatment.  We also assessed the effect of alternative carbon sources on glutathione levels and isocitrate lyase activity. Changes in nutrient availability led to morphological flexibility and was related to perturbations in glutathione levels and isocitrate lyase activity, confirming the key role of the maintenance of intracellular redox status in the adaptive metabolic strategy of the pathogen.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast strains and growth conditions The C. albicans wild-type strain SC5314 [45] was cultured at 30°C in modified minimal YNB (yeast nitrogen base, 2% D-glucose) supplemented with amino acids (pH 5.4). Hyphal growth was induced by adding 10% fetal serum at 37°C or in semi-synthetic Spider medium at 37°C [46, 47]. Cultures were carried out either in liquid medium or on medium solidified with 2% agar.   Isolation of C. albicans mitochondria C. albicans cells were cultured overnight and harvested by centrifugation at 4,000 x g for 10 minutes at 4°C, washed with 50 ml of water and resuspended in 0.6 M sorbitol, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 supplemented with protease inhibitor mixture (Sigma). Cells were disrupted by vortexing with 0.45 mm-diameter sterile glass beads. All subsequent steps were carried out at 4°C. Glass beads and unbroken cells were removed by centrifugation at 4,000 x g for 10 minutes. The supernatants were centrifuged (14,000 x g, 10 min, 4°C) and the resulting pellets were resuspended in 0.6 M sorbitol, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5. The supernatants obtained from this second centrifugation constituted the cytosolic fractions. Purified mitochondria were immediately frozen at -80°C. Purification of glutathionylated mitochondrial proteins Glutathionylated proteins were purified with a modified version of a previously described "biotin/Grx-switch" procedure [50]. Mitochondrial proteins ( 100 µg) were treated with 0.05% Triton X-100 for 5 minutes and then with a mixture of N-ethylmaleimide (NEM, 5 mM) and  S-methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, 1 mM) for 20 minutes, to block the free -SH  groups on proteins. Unreacted NEM and MMTS were removed on a desalting column (Thermoscientific, ZebaTM Spin Desalting Columns, 7K MWCO). Samples were then incubated for 45 minutes with glutaredoxin (Calbiochem, Glutaredoxin-S2, E. coli, Grx1, 5 µM) in the presence of GSH (0.05 mM), GR (6 U/ml) and NADPH (300 µM), to reduce the sulfhydryl groups that had undergone glutathionylation. The samples were then treated with 250 µM HPDP-biotin for 30 minutes to label newly exposed sulfhydryl groups, and excess HPDP-biotin was removed on a desalting column. Biotinylated and non-biotinylated proteins were then separated with high-affinity streptavidin magnetic beads (Thermoscientific, PierceTM Streptavidin Magnetic Beads) previously equilibrated with 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 7.5 (0.6 M sorbitol), in the presence of protease inhibitor cocktail. After incubation for 1 h, the supernatants were collected and the beads were washed with 30 µl of water. They were then resuspended in 30 µl of 95% formamide, 10 mM EDTA. Biotinylated proteins were dissociated from the streptavidin magnetic beads by heating for 10 minutes at 90°C. SDS-PAGE of glutathionylated proteins for mass spectrometry  Samples of 5 µg of protein were subjected to a short run (low migration) on a NUPAGE 4-12% acrylamide gel, which was stained with Coomassie blue (Simply-blue Safestain Invitrogen). We digested three bands per condition overnight, at 37°C, with sequencing-grade trypsin (12.5 μg/ml, Promega, Madison, Wi, USA) in 20 μl of 25 mmol/L NH4HCO3, before pooling. LC-MS/MS acquisition  All digests of protein extracts were analyzed with a LTQ Velos Orbitrap equipped with an EASY-Spray nanoelectrospray ion source and coupled to an Easy nano-LC Proxeon 1000 system (all devices were obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) and chromatographic separation of the peptides. All the experimental conditions for LC-MS/MSMS acquisitions were as previously described [51].

### Data Protocol
Data Processing MS/MS data were processed with an in-house Mascot search server (Matrix Science, Boston, MA; version 2.4.1). The mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragments. The following variable modifications were allowed: oxidation (M), phosphorylation (STY), acetylation (K, N-term), deamidation (N, Q). Glutathionylation (C), NEM and MMTS modifications, and HPDP-biotin derivatization were added for additional analyses of trypsin digests. The maximum number of missed trypsin cleavages was limited to two. MS/MS data were used to search a C. albicans ORF database (# 6209) retrieved from the Candida Genome Database website (http://www.candidagenome.org/).  Quantitative analysis in label-free experiments The proteins in the various homogenates were subjected to low-migration electrophoresis, stained and fixed. The bands were subjected to in-gel digestion, in triplicate, overnight at 37°C, with sequencing-grade trypsin (12.5 μg/ml, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in 20 μl of 25 mmol/L NH4HCO3. LC-MS/MS acquisition was performed with a two-hour gradient. MS/MS data were processed with a Mascot search server. Label-free quantification was performed on raw data with Progenesis-Qi software 4.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, Newcastle, UK), according to [52]. A decoy search was performed, with a significance threshold of 0.05. The resulting files were imported into Progenesis-QI software. Peptides with an ion score below 15 were rejected. Conflicts for the identification of some peptides were resolved manually.

### Publication Abstract
Candida albicans is an opportunist pathogen responsible for a large spectrum of infections, from superficial mycosis to the systemic disease candidiasis. Its ability to adopt various morphological forms, such as unicellular yeasts, filamentous pseudohyphae and hyphae, contributes to its ability to survive within the host. It has been suggested that the antioxidant glutathione is involved in the filamentation process. We investigated S-glutathionylation, the reversible binding of glutathione to proteins, and the functional consequences on C. albicans metabolic remodeling during the yeast-to-hyphae transition. Our work provided evidence for the specific glutathionylation of mitochondrial proteins involved in bioenergetics pathways in filamentous forms and a regulation of the main enzyme of the glyoxylate cycle, isocitrate lyase, by glutathionylation. Isocitrate lyase inactivation in the hyphal forms was reversed by glutaredoxin treatment, in agreement with a glutathionylation process, which was confirmed by proteomic data showing the binding of one glutathione molecule to the enzyme (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003685). We also assessed the effect of alternative carbon sources on glutathione levels and isocitrate lyase activity. Changes in nutrient availability led to morphological flexibility and were related to perturbations in glutathione levels and isocitrate lyase activity, confirming the key role of the maintenance of intracellular redox status in the adaptive metabolic strategy of the pathogen.

### Keywords
Candida albicans / filamentation/ glutathionylation/ isocitrate lyase / mitochondria

### Affiliations
Institut Jacques Monod

### Submitter
Camille GARCIA

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Michel Camadro
Institut Jacques Monod


