### Accession
PXD013139

### Title
Targeting the E2F1/GAS5/p53 Axis as a Potential Therapeutic Strategy for Gefitinib-Resistant Lung Cancer

### Description
Lung cancer is one of the most common and fatal cancer worldwide. There are two major types of lung cancer, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and small cell lung cancer (SCLC). Recently, gefitinib, a small molecule, which target tyrosine kinase, has been regarded as the first-line treatment in NSCLC patients. However, several patients have been observed tumor recurrence and eventually developed progressive outcomes after target therapy. Thus, an effective therapeutic approach need to be explored. Here, we found that ectopically expressed ATP synthase on plasma membrane exhibited gefitinib-resistance properties in lung cancer cell lines. Furthermore, we unraveled that citreoviridin, an ectopic ATP synthase inhibitor, suppressed the abilities of both proliferation and colony formation in lung cancer cell lines. To elucidate the comprehensive mechanism regulated by citreoviridin, we performed microarray analysis. The results indicated that not only mRNAs but also long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are involved in citreoviridin-treated cell death. One of the well-known lncRNAs, growth arrest-specific transcript (GAS5), was robustly upregulated after citreoviridin treatment. In order to investigate the upstream modulator of GAS5, we utilized chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay and revealed that E2F transcription factor 1 (E2F1) could bind to the promoter of GAS5. Consistently, both microarray and qPCR data showed the expression level of E2F1 was negatively correlated to GAS5 after citreoviridin treatment. The evidence suggests that E2F1 might be a potential repressor of GAS5. Furthermore, combining microarray and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) analysis as well as qPCR demonstrated that p53 pathway was activated. To further realize the GAS5-p53 regulating network, RNA-protein pull-down assay followed by LC-MS/MS will be utilized to dissect the GAS5-interacting proteomic profiling.From the results, we identified 107 GAS5-interacting proteins in common from A549 and H1975 cell lines. Our proteomics experiments identified topoisomerase 2-alpha (TOP2A) as the key protein involved in the citreoviridin-regulated gefitinib-resistance pathway, therefore, we picked out TOP2A for further study. Additionally, we further validated the interaction between TOP2A and GAS5 by western blot and RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP). Taken together, this study suggests targeting E2F1/GAS5/p53 axis is a potential therapeutic strategy for gefitinib-resistant lung cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome Reduction and alkyation of proteins First, 1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEABC) was added to make each sample contain 50 mM TEABC (pH was adjusted to about 8.5). For reduction, 200 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) was added to make each sample contain 5 mM TCEP and incubated in water bath at 37°C for 30 min. For alkyation, 200 mM S-Methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) was added to make each sample contain 2 mM MMTS and rotated in the dark at RT for 30 min. Gel-assisted digestion For gel digestion for proteins into peptides, 30% acrylamide/bisacrylamide (37.5:1), 10% ammonium persulfate (APS) and tetramethylethylenediamine (TEMED) were mixed with the sample followed by vortexed and spun down immediately (the ratio by volume of sample: 30% acrylamide/bisacrylamide: 10% APS: TEMED = 12.47:6.53:0.3:0.3). Then, the mixture was incubated at RT for 10 min for the gel to coagulate. 200 μl of 25mM TEABC was added to cut the gel into small pieces. To wash the gel, 25mM TEABC/50% acetonitrile (ACN) and 25mM TEABC were added followed by vortexed for 10 min and spun down with several times. To dehydrate the gel, 100% ACN was added and dried for 30 min with concentrator centrifugal evaporator (miVac Duo Concentrator; Genevac, Ipswich, UK; Eppendorf concentrator 5301). Trypsin was added into sample to rehydrate the gel (protein: trypsin = 10:1). 25mM TEABC was added and kept on ice for 10 min until the gel was covered by 25mM TEABC. To fully digestion, the sample was incubated in water bath at 37°C overnight. Gel extraction To extract the peptides in the gel, 40 μl of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube (tube gp). The tube gp was centrifuged at 13000 xg for 30 sec and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube (tube p). 400 μl of 50% ACN/0.1% TFA and 400 μl of 100% ACN were added followed by vortexed for 15 min and spun down. The tube gp was centrifuged at 13000 xg for 30 sec and the supernatant was transferred to the tube p until the gel became white and aggregate. After that, the solution in the tube p was filtered to a new tube (tube pep). Finally, the extracted peptides were dried for 10 hr with concentrator centrifugal evaporator (miVac Duo Concentrator; Genevac, Ipswich, UK; Eppendorf concentrator 5301). ZipTip desalting To desalt, we performed ZipTip® Pipette Tips (Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA). First, the sample was resolved by 30 μl of 0.1% TFA. To wet ZipTip, 20 μl of 50% ACN/0.1% TFA was aspirated and dispensed for 5 times. To equilibrate ZipTip, 20 μl of 0.1% TFA was aspirated and dispensed for 10 times. For sample binding, 20 μl of sample was pipetted for 20 times. To wash ZipTip, 20 μl of 0.1% TFA was aspirated and dispensed for 10 times. For elution, 20 μl of 50% ACN/0.1% TFA was pipetted for 10 times. Finally, the eluted solution was dried for 2 hr with concentrator centrifugal evaporator (miVac Duo Concentrator; Genevac, Ipswich, UK; Eppendorf concentrator 5301).

### Data Protocol
NanoLC-MS/MS analysis NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA) connected to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanospray interface (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Peptide samples were loaded onto a 2 cm × 180 μm capillary trap column and then separated in a 75 μm × 25 cm nanoACQUITY 1.7 μm BEH C18 column (Waters, Milford, MA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, and B consisted of 0.1% formic acid and 80% ACN. A linear gradient of 10% to 40% B in 90 min and 40% to 85% B in 10 min was employed throughout this study. Mass spectra from survey full scans were acquired on the Orbitrap (m/z 350-1500). The resolution was set to 60,000 at m/z 400 and the automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 1 × 106 ions. The m/z values triggering MS/MS were put on an exclusion list for 90 sec. The top ten most-intense precursor ions were selected from the MS scan for subsequent collision-induced dissociation MS/MS scan by ion trap (AGC target at 7000). Proteome data analysis Raw MS spectral information was processed for peak detection and identification by using MaxQuant software version 1.5.5.1. Peptide identification was performed by using the Andromeda search engine against the Reviewed Swiss-Prot human database version canonical (Published February, 2017). Search criteria used in this study were trypsin specificity, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications of Carbamidomethyl (C), Oxidation (M), Carbamyl (N-term) and Deamidation (NQ), and allowed for up to two missed cleavages. The type selected Standard, and multiplicity chose 1. A minimum of seven amino acids in the peptide length was required. The precursor mass tolerance was 3 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was 0.5 Da. By using a decoy database strategy, peptide identification was accepted based on the posterior error probability with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor gefitinib is commonly used for lung cancer patients. However, some patients eventually become resistant to gefitinib and develop progressive disease. Here, we indicate that ecto-ATP synthase, which ectopically translocated from mitochondrial inner membrane to plasma membrane, is considered as a potential therapeutic target for drug-resistant cells. Quantitative multi-omics profiling reveals that ecto-ATP synthase inhibitor mediates CK2-dependent phosphorylation of DNA topoisomerase II&#x3b1; (topo II&#x3b1;) at serine 1106 and subsequently increases the expression of long noncoding RNA, GAS5. Additionally, we also determine that downstream of GAS5, p53 pathway, is activated by ecto-ATP synthase inhibitor for regulation of programed cell death. Interestingly, GAS5-proteins interactomic profiling elucidates that GAS5 associates with topo II&#x3b1; and subsequently enhancing the phosphorylation level of topo II&#x3b1;. Taken together, our findings suggest that ecto-ATP synthase blockade is an effective therapeutic strategy via regulation of CK2/phospho-topo II&#x3b1;/GAS5 network in gefitinib-resistant lung cancer cells.

### Keywords
Ectopic atp synthase, Lung cancer, Lncrna-interactomics, Gefitinib resistance

### Affiliations
Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University

### Submitter
Yi-Wen Chang

### Lab Head
Dr Hsueh-Fen Juan
Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University


