### Accession
PXD011042

### Title
Proteomic profiling of Burkholderia thailandensis during host infection

### Description
Burkholderia pseudomallei and B. mallei are the causative agents of melioidosis and glanders, respectively, and are often fatal to humans and animals. Owing to the high fatality rate, potential for spread by aerosolization, and the lack of efficacious therapeutics, B. pseudomallei and B. mallei are considered biothreat agents of concern. In this study, we investigate the proteome of Burkholderia thailandensis, a closely related surrogate for the two more virulent Burkholderia species, during infection of host cells, and compare to that of B. thailandensis in culture. Studying the proteome of intracellular Burkholderia spp. is expected to reveal molecular mechanisms of intracellular survival and host immune evasion; but proteomic profiling of intracellular Burkholderia is challenging. Proteomic analyses of intracellular bacteria are typically hindered by the overwhelming host protein content recovered from infected cultures. To address this problem, we have applied bio-orthogonal noncanonical amino acid tagging (BONCAT) to B. thailandensis, enabling the enrichment of newly expressed bacterial proteins from virtually any growth condition, most importantly intracellular contexts. In this study, we show that B. thailandensis proteins were selectively labeled and efficiently enriched from infected host cells using BONCAT. We also demonstrate that this method can be used to label bacteria in situ by fluorescent tagging. Finally, we present a global proteomic profile of B. thailandensis as it infects host cells and a list of proteins that are differentially regulated in infection conditions as compared to bacterial monoculture. Among the identified proteins are quorum sensing regulated genes as well as homologs to previously identified virulence factors. This method provides a powerful tool to study the molecular processes during Burkholderia infection, a much-needed addition to the Burkholderia molecular toolbox.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed by SDS-PAGE using a 10% Bis-229 Tris NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen) with the MES buffer system and run approximately 2cm. The gel lane was excised robotically into 10 equal sized segments, and in-gel digestion was performed on each segment (ProGest, DigiLab) with the following protocol: A 25mM ammonium bicarbonate wash followed by acetonitrile wash; reduction with 10mM dithiothreitol at 60°C followed by alkylation with 50mM iodoacetamide at room temperature; digestion with trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 4h, and quenching with formic acid. Samples were then lyophilized and reconstituted in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Mascot with the following parameters: Enzyme: Trypsin/P; Database: SwissProt Human and UniProt Burkholderia thailandensis (strain ATCC 700388 / DSM 13276 / CIP 106301 / E264) (forward and reverse appended with common contaminants); Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C); Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (N-term), Pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Deamidation (N/Q), Met->Anl(M), Met->Anl-Biotin (M); Mass values: Monoisotopic; Peptide Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm; Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02 Da; Max Missed Cleavages: 2; Mascot DAT files were parsed into Scaffold Proteome Software for validation, filtering and to create a non-redundant list per sample. Data were filtered using 1% protein and peptide FDR and requiring at least two unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Burkholderia pseudomallei</i> and <i>B. mallei</i> are the causative agents of melioidosis and glanders, respectively, and are often fatal to humans and animals. Owing to the high fatality rate, potential for spread by aerosolization, and the lack of efficacious therapeutics, <i>B. pseudomallei</i> and <i>B. mallei</i> are considered biothreat agents of concern. In this study, we investigate the proteome of <i>Burkholderia thailandensis</i>, a closely related surrogate for the two more virulent <i>Burkholderia</i> species, during infection of host cells, and compare to that of <i>B. thailandensis</i> in culture. Studying the proteome of <i>Burkholderia</i> spp. during infection is expected to reveal molecular mechanisms of intracellular survival and host immune evasion; but proteomic profiling of <i>Burkholderia</i> during host infection is challenging. Proteomic analyses of host-associated bacteria are typically hindered by the overwhelming host protein content recovered from infected cultures. To address this problem, we have applied bio-orthogonal noncanonical amino acid tagging (BONCAT) to <i>B. thailandensis</i>, enabling the enrichment of newly expressed bacterial proteins from virtually any growth condition, including host cell infection. In this study, we show that <i>B. thailandensis</i> proteins were selectively labeled and efficiently enriched from infected host cells using BONCAT. We also demonstrate that this method can be used to label bacteria <i>in situ</i> by fluorescent tagging. Finally, we present a global proteomic profile of <i>B. thailandensis</i> as it infects host cells and a list of proteins that are differentially regulated in infection conditions as compared to bacterial monoculture. Among the identified proteins are quorum sensing regulated genes as well as homologs to previously identified virulence factors. This method provides a powerful tool to study the molecular processes during <i>Burkholderia</i> infection, a much-needed addition to the <i>Burkholderia</i> molecular toolbox.

### Keywords
Burkholderia thailandensis, Lc-ms/ms, Boncat

### Affiliations
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory

### Submitter
Magdalena Franco

### Lab Head
Dr Magdelena Franco
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory


