### Accession
PXD000783

### Title
The Phophoproteome of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii

### Description
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii is the most intensively-studied and well-developed model for investigation of a wide-range of microalgal processes ranging from basic development through understanding triacylglycerol production. While proteomic technologies permit interrogation of these processes at the protein level and efforts to date indicate phosphorylation-based regulation of proteins in C. reinhardtii is essential for its underlying biology, characterization of the C. reinhardtii phosphoproteome has been limited. Herein, we report the richest exploration of the C. reinhardtii proteome to date. Complementary enrichment strategies were used to detect 4,588 phosphoproteins distributed among every cellular component in C. reinhardtii. Additionally, we report 18,160 unique phosphopeptides at <1% false discovery rate, which comprise 15,862 unique phosphosites – 98% of which are novel. Given that an estimated 30% of proteins in a eukaryotic cell are subject to phosphorylation, we report the majority of the phosphoproteome (23%) of C. reinhardtii. Proteins in key biological pathways were phosphorylated, including photosynthesis, pigment production, carbon assimilation, glycolysis, and protein and carbohydrate metabolism, and it is noteworthy that hyperphosphorylation was observed in flagellar proteins.  This rich dataset will significantly enhance understanding of a range of regulatory mechanisms controlling a variety of cellular process and will serve as a critical resource for the microalgal community.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion was performed as described previously with modifications (17). Samples were diluted 2-fold using 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced using 5 mM DTT for 45 min at room temperature, and alkylated using 10 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. The samples were then diluted to 1 M urea using 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added to a final enzyme:substrate w:w ratio of 1:30. At this step the protein concentration was 1-1.5 mg/mL. The trypsin digest was incubated at 37°C for 12 h. After digestion, the peptide mixture was frozen at -20°C to halt protease activity. Samples not immediately analyzed were stored at -80°C. Each biological replicate was split equally: 8 mg sample was used for TiO2-HILIC enrichment, and 8 mg for HILIC-PolyMAC enrichment. Three biological replicates, i.e. a total of 6 samples, were analyzed.  TiO2 beads (Titansphere TiO 5 m, GL Science, Inc. Japan) were equilibrated once using acetonitrile and once using loading buffer (80%ACN/5% TFA /saturated phthalic acid) for 5 min in each step. Solvent was removed at each step by a 2 min centrifugation at 20,000 x g. Trypsin-proteolyzed peptides were lyophilized in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in loading buffer to a final concentration of 1-1.5 mg/mL. The resultant solution was equilibrated with TiO2 beads in a w:w ratio of 1:5 and incubated for 1 h at room temperature using a head-to-head rotator at 30 rpm. The beads were washed once using 1.5 mL loading buffer and three times using 1.5 mL washing buffer (2% TFA/80% ACN), by incubating for 20 min. Phosphopeptides were eluted twice using 500 L 0.5% ammonium hydroxide  with shaking at 1400 rpm for 10 min; elutions were subsequently combined. Phosphopeptides were lyophilized in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -80°C until further processing. PolyMAC (Tymora Analytical Operations, West Lafayette, IN) enrichment was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions with two modifications. The binding time was increased from 5 min to 1 h and the PolyMAC capture time was increased from 10 min to 30 min. PolyMAC (Tymora Analytical Operations, West Lafayette, IN) enrichment was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions with two modifications. The binding time was increased from 5 min to 1 h and the PolyMAC capture time was increased from 10 min to 30 min. The first replicate sample of each workflow was analyzed using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Rockford, USA) coupled with a nanoLC Ultra (Eksigent, Dublin, USA). Each sample (5 μL) was loaded onto a trap column (C18 PepMap100, 300 μm 1 mm, 5 μm, 100 Å, Dionex, Sunnyvale, USA) at a ﬂow rate of 4 μL/min for 5 min. Peptide separation was carried out on a C18 column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 15 cm  75 μm  3 μm, 100 Å, Dionex) at a ﬂow rate of 0.26 μL/min. Peptides were separated using an 85 min linear gradient ranging from 5% to 40% B. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode. The MS survey scan was performed in the FT cell from a mass range of 300 to 1,700 m/z. The resolution was set to 60,000 @ 400 m/z, and the automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 500,000 ions. CID fragmentation was used for MS/MS and the 20 most intense signals in the survey scan were fragmented. An isolation window of 1.5 m/z, and a target value of 10,000 ions was used. Fragmentation was performed with normalized collision energies of 35% and activation times of 30 ms. Dynamic exclusion was performed with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 75 s, and a minimum MS signal for triggering MS/MS was set to 5,000 counts. All subsequent replicates (four of six total samples) were analyzed using a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Concord, Canada) coupled to a nanoLC2D (Eksigent, Dublin, OH). Five microliters of each sample was loaded onto a trap column (ChromXp C18, 350µm 0.5mm, 5µm, 120Å, Eksigent, Dublin, USA) at a flow rate of 3 µL/min for 7 min. Peptide separation was carried out on a C18 column (ChromXp C18, 15 cm × 75 μm × 3 μm, 120 Å, Eksigent) at a flow rate of 0.3 L/min. Peptides were separated using a 120 min linear gradient from 5% to 50% B (mobile phase A, 1% formic acid; mobile phase B, 1% formic acid in ACN). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization and high sensitivity mode. The MS survey spectrum was accumulated from a mass range of 380 to 1250 m/z in 250ms. For IDA (information dependent acquisition) MS/MS experiments, the first 20 features above 150 counts threshold and having a charge state of +2 to +5 were fragmented using rolling collision energy +/- 5%, with 100 ms spectra accumulation/experiment. Each MS/MS experiment put the precursor m/z on a 75 s dynamic exclusion list. Auto calibration was performed every 5 samples (9h) to assure high mass accuracy in both MS and MS/MS acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap-Velos raw data were converted to Mascot generic format (.mgf) files by Mascot Daemon 2.4 (Matrix Science, London, UK). TripleTOF 5600 raw data were processed using MS Data Converter (ABSciex) to generate .mgf files. For each replicate, all fractions were merged prior to database search using Mascot Daemon 2.4. All Mascot searches were performed against a combined database (19,603 sequences total) containing the full Phytozome v9.0 database (http://www.phytozome.net/, Dec. 2012) and the NCBI chloroplast and mitochondrion databases using the following settings: trypsin with up to two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation fixed at Cys; variable oxidation at Met; variable protein N-terminal acetylation, variable deamidation at Asn and Gln; variable phosphorylation at Ser, Thr, and Tyr. The mass error tolerance for precursor ions was set to 10 ppm, 0.08 Da for TripleTOF 5600 fragment ions, and 0.8 Da for Orbitrap-Velos fragment ions. A decoy reverse database search was also performed to estimate the false positive rate of protein identification. Identified proteins were further analyzed with Scaffold (v3.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) and Scaffold PTM (v3.1; Proteome Software, Portland, OR) to confirm the identification and phosphorylation sites localization probability. First, Scaffold was used to filter proteins and peptides based on the Protein Prophet (19) and Peptide Prophet (20) algorithms to obtain 99% protein and peptide probability and 1% protein and peptide FDR with at least one peptide matched. Next, Scaffold PTM was used to obtain an estimate of the phosphosite localization probability by assigning Ascores (21) to each PTM call. A Scaffold PTM spectrum report for each search was exported, listing all MS/MS queries with their Ascores for every protein having a 99% or better probability. An Excel Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) (Microsoft, Redmond, WA) program was written to compile the spectrum reports and generate the peptide, protein, and phosphosite tables for all non-redundant proteins. Phosphosites were compiled as follows. 1) All MS/MS queries for each peptide of a protein were counted and the highest Ascore query tabulated; in case of a tie the highest Mascot score query was tabulated. 2) All phosphosites for the protein were tabulated. 3) For each phosphosite, the highest Ascore was sought from all peptides containing the site, including missed cleavage peptides and multiply-modified peptides. 4) Each phosphosite was flagged if its Ascore was 13 or better, connoting a 95% site localization confidence (21-23). 5) Each phosphosite was flagged if its Ascore was 18 or better and its neighboring residues were not Ser, Thr, or Tyr. Phosphosites with neighboring Ser, Thr, or Tyr residues and Ascores of 40 or better were also flagged. The estimated site localization confidence for this more stringent filter is 99% (24). The same VBA program determined the subset of non-redundant phosphosites among all proteins recursively as follows. First, for each site the largest contiguous sequence spanning the site was constructed using only peptides observed as modified at the site with high confidence. With all observed site sequences thus tabulated, each was compared to the rest to cull redundant entries. This processing was based solely on observed peptides and thus was independent of putative protein association. For motif analysis only non-redundant 99% localization confidence sites were considered. A list of 13 residue sequences centered on each site was constructed from its observed largest contiguous sequence. For any site within 6 residues of the N- or C- terminus of its largest contiguous sequence, the VBA program used the inferred protein sequence to extend the site neighborhood to give a phosphosite-centered 13-mer sequence. Sequences were categorized as basic, acidic, proline-directed, tyrosine, or “other” according to the rules of Huttlin and colleagues (23), well-articulated by Lasonder and colleagues (25). Motifs were determined for each category using Motif-X (http://motif-x.med.harvard.edu/motif-x.html2) (26, 27). The background was the IPI Arabidopsis thaliana proteome, the width was set to 13, occurrences set to 20, significance set to 1x10-7, and pT sites replaced at position 7 with pS. For tyrosine motifs the thresholds were relaxed: occurrences set to 5 and significance set to 1x10-6.

### Publication Abstract
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii is the most intensively-studied and well-developed model for investigation of a wide-range of microalgal processes ranging from basic development through understanding triacylglycerol production. Although proteomic technologies permit interrogation of these processes at the protein level and efforts to date indicate phosphorylation-based regulation of proteins in C. reinhardtii is essential for its underlying biology, characterization of the C. reinhardtii phosphoproteome has been limited. Herein, we report the richest exploration of the C. reinhardtii proteome to date. Complementary enrichment strategies were used to detect 4588 phosphoproteins distributed among every cellular component in C. reinhardtii. Additionally, we report 18,160 unique phosphopeptides at &lt;1% false discovery rate, which comprise 15,862 unique phosphosites - 98% of which are novel. Given that an estimated 30% of proteins in a eukaryotic cell are subject to phosphorylation, we report the majority of the phosphoproteome (23%) of C. reinhardtii. Proteins in key biological pathways were phosphorylated, including photosynthesis, pigment production, carbon assimilation, glycolysis, and protein and carbohydrate metabolism, and it is noteworthy that hyperphosphorylation was observed in flagellar proteins. This rich data set is available via ProteomeXchange (ID: PXD000783) and will significantly enhance understanding of a range of regulatory mechanisms controlling a variety of cellular process and will serve as a critical resource for the microalgal community.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Algae, Phosphopeptides, Chlamydomonas

### Affiliations
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Dept. of Chemistry
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
William Slade

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie M. Hicks
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Dept. of Chemistry


