### Accession
PXD008175

### Title
The effect of Scp160p on polyQ-mediated protein aggregation

### Description
We have previously shown that the yeast homolog of the RNA-binding vigilin proteins – Scp160p – is involved in enhancing translation efficiency in the context of codon usage. In the current study, we investigated the influence of Scp160p on the biology of polyQ reporters which differ in the codon usage of their polyQ regions. We observe that Scp160p facilitates aggregation of the polyQ reporters independent of codon usage.  To explore if Scp160p might also facilitate the aggregation of endogenous polyQ-containing proteins in the yeast proteome, we combined filter trap binding and dimethyl labeling mass spectrometry to assess the aggregation state of the proteome in scp160Δ cells. Filter trap binding allows the isolation of protein aggregates which are SDS-resistant (a feature of polyQ aggregates) from wild-type and scp160Δ cells. Dimethyl labeling with nanoLC-MS/MS provided a quantitative comparison of the amount of aggregated proteins isolated by filter trap binding.

### Sample Protocol
Filter Trap binding To carry out filter trap binding, 400μg of whole cell lysates were semi-denatured by treating with 1x PBS containing 1% SDS at room temperature for 2 hours. Treated lysates were passed through nitrocellulose membrane (Whatman Protran, pore size 0.45μm) under vacuum using a Minifold I vacuum filtration system (Schleicher & Schuell) (Wanker et al., 1999; Scherzinger et al., 1999). The membrane was rinsed twice with 1x PBS containing 1% SDS and twice with 1x PBS. SDS-resistant aggregated proteins trapped on the membrane were digested on the membrane with Trypsin as described by Luque-Garcia, 2009. Membranes where lysate was applied were cut out, rinsed four times with 1mL water, and then washed for 5 min at room temperature in 1mL water with agitation at 1,000rpm. Membranes were blocked in 1mL PVP-40 (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at 37°C with gentle agitation (300rpm). PVP-40 was removed and the membranes were washed six times with 1mL water. 250ng of Trypsin in 20μL of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to each sample. Additional 50mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to completely submerge the membranes (~20μL). Digestion proceeded overnight at 37°C with gentle agitation (300rpm).  Samples were dried by speed vacuum. 90μL of acetone per 4mm2 of membrane was added to each sample, vortexed and incubated for 30 min at room temperature to dissolve the nitrocellulose membrane and precipitate the peptides. Reactions were centrifuged at 14,000xg for 10 min, and the acetone - together with dissolved nitrocellulose - was discarded while the peptide pellets were air-dried. Pellets was resuspended in 20μL of sample solution (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). NanoLC-MS/MS analysis and MS data processing Extracted peptides were first desalted and then labeled using C18 StageTips (Boersema et al., 2013) as described elsewhere (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Wild-type samples were labeled with dimethyl “light” ((CH3)2) and scp160Δ samples were labeled with dimethyl “heavy” ((CH1D2)2). Complete incorporation levels of the dimethyl labels was achieved in all cases. Eluted peptides were mixed in a 1:1 ratio according to measured protein amounts. The analysis of the peptide mixture was performed on an Easy-nLC 1200 System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described elsewhere (Kliza et al., 2017). The peptides were injected onto the column in HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 500nl/min and subsequently eluted with a 87 min gradient of 10–33-50-90% HPLC solvent B (80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid). During peptide elution the flow rate was kept constant at 200nl/min. The seven most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented in each scan cycle using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD). The target values for the MS scan and MS/MS fragmentation were 3x10e6 and 10e5 charges with a maximum fill time of 25ms and 110ms, respectively. In all measurements, sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 30s.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were processed with MaxQuant software suite v.1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann, 2008). Database search was performed using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011), which is a module of the MaxQuant. MS/MS spectra were searched against a database consisting of 6,721 protein entries from Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the sequence of Cyc8p and a database consisting of 285 commonly observed contaminants. In database search, full tryptic specificity was required and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Protein N-terminal acetylation, and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Initial precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5ppm (parts per million), at the fragment ion level 20ppm was set for HCD fragmentation. Peptide, protein, and modification site identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) set to 0.01. For protein group quantitation a minimum of two quantified peptides were required. Perseus software (version 1.5.0.15), a module from the MaxQuant suite (Tyanova et al., 2016), was used for calculation of the significance B (psigB) for each protein ratio with respect to the distance of the median of the distribution of all protein ratios as well as its intensities. All proteins with psigB < 0.1 in a pairwise comparison were considered to be differentially retained on the nitrocellulose membrane. Q/N-richness of the resulting protein list was determined by inspection of the protein sequences and classified into “polyQ-containing”, “polyN-containing”, “polyQ/N-containing”, “Q/N-rich and prionogenic”. PolyQ regions were defined as a stretch with at least 6 glutamines for every 8 consecutive amino acids (8-mers allowing 2 mismatches) (Totzeck, 2017). The same parameter was used to define polyN regions. Proteins with both a polyQ and polyN regions were classified as “polyQ/N-containing”. Proteins considered “Q/N-rich and prionogenic” were computationally predicted and published at least one of Michelitsch and Weissman, 2000 or Alberti et al., 2009.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aggregation, Polyglutamine, Prions, Rna-binding protein, Vigilin, Polyq

### Affiliations
Interfaculty Institute of Biochemistry Universität Tübingen Hoppe-Seyler Straße 4 72076 Tübingen Germany
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Ralf-Peter Jansen
Interfaculty Institute of Biochemistry Universität Tübingen Hoppe-Seyler Straße 4 72076 Tübingen Germany


