### Accession
PXD017166

### Title
Alfalfa_salt_stress_PRM_protomics

### Description
The dataset presented here is about global protein levels in a common alfalfa cultivar, Medicago sativa L. (cv. Nongjing No 1), with exposure to 200mM salt stress for 14 days using parallel proteomics monitoring (PRM) based targeted proteomics approach.

### Sample Protocol
Seeds were germinated in the dark at 28 °C for 48 h and then transferred into 1/2 Hoagland nutrient solution. The experiment was carried out in greenhouse with an average temperature of 26 °C /18 °C day / night with a photoperiod 16/8 h dark/light and light intensity 200 μmol m-2 s-1. The air humidity was 60~70%.

### Data Protocol
After protein digestion and peptide labeling with Duplex TMT, peptides were then analyzed on an AB SCIEX Triple time-of-flight (TOF) 5600 system and packaged with 5 μm C18 resin using a fused silica capillary emitter (inner diameter, 75 μm; length, 15 cm; New Objective, Woburn, MA). For Information Dependent Acquisition (IDA), a survey scan obtained within 250 ms and 20 product ion scans were collected within 50 ms for each scan. The raw data file (.wiff) obtained was performed on a mascot swissprot rice database using protein targeting software V.4.2 (AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA). For both peptides and the MS/MS fragments, the threshold was specified to be ± 0.05 Dalton. Proteins are identified based on criteria for at least two peptides should match.

### Publication Abstract
Alfalfa is the most extensively cultivated forage legume worldwide, and salinity constitutes the main environmental scourge limiting its growth and productivity. To unravel the potential molecular mechanism involved in salt tolerance in alfalfa, we accomplished a combined analysis of parallel reaction monitoring-based proteomic technique and targeted metabolism. Based on proteomic analysis, salt stress induced 226 differentially abundant proteins (DAPs). Among them, 118 DAPs related to the antioxidant system, including glutathione metabolism and oxidation-reduction pathways, were significantly up-regulated. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD017166. Overall, 107 determined metabolites revealed that the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, especially the malate to oxaloacetate conversion step, was strongly stimulated by salt stress. This leads to an up-regulation by about 5 times the ratio of NADPH/NADP<sup>+</sup>, as well as about 3 to 5 times in the antioxidant enzymes activities, including those of catalase and peroxidase and proline contents. However, the expression levels of DAPs related to the Calvin-Benson-Bassham (CBB) cycle and photorespiration pathway were dramatically inhibited following salt treatment. Consistently, metabolic analysis showed that the metabolite amounts related to carbon assimilation and photorespiration decreased by about 40% after exposure to 200 mM NaCl for 14 d, leading ultimately to a reduction in net photosynthesis by around 30%. Our findings highlighted also the importance of the supplied extra reducing power, thanks to the TCA cycle, in the well-functioning of glutathione to remove and scavenge the reactive oxygen species (ROS) and mitigate subsequently the oxidative deleterious effect of salt on carbon metabolism including the CBB cycle.

### Keywords
Salt stress, Protomics, Prm, Alfalfa

### Affiliations
CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese academy of Sciences, 200032, Shanghai, China
CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Mingnan Qu

### Lab Head
Dr Mingnan Qu
CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese academy of Sciences, 200032, Shanghai, China


