### Accession
PXD010518

### Title
ELF3-AP MS at ZT4 in wt, phyb and phya mutant backgrounds

### Description
Molecular basis of flowering under natural long-day conditions in Arabidopsis

### Sample Protocol
Fourteen-day-old ELF3:ELF3-6H3F, ELF3:ELF3-6H3F/phyB-9, ELF3:ELF3-6H3F/phyA-211, 35S::GFP lines grown on LS agar plates under the LD+FR+temp conditions were harvested at ZT4. Procedures for Tandem FLAG and His-immunoprecipitations (IP), protein digestion, and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) were performed according to 1. Huang, H., Alvarez, S., and Nusinow, D. “Data on the Identification of Protein Interactors with the Evening Complex and PCH1 in Arabidopsis Using Tandem Affinity Purification and Mass Spectrometry (TAP-MS).” Data in brief 8, (2016): 56–60. doi:10.1016/j.dib.2016.05.014, 1. Huang, H., Alvarez, S., Bindbeutel, R., Shen, Z., Naldrett, M. J., Evans, B. S., Briggs, S. P., Hicks, L. M., Kay, S. A., and Nusinow, D. “Identification of Evening Complex Associated Proteins in Arabidopsis by Affinity Purification and Mass Spectrometry.” Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP 15, no. 1 (2016): 201–217. doi:10.1074/mcp.M115.054064, 1. Huang, H. and Nusinow, D. “Tandem Purification of His6-3x FLAG Tagged Proteins for Mass Spectrometry From Arabidopsis” BIO-PROTOCOL 6, no. 23 (2016): doi:10.21769/BioProtoc.2060.

### Data Protocol
"AP-MS Data Analysis—MS data were extracted by Proteome Dis- coverer (ThermoFisher Scientific; v.1.4) and converted into mgf. Da- tabase searches were done using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; v.2.5.0) using the TAIR10 database (20101214, 35,386 entries) and the cRAP database (http://www.thegpm.org/cRAP/) and assum- ing the digestion enzyme trypsin and 2 missed cleavages. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.80 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 15 ppm. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethyl of cysteine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Scaffold (Pro- teome Software Inc., Portland, OR; v.4.4.3) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifica- tions were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. The Scaffold Local FDR was used and only peptides probabilities with FDR􏰊1% were used for further analysis. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability as assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Only the proteins identified with 􏰏 2 unique peptides were further used in the analysis, except when proteins with only one peptide were identified in more than one replicate. The unique Normalized Spectral Abundance Factor (uNSAF) was selected for the quantitative measurement (Scaffold_4.4.3) to estimate the protein abundance of individual proteins in samples. Total unique peptide count refers to all uniquely identified peptides (including modified peptides and those shared with other proteins), whereas exclusive unique peptide counts refers to peptides that are derived from and can be assigned to only a single protein. SAINT analysis (Express Version: exp3.1) was run using default settings with samples kept separate, applying the following filters (unique peptides 􏰋 2, protein length included in model, and proteins collapsed to gene ID)."

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Arabidopsis, Plants, Early flowering3

### Affiliations
Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, St. Louis, MO, 63132, USA.

### Submitter
Dmitri Nusinow

### Lab Head
Dr Dmtri A. Nusinow
Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, St. Louis, MO, 63132, USA.


