### Accession
PXD030597

### Title
Growth factor-induced alterations of plasma membrane-associated proteome of DAOY cell

### Description
In this study we investigated alterations in the plasma membrane (PM)-associated proteome of DAOY medulloblastoma cells. We used a surface biotinylation approach to label PM-associated proteins. We enriched for biotinylated proteins by streptavidin-pull-down and determined the composition by mass-spectrometry. We compared CRISPR/CAS9 control cells and CRISPR/CAS9 MAP4K4 (MAP4K4 depletion) cells under starvation and after 30 min stimulation with 20 ng/ml HGF. We performed two group analyses of all conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Cell-surface labelling  DAOY cells were prepared in four T75 flasks to reach a 70% confluency (per condition and replicates). Standard medium was then replaced with SFM. After 24 hours, cells were 85% confluent, and media were replaced with either pre-warmed SFM or pre-warmed SFM supplemented with 20 ng/mL HGF (PeproTech, 100-39) for 30 min. EZ-Link-Sulfo-NHS-SS-biotin kit (Thermo Scientific, 89881) was used to surface label DAOY_sgCTL and DAOY_sgMAP4K4 cells. In brief, 10 ml EZ-Link-Sulfo-NHS-SS (0.25 mg/ml, diluted in ice-cold PBS) was added at 4°C for 30 minutes. Biotinylation reaction was terminated by addition 500 µl of provided quenching solution. Cells from four T75 were collected in a unique tube and washed three times with 10 ml ice-cold TBS (700g, 3 minutes centrifugations). Cell pellets were lysed on ice for 30 minutes with one cycle of sonication (Sonoplus, HD2070) and 5 seconds vortexing every 5 minutes. Insoluble debris pelleted using centrifugation at 10’000 g for 2 minutes. Biotinylated proteins were affinity-purified from lysates using columns containing NeutrAvidin Agarose slurry for one hour at room temperature with end-over-end mixing. After 3 washing steps with lysis buffer, bound proteins were eluted using sample buffer (BioRad, 1610747), complemented with 50 mM DTT, for one hour at room temperature with end-over-end mixing. Purified lysates were kept at -20°C for up to 1 day before Mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were prepared for mass-spectrometry (MS) by using the iST Kit (PreOmics, Germany) according to a modified protocol. In brief, proteins were precipitated with a 10% TCA, solubilized in 50 µl iST Kit lysis buffer, boiled at 95°C for 10 minutes and processed with High Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU) for 30 s, with ultrasonic amplitude set to 85%. Proteins were quantified using Qubit, and 50 µg of the samples were for digestion using 50 µl of the iST Kit digestion solution. After 60 min f incubation at 37°C, the digestion was stopped with 100 µl of iST Kit Stop solution. The non-bound components of the solutions in the cartridge were removed by centrifugation at 3800 x g, while the peptides were retained by the iST-filter. Finally, the peptides were washed, eluted, dried and re-solubilized in 20 µl iST Kit LC-Load buffer for MS-Analysis.  Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to a M-Class UPLC (Waters). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. For each sample, 1 μl of peptides were loaded on a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min by a gradient from 8 to 27% B in 85 min, 35% B in 5 min and 80% B in 1 min. Samples were acquired in a randomized order. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA), acquiring a full-scan MS spectra (350−1’400 m/z) at a resolution of 120’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 3’000’000, followed by HCD (higher-energy collision dissociation) fragmentation on the twenty most intense signals per cycle. HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15’000 using a normalized collision energy of 25 and a maximum injection time of 22 ms. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 100’000 ions. Charge state screening was enabled. Singly, unassigned, and charge states higher than seven were rejected. Only precursors with intensity above 110’000 were selected for MS/MS. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 30 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1012 and 445.1200. The mass spectrometry proteomics data were handled using the local laboratory information management system (LIMS).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label free protein quantification The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against a Swissprot Homo sapiens reference proteome (taxonomy 9606, version from 2016-12-09), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavages. MaxQuant Orbitrap default search settings were used. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label free quantification was enabled and a 2-minute window for match between runs was applied. In the MaxQuant experimental design template, each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values. Protein fold changes were computed based on Intensity values reported in the proteinGroups.txt file. A set of functions implemented in the R package SRMService was used to filter for proteins with two or more peptides allowing for a maximum of four missing values, and to normalize the data with a modified robust z-score transformation and to compute p-values using the t-test with pooled variance. If all protein measurements are missing in one of the conditions, a pseudo fold change was computed replacing the missing group average by the mean of 10% smallest protein intensities in that condition. For data visualization and normalization across all samples, all group comparison correspond has been processed by statistical analysis of all sgMAP4K4 samples (starved and stimulated) versus all sgCTL samples (starved and stimulated).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hepatocyte growth factor, Plasma membrane proteome, Medulloblastoma, Map4k4

### Affiliations
University Children's Hospital Zürich
Balgrist Campus Lengghalde 5 CH-8008 Zürich Switzerland

### Submitter
Martin Baumgartner

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Baumgartner
Balgrist Campus Lengghalde 5 CH-8008 Zürich Switzerland


