### Accession
PXD025826

### Title
On-tissue spatially-resolved glycoproteomics guided by N-glycan imaging reveal global dysregulation of canine glioma glycoproteomic landscape

### Description
Here we present an approach to identify N-linked glycoproteins and deduce their spatial localization using a combination of MALDI N-glycan MSI and spatially-resolved glycoproteomics. We subjected glioma biopsies to on-tissue PNGaseF digestion and MALDI-MSI and found that the glycan HexNAc4-Hex5-NeuAc2 was predominantly expressed in necrotic regions of high-grade canine gliomas. To determine the underlying sialo-glycoprotein, various regions in adjacent tissue sections were subjected to microdigestion and manual glycoproteomic analysis. Results identified haptoglobin as the protein associated with HexNAc4-Hex5-NeuAc2, making our study the first report that directly links glycan imaging with intact glycopeptide identification. In total, our spatially-resolved glycoproteomics technique identified over 400 N-, O-, and S- glycopeptides from over 30 proteins, demonstrating the diverse array of glycosylation present on the tissue slides and the sensitivity of our technique. Ultimately, this proof-of-principle work demonstrates that spatially-resolved glycoproteomics greatly complement MALDI-MSI in understanding dysregulated glycosylation.

### Sample Protocol
Sections (8 µm thick) were taken from the FFPE blocks using a microtome (Leica Biosystems, Nanterre, France) and mounted on indium/tin oxide-coated slides (ITO, LaserBioLabs, Sophia-Antipolis, France). The ITO slides were pre-treated by pipetting 1.5 mL of polylysine solution on the conductive surface and incubating at room temperature for 5 min. The treatment was performed twice and dried under a heat gun then dipped in HPLC water. The mounted sections were heated at 60 ºC on a slide heater for 1 h. While the slides were still hot, the sections were dewaxed in xylene and rehydrated following standard procedures.(Angel et al., 2018) The slides were then subjected to antigen retrieval by incubating in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH = 9) at 95 ºC for 1h, followed by rinsing in HPLC water. PNGaseF (New England Biosystems) was subjected to dialysis by pipetting 40 µL of PNGaseF onto a PVDF membrane at set on top of 200 mL of water. The buffer exchange was allowed to proceed for 2 h at RT. The PNGaseF was then rehydrated and sprayed onto tissue slices at a rate of 10 µL/min for a total of 15 layers. The slides were placed in a humidified chamber and left overnight at 37 ºC. After the reaction, DHB matrix was sublimated onto the sections at 140 ºC for 10 min, which leads to an average of 0.424 mg matrix deposited per cm2 based on three independent measurements. MS imaging of tissue slices was performed using a RapiFlex MALDI TOF instrument (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). Images were acquired at 70 µm resolution scanning at m/z 700-3,200 with the Smartbeam 3D laser firing at a frequency of 10 kHz. Each spectrum was recorded after accumulating 1,000 laser shots per spot. The laser ablation pattern was set at M5 at a 35 x 35 µm scan range. The ion source voltage was set to 19.984 kV, while the PIE and lens were at 2.608 and 12.366 kV, respectively. The reflectors were set at 20.663, 1.112 and 8.558 kV. Matrix suppression by deflection up to m/z 240 was activated. The reflector detector gain and sampling rate were kept constant on all imaging acquisitions. Additionally, high-resolution MS1 spectra were acquired using a MALDI LTQ orbitrap XL instrument (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) operated at 30,000 FWHM at m/z 400. Glycans were detected as sodiated or potassiated adducts in positive mode. Spectra were acquired directly on-tissue and were averaged from 10 scans with each scan composed of 1 µscan acquired at 1 µscan/step and 10 laser shots.

### Data Protocol
Following intact MS1 analyses, the Glycomod tool (https://web.expasy.org/glycomod/) was initially used to predict the structure and composition of the observed N-glycans from the full MS spectra recorded at high mass accuracy, with the searches performed at 10 ppm mass tolerance. All monosaccharides were allowed except for NeuGc, which is known to be excluded from rat and mouse brain.(Davies and Varki, 2013) Only the GlycoMod hits that were listed in “GlyConnect” were considered for further analysis. With putative glycan structure information in-hand, the MS images were uploaded on SCiLS Lab version 2016b (Bruker Daltonics). The baseline was calculated using the top hat method. The ion distributions (as sodiated or potassiated adducts) of the glycans were mapped by plotting the signal intensities in all spectra normalized against the total ion count followed by application of weak hotspot removal. These ion distributions were plotted at ±0.250 Da m/z intervals, and the intervals were used for peak alignment and further analysis. Optical images of the H&E-stained adjacent sections were uploaded to the software and co-registered with the corresponding MS images. These H&E images were used to refine the regions of interest (ROIs) in each tissue section where spectra were extracted for Principal Component Analysis (PCA). ROIs corresponding to benign, tumor and necrotic regions, where possible, were taken from each tissue section. PCA was performed using the first 5 components, corresponding to approximately 90% of the variance explained, with the first component accounting for more 50% of the variance

### Publication Abstract
Here, we present an approach to identify N-linked glycoproteins and deduce their spatial localization using a combination of matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI) N-glycan mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) and spatially resolved glycoproteomics. We subjected glioma biopsies to on-tissue PNGaseF digestion and MALDI-MSI and found that the glycan HexNAc4-Hex5-NeuAc2 was predominantly expressed in necrotic regions of high-grade canine gliomas. To determine the underlying sialo-glycoprotein, various regions in adjacent tissue sections were subjected to microdigestion and manual glycoproteomic analysis. Results identified haptoglobin as the protein associated with HexNAc4-Hex5-NeuAc2, thus directly linking glycan imaging with intact glycopeptide identification. In total, our spatially resolved glycoproteomics technique identified over 400 N-, O-, and S- glycopeptides from over 30 proteins, demonstrating the diverse array of glycosylation present on the tissue slices and the sensitivity of our technique. Ultimately, this proof-of-principle work demonstrates that spatially resolved glycoproteomics greatly complement MALDI-MSI in understanding dysregulated glycosylation.

### Keywords
Hypersialylation, Glycoproteomics, Haptoglobin, Glioblastoma, Sialic-acid, Maldi-msi, Spatially-resolved, Glycan-imaging

### Affiliations
Laboratoire PRISM INSERM U1192 Université de Lille Villeneuve d'ascq France
PRISM

### Submitter
Soulaimane Aboulouard

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
Laboratoire PRISM INSERM U1192 Université de Lille Villeneuve d'ascq France


