### Accession
PXD029135

### Title
Proteomic effects of budesonide and imiquimod on human bronchial epithelial cells

### Description
We carry out a comparative proteomic analysis of human bronchial epithelial cells from patients clinically treated or not with inhaled budesonide and stimulated or not with the viral mimic Poly(I:C).We also wanted to investigate the potential anti-viral effects of imiquimod, a TLR7 agonist, on the bronchial epithelial cells proteome in vitro.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in ice cold 5% SDS in 100 mM Tris (pH=7.55) sonication using a Branson Digital Sonifier® 250-D (Branson Ultrasonics Corporation, Danbury, USA), at amplitude 10%, with 10s pulse on and 20s off, for a total of 36 cycles. The lysates were centrifuged at 15,871 xg for 8 minutes to remove insoluble material. 60 μg protein per cell lysate supernatant per sample was processed on HILIC Microspheres (ReSyn Biosciences, Gauteng, South Africa) in a King-Fisher Flex (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen). The following steps were performed in 96-well plates in the system: magnetic microspheres (1:10 protein:beads ratio) were incubated in equilibration buffer (15% ACN, 100 mM NH4Ac, pH=4.5); protein samples were incubated in binding buffer (30% ACN, 200 mM NH4Ac, pH=4.5) for binding of proteins to HILIC beads; beads were washed twice in 95% ACN; digestion of proteins for 1h at 37°C with trypsin (20:1 protein:trypsin ratio) dissolved in 50 mM AMBIC. Peptides were recovered from the plate and dried in a Speedvac (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) prior to C18 desalting.  Peptide desalting was performed using BioPureSPN Mini, PROTO 300 C18 (The Nest Group, Inc., MA, USA). Briefly, columns were equilibrated with 100 μl 70% ACN, 5% FA and conditioned using 100 μl 5% FA. Peptide samples were resuspended in 100 ul 5% FA and loaded on the column. Columns were washed with 5% FA and before elution of peptides using 100 μl 50% ACN, 5% FA. The resulting peptide solution was dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20°C until analysis.    Samples were resuspended in 10 μl 0.1% FA and 6 μl were loaded onto an EASY-nano LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). The analytical column was a silica capillary (75 μm* 16 cm Pico Tip Emitter, New Objective, USA) packed in house with C18 ReproSil-Pur 1.9 μm (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Peptides were separated using a 60 min LC gradient from 5% to 25% solvent B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA) and continuously sampled by a Q-Exactive HF-X Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) through an electrospray interface. Data were acquired using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) in positive ion mode. Precursor spectra (375 to 1500 m/z) were acquired at 120,000 resolution with automatic gain control (AGC, MS1 target 3x106) and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The 20 most abundant ion peptides were continuously selected for fragmentation. Fragmentation spectra were acquired at 15,000 resolution with an AGC target of 1x105 ions and a maximum injection time of 20 ms. Isolation width for fragmentation was set to 1.2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS data files were processed using MaxQuant (https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.1511) version 1.6.15.0 with default settings except that match-between-runs was enabled. The search database was THISP level 2 database dated 2020-06-01 (https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jproteome.6b00445). The non-normalized protein group intensity values from the MaxQuant processing were median normalized using NormalyzerDE (https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00523) and used for subsequent analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bronchial epithelial cells, Huma, Lung, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Experimental Medical Science, Respiratory Immunopharmacology group, Biomedical Centre (BMC), Lund University
Lund University

### Submitter
Juan José Nieto Fontarigo

### Lab Head
Dr Lena Uller
Department of Experimental Medical Science, Respiratory Immunopharmacology group, Biomedical Centre (BMC), Lund University


