### Accession
PXD030438

### Title
Proteomic analysis of psychrophilic and mesophilic bacterial species

### Description
This study, in an attempt to mimic the molecular adaptation of polar microorganisms, combines proteomic approaches with a classical microbiological analysis in several bacterial species. The comparison of the strategies employed by each bacterial species estimates the contribution of genome versus environmental variables in the adaptation to temperature.  Regarding the molecular machinery used by these bacteria to face the consequences of temperature changes, chaperones have a pivoting role. They form complexes with other proteins in the response to the environment, establishing cooperation with transmembrane proteins, elongation factors, and proteins for protection against oxidative damage.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria included in this study were purchased from culture collections. Individual pre-inocula were prepared from vials stored in glycerol at -80ºC. Aliquots of 100µl from these vials were incubated at their corresponding optimal growth temperature in tubes with 5ml of each specific broth. Once they reached the half exponential phase (corresponding to an optical density (O.D.) at 600nm about 0.5), 500µl of each one was inoculated in Erlenmeyer flasks with broth at a final volume of 100ml. Flasks of each species were incubated in triplicates at each experimental temperature of 4ºC, 12ºC and 30ºC for 5 days in aerobic conditions. The O.D. at 600nm was checked twice per day until they reached the stationary growth phase. Then, pellets of each flask were obtained by centrifugation for 20 minutes (10, 000 x g; 4ºC) and washed with phosphate buffer saline (PBS). Pellets were used to extract proteins for subsequent experiments. The proteins expressed in each bacterium were separated by 2-DE. After the first dimension in IEF (isoelectric focusing) IPG-strips (Immobiline Dry Strips, GE; pH 3-11 NL -non-linear- of 24 cm), that separate proteins based on their isoelectric point, the strips were equilibrated in two successive steps with SDS equilibration buffer solutions containing Tris buffer 100 mM, urea 6M, glycerol 30% (w/v) and DTT 0.5% (w/v). Then they were incubated with iodoacetamide 4.5% (w/v). The second dimension in SDS-PAGE, to separate proteins by their molecular weight, was carried out on 12% acrylamide (2.6% crosslinking) gels (1.0 mm thick). Gels were stained with Coomassie Blue or with MALDI-MS-compatible silver reagent for protein identification.

### Data Protocol
Spectral data were analyzed to search the NCBIprot database using the Mascot database search algorithm. Combined peptide mass fingerprint and MS/MS ion search modes were used. Given that we are searching for environmental microorganisms, some precautions have been taken to check the results from protein identifications. We have also considered other main features of proteins in 2D gels such as their molecular weight and isoelectric point to better confirm their identity. Mascot search parameters were tryptic peptides with one missed cleavage, using 80 ppm and 0.3 Da for precursor and fragment tolerances, respectively. Theoretical molecular weight and isoelectric point were calculated for each protein with the Compute pI/MW tool (ExPASy, Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Switzerland). Apparent molecular weight and isoelectric point were obtained from each spot position in gels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Maldi-tof ms, Proteomics, Mesophilic bacteria, Psychrophilic bacteria, Adaptation

### Affiliations
Microbial Evolution Laboratory, Centro de Astrobiologia (CSIC-INTA), 28850 Torrejón de Ardoz, Madrid, Spain
ES (+34) 915206455

### Submitter
Eva Garcia

### Lab Head
Dr Cristina Cid Sanchez
Microbial Evolution Laboratory, Centro de Astrobiologia (CSIC-INTA), 28850 Torrejón de Ardoz, Madrid, Spain


