### Accession
PXD007261

### Title
Pseudomonas aeruginosa BONCAT biofilms

### Description
Cell-selective BONCAT analysis of proteins synthesized by a P. aeruginosa biofilm subpopulation throughout treatment with ciprofloxacin.

### Sample Protocol
Biofilms were grown at 37 °C with a constant flow rate of 0.03 ml/min. For proteomic analyses, biofilms were grown in silicone rubber tubing (10 mm interior diameter, 20 cm long) (McMaster-Carr) at 37 °C with a constant flow rate of 0.5 ml/min. Flow was stopped and tubing was clamped. FAB medium with 0.05 g/L glucose and 1 mM Anl was injected by syringe and biofilms were incubated for 1.5 h at 37 °C. For ciprofloxacin treated samples, 60 µg/mL ciprofloxacin was included in the labeling medium. Loosely adherent biofilm cells were extracted by collecting media within each tube and flushing with 0.9% NaCl. Tubing was cut into 1 cm pieces and vortexed in 0.9% NaCl to remove remaining cells. All cells were combined. For proteomic analysis, cells were collected from tubing as described, pelleted, and frozen at -80 °C.  All samples were lysed by resuspension in lysis buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, 4% SDS). Lysates were sonicated with a microtip probe for 30 s at setting 20% (Qsonica). For all enrichments, cysteines were reduced by addition of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 20 min at room temperature and free thiols alkylated by addition of 100 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min in the dark.  For the comparison between ciprofloxacin-treated samples, lysates were reduced and alkylated as above. For each sample, approximately 0.5 mg of protein in 0.5 mL PBS was incubated with 50 μL of DBCO-agarose bead 50% slurry (Click Chemistry Tools) for 2.5 h at room temperature. Beads were washed extensively in gravity flow columns (Bio-Rad) with 40 ml (8x5 ml) each of PBS, 0.8% (w/v) SDS; 8 M urea; and 20% (v/v) acetonitrile in water. Beads were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB) for on-bead tryptic digestion.  For on-bead digestion following BONCAT enrichment with DBCO-agarose, beads were incubated with 100 ng trypsin in 100 µl 9:1 50 mM AB:acetonitrile for 18 h at 37 °C. Supernatant was collected and beads were washed twice with 100 µl 20% acetonitrile to extract all peptides. Peptides were dried, passed through HiPPR spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to remove residual SDS, and desalted with C18 ZipTips.  Ciprofloxacin experiments were performed on a hybrid ion trap-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the following modifications: For the EASY- nLC 1000 system, solvent A consisted of 97.8% H2O, 2% ACN, and 0.2% formic acid and solvent B consisted of 19.8% H2O, 80% ACN, and 0.2% formic acid. For the LC-MS/MS experiments, digested peptides were directly loaded at a flow rate of 500 nl/min onto a PicoFrit column (New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed in house with ReproSil-Pur C18AQ 1.9 um resin (120 Å pore size, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) and the column was heated to 60 ºC. The peptides were separated with a 120 min gradient (0-30% B in 120 min) at a flow rate of 220 nL/min. The gradient was as follows: 0–30% B (50 min), and 100% B (10 min). The Orbitrap was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode to automatically alternate between a full scan (m/z=400–1600) in the Orbitrap and subsequent 20 CID MS/MS scans (Top 15 method) in the linear ion trap. CID was performed with helium as collision gas at a normalized collision energy of 35% and 30 ms of activation time.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched using MaxQuant against the P. aeruginosa PA14 UniProt entries (5,886 sequences) and a contaminant database (246 sequences). Trypsin was specified as the digestion enzyme with up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and protein N- terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were variable modifications. Protein abundances were estimated with MaxLFQ, and for each experiment, peptides were matched between runs. LFQ values were normalized and used to calculate abundance ratios between samples and to estimate variance using the limma package in R version 3.2.2. P-values were adjusted for false discovery by the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure.

### Publication Abstract
Biofilm infections exhibit high tolerance against antibiotic treatment. The study of biofilms is complicated by phenotypic heterogeneity; biofilm subpopulations differ in their metabolic activities and their responses to antibiotics. Here, we describe the use of the bio-orthogonal noncanonical amino acid tagging (BONCAT) method to enable selective proteomic analysis of a <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> biofilm subpopulation. Through controlled expression of a mutant methionyl-tRNA synthetase, we targeted BONCAT labeling to cells in the regions of biofilm microcolonies that showed increased tolerance to antibiotics. We enriched and identified proteins synthesized by cells in these regions. Compared to the entire biofilm proteome, the labeled subpopulation was characterized by a lower abundance of ribosomal proteins and was enriched in proteins of unknown function. We performed a pulse-labeling experiment to determine the dynamic proteomic response of the tolerant subpopulation to supra-MIC treatment with the fluoroquinolone antibiotic ciprofloxacin. The adaptive response included the upregulation of proteins required for sensing and repairing DNA damage and substantial changes in the expression of enzymes involved in central carbon metabolism. We differentiated the immediate proteomic response, characterized by an increase in flagellar motility, from the long-term adaptive strategy, which included the upregulation of purine synthesis. This targeted, selective analysis of a bacterial subpopulation demonstrates how the study of proteome dynamics can enhance our understanding of biofilm heterogeneity and antibiotic tolerance.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Bacterial growth is frequently characterized by behavioral heterogeneity at the single-cell level. Heterogeneity is especially evident in the physiology of biofilms, in which distinct cellular subpopulations can respond differently to stresses, including subpopulations of pathogenic biofilms that are more tolerant to antibiotics. Global proteomic analysis affords insights into cellular physiology but cannot identify proteins expressed in a particular subpopulation of interest. Here, we report a chemical biology method to selectively label, enrich, and identify proteins expressed by cells within distinct regions of biofilm microcolonies. We used this approach to study changes in protein synthesis by the subpopulation of antibiotic-tolerant cells throughout a course of treatment. We found substantial differences between the initial response and the long-term adaptive strategy that biofilm cells use to cope with antibiotic stress. The method we describe is readily applicable to investigations of bacterial heterogeneity in diverse contexts.

### Keywords
Biofilms, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Boncat, Ciprofloxacin

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering California Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Brett Babin

### Lab Head
Dr David A. Tirrell
Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering California Institute of Technology


