### Accession
PXD043492

### Title
Deubiquitinating enzymes in human macrophages after Francisella tularensis infection

### Description
Ubiquitination/deubiquitination belong to the most important regulatory mechanisms carried out through the attachment/removal of the ubiquitin molecule, respectively. The process is necessary not only to mark molecules for degradation, but also for example to the activation of signaling pathways leading to pro-inflammatory host response. Many intracellular pathogens, such as Francisella tularensis, have evolved mechanisms of blocking such host immune responses to escape degradation. Here, we describe that F. tularensis interferes with the host's ubiquitination system. We showed increased total activity of deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) in human macrophages after infection and confirmed the reduced enzymatic activities of two specific DUBs: USP10 and UCH-L5, and the increased activity of USP25. We further revealed the enrichment of these three enzymes in exosomes derived from  F. tularensis-infected cells.

### Sample Protocol
TMT6 isobaric labeling 100 µg isolated proteins from cell lysates were prepared according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT labeling using TMTsixplex Isobaric Mass Tagging kit (Thermo Fisher, 90064). Proteins were digested with trypsin (SOLu-trypsin dimethylated; Sigma-Aldrich, EMS0005) at ratio trypsin:proteins=1:30 (w/w) overnight at 37 °C. Upon acidification of samples with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), the sodium deoxycholate (DOC; Sigma-Aldrich, D5670) precipitate was formed and then removed by centrifugation for 1 min 3,000 x g. An equal volume of ethyl acetate was added to the supernatant and the mixture was vortexed and centrifuged for 1 min 3,000 x g. The upper organic phase was removed, and the extraction process was repeated four times to remove DOC. The samples were vacuum-dried and redisolved in 71 µl 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate TEAB and isobaric labeled by TMTsixplex Isobaric Mass Tagging Reagents. The pool samples were desalted using Empore C18-SD extraction disk cartridges (4 mm/1 mL; Supelco, 66871-U), eluted by 60% acetonitrile (ACN) /0.1% TFA vacuum-dried and stored at -20 °C. The isobaric labeled peptides were fractionated by a home made gradient capillary chromatography, in which reverse phase C18 under basic pH and HILIC stationary phase were used. Each fraction was vacuum-dried and stored at -20 °C.  LFQ analysis The proteins eluted from DUBs immunoprecipitation were precipitated by 0.18 volume of 100% trichloroacetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, T4885), incubated for 4 hours on ice, and centrifuged for 30 minutes at 21,000 x g at 4 °C. The supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was washed with ice-cold 90% acetone, and centrifuged for 15 minutes at 21,000 x g at 4 °C, then the acetone was removed and the pellet was dried. Next, the pellet was solubilized in 4% DOC in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC; Fluka, 09830). The proteins were reduced with 4 mM dithiothreitol (DTT; Fluka, 43819) in 25 mM ABC and directly alkylated with 16 mM iodoacetamide (IAA; Sigma-Aldrich, I1149) in 25 mM ABC. The excess of IAA reagent was quenched by the addition of DTT to a final concentration of 4 mM DTT in 25 mM ABC. The digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C using SOLu-trypsin in a ratio of 1:30 (w/w). Next, 1% TFA (Fluka, 34967) was used to acidify the sample mixture. The DOC precipitate was removed by centrifugation and ethyl acetate extraction as was described before. The samples were desalted using Empore C18-SD extraction disk cartridges (4 mm/1 mL; Supelco, 66871-U).  Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) The samples were dissolved in 20 µl 2% ACN/0.1% TFA (v/v) and 1 µl of the sample was analyzed using a gradient nanoLC system with UV detection (UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Dionex, USA) containing µ-Precolumn (300 µm × 5 mm, C18PepMap 5 µm 100 Å particles; Dionex, USA) and analytical NanoEase column 100 µm × 150 mm, Atlantis C18 3 µm 100 Å particles; Waters, USA). The optimized sample loadings were then used for LC-MS analysis carried out on the UltiMate 3000 RSLC-nano HPLC system (Dionex, USA) ) with a trap column (75 µm × 20 mm) packed with 3 µm Acclaim PepMap100 C18 particles and a separation column (75 µm × 150 mm) packed with 2 µm Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 particles, all coupled to the QExactive system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) in the positive ion mode. Instrumental data acquisition was done using Xcalibur software v. 4.2.47 and Tune control software v. 2.11.0.3006. The instrument settings for TMT quantitation analysis were adjusted as follows: full MS scan (400–1650 m/z) at 70,000 FWHM with maximum filling time 100 ms and AGC target 3E6; top 10 precursors in MS/MS at 35,000 FWHM with isolation window 1.2 m/z, fixed first mass at 110 m/z, maximum filling time 250 ms and AGC target 2E5. The settings for label-free quantitation analysis were: full MS scan (350–1650 m/z) at 70,000 FWHM with maximum filling time 100 ms and AGC target 1E6; top 12 precursors in MS/MS at 17,500 FWHM with isolation window 1.6 m/z, fixed first mass at 140 m/z, maximum filling time 100 ms and AGC target 1E5.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis The obtained raw spectra files were processed in Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA, v. 2.4.1.15) to identify proteins and to quantify relative protein abundance in the samples. The data processing workflow contained a spectrum selector, non-fragment filter, top N peaks filter (only LFQ), precursor detector, SequestHT search engine, Percolator validator, Spectrum Confidence Filter, SequestHT search engine and Percolator validator (second round search, only TMT quantitation) nodes. The parameters for the first SequestHT database search were: protein database - UniProt human reference proteome UP000005640 and UniProt Francisella tularensis reference proteome UP000006302; enzyme - trypsin; maximum missed cleavage sites - 1; min. peptide length - 7; precursor mass tolerance - 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance - 0.02 Da; the weight of b- and y-ions - 1; static modifications - Carbamidomethyl / +57.021 (C); dynamic modifications - Oxidation / +15.995 Da (M); dynamic modifications (protein terminus) - Acetyl / +42.011 Da (N-terminus), Met-loss / -131.040 Da (M), Met-loss+Acetyl / -89.030 Da (M). The obtained search results (msf file) were processed in the consensus workflow containing PSM Grouper, Peptide Validator, Protein and Peptide Filter (two peptides with strict target FDR 0.01), Protein Scorer, Protein FDR Validator, Protein Grouping, Protein in Peptide Annotation, Modification Sites, Protein Annotation and Protein Marker nodes. In the TMT6 labeling experiment was used Reporter Ions Quantifier node in the processing workflow and the Reporter Ions Quantifier node in the consensus workflow (with pairwise computed protein ratio and background-based t-testing). On the other side, the label-free quantitation analysis, Minora Feature Detector node was used in the processing workflow and Feature Mapper and Precursor Ions Quantifier (with pairwise computed protein ratio and background-based t-testing) nodes were applied in the consensus workflow.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Francisella tularensis</i> influences several host molecular/signaling pathways during infection. Ubiquitination and deubiquitination are among the most important regulatory mechanisms and respectively occur through attachment or removal of the ubiquitin molecule. The process is necessary not only to mark molecules for degradation, but also, for example, to the activation of signaling pathways leading to pro-inflammatory host response. Many intracellular pathogens, including <i>Francisella tularensis</i>, have evolved mechanisms of modifying such host immune responses to escape degradation. Here, we describe that <i>F. tularensis</i> interferes with the host's ubiquitination system. We show increased total activity of deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) in human macrophages after infection, while confirm reduced enzymatic activities of two specific DUBs (USP10 and UCH-L5), and demonstrate increased activity of USP25. We further reveal the enrichment of these three enzymes in exosomes derived from <i>F. tularensis</i>-infected cells. The obtained results show the regulatory effect on ubiquitination mechanism in macrophages during <i>F. tularensis</i> infection.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Host-pathogen, Macrophage, Francisella tularensis

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Pathology and Biology, Faculty of Military Health Sciences, University of Defence, Trebesska 1575, 500 01 Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic
Department of Molecular Pathology and Biology FMHS UD, Trebesska 1575, CZ-50001 Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Pavel Rehulka

### Lab Head
Dr Jiri Stulik
Department of Molecular Pathology and Biology, Faculty of Military Health Sciences, University of Defence, Trebesska 1575, 500 01 Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic


