### Accession
PXD030979

### Title
Quantitative proteomics on pink1 mutant Drosophila melanogaster

### Description
Because pink1-mutant flies exhibit a global shutdown of protein synthesis, we decided to measure the levels of individual proteins in adult flies through quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from whole flies were prepared by grinding flies in radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer (RIPA) (20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% (v/v) Nonidet P40, 0.5% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, and 1 mM EDTA) supplemented with 1 µg/mL leupeptin, 1 µg/mL antipain, 1 µg/mL chymostatin, 1 µg/mL pepstatin and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (PhosSTOP, Roche). The suspensions were cleared by centrifugation at 21,000 g and 4°C for 10 minutes, and the protein concentrations of the supernatants were measured using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). The cleared lysates were stored at -80°C until proteomics analysis. TMT labelling was performed according to the manufacturer’s recommended protocol (https://www.thermofisher.com/order/catalogue/product/90110). One hundred micrograms of each digested protein sample was labelled individually with each of the 10 TMT tags. After labelling, the samples were combined, cleaned on a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge, dried and dissolved in 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10). TMT peptide fractionation was performed using an Acquity ethylene-bridged hybrid C18 UPLC column (Waters; 2.1 mm i.d. x 150 mm, particle size of 1.7 µm). Dried fractions were separated using the LC-MS/MS method as detailed below. The fractions were combined into pairs (i.e., the first fraction with the middle fraction) and analysed by LC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA) system and a Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
the raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer v2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Mascot (Matrix Science) v2.6. The data were aligned with the UniProt data from Pseudomonas aeruginosa (5584 sequences), which is the common repository of adventitious proteins (cRAP, version 1.0). All comparative analyses were performed with the R statistical language. The R package MSnbase 62 was used for the processing of proteomics data. Briefly, this process entailed the removal of missing values (instances where a protein was identified but not quantified in all channels were rejected from further analysis), log2-transformation of the raw data, and subsequent sample normalization utilizing the 'diff.median' method in MSnbase (this translates all samples columns such that they all match the grand median). The differential abundances of the proteins were evaluated using the limma package, and the differences in protein abundances were statistically analysed using Student’s t‐test with their variances moderated by the empirical Bayes method in limma. The p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Drosophila, Tmt

### Affiliations
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Luis Martins

### Lab Head
Dr L. Miguel Martins
University of Cambridge


