### Accession
PXD003316

### Title
Tumor matrix stiffness induces CCN1/CYR61  upregulation of N-Cadherin to promote cancer cell  trans-endothelial migration and metastasis

### Description
Tumor progression is often accompanied with increased extracellular matrix stiffness, but how this affects endothelial cells (ECs) is largely unknown. We used mass spectrometry to analyse the proteomic changes of primary human ECs cultured on physiological or tumor stiffness and found that CCN1/CYR61 is highly induced by tumor stiffness. Knock out of Ccn1 in the vasculature of Ccn1loxP/loxP mice by administrating a soluble form of Cre shows that fewer of the treated mice harbour circulating tumor cells and lung metastases, without affecting primary tumor growth, using the B16F10 syngeneic mouse melanoma model This demonstrates that CCN1 loss in the host impairs cancer metastasis and we dissected the molecular mechanism in vitro. Stiffness-induced CCN1 acts via (integrin αvβ3), FAK, beta-catenin signalling to increase N-Cadherin expression in ECs, which, in turn, leads to an elevated adhesion of cancer cells to ECs via N-Cadherin homophilic interactions.

### Sample Protocol
For the stiffness proteome, HUVECs were SILAC-labelled in EGM2 medium containing Lys-8 and Arg-10 (heavy) or Lys-0 and Arg-0 (light) amino acids. Forward and reverse experiments, where labelling conditions were swapped, were performed. For the proteome of HUVECs silenced for CCN1 and cultured on Matrigel, a heavy SILAC-HUVEC standard was mixed at a 1:1 ratio with each of the lysates from the non-labelled samples (triplicates). Cell lysates were collected in 2 % SDS, reduced with DTT and run through an SDS-PAGE gel before digesting proteins in gel with trypsin (Stiffness and siCCN1 experiments), or (Matrigel experiment) proteins were digested on filter using the FASP protocol and peptides separated into 6 fractions using on-tip SAX chromatography.

### Data Protocol
Digested peptides were desalted using StageTip (Rappsilber et al., 2007). After removal of ACN using speed vacuum, peptides were resuspended in 1% TFA, 0,2% acetic acid buffer and injected on an EASY-nLC system coupled on line to a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific) Peptides were separated using a 20 cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in house with reversed-phase Reprosil Pur Basic 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH) and eluted with a flow of 200 nl/min from 5% to 30% of buffer containing 80% ACN in 0.5% acetic acid, in a 90 min linear gradient (190 min gradient for the Matrigel proteome).  The mass range acquired for the full scan MS is 300-1650 m/z with a resolution of 240000 (rCID mode) or 120000 (HCD mode) at 400 Th and the Orbitrap aims to collet 1 x 106 charges at a time. For HCD fragmentation, the top ten most intense peaks in the full MS are isolated for fragmentation at the MS/MS level with a target of 5000 (rCID mode) or 40000 (HCD mode) ions at a resolution of 15000 at 400 Th. Ions singly charged are excluded, whilst the ions that have been isolated for MS/MS are subsequently added to an exclusion list. MS data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific) and the files (.RAW) processed with MaxQuant and searched with the Andromeda search engine against the human UniProt database. MaxQuant version 1.4.1.6 was used for both the stiffness dataset and CCN1 knockdown proteome, whilst 1.3.6.0 and 1.4.1.0 were used for the contact inhibited and Matrigel proliferation datasets respectively.  MaxQuant was run on default settings except for the following:  Arg-10/Lys-8 special amino acids, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (Cys) and variable modifcations of acetyl (Protein N-term) and oxidation (Met), trypsin specific digestion (following Lys/Arg except if followed by Pro) with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Protein quantification was based on unique peptides, and requantify and match between runs were checked. The protein groups file was used in Perseus using the normalized H/L ratios as expression columns. Proteins labelled as contaminants, reverse and only identified by site were removed. Proteins with at least one unique peptide were kept for further analysis. The reported H/L ratio was inverted in SILAC standard or reverse SILAC labelling experiments for easier comparison. Ratios and intensities were transformed using Log2 or Log10, respectively. Annotations from online databases including the UniProt keywords, Gene Ontology Biological Process (GOBP) terms and KEGG pathways were added. In SILAC spike-in experiments the ratio of ratios was calculated.

### Publication Abstract
Tumor progression alters the composition and physical properties of the extracellular matrix. Particularly, increased matrix stiffness has profound effects on tumor growth and metastasis. While endothelial cells are key players in cancer progression, the influence of tumor stiffness on the endothelium and the impact on metastasis is unknown. Through quantitative mass spectrometry, we find that the matricellular protein CCN1/CYR61 is highly regulated by stiffness in endothelial cells. We show that stiffness-induced CCN1 activates &#x3b2;-catenin nuclear translocation and signaling and that this contributes to upregulate N-cadherin levels on&#xa0;the surface of the endothelium, <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i> This facilitates N-cadherin-dependent cancer cell-endothelium interaction. Using intravital imaging, we show that knockout of <i>Ccn1</i> in endothelial cells inhibits melanoma cancer cell binding to the blood vessels, a critical step in cancer cell transit through the vasculature to metastasize. Targeting stiffness-induced changes in the vasculature, such as CCN1, is therefore a potential yet unappreciated mechanism to impair metastasis.

### Keywords
Stiffness; protome; silac; ccn1; matrigel; huvec; tumour; vasculature

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute
Tumour Microenvironment & Proteomics

### Submitter
Sara Zanivan

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Zanivan
CRUK Beatson Institute


