### Accession
PXD017196

### Title
The dissociation of RQT complex on ribosome

### Description
Ribosome-associated quality control (RQC) represents a rescue pathway in eukaryotic cells triggered upon translational stalling. Collided ribosomes are recognized for subsequent dissociation followed by targeting of the faulty nascent peptides for degradation. However, endogenous RQC inducing sequences and the mechanism underlying the ubiquitin-dependent ribosome dissociation remain poorly understood. Here, we identified the SDD1 mRNA from S. cerevisiae as an endogenous RQC substrate and reveal its mRNA and nascent peptide dependent stalling mechanism by mutational and cryo-EM analyses. In vitro translation of SDD1 mRNA enabled the reconstitution of Hel2-dependent poly-ubiquitination of colliding di- and preferentially tri-ribosomes. Their distinct architecture is visualized by cryo-EM and provides the structural basis for more efficient recognition by Hel2 over disomes. Subsequently, the Slh1/Rqt2 helicase subunit of the RQC trigger (RQT) complex preferentially dissociates the first stalled poly-ubiquitinated ribosome in an ATP dependent manner. Together, these findings provide fundamental mechanistic insights into RQC and its physiological role in dealing with endogenous substrates to maintain cellular protein homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
in vitro reaction samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE, followed by staining with Coomassie (Bio Craft). After washing with water, proteins in the gel slices were reduced using 5 mM TCEP (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and alkylated using 10 mM Methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, Tokyo Chemical Industry). In-gel trypsin digestion was performed with 20 ng/µl trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides extracted from gel slices with acetonitrile were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were then resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and analysed by LC-MS/MS on EASY-nLC 1200-connected Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on an analytical column (C18, 1.6 µm particle size x 75 µm diameter x 250 mm, Ion Opticks) using 2 hr gradients (0% to 40% acetonitrile over 120 min) with a constant flow of 300 nl/min. Peptides ionization was performed using Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A ‘3 sec cycle’ data-dependent acquisition method was used where the most intense ions in every 3 sec were selected for MS/MS fragmentation by HCD.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed using a Sequest HT search program in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS/MS spectra were searched against the SwissProt reviewed S. cerevisiae reference proteome (UniProt). Intensity-based non-label protein quantification was performed using a Precursor Ions Quantifier node in Proteome Discoverer 2.2.

### Publication Abstract
Ribosome-associated quality control (RQC) represents a rescue pathway in eukaryotic cells that is triggered upon translational stalling. Collided ribosomes are recognized for subsequent dissociation followed by degradation of nascent peptides. However, endogenous RQC-inducing sequences and the mechanism underlying the ubiquitin-dependent ribosome dissociation remain poorly understood. Here, we identified SDD1 messenger RNA from Saccharomyces cerevisiae as an endogenous RQC substrate and reveal the mechanism of its mRNA-dependent and nascent peptide-dependent translational stalling. In vitro translation of SDD1 mRNA enabled the reconstitution of Hel2-dependent polyubiquitination of collided disomes and, preferentially, trisomes. The distinct trisome architecture, visualized using cryo-EM, provides the structural basis for the more-efficient recognition by Hel2 compared with that of disomes. Subsequently, the Slh1 helicase subunit of the RQC trigger (RQT) complex preferentially dissociates the first stalled polyubiquitinated ribosome in an ATP-dependent manner. Together, these findings provide fundamental mechanistic insights into RQC and its physiological role in maintaining cellular protein homeostasis.

### Keywords
Yeast, Ribosome, In vitro reaction

### Affiliations
Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8578, Japan

### Submitter
Akinori Endo

### Lab Head
Dr Toshifumi Inada
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8578, Japan


