### Accession
PXD003805

### Title
Metaproteome of chicken gastrointestinal tract microbiota

### Description
The chicken gastrointestinal tract (GIT) harbours a complex microbial community, involved in several physiological processes such as host immunomodulation and feed digestion. Other studies were already performed to define the chicken gut metagenome and its fecal metaproteome. For the first time, the present study analysed dietary effects on the protein inventory of the microbiota in crop and ceca of broilers. We performed quantitative label-free metaproteomics by using 1D-gel electrophoresis coupled with LC-MS/MS to identify the structural and functional changes triggered by diets supplied with varying amount of mineral phosphorus (P) and microbial phytase (MP). Phylogenetic assessment based on label-free quantification (LFQ) values of the proteins identified Lactobacillaceae as the major family in the crop section regardless of the diet, whereas proteins belonging to the family Veillonellaceae increased with the P supplementation. Within the ceca section, proteins of Bacteroidaceae were more abundant in the P-supplied diets, whereas proteins of Eubacteriaceae decreased with the P-addition. Proteins of the Ruminococcaceae increasedraised with the amount of MP while proteins of Lactobacillaceae werewas more abundant in the MP-lacking diets. Classification of the identified proteins into COGs and KEGG pathways underlined a diverse microbiota activity depending on the dietary regimen, indicating a thriving microbial community in the case of P and MP supplementation, and stressed microbial community when no P and MP were supplied. Insights oninto the identified KEGG pathways, as well as comparison between the GIT sections, dietary treatments, and the bacterial families encoding for the pathways of interest are provided. T) harbours a complex microbial community, involved in several physiological processes such as host immunomodulation and feed digestion. Other studies were already performed to define the chicken gut metagenome and its fecal metaproteome. For the first time, the present study analysed dietary effects on the protein inventory of the microbiota in crop and ceca of broilers. We performed quantitative label-free metaproteomics by using 1D-gel electrophoresis coupled with LC-MS/MS to identify the structural and functional changes triggered by diets supplied with varying amount of mineral phosphorus (P) and microbial phytase (MP). Phylogenetic assessment based on label-free quantification (LFQ) values of the proteins identified Lactobacillaceae as the major family in the crop section regardless of the diet, whereas proteins belonging to the family Veillonellaceae increased with the P supplementation. Within the ceca section, proteins of Bacteroidaceae were more abundant in the P-supplied diets, whereas proteins of Eubacteriaceae decreased with the P-addition. Proteins of the Ruminococcaceae increasedraised with the amount of MP while proteins of Lactobacillaceae werewas more abundant in the MP-lacking diets. Classification of the identified proteins into COGs and KEGG pathways underlined a diverse microbiota activity depending on the dietary regimen, indicating a thriving microbial community in the case of P and MP supplementation, and stressed microbial community when no P and MP were supplied. Insights oninto the identified KEGG pathways, as well as comparison between the GIT sections, dietary treatments, and the bacterial families encoding for the pathways of interest are provided.

### Sample Protocol
Twenty four pooled samples were kept on dry ice during their transport to the laboratory and stored at -80°C until their analysis. After thawing at 4°C, bacterial cells were separated by using a previously described method (20) with modifications. Briefly, aliquots of 0.5 g of pooled samples were resuspended by vortexing in 15 mL washing buffer (50 mM Na2HPO4, 0.1% Tween 80, [pH 8.0]). Samples were then incubated for 10 min in a sonication bath (amplitude 50%, 0.5 cycle), shaken for 20 min in a reciprocal shaker at 100 oscillations/min and centrifuged at low speed (200 x g, for 15 min, 4°C). Supernatant containing the bacterial cells was collected in a 50 mL tube and the remaining pellet was subjected to further 4 rounds of the whole protocol, for a total of five rounds. Bacterial cells in the pooled supernatant were pelleted by centrifugation at 15,000 x g for 30 min at 4°C and subjected to protein extraction.  Protein extraction, quantitation, digestion Recovered cells were resuspended by vortexing with 100 µL extraction buffer (2% SDS, 20 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.5]) and mixing at 1400 rpm for 10 min at 60°C. Each sample was then mixed with 1 mL Tris-HCl buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl [pH7.5], 0.1 mg/mL MgCl2, 1 mM PMSF, 1 µL/mL Benzonase). Cell lysis was ensured by 5 rounds of 1 min ultra-sonication using a sonication probe (amplitude 50%, cycle 0.5) and 1 min rest on ice. After 10 min shaking at 1400 rpm, 37°C, samples were centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 15 min at 4°C. Extracted proteins contained in the supernatant were quantified with the Quick Start™ Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad, California, U.S.A.) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Approximately 50 µg of the extracted proteins were precipitated by incubation (30 min at 4°C) with precooled 20% TCA. Protein pellet was resuspended in 25 µL Laemmli-buffer for 5 min at 95°C before being purified on 1D-SDS-PAGE (4% stacking gel, 20 mA; 12% running gel, 40 mA). Proteins were trapped in the first centimeter of the separation gel and an overnight in-gel digestion using in-gel trypsin was done on the complete part of the protein-loaded gel piece (21, 22). Recovered peptides were purified and desalted by using Zip-Tip C18 tips (Millipore, USA), dried at the SpeedVac and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile (ACN)/ 0.1% TFA before the LC-MS/MS measurement. LC-MS/MS analysis Five microliters5 µL of the resuspended peptides mixture were measured in three technical replicates by using Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) faced with EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) with column EASY-Spray PEPmap C18 2 µM, 50 cmx75 µm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). The concentration gradient of ACN started from 5% to 35% in 200 min and from 35% to 45% in the following 40 min. Spectra de-noising was performed prior to peptides identification by considering the only top 12 peaks in a window of 100 Da width.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatic data analysis To reduce the false discovery rate of peptides identification and for a better evaluation of proteins abundance a two-step approach for bioinformatics data analysis was chosen (23, 24). Acquired raw data were at first processed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer software (v.1.4.1.14), Mascot (v. 2.4) and searched against NCBI-nr bacteria and chicken databases (release July 12th, 2014) in order to export a protein fasta database. Methionine oxidation was set as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. Default settings of the software were kept, these include protein grouping with peptide confidence set on “high” and delta Cn of 0.1. The Percolator node supporting a strict maximum parsimony principle was activated with a false discovery rate of 1%. In the second process, exported protein fasta file from the first search was subsequently used as in-house database for the peaks alignment and mass re-calibration in the first step of the MaxQuant search. MaxQuant software (v.1.5.1.2) set on LFQ modality was used for peptides identification and proteins IDs inference. In the second step of MaxQuant analysis, raw data were independently searched against UniProtKB databases (release October 2014) bacteria (UniProt ID 2) and chicken (UniProt ID 9031). In the database search, cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modification. Two missed cleavage sites were allowed for protease digestion and peptides had to be fully tryptic. All other parameters of the software were set as default, including a peptide and protein FDR < 1%, at least 1 peptide per protein, precursor mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm after mass recalibration and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
The chicken gastrointestinal tract (GIT) harbours a complex microbial community, involved in several physiological processes such as host immunomodulation and feed digestion. For the first time, the present study analysed dietary effects on the protein inventory of the microbiome in crop and ceca of broilers. We performed quantitative label-free metaproteomics by using 1-D-gel electrophoresis coupled with LC-MS/MS to identify the structural and functional changes triggered by diets supplied with varying amount of mineral phosphorous (P) and microbial phytase (MP). Phylogenetic assessment based on label-free quantification (LFQ) values of the proteins identified Lactobacillaceae as the major family in the crop section regardless of the diet, whereas proteins belonging to the family Veillonellaceae increased with the P supplementation. Within the ceca section, proteins of Bacteroidaceae were more abundant in the P-supplied diets, whereas proteins of Eubacteriaceae decreased with the P-addition. Proteins of the Ruminococcaceae increased with the amount of MP while proteins of Lactobacillaceae were more abundant in the MP-lacking diets. Classification of the identified proteins indicated a thriving microbial community in the case of P and MP supplementation, and stressed microbial community when no P and MP were supplied. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003805.

### Keywords
Microbiota, Metaproteome

### Affiliations
University of Hohenheim, Institute of Animal Science, Stuttgart, Germany
University of Hohenheim

### Submitter
Jana Seifert

### Lab Head
Dr Jana Seifert
University of Hohenheim, Institute of Animal Science, Stuttgart, Germany


