### Accession
PXD023780

### Title
Multiple unbiased approaches identify oxidosqualene cyclase as the molecular target of a promising anti-leishmanial

### Description
Samples were reduced by the addition of TCEP (25 mM final concentration) and incubated at 37 ºC for 10 min. Alkylation was carried out by the addition of iodoacetamide (25 mM final concentration) and incubated at RT for 1 h in the dark. Samples were then digested by the addition of 1:50 LysC (Wako, Japan) in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) followed by incubation at 37 ºC for 6h and then addition of 1:50 trypsin (Thermo) followed by incubation at 37 ºC overnight. The efficiency of sample digestion efficiency was assessed by MS (LTQ XL, Thermo). The samples were then vacuum-dried and resuspended in 100 mM TEAB (100 µL). Samples were then incubated in their respective Tandem Mass Tag™ (TMT) 10-plex reagents (Thermo) for 1 h at RT with agitation. Reactions were quenched by the addition of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min and each set of samples (treated and vehicle) were pooled in the same tube and dried overnight. The TMTTM-labelled samples were dried and kept at -85 ºC until further analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Pooled samples were resuspended in 200 µL 10 mM ammonium (formate pH 9.5) and subjected to fractionation on an RP-High pH HPLC. A C18 column (XBridge peptide BEH, 130Å, 3.5 µm 2.1 x 150 mm, Waters) with a guard column (XBridge, C18, 3.5 µm, 2.1 x 10mm, Waters) were used on an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo-Scientific). Buffer A (10 mM ammonium formate in milliQ water) and Buffer B (10 mM ammonium formate with 90% acetonitrile) were used for fractionation, both buffers were adjusted to pH 9.5 with ammonia. Fractions were collected using a WPS-3000FC auto-sampler (Thermo-Scientific) at 1 min intervals. The column and guard column were equilibrated with 2% Buffer B for 20 min at a constant flow rate of 0.2 mL min-1. Samples (180 µL) were loaded onto the column at 0.2 mL min-1, and a separation gradient started 1 min after samples were loaded onto the column. Peptides were eluted from the column with a gradient of 2% Buffer B to 20% B in 8 min then from 20% B to 47% B in 37 min. The column was washed for 15 min at 100% Buffer B and re-equilibrated at 2% buffer B for 20 min. Collection of fractions started 1 min after injection and stopped after 80 min (total of 80 fractions, 200 µL each). The total number of fraction concatenated was set to 20 and the contents of the fractions were dried and suspended in 50 µL 1% formic acid, prior to analysis by LC-MS.Analysis of peptides was performed on a Q-Exactive-HF (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS (Thermo Scientific). LC buffers used were as follows: Buffer A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and Buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)). Aliquots of each sample (1 µL) were loaded at 5 ?L min-1 onto a trap column (100 µm x 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in 5% buffer B. The trap column was washed for 5 min at the same flow rate and then switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific, resolving C18 column (75 µm x 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 ?m, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl min-1 with a linear gradient from 5% buffer B (for fractions 1-10, 7% for fractions 11-20) to 35% buffer B in 130 min, and then to 98% Buffer B at 132 min. The column was then washed with 98% buffer B for 20 min and re-equilibrated in 5% buffer B for 17 min. Q-exactive HF was used in data-dependent mode. A scan cycle comprised MS1 scan (m/z range from 335-1800, with a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms, a resolution of 120,000 and automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3 x 106) followed by 15 sequential dependant MS2 scans (with an isolation window set to 0.7 Da, resolution at 60,000, maximum ion injection time at 200 ms and AGC 1 x 105). To ensure mass accuracy, the mass spectrometer was calibrated on the first day that the runs are performed.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analysed using the software MaxQuant (http://maxquant.org/, version 1.6.17.0). Carbamidomethyl (C), oxidation (M), acetyl (Protein N-term), deamidation (NQ) and Gln-> pyro-Glu were set as a variable modifications. Proteins were identified by searching the MS and MS/MS data for the peptides against Leishmania donovani BPK282A1 version 49 (TriTrypDB). Trypsin/P and LysC/P were selected as the digestive enzyme with two potential missed cleavages. Reporter ion MS2 mode was selected using the TMT-10plex labels on N-terminus and lysine. Protein abundance was calculated according to the normalized reporter ion intensities. The FDR threshold for peptides and proteins was 0.01. Two missed tryptic cleavages were allowed, FTMS MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and ITMS MS/MS mass tolerance was 0.06 Da. Isobaric match between runs option was active.

### Publication Abstract
Phenotypic screening identified a benzothiophene compound with activity against Leishmania donovani, the causative agent of visceral leishmaniasis. Using multiple orthogonal approaches, oxidosqualene cyclase (OSC), a key enzyme of sterol biosynthesis, was identified as the target of this racemic compound and its enantiomers. Whole genome sequencing and screening of a genome-wide overexpression library confirmed that OSC gene amplification is associated with resistance to compound 1. Introduction of an ectopic copy of the OSC gene into wild-type cells reduced susceptibility to these compounds confirming the role of this enzyme in resistance. Biochemical analyses demonstrated the accumulation of the substrate of OSC and depletion of its product in compound (S)-1-treated-promastigotes and cell-free membrane preparations, respectively. Thermal proteome profiling confirmed that compound (S)-1 binds directly to OSC. Finally, modeling and docking studies identified key interactions between compound (S)-1 and the LdOSC active site. Strategies to improve the potency for this promising anti-leishmanial are proposed.

### Keywords
Thermal proteome profiling, Leishmania, Oxidosqualene synthase

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Mode of Action group, University of Dundee

### Submitter
Victoriano Corpas-Lopez

### Lab Head
Dr Susan Wyllie
Mode of Action group, University of Dundee


