### Accession
PXD013074

### Title
Proteomic characterization and label-free comparison of outer membrane vesicles from Francisella tularensis subsp. holarctica strain FSC200 isolated from different cultivation conditions

### Description
Francisella tularensis is a Gram-negative, facultative intracellular bacterium, causing a severe disease known as tularemia. It is known to secrete unusually shaped nanotubular outer membrane vesicles (OMV) loaded with number of virulence factors and immunoreactive proteins. In this study the nanotubes were purified from a clinical isolate of subsp. holarctica strain FSC200. We here provide a comprehensive proteomic characterization of OMV isolated from bacteria grown under different cultivation conditions simulating the diverse conditions of F. tularensis life cycle. These included conditions mimicking the environment inside the mammalian host during inflammation: oxidative stress, low pH and high temperature (42 °C); and by contrast, low temperature (25 °C) that mimicked the external milieu and agar plate cultivation. We observed several-fold increase in vesiculation rate at high temperature and low pH but the differences were not only in the amount of secreted OMV but particularly in their protein cargo. Amongst the proteins preferentially selectively packed into OMV under conditions mimicking mammalian host many were previously described as virulence factors connected to the unique intracellular trafficking of Francisella. Protein changes revealed also high probability of alterations of the bacterial surface on the level of lipopolysaccharide, polysaccharide capsule and phospholipids.

### Sample Protocol
In the first part of the study proteins were only identified in isolated OMV from bacteria cultivated under standard conditions. In the second part relative quantification was performed to compare protein composition of OMV and membrane fraction to find proteins that are selectively enriched in OMV. In the third part of the study OMV were isolated from six different cultivation conditions and relative quantification was performed to find protein changes in OMV cargo characteristic for the stresses. OMV and membrane samples were lysed in 5% sodium deoxycholate, reduced by dithiothreitol, alkylated by iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin. Sodium deoxycholate was extracted to ethyl-acetate and samples were desalted. The peptide mixtures were then analyzed by nano-LC coupled on-line with Q-Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Database search and relative quantification was performed by MaxQuant ver. 1.6.2.3 coupled with Andromeda search engine. Data were searched against a database of F. tularensis subsp. holarctica strain FSC200 downloaded from NCBI in July 2017 (1438 sequences) and MaxQuant-implemented database was used for the identification of common contaminants. The identification and quantification parameters of MaxQuant were set as follows: mass tolerance for the first search 20 ppm, for the second search from recalibrated spectra 4.5 ppm (with individual mass error filtering enabled); minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids; maximal mass of peptide 4600 Da; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modifications: oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-term, maximum number of variable modifications: 5 per peptide; digestion with trypsin/P with maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Mass tolerance for fragments in MS/MS was 20 ppm taking the 12 most intensive peaks per 100 Da for search. Minimal Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and minimal delta score for modified peptides was 6. False discovery rate (FDR) was based on target decoy approach using reverted database and it was set to 0.01 for peptide and protein identification. For the identification of proteins in OMV samples (first part of the study) label-free quantification was disabled. For the calculation of the protein abundances and relative comparison between OMV and membrane fraction as well as among the group of stress-derived OMV samples (second and third part), label-free quantification was enabled, iBAQ calculation was on, matching between runs was enabled and replicates were analyzed as separate experiments. For relative comparison between samples algorithm of relative intensity based absolute quantification (riBAQ) was applied (Krey et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Francisella tularensis</i> is a Gram-negative, facultative intracellular bacterium, causing a severe disease called tularemia. It secretes unusually shaped nanotubular outer membrane vesicles (OMV) loaded with a number of virulence factors and immunoreactive proteins. In the present study, the vesicles were purified from a clinical isolate of subsp. <i>holarctica</i> strain FSC200. We here provide a comprehensive proteomic characterization of OMV using a novel approach in which a comparison of OMV and membrane fraction is performed in order to find proteins selectively enriched in OMV vs. membrane. Only these proteins were further considered to be really involved in the OMV function and/or their exceptional structure. OMV were also isolated from bacteria cultured under various cultivation conditions simulating the diverse environments of <i>F. tularensis</i> life cycle. These included conditions mimicking the milieu inside the mammalian host during inflammation: oxidative stress, low pH, and high temperature (42&#xb0;C); and in contrast, low temperature (25&#xb0;C). We observed several-fold increase in vesiculation rate and significant protein cargo changes for high temperature and low pH. Further proteomic characterization of stress-derived OMV gave us an insight how the bacterium responds to the hostile environment of a mammalian host through the release of differentially loaded OMV. Among the proteins preferentially and selectively packed into OMV during stressful cultivations, the previously described virulence factors connected to the unique intracellular trafficking of <i>Francisella</i> were detected. Considerable changes were also observed in a number of proteins involved in the biosynthesis and metabolism of the bacterial envelope components like O-antigen, lipid A, phospholipids, and fatty acids. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD013074.

### Keywords
Francisella tularensis; fsc200; outer membrane vesicles; stress response

### Affiliations
Faculty of Military Health Sciences, University of Defense, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic
Department of Molecular Pathology, Faculty of Military Health Sciences, University of Defense, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Jana Klimentova

### Lab Head
Dr Jiri Stulik
Department of Molecular Pathology, Faculty of Military Health Sciences, University of Defense, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic


