### Accession
PXD033924

### Title
HPLC-MS datasets of the protein mix immunoprecipitated by SIRT7 antibody in HaCaT cells

### Description
We conducted HPLC-MS analysis of the protein mix immunoprecipitated by SIRT7 antibody under non-IR and 8 Gy X-ray irradiation to identify the interacting proteins of SIRT7 in HaCaT cells.

### Sample Protocol
We performed immunoprecipitation of SIRT7 followed with high performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS) and tried to identify the interacting protein partners of SIRT7.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra were subjected to sequence database for searching with Proteome Discoverer v2.1 software (Thermo Scientific) and the results were analyzed by Xcalibur 2.0.

### Publication Abstract
Cutaneous radiation injury (CRI) interrupts the scheduled process of radiotherapy and even compromises the life quality of patients. However, the current clinical options for alleviating CRI are relatively limited. Resveratrol (RSV) has been shown to be a promising protective agent against CRI; yet the mechanisms of RSV enhancing radioresistance were not fully elucidated and limited its clinical application. In this study, we demonstrate RSV promotes cutaneous radioresistance mainly through SIRT7. During ionizing radiation (IR) treatment, RSV indirectly phosphorylates and activates SIRT7 through AMPK, which is critical for maintaining the genome stability of keratinocytes. Immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry identified HMGB1 to be the key interacting partner of SIRT7 to mediate the radioprotective function of RSV. Mechanistic study elucidated that SIRT7 interacts with and deacetylates HMGB1 to redistribute it into nucleus and "switch on" its function for DNA damage repair. Our findings establish a novel AMPK/SIRT7/HMGB1 regulatory axis that mediates the radioprotective function of RSV to alleviate IR-induced cutaneous DNA injury, providing an efficiently-curative option for patients with CRI during radiotherapy.

### Keywords
Human, Hplc-ms, Sirt7

### Affiliations
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Research, School of Public Health, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China
Southern Medical University

### Submitter
Xingyuan Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Yi Jin
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Research, School of Public Health, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China


