### Accession
PXD037902

### Title
The brain protein secreted amyloid precursor protein alpha (sAPPalpha) regulates neurologically-important proteins of the cellular proteome and secretome of mouse primary astrocytes

### Description
Mouse primary astrocytes in culture were exposed to 1 nM secreted amyloid precursor protein alpha (sAPPalpha) or PBS (control) for 2 h or 6 h and changes in the cellular proteome or secretome respectively were quantified by SWATH-MS.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome - After treatment with sAPPalpha, cell pellets were snap frozen and stored at -80`C Secretome - Cells were rinsed 6 x with PBS followed by incubation in serum free media with sAPPalpha or PBS as the control. Media was processed by sucessive centrifugation (300xg, 1,000xg and 20,000xg) and concentrated on 10 KDa cutoff ultra-concentrating filters. The proteome cell pellet was thawed in 200 uL digestion buffer (500 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM EDTA, 1mM EGTA, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate) and homoginsed with grinding. The pestle was rinsed with 200 uL urea solution (8M Urea in aqueous 500 mM TEAB), vortexed, sonicated and supplemented with 100U Benzonase. After incubation 37`C, 30 min and centrifugation at 16,000 xg, 30 min at 20`C the supernatant was transferred to a 10kDa MWCO centrifugal filter unit where the samples were detergent depleated via Filter Aided Sample Preperation (8M urea washes, followed by reduction and alkylation with 5 mM TECP and 10 mM IAA repectivley and final washing in 100 mM TEAB). The protein content of each sample (secretome and proteome) was quantified by the Bradford Assay, then supplemented with trypsin (1 to 20 (w/w) 16 h followed by 1 to 40 (w/w) for 4 h). After digestion the peptides were purified and concentrated by solid phase extraction on Sep-Pac C18 cartridges and dried using a centrifugal vacuum concentrator.

### Data Protocol
To creates a spectral library peptides of a pooled sample were first purified by solid phase extraction on Sep-Pak Plus Light C18 cartridges (Waters) and then fractionated into 12 fractions by OG-IEF along a linear pH gradient from 4 to 10 using a 3000 OFFGEL Fractionator (Agilent Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Each fraction was then analysed by DDA mass spectrometry on a 5600+ Triple Time-Of-Flight (TOF) mass spectrometer coupled to an Eksigent "ekspert nanoLC 415" uHPLC system (AB Sciex). For peptide/protein identification the raw data files of all fractions were searched against the mouse reference sequence database (downloaded from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ on 21/12/2021) containing 146407 sequence entries using the Protein Piolet software (version 4.5). Trypsin, carboxymethylcysteine and biological modifications were selected for a thorough search set up. Protein quantification was achieved by data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry using the SWATH-MS workflow in 33 variable mass windows. Each sample was analysed in four technical replicates using the same LC-gradient as for the DDA analysis. The spectral library was built using the SWATH application (version 2.0) embedded into the PeakView software (version 2.2, AB Sciex). DIA spectral data was aligned to the library spectra at a false discovery threshold for peak picking of q = 0.01 in at least one sample. Peak area under the curve (AUC) was then exported to the MarkerView software (version1.2, AB Sciex) for further statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Secreted amyloid precursor protein alpha (sAPP&#x3b1;), processed from a parent mammalian brain protein, amyloid precursor protein, can modulate learning and memory. Recently it has been shown to modulate the transcriptome and proteome of human neurons, including proteins with neurological functions. Here, we analysed whether the acute administration of sAPP&#x3b1; facilitated changes in the proteome and secretome of mouse primary astrocytes in culture. Astrocytes contribute to the neuronal processes of neurogenesis, synaptogenesis and synaptic plasticity. Cortical mouse astrocytes in culture were exposed to 1 nM sAPP&#x3b1;, and changes in both the whole-cell proteome (2 h) and the secretome (6 h) were identified with Sequential Window Acquisition of All Theoretical Fragment Ion Spectra-Mass Spectrometry (SWATH-MS). Differentially regulated proteins were identified in both the cellular proteome and secretome that are involved with neurologically related functions of the normal physiology of the brain and central nervous system. Groups of proteins have a relationship to APP and have roles in the modulation of cell morphology, vesicle dynamics and the myelin sheath. Some are related to pathways containing proteins whose genes have been previously implicated in Alzheimer's disease (AD). The secretome is also enriched in proteins related to Insulin Growth Factor 2 (IGF2) signaling and the extracellular matrix (ECM). There is the promise that a more specific investigation of these proteins will help to understand the mechanisms of how sAPP&#x3b1; signaling affects memory formation.

### Keywords
Amyloid precuror protein, Astrocytes, Proteome, Secretome

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand
Department of Biochemistry, University of Otago

### Submitter
Torsten Kleffmann

### Lab Head
Dr Warren Perry Tate
Department of Biochemistry, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand


