### Accession
PXD005246

### Title
SILAC phosphoproteomics of 293-F10 cells [induced (H) vs uninduced (L)]

### Description
The objective of this experiment was to identify cellular targets of F10-mediated phosphorylation through Stable Isotope Labeling of Amino acids in Cell culture (SILAC).  293-F10 cells were propagated in heavy (H) or light (L) media for 10 cellular doublings.  Mass spectrometry was used to confirm that the majority of tryptic peptides showed >90% incorporation of the heavy isotope. H-labeled cells were treated with doxycycline to induce expression of F10 for 10 hours, and then these cells were mixed with uninduced, L-labeled cells in a 1:1 ratio. Three biological replicates were obtained from separately passaged cultures and doxycycline inductions.  Cells were lysed and post-nuclear supernatant proteins were precipitated and subjected to tryptic digestion. Tryptic peptides were desalted, enriched for phosphopeptides, and analyzed in triplicate by LC-MS/MS.  The resulting 9 data files were pooled and phosphoprotein identification and quantification was completed using MaxQuant software (version 1.2.2.5). Differential phosphorylation in response to F10 induction was determined using an outlier score for log protein ratios. The Benjamini-Hochberg test was then used to correct for the biased statistical spread of highly abundant proteins.

### Sample Protocol
FLP-In T-Rex 293 c.o.-3xFLAG-F10 cells were incubated for 10 doublings in SILAC media supplemented with 10% FCS and either 0.398mM L-arginine and 0.798mM L-lysine (light media) or 0.398mM 13C6, 15N4 L-arginine and 0.798mM 13C6, 15N2 L-lysine (heavy media).  Cells grown in the presence of heavy media were then induced with 50ng/ml doxycycline for 10h.  Cells were harvested and mixed 1:1 (heavy:light).  Cells were sedimented at 673 x g for 7min and washed with 1ml cold PBS.  Cell pellets were swollen in 200µl Hypotonic Buffer [10mM Tris pH 8.0, 10mM KCl with protease and phosphatase cocktails] for 20min on ice, and then disrupted by dounce homogenization. Nuclei were removed by sedimentation at 931 x g for 10min. Proteins from post-nuclear supernatants were precipitated by chloroform-methanol extraction, resuspended in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, treated with 10mM DTT for 30min at 37°C followed by 50mM iodoacetamide for 30min at room temperature to reduce disulfide bonds and alkylate cysteine residues, respectively.  Proteins were digested with trypsin gold, MS grade overnight at 37°C at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50.  Reactions were stopped through addition of TFA (final concentration 0.1%) and desalted with Oligo R3 columns.  Desalted peptides were then processed for enrichment of phosphopeptides using a TiO2-based enrichment. Briefly, desalted peptides were dried and resuspended in 5μL of 1% SDS by sonication for 10min followed by the addition of 100μL TiO2 loading buffer (1M glycolic acid in 5% TFA; 80% acetonitrile). TiO2 beads were washed in acetonitrile.  Samples were added and incubated at 21ºC for 15 min in a thermomixer prior to the beads being sedimented for 1min.  The unbound supernatant was incubated with new TiO2 beads as above. The two batches of beads were combined and washed using 100µl of loading buffer at 21ºC for 15s, then 100µl washing buffer 1 (80% acetonitrile; 1% TFA) at 21ºC for 15s and finally 100µl washing buffer 2 (20% acetonitrile; 0.1% TFA) at 21ºC for 15s. The TiO2 beads were dried in a vacuum centrifuge for 5min.  Bound peptides were eluted from the dried TiO2 beads with 100µl of 1% ammonium hydroxide by vortexing at room temperature with a Tommy Shaker for 15min.  After centrifugation, the supernatant was collected, acidified with 50% TFA in water to a pH <2 and desalted using an Oligo R3 column. Each sample was analyzed in triplicate by LC-MS/MS on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos interfaced with an AB Sciex Eksigent NanoLC 2D HPLC-Thermo system.  Elution occurred over a 240 minute 2–98% Buffer B gradient at a flow rate of ∼300 nL/min delivered by a NanoLC 2D HPLC pump. Buffer A contained 0.1% formic acid in H2O and Buffer B contained 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile.  The HPLC effluent was directly coupled to the nanoelectrospray ionization source of an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos hybrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data from the 3 biological replicates were processed together with MaxQuant software (version 1.2.2.5) using the Andromeda algorithm for searching the UniProtKB Homo sapiens reference proteome database containing 73,136 canonical and isoform sequences (February 2013), to which common, ubiquitous laboratory contaminants, as well the viral F10 sequence, were added.  Maximum missed cleavages considered for full trypsin digestion were set to 2. The search criteria were set to: precursor and fragment ions had a MS tolerance of 20ppm with a MS/MS tolerance of 0.5Da; false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for both peptides and proteins; and minimum number of peptides for identification=1.  FDR calculations were based on matches to decoy database of reversed protein sequences.

### Publication Abstract
Vaccinia virus, a complex dsDNA virus, is unusual in replicating exclusively within the cytoplasm of infected cells. Although this prototypic poxvirus encodes &gt;200 proteins utilized during infection, a significant role for host proteins and cellular architecture is increasingly evident. The viral B1 kinase and H1 phosphatase are known to target cellular proteins as well as viral substrates, but little is known about the cellular substrates of the F10 kinase. F10 is essential for virion morphogenesis, beginning with the poorly understood process of diversion of membranes from the ER for the purpose of virion membrane biogenesis. To better understand the function of F10, we generated a cell line that carries a single, inducible F10 transgene. Using uninduced and induced cells, we performed <i>s</i>table <i>i</i>sotope <i>l</i>abeling of <i>a</i>mino acids in <i>c</i>ell culture (SILAC) coupled with phosphopeptide analysis to identify cellular targets of F10-mediated phosphorylation. We identified 27 proteins that showed statistically significant changes in phosphorylation upon the expression of the F10 kinase: 18 proteins showed an increase in phosphorylation whereas 9 proteins showed a decrease in phosphorylation. These proteins participate in several distinct cellular processes including cytoskeleton dynamics, membrane trafficking and cellular metabolism. One of the proteins with the greatest change in phosphorylation was mDia, a member of the formin family of cytoskeleton regulators; F10 induction led to increased phosphorylation on Ser<sup>22</sup> Induction of F10 induced a statistically significant decrease in the percentage of cells with actin stress fibers; however, this change was abrogated when an mDia Ser<sup>22</sup>Ala variant was expressed. Moreover, expression of a Ser<sup>22</sup>Asp variant leads to a reduction of stress fibers even in cells not expressing F10. In sum, we present the first unbiased screen for cellular targets of F10-mediated phosphorylation, and in so doing describe a heretofore unknown mechanism for regulating stress fiber formation through phosphorylation of mDia. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005246.

### Keywords
Vaccinia virus, F10 protein kinase, Silac, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Medical College of Wisconsin
Departments of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology and Microbiology & Immunology Medical University of South Carolina USA

### Submitter
Michael Pereckas

### Lab Head
Dr Paula Traktman
Departments of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology and Microbiology & Immunology Medical University of South Carolina USA


