### Accession
PXD023144

### Title
Packed red blood cells inhibit T-cell activation via ROS-dependent signaling pathways

### Description
Numerous observations indicate that red blood cells (RBCs) affect T-cell activation and proliferation. We have studied effects of packed RBCs (PRBCs) on T-cell-receptor (TCR) signaling and the molecular mechanisms whereby (P)RBCs modulate T-cell activation. In line with previous reports, PRBCs attenuated the expression of T-cell activation markers CD25 and CD69 upon co-stimulation via CD3/CD28. In addition, T-cell proliferation and cytokine expression were markedly reduced when T-cells were stimulated in presence of PRBCs. Inhibitory activity of PRBCs required direct cell-cell contact and intact PRBCs. The production of activation-induced cellular reactive oxygen species (ROS), which act as second messengers in T-cells, was completely abrogated to levels of unstimulated T-cells in presence of PRBCs. Phosphorylation of the TCR-related zeta-chain and thus proximal TCR signal transduction was unaffected by PRBCs, ruling out mechanisms based on secreted factors and steric interaction restrictions. Only downstream signaling events requiring ROS for full functionality were affected, confirmed by an untargeted mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics approach. PRBCs inhibited T-cell activation more efficiently than did treatment with 1 mM of the anti-oxidant N-acetyl cysteine. Taken together, our data suggest that inflammation-related radical reactions are modulated by PRBCs. These immunomodulating effects might be responsible for clinical observations associated with transfusion of PRBCs.

### Sample Protocol
1x10^7 CD4+ T-cells of two healthy donors were stimulated with aCD3/CD28 coated microbeads for 3 h in presence/absence of PRBCs or 1 mM NAC. Thereafter, cells were washed thoroughly using RBC lysis buffer (154 mM NH4Cl, 10 mM KHCO3, 100 µM Na2 EDTA). Washed CD4+ T-cells were lysed in lysis buffer  (4% SDC, 100mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) followed by mechanical shear stress via ultrasonication and subsequent heat inactivation at 95°C. Phosphopeptide Enrichment Sample Preparation For the posphopeptide enrichment, a slightly modified protocol of the EasyPhos workflow was applied (Humphrey, 2018). Briefly, the total protein content was used for the enrichment procedure. Protein reduction using 100mM TCEP and alkylation using 400mM 2-CAM with subsequent enzymatic digestion with Trypsin/Lys-C mixture (1:100 Enzyme to Substrate ratio) at 37°C for 18 h was performed. The solution containing the peptides was mixed with enrichment buffer containing 48% TFA(vol/vol) and 8mM Potassium dihydrogen phosphate. Samples were incubated with 3mg TiO2 Titansphere beads for 5 minutes at 40°C with subsequent washing and elution from StageTips with 40% ACN and 5% Ammonium hydroxide solution. Samples were dried and reconstituted in 15µL MS loading buffer containing 97.7% H2O, 2% ACN and 0.3% TFA. LC‐MS Analysis LC‐MS/MS analyses were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC‐system coupled to a timsTOF pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics). 10 and 5 µl of phosphopeptide enriched and global proteome samples, respectively, were loaded on a 2 cm x 100µm C18 Pepmap100 pre‐column (Thermo) at a flow rate of 10 µl/min using mobile phase A. Afterwards, peptides were eluted from the pre‐column to a 25 cm x 75 µm 25cm Aurora Series emitter column (Ionopticks) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and separation was achieved using a gradient of 8% to 40% mobile phase B (79.9% acetonitrile, 20% H2O, 0.1% FA) over 90 min.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.6.17.0 (Tyanova, 2016) employing the Andromeda search engine was used for protein identification against the UniProt Database (version 12/2019 with 20 380 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 20ppm for MS spectra and 40ppm for MS/MS spectra, a FDR < 0.01 and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation as well as phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Numerous observations indicate that red blood cells (RBCs) affect T-cell activation and proliferation. We have studied effects of packed RBCs (PRBCs) on T-cell receptor (TCR) signaling and the molecular mechanisms whereby (P)RBCs modulate T-cell activation. In line with previous reports, PRBCs attenuated the expression of T-cell activation markers CD25 and CD69 upon costimulation via CD3/CD28. In addition, T-cell proliferation and cytokine expression were markedly reduced when T-cells were stimulated in the presence of PRBCs. Inhibitory activity of PRBCs required direct cell-cell contact and intact PRBCs. The production of activation-induced cellular reactive oxygen species, which act as second messengers in T-cells, was completely abrogated to levels of unstimulated T-cells in the presence of PRBCs. Phosphorylation of the TCR-related zeta chain and thus proximal TCR signal transduction was unaffected by PRBCs, ruling out mechanisms based on secreted factors and steric interaction restrictions. In large part, downstream signaling events requiring reactive oxygen species for full functionality were affected, as confirmed by an untargeted MS-based phosphoproteomics approach. PRBCs inhibited T-cell activation more efficiently than treatment with 1&#xa0;mM of the antioxidant N-acetyl cysteine. Taken together, our data imply that inflammation-related radical reactions are modulated by PRBCs. These immunomodulating effects may be responsible for clinical observations associated with transfusion of PRBCs.

### Keywords
Erythrocyte, Phosphoproteomics, Reactive oxygen species (ros), Immunosuppressor, Redox regulation, T‐cell

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Department of Analytical Chemistry, Joint Metabolome Facility

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Department of Analytical Chemistry, Joint Metabolome Facility


