### Accession
PXD038297

### Title
Interactions of graphene-based materials with the blood-brain barrier

### Description
In this work, we performed an in vitro investigation of GRM interactions with the BBB. To this aim,we employed GRMs with different surface chemistry and stability, both murine and human models of increasing complexity, and a portfolio of complementary label-free analytical techniques. The use of label-free strategies allows to avoid the problem of fluorescent tag interference and leaching, which makes the results on the bionano-interactions difficult to interpret.42-43 The workflow developed in this paper is widely applicable to study the translocation of different micro- and nano-materials and represents a valuable method to reduce the more expensive and ethically concerning in vivo biodistribution studies.

### Sample Protocol
bEnd.3 cells were plated at a density of 80,000 cells in completed DMEM medium (Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum, 1% penicillin-streptomycin, and 1% Glutamine) in a 12-wells tissue culture. Confluent cells were incubated with FLG and GO (10 μg/mL) for 24h at 37°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere. Previously, the FLG and GO clusters were dispersed using a bath sonicator (Labsonics LBS2, Falc) at a frequency of 59 Hz and 100% of power for 15 min. After graphene exposure, the medium was removed, and bEnd3 cells were washed three times in PBS to remove clusters of graphene attached onto the cellular surface. Then, cells were treated with RIPA buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 140mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 0.1% sodium deoxycholate) supplemented with complete EDTA-free protease inhibitors (Roche Diagnostics) and serine/threonine and tyrosine phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma). Lysates were sonicated (Branson SLPe sonicator; 25% amplitude) and centrifuged for 15 min minutes at 4 °C at 13000 RPM. Supernatants were collected and the total protein content was determined with the BCA Protein Assay kit (Thermo Scientific) using the standard protocol. The samples were stored at -20 °C. Following BCA protein quantification, aliquots of 50 µg of total protein were collected from each sample. Cysteine residues were reduced in 100 mM dithiothreitol (10 µL, 56 °C for 30 min) and then alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide (30 µL) at RT in the dark. Proteins were then digested with trypsin (1:50 w/w ratio with the sample) overnight at 37 °C under gentle shaking. The resulting peptides were then dried under vacuum and resuspended in 100 µL of 3% acetonitrile solution at the time of proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
The proteomics analysis was conducted on a Thermo Exploris 480 orbitrap system, coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system. After trapping and desalting, the tryptic peptides were loaded on a Aurora C18 column (75 mm x 250 mm, 1,6 µm particle size) nanocolumn (Ion Opticks, Fitzroy, Australia) and separated using a linear gradient of acetonitrile in water (both added with 0.1% formic acid), from 3% to 41% in 1 h, followed by column cleaning and reconditioning. The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min. Total run time was 1.5h. Injection volume was set to 1 µL. Peptides were analyzed in positive ESI mode, using a capillary voltage set to 2.0 kV. The RF lens was set to 40% and the AGC target was set to 300%. Data acquisition was performed in Data Independent mode (DIA) with a survey scan set from 400 to 1000 m/z at 120,000 resolution, followed by MS/MS acquisition of 60 m/z transmission windows, each having a fixed 10 Da width. MS/MS spectra were acquired in HCD mode. All the collected MS/MS spectra were analyzed using Spectronaut, by running a DirectDIA analysis against the reference Mus Musculus FASTA database (Tax ID: 10090 reporting 17126 reviewed entries). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as fixed modification; acetylation, methylation, deamidation, oxidation and phosphorylation were selected as variable modifications. Positive protein identifications were retained at 1% false discovery rate (FDR)threshold and at least two peptides were used for protein quantification

### Publication Abstract
Thanks to their biocompatibility and high cargo capability, graphene-based materials (GRMs) might represent an ideal brain delivery system. The capability of GRMs to reach the brain has mainly been investigated <i>in vivo</i> and has highlighted some controversy. Herein, we employed two <i>in vitro</i> BBB models of increasing complexity to investigate the bionano interactions with graphene oxide (GO) and few-layer graphene (FLG): a 2D murine Transwell model, followed by a 3D human multicellular assembloid, to mimic the complexity of the <i>in vivo</i> architecture and intercellular crosstalk. We developed specific methodologies to assess the translocation of GO and FLG in a label-free fashion and a platform applicable to any nanomaterial. Overall, our results show good biocompatibility of the two GRMs, which did not impact the integrity and functionality of the barrier. Sufficiently dispersed subpopulations of GO and FLG were actively uptaken by endothelial cells; however, the translocation was identified as a rare event.

### Keywords
Blood-brain barrier, Graphene, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Analytical Chemistry Lab, Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia

### Submitter
Andrea Armirotti

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Armirotti
Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia


