### Accession
PXD029869

### Title
Identification of RNA helicases that mediate processing of tRNAs into distinct tRNA fragments by LC-MS/MS.

### Description
Specific environmental insults cause the limited fragmentation of transfer RNAs (tRNAs) into tRNA-derived small RNAs (tsRNAs), which have been implicated in a wide range of biological processes. tRNA fragmentation results from endonucleolytic activities targeting single-stranded tRNA regions. However, how a tRNA with a single hydrolyzed phosphodiester bond in the anticodon loop (‘nicked’ tRNA) gives rise to distinct tsRNAs remains poorly understood. By utilizing biochemical fractionation of tsRNA-containing ribonucleoprotein complexes (RNPs) coupled with LC-MS/MS, we identified several RNA helicase enzymes that represent putative tRNA/tsRNA processing enzymes. Furthermore, a combination of biochemical and computational approaches revealed that specific RNA helicases indeed bind specific tRNAs with high affinity, as well as process nicked tRNAs into individual tsRNAs. In summary, these findings reveal that tRNA-derived duplexes can be substrates of well-known RNA helicases, thereby expanding their potential for cellular function to the creation of individual tsRNAs during the cellular stress response.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells at 80% confluency were acutely exposed to iAs or left untreated (controls), followed by two washes using 10 mL of chilled 1x PBS. Cells were covered with a thin film of chilled 1x PBS and exposed to UV light (254 nm) with 400 mJ/cm2 (Stratagene). Cells were collected by scraping and centrifugation and the resulting cell pellets were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further processing. Pellets were lysed with a G26 needle on ice in lysis buffer buffer (20 mM Tris, pH 7.4; 150 mM NaCl; 10 mM MgCl2; 10% glycerol; 1 mM DTT; 0.2% NP-40) supplemented with 1x protease inhibitors (Roche). The resulting soluble protein extract was filtered (45 μm) and loaded onto a HiLoad® 26/600 Superdex® 200 pg SEC column pre-equilibrated in column running buffer (20 mM Tris, pH 7.4; 150 mM NaCl; 1mM DTT) at 4°C. Gel filtration was performed on an ÄKTA Purifier FPLC system (GE) for the duration of 1.1 column volume (CV) at a flow rate of 2.5 mL/min. 5’ tsRNA-containing SEC fractions were thawed on ice, pooled and subjected to anion exchange chromatography (IEX) at 4°C on an ÄKTA Purifier FPLC system (GE) using HiTrap Q Fast Flow columns (Cytiva, 1 mL) with a flow rate of 1 mL/min in IEX buffer A (20 mM Tris, pH 7.4; 1.5 mM MgCl2; 10 mM KCl). A linear gradient (40-60%) of IEX buffer B (20 mM Tris, pH 7.4; 1.5 mM MgCl2; 10 mM KCl and 1M NaCl) was applied for the duration of 20 CV while fractions (750 μL) were collected. IEX fractions exhibiting a positive 5’ tsRNA-GlyGCC/tRNA-GlyGCC signal ratio on northern blots were concentrated to an approximate volume of 50 μL using a speed-vac on high temperature settings (60°C). Experiments were performed in 3 independent replicates. 12.5 μL of 4x SDS-sample buffer was added to each fraction, followed by denaturation for 2 minutes at 90°C. Fractions were separated by modified SDS-PAGE prepared by overlaying equal volumes of stacking (4%) and resolving (6%) gels. Pre-stained protein marker (Thermo) was used to monitor sample migration through the stacking gel. Once samples reached the resolving gel, migration was allowed for approximately one centimeter, followed by fixation and staining of gels using Colloidal Blue staining kit (Invitrogen). Gel sections were excised, cut up, and destained with acetonitrile (ACN) and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Before each of the following reaction steps, gel pieces were washed with 50 mM ABC in 50% ACN  and dehydrated in 100% ACN in order to facilitate the uptake of the solutions. Disulfide bridges were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM ABC for 30 min at 56 °C. Subsequently the free thiols were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ABC in the dark (30 min at RT). Proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ABC overnight at 37 °C. The reaction was stopped by adding 10 μL of 10% (v/v) formic acid (FA) and peptides were extracted by sonication with 5% FA. Digests were concentrated and desalted using costum-made C18 stagetips. The purified peptides were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), using a pre-column for sample loading (PepMapAcclaim C18, 2 cm × 0.1 mm, 5 μm) and a C18 analytical column (PepMapAcclaim C18, 50 cm × 0.75 mm, 2 μm, both Dionex-Thermo Fisher Scientific), applying a linear gradient from 2 to 35% solvent B (B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% FA; solvent A: 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 230 nL/min over 60 min. Eluting peptides were analysed on a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific), operated in data-dependent mode. Survey scans were recorded in a scan range of 375–1500 m/z, at a resolution of 60000 at 200 m/z and an AGC target value of 3E6. The 8 most intense ions were selected with an isolation width of 1.6 Da, fragmented in the HCD cell at 27% collision energy and the spectra recorded at a target value of 1E5 and a resolution of 30000. Peptides with a charge of +1 or > +6 were excluded from fragmentation, the peptide match and exclude isotope features were enabled and selected precursors were dynamically excluded from repeated sampling for 15 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software package, version 1.6.0.16 was used to identify the proteins searching against the human uniprot database 2018.07_UP000005640_9606_Homo_sapiens_all plus the sequences of common contamintants with tryptic specificity allowing 2 missed cleavages. Oxidized methionine, acetylation of the protein N-terminus were set as variable, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification. Results were filtered at a false discovery rate of 1% at the protein and PSM level.

### Publication Abstract
Stress-induced tRNA fragmentation upon environmental insult is a conserved cellular process catalysed by endonucleolytic activities targeting mature tRNAs. The resulting tRNA-derived small RNAs (tsRNAs) have been implicated in various biological processes that impact cell-to-cell signalling, cell survival as well as gene expression regulation during embryonic development. However, how endonuclease-targeted tRNAs give rise to individual and potentially biologically active tsRNAs remains poorly understood. Here, we report on the in vivo identification of proteins associated with stress-induced tsRNAs-containing protein complexes, which, together with a 'tracer tRNA' assay, were used to uncover enzymatic activities that can bind and process specific endonuclease-targeted tRNAs in vitro. Among those, we identified conserved ATP-dependent RNA helicases which can robustly separate tRNAs with endonuclease-mediated 'nicks' in their anticodon loops. These findings shed light on the existence of cellular pathways dedicated to producing individual tsRNAs after stress-induced tRNA hydrolysis, which adds to our understanding as to how tRNA fragmentation and the resulting tsRNAs might exert physiological impact.

### Keywords
Ddx3x, Rna helicase enzymes, Tsrna, Ddx5x, Trna fragments

### Affiliations
Max Perutz Labs, Mass Spectrometry Facility, University of Vienna
Medical University of Vienna,Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Dorothea Anrather

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Schaefer
Medical University of Vienna,Vienna, Austria


