### Accession
PXD004249

### Title
Human bladder cancer and colon cancer quatitative MS/MS

### Description
We analyzed a set of 40 independently collected tumor tissue/control samples using a label-free quantitation single pass LC-MS/MS approach. In this set, 10 samples originated from a colon tumor (i.e. AC) and 10 from control non-malignant tissue samples (NCA), as well as 10 from BC samples and 10 from control bladder tissue (NCB) samples.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides mixtures were analyzed by LC-MS (liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry) using Nano-Acquity (Waters) LC system and Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron Corp., San Jose, CA). Prior to the analysis, proteins were subjected to standard ”in-solution digestion” procedure during which proteins were reduced with 200 mM dithiothreitol (for 60 minutes at 60°C), alkylated with 500 mM iodoacetamide (45 minutes in dark at room temperature) and digested overnight with trypsin. Peptide mixture was applied to RP-18 precolumn using water containing 0,1% TFA as mobile phase and then transferred to nano-HPLC RP-18 column using an acetonitrile gradient (5 % - 35 % AcN in 180 minutes) in the presence of 0,05% formic acid with the flowrate of 250 nl/min. Column outlet was directly coupled to the ion source of the spectrometer. A blank run ensuring lack of cross contamination from previous samples preceded each analysis. Qualitative analyses (i.e., peptide and protein identification) were performed on pooled samples in data-dependent MS-to-MS/MS acquisition mode. Up to five MS/MS processes were allowed for each MS scan. To increase the number of peptide identifications, three LC-MS/MS runs were performed per pooled sample, each covering one of three ranges of m/z values: 300–600, 500–900, or 800–2000. This approach substantially improved the coverage of protein identification. Quantitative analyses of individual samples were carried out in separate survey scan LC-MS runs with an m/z measurement range of 300-2000 using the same acetonitrile gradient as in the qualitative LC-MS/MS runs. The data-dependent MS-to-MS/MS switch was disabled, and the spectrometer resolution was set to 15,000.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted from raw files using Mascot Distiller (Matrix Science), followed by an initial Mascot database search restricted to human sequences against the SwissProt database. Search parameters were: enzyme specificity, trypsin; number of missed cleavage sites, 1; precursor tolerance window 30 ppm; MS/MS tolerance 0.2 Da; variable modification, methionine oxidation; fixed modification, cysteine carbamidomethylation. Mascot search results were internally calibrated using DatViewer software. Calibrated data with sample-specific mass tolerance values were saved as mass-error corrected MGF files for the second database search using Mascot search engine, with the same search parameters except enzyme specificity which was set to “no enzyme specificity” and sample specific mass tolerance values. Quantitative analysis was performed on peptides fulfilling the criterion of FDR < 1%,  The list of peptides identified from the LC-MS/MS runs was overlaid onto two-dimensional maps generated from the LC-MS profile data for individual samples. The list of identified peptides was used to tag the corresponding peptide-related ion spectra on the basis of m/z value, the deviation from the predicted elution time, and the match between theoretical and observed isotopic envelopes. The relative abundance of each peptide ion was determined as the volume of the corresponding peak. To minimize the effects of non-biological sources of variation, log-transformed peptide abundance was normalized by fitting a robust, locally weighted regression smoother (LOESS) between the individual samples and a median pseudosample. The parameters of the fit were established using a set of features exhibiting low variance in the non-normalized data and then applied to the whole dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Proteolytic cascades are deeply involved in critical stages of cancer progression. During the course of peptide-wise analysis of shotgun proteomic data sets representative of colon adenocarcinoma (AC) and ulcerative colitis (UC), we detected a cancer-specific proteolytic fingerprint composed of a set of numerous protein fragments cleaved C-terminally to V, I, A, T, or C residues, significantly overrepresented in AC. A peptide set linked by a common VIATC cleavage consensus was the only prominent cancer-specific proteolytic fingerprint detected. This sequence consensus indicated neutrophil elastase as a source of the fingerprint. We also found that a large fraction of affected proteins are RNA processing proteins associated with the nuclear fraction and mostly cleaved within their functionally important RNA-binding domains. Thus, we detected a new class of cancer-specific peptides that are possible markers of tumor-infiltrating neutrophil activity, which often correlates with the clinical outcome. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers: PXD005274 (Data set 1) and PXD004249 (Data set 2). Our results indicate the value of peptide-wise analysis of large global proteomic analysis data sets as opposed to protein-wise analysis, in which outlier differential peptides are usually neglected.

### Keywords
Human, Adenocarcinoma, Colon cancer, Quantitative lc-msms, Label-free, Bladder cancer

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics - Polish Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Michał Kistowski

### Lab Head
Dr Michał Dadlez
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics - Polish Academy of Sciences


