### Accession
PXD002575

### Title
Zea mays AM fungi interaction -  A rice Serine/Threonine receptor-like kinase regulates arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis at the peri-arbuscular membrane

### Description
We describe a method that detects membrane proteins from cell type-specific plant plasma membrane subdomains. As the biochemical properties of membrane subdomains are often unknown, general membrane enrichment by continuous sucrose density gradient centrifugation was combined with filter-aided sample preparation, strong cation exchange pre-fractionation and sensitive LTQ Orbitrap Velos-based mass-spectrometry proteomics. This workflow identified plasma membrane proteins, including underrepresented proteins, at an unprecedented level of sensitivity and reproducibility.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 40g root fresh weight entered into the protein extraction of each of the two biological replicates. The procedure followed a modified version of Kim et al. (2007), namely, roots were ground using a laboratory blender and subsequently homogenized in ice-cold extraction buffer [25mM Hepes-KOH  pH 7.2, 200mM Sorbitol, 1mM DTT and 2mM PMSF]. Samples where filtered through 2 layers of Miracloth (Calbiochem, San Diego, CA, USA). The samples were subjected to ultracentrifugation at 100,000g for 45min at 4°C. The supernatants represented the total soluble protein fraction (TPF), while the pellets represented the microsomal fraction (MF). The TPFs were subjected to overnight precipitation with 25% acetone at -20°C and proteins were collected by centrifugation at 15 000g for 30min at 4°C. The MFs, were re-suspended in STED 10 [10% sucrose w/w, 0.5M Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 0.5M EDTA and 0.5M DTT] and then subjected to over night centrifugation at 100,000 g at 4°C in a continuous sucrose gradient. A total of 14 fractions were collected from each sample, washed in 20mM Tris/Hepes pH7.2 and 1mM MgCl2 and centrifuged at 100,000g at 4°C for 60min. The obtained pellets were re-suspended with Laemmli buffer for Western blotting or in SDS-Lysis buffer for proteins solubilisation and digestion.

### Data Protocol
The peptide mixture was dried in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Schönenbuch, Switzerland) and redissolved in solvent A (10mM KH2PO4 pH 2.9 in 25% acetonitrile). Peptides were loaded on a 2.1mm inner diameter x 200mm long SCX column (column material poly-sulphoethyl A, 5 micron particle size, 200 Å pore size, Poly-LC, www.polylc.com) and eluted at a flow rate of 0.2ml min-1 using solvent B (10mM KH2PO4, pH 2.9, 0.5M KCl in 25% acetonitrile). Separation was performed with the following gradient: 0-10min,  0 % B; 15min, 5% B; 50min, 35% B; 60min, 100% B; 65min, 100%; 68min 2 0% B; 110min 2 0% B. The 27 fractions obtained were pooled to eight master fractions according to the SCX chromatogram, and desalted using ZipTips C18 (Millipore, Zug, Switzerland). The samples were analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, www.thermoscientific.com) coupled to an Eksigent Nano HPLC system (Eksigent Technologies, www.eksigent.com). The solvent composition of buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in H2O, and buffer B contained 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Samples were dissolved in 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto a self-made tip column (75µm inner diameter x 80mm long) packed with reverse-phase C18 material (AQ, particle size 3µm, pore size 200 Å; Bischoff GmbH, www.bischoff-chrom.com) and eluted at a flow rate of  250nl min-1. The following LC gradient was applied: 0-5min 2% B; 95min 50% B; 98min 70% B; 100min 100% B; 105min 100% B; 108min 2% B; 140min 2% B. Mass spectra were acquired in the m/z range 300–1700  in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 30000 at m/z 400. MS/MS spectra were recorded in a data-dependent manner for the twenty most intense signals in the ion trap. Precursor masses already selected for MS/MS acquisition were excluded from further selection for 45sec, and the exclusion window was set to 10ppm. FT preview mode was enabled, and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.120025 was used for internal calibration (lock mass). Protein identification and data processing The MS and MS/MS data were converted into Mascot generic files (mgf) with Mascot Distiller 2.4. The Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 2.4) was used for database searches. MS and MS/MS data were searched against a database containing forward and reversed protein sequences from Zea mays (www.maizesequence.org) and Rhizophagus irregularis (www.uniprot.com). Furthermore, a set of 260 known protein contaminants such as keratin and trypsin were added. The following search parameters were applied: (i) trypsin was used as the protein-digesting enzyme, and up to two missed cleavages were tolerated, (ii) carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, (iii) oxidation of methionine and pyro-Glu for N-term Gln were selected as variable modifications. Searches were performed with a parent-ion mass tolerance of ±10ppm and a fragment-ion mass tolerance of ±0.6 Da. Scaffold version 4.0 (Proteome Software Inc, Portland, Oregon) was used to validate and quantify MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. We filtered the data with Scaffold in order to keep the false-discovery rate (FDR) at the protein level <1% and the protein identification with at least 2 peptides. Proteins that were identified using the same set of peptides and were not differentiated by the MS/MS analysis were grouped to protein clusters to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Spectral count was used as quantitative method and the following rules for the semi-quantitative protein measurements have been applied: i) at least 8 peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) for the sum over all experiments were required for a quantitative evaluation. ii) As quantitative assessment between the two groups (MOCK and MYC) summed all the PSMs for each group and added plus one. We express this quantitative assessment then as log2 fold change. iii) Proteins were considered up or down regulated when the absolute log2 fold change was larger than one. This corresponds to 2 times up or down regulation.

### Publication Abstract
In terrestrial ecosystems most plant species live in mutualistic symbioses with nutrient-delivering arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi. Establishment of AM symbioses includes transient, intracellular formation of fungal feeding structures, the arbuscules. A plant-derived peri-arbuscular membrane (PAM) surrounds the arbuscules, mediating reciprocal nutrient exchange. Signaling at the PAM must be well coordinated to achieve this dynamic cellular intimacy. Here, we identify the PAM-specific Arbuscular Receptor-like Kinase 1 (ARK1) from maize and rice to condition sustained AM symbiosis. Mutation of rice ARK1 causes a significant reduction in vesicles, the fungal storage structures, and a concomitant reduction in overall root colonization by the AM fungus Rhizophagus irregularis. Arbuscules, although less frequent in the ark1 mutant, are morphologically normal. Co-cultivation with wild-type plants restores vesicle and spore formation, suggesting ARK1 function is required for the completion of the fungal life-cycle, thereby defining a functional stage, post arbuscule development.

### Keywords
Proteomics am fungi maize plasma membrabe

### Affiliations
Institute for Sustainable Plant Protection, National Research Council
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Marco Chiapello

### Lab Head
Dr Uta Paszkowski
University of Cambridge


