### Accession
PXD038616

### Title
The differential proteomic response of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus to the silver (1) compound, SBC3

### Description
The race to combat antibiotic resistance and develop novel therapies has triggered studies on novel metal-based formulations. Silver remains a strong candidate since ancient times due to its multimodal and broad-spectrum activity against bacterial and fungal pathogens. N-heterocyclic carbene (NHC) complexes coordinate transition metals to generate a broad range of anticancer and/or antimicrobial agents with ongoing efforts being made to enhance lipophilicity and drug stability. The lead silver(I) acetate complex, 1,3-dibenzyl-4,5-diphenylimidazol-2-ylidene (NHC*) (SBC3) synthesised by the Tacke group has previously demonstrated promising growth and biofilm-inhibiting properties. As an extension of this, we examined the responses of two structurally different bacteria to SBC3 using label-free quantitative proteomic analysis. Multidrug resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Gram-negative) and Staphylococcus aureus (Gram-positive) are associated with chronic wound infections and Cystic Fibrosis lung colonisation where co-infection often exacerbates disease. SBC3 increased the abundance of alginate biosynthesis, secretion system and drug detoxification proteins in P. aeruginosa whilst a multitude of pathways including anaerobic respiration, twitching motility, and ABC transport were decreased. This contrasted with affected pathways in S. aureus such as increased DNA replication/repair and cell redox homeostasis and decreased protein synthesis, lipoylation, glucose metabolism. Increased abundance of cell wall/membrane proteins were indicative of the structural damage induced by SBC3 to both cell types. These findings show the potential broad applications of SBC3 in treating Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.

### Sample Protocol
P. aeruginosa and S. aureus were grown in the presence of SBC3 (7.5 μg/ml and 12 μg/ml, respectively) at 37°C in an orbital shaker at 200 rpm for 6 hours until mid-exponential growth phase (n = 3, per sample group). Cells were washed three times in sterile PBS, resuspended in lysis buffer (pH 8.0) containing 6 M urea (Sigma), 2 M thiourea (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.1 M Tris-HCl (Sigma) and protease inhibitors (10 µg/ml aprotinin (Caymen Chemical Company), leupeptin (Thermo Scientific), pepstatin A (Sigma) and N-α-tosyl-L-lysine chloromethyl ketone hydrochloride (TLCK), and 1 mM/ml phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF; Sigma) and lysed by sonication. Samples were sonicated for 10 min at 13000 x g to eliminate cell debris. The supernatant was combined with acetone in a 1:3 ratio, sample to acetone. Proteins were acetone precipitated overnight at -20°C. Proteins were pelleted via centrifugation and acetone was discarded. Protein pellets were resuspended in 25µl resuspension buffer (same as lysis buffer but without protease inhibitors). Two µl aliquots of sample were used to quantify protein using the QubitTM quantification system (Invitrogen). One hundred and five µl of ammonium bicarbonate (50 mM) was added to remaining samples. One µl 0.5 M dithiothreitol (DTT; Sigma-Aldrich) was added and samples were incubated at 56°C for 20 min. Samples were alkylated with 2.7 µl iodoacetamide (IAA; Sigma-Aldrich) incubated in the dark at room temperature for 15 min. Proteins were digested with 0.5 µg Sequence Grade Trypsin (Promega) in combination with 1 µl 1% (w/v) ProteaseMAX overnight at 37°C. Digestion was inhibited with 1 µl trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Sigma-Aldrich). Samples were incubated at room temperature for 5 min and centrifuged at 13000 x g for 10 min. Peptides in the resulting supernatant were purified using C-18 spin columns (Pierce) and dried in a SpeedyVac concentrator (Thermo Scientific Savant DNA120) at 39°C for 2 h. Samples were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% TFA, sonicated in a water bath for 5 min and centrifuged at 13000 x g for 5 min. The supernatant (2 µ containing 75 µg protein) was loaded onto a QExactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a 133 min reverse phase gradient.

### Data Protocol
Protein quantification and label-free quantification (LFQ) normalisation were processed through MaxQuant software version 1.6.3.4 using a Staphylococcus aureus NCT8325 (downloaded 12/10/2021; 2889 entries) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 (downloaded 09/07/2021; 5564 entries). The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm, followed by 4.5 pp, with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. A maximum of two missed cleavage sites were permitted. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptides and proteins. Peptides with a minimum amino acid length of seven were considered for identification. Subsequent graphical and statistical analyses were conducted via Perseus v.1.6.6.0 (www.maxquant.org/). The quantitative measurement for protein abundance used normalised label-free quantitative (LFQ) values. Contaminants and peptides identified by site were omitted. LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed and samples were placed into the corresponding SBC3 treatment or control group. Proteins not found in three out of four replicates in at least one group were omitted. The data were imputated to replace missing values with values that simulate signals of low abundant proteins chosen randomly from a distribution with a downshift  1.8 times the mean standard deviation of all measured values and a width of 0.3 times this standard deviation. Normalised LFQ intensity values were used for principal component analyses. Pairwise Student’s t-tests were conducted for SBC3 treated versus untreated sample groups (p<0.05) on the imputated data set. To generate volcano plots, negative log p values were plotted (y-axis) against the log2 fold-change values (x-axis). Statistically significant (ANOVA p<0.05) and differentially abundant proteins (i.e., proteins with a relative fold-change ≥1.5) were selected for subsequent analyses. The Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING) v11.5 (www.string-db.org/) was used to map statistically significant and differentially abundant proteins using their corresponding gene names retrieved from UniProt gene lists for P. aeruginosa PAO1 and S. aureus NCTC 8325. A high confidence score (0.7) was used to generate map protein/protein interaction networks for treatment versus control sample groups. Disconnected nodes were omitted. Functional enrichment analysis was carried out along with manual searches using the UniProt database to determine individual protein and pathway functions.

### Publication Abstract
The urgent need to combat antibiotic resistance and develop novel antimicrobial therapies has triggered studies on novel metal-based formulations. <i>N</i>-heterocyclic carbene (NHC) complexes coordinate transition metals to generate a broad range of anticancer and/or antimicrobial agents, with ongoing efforts being made to enhance the lipophilicity and drug stability. The lead silver(I) acetate complex, 1,3-dibenzyl-4,5-diphenylimidazol-2-ylidene (NHC*) (SBC3), has previously demonstrated promising growth and biofilm-inhibiting properties. In this work, the responses of two structurally different bacteria to SBC3 using label-free quantitative proteomics were characterised. Multidrug-resistant <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> (Gram-negative) and <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> (Gram-positive) are associated with cystic fibrosis lung colonisation and chronic wound infections, respectively. SBC3 increased the abundance of alginate biosynthesis, the secretion system and drug detoxification proteins in <i>P. aeruginosa</i>, whilst a variety of pathways, including anaerobic respiration, twitching motility and ABC transport, were decreased in abundance. This contrasted the affected pathways in <i>S. aureus</i>, where increased DNA replication/repair and cell redox homeostasis and decreased protein synthesis, lipoylation and glucose metabolism were observed. Increased abundance of cell wall/membrane proteins was indicative of the structural damage induced by SBC3 in both bacteria. These findings show the potential broad applications of SBC3 in treating Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.

### Keywords
Antimicrobial, Silver, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Pseudomonas, Staphylococcus

### Affiliations
Maynooth University
Biology Department, Maynooth University

### Submitter
Magdalena Piatek

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Kevin Kavanagh
Biology Department, Maynooth University


