### Accession
PXD022530

### Title
PAM complex sequesters from TIM translocon and becomes part of an insoluble protein fraction under protein folding stress

### Description
Upon mitochondrial dysfunction, mitophagy has been described to be activated by a breakdown of membrane potential leading to PINK1 accumulation on the outer membrane and engulfment of mitochondria for degradation. However, recent findings have indicated that mitophagy may also be triggered in the absence of membrane potential alterations. Here, we report mechanistic details on how inhibition of protein import induces mitophagy independent of mitochondrial membrane depolarization. Carrying out a genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 screen for regulators of mitophagy, we found that the pre-sequence translocase-associated motor complex PAM controls mitophagy induction. Loss of PAM caused defects in protein import and was sufficient to induce mitophagy without depolarization. Quantitative interaction and aggregation proteomics revealed that PAM was highly sensitive to proteostasis perturbation; upon misfolding conditions, PAM dissociated from the import machinery, sequestered into the insoluble fraction and caused mitophagy despite an intact membrane potential. Our findings extend the current mitophagy model and provide mechanistic insight into how proteostasis perturbation leads to mitophagy induction. They reveal the PAM complex as key folding sensor integrating proteostasis, import and mitophagy.

### Sample Protocol
Streptavidin pull down and MS sample preparation  All buffers were prepared freshly on the day of the streptavidin pull-down experiments. Frozen cell pellets were thawed on ice and incubated for 15 min in lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM sodium phosphate pH 8, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1% (w/v) SDS, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM chloroacetamide and protease inhibitor (Sigma Aldrich)). Lysates were sonicated on ice three times for 30 s at 45% amplitude with 2 s rest between the cycles. For trichloroacetic acid (TCA) precipitation, an equal volume of 40% ice cold TCA was added to the lysate and incubated for 1 h on ice. Precipitated proteins were spun down at 20.000 x g at 4°C for 10 min. Pellets were washed 3 times with 90% ice cold acetone, air-dried and dissolved in resuspension buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM sodium phosphate pH 8, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 1% SDS) by shaking for 1 h at room temperature. After determination of the protein concentrations using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific), same protein amounts were diluted with an equal volume of mili-Q water and subject to Streptavidin pull down. For Streptavidin pull down 15 µl of streptavidin magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were prepared by washing 3 times with washing buffer (4M urea, 0.5 % SDS (w/v) and 100 mM sodium phosphate pH 8). The protein lysates were mixed with streptavidin beads and gently rotated overnight at 4°C.  The beads were washed 5 times using washing buffer and 10 times using washing buffer without SDS.  For on-beads digestion, Streptavidin beads were resuspended in elution buffer (2 M urea, 200 mM EPPS pH 8.2, 8% ACN) and incubated with 1 µg LysC protease per 20 µl beads for 2-3 h at 37°C. Afterwards, the samples were dilute 1:2.5 in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.2 and digested with 0.2 µg Trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. The supernatant was mixed with ACN (final concentration 20%) and eluted peptides were labelled with TMT10. Samples were pooled and dried by vacuum centrifugation for further processing.Dried peptides were resuspended with 0.5 µg/µl in 2 % (v/v) acetonitrile / 1 % (v/v) formic acid solution. Samples were shot with settings similar to previously studies. First, peptides were separated on an Easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) and a 22 cm long, 75 mmID fused-silica column, which had been packed in house with 1.9 mm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch), and kept at 45°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 5%–38% acetonitrile over 120 min and subsequently sprayed into a QExactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific) at a spray voltage of 2.3 kV. Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and an AGC target value of 3x 106. Up to 20 most intense peptides per full scan were isolated using a 1 Th window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy of 35). MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 45,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 86 ms and an AGC target value of 1x 105. Ions with charge states of 1 and > 6 as well as ions with unassigned charge states were not considered for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s to minimize repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Files were recalibrated using the Homo sapiens SwissProt database (TaxID = 9606, v. 2017-10-25) with methionine oxidation (+15.995) as dynamic modification and carbamidomethyl (Cys,+57.021464), TMT6 (N-terminal, +229.1629) and TMT6 (+229.1629) at lysines as fixed modifications. Spectra were selected using default settings and database searches performed using SequestHT node in PD. Database searches were performed against a trypsin digested Homo sapiens SwissProt database and FASTA files of common contaminants (`contaminants.fasta` provided with MaxQuant) for quality control. Fixed modifications were set as TMT6 at lysine residues, TMT6 (N-terminal) and carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues. As dynamic modifications acetylation (N-terminal) and methionine oxidation were set. After search, posterior error probabilities were calculated and PSMs filtered using Percolator using default settings. The Consensus Workflow for reporter ion quantification was performed with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Mitophagy is essential to maintain mitochondrial function and prevent diseases. It activates upon mitochondria depolarization, which causes PINK1 stabilization on the mitochondrial outer membrane. Strikingly, a number of conditions, including mitochondrial protein misfolding, can induce mitophagy without a loss in membrane potential. The underlying molecular details remain unclear. Here, we report that a loss of mitochondrial protein import, mediated by the pre-sequence translocase-associated motor complex PAM, is sufficient to induce mitophagy in polarized mitochondria. A genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 screen for mitophagy inducers identifies components of the PAM complex. Protein import defects are able to induce mitophagy without a need for depolarization. Upon mitochondrial protein misfolding, PAM dissociates from the import machinery resulting in decreased protein import and mitophagy induction. Our findings extend the current mitophagy model to explain mitophagy induction upon conditions that do not affect membrane polarization, such as mitochondrial protein misfolding.

### Keywords
Protein misfolding, Pam interactors, Biotinylation-streptavidin-pull down, Turboid

### Affiliations
Goethe University Frankfurt, Faculty of medicine, Institute of biochemistry II, Münch Group
Goethe Universität Frankfurt am Main, Faculty of medicine, Institute of Biochemistry II, Münch Group

### Submitter
Jonas Michaelis

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Goethe University Frankfurt, Faculty of medicine, Institute of biochemistry II, Münch Group


