### Accession
PXD012748

### Title
Endogenous human milk proteolysis as a function of pH

### Description
The use of human milk products is increasing for high-risk infants. Human milk contains endogenous enzymes that comprise a dynamic proteolytic system; yet, biological properties of these enzymes and their activities in response to variations including pH within infants are unclear. This study was designed to determine the specificity of enzyme-substrate interactions in human milk as a function of pH.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly expressed human milk was collected. Protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, 05892970001) was added to the first aliquot of the human milk to prevent proteolysis as the no-incubation control group. Six treatment groups were incubated at 37 °C for 2 hours under different pH conditions in this study. One treatment group remained at its natural pH of approximately 7; the pH of other treatment groups was adjusted by 1M HCl to 6 (6.0 ± 0.1), 5 (5.0 ± 0.1), 4 (4.0 ± 0.1), 3 (3.0 ± 0.1) and 2 (2.0 ± 0.1), respectively. After incubation, protease inhibitor cocktail was added to stop proteolysis. Mixtures of 1M NaOH and 1M HCl were added to neutralize samples and to adjust sample volumes. Each sample was centrifuged at 15000 x g at 4 °C for 15 min and the aqueous layer was collected. An equal volume of 20% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA) was added and the mixture was kept at 4°C for 10 min for protein precipitation. After centrifugation at 15000 x g at 4°C for 10 min, peptides from the supernatant were purified by solid-phase extraction with C18 96-well plate (GlySci, FNSC18). Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS with Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass analyzer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS spectra from Orbitrap were converted to the MGF format by ProteoWizard 3.0. Sequences of peptides were identified by X!Tandem database search against SwissProt Homo sapiens (Human) proteome. A non-specific enzyme cleavage pattern ([X]|[X]) was set, and 50 missed cleavage sites were allowed. No complete modifications were defined. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, as well as phosphorylation of serine and threonine were selected as potential modifications. Mass error tolerance was ±20 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions. Individual spectra were accepted when the e-value of peptide match was below 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Endogenous proteolysis, Q exactive, Ph, Peptide, Milk

### Affiliations
Foods for Health Institute, Department of Food Science and Technology, University of California, Davis, CA, USA
University of California, Davis

### Submitter
Junai Gan

### Lab Head
Dr J. Bruce German
Foods for Health Institute, Department of Food Science and Technology, University of California, Davis, CA, USA


