### Accession
PXD030259

### Title
TMT quantification of insoluble fractions in SH-SY5Y

### Description
To identify the misfolded proteins which can be rescued by slowing down translation speed of ribosomes by a very low concentration of cycloheximide.

### Sample Protocol
Protein lysates from SH-SY5Y cell line were reduced and denatured using DTT and incubated at 70°C for 10 minutes. Concentration was then measured using reducing agent-compatible BCA kit (ThermoFisher, USA). Then, 60 ug of lysates were digested using mass spec grade trypsin/lys-c mix (Promega, USA) at a ratio of 1:50 enzyme:protein (w/w), which was done after removal of detergent from the samples using FASP protein digestion kit (Abcam, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The digested peptides were eluted in 50mM TEAB, concentrations were quantified using Pierce™ Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (ThermoFisher, USA).  Equal peptide concentrations for each sample were then labeled using TMTsixplex™ Isobaric Mass Tagging Kit (ThermoFisher, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The concentrations of the labeled samples were then normalized using Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (ThermoFisher, USA). Equal concentration of the six different labeled samples were then combined into one tube, vacuum dried and dissolved in 5 mM ammonium hydroxide and 0.9% acetonitrile. Afterwards, to decrease the complexity of the sample, the TMT-labeled peptides’ sample was fractionated into 24 fractions using Thermo UltiMate HPLC system (ThermoFisher, USA) at flow rate 0.1 ml/min.

### Data Protocol
The fractions then underwent mass spectrometry analysis using Waters nanoACQUITY UPLC (Waters, USA) connected to Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (ThermoFisher, USA). Raw data files were searched against the Uniprot Human database using Proteome Discoverer v2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Misfolding

### Affiliations
Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate University
Cell Signal Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate University, Japan

### Submitter
Hiroaki Sako

### Lab Head
Dr Tadashi Yamamoto
Cell Signal Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate University, Japan


