### Accession
PXD001933

### Title
The value of subcellular fractionation for protein identification in a B-cell line (Ramos)

### Description
Integrated in the Chromosomic-centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP), a lymphocytic B-cell line (Ramos) was selected as a model of B-cells. We performed a subfractionation strategy (in triplicate) for the extraction of proteins from 4 different fractions (cytoplasm, CYT; organella, ORG; membrane, MB; nucleus, NUC).

### Sample Protocol
Gel pieces (5 per sample:1-5 for replicate 1; 6-10 for replicate 2; 11-15 for replicate 3) were destained with 15 mM potassium ferrocyanide and 50mM sodium thiosulfate. Protein reduction and alkylation was performed with 10mM DTT at 56ºC for 45 min, and with 55 mM IAA at room temperature for 30 min. Proteins were digested with trypsin (6.25 ng/mL) at 37ºC for 18 h. The peptide solution was acidified with FA and desalted by using C18-Stage-Tips columns20. The samples were partially dried and stored at -20ºC until being analyzed by LC-MS/MS.  A nano-UPLC system (nanoAcquity, Waters Corp., Milford/MA, USA) coupled to a LTQ-Velos-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose/CA, USA) via a nano-electrospray ion source (NanoSpray flex, Proxeon, Thermo) was used for  reversed-phase LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were dissolved in 0.5% FA/3% ACN and loaded onto a trapping column (nanoACQUITY UPLC 2G-V/M Trap Symmetry 5 μm particle size, 180 μm × 20 mm C18 column, Waters Corp., Milford/MA, USA). Peptides were separated on a nanoACQUITY UPLC BEH 1.7 μm, 130 Å, 75 μm × 250 mm C18 column (Waters Corp., Milford/MA, USA) with a linear gradient from 7% to 35% solvent B (ACN/0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min over 120 minutes. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos was operated in the positive ion mode applying a data-dependent automatic switch between survey MS scan and tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) acquisition. Survey scans were acquired in the mass range of m/z 400 to 1600 with 60,000 resolution at m/z 400 with lock mass option enabled for the 445.120025 ion. The 20 most intense peaks having ≥2 charge state and above 500 intensity threshold were selected in the ion trap for fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation with 35% normalized energy, 10 ms activation time, q = 0.25, ±2 m/z precursor isolation width and wideband activation. Maximum injection time was 1000 ms and 50 ms for survey and MS/MS scans, respectively. AGC was 1 x 10E6 for MS and 5 × 10E3 for MS/MS scans. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 90 s.

### Data Protocol
MASCOT and SEQUEST HT search algorithms were used for searching the acquired MS/MS spectra, using Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer software (v. 1.4.1.14) against a custom database of all human reviewed sequences downloaded from UniProt database (February 2014) and common contaminant sequences (e.g., human keratins, trypsin, BSA). Search parameters were as follows: fully-tryptic digestion with up to two missed cleavages, 10 ppm and 0.8 Da mass tolerances for precursor and product ions, respectively, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein n-terminus were established as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. Peptides having MASCOT scores of less than 20 were not considered for analysis. One percent false discovery rate (1% FDR) using Percolator was used for peptide validation.

### Publication Abstract
A comprehensive study of the molecular active landscape of human cells can be undertaken to integrate two different but complementary perspectives: transcriptomics, and proteomics. After the genome era, proteomics has emerged as a powerful tool to simultaneously identify and characterize the compendium of thousands of different proteins active in a cell. Thus, the Chromosome-centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) is promoting a full characterization of the human proteome combining high-throughput proteomics with the data derived from genome-wide expression profiling of protein-coding genes. Here we present a full proteomic profiling of a human lymphoma B-cell line (Ramos) performed using a nanoUPLC-LTQ-Orbitrap Velos proteomic platform, combined to an in-depth transcriptomic profiling of the same cell type. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001933. Integration of the proteomic and transcriptomic data sets revealed a 94% overlap in the proteins identified by both -omics approaches. Moreover, functional enrichment analysis of the proteomic profiles showed an enrichment of several functions directly related to the biological and morphological characteristics of B-cells. In turn, about 30% of all protein-coding genes present in the whole human genome were identified as being expressed by the Ramos cells (stable average of 30% genes along all the chromosomes), revealing the size of the protein expression-set present in one specific human cell type. Additionally, the identification of missing proteins in our data sets has been reported, highlighting the power of the approach. Also, a comparison between neXtProt and UniProt database searches has been performed. In summary, our transcriptomic and proteomic experimental profiling provided a high coverage report of the expressed proteome from a human lymphoma B-cell type with a clear insight into the biological processes that characterized these cells. In this way, we demonstrated the usefulness of combining -omics for a comprehensive characterization of specific biological systems.

### Keywords
Human, Nucleus, Ramos, Organella, B-cell, Membrane, Orbitrap, Cytoplasm

### Affiliations
Cancer Research Institute-USAL
Department of Medicine and General Cytometry Service-Nucleus, Cancer Research Centre (CSIC/USAL/IBSAL). Avda. Universidad de Coimbra, S/N, 37007 Salamanca, Spain. Phone: +34 923294811 Fax: +34 923294743

### Submitter
Paula Díez

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Fuentes
Department of Medicine and General Cytometry Service-Nucleus, Cancer Research Centre (CSIC/USAL/IBSAL). Avda. Universidad de Coimbra, S/N, 37007 Salamanca, Spain. Phone: +34 923294811 Fax: +34 923294743


