### Accession
PXD014522

### Title
Discovery of species-unique peptide biomarkers of bacterial pathogens by tandem mass spectrometry-based proteotyping

### Description
Respiratory-tract infections are a predominant cause for clinical treatment, although, clinical assessments and standard clinical laboratory protocols are time-consuming and often inadequate for reliable diagnoses. Novel methods, preferably applied directly to clinical samples, excluding cultivation steps, are needed to improve diagnostics, provide adequate treatment and reduce the use of antibiotics and associated development of antibiotic resistance.   This study applied nano-liquid chromatography coupled with tandem MS, with a bioinformatics pipeline and an in-house database of curated high-quality reference genome sequences to identify species-unique peptides as potential biomarkers for bacterial pathogens commonly found in respiratory tract infections: Staphylococcus aureus; Moraxella catarrhalis; Haemophilus influenzae and Streptococcus pneumoniae.   The species-unique peptides were initially identified in pure-culture bacterial reference strains, reflecting the genomic variation in the four species and, furthermore in clinical respiratory tract samples, without prior cultivation, elucidating proteins expressed in clinical conditions of infection. Peptide biomarker candidates for each species is presented. As a proof-of-principle, the most promising species-unique peptides were applied in targeted tandem MS-analyses of clinical samples and their relevance for identifications of the pathogens, i.e. proteotyping, was validated, demonstrating their potential as effective peptide biomarker candidates for diagnostics of infectious diseases.

### Sample Protocol
For removal of human biomass, the MolYsis kit (MolYsis Basic5 kit, Molzym GmbH & Co. Bremen, Germany) was used, according to the supplier’s protocol, with minor modifications. After sample treatment, the resulting bacterial pellets were re-suspended in 120 µl ammonium bicarbonate (20 mM pH 8) and bacteria were lysed using bead beating (13). For digestion of proteins, to generate peptides, sodium deoxycholate (SDC, 5% in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8) was added to 1% (w/v) final concentration. Bacterial cells were lysed by bead beating, and the supernatants were collected. Trypsin (2 µg/ml, 100 µl ammonium bicarbonate, 20 mM pH 8) was added and samples were digested for approximately 8 h at 37°C. SDC was removed by precipitation by addition of formic acid (FA) followed by centrifugation at 13,000 x g for 10 min. Supernatants containing the peptides were stored at -20 °C until analysis

### Data Protocol
RAW data was matched using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, version 1.4), against the targeted databases. Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science) was used as a search engine with precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 200 mmu and variable methionine oxidation. Fixed Value with a maximum delta Cn of 0.05 was employed in the database matching and the peptides used for protein identification were filtered at 1% FDR. The fragmentation spectra and ion series for all detected peptides in the clinical samples were inspected manually to verify correct identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry (MS) and proteomics offer comprehensive characterization and identification of microorganisms and discovery of protein biomarkers that are applicable for diagnostics of infectious diseases. The use of biomarkers for diagnostics is widely applied in the clinic and the use of peptide biomarkers is increasingly being investigated for applications in the clinical laboratory. Respiratory-tract infections are a predominant cause for medical treatment, although, clinical assessments and standard clinical laboratory protocols are time-consuming and often inadequate for reliable diagnoses. Novel methods, preferably applied directly to clinical samples, excluding cultivation steps, are needed to improve diagnostics of infectious diseases, provide adequate treatment and reduce the use of antibiotics and associated development of antibiotic resistance. This study applied nano-liquid chromatography (LC) coupled with tandem MS, with a bioinformatics pipeline and an in-house database of curated high-quality reference genome sequences to identify species-unique peptides as potential biomarkers for four bacterial pathogens commonly found in respiratory tract infections (RTIs): <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i>; <i>Moraxella catarrhalis</i>; <i>Haemophilus influenzae</i> and <i>Streptococcus pneumoniae</i> The species-unique peptides were initially identified in pure cultures of bacterial reference strains, reflecting the genomic variation in the four species and, furthermore, in clinical respiratory tract samples, without prior cultivation, elucidating proteins expressed in clinical conditions of infection. For each of the four bacterial pathogens, the peptide biomarker candidates most predominantly found in clinical samples, are presented. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD014522. As proof-of-principle, the most promising species-unique peptides were applied in targeted tandem MS-analyses of clinical samples and their relevance for identifications of the pathogens, <i>i.e.</i> proteotyping, was validated, thus demonstrating their potential as peptide biomarker candidates for diagnostics of infectious diseases.

### Keywords
Proteotyping, Moraxella catarrhalis, Bacteria, Staphylococcus aureus, Haemophilus influenzae, Streptococcus pneumoniae

### Affiliations
PhD, Consultant at Nanoxis Consulting AB, Gothenburg, Sweden
University of Gothenburg

### Submitter
Sahlgrenska Academy Proteomics Core

### Lab Head
Dr Roger Karlsson
PhD, Consultant at Nanoxis Consulting AB, Gothenburg, Sweden


