### Accession
PXD002871

### Title
Phosphoproteomics quantitative characterization in Jurkat E6.1 and Jurkat Gamma1.

### Description
Phosphorylation is a reversible post-translational modification, playing a vital role in protein function. In T cells, protein phosphorylation is the key mechanism regulating T cell receptor – driven signaling pathways. In order to gain insights into the phosphoproteome evolution of T cell activation, we performed a large-scale quantitative phosphoproteomics study of Jurkat E6.1 (wild type) and Jurkat gamma1 (Phospholipase gamma1 null) cell clones upon costimulation with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies at times ranging from 15 min to as long as 120 min. In total, we identified 5585 phosphopeptides belonging to 2008 phosphoproteins from both cell clones. We detected 130 and 114 novel phosphopeptides in Jurkat E6.1 and Jurkat gamma1 clones, respectively. A significantly lower number of proteins containing regulated phosphorylation sites were identified in Jurkat gamma1 in comparison to Jurkat E6.1, reflecting the vital role of Phospholipase gamma1 in T cell signaling. Several new phosphorylation sites from lymphocyte-specific protein tyrosine kinase (LCK) were identified. Of these, Serine-121 showed significant changes in JE6.1 while only small changes in the Jgamma1 clone.

### Sample Protocol
JE6.1 and Jgamma1 cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA, USA) and cultured according to their guidelines. For each time point, 2.5×107 cells were treated with anti-CD3 (clone OKT3, eBiosciences) and anti-CD28 (clone CD28.2, eBioscience) monoclonal antibodies, at a concentration of 5 μg/mL of each antibody, for 30 min at 4 oC. After such time, the activation was initiated by collecting and resuspending cells in serum-free RPMI-1640 medium at 37 oC containing 8.5 μg/mL of goat anti-mouse polyclonal IgG antibody (Invitrogen, Camarillo, CA, USA). Cell density for activation was of 2.5×107 cells/mL. Activation was stopped at assigned time points (15, 30, 60, and 120 min) by diluting cell cultures with 10-fold excess of ice-cold PBS. The cell culture without antibody treatment (0 min) was used as the control. Cell pellets were suspended in lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT) and incubated at 95 oC for 5 min. To allow for complete cell disruption, the cell extract was sonicated 5 times for 5 s (Sonic Vibracell TM). The cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 16000×g for 20 min at 13 oC. Protein concentration measurement was performed with the Bradford Protein Assay (Bio-Rad, CA, USA). Five biological replicates from each clone were processed. Protein was digested with Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) using the FASP (Filter Aided Sample Preparation) digestion protocol [16]. Tryptic peptides were eluted by the addition of 3×100 µl of 200 mM TEAB followed by a centrifugation at 14000×g for 15 min at 13 oC. Peptide labeling by isobaric tandem mass tag: Each tryptic peptide mixture obtained from 80 µg of protein extract was labeled with tandem mass tags (TMT) (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) based on the standard procedure. Five labeled peptide mixtures were combined in a low-bind 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube, evaporated, and desalted using a C18 SPE cartridge (3 mL, 15 mg, Agilent Technologies, USA) before separation by Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) chromatography. Peptide separation by SCX chromatography was performed on an Agilent 1100 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany) using a Polysulfoethyl A TM, 50×2.1 mm, 5 µm, 200 Å column. Peptides were suspended in 200 µl of SCX buffer A (30% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and loaded onto the column at 200 µl/min of 100% SCX buffer A . Bound peptides were eluted by linear gradient of SCX buffer B (30% ACN, 0.1% formic acid, 500 mM NH4Cl) from 0 to 25% in 38 min and then to 100% in 20 min. For each injection, samples were separated and collected in 6 final fractions. Each fraction was cleaned up by solid phase extraction before the subsequent phosphopeptide enrichment experiments. Phosphopeptide enrichment:  Enrichment of phosphopeptides by sequential Immobilized Metal Ion Affinity chromatography (IMAC) and Titanium dioxide (TiO2) chromatography was carried out according to previous studies [17,18].  LC-MSn Analysis:  All IMAC and TiO2 phosphopeptide fractions were analyzed separately by LC-MSn using an LTQ-Orbitrap XL instrument equipped with a nanoESI ion source (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Samples were evaporated to dryness and redissolved in 20 µl of 1% formic acid and 5% MeOH. The HPLC system was composed of an Agilent 1200 capillary nano pump, a binary pump, a thermostated microinjector and a micro switch valve. Separation was carried out using a C18 pre-concentration cartridge (Agilent Technologies) connected to a 15 cm-long 100 μm i.d. C18 column (Nikkyo Technos Co, Japan). Separation was done at 0.4 μl/min using a linear ACN gradient from 0 to 40% in 180 min (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid, solvent B: acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid). The LTQ-Orbitrap instrument was set up in the positive ion mode with a spray voltage of 1.8 kV. The scan range of each full MS was m/z 400-2000. The spectrometric analysis was performed in an automatic data dependent mode. A full scan followed of 1 HCD and 1 CID MS/MS for the 3 most abundant signals were acquired. A subsequent MS3 scan was performed when a neutral loss of -98, -49, or -32.7 m/z (loss of H3PO4 for the +1, +2, and +3 charged ions, respectively) was detected in the CID MS/MS among the 5 most intense ions. Dynamic exclusion was set to 1 with a time window of 45 s to minimize the redundant selection of precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
Database search was carried out using multiple search engines including SEQUEST (Bioworks v3.3, ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA) [19], OMSSA (version 2.1.4) [20], and EasyProt [21]. The database search workflow was as previously described [22,23]. In brief, Thermo RAW files were processed using the EasierMgf software to produce the MGF files needed as input for the different search engines. Each search engine was ran against the Human Swiss-Prot database (Human Swiss-Prot, release 4-11) using the target-decoy strategy [24]. Database searches for MS2 and MS3 were performed separately. MS2 searches were performed with the following parameters: parent tolerance, 20 ppm; fragment tolerance, 0.8 Da; enzyme, trypsin; missed cleavages, 1; fixed modifications, TMTsixplex (N-terminal, K), carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications, oxidation (M), phosphorylation (S, T, Y). For the MS3 searches, the setup parameters included: parent tolerance, 2 Da; fragment tolerance, 0.8 Da; enzyme, trypsin; fixed modifications, TMTsixplex (N-terminal, K), carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications, oxidation (M), phosphorylation (S, T, Y), dehydration (S, T). The results from the different search engines were combined and filtered using the Integrator software. Only those hits detected from at least two search engines were considered as positive identifications [23]. When a peptide assigned to 2 or more proteins the first accession number in our data was considered in following discussions. The localization of P-sites was evaluated according to the Q-Ascore algorithm by using the Integrator software [23,25]. P-sites with Q-Ascore≥19 were considered of high confidence.  Quantitative information of each peptide was obtained based on its reporter ion intensities. Peptides identified from the MS3 spectrum were quantified using the reporter ions from the previous MS2 spectrum. When a peptide was identified by both MS2 and MS3 spectra, only MS2 spectra was considered for quantitation. Scans with all missing values in reporter ions were removed from the analysis. Before the analysis, data was normalized using the median of non-phosphorylated peptides. DanteR [26] was used to pre-process data and perform relative quantification of peptides labeled with TMT. ANOVA was performed at peptide level by comparing treated versus control peptides using a linear model. Peptides were ordered using median and minimum number of peptides was set to 1 and maximum to 1000. Finally, p-values were adjusted by using the Benjamini & Hochberg False Discovery Rate (FDR) correction. Regulated peptides were determined using an adjusted p-value cutoff of 0.05 and a fold change lower than 0.67 (down) or higher than 1.5 (up).

### Publication Abstract
Phosphorylation is a reversible post-translational modification, playing a vital role in protein function. In T cells, protein phosphorylation is the key mechanism regulating T cell receptor-driven signaling pathways. In order to gain insights into the phosphoproteome evolution of T cell activation, we performed a large-scale quantitative phosphoproteomics study of Jurkat E6.1 (wild type) and Jurkat gamma1 (Phospholipase gamma1 null) cell clones upon costimulation with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies at times ranging from 15min to as long as 120min. In total, we identified 5585 phosphopeptides belonging to 2008 phosphoproteins from both cell clones. We detected 130 and 114 novel phosphopeptides in Jurkat E6.1 and Jurkat gamma1 clones, respectively. A significantly lower number of proteins containing regulated phosphorylation sites were identified in Jurkat gamma1 in comparison to Jurkat E6.1, reflecting the vital role of Phospholipase gamma1 in T cell signaling. Several new phosphorylation sites from lymphocyte-specific protein tyrosine kinase (Lck) were identified. Of these, serine-121 showed significant changes in JE6.1 while only small changes in the Jgamma1 clone. Our data may contribute to the current human T cell phosphoproteome and provide a better understanding on T cell receptor signaling. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002871.

### Keywords
Jurkat t cells, Phosphorylation, Phospholipase c gamma 1, Cd3/cd28 costimulation, Quantitative phosphoproteomics.

### Affiliations
CSIC/UAB Proteomics Laboratory, IIBB-CSIC, Barcelona, Spain
IIBB-CSIC

### Submitter
Montserrat Carrascal

### Lab Head
Dr Joaquin Abian Moñux
CSIC/UAB Proteomics Laboratory, IIBB-CSIC, Barcelona, Spain


