### Accession
PXD000816

### Title
Salivary proteins in buffalo with special emphasis to estrous cycle

### Description
Saliva is considered as the best source for biomarker-discovery studies, since it is a non-invasive method when compared to other body sources. Usually, buffalo cannot express their estrus signs precisely. Hence, there is a need for concise methods to detect the time of estrus to ensure the success in artificial insemination. Therefore, we have established a reference proteome map on buffalo whole saliva during estrous cycle in order to document the estrus-specific proteins using SDS-PAGE and mass spectrometry. The present findings conclude that the proteomic approach adopted to identify the proteins from buffalo saliva around estrous cycle may provide a new tool for screening the estrus phase.

### Sample Protocol
SDS-PAGE The electrophoresis of whole saliva was done using 12% SDS-PAGE under denaturing condition. The saliva containing 40 µg protein from three phases viz., proestrus, estrus and postestrus was loaded on to the gel.  Trypsin in-gel digestion In order to make comprehensive identification of proteins, the SDS–PAGE gel plugs from each phase was divided into seven parts. The pieces were then destained using 100 µL of 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate/50% (V) acetonitrile under 37°C. The destained gel pieces were dried under the speed-vac (Savant, Germany). The dried pieces were incubated in 100 mL of 2% β-mercaptoethanol with 25 mM Ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at room temperature under dark condition, for the reduction of salivary proteins. 10 % Vinyl pyridine and 25 mM Ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile at equal volume were added and incubated for 20 min for the cysteine alkylation. Then the gel pieces were soaked with 1 mL of 25 mM Ammonium bicarbonate for 10 min then Speed-Vac until dryness. The completely dried pieces were incubated in 25 mM Ammonium bicarbonate containing 100 ng of modified trypsin (Promega, Germany) for overnight. The digested peptides were transferred into fresh tube and subjected to Speed-Vac and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid just before loading in the mass spectrometry.  Mass spectrometry  The in-gel digested peptides were analyzed using LTQ-Orbitrap (Discovery) mass spectrometer with nanoelectrospray ionization source (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA, USA) and fractionated with nano-flow high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Agilent Technologies 1200 series, Germany) with an Agilent C18 column having 100X0.075 mm and 3.5µm particle diameter along with mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The peptide elution was noted at a linear gradient of 5%-35% B for the first 30 min, followed by rapid increase to 95% B for the next 10 min.  The MS spectra (Survey Scan) were acquired with high resolution over the acquisition range of m/s 200-2000 and then the precursor ions were selected for further MS/MS scan.

### Data Protocol
The gathered mass spectrum was analyzed by Xcalibur software (version 2.0 SR1). The MS/MS spectrum ion scans were undergone with database search software, SEQUEST (TURBO) to identify the protein peptides. The mass tolerance for the precursor peptide ions was set to 3.5 and the fragment ion tolerance was set to 1. More than two matched peptides were used for the protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Saliva is considered as the best source of biological material for biomarker discovery studies since it is noninvasive in comparison to other body sources. Usually buffalo cannot precisely express estrus signals. Hence, there is a need for concise methods to detect the time of estrus to ensure the success of artificial insemination. Therefore, we have established a reference proteome map on the whole saliva of buffalo during their estrous cycle with special reference to estrus. Nearly 12 bands have been observed using sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) of whole saliva. Collectively, 179 proteins are identified with respect to different phases of the estrous cycle using mass spectrometry. On the whole, 37 proteins are exclusively expressed in the estrus phase, which include &#x3b2;-enolase, Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4, clusterin, lactoperoxidase, serotransferrin, TGM3, UBA6, and transducin. Among the proteins, &#x3b2;-enolase and TLR 4 were validated, and their specific expression was found during estrus as compared to other phases using immunoblot. The functional annotation reveals many as binding proteins in the estrus saliva when compared to the other phases. The present findings conclude that the proteomic approach adopted to identify the proteins from buffalo saliva around the estrous cycle may provide a new tool for screening the estrus phase. The results further conclude that the specific expression of &#x3b2;-enolase and TLR 4 can be taken as the indicator of estrus in buffalo.

### Keywords
Water buffaloes; whole saliva; sds-page; lc-ms/ms; estrus-specific proteins

### Affiliations
Centre for Pheromone Technology, Department of Animal Science, Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli, India
Department of Biotechnology, School of Chemical & Biotechnology, SASTRA University, Thanjavur

### Submitter
Subramanian Muthukumar

### Lab Head
Dr Govindaraju Archunan
Centre for Pheromone Technology, Department of Animal Science, Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli, India


