### Accession
PXD033306

### Title
Cellular, molecular and proteomic characteristics of early Hepatocellular carcinoma

### Description
Ηepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) accounts for the majority of primary liver cancers. Early de-tection/diagnosis is vital for the prognosis of HCC whereas diagnosis at late stages is associated with very low survival rate. Early diagnosis is based on patient’s 6 month surveillance and use of at least two imaging modalities. The aim of this study was to investigate diagnostic markers for the detection of early HCC based on proteome analysis, microRNAs (miRNAs) and circulat-ing tumor cells (CTCs) in the blood of patients with cirrhosis, early and advanced HCC. We studied 89 patients with HCC of whom 33 had early HCC and 28 cirrhotic patients. CTCs were detected by Real-Time Quantitative Reverse Transcription PCR and immunofluorescence using the markers Epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EPCAM), Vimentin, A Fetoprotein (AFP) and surface major Vault protein (sMVP). Expression of the five most commonly HCC-involved miRNAs (miR-122, miR-200a, miR-200b, miR-221, miR-222) was examined in the serum by qRT-PCR. Finally patient serum was analyzed by whole proteome analysis (LC/MS). Twenty seven out of 53 (51%) patients with advanced HCC had detectable CTCs. Among them, 10/27 (37%) presented evidence of mesenchymal or intermediate stage cells (vimentin and/or sMVP positive). Moreover, 5/17 (29%) patients with early HCC and 6/28 (21%) cirrhotic patients had detectable CTCs. Patients with early and advanced HCC exhibited a significant increase of miR-200b when compared to cirrhotic patients. Our proteome analysis indicated that early HCC patients present a significant upregulation of APOA2, APOC3 proteins when compared to cir-rhotic patients, that when used in combination, cover the 100% of the patients with early HCC. In conclusion, miR-200b, APOA2 and APOC3 proteins are sensitive markers and can be poten-tially useful in combination for the early diagnosis of HCC.

### Sample Protocol
For each patient and normal sample 30 μl of serum were analyzed. Peptides were separated with a Acclaim Pepmap 75umX50cm on a Ultimate 3000 nano LC system set at 40°C. The HPLC was performed using 350 nl/min flow with solvent A as 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B as 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. For each injection, 500ng was loaded and eluted with a linear gradient from 8% to 24% buffer B over 50 min, then the gradient was ramped up to 36% buffer B over 10 min. The column was washed with 100% buffer B for 5 min and was left to equilibrate to 8% buffer B for 15min. The gas phase fractionation (GFP) of the pooled sample was done using 12X50 m/z windows ranging from 400-1000m/z at 60,000 MS1 with an AGC of 3e6 for 60ms and MS2 at 30,000 with an AGC of 1e6 for 60ms, NCE was set to 27, and +2H was assumed as the default charge state. The GPF-DIA acquisitions used 4m/z precursor isolation windows in a staggered-window pattern with optimized window placements. The DIA conditions for the sample analysis were a) for MS1 was measured at 390-1010m/z with 60,000 resolution and an AGC target of 3e6, IT of 60 ms, and b) 76X8m/z DIA isolation windows were measured at 15,000 resolution, in a stag-gered-window pattern with optimized window placements from 400 to 1000m/z using an NCE 0f 27 at a +2 default charge state.

### Data Protocol
The raw files from GFP were overlap demultiplexed with 10 ppm accuracy after peak picking in ProteoWizard (version 3.0.18299). Searches were performed using Encyclope-DIA (version 0.9), which was configured to use default settings: 10 ppm precursor, frag-ment, and library tolerances. EncyclopeDIA was allowed to consider both B and Y ions and trypsin digestion was assumed. The created library was imported in skyline (version 20.1) by removing repeated pep-tides. The raw files were imported and reintegrated by a m-prophet model with 1:1 decoys and the peptides were filtered for dotp>0.7. The total fragment area for each peptide was exported and all peptides corresponding to a protein were summed. The statistical analy-sis of the samples was performed in Perseus version (1.6.10.0). The total fragment area of each protein from the previous step was normalized to the total area of the sample. Additionaly, DIA-NN library free search was conducted using the default settins

### Publication Abstract
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) accounts for the majority of primary liver cancers. Early detection/diagnosis is vital for the prognosis of HCC, whereas diagnosis at late stages is associated with very low survival rate. Early diagnosis is based on 6-month surveillance of the patient and the use of at least two imaging modalities. The aim of this study was to investigate diagnostic markers for the detection of early HCC based on proteome analysis, microRNAs (miRNAs) and circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in the blood of patients with cirrhosis or early or advanced HCC. We studied 89 patients with HCC, of whom 33 had early HCC and 28 were cirrhotic. CTCs were detected by real-time quantitative reverse transcription PCR and immunofluorescence using the markers epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EPCAM), vimentin, alpha fetoprotein (aFP) and surface major vault protein (sMVP). Expression of the five most common HCC-involved miRNAs (miR-122, miR-200a, miR-200b, miR-221, miR-222) was examined in serum using quantitative real time PCR (qRT-PCR). Finally, patient serum was analyzed via whole proteome analysis (LC/MS). Of 53 patients with advanced HCC, 27 (51%) had detectable CTCs. Among these, 10/27 (37%) presented evidence of mesenchymal or intermediate stage cells (vimentin and/or sMVP positive). Moreover, 5/17 (29%) patients with early HCC and 2/28 (7%) cirrhotic patients had detectable CTCs. Patients with early or advanced HCC exhibited a significant increase in miR-200b when compared to cirrhotic patients. Our proteome analysis indicated that early HCC patients present a significant upregulation of APOA2, APOC3 proteins when compared to cirrhotic patients. When taken in combination, this covers the 100% of the patients with early HCC. miR-200b, APOA2 and APOC3 proteins are sensitive markers and can be potentially useful in combination for the early diagnosis of HCC.

### Keywords
Hcc; ctcs; mirnas; proteomics

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
B’ Pathology Clinic, Hippokrateion Hospital, National and Kapodestrian University of Athens.

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Professor John Koskinas
B’ Pathology Clinic, Hippokrateion Hospital, National and Kapodestrian University of Athens.


