### Accession
PXD029754

### Title
Solution study of a type I polyketide synthase from Mycobacterium tuberculosis: pks13, the condensase of mycolic acids

### Description
Background:   Among the nineteen polyketide synthases encoded by the genome of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Pks13 was identified as the condensase required for the final condensation step of two long acyl chains. This leads to mycolic acids, which are essential components of the cell envelope of Corynebacterineae species. The single polypeptide chain of Pks13 comprises five catalytic domains, including two functional acyl carrier protein domains, separated by linkers comprising up to ca. 200 amino acid residues. In many aspects, Pks13 is an atypical polyketide synthase. It has been validated as a promising druggable target and its structure is badly needed to speed up drug discovery to fight against tuberculosis.   Results:   We report here a quasi-atomic model of Pks13 obtained using small angle X-ray scattering of the entire protein and various molecular subspecies combined with known high-resolution structures of Pks13 domains or structural homologues. In addition, the structural changes induced by the loading of a substrate analogue have been challenged. As a comparison, the low-resolution structures of two other mycobacterial polyketide synthases, Mas and PpsA from Mycobacterium bovis BCG, are also presented. This study highlights an identical and elongated structure of the apo and holo forms at the resolution probed. Catalytic domains are segregated into two parts, which correspond to the condensation reaction per se and to the release of the product, a pivot for the enzyme flexibility being at the interface. The two acyl carrier protein domains are found at opposite sides of the ketosynthase domain and display distinct characteristics in terms of flexibility. Apo-Pks13 is in our conditions in a monomeric state, but loading of a substrate analogue push the enzyme towards the functional dimeric state.   Conclusions:   The Pks13 model provides the first structural information on the molecular mechanism of this complex enzyme and open up new perspectives to develop inhibitors that target the interactions with its enzymatic partners or between catalytic domains within Pks13 itself.

### Sample Protocol
Bottom-up analysis: SDS solution was added into 30-50 µg of each protein (unmodified and palmitoylated Pks13) to reach a final concentration of 5%. The protein was reduced with 100 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Sigma) and alkylated with 2-chloroacetamide (Sigma) at 95°C for 5 min. Each sample was loaded onto S-trap Micro spin columns (Protifi, USA), according to the manufacturer’s instruction (86) and digested with trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. Digested peptide extracts were analysed by online nanoLC using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system (ThermoScientific) coupled with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operating in positive mode. Two µL of each sample (1 µg, analysed by Pierce quantitative fluoremetric peptide assay) were loaded onto a 300 mm ID 5 mm PepMap C18 pre-column (Thermo Scientific) at 20 ml/min in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.05% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. After 5 min of desalting, peptides were on-line separated on a 75 mm ID 50 cm C18 column (in-house packed with Reprosil C18-AQ Pur 3 mm resin, Dr. Maisch; Proxeon Biosystems) equilibrated in 90% buffer A (0.2% [v/v] formic acid), with a gradient of 10–30% buffer B (80% [v/v] acetonitrile, 0.2% [v/v] formic acid) for 50 min, then 30–45% for 10 min at 300 nl/min. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using a top-speed approach (cycle time of 3 s). Survey scans MS were acquired in the Orbitrap over 350–1400 m/z with a resolution of 60,000, and a maximum injection time (IT) of 50 ms. The most intense ions (2+ to 6+) were selected at 1.7 m/z with quadrupole and fragmented by Higher Energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD). The monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on, the intensity threshold for fragmentation was set to 25,000, and the normalized collision energy (NCE) was set to 28%. The resulting fragments were analysed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 15,000. Dynamic exclusion was used within 30 s with a 10 ppm tolerance. The ion at 445.120025 m/z was used as lock mass.  Native MS: Prior to native MS analysis, Pks13 apo was desalted in 200mM ammonium acetate, pH 7 using Micro Bio-Spin devices (Bio-Rad, Marnes-la-Coquette, France) at a molar concentration of 1 μM. The sample was analyzed on a SYNAPT G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters, Manchester, UK) running in positive ion mode (m/z 1000 to 15,000 Th) and coupled to an automated chip-based nano-electrospray source (Triversa Nanomate, Advion Biosciences, Ithaca, NY, USA). The voltage applied to the chip and the cone voltage were set to 1.6 kV and 150 V, respectively.  Sample cone voltage, Ion Energy and Trap Collision Energy were set to 150 V, -2.5 V and 75V, respectively. The instrument was calibrated with a 2 mg/ml cesium iodide solution in 50% isopropanol.

### Data Protocol
Bottom-up analysis: The Mascot (Mascot server v2.8.1; http://www.matrixscience.com) database search engine was used for peptide and protein identification. MS/MS spectra were compared to a custom based database containing the Pks13-His sequence. Mass tolerance for MS and MS/MS was set at 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. The enzyme selectivity was set to full trypsin with two missed cleavages allowed. Protein modifications were fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines, variable oxidation of methionines, variable palmitoylation of serine and variable acetylation of protein N-terminus.   Native MS: Raw data were acquired with MassLynx 4.1 (Waters, Manchester, UK) and deconvoluted with UniDec (87) using the following parameters: m/z range: 4000–12,000 Th; subtract curved: 100; Gaussian smoothing: 200; bin every 10 Th; charge range: 25–40; mass range: 50,000–300,000 Da; sample mass: every 10 Da; Use Automatic m/z peak Width; peak detection range: 500 Da, and peak detection threshold: 0.1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pks13, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Polyketide synthases, Native ms, Mycolic acids, Bottom up

### Affiliations
Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale (IPBS), Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, Toulouse, France
IPBS

### Submitter
Julien Marcoux

### Lab Head
Dr Julien Marcoux
Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale (IPBS), Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, Toulouse, France


