### Accession
PXD003379

### Title
Inner ear proteomics/transcriptomics

### Description
The correlation between expression levels of mRNA and protein in mammals is relatively low, with a Pearson correlation coefficient of ~0.40. Post transcriptional regulation contributes to this low correlation. Across taxa, it was demonstrated that translation efficiency, i.e. the protein-to-mRNA ratio in steady state, varies between species in a direction that buffers the protein levels from changes in the transcript abundance. Evidence for this behavior in tissues is sparse. We asked whether this phenomenon is evident in our auditory system data, and on previously obtained proteomic and transcriptomic data from different tissue datasets.

### Sample Protocol
Solubilization of the vestibule and cochlear tissue (three samples of each) was done in lysis buffer containing 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. All samples were reduced with 0.1M DTT, followed by alkylation with 0.05M iodoacetamide and subsequent 3h digestion with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako Chemicals; 1:100 enzyme to protein ratio). Lysates were diluted 4-fold in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested overnight with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega; 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio). The resulting peptides were acidified with TFA and subsequently purified on C-18 stageTips. Alternatively, one replicate was fractionated into six fractions using strong anion exchange stage-tip based columns with buffers of different pH values. Peptides were loaded onto 75µm i.d. x 50 cm long EASY-spray PepMap columns (Thermo Scientific) packed with 2µm C18 particles 100 Å pore size, using 4 h gradients at a flow rate of 300 nl/min with buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated using either 5-25%, 7-28% or 7-33% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). MS data were acquired in a data-dependent mode, using a top-10 method. MS spectra were acquired at 70,000 resolution, m/z range of 300-1700 Th, a target value of 3E+06 ions and a maximal injection time of 20 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired after HCD fragmentation, with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25 at 17,500 resolution a target value of 1E+05 ions and maximal injection time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 or 30 sec. All MS measurements were done in the positive ion mode..

### Data Protocol
Computational analysis: Raw MS files were analyzed with MaxQuant (version1.4.1.6) and the integrated Andromeda search engine. MS/MS spectra were searched against the Mouse UniprotKB database (May 2013). This database included a decoy database in which all sequences were reversed and each lysine and arginine were swapped with their preceding amino acid, and a list of common contaminants. Search included tryptic peptides with the variable modifications N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106 Da) and methionine oxidation (+15.99491 Da) and the fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine (+57.02146 Da). Maximal number of miscleavages was set to 2 and maximal number of modifications was set to 5. MaxQuant analysis included two search engine steps. The first was used for mass recalibration, and was initiated with a peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm. The main database search peptide initial mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, and mass tolerance for the fragment ions was set to 20 ppm. Database results were filtered to have a maximal FDR of 0.01 on both the peptide and the protein levels. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino acids and a minimum number of peptides per protein was set to 1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Correlation, Ear, Cochlea, Mrna, Vestibule, Protein

### Affiliations
Department of Humand Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
Tel Aviv University

### Submitter
Yair Pozniak

### Lab Head
Dr Tamar Geiger
Department of Humand Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel


