### Accession
PXD021196

### Title
Re-analysis of glycoproteomics data with MSFragger-Glyco

### Description
Reanalysis of submissions PXD011533 and PXD009476 using MSFragger-Glyco mode. Processed MSFragger results files (pepXML) and PSM tables (psm.tsv) supporting MSFragger-Glyco manuscript (Fast and Comprehensive N- and O-glycoproteomics analysis with MSFragger-Glyco. Recent advances in methods for enrichment and mass spectrometric analysis of intact glycopeptides have produced large-scale glycoproteomics datasets, but interpreting this data remains challenging. We present MSFragger-Glyco, aa new glycoproteomics mode of the MSFragger search engine, called MSFragger-Glyco, for fast and sensitive identification of N- and O-linked glycopeptides and open glycan searches. Reanalysis of recent N-glycoproteomics data resulted in annotation of 80% more glycopeptide-spectrum matches (glycoPSMs) than previously reported. In published O-glycoproteomics data, our method more than doubled the number of glycoPSMs annotated when searching the same glycans as the original search and yielded 4-6-fold increases when expanding searches to include additional glycan compositions and other modifications. Expanded searches also revealed many sulfated and complex glycans that remained hidden to the original search.

### Sample Protocol
N-Glycan data: **all raw data was obtained from PXD011533**. Briefly, their sample processing was as follows. Mouse brain tissue was homogenized, digested with trypsin, reduced (TCEP) and alkylated (choloracetamide). Peptides were lectin enriched (Concanavalin A) and fractionated into 12 fractions by high pH RPLC. Fractions were analyzed by HCD-pd-AI-ETD LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer with AIETD scans triggered by the observation of oxonium ions (204.0867, 138.0545, or 366.1396) in HCD spectra.   O-Glycan data: **all raw data was obtained from PXD009476**. Briefly, their sample processing was as follows. Proteins from human kidney tissue, serum, and T cells were digested with trypsin and guanidinated. Glycopeptides were enriched (SAX HyperSep Retian AX columns), desalted, and released via digestion with OperATOR enzyme. Released glycopeptides were fractioned into 24 fractions (high PH RPLC) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF via HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
N-glycan data from PXD011533: Raw files were converted to mzML with MSConvert from ProteoWizard, with AI-ETD and HCD scans extracted to separate files. MzMLfiles were searched with MSFragger-Glyco using 182 mass offsets, identical to the glycan database used by Riley et al. (PXD011533), against the glycoprotein database used by Riley et al. containing 3,574 entries with decoys added using Philosopher. Trypsin digestion with up to 3 missed cleavages was specified with variable modifications of oxidized Met, protein N-terminal acetylation, and peptide N-terminal pyroglutamate. Peptides containing the consensus sequon (N-X-S/T) and decoy (reversed) peptides containing the reversed sequon were considered as potential glycopeptides. Only spectra containing oxonium ion peaks with summed intensity at least 10% of the base peak were considered for glycan searches. Data was deisotoped and de-charged in MSFragger-Glyco, calibrated, and searched with mass tolerances for precursors and products of 20 and 10 ppm, respectively. Errors in monoisotopic peak detection by the instrument were allowed (+1 and +2 Da). Precursor and electron transfer-no dissociation peaks were removed, and data was square root-transformed prior to analysis. For AI-ETD data, b,y,c,z, and Y ions were considered in searching; for HCD data, b,y,Y and b,y + HexNAc ions were considered. No b or y ions containing the intact glycan were considered in either mode. Search results from all raw files and both activation modes were processed together using Philosopher, including PeptideProphet (extended mass model), ProteinProphet, and FDR filtering.   O-Glycan data from PXD009476: Kidney, Serum, and T cell-derived samples were searched separately with MSFragger-Glyco using reviewed human sequences from UniProtKB (downloaded 08/22/2019, 20464 sequences in total) with decoys and common contaminants added using Philosopher. Protein sequences were pre-digested at S/T with up to 10 missed cleavages, as not all Ser and Thr residues are glycosylated and the sites of glycosylation are not known in advance. The resulting peptides were introduced to MSFragger-Glyco as protein sequences in a custom database and digested with Trypsin, allowing 1 missed cleavage. Variable modifications of oxidation (M), guanidinylation and carbamidomethylation (K), and deamidation (N, Q) were specified. A list of 300 O-glycan mass offsets was used for search. Peptides were required to contain at least one S/T residue to be considered for glycan search, and spectra were required to have summed oxonium ion intensity at least 10% of the base peak. Data was deisotoped and de-charged in MSFragger-Glyco, calibrated with parameter optimization, and searched with mass tolerances for precursors and products of 20 ppm and 10 ppm, respectively. Errors in monoisotopic peak detection by the instrument were allowed (+1 and +2 Da). Precursor peaks were removed, and intensities were square root-transformed prior to analysis. Only unshifted (no glycan) b and y ions were considered in searching. Filtering and validation were performed in Philosopher as for N-glycan AI-ETD data, with the exception of no glycan motif modeling in PeptideProphet.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Glycopeptide, Reanalysis, O-glycosylation, Glycosylation, Msfragger, N-glycosylation, Glycan

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School
University of Michigan

### Submitter
Daniel Polasky

### Lab Head
Dr Alexey Nesvizhskii
Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School


