### Accession
PXD005869

### Title
Scanning quadrupole DIA -  Scanning Quadrupole Data Independent Acquisition - Part A

### Description
A scanning quadrupole data independent acquisition (DIA) method is described and characterised for the qualitative and quantitative label free proteomic analysis of complex biological samples. The principle of the scanning quadrupole DIA is discussed and the effect of the optimization of analytical instrument characteristics, such as acquisition speed, sample complexity, and scan/integration time in relation to sample complexity for a number of different model proteomes of various complexity and dynamic range, including plasma, human cell lines, and bacteria samples, discussed. In addition, its technological merits from an acquisition neutral perspective are reviewed. The qualitative and semi-quantitative performance of the method is illustrated and contrasted for the analysis of a well-characterised human cell line sample using untargeted and targeted search strategies. The application of the method is demonstrated for the analysis of the calcineurin-dependent proteome of drug treated Aspergillus fumigatus. The design of these experiments afforded assessment of the precision and accuracy of scanning quadrupole data independent acquisition (DIA) method as will be demonstrated by peptide and protein centric analysis of the study pool QC samples of the study. Moreover, novel and specific interactors in response to drug treatment that are indicative of the role of calcineurin role in regulating these effectors have been identified.

### Sample Protocol
20 µg of HeLa cells (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Waltham, MA) were dissolved in 0.1% (w/v) RapiGest (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich) and heated at 80ºC for 45 min. The samples were reduced in the presence of 5 mM DTT (Sigma Aldrich) at 60ºC for 30 min and alkylated in the presence of 10 mM IAA (Sigma Aldrich) at ambient temperature in the dark for an additional 30 min. Proteolytic digestion was initiated by adding sequencing grade TMPK-treated trypsin (Promega, Madison, MI) at a 1:50 (w/w) ratio and incubation conducted for 4 h at 37ºC. A second aliquot of trypsin was added at a 1:50 (w/w) ratio and followed by incubation overnight at 37ºC. TFA was added to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) in order to hydrolyze RapiGest and the solutions incubated at 37°C for 20 min before being vortexed and centrifuged for 30 min at 13,000 rpm. E.coli digestion standard (Waters Corporation) and pre-digested extract from human K562 cells (Promega) were resuspended in a 10% (v/v) aqueous acetonitrile solution and diluted with aqueous 0.1% (v/v) formic acid to an intermediate concentration of 1 or 2 µg/µl. Undepleted and unfractionated human plasma samples were donated by Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, NIHR Leicester Cardiovascular Biomedical Research Unit, Glenfield Hospital, Leicester, United Kingdom. Aspergillus fumigatus immunoprecipitated samples were supplemented with RapiGest SF (Waters Corporpation) surfactant to a final concentration of 0.1%, reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 80°C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature. On resin proteolytic digestions were accomplished by addition of 500 ng sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) for 18 hr at 37°C as previously described [34]. Following removal of supernatants, peptides were acidified to pH 2.5 with TFA and hydrolyzed RapiGest was removed by centrifugation. Next, all samples were lyophilized to dryness and resuspended in 40 µl 1%TFA/2% acetonitrile

### Data Protocol
SONAR quadrupole scanning DIA data were processed using Progenesis QI for proteomics v2 (PQIp) (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom) and ProteinLynx Global Server v3.0.2 (Waters Corporation) using optimized threshold and search parameters. Qualitative analysis was performed with Scaffold v4.7.1 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR) or Skyline v3.5 (University of Washington, Seattle, WA) using libraries derived from PQIp and PLGS protein database searches. ISOQuant was applied for the integrated quantitative analysis of data derived from multiple LC-MS runs (http://www.isoquant.net) [35]. Protein and peptides identifications were obtained by searching Homo sapiens UniProt (20,161 reviewed entries, release 2016_10) or Aspergillus fumigates NCBI (9150 RefSeq entries, April 2016) databases. Targeted data analysis/library searches were conducted with development software [36,37] using an in-house developed retention time normalized library representing 25,719 non-modified (variable) peptides (PSM), mapping to 6002 proteins/4994 protein groups, based on the analysis of the HeLa sample using a basic pH multiple fraction concatenation strategy (96 fractions concatenated into 12 samples reanalyzed by acidic pH reversed phase DDA LC-MS) [38,39] of which the qualitative and quantitative results were visualized with open source informatics. The first dimension separation were conducted with I-Class ACQUITY/Fractionation Manager system (Waters Corporation) equipped with a BEH C17 2.1 mm x 100 mm column operated at 0.5 ml/min. Mobile phase A was 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 10), whilst mobile phase B was 10% 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) and 90% acetonitrile, using a gradient of 4 to 35% mobile phase B over 50 min. The second dimension reversed phase LC-MS DDA method(s) have been described in great detail elsewhere [34]. The results have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository [40] with dataset identifiers PXD005848 and PXD171895.

### Publication Abstract
A novel data-independent acquisition (DIA) method incorporating a scanning quadrupole in front of a collision cell and orthogonal acceleration time-of-flight mass analyzer is described. The method has been characterized for the qualitative and quantitative label-free proteomic analysis of complex biological samples. The principle of the scanning quadrupole DIA method is discussed, and analytical instrument characteristics, such as the quadrupole transmission width, scan/integration time, and chromatographic separation, have been optimized in relation to sample complexity for a number of different model proteomes of varying complexity and dynamic range including human plasma, cell lines, and bacteria. In addition, the technological merits over existing DIA approaches are described and contrasted. The qualitative and semiquantitative performance of the method is illustrated for the analysis of relatively simple protein digest mixtures and a well-characterized human cell line sample using untargeted and targeted search strategies. Finally, the results from a human cell line were compared against publicly available data that used similar chromatographic conditions but were acquired with DDA technology and alternative mass analyzer systems. Qualitative comparison showed excellent concordance of results with &gt;90% overlap of the detected proteins.

### Keywords
Dia

### Affiliations
Waters Corporation

### Submitter
Hans Vissers

### Lab Head
Dr JPC Vissers
Waters Corporation


