### Accession
PXD026684

### Title
mNaa10-KO liver immunoprecipitation

### Description
NAA10-mediated N-terminal acetylation is widespread and has been considered essential for viability in many model organisms. However, a Naa10 null mouse model is viable and has intact global N-terminal acetylation levels. The purpose of this project was to assess the N-terminal acetyltransferase activity of NAA15 immunoprecipitates from Naa10-KO mouse liver. We show that there is a novel paralog of Naa10 present in mice, termed Naa12, with a NatA-type enzymatic activity. We demonstrate the presence of Naa12 by detecting unique Naa12 peptides in NAA15 immunoprecipitates.

### Sample Protocol
90-120 mg liver tissue from WT or Naa10-KO mice was lysed in 500 μl IPH lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40, 1× complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) using Kontes Pellet Pestle Motor, and incubated on ice for 40 min. Cell debris was pelleted by centrifugation (17000 × g, 4 °C, 10 min) and the supernatants transferred to new Eppendorf tubes. The protein concentration was determined by BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific) and the tissue lysates were subsequently diluted with IPH lysis buffer to an equal protein concentration of 25 μg/μl. WT and Naa10-KO tissue lysates were divided in two, one half was mixed with 15 µg anti-Naa15 antibody and the other half with 15 g of anti-V5 antibody as a negative control. The mixtures were incubated at 4 °C for 3 h on a rotator. Afterwards, 180 µl of Protein A/G magnetic beads (Millipore) pre-washed in IPH lysis buffer was added to each sample and incubated overnight. Then, the magnetic beads were washed three times in IPH lysis buffer and two times in 1x acetylation buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 2 mM EDTA, 20% Glycerol). Bound proteins were eluted from the magnetic beads using 60 µl of elution buffer (2% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT) and heated for 5 min at 95 °C. The eluates were processed for LC-MS/MS analysis using filter aided sample preparation. The eluted protein mixtures were mixed with UA buffer (8 M urea, 100 Mm Tris-HCl pH 8.0) and centrifuged through Microcon 30kDa MWCO filters followed by Cys-alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide dissolved in UA buffer. Afterwards, the buffer was exchanged with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate through sequential centrifugation, proteins were trypsinized (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega) and digested peptides were collected by centrifugation. Peptides were acidified using 5% formic acid and desalted using C18-stagetips. 40 µg peptides from each sample were loaded onto C18-stagetips pre-conditioned with buffer A (1% formic acid). The C18-stagetips were then washed with buffer A, before peptides were eluted with buffer B (80% acetonitrile/ACN, 1% formic acid). The final eluate was concentrated by Speedvac to evaporate ACN and diluted to desired volume with 5% formic acid. 1 µg of the peptide samples were injected into an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Scientific) and analyzed by a 3-hour data-dependent acquisition method on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed in Maxquant (v. 1.6.17.0), searching against a mouse proteome database retrieved from Uniprot on 22 June 2018, in which the Naa12 sequence was added manually, and with a reverse decoy database. MaxQuant was run with default settings. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to a 1 % false discovery rate (FDR). Minimum peptide length was set to 7. Modifications included in protein quantification were oxidation (M), amino-terminal acetylation, lysine acetylation, and phosphorylation (STY). Other parameters: match between runs – true, matching time window – 0.7 min, 900 alignment time window – 20 min, find dependent peptides – true, mass bin size – 0.0065. The peptide list was filtered by removing reverse decoy hits and peptides derived from known contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
Amino-terminal acetylation is catalyzed by a set of N-terminal acetyltransferases (NATs). The NatA complex (including X-linked Naa10 and Naa15) is the major acetyltransferase, with 40-50% of all mammalian proteins being potential substrates. However, the overall role of amino-terminal acetylation on a whole-organism level is poorly understood, particularly in mammals. Male mice lacking <i>Naa10</i> show no globally apparent in vivo amino-terminal acetylation impairment and do not exhibit complete embryonic lethality. Rather <i>Naa10</i> nulls display increased neonatal lethality, and the majority of surviving undersized mutants exhibit a combination of hydrocephaly, cardiac defects, homeotic anterior transformation, piebaldism, and urogenital anomalies. <i>Naa12</i> is a previously unannotated <i>Naa10</i>-like paralog with NAT activity that genetically compensates for <i>Naa10</i>. Mice deficient for <i>Naa12</i> have no apparent phenotype, whereas mice deficient for <i>Naa10</i> and <i>Naa12</i> display embryonic lethality. The discovery of <i>Naa12</i> adds to the currently known machinery involved in amino-terminal acetylation in mice.

### Keywords
Nat, Naa10, N-terminal acetylation, Naa12, Nta

### Affiliations
University of Bergen
University of Bergen, Department of Biomedicine

### Submitter
Rasmus Ree

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Arnesen
University of Bergen, Department of Biomedicine


