### Accession
PXD009845

### Title
MiR-135a-5p is critical for exercise-induced proliferation of adult neurogenesis

### Description
Physical exercise stimulates adult hippocampal neurogenesis in mammals, and is considered a relevant strategy for preventing age-related cognitive decline in aging humans. However, its mechanism is controversial. Here, by investigating microRNAs (miRNAs) and their downstream pathways, we uncover that downregulation of miR-135a-5p mediates exercise-induced proliferation of adult NPCs in adult neurogenesis in the mouse hippocampus, likely by activation of phosphatidylinositol (IP3) signaling. Specifically, while overexpression of miR-135 prevents exercise-induced proliferation in the adult mouse hippocampus in vivo and in NPCs in vitro, its inhibition activates NPCs proliferation in resting and aged mice. Label free proteomics and bioinformatics analysis identifies 11 potential targets of miR-135 in NPCs, several of them involved in phosphatidylinositol signaling. Thus, miR-135a is key in mediating exercise-induced adult neurogenesis and opens intriguing perspectives toward the therapeutic exploitation of miR-135 to delay or prevent pathological brain ageing.Physical exercise stimulates adult hippocampal neurogenesis in mammals, and is considered a relevant strategy for preventing age-related cognitive decline in aging humans. However, its mechanism is controversial. Here, by investigating microRNAs (miRNAs) and their downstream pathways, we uncover that downregulation of miR-135a-5p mediates exercise-induced proliferation of adult NPCs in adult neurogenesis in the mouse hippocampus, likely by activation of phosphatidylinositol (IP3) signaling. Specifically, while overexpression of miR-135 prevents exercise-induced proliferation in the adult mouse hippocampus in vivo and in NPCs in vitro, its inhibition activates NPCs proliferation in resting and aged mice. Label free proteomics and bioinformatics analysis identifies 11 potential targets of miR-135 in NPCs, several of them involved in phosphatidylinositol signaling. Thus, miR-135a is key in mediating exercise-induced adult neurogenesis and opens intriguing perspectives toward the therapeutic exploitation of miR-135 to delay or prevent pathological brain ageing.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and ion library creation: The ion library preparation has been previously described (Braccia et al., 2018). Protein digestion for Sequential window acquisition of all theoretical (SWATH) mass spectra: The volume corresponding to 50 µg of proteins from each sample was incubated in 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in ammonium bicarbonate 50 mM, for reduction of disulfide bonds and then alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA). Protein content was precipitated with cold acetone. The resulting protein pellets were dried under a nitrogen stream and then dissolved in ammonium bicarbonate 50 mM.  An overnight digestion was performed using trypsin. The resulting peptides were desalted on Pierce C18 Spin columns (Thermo scientific, USA), according to manufacturer’s instructions. The desalted peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge. LC-MS/MS analysis: Adult hippocampal NPC tryptic digests were re-dissolved in 3% ACN with 0.1% FA. As internal standard for retention time calibration, 5 µl of PepCalMix (corresponding to 250 pmoles) were spiked into each fraction. 2 µg of digest from each sample was acquired in SWATH mode (10.1038/sdata.2014.31, doi: 10.1002/pmic.201400270.) using a pre-acquired, dedicated ion library, as already described by our group (Braccia et al. 2018).

### Data Protocol
For SWATH quantification, the following criteria were set: minimum peptide confidence 90%, 50 ppm maximum mass tolerance, 30 minutes maximum RT tolerance, 6 MRM transitions per peptide and modified peptides were allowed. With these settings, we were able to quantify 3352 proteins from all the samples at 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Physical exercise stimulates adult hippocampal neurogenesis and is considered a relevant strategy for preventing age-related cognitive decline in humans. The underlying mechanisms remains controversial. Here, we show that exercise increases proliferation of neural precursor cells (NPCs) of the mouse dentate gyrus (DG) via downregulation of microRNA 135a-5p (miR-135a). MiR-135a inhibition stimulates NPC proliferation leading to increased neurogenesis, but not astrogliogenesis, in DG of resting mice, and intriguingly it re-activates NPC proliferation in aged mice. We identify 17 proteins (11 putative targets) modulated by miR-135 in NPCs. Of note, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) receptor 1 and inositol polyphosphate-4-phosphatase type I are among the modulated proteins, suggesting that IP3 signaling may act downstream miR-135. miR-135 is the first noncoding RNA essential modulator of the brain's response to physical exercise. Prospectively, the miR-135-IP3 axis might represent a novel target of therapeutic intervention to prevent pathological brain aging.

### Keywords
Adult neurogenesis, Mirna, Swath

### Affiliations
Analytical Chemistry Lab, Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia

### Submitter
Andrea Armirotti

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Armirotti
Analytical Chemistry Lab, Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia


