### Accession
PXD037029

### Title
Identification and analysis of the interaction network of African Swine Fever Virus D1133L with host proteins

### Description
African swine fever virus (ASFV) is a large double-stranded DNA virus encoding >150 open reading frames. Among them, ASFV-encoded D1133L was predicted to be a helicase but its specific function remains unknown. Since virus-host protein interactions are key to understanding viral protein function, we used co-immunoprecipitation combined with liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry to investigate D1133L. This study describes the interaction network of ASFV D1133L protein in porcine kidney PK-15 cells. Overall, 1471 host proteins are known to interact with D1133L.

### Sample Protocol
To explore the potential host proteins that interact with D1133L, a 3 × FLAG tag D1133L plasmid or empty FLAG plasmid was transfected into PK-15 cells for Co-IP and LC-MS analysis. PK-15 cells were collected and lysed using NP-40 lysis buffer containing PMSF for 30 min at 4℃. An ultrasonic instrument was used to further lyse the cells over a total of 2.0 min, 20 kHz frequency, and 25 W sonicator power. The treated cell lysate was incubated for 18 h at 4℃ with the specified antibodies or the corresponding species IgG as controls. Then, protein A/G agarose beads (Roche) were mixed for 3 h with cell lysate to bind antibodies in it. Ultimately, the beads were collected by centrifugation and washed with NP-40 lysis buffer to conduct the next step. Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (LC/MS) were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer coupled with an Easy nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptide mixture was loaded onto the reversed-phase column packed in-house in buffer A (0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 84% acetonitrile). The flow rate was controlled to 300 nL/min, the total operation was 60 min. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top 10 method, dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. To determine if the target value was based on predictive automatic gain control, the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 20 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, and the resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200. The normalized collision energy was 27 eV, and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage the target value is likely to reach at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run in peptide recognition mode.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using the MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; v.2.2) against the UniProt Galagidae protein database. Relevant details of the protein identification process are as follows: 20 ppm peptide mass tolerance, 0.1 Da MS/MS tolerance, two missed cleavage, fixed modification = carbamidomethyl (C), variable modification = oxidation (M), ion score >20, and FDR <0.01 at peptide and protein levels. Non-specific interactions were removed by eliminating the detected proteins in the negative control sample.

### Publication Abstract
African swine fever (ASF) is a contagious and lethal hemorrhagic disease in pigs; its spread results in huge economic losses to the global pig industry. ASF virus (ASFV) is a large double-stranded DNA virus encoding &gt;150 open reading frames. Among them, ASFV-encoded D1133L was predicted to be a helicase but its specific function remains unknown. Since virus-host protein interactions are key to understanding viral protein function, we used co-immunoprecipitation combined with liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry to investigate D1133L. This study describes the interaction network of ASFV D1133L protein in porcine kidney PK-15 cells. Overall, 1,471 host proteins that potentially interact with D1133L are identified. Based on these host proteins, a protein-protein network was constructed. Gene ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes enrichment analyses showed that cellular D1133L-interacted proteins are involved in the ribosome, spliceosome, RNA transport, oxidative phosphorylation, proteasome, and DNA replication. Vimentin (VIM), tripartite motif-containing protein 21 (TRIM21), and Tu translation elongation factor (TUFM) were confirmed to interact with D1133L <i>in vitro</i>. VIM or TRIM21 overexpression significantly promoted ASFV replication, but TUFM overexpression significantly inhibited ASFV replication. These results help elucidate the specific functions of D1133L and the potential mechanisms underlying ASFV replication.

### Keywords
Protein-protein interaction network, African swine fever virus (asfv), D1133l

### Affiliations
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Insititute

### Submitter
Hao Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Zheng Haixue
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences


