### Accession
PXD024513

### Title
Global mapping of short-lived proteins in human cells

### Description
Rapid protein degradation enables cells to quickly modulate protein abundance in response to stimuli. Previous studies have generally sought to delineate basic features of proteome turnover. A focused map of short-lived proteins, however, remains a missing piece of the human proteome. To begin to address this, we combined cycloheximide chase assays with advanced high-throughput quantitative proteomics to map short-lived proteins in four genetically distinct human cell lines. Apparent half-lives of ≤ 8 hr were measured for 1,017 proteins. Systematic analyses revealed general properties of short-lived proteins (e.g., enriched in substrate recognition subunits of E3 ubiquitin ligase complexes, thermally instable, evolutionarily younger). We further quantified 103 proteins with widely different stabilities among cell lines. Of these, we show that truncated forms of ATRX and GMDS were expressed in U2OS and HCT116 cells, respectively, which had shorter half-lives than their full-length counterparts. This study provides a large-scale resource of human short-lived proteins in cultured cells, leading to untapped avenues of protein regulation for therapeutic intervention.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 30 min, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark and then quenched with 10 mM DTT for 15 min at room temperature. Streamlined (SL)-TMT protocol was used for sample preparation70. Briefly, 100 μg of protein from whole cell lysate were chloroform-methanol precipitated and reconstituted in 100 μl of 200 mM EPPS (pH 8.5). The samples were digested by Lys-C overnight at room temperature and then trypsin for 6 hr at 37°C, both at a 1:100 protease-to-protein ratio. Peptides corresponding to 40 μg of protein were then labeled with TMTpro 16-plex reagents15 in the presence of 29% acetonitrile. Samples from the same cell line were allocated in the same TMT group (Labels used: 126-0 hr; 127N-0 hr; 127C-0 hr; 128N-0 hr; 128C-1 hr; 129N- 1 hr; 129C-2 hr; 130N-2 hr; 130C-4 hr; 131N-4 hr; 131C-6 hr; 132N-6 hr; 132C-8 hr; 133N-8 hr; 133C-8 hr; 134N-8 hr). Samples were labeled for 90 min at room temperature. Two microliters of each sample were pooled, desalted and analyzed on a Q Exactive (ThermoFisher Scientific) to check labeling efficiency. After labeling efficiency check, samples were quenched by adding 5% hydroxylamine and pooled. Pooled samples were then desalted with 100 mg Sep-Pak solid-phase extraction columns, and fractionated with high-pH reversed-phase chromatography. Fractions were collected in a 96-well plate and combined for a total of 24 fractions prior to desalting and subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw ﬁles were converted to mzXML and monoisotopic peaks were re-assigned using Monocle71. Database searching included all human entries from Uniprot (downloaded on 02/15/2020). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Sequences of common contaminant proteins (e.g. trypsin, keratins, etc) were appended as well. Searches were performed using the Comet search algorithm and a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.9 Da product ion tolerance. TMTpro on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.2071 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) were set as static modifications (except when testing for labeling efficiency, in which TMTpro modification was set to variable), while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) was set as a variable modification. MS1 and MS3 masses were re-calibrated as necessary. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR)72. PSM filtering was performed using linear discriminant analysis as described previously73, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. Each run was ﬁltered separately. Protein-level FDR was subsequently estimated. For each protein across all samples from each cell line, the posterior probabilities reported by the linear discriminant analysis (LDA) model for each peptide were multiplied to give a protein-level probability estimate. Using the Picked FDR method74, proteins were ﬁltered to the target 1% FDR level. For reporter ion quantification, a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned, and the most intense m/z was used. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMTpro reagents according to manufacturer specifications. Briefly, the correction factors are applied to the raw peak intensity before calculating signal-to-noise. The correction is done by arranging a system of linear equations where the unknowns are the corrected channel intensities, their coefficients are the correction factors, and the constant terms are the observed peak intensities. A solution is found by solving the system using matrix operations. Peptides were ﬁltered to include only those peptides with a summed signal-to-noise (SN) ≥ 160 across 16 TMTpro channels. For each protein, the ﬁltered peptide TMTpro SN values were summed to create protein quantification values. To control for different total protein loading within a TMTpro experiment, the summed protein quantities of each channel were adjusted to be equal within the experiment.

### Publication Abstract
Rapid protein degradation enables cells to quickly modulate protein abundance. Dysregulation of short-lived proteins plays essential roles in disease pathogenesis. A focused map of short-lived proteins remains understudied. Cycloheximide, a translational inhibitor, is widely used in targeted studies to measure degradation kinetics for short-lived proteins. Here, we combined cycloheximide chase assays with advanced quantitative proteomics to map short-lived proteins under translational inhibition in four human cell lines. Among 11,747 quantified proteins, we identified 1,017 short-lived proteins (half-lives &#x2264; 8 h). These short-lived proteins are less abundant, evolutionarily younger, and less thermally stable than other proteins. We quantified 103 proteins with different stabilities among cell lines. We showed that U2OS and HCT116 cells express truncated forms of ATRX and GMDS, respectively, which have lower stability than their full-length counterparts. This study provides a large-scale resource of human short-lived proteins under translational arrest, leading to untapped avenues of protein regulation for therapeutic interventions.

### Keywords
Cycloheximide, Short-lived proteins, Real-time search, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Jiaming Li

### Lab Head
Dr Steven P. Gygi
Harvard Medical School


