### Accession
PXD030590

### Title
Folding of beta-tubulin by the chaperonin TRiC/CCT studied by chemical cross-linking and mass spectrometry

### Description
Chemical cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry was used to study the folding of the client protein, beta-tubulin, by the chaperonin TRiC/CCT. Different complexes containing TRiC/CCT and/or the chaperone prefoldin were cross-linked in absence or presence of nucleotides with the homobifunctional, noncleavable reagent, disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS).

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking using DSS was performed following previously described procedures (Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014). Samples were digested using endoproteinase Lys-C followed by trypsin. Digests were fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography and SEC fractions were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos system. Additional experimental details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.4, against the sequences of target proteins and identified contaminants. Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance = 15 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 20 ppm. The original scoring scheme of xQuest (Rinner et al., Nat. Methods, 2008) was used. False discovery rates (FDRs) were controlled by searches against shuffled sequences of all database entries. The FDR was set to <5% at the non-redundant peptide-pair level. Cross-linking identifications are compiled in a spreadsheet in Microsoft Excel format; a separate spreadsheet connects the raw files and the individual cross-linking experiments.

### Publication Abstract
The ATP-dependent ring-shaped chaperonin TRiC/CCT is essential for cellular proteostasis. To uncover why some eukaryotic proteins can only fold with TRiC assistance, we reconstituted the folding of &#x3b2;-tubulin using human prefoldin and TRiC. We find unstructured &#x3b2;-tubulin is delivered by prefoldin to the open TRiC chamber followed by ATP-dependent chamber closure. Cryo-EM resolves four near-atomic-resolution structures containing progressively folded &#x3b2;-tubulin intermediates within the closed TRiC chamber, culminating in native tubulin. This substrate folding pathway appears closely guided by site-specific interactions with conserved regions in the TRiC chamber. Initial electrostatic interactions between the TRiC interior wall and both the folded tubulin N domain and its C-terminal E-hook tail establish the native substrate topology, thus enabling C-domain folding. Intrinsically disordered CCT C termini within the chamber promote subsequent folding of tubulin's core and middle domains and GTP-binding. Thus, TRiC's chamber provides chemical and topological directives that shape the folding landscape of its obligate substrates.

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; dss; structural proteomics; protein folding, Tric/cct; prefoldin; tubulin

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland


