### Accession
PXD036656

### Title
Escherichia coli killing by Shigella sonnei is mediated by colicins found in epidemiologically successful sublineages

### Description
Shigella sonnei as an enteric pathogen, can benefit from outcompeting gut commensals such as Escherichia coli and there can be several mechanisms that assist in interbacterial competition. It is, therefore, important to understand these mechanisms as they provide insights into the interactions of these pathogens in the complex environment they exist. We used our novel Bulk Phenotyping of Epidemiological Replicates (BPER) pipeline combined with bacterial Genome Wide Association Studies (GWAS) on a previously described real-world collection of S. sonnei isolates (n=165) to demonstrate the vital role that colicins could have played in shaping the observed epidemiology of S. sonnei. We then used targeted mass spectrometry on representative S. sonnei isolates to detect colicin sequences in cell free supernatants, which further validated our BPER results to suggest the vital role of colicins. Here, we also introduce BPER as an epidemiologically relevant way of phenotypic testing in the laboratory where the phenotypic results can be interpreted with much more relevance to the effects of those phenotypes in natural settings.

### Sample Protocol
TCA precipitated proteins from Shigella culture supernatants were resolubilized in UTCT buffer (urea 2M, thiourea 7M, CHAPS 4%, Tris HCl 20 mM pH 7.8) for 1 hour at 30°C under shaking (800rpm) and clarified by centrifugation at 12 000 g at 4°C for 15 minutes. Samples were quantified with Bradford assay. 10µg of proteins were precipitated and digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, MA, USA). Each sample was further analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a TripleTOF-5600 mass spectrometer (Sciex, Canada) coupled to a U3000-RSLC system (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA) as described previously (Roche et al., 2021).

### Data Protocol
Data were searched with target-decoy strategy against the UniProtKB database from S.sonnei (release 2021_01, 22219 sequences) concatenated to a home-made database consisting of all E.coli colicins, immunity and lysis proteins. Peptides and proteins were identified with Mascot algorithm (version 2.8.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) and data were further imported into Proline v2.1 software (Bouyssié et al, 2020). Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1 and 1% FDR at peptide spectrum match (PSM score) level. The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to quantify each protein in each biological sample and in two technical MS replicates. The total number of MS/MS spectra was computed while considering shared and unique peptides (BASIC Spectral Count) or only unique peptides (SPECIFIC Spectral Count).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Colicins, Bper, Shigella

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
Department of Clinical Infection, Microbiology, and Immunology; Institute for Infection, Veterinary, and Ecological Sciences (IVES), University of Liverpool, L69 7ZB, Liverpool, United Kingdom.

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Kate Baker
Department of Clinical Infection, Microbiology, and Immunology; Institute for Infection, Veterinary, and Ecological Sciences (IVES), University of Liverpool, L69 7ZB, Liverpool, United Kingdom.


