### Accession
PXD003814

### Title
Phosphoproteomics scaled-down to tumor biopsy level. Part 2: biopsies

### Description
Mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics of tumor tissue or cell line lysates provides insight in aberrantly activated signaling pathways and potential drug targets. For improved understanding of the individual patient’s tumor biology, analysis of the phosphoproteome should be feasible and reproducible using tumor needle biopsies. We hereto scaled down a pTyr-phosphopeptide enrichment protocol to biopsy-level protein input and show its performance using colorectal cancer (CRC) cell line and needle biopsies from patients. In this study, the feasibility of label-free pTyr-phosphoproteomics at the biopsy level is demonstrated. Unsupervised cluster analysis shows that this approach can identify patient-specific profiles, which will improve our understanding of individual tumor biology and may enable future pTyr-phosphoproteomics-based TKI treatment selection.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture, biopsies, lysis and digestion HCT116 CRC cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection and cultured in DMEM medium containing 10% FBS, 100 U/ml sodium penicillin and 100 µg/ml streptomycin. Cells were maintained at 37°C with 5% CO2 in air atmosphere and expanded on 150 mm petri dishes. Cells were washed once in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) prior to lysis in 9M urea buffer containing 20 mM HEPES pH 9.0 and phosphatase. Cells were scraped and sonicated and subsequent centrifugation of the lysate was performed for 15 min at maximum speed. The cleared lysate was aliquotted and stored at -80 °C until further use. Eight primary CRC tumors (Tumor 1-8) were sampled within 60 minutes after resection using a 14-gauge core biopsy device according to an IRB-approved protocol for biobanking of remaining human surgical specimen. Per tumor, ≥ 3 needle biopsies were taken from different sides of the tumor, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. After attaching to or embedding in (nearly-) frozen RNAse-free water, needle biopsies were longitudinally cut in toto in 10 µm cryosections under -20°C conditions, while a 5 µm slide to determine tumor cell content based on haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining was cut after ± 10 sections. Cryosections were transferred to precooled 1.5 ml Eppendorf vials and stored at -80°C. Needle biopsies with ≥ 40% tumor cells were considered representative and selected for further processing, aiming to analyze ≥ 2 biopsies per tumor for a minimum of 5 tumors. Lysis was performed using approximately 1000 µl 9M urea buffer per sample. Lysates were reduced in 4 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) for 20 min at 60°C, cooled to room temperature and subsequently alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min in the dark. After dilution to 2M urea using 20 mM HEPES buffer pH 8.0, the lysate was digested with 20 µg Sequencing Grade Modified trypsin/mg protein by overnight incubation at 22°C. Digestion was then halted by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. Samples were then incubated for 15 min on ice, centrifuged for 5 min at 1800 x g and transferred to a new tube. Tryptic digests were desalted using 10 ml (cells) or 1 ml (biopsies) Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) placed on a vacuum system. Bound peptides were washed using 0.1% TFA before elution to glass vials in 40% ACN/0.1% TFA. Eluates were lyophilized for 48 hours and stored at -80 ºC until further use.  pTyr Phosphopeptide enrichment. Enrichment for tyrosine phosphorylated phosphopeptides was performed using the anti-phosphotyrosine antibody P-Tyr-1000 coupled to agarose beads (PTMScan, Cell Signaling Technology). Briefly, lyophilized phosphopeptides were dissolved in IAP buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate and 50 mM NaCl) and incubated with 2 µl P-Tyr-1000 beads per mg protein at 4 ºC for 2 hours. After washing in cold IAP buffer and MQ, peptides were eluted from the beads in two steps in 0.15% TFA, desalted in 20 ul Proxeon StageTips (Thermo Scientific) using 0.1% TFA  and eluted with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA into glass-lined autosampler vials and stored at 4 oC until LC-MS/MS measurement on the same day.   LC-MS/MS. Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 20 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 3 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 90 min (120 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3 E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (4 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 2 E5 charges and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human reference proteome  (no fragments, downloaded January 2014, 42104 entries) using MaxQuant 1.4.1.2. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 17. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match between runs option checked. Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected.  Label-free phosphopeptide quantification Phosphopeptides were quantified by their extracted ion intensities (‘Intensity’ in MaxQuant). For each sample the phosphopeptide intensities were normalized on the median intensity of all identified peptides (from the MaxQuant Evidence table) in the sample (‘normalised intensity’). Normalisation and cluster analysis was performed in R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Phosphoproteomics, Biopsy, Crc, Colorectal cancer, Ptyr, Label-free, Single-shot

### Affiliations
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


