### Accession
PXD041732

### Title
BioID screen for Uhrf2 interactors in AML12 cells

### Description
We identified the ubiquitin ligase Uhrf2 as an important regulator of liver regeneration. To gain insight into the mechanisms of action of Uhrf2 in hepatocytes, we searched for Uhrf2 interactors in the AML12 hepatocyte cell line using BioID interaction screening. This resulted in the identification of major chromatin remodelling proteins as Uhrf2 interactors.

### Sample Protocol
AML12 cells with DOX-inducible expression of Uhrf2-BioID were seeded into 15 cm dishes in DMEM/10% FBS/1% P/S, supplemented with 50 uM biotin (Sigma-Aldrich; B4501) and 10 ug/ml DOX and cultured for 24 h. The following day, cell media were changed, and some samples were additionally treated with the proteasome inhibitor 5 uM MG-132 (Merck; 474790-10MG). Cells were cultured overnight, trypsinised, pelleted and stored at -80°C until further use. Cell pellets were thawed and lysed in BioID lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.4% SDS, 1% NP-40, 1.5 mM MgCL2, 1 mM EDTA) at a ratio of 4:1 vol:wt. Samples were incubated under rotation at 4°C for 30 min and then centrifuged for 20 min at 16’100 g at 4°C. The same volumes of supernatant fractions were incubated with washed Dynabeads™ MyOne™ Streptavidin C1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific; 65001) under rotation at 4°C overnight. The next day, the beads were washed once in BioID wash buffer (2% SDS, 50 mM Tris pH7.5), twice in BioID lysis buffer and three times in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Biotinylated protein pull-down efficiency was monitored by Western blot. Protein-bound beads were analysed by mass spectrometry at the Functional Genomics Centre Zurich. Overnight on-bead digestion was performed at 37°C under rotation using 1 ug trypsin in a total volume of 100 ul. The next day, the bead supernatant was collected, and the beads were vortexed in 100 ul Milli Q water. The peptide supernatants were pooled and 50 ul formic acid was added. Following evaporation on a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific; SAVANT SPD121P), peptides were dissolved in 15 ul 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid buffer, vortexed, water-bath sonicated for 3 min and placed on a shaker for 10 min at 37°C.

### Data Protocol
Dissolved peptide samples were transferred to autosampler vials for liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. 1 ul was injected on a NanoAcquity UPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Raw files were converted to Mascot Generic File formats (.mgf files) from which they were further analysed using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK). For the visualisation of the protein and peptide identification results, Mascot protein identification results were imported into the Scaffold software (Proteome Software, Portland, OR).

### Publication Abstract
Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) are key regulators of the remarkable regenerative capacity of the liver. Mice lacking FGF receptors 1 and 2 (Fgfr1 and Fgfr2) in hepatocytes are hypersensitive to cytotoxic injury during liver regeneration. Using these mice as a model for impaired liver regeneration, we identified a critical role for the ubiquitin ligase Uhrf2 in protecting hepatocytes from bile acid accumulation during liver regeneration. During regeneration after partial hepatectomy, <i>Uhrf2</i> expression increased in an FGFR-dependent manner, and Uhrf2 was more abundant in the nuclei of liver cells in control mice compared with FGFR-deficient mice. Hepatocyte-specific Uhrf2 knockout or nanoparticle-mediated Uhrf2 knockdown caused extensive liver necrosis and impaired hepatocyte proliferation after partial hepatectomy, resulting in liver failure. In cultured hepatocytes, Uhrf2 interacted with several chromatin remodeling proteins and suppressed the expression of cholesterol biosynthesis genes. In vivo, the loss of Uhrf2 resulted in cholesterol and bile acid accumulation in the liver during regeneration. Treatment with a bile acid scavenger rescued the necrotic phenotype, hepatocyte proliferation, and the regenerative capacity of the liver in Uhrf2-deficient mice subjected to partial hepatectomy. Our results identify Uhrf2 as a key target of FGF signaling in hepatocytes and its essential function in liver regeneration and highlight the importance of epigenetic metabolic regulation in this process.

### Keywords
Bioid, Mouse, Aml12 cells, Q-exactive hf

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, ETH Zurich
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Coenraad Frederik Slabber

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Sabine Werner
Department of Biology, ETH Zurich


