### Accession
PXD008442

### Title
Quantitative proteomic characterization of the lung extracellular matrix in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis

### Description
Remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) is a common feature in lung diseases such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). Here, we applied a sequential tissue extraction strategy to describe disease-specific remodeling of human lung tissue in disease, using end-stages of COPD and IPF. Our strategy was based on quantitative comparison of the disease proteomes, with specific focus on the matrisome, using data-independent acquisition and targeted data analysis (SWATH-MS). Our work provides an in-depth proteomic characterization of human lung tissue during impaired tissue remodeling. In addition, we show important quantitative and qualitative effects of the solubility of matrisome proteins. COPD was characterized by a disease-specific increase in ECM regulators, metalloproteinase inhibitor 3 (TIMP3) and matrix metalloproteinase 28 (MMP-28), whereas for IPF, impairment in cell adhesion proteins, such as collagen VI and laminins, was most prominent. For both diseases, we identified increased levels of proteins involved in the regulation of endopeptidase activity, with several proteins belonging to the serpin family. The established human lung quantitative proteome inventory and the construction of a tissue-specific protein assay library provides a resource for future quantitative proteomic analyses of human lung tissues.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For all samples digested in-solution 1 µg peptides were injected. For the SDS-PAGE separated protein samples were each lane separated into 45 bands that were pooled into 10 MS injections from which 1 µl each were injected. Peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an EASY-Spray column (ID 75 µm x 25 cm) PepMap®RSLC C18 2 µm 100 Å resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific)). Solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 100% acetonitrile) were used to run a gradient from 5% to 35% buffer B over 120 min, 35 to 95% buffer B for 5 min, and finally 95% buffer B for 10 min, at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. For data-dependent acquisition (DDA) full MS survey scans (resolution 70,000 at 200 m/z) at mass range 400-1600 m/z were followed by MS/MS scans (resolution 17,500 at 200 m/z) of the top 15 most intense ions using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD). A MS precursor threshold of 1.7e4 was required to trigger MS/MS scans. The ion accumulation time was 100 ms in MS and 60 ms in MS/MS, using an AGC target setting of 1e6. For data-independent acquisition (DIA) MS survey scans at mass range 400-1200 m/z were followed by 32 MS/MS full fragmentation scans with an isolation window of 26 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Data acquired in DDA were converted to mzML using MSconvert. All data analyses were managed in openBIS. MS searches were performed using X! Tandem and OMSSA towards a human protein reference database (PTHR100) with reversed decoys. Search parameters included a precursor mass tolerance of 30 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, 2 miscleavages, carbamidomethyl as static modification and methionine oxidation as variable modification. Resulting files were further analyzed in the Trans-proteomic pipeline (TPP v4.7 POLAR VORTEX rev 0, Build 201405161127) using peptideProphet, iProphet and MAYU. The assay library used for DIA quantification was created according to the workflows included in openBIS. Briefly, target assays were generated using spectraST, FDR calculations of 1% for peptide and protein were calculated with CLI and feature alignment with TRIC. DIA files were analyzed using openSWATH.

### Publication Abstract
Remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) is a common feature in lung diseases such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). Here, we applied a sequential tissue extraction strategy to describe disease-specific remodeling of human lung tissue in disease, using end-stages of COPD and IPF. Our strategy was based on quantitative comparison of the disease proteomes, with specific focus on the matrisome, using data-independent acquisition and targeted data analysis (SWATH-MS). Our work provides an in-depth proteomic characterization of human lung tissue during impaired tissue remodeling. In addition, we show important quantitative and qualitative effects of the solubility of matrisome proteins. COPD was characterized by a disease-specific increase in ECM regulators, metalloproteinase inhibitor 3 (TIMP3) and matrix metalloproteinase 28 (MMP-28), whereas for IPF, impairment in cell adhesion proteins, such as collagen VI and laminins, was most prominent. For both diseases, we identified increased levels of proteins involved in the regulation of endopeptidase activity, with several proteins belonging to the serpin family. The established human lung quantitative proteome inventory and the construction of a tissue-specific protein assay library provides a resource for future quantitative proteomic analyses of human lung tissues. SIGNIFICANCE: We present a sequential tissue extraction strategy to determine changes in extractability of matrisome proteins in end-stage COPD and IPF compared to healthy control tissue. Extensive quantitative analysis of the proteome changes of the disease states revealed altered solubility of matrisome proteins involved in ECM regulators and cell-ECM communication. The results highlight disease-specific remodeling mechanisms associated with COPD and IPF.

### Keywords
Human, Copd, Lung, Swath-ms, Ipf

### Affiliations
Lund University
Infection medicine proteomics BMC D13 Klinikgatan 28 22241 Lund Sweden

### Submitter
Emma Åhrman

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Malmström
Infection medicine proteomics BMC D13 Klinikgatan 28 22241 Lund Sweden


