### Accession
PXD009079

### Title
Human mitochondrial cysteine desulfurase complex

### Description
Cysteine desulfurase plays central role in mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis not only by providing sulfur through the catalysis of L-cysteine to L-alanine but also by serving as the platform for the assembly of other components of the biosynthetic machinery, including ISCU, frataxin, and ferredoxin. Human mitochondrial cysteine desulfurase complex consists of a homodimer with three components: NFS1, ISD11 and acyl carrier protein (ACP). In this study we used chemical crosslinking coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (XC-MS) to investigate the structures of cysteine desulfurase complexes.

### Sample Protocol
The chemical cross-linking reaction was started by mixing 1 mg/mL purified NIAU in PBS buffer with 20-fold BS3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific)After the reactions were incubated at room temperature for 30 min, the cross-linked products were analyzed by SDS-PAGE. Bands from the SDS–PAGE gel corresponding to cross-linked complexes were excised, and the proteins were reduced/alkylated and digested by addition of trypsin following standard protocols. Digested peptides were extracted with 50 µL Millipore water containing 1% TFA by vortexing 10 min at room temperature. An additional extraction was performed with 80 µL of 70% acetonitrile/25% H2O/5% TFA (v/v/v). Peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge, reconstituted with 20 µL H2O containing 0.1% TFA for injection onto a Linear Trap Quarupole (LTQ) Orbitrap XL using an Agilent 1100 LC system at the University of Wisconsin-Madison Mass Spectrometry/Proteomics Facility. The peptides were loaded directly onto an analytical column of 75 μm inner diameter and 360 μm outer diameter house-packed with ∼13 cm C18 resin (Magic-C18, 200Å, 3 μm, Bruker, Billerica, MA). MS1 spectra were collected using the Orbitrap at resolution 100,000 with preview mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were processed into peak lists using Mascot server. The StavroX 3.5.1 software (Gotze et al., 2012) was used to generate a list of the crosslinked peptides. The false discovery rate (FDR) cut off was set to 5%, and precursor and fragment ion tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Each crosslinked peptide was also assigned a score by StavroX 3.5.1 software based on comparison between the theoretical fragmentation and the actual MS/MS spectrum of the crosslinked peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Cysteine desulfurase plays a central role in mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis by generating sulfur through the conversion of L-cysteine to L-alanine and by serving as the platform for assembling other components of the biosynthetic machinery, including ISCU, frataxin, and ferredoxin. The human mitochondrial cysteine desulfurase complex consists of two copies each of NFS1, ISD11, and acyl carrier protein. We describe results from chemical crosslinking coupled with tandem mass spectrometry and small-angle X-ray scattering studies that are consistent with a closed NFS1 dimer rather than an open one for both the cysteine desulfurase-ISCU and cysteine desulfurase-ISCU-frataxin complexes. We present a structural model for the cysteine desulfurase-ISCU-frataxin complex derived from chemical crosslinking restraints in conjunction with the recent crystal structure of the cysteine desulfurase-ISCU-zinc complex and distance constraints from nuclear magnetic resonance.

### Keywords
Human, Cysteine desulfurase, Cx-ms

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry University of Wisconsin-Madison
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Kai Cai

### Lab Head
Dr John L Markley
Department of Biochemistry University of Wisconsin-Madison


