### Accession
PXD036354

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis strain 12CS0282

### Description
The data set comprises results from the whole cellular proteome, secreted proteins and proteins located on the bacterial surface of Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis. The theroretical proteome was created from genome analysis and characterized using bioinformatical analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of whole cell proteins was carried out as described previously [Möller et al., 2020]. For this purpose, the cells were resuspended in PBS buffer with protease inhibitor (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) and lysed with a homogenizer (MP Biomedical, Fisher Scientific, Schwerte, Germany) using glass beads (5.5 m s−1, 30 s, 5 cycles, 4 °C). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 13,000 x g for 30 min at 4 °C and the supernatant was retained. Protein buffer was added to a final concentration of 10 mM DTT, 2% sodium deoxycholate and 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0). For in solution tryptic digest, 40 µg of protein was transferred into a new low-binding tube and incubated at 55 °C for 30 min for protein denaturation followed by an alkylation of sulfhydryl groups (40 mM CAA final concentration). Precipitation of proteins was carried out overnight at 4 °C with 80 % acetone, washed three times with 80 % ice-cold acetone, dried under N2 atmosphere to avoid oxidation [Kraner et al., 2017] and resuspended in 100 mM TEAB buffer. Proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C under constant shaking with 2 µg of trypsin. Desalting occurred with C18 stage tips with 25 µg of all peptide samples (three biological replicates of secret-ed proteins, whole proteome and surface proteins). Peptides were vacuum-dried and resuspended in 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for LC-MS/MS analysis [Bittel et al., 2018].  For preparation of extracellular proteins, the bacteria were removed by centrifugation (10 min, 4 °C, 4000 x g) and the supernatant was subsequently filtered using a 0.2 µm pore size filter (Minisart, Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany). The proteins were precipitated by using 10% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and resuspended in protein buffer (10 mM DTT, 2% sodium deoxycholate, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0). Pierce TM 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used to determine the protein concen-tration. 25 µg of the proteins were used for a tryptic digest on 10 kDa vivacon 500 membrane filters as previously described following a modified Filter Aided Sample preparation (FASP) protocol [Möller et al., 2019; Wisniewski et al., 2009; Kraner et al., 2017]. Cell surface proteins were isolated by tryptic shaving [Bittel et al., 2018,Tjalsma et al., 2008]. For this purpose, cells were harvested and treated with 1.5 µg sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for 1.5 h at 37 °C. Mass spectrometric analyses were carried as described before [Bittel et al., 2018; Kraner et al., 2017; Möller et al., 2020]. The separation of ten µg of peptides were carried out by a nanoflow Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) using an EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific; C18 with 2 µm particle size, 50 cm × 75 µm) with a (flow rate of 200 nL min−1 and increasing acetonitrile concentrations over 120 min. The total method duration including equilibration and column wash was set to 160 min. Triplicates of all samples were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with following settings: spray voltage 2000 V, transfer tube temperature 275 °C, scan range for the MS 1 detection in the Orbitrap 300–2000 (m/z), 50 ms maximum injection time, automatic gain control (AGC) target of 4 x 106 and Orbitrap resolution of 120.000 [Möller et al., 2020 W25]. For collision-induced dissocia-tion with a collision energy of 35%, the ten most intense ions were selected and for ion trap detection a maximum injection time of 250 ms and an AGC target of 1 x 105 were set.

### Data Protocol
Resulting raw data files were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 program package (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and the theoretical proteome of C. pseudotuberculosis 12CS0282. As described by Schäfer and co-workers [Schäfer et al., 2017 Nuclear trafficking], the theoretical masses of peptides were generated with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl modification on cysteine was set as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine as dynamic modification. To compare the measured spectra of product ions, the mass tolerance for survey scans was set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da for fragment mass measurements. False discovery rate (FDR) was set on 1 % for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Veterinary pathogen, Caseous lymphadenitis, Microbial proteomics

### Affiliations
FAU Erlangen
FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg, Department Biology, Microbiology, Germany

### Submitter
Jens Möller

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Burkovski
FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg, Department Biology, Microbiology, Germany


