### Accession
PXD037171

### Title
Stings on wings: venom proteomics and tissue transcriptomics of the lesser banded hornet, Vespa affinis

### Description
The project aims at unraveling the venom repertoire of the lesser banded hornet (Vespa affinis) and investigate the regimes of natural selection underpinning their venom evolution. The study also sheds light on the clinical repercussions of the V. affinis venom.

### Sample Protocol
The proteomic composition of V. affinis venom was determined using tandem mass spectrometry, wherein, following SDS-PAGE separation, the excised protein bands were treated with dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma-Aldrich, USA), alkylated with iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), and trypsin digested (2 µg/µl; Promega Corporation, USA). Subsequently, the analytes were subjected to tandem mass spectrometry analysis in Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
PEAKS Studio X (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) was used to identify protein families by searching the raw MS/MS spectra against NCBI’s ‘non-redundant’ (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) protein database, as well as V. affinis venom gland tissue transcriptome generated in this study. A monoisotopic mass search was performed with ‘semispecific’ trypsin digestion and a maximum of three missed cleavages, and the parent and fragment mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and 0.06 Da, respectively. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation (M) was set as a variable modification. Quality filtering parameters were set to a False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 0.1%, detection of ≥1 unique peptide and a -10lgP protein score of ≥50. The Common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (CRAP; www.thegpm.org/crap/) database was included during the spectral searches to effectively eliminate common contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
Distinct animal lineages have convergently recruited venoms as weaponry for prey capture, anti-predator defence, conspecific competition, or a combination thereof. Most studies, however, have been primarily confined to a narrow taxonomic breadth. The venoms of cone snails, snakes, spiders and scorpions remain particularly well-investigated. Much less explored are the venoms of wasps (Order: Hymenoptera) that are infamous for causing excruciating and throbbing pain, justifying their apex position on Schmidt's pain index, including some that are rated four on four. For example, the lesser banded wasp (<i>V. affinis</i>) is clinically important yet has only been the subject of a few studies, despite being commonly found across tropical and subtropical Asia. Stings from these wasps, especially from multiple individuals of a nest, often lead to clinically severe manifestations, including mastocytosis, myasthenia gravis, optic neuropathy, and life-threatening pathologies such as myocardial infarction and organ failure. However, their venom composition and activity remain unexplored in the Indian subcontinent. Here, we report the proteomic composition, transcriptomic profile, and biochemical and pharmacological activities of <i>V. affinis</i> venom from southern India. Our findings suggest that wasp venoms are rich in diverse toxins that facilitate antipredator defence. Biochemical and pharmacological assessments reveal that these toxins can exhibit significantly higher activities than their homologues in medically important snakes. Their ability to exert potent effects on diverse molecular targets makes them a treasure trove for discovering life-saving therapeutics. Fascinatingly, wasp venoms, being evolutionarily ancient, exhibit a greater degree of compositional and sequence conservation across very distant populations/species, which contrasts with the patterns of venom evolution observed in evolutionarily younger lineages, such as advanced snakes and cone snails.

### Keywords
Vespa affinis, Venom gland transcriptome, Venom proteome, Wasp venom, Arthropod venom

### Affiliations
Assistant Professor, Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, Karnataka, India.
Assistant Professor, Evolutionary Venomics Lab, Center for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India

### Submitter
Kartik Sunagar

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Kartik Sunagar
Assistant Professor, Evolutionary Venomics Lab, Center for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India


