### Accession
PXD011384

### Title
The stoichiometry of the outer kinetochore responds to microtubule-proximal regulation

### Description
The authors of this manuscript suggest the stoichiometry of outer submodules of the budding yeast kinetochore is strongly influenced by factors at the kinetochore-microtubule interface, including Fin1, Dam1, and microtubule tracking. Outer kinetochore stoichiometry is remarkably plastic and responsive to microtubule-proximal regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Kinetochores were purified as described (Akiyoshi et al., 2009). To purify kinetochores from cells arrested in G1, 8L of culture was arrested with α-factor (5µM). To purify kinetochores from cells arrested in anaphase, 5L of yeast culture was collected after shifting the culture to 37°C for 3 hrs. Cell pellets were frozen in liquid N2 and lysed using the Retsch mixer mill mm400 for 3 cycles (3 mins on/5 mins off in liquid N2). Lysate in H0.15 (25mM HEPES pH 8.0, 2mM MgCl2, 0.1mM EDTA pH 8.0, 0.5mM EGTA pH 8.0, 0.1% NP-40, 150 mM KCl, 15% glycerol with 2mM DTT, protease and phosphatase inhibitors) was ultra-centrifuged to collect the clear top layer, which was used for affinity-purification after incubating with antibody-conjugated Dyna-beads for 3 hrs. Kinetochores were eluted with 0.5 mg/mL 3XFlag peptide prior to MudPIT. TCA-precipitated protein samples Dsn1-His-Flag or no-tag controls isolated from three biological replicates from G1 phase or anaphase cells (12 total immunoprecipitated samples) were analyzed independently by Multidimensional Protein Identification Technology (MudPIT), as described previously (Florens and Washburn, 2006; Washburn et al., 2001). Briefly, samples were urea denatured, reduced, and alkylated prior to digestion with recombinant LysC (Promega) and modified trypsin (Promega).  Reactions were quenched by the addition of formic acid to a final concentration of 5%. After digestion, peptide mixtures were pressure-loaded onto 100 µm fused silica microcapillary columns packed first with 9 cm of reverse phase material (Aqua; Phenomenex), followed by 3 cm of 5-μm Strong Cation Exchange material (Luna; Phenomenex), followed by 1 cm of 5-μm C18 RP. The loaded microcapillary columns were placed in-line with a 1260 Quartenary HPLC (Agilent). The application of a 2.5 kV distal voltage electrosprayed the eluting peptides directly into Orbitrap-Velos Pro or Elite hybrid mass spectrometers (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a custom-made nano-LC electrospray ionization source. Full MS spectra were recorded on the eluting peptides over a 400 to 1600 m/z range in the Orbitrap at 60K resolution, followed by fragmentation in the ion trap (at 35% collision energy) on the first to fifteenth most intense ions selected from the full MS spectrum. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 90 sec (Zhang et al., 2009). Mass spectrometer scan functions and HPLC solvent gradients were controlled by the XCalibur data system (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
RAW files were extracted into .ms2 file format (McDonald et al., 2004) using RawDistiller v. 1.0, in-house developed software (Zhang et al., 2011). RawDistiller D(g, 6) settings were used to abstract MS1 scan profiles by Gaussian fitting and to implement dynamic offline lock mass using six background polydimethylcyclosiloxane ions as internal calibrants (Zhang et al., 2011). MS/MS spectra were first searched using ProLuCID (Xu et al., 2015) with a peptide mass tolerance of 6 ppm and 500 ppm for fragment ions. Trypsin specificity was imposed on both ends of candidate peptides during the search against a protein database containing 5,843 yeast proteins (NCBI 2013-02-26 release), as well as 193 usual contaminants such as human keratins, IgGs and proteolytic enzymes. To estimate false discovery rates (FDR), each protein sequence was randomized (keeping the same amino acid composition and length) and the resulting "shuffled" sequences were added to the database, for a total search space of 12,038 amino acid sequences. Masses of 57.0215 Da was differentially added to cysteine residues to account for alkylation by CAM and 15.9949 Da were differentially added to methionine residues. DTASelect v.1.9 (Tabb et al., 2002) was used to select and sort peptide/spectrum matches (PSMs) passing the following criteria set: PSMs were only retained if they had a DeltCn of at least 0.08; minimum XCorr values of 1.8 for singly-, 2.1 for doubly-, and 2.5 for triply-charged spectra; peptides had to be at least 7 amino acids long.  Results from each sample were merged and compared using CONTRAST (Tabb et al., 2002). Combining all three runs from G1 or anaphase samples, proteins had to be detected by at least 2 peptides and/or 2 spectral counts. Proteins that were subsets of others were removed using the parsimony option in DTASelect on the proteins detected after merging all runs. Proteins that were identified by the same set of peptides (including at least one peptide unique to such protein group to distinguish between isoforms) were grouped together, and one accession number was arbitrarily considered as representative of each protein group.  NSAF7 (Zhang et al., 2010) was used to create the final reports on all detected peptides and non-redundant proteins identified across the different runs. Spectral and protein level FDRs were, on average, 0.1 ± 0.09% and 2.4 ± 1.0%, respectively. NSAF7 was also used to generate a list of all peptide to spectrum matches (PSMs) leading to the identification of proteins in either or both of the G1 and anaphase samples.

### Publication Abstract
The kinetochore is a large molecular machine that attaches chromosomes to microtubules and facilitates chromosome segregation. The kinetochore includes submodules that associate with the centromeric DNA and submodules that attach to microtubules. Additional copies of several submodules of the kinetochore are added during anaphase, including the microtubule binding module Ndc80. While the factors governing plasticity are not known, they could include regulation based on microtubule-kinetochore interactions. We report that Fin1 localizes to the microtubule-proximal edge of the kinetochore cluster during anaphase based on single-particle averaging of super-resolution images. Fin1 is required for the assembly of normal levels of Dam1 and Ndc80 submodules. Levels of Ndc80 further depend on the Dam1 microtubule binding complex. Our results suggest the stoichiometry of outer kinetochore submodules is strongly influenced by factors at the kinetochore-microtubule interface such as Fin1 and Dam1, and phosphorylation by cyclin-dependent kinase. Outer kinetochore stoichiometry is remarkably plastic and responsive to microtubule-proximal regulation.

### Keywords
Kinetochore, Mudpit, Anaphase

### Affiliations
Stowers Institute for Medical Research

### Submitter
Michaella Levy

### Lab Head
Dr Laurence Florens
Stowers Institute for Medical Research


