### Accession
PXD008195

### Title
iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis reveals new metabolic pathways responding to cold stress in two Winter Turnip Rape (Brassica rapa L.), part 2

### Description
Winter turnip rape (Brassica rapa L.) is a valuable ecologically beneficial oil crop that is produced mainly for its ability of conserving soil and water in winter and spring and its high quality edible oil in northwestern China. However, coldness and extremely low temperature negatively affects the growth and development of winter turnip rape, resulting in failure to overwinter and production in northwestern China. ‘Longyou 7’(Brassica rapa L.) and  ‘Tianyou 4’ (Brassica rapa L.) are closely related plant species, but their cold tolerances are different. ‘Longyou 7’ is a cold-tolerant cultivar, ‘Tianyou 4’is a cold-sensitive cultivar. In this study, we used iTRAQ-based proteomics to compare quantitative changes in the proteome of  two winter turnip rape leaves and roots in response to cold stress to elucidate the possible molecular mechanism underlying the ability of ‘Longyou 7’ to adapt to cold stress.

### Sample Protocol
Both Longyou7 and Tianyou 4 Plants were grown in plastic pots until six true leaves in a ventilated greenhouse (20 °C, 16 h light/8 h dark cycle), and then moved into growth chamber  for treatment. Cold treatment was started by gradually decreasing the temperature from 20 °C to −4 °C. The plants were grown at 20 °C for 48 h and then induced at 10 °C and 4 °C for 48 h, respectively. Finally, they were stressed at −4 °C for 8 h. The leaves and roots of plants grown at 20 °C (as control, CK) and −4 °C (as treatments, TR) were collected and frozen in liquid nitrogen for proteomic analysis. Generally, eight samples were collected and named 4LCK (leaf of ‘Tianyou 4’ at 20 °C), 4LTR (leaf of ‘Tianyou 4’ treated at −4 °C), 4RCK (root of ‘Tianyou 4’ at 20 °C), 4RTR (root of ‘Tianyou 4’ treated at −4 °C), 7LCK (leaf of ‘Longyou 7’ at 20 °C), 7LTR (leaf of ‘Longyou 7’ treated at −4 °C), 7RCK (root of ‘Longyou 7’ at 20 °C), and 7RTR (root of ‘Longyou 7’ treated at −4 °C), respectively. Each sample were polled from three plants and two biological replicates were included.

### Data Protocol
protein identification was perfored by mascot identification

### Publication Abstract
Winter turnip rape (<i>Brassica rapa</i> L.) is a large-scale winter-only oil crop cultivated in Northwest China. However, its cold-resistant molecular mechanism remains inadequate. Studying the cold adaptation mechanisms of winter turnip rape based on the proteomic technique of isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) offers a solution to this problem. Under cold stress (-4 &#xb0;C for eight hours), 51 and 94 differently accumulated proteins (DAPs) in Longyou 7 (cold-tolerant) and Tianyou 4 (cold-sensitive) were identified, respectively. These DAPs were classified into 38 gene ontology (GO) term categories, such as metabolic process, cellular process, catalytic activity, and binding. The 142 DAPs identified between the two cold-stressed cultivars were classified into 40 GO terms, including cellular process, metabolic process, cell, catalytic activity, and binding. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes enrichment analysis indicated that the DAPs participated in 10 pathways. The abundance of most protein functions in ribosomes, carbon metabolism, photosynthesis, and energy metabolism including the citrate cycle, pentose phosphate pathway, and glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism decreased, and the proteins that participate in photosynthesis&#x207b;antenna and isoflavonoid biosynthesis increased in cold-stressed Longyou 7 compared with those in cold-stressed Tianyou 4. The expression pattern of genes encoding the 10 significant DAPs was consistent with the iTRAQ data. This study provides new information on the proteomic differences between the leaves of Longyou 7 and Tianyou 4 plants and explains the possible molecular mechanisms of cold-stress adaptation in <i>B. rapa</i>.

### Keywords
Cold stress, Proteomics, Winter turnip rape, Itraq

### Affiliations
HEXI UNIVERSITY
HEXI University,No. 846, beicheng road, zhangye city, gansu province, China

### Submitter
zeng xiucun

### Lab Head
Dr Zeng XiuCun
HEXI University,No. 846, beicheng road, zhangye city, gansu province, China


