### Accession
PXD013658

### Title
Surpassing 10,000 identified and quantified proteins in a single run by optimizing current LC-MS instrumentation and data analysis strategy

### Description
Comprehensive proteome quantification is crucial for a better understanding of underlying mechanisms of diseases. Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) has become the method of choice for comprehensive proteome quantification due to its power and versatility. Even though great advances have been made in recent years, full proteome coverage for complex samples remains challenging due to the high dynamic range of protein expression. Additionally, when studying diseases regulatory proteins, biomarkers or potential drug targets are often low abundant, such as for instance kinases and transcription factors. Here, we show that with improvements in chromatography and data analysis the single shot proteome coverage can go beyond 10,000 proteins in human tissue. In a testis cancer study, we quantified 11,200 proteins using data independent acquisition (DIA). This depth was achieved with a false discovery rate of 1% which was experimentally validated using a two species test. We introduce the concept of hybrid libraries which combine the strength of direct searching of DIA data as well as the use of large project-specific or published DDA data sets. Remarkably deep proteome coverage is possible using hybrid libraries without the additional burden of creating a project-specific library.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells/testis healthy and cancer tissue samples were lysed in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate) using the TissueLyzer II (Qiagen) with following settings: 3 cycles, 30 beats per s, 30 s. DNA was sheared using sonication in the Bioruptor (Diagenode) using following settings: 5 cycles, 30 s ON, 30 s OFF, 4°C, high intensity. After clearing of the lysates by centrifugation, aliquots were reduced by parallel treatment with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA) for 1 h at 37°C. Afterwards the urea concentration was lowered to 1.5 M by addition of 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate buffer and digested by trypsin (1 to 100 ratio, Promega) over night at 37°C. Peptides were purified using MacroSpin clean-up columns (NEST group) following manufacturers protocol. For library generation, peptides were fractionated by high pH reverse phase chromatography (in total 20 fractions for the HeLa library and 40 fractions for the testis library. Peptides were separated by a non-linear gradient in in-house packed 50 cm columns using three different solid phases (Dr Maisch ReproSil Pur 1.8µm, Waters BEH 1.7µm and Waters CSH 1.7 µm). The gradient length was between 2h and 8h. The Easy nLC 1200 (Thermo) was coupled online to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo). For library generation, it was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) Top20 mode and for method optimization and testis sample analysis, it was operated in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode. The number of DIA windows was adjusted to the chromatographic peak width to achieve 3-5 datapoints per peak.

### Data Protocol
Database search of DIA and DDA data was performed in SpectroMine (1.0.21621.9.18427, Biognosys). Data were searched against the Human UniProt FASTA including isoforms (downloaded on Jul 1st, 2018) using following settings: fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications: acetyl (protein N-term), oxidation (M); enzyme: trypsin/P with up to two missed cleavages. Mass tolerances were automatically determined by SpectroMine and other settings were set to default. Search results were filtered by a 1% FDR on precursor, peptide and protein level. Libraries were generated using the default settings. Hybrid libraries were generated by combining search archives from the searches for the libraries (DDA) and the DIA searches. DIA data were analyzed in Spectronaut (12.0.20491.18.30559, Biognosys). Prior analysis the raw files were converted to htrms files and MS1 and MS2 data were centroided. Data analysis parameters in Spectronaut were set to the defaults and results were filtered by 1% FDR on precursor and protein level. Quantitative data for the testis were filtered by Q value percentile = 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
Comprehensive proteome quantification is crucial for a better understanding of underlying mechanisms of diseases. Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) has become the method of choice for comprehensive proteome quantification due to its power and versatility. Even though great advances have been made in recent years, full proteome coverage for complex samples remains challenging due to the high dynamic range of protein expression. Additionally, when studying disease regulatory proteins, biomarkers or potential drug targets are often low abundant, such as for instance kinases and transcription factors. Here, we show that with improvements in chromatography and data analysis the single shot proteome coverage can go beyond 10&#x2009;000 proteins in human tissue. In a testis cancer study, we quantified 11&#x2009;200 proteins using data independent acquisition (DIA). This depth was achieved with a false discovery rate of 1% which was experimentally validated using a two species test. We introduce the concept of hybrid libraries which combines the strength of direct searching of DIA data as well as the use of large project-specific or published DDA data sets. Remarkably deep proteome coverage is possible using hybrid libraries without the additional burden of creating a project-specific library. Within the testis cancer set, we found a large proportion of proteins in an altered expression (in total: 3351; 1453 increased in cancer). Many of these proteins could be linked to the hallmarks of cancer. For example, the complement system was downregulated which helps to evade the immune response and chromosomal replication was upregulated indicating a dysregulated cell cycle.

### Keywords
Testis cancer, Hybrid library, Liquid chromatography, Dia

### Affiliations
Biognosys AG

### Submitter
Jan Muntel

### Lab Head
Dr Lukas Reiter
Biognosys AG


