### Accession
PXD009485

### Title
Hit-Gel: Streamlining in-gel protein digestion for high-throughput proteomics experiments.

### Description
Traditional in gel-digestion procedures require extensive sample handling, are prone to contamination and not compatible with high-throughput sample preparation. To address these shortcomings, we have modified the conventional in-gel digestion procedure for high-throughput proteomics studies. The modified method, termed “High Throughput in Gel digestion” (HiT-Gel), is based on a 96-well plate formatwhich results in a drastic reduction in labour intensity and sample handling. Direct comparison revealed that HiT-Gel reduces technical variation and significantly decreases sample contamination over the conventional in-gel digestion method. HiT-Gel also produced superior results when a single protein band was excised from a gel and processed by in-gel digestion.Moreover, we applied Hit-Gel for a mass spectrometry analysis of Arabidopsis thalianaprotein complexesseparated by native PAGE in 24 fractions and four biological replicates. We show that the high throughput capacity ofHiT-Gel facilitates large scale studies with high sample replication or detailed fractionation. Our method can easily be implemented as it does not require specialised laboratory equipment.

### Sample Protocol
Plant growth conditions and sample preparation procedures Wild-type A. thaliana Col-0 plants were cultivated on soil for 3 weeks in a controlled environment room under a short-day photoperiod (12 h light/12 h dark, 130 µmol photons m-2 s-1, 60% ambient humidity and 22°C). Biological replicates were prepared by combining whole rosettes of 5 plants. Plant tissue was harvested into liquid nitrogen before being ground to a fine powder. Proteins were extracted under denaturing or native conditions as specified in the experimental workflow. Under denaturing conditions, a SDS buffer (4% [w/v] sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS); 40mM Tris-Cl pH 7.5; 5% [v/v] glycerol; 30 µl.ml-1 Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche)), was added to the sample in a 1:1,5 weight to volume ratio and the proteins extracted at room temperature. Estimation of protein concentration was performed with the aid of a BCA assay kit (Thermo Scientific) according to the instructions of the manufacturer.  Protein separation by SDS-PAGE Approximately 100 µg of SDS-extracted A. thaliana proteins or 50 ng of BSA was used for each of the technical replicates. Protein samples were separated under denaturing conditions on a Mini-Protean handcast 12%Tris-glycine gels with a 5% stacking gel (1mm spacer width) using the BioRad Mini-PROTEAN® system. Gel staining and in-gel digestion After protein separation on the PAGE gels, staining was performed at room temperature for one hour using a Coomassie Blue solution (20% [v/v] methanol;10% [v/v] acetic acid; 0,1% [w/v Coomassie Brilliant Blue R]). Destaining of the gels was subsequently performed at room temperature for 2 hours (or 6 hours for large gels) using a destaining solution (50% [v/v] methanol; 10% [v/v]). Mini gels were fractionated into 8 pieces, while large format gels were fractionated into twenty pieces. The conventional method was performed as previously reported1,2. The HiT-Gel method was performed according to the Supplementary methods. Following the in-gel digestion procedures, the peptides were desalted on Finisterre C18 SPE columns (Teknokroma) by reverse-phase chromatography. Before storage at -80 °C the peptides were dried using a vacuum centrifuge.  Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry analysis for the method comparison Peptides were resuspended in 30 μlof resuspension buffer (5% v/v acetonitrile, 2% v/v trifluoroacetic acid). Measurements were performed on a Q Exactive HF coupled to an Easy nLC1000 HPLC (Thermo Scientific). 8 μl of the samples were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC reversed-phase column (75 μm inner diameter, 15 cm length, 2 µm bead size (Thermo Scientific)) at a flow rate of 0.4 μl min-1 in a buffer consisting of 3% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid. Peptide elution was facilitated by increasing the acetonitrile gradient from 3% to 30% [v/v]over 110 min, from 30% to 40% for the next 10 min and from 40% to 80% for the last 1 min. The column was then washed with 80% [v/v] acetonitrile for 4 min, at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. Peptide ions were detected in a full scan from mass-to-charge ratio 200 to 2000. MS/MS scans were performed for the ten peptides with the highest MS signal (AGC target 2e5, isolation width mass-to-charge ratio 2 m/z, relative collision energy 30%). Peptides for which MS/MS spectra had been recorded were excluded from further MS/MS scans for 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Peak area based protein quantification and statistical analysis for the method comparison Quantitative analysis of MS/MS measurements was performed with the Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics). Proteins were identified from the raw spectra using Mascot (Matrix Science). Mascot search parameters were: A. thaliana TAIR10 protein annotation17 , requirement for tryptic ends, one missed cleavage allowed, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (cysteine), variable modification: oxidation (methionine), peptide mass tolerance = ± 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance = ± 0.6 Da, allowed peptide charges of +2 and +3. A decoy database search was used to limit false discovery rates to 1% on the protein level. Peptide identifications below rank one or with a Mascot ion score below 25 were excluded. Mascot results were imported into Progenesis QI, quantitative peak area information extracted and the results exported to R statistical software for data plotting and statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
In-gel digestion has been used as a standard method for the preparation of protein samples for mass spectrometry analysis for over 25 years. Traditional in gel-digestion procedures require extensive sample handling, are prone to contamination and not compatible with high-throughput sample preparation. To address these shortcomings, we have modified the conventional in-gel digestion procedure for high-throughput proteomics studies. The modified method, termed "High Throughput in Gel digestion" (HiT-Gel), is based on a 96-well plate format which results in a drastic reduction in labour intensity and sample handling. Direct comparison revealed that HiT-Gel reduces technical variation and significantly decreases sample contamination over the conventional in-gel digestion method. HiT-Gel also produced superior results when a single protein band was excised from a gel and processed by in-gel digestion. Moreover, we applied Hit-Gel for a mass spectrometry analysis of Arabidopsis thaliana protein complexes separated by native PAGE in 24 fractions and four biological replicates. We show that the high throughput capacity of HiT-Gel facilitates large scale studies with high sample replication or detailed fractionation. Our method can easily be implemented as it does not require specialised laboratory equipment.

### Keywords
High-throughput, Fractionation, Native protein complex, Sample preparation, Large-scale, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, In-gel digestion, Tryptic digest

### Affiliations
AG Alexander Graf Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie Wissenschaftspark Golm Am Mühlenberg 1 14476 Potsdam, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology | Celon Pharma

### Submitter
Michal Gorka

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Alexander Graf
AG Alexander Graf Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie Wissenschaftspark Golm Am Mühlenberg 1 14476 Potsdam, Germany


