### Accession
PXD007253

### Title
SILAC proteomics analysis to assess differences in protein expression upon BRCA2 inactivation

### Description
BRCA2 maintains genome stability by facilitating DNA repair via homologous recombination and replication fork stability. Loss of BRCA2 is deleterious for survival of normal cells, but is paradoxically tolerated in cancer cells. Using quantitative mass-spectrometry, differences in protein expression were identified that might shed light on how breast cancer cells (HCC38) survive in the absence of BRCA2.

### Sample Protocol
HCC38 cells were cultured in RPMI, supplemented with 10% FCS and 1% Pen/Strep. Cells were infected with Tet-pLKO-puro, harboring short RNA hairpins (shRNAs) directed against luciferase (5’-AAGAGCTGTTTCTGAGGAGCC-3’) or BRCA2 (#5’-AACAACAATTACGAACCAAACTT-3’). Stable isotope labeling of both cell lines was done using RPMI media with normal Arg and Lys (Light) or Arg10 and Lys6 (heavy) (Silantes). Cells were treated for 48 hours with 1μg/mL doxycycline to activate the hairpins. For SILAC-MS detection, protein concentrations were measured using Bradford assay. Lysates were then mixed in 1:1 ratio of luciferase:BRCA2 for light:heavy labeled cells and label-swapped heavy:light. Two independent experiments were performed including label swap

### Data Protocol
Protein samples were subjected to gel-electrophoresis for size-separation. Each gel slice was further cut into 1 mm pieces and completely destained using 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) in 50% acetonitrile (ACN). A reduction and alkylation step was performed to block cysteines. Briefly, 10 mM DTT in 100 mM ABC was added to the gel pieces and incubated for 30 min at 55°C. Next, 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ABC was added and incubated for 30 min at room temperature. Gel pieces were dehydrated and re-swelled in 10 ng/µl trypsin solution in 100 mM ABC at 37°C overnight. Peptides were fully extracted after incubating with 5% formic acid for 20 min.    Online chromatography of the extracted tryptic peptides was performed using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to a Q-Exactive-Plus mass spectrometer with a NanoFlex source (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with a stainless-steel emitter. Tryptic digests were loaded onto a 5 mm × 300 μm internal diameter (i.d.) trapping micro column packed with PepMAP100, 5 μm particles (Dionex) in 0.1% formic acid at the flow rate of 20 μl/min. After loading and washing for 3 min, trapped peptides were back-flush eluted onto a 50 cm × 75 μm i.d. nanocolumn, packed with Acclaim C18 PepMAP RSLC, 2 μm particles (Dionex). Column temperature was maintained at 40 degr. Celsius. Eluents used were 100:0 H2O/acetonitrile (volume/volume (V/V)) with 0.1% formic acid (Eluent A) and 0:100 H2O/acetonitrile (v/v) with 0.1% formic acid (Eluent B). The following mobile phase gradient was delivered at the flow rate of 300 nl/min: 3–50% of solvent B in 90 min; 50–80% B in 1 min; 80% B during 9 min, and back to 1 % B in 1 min and held at 1% A for 19 min which results in a total run time of 120 min. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) top-12 method dynamically choosing the most abundant not-yet-sequenced precursor ions from the survey scans (300–1650 Th) with a dynamic exclusion of 20 sec. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at mass-to-charge (m/z) 200 with a maximum inject time of 50 ms or AGC 3E6. DDA was performed via higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation with a target value of 5x10E4 ions determined with predictive automatic gain control in centroid mode. Isolation of precursors was performed with a window of 1.6 m/z. Resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200 with a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. Normalized collision energy was set at 28. The S-lens RF level was set at 60 and the capillary temperature was set at 250°C. Precursor ions with single, unassigned, or six and higher charge states were excluded from fragmentation selection.   Mass spectrometry raw files were processed in MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) containing the integrated Andromeda search engine and searched against the human proteome downloaded from the UniProt database (20197 entries), using a false discovery rate of 0.01 at the protein and peptide level. Multiplicity was set to 1 with Lys6 and Arg10 selected as labels. Carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification.  Default parameters were used for all other settings.

### Publication Abstract
Loss of BRCA2 affects genome stability and is deleterious for cellular survival. Using a genome-wide genetic screen in near-haploid KBM-7 cells, we show that tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF&#x3b1;) signaling is a determinant of cell survival upon BRCA2 inactivation. Specifically, inactivation of the TNF receptor (TNFR1) or its downstream effector SAM68 rescues cell death induced by BRCA2 inactivation. BRCA2 inactivation leads to pro-inflammatory cytokine production, including TNF&#x3b1;, and increases sensitivity to TNF&#x3b1;. Enhanced TNF&#x3b1; sensitivity is not restricted to BRCA2 inactivation, as BRCA1 or FANCD2 inactivation, or hydroxyurea treatment also sensitizes cells to TNF&#x3b1;. Mechanistically, BRCA2 inactivation leads to cGAS-positive micronuclei and results in a cell-intrinsic interferon response, as assessed by quantitative mass-spectrometry and gene expression profiling, and requires ASK1 and JNK signaling. Combined, our data reveals that micronuclei induced by loss of BRCA2 instigate a cGAS/STING-mediated interferon response, which encompasses re-wired TNF&#x3b1; signaling and enhances TNF&#x3b1; sensitivity.

### Keywords
Silac breast cancer brca2 hcc38

### Affiliations
Medical Oncology, University Medical Center Groningen
UMCG

### Submitter
Francien Talens

### Lab Head
Dr Marcel A T M van Vugt
Medical Oncology, University Medical Center Groningen


