### Accession
PXD034652

### Title
Free fatty acid and α‐lactalbumin‐oleic acid complexes in preterm human milk are cytotoxic to fetal intestinal cells in vitro

### Description
Human milk, the best enteral selection for a preterm infant, becomes altered during freezing and soluble free fatty acid is generated over time. Free fatty acids may form complexes, such as the oleic acid-bound protein called HAMLET (human α‐lactalbumin made lethal to tumor cells). We determined the in vitro biological activity of preterm human milk protein‐oleic complexes (HAMLET-like complexes) and tested the hypothesis that laboratory-synthesized HAMLET exhibits cytotoxicity in human immature epithelial intestinal cell culture. Thirty-four milk samples from 15 mothers of hospitalized preterm infants were donated over time. Milk fractions were tested repeatedly for FHs 74 Int and HIEC-6 fetal cell cytotoxicity, using a sensitive viability assay. Protein and fatty acid identities were confirmed by Western blot, high performance liquid chromatography, and mass spectrometry. Cytotoxicity of intestinal cells exposed to milk increased respective to milk storage time (p<0.001) and was associated with free oleic acid (p=0.009). Synthesized HAMLET was cytotoxic in cultures of both lines. Preterm milk samples killed most cells in culture after an average 54 days in frozen storage (95% C.I. 34-72 days). After prolonged storage time, preterm milk and HAMLET showed a degree of cytotoxicity to immature intestinal cells in culture. Protein was reduced 221 in 1 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated in 5.5 mM

### Sample Protocol
Gel bands were destained, reduced, and alkylated. The samples were digested with 100ng trypsin overnight at 37C.  The digestion was acidified to 1% formic acid and peptides extracted from gel bands.  Peptides were dried in a speed vac, reconstituted in 5% formic acid, and desalted using C18 Stage Tips (Thermo).  The peptides were dried in a SpeedVac and stored at -80C. Peptides separated and analyzed on an EASY nLC 1200 System (ThermoScientific) in-line with the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (ThermoScientific) with instrument control software v. 4.2.28.14.  Two to ten µg of tryptic peptides are pressure loaded onto C18 reversed phase column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 µm x 50 cm (C18, 2 µm, 100 Å) ThermoFisher cat. # 164536) using a gradient of 5% to 35% B in 180 min (Solvent A: 5% acetonitrile/ 0.1% formic acid; Solvent B: 80% acetonitrile/ 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.    Mass spectra are acquired in data-dependent mode with a high resolution (60,000) FTMS survey scan, mass range of m/z 375-1575, followed by tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) of the most intense precursors with a cycle time of 3 s.  The automatic gain control target value is 4.0e5 for the survey MS scan.  HCD fragmentation is performed with a precursor isolation window of 1.6 m/z, a maximum injection time of 50 ms, and HCD collision energy of 35%.  Monoisotopic-precursor selection was set to “peptide”.  Precursors within 10 ppm mass tolerance are dynamically excluded from resequencing for 15 sec.    Advanced peak determination is not enabled.  Precursor ions with charge states that were undetermined or >6 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
The raw data are searched with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 against a reviewed human database containing 20,386 protein sequences downloaded October 2021. Variable modification of methionine oxidation was included. Static cysteine modification for carbamidomethyl are also included. Up to 2 missed cleavages are allowed with trypsin selected as the enzyme. Protein identifications were filtered to have an Xcorr vs charge state  > 1.5, 2.0, 2.5 for +1, +2, and +3 ions, with at least 2 unique peptides matching the protein, 10ppm peptide mass accuracy, and 0.6Da fragment ion mass accuracy to be considered a positive identification.

### Publication Abstract
Human milk, the best enteral selection for a preterm infant, becomes altered during freezing and soluble free fatty acid is generated over time. Free fatty acids may form complexes, such as the oleic acid-bound protein called HAMLET (human &#x3b1;-lactalbumin made lethal to tumor cells). We determined the <i>in vitro</i> biological activity of preterm human milk protein-oleic complexes (HAMLET-like complexes) and tested the hypothesis that laboratory-synthesized HAMLET exhibits cytotoxicity in human immature epithelial intestinal cell culture. Thirty-four milk samples from 15 mothers of hospitalized preterm infants were donated over time. Milk fractions were tested repeatedly for FHs 74 Int and HIEC-6 fetal cell cytotoxicity, using a sensitive viability assay. Protein and fatty acid identities were confirmed by Western blot, high performance liquid chromatography, and mass spectrometry. Cytotoxicity of intestinal cells exposed to milk increased respective to milk storage time (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.001) and was associated with free oleic acid (<i>p</i> = 0.009). Synthesized HAMLET was cytotoxic in cultures of both lines. Preterm milk samples killed most cells in culture after an average 54 days in frozen storage (95% C.I. 34-72 days). After prolonged storage time, preterm milk and HAMLET showed a degree of cytotoxicity to immature intestinal cells in culture.

### Keywords
Ara - 20:4n-6, Lactoferrin, Fetal intestinal epithelium, Prematurity, Growth, Oleic acid, Hamlet (human alpha-lactalbumin made lethal to tumor cells), Necrotizing entercolitis, Human milk, Alpha-lactalbumin, Free fatty acid, Cytotoxic

### Affiliations
Pediatrics and Neonatology Medical University of South Carolina
Medical University of SC

### Submitter
Jennifer Bethard

### Lab Head
Dr Katherine Chetta
Pediatrics and Neonatology Medical University of South Carolina


