### Accession
PXD025328

### Title
Structural basis of human transcription-DNA repair coupling

### Description
Transcription-coupled DNA repair (TCR) efficiently removes bulky DNA lesions from transcribed parts of the genome and constitutes a major defence against DNA damage by UV irradiation. TCR begins when RNA polymerase II (Pol II) stalls at a DNA lesion and recruits the Cockayne syndrome protein CsB, the E3 ubiquitin ligase complex CRL4CsA, and the UV-stimulated scaffold protein A (UVSSA). Here we provide five high-resolution structures of Pol II transcription complexes with bound TCR factors and complementary biochemical data. Together with published work, our results converge on a model for the molecular mechanism of transcription-DNA repair coupling. In this model, Pol II stalling triggers the formation of an alternative transcription elongation complex that we call ECact. In ECact, CsB has replaced the elongation factor DSIF, binds the PAF1 complex, and repositions upstream DNA such that it contacts the elongation factor SPT6. The CsB translocase now pulls on the upstream DNA template, thereby pushing Pol II forward. If the lesion cannot be bypassed, Pol II gets stably stalled. CRL4CsA spans over the Pol II clamp to reach the Pol II jaw and direct ubiquitination of RPB1 residue lysine-1268. This triggers the recruitment of TFIIH to UVSSA, which is located at downstream DNA, and enables nucleotide excision repair. Finally, large-scale conformational changes in CRL4CsA enable ubiquitination of CsB and the release of TCR factors, thereby allowing Pol II to resume elongation and continue transcription over repaired DNA.

### Sample Protocol
Crosslinking mass-spectrometry Pol II EC were formed as described in the RNA extension assay. DNA and RNA sequences used for EC formation are the following: (TS) CGC TCT GCT CCT TCT CCC ATC CTC TCG ATG GCT ATG AGA TCA ACT AG, (NTS) CTA GTT GAT CTC ATA TTT CAT TCC TAC TCA GGA GAA GGA GCA GAG CG and (RNA) rArUrC rGrAr GrArG rGrA. Equimolar amounts of EC, CsB, CsA-DDB1 and UVSSA were mixed in the final complex formation buffer of 100 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM MgCl2 and 5% glycerol. The complex was incubated at 30 °C for 10 min and subsequently purified over a Superose 6 increase 3.2/300 column equilibrated in complex formation buffer. For BS3 cross-linking the protein solution was supplemented with 1 mM BS3 and incubated at 30 °C for 30 min. The crosslinking was quenched with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. For EDC crosslinking the complex formation buffer contained HEPES pH 6.7 instead of pH 7.5. The protein solution was supplemented with 2 mM EDC and 5 mM sulfo-NHS and incubated at 30 °C for 30 min. The cross-linking reaction was quenched with 50 mM 2-mercaptoethanol and 20 mM Tris pH 7.9.   Analysis of cross-linked peptides was performed as described - the cross-linked proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 minutes at 37 °C and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at 25 °C. Protein digestion was performed overnight in denaturing conditions (1 M urea) with 5 µg of trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C. To the digested samples were added formic acid (FA) and acetonitrile (ACN) to 0.1% (v/v) and 5% (v/v) final concentrations. Samples were purified with Sep-Pak C18 1cc 50 mg sorbent cartridge (Waters) by washing away salts and contaminants with 5% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v)  FA and eluting bound peptides with 80% (v/v)  ACN, 0.1% (v/v)  FA. The extracted peptides were dried under vacuum and resuspended in 30 µl 30% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Size separation of peptides was performed with Superdex Peptide PC3.2/30 column (GE Healthcare) at flow rate of 50 µl/min of 30% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) TFA. 100 µl fractions corresponding to elution volume 1.1ml-2 ml were collected, dried under vacuum and resuspended in 20 µl 2% (v/v) ACN, 0.05% (v/v) TFA.  Ubiquitination analysis The samples for the ubiquitination analysis were produced by in vitro ubiquitination assay as described above. For mass-spectrometry the samples were reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM chloroacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature. Unreacted chloroacetamide was quenched by supplementing additional 5 mM DTT. Proteolytic digestion was performed overnight in denaturing conditions (1 M Urea) with trypsin (Promega) in 1:20 (w/w) protein ratio. The digestion mixtures were acidified with FA to 1% (v/v) end concentration and ACN was added to 5% (v/v) final concentration. Reversed-phase chromatographic purification for mass spectrometric analysis was performed with Harvard Apparatus Micro SpinColumns C18 by washing away salts and contaminants with 5% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA. Purified peptides were eluted with 50% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA. The peptide mixture was dried under vacuum and resuspended in 2% (v/v) ACN, 0.05% (v/v) TFA (5 µl for 1 µg of estimated protein amount before digestion).

### Data Protocol
Crosslinking mass-spectrometry Mass spectrometric analysis was performed on Q Exactive HF-X Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Online chromatographic separation was achieved with an in-house packed C18 column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 30 cm length, Dr. Maisch GmbH). Samples were analyzed as three 5 µl injections, separated on 75 min gradient: flow rate – 300 nl/min; mobile phase A – 0.1% (v/v) FA; mobile phase B – 80% (v/v) ACN, 0.08% (v/v) ACN. The gradient was formed with an increase from 8%/12%/18% mobile phase B to 38%/42%/48% (depending on the fraction). MS1 acquisition was achieved with the following settings: resolution – 120,000; mass range – 380-1580 m/z; injection time – 50 ms; automatic gain control target – 1×10E6. MS2 fragment spectra were collected with dynamic exclusion of 10s and varying normalized collision energy for the different injection replicates (28%/30%/28%-32%) and the following settings: isolation window – 1.4 m/z; resolution – 30,000; injection time – 128 ms; automatic gain control target 2×10E5.  Result raw files were converted to the mgf format with ProteomeDiscoverer 2.1.0.81 (Thermo Fisher Scientific): signal-to-noise ratio – 1.5; precursor mass – 350-7,000 Da. Cross-linked peptides were identified with pLink v2.3.9 (pFind group) and the following parameters: missed cleavage sites – 3; fixed modification – carbamidomethylation of cysteines; variable modification – oxidation of methionines; peptide tolerance – 10 ppm; fragment tolerance – 20 ppm; peptide length – 5-60 amino acids; spectral false discovery rate – 1%. The sequence database was assembled from all proteins within the complex. Cross-link sites were visualized with XiNet and Xlink Analyzer plugin in Chimera. Ubiquitination analysis LC-MS/MS analysis was performed by injecting 4 µl of the samples in Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on in-house packed C18 column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 31 cm length, Dr. Maisch GmbH). Chromatographic separation was achieved with with mobile phase A – 0.1% (v/v) FA and mobile phase B – 80% (v/v) ACN, 0.08% (v/v) ACN. A gradient was formed by the increase of mobile phase B from 5% to 42% in 43 minutes. Eluting peptides were analyzed by data dependent acquisition with the following MS1 parameters: resolution – 60,000; scan range 350-1500 m/z; injection time – 50 ms;  automatic gain control target  - 4×10E5. Analytes with charge states 2-7 were selected for Higher-energy collisional dissociation with 30% normalized collision energy. Dynamic exclusion was set to 10 seconds. Fragment MS2 spectra were acquired with the following settings: isolation window – 1.6 m/z; detector type – orbitrap; resolution – 15,000; injection time – 120 ms; automatic gain control target – 5×10E4. The resulting acquisition files were analyzed with MaxQuant (v 1.6.17.0). Fragment peptide spectra were searched against a database containing the all proteins of the complex and common protein contaminants. Oxidation of methionines, acetylation of protein N-terminus and ubiquitination residue on lysines were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. Default settings were used with the following exceptions: main search peptide tolerance was set to 6 ppm; trypsin was selected for digestion enzyme and maximum missed cleavages were increased to 3.

### Publication Abstract
Transcription-coupled DNA repair removes bulky DNA lesions from the genome<sup>1,2</sup> and protects cells against ultraviolet (UV)&#xa0;irradiation<sup>3</sup>. Transcription-coupled DNA repair begins when RNA polymerase II (Pol II) stalls at a DNA lesion and recruits the Cockayne syndrome protein CSB, the E3 ubiquitin ligase, CRL4<sup>CSA</sup> and UV-stimulated scaffold protein A (UVSSA)<sup>3</sup>. Here we provide five high-resolution structures of Pol II transcription complexes containing human transcription-coupled DNA repair factors and the elongation factors PAF1 complex (PAF) and SPT6. Together with biochemical and published<sup>3,4</sup> data, the structures provide a model for transcription-repair coupling. Stalling of Pol II at a DNA lesion triggers replacement of the elongation factor DSIF by CSB, which binds to PAF and moves upstream DNA to SPT6. The resulting elongation complex, EC<sup>TCR</sup>, uses the CSA-stimulated translocase activity of CSB to pull on upstream DNA and push Pol&#xa0;II forward. If the lesion cannot be bypassed, CRL4<sup>CSA</sup> spans over the Pol II clamp and ubiquitylates the RPB1 residue K1268, enabling recruitment of TFIIH to UVSSA and DNA repair. Conformational changes in CRL4<sup>CSA</sup> lead to ubiquitylation of CSB and to release of transcription-coupled DNA repair factors before transcription may continue over repaired DNA.

### Keywords
Protein-protein crosslinking, Transcription-dna repair, Ubiquitination analysis

### Affiliations
MPIbpc
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Molecular Biology, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany

### Submitter
Aleksandar Chernev

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Cramer
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Molecular Biology, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany


