### Accession
PXD033387

### Title
Interactions between paralogous bacterial enhancer binding proteins enable metal-dependent regulation of alternative nitrogenases in Azotobacter vinelandii

### Description
All diazotrophic bacteria and archaea isolated so far utilise a nitrogenase enzyme containing molybdenum in the active site co-factor to fix atmospheric dinitrogen to ammonia. However, in addition to the Mo-dependent nitrogenase, some nitrogen-fixing prokaryotes also express genetically distinct alternative nitrogenase isoenzymes, namely the V-dependent and Fe-only nitrogenases respectively.  Nitrogenase isoenzymes are expressed hierarchically according to metal availability and catalytic efficiency.  In proteobacteria, this hierarchy is maintained via stringent transcriptional regulation of gene clusters by dedicated bacterial enhancer binding proteins (bEBPs). The model diazotroph Azotobacter vinelandii contains two paralogs of the vanadium nitrogenase activator VnfA (henceforth, VnfA1), designated VnfA2 and VnfA3, with unknown functions.  Here we demonstrate that the VnfA1 and VnfA3 bEBPs bind to the same target promoters in the Azotobacter vinelandii genome and co-activate a subset of genes in the absence of V, including the structural genes for the Fe only nitrogenase. Co-activation is inhibited by the presence of V and is dependent on an accessory protein VnfZ that is co-expressed with VnfA3. Our studies uncover a plethora of interactions between bEBPs required for nitrogen fixation, revealing unprecedented potential for fine tuning expression of alternative nitrogenases in response to metal availability.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to Co-IP, cultures were grown exactly as described for the ChIP-seq sample preparation either in the presence or absence of V (Fe-only conditions).  For each strain and growth condition, triplicate exponentially grown cultures (O.D600nm 0.5 – 0.6 ) were cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde (Sigma F8775) at 30°C and 250 rpm. Following cross-link quenching with 125 mM glycine, cells were collected by centrifugation (6,500 x g, 4°C, 5 min) at 4°C and washed twice with ice-cold PBS (Sigma P4417) and resuspended in 1 mL of lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton® X-100, 50 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0) amended with 1x cOmplete™ Mini EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche 118361170001) as recommended by the manufacturer. Samples were then lysed by sonication in a water-ice bath (8 x 15 sec on followed by 15 sec off at 8 microns amplitude). After sonication, the lysate was centrifuged twice (16,000 × g, 4°C, 5 min) and the supernatant retained in a fresh tube. VnfA1-FLAG and VnfA3-FLAG proteins were pulled down from the cleared protein extract using the μMACS epitope tag protein isolation kit (Miltenyi Biotec FLAG 130-101-591) and eluted from the μ columns (Miltenyi Biotec 130-042-701) with SDS-PAGE sample buffer (50 mM Tris HCl pH 6.8, 50 mM DTT, 1% SDS, 1 mM EDTA, 0.005% bromophenol blue, 10% glycerol) as recommended by the manufacturer. Equivalent amounts of the pulled down lysate were then loaded onto a 10% acrylamide resolving gel and ran briefly until the dye front entered the gel (150 V per gel for 3-5 minutes). Each sample was then cut out and the gel slices were prepared from mass spectrometry as previously described using standard procedures.  Briefly, the gel slices were de-stained with 30% ethanol, washed with 50 mM TEAB buffer pH 8.0 (Sigma), incubated with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 65 °C followed by incubation with 30 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature  (both DTT and IAA solutions were prepared in 50 mM TEAB). After a final wash step with 50% acetonitrile in 50 mM TEAB, the gel was dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile and dried under vacuum. Finally, the gels were soaked with 50 mM TEAB containing 10 ng/µl Sequencing Grade Trypsin (Promega) and incubated at 40 °C for 8 h. The resulting peptides were prepared for liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and identified using an Orbitrap Eclipse™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer coupled to an UltiMate® 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK). Data were acquired with the following mass spectrometer settings in positive ion mode: MS1/OT: resolution 120K, profile mode, mass range m/z 300-1800, spray voltage 2800 V, AGC 4e5, maximum injection time of 50 ms; MS2/IT: data dependent analysis was performed using HCD and CID fragmentation with the following parameters: top20 in IT rapid, centroid mode, isolation window 1.0 Da, charge states 2-5, threshold 1.0e4, CE = 33, AGC target 1.0e4, max. inject time 35 ms, dynamic exclusion 1 count, 15 s exclusion, exclusion mass window ±10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Recalibrated peaklists were generated with MaxQuant 2.0.1.0 in LFQ mode using the A. vinelandii protein sequence database (from Uniprot, downloaded on 24/08/2021, 5,241 entries) plus the Maxquant contaminants database (250 entries). The quantitative LFQ results from MaxQuant with default parameters were used together with search results from an in-house Mascot Server 2.7 (Matrixscience, London, UK) on the same databases. All Mascot searches were collated and verified with Scaffold v.5 (Proteome Software). Proteins were identified using identification probabilities of 99% for proteins (minimal 5 unique peptides) and 95% for peptides. The quantitative spectra value in Scaffold from both the tagged (VnfA1-FLAG; CAA005  or VnfA3-FLAG; CAA025 ) and untagged (wild type, DJ) strains, generated from each of three independent experiments were used for further differential expression analysis using the Benjamini-Hochberg test for multiple corrections. The analysis was performed using the statistical functions built into Scaffold v.5 (Proteome Software) following the developer’s instructions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alternative nitrogenases, Lc-msms, Azotobacter, Co-ip

### Affiliations
Group Leader, Department of Molecular Microbiology
John Innes Centre

### Submitter
Carlo de Oliveira Martins

### Lab Head
Dr Ray Dixon
Group Leader, Department of Molecular Microbiology


