### Accession
PXD034630

### Title
Designed high-redox potential laccases exhibit high functional diversity

### Description
White-rot fungi secrete an impressive repertoire of high-redox potential laccases (HRPLs) and peroxidases for efficient oxidation and utilization of lignin. Laccases are attractive enzymes for green-chemistry applications due to their broad substrate range and low environmental impact. Since expression of functional recombinant HRPLs is challenging, iterative directed evolution protocols have been applied to improve their expression, activity and stability. We implement a rational, stabilize-and-diversify strategy to two HRPLs that we could not functionally express: first, we use the PROSS stability-design algorithm to allow functional expression in yeast. Second, we use the stabilized enzymes as starting points for FuncLib active-site design to improve their activity and substrate diversity. Four of the FuncLib designed HRPLs and their PROSS progenitor exhibit substantial diversity in reactivity profiles against high-redox potential substrates, including lignin monomers. Combinations of 3-4 subtle mutations that change the polarity, solvation and sterics of the substrate-oxidation site explain the differences in reactivity profiles. These stable and versatile HRPLs are a step towards the generation of an effective lignin-degrading consortium of enzymes that can be secreted from yeast. More broadly, the stabilize-and-diversify strategy can be applied to other challenging enzyme families to expand the utility of natural enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
Gel bands of the N-deglycosylated Th3 were excised from the gel, sliced into 1-2mm pieces and placed in a microcentrifuge tube. The bands were destained with 25mM NH4HCO3 in 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and then vacuum dried. Protein disulfide bonds were reduced by saturating the dry gel bands with 10 mM dithiothreitol in 25 mM NH4HCO3 at 56°C for 1 hour and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM NH4HCO3 in the dark for 45 min at room temperature. Bands were washed twice with 25 mM NH4HCO3 and twice with 25mM NH4HCO3 in 50% ACN, then vacuum dried followed by rehydrating them with 500ng trypsin in 25mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 37°C. Peptides were then extracted by addition of 50% ACN/5% formic acid, vortexed, centrifuged, and the supernatant collected. The digestions were stopped by addition of trifluroacetic acid (1% final concentration). Three SDS-PAGE bands of the N-deglycosylated Th3 were subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion, followed by a desalting step. ULC/MS grade solvents were used for all chromatographic steps. Each sample was loaded using split-less nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (10 kpsi nanoAcquity; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile phase was: A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and B) acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were then separated using an Aurora (75 µm internal diameter, 250 mm length, Bruker Daltonics) at 0.30 µL/min. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 2% to 30%B in 29 min, 30% to 90%B in 3 min, maintained at 90% for 0.5 min and then back to initial conditions. The nanoUPLC was coupled online through a Captive Spray emitter to an ion mobility-time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonics). Data was acquired in data dependent acquisition (DDA)-PASEF mode. Scan range was set to 100-1700 m/z and ion mobility 1/k0 ranged 0.60-1.60 V-s/cm2.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched using Byonic v.4.3.4 search engine (ProteinMetrics) against the Uniprot S. cerevisiae proteome database (January 2022 version, 6,050 entries), concatenated with the Th3 laccase sequence and common lab contaminants. Search allowed for fixed Carbamidomethylation on C, variable oxidation on MP and variable deamidation on NQ. Results were filtered for an estimated 1% FDR on the protein level.

### Publication Abstract
White-rot fungi secrete an impressive repertoire of high-redox potential laccases (HRPLs) and peroxidases for efficient oxidation and utilization of lignin. Laccases are attractive enzymes for the chemical industry due to their broad substrate range and low environmental impact. Since expression of functional recombinant HRPLs is challenging, however, iterative-directed evolution protocols have been applied to improve their expression, activity, and stability. We implement a rational, stabilize-and-diversify strategy to two HRPLs that we could not functionally express. First, we use the PROSS stability-design algorithm to allow functional expression in yeast. Second, we use the stabilized enzymes as starting points for FuncLib active-site design to improve their activity and substrate diversity. Four of the FuncLib-designed HRPLs and their PROSS progenitor exhibit substantial diversity in reactivity profiles against high-redox potential substrates, including lignin monomers. Combinations of 3-4 subtle mutations that change the polarity, solvation, and sterics of the substrate-oxidation site result in orders of magnitude changes in reactivity profiles. These stable and versatile HRPLs are a step toward generating an effective lignin-degrading consortium of enzymes that can be secreted from yeast. The stabilize-and-diversify strategy can be applied to other challenging enzyme families to study and expand the utility of natural enzymes.

### Keywords
Pross, Enzyme promiscuity, Funclib, Lignin degradation, Protein stability, Enzyme design, Heterologous expression, Laccase

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7600001, Israel

### Submitter
Meital Kupervaser

### Lab Head
Dr Sarel J. Fleishman
Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7600001, Israel


