### Accession
PXD003670

### Title
Carcinoma-associated fibroblasts stimulate cancer cell invasion by mechanically remodeling the basement membrane

### Description
The first step in metastasis is dissemination of tumor cells into the surrounding tissue, or stroma. In carcinomas, cancers of epithelial origin, tumor cells must first breach the basement membrane (BM), a network that encapsulates the tumor. As tumor progresses, other cell types that reside in the stroma, such as carcinoma-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) accumulate around the tumor. Whether CAFs can help cancer cells to breach the BM remains an open question. Here we show that CAFs promote cancer cell invasion by physically remodeling the BM. Using a novel 3D in vitro model we observed that primary CAFs isolated from colon cancer patients stimulate cancer cell invasion through a native mesenteric BM. This stimulated invasion is the result of the physical presence of CAFs rather than an increased invasive potential of cancer cells. In the presence of CAFs, cancer cells can invade the BM in a matrix metalloproteinase-independent manner. Using live imaging, we found that CAFs actively pull and stretch the BM, leading to the formation of gaps through which cancer cells can migrate. Notably, CAF-mediated gap-widening is independent of proteolysis but relies on actomyosin contractility. We propose that CAFs exert mechanical forces that alter the organization and the physical properties of the BM, making it permissive for cancer cell invasion.

### Sample Protocol
To prepare SILAC media, SILAC DMEM lacking two amino acids, arginine and lysine was (Life technologies) was supplemented with their isotopically labeled counterparts. The isotopic label was “heavy” when the medium was supplemented with 4, 4, 5, 5-D4 L-Lysine-2HCL (0,4 mM) and 13C6N4 L-Arginine (0,8 mM), “medium” when supplemented with 13C615N2 L-Lysine-2HCL (0,4 mM) and 13C6 L-Arginine-HCL (0,8 mM) and “light” when supplemented with L-Lysine-2HCL (0,4 mM) and L-Arginine-HCL (0,8 mM). The resulting “heavy”, “medium” and “light” SILAC media were supplemented with 10% SILAC FBS. 3x105 fibroblasts were cultured for at least 6 divisions (8 to 15 days depending on their proliferation rate) in their corresponding media. CAFs were cultured in “Heavy” while J-CAFs in “Medium” medium. In the same time, co-cultures of 3x105 CAFs with 1,2x105 HCT116 and 3x105 j-CAFs with 1,2x105 HCT116 were cultured with “Light” medium. Cells were washed 5 times with PBS and then cultured for 48 hours with serum-free “Light” medium, in order to eliminate all traces of serum in the cultures. After the 48h, the “Light” conditional medium (CM) of the co-cultures was collected. “Heavy” CAFs and “Medium” j-CAFs were also washed and starved in 7ml serum-free “Heavy” and “Medium” media, respectively; and incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2. After 48h, 3ml of the “Light” CM (co-culture CAFs-HCT116) was added to the “heavy” CAFs on 10cm 30kPa plates and 3ml of the CM from the co-culture j-CAFs-HCT116 was added to the “medium” j-CAFs respectively. Using this procedure, we aimed to stimulate CAFs and j-CAFs with conditioned medium (CM) coming from co-cultures of cancer cells and fibroblasts, therefore containing all the cross talk-derived molecules.   After 48h hours, the CM of CAFs and j-CAFs was collected and mixed in equal numbers accordingly with the number of cells, in order to have a 1:1 ratio. Mixed CM was filtered through 0,20µm pore size filters and analyzed by mass spectrometry. For the total proteome analysis, “Heavy” CAFs and “Medium” j-CAFs were detached from their substrate using trypsin, mixed in equal numbers, spun down (1000 rpm for 3min), washed with cold PBS and lysed with lysis Buffer for 10min at 4°C. The Lysates were pelleted for 10min @ 4°C and the supernatant was analyzed by mass spectrometry. The stable isotope labeling ratio was calculated by using a fraction of the different “cells” and analyzing by LC-MS/MS after protein in-gel separation and digestion of a blue band. The incorporation rates calculated from all quantified proteins were above 95%.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed at the Institut Curie laboratoire de spectrométrie de masse protéomique. Raw MS files from the Orbitrap were analyzed via the MascotTM (2.3, Matrix Science Ltd) software created with Proteome DiscovererTM (1.4, Thermo Scientific) or Sequest HT using the Uniprot Human database (032015). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two miss cleavages was allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation, carbamidomethyl cysteine, label 13C615N2 Lysine and label 2H4 lysine were set as variable modifications. For identification, the false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% with Percolator q-values. The resulting files were further processed by using the Institut Curie-developed software myProMS  version 3.0 (work in progress) which performs search engine results validation, false positive rate (FDR)-based data filtering, protein quantification, statistical analysis and data visualization. For SILAC-based protein quantification, peptides XICs (Extracted Ion Chromatograms) were retrieved from Proteome DiscovererTM. Scale normalization was applied to compensate for mixing errors of the different SILAC cultures as described by Yang et al . Protein ratios were computed as the geometrical mean of related peptides. To estimate ratio significance, a t test was performed with a Benjamin–Hochberg FDR control threshold set to 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
At the stage of carcinoma in situ, the basement membrane (BM) segregates tumor cells from the stroma. This barrier must be breached to allow dissemination of the tumor cells to adjacent tissues. Cancer cells can perforate the BM using proteolysis; however, whether stromal cells play a role in this process remains unknown. Here we show that an abundant stromal cell population, cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), promote cancer cell invasion through the BM. CAFs facilitate the breaching of the BM in a matrix metalloproteinase-independent manner. Instead, CAFs pull, stretch, and soften the BM leading to the formation of gaps through which cancer cells can migrate. By exerting contractile forces, CAFs alter the organization and the physical properties of the BM, making it permissive for cancer cell invasion. Blocking the ability of stromal cells to exert mechanical forces on the BM could therefore represent a new therapeutic strategy against aggressive tumors.Stromal cells play various roles in tumor establishment and metastasis. Here the authors, using an ex-vivo model, show that cancer-associated fibroblasts facilitate colon cancer cells invasion in a matrix metalloproteinase-independent manner, likely by pulling and stretching the basement membrane to form gaps.

### Keywords
Cell invasion, Caf, Silac, Secretome, Basement membrane

### Affiliations
Institut Curie
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Protéomique (LSMP), Institut Curie, PSL Research University, France

### Submitter
Guillaume Arras

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Protéomique (LSMP), Institut Curie, PSL Research University, France


