### Accession
PXD033644

### Title
Transforming chemical proteomics into high-throughput method using SP2E workflow.

### Description
Protein post-translational modifications (PTMs) play a critical role in regulation of protein catalytic activity, localization and protein-protein interactions. An attachment of PTMs onto proteins significantly diversify their structure and function resulting in so called proteoforms. However, the sole identification of post-translationally modified proteins, which are often cell type and disease specific, is still a highly challenging task. Sub-stoichiometric amounts and modification of low abundant proteins necessitate purification or enrichment of the modified proteins. Introduction of the mass spectrometry-based chemical proteomic strategy has enabled to screen protein PTMs with increased throughput, but the sample preparation has remained highly time consuming and tedious. Here, we report an optimized workflow for enrichment of PTM proteins in 96-well plate format which could be extended to robotic automation. This platform allows to significantly lower the input of total protein, which opens up the possibility to screen specialized and difficult to culture cell lines in high-throughput manner. The presented SP2E protocol is robust, time- and cost-effective as well as suitable for large-scale screening of proteoforms. Application of the SP2E protocol will thus enable the characterization of proteoforms in various processes such as neurodevelopment, neurodegeneration and cancer. This may contribute to an overall acceleration of the recently launched Human Proteoform Project.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, lysates were clicked to biotin-PEG-N3 with CuAAC or to DBCO-PEG-biotin with SPAAC. Then, the reagents of the click reactions were removed using carboxylate-coated magnetic beads clean-up protocol. After elution of the proteins from the carboxylate-coated, the biotinylated proteins were enriched by streptavidin-coated magnetic beads. Subsequently, the proteins were digested overnight by trypsin. On the 96-well plate, peptides were measured directly without desalting, while samples prepared in Eppendorf tubes were desalted before the MS-measurement. MS-measurements were performed on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 Nano-HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and FAIMS interface (Thermo Fisher Scientific). First, peptides were loaded on an Acclaim PepMap 100 µ-precolumn cartridge (5 µm, 100 Å, 300 µm ID x 5 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Then, peptides were separated at 40 °C on a PicoTip emitter (noncoated, 15 cm, 75 µm ID, 8 µm tip, New Objective) that was in house packed with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ material (1.9 µm, 150 Å, Dr. A. Maisch GmbH). The gradient was run from 4-35.2% acetonitrile supplemented with 0.1% formic acid during a 150 min method (0-5 min 4%, 5-6 min to 7%, 7-105 min to 24.8%, 105-126 min to 35.2%, 126-140 80%, 140-150 min 4%) at a ow rate of 300 nL/min. FAIMS was performed with two alternating CVs including -50 V and -70 V. For measurements of chemical-proteomics samples, the Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer was operated in dd-MS2 mode with following settings: Polarity: positive; MS1 resolution: 240k; MS1 AGC target: standard; MS1 maximum injection time: 50 ms, MS1scan range: m/z 375-1500; MS2 ion trap scan rate: rapid; MS2 AGC target: standard; MS2 maximum injection time: 35 ms; MS2 cycle time: 1.7 s; MS2 isolation window: m/z 1.2; HCD stepped normalised collision energy: 30%; intensity threshold: 1.0e4 counts; included charge states: 2-6; dynamic exclusion: 60 s.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant raw files were analysed using MaxQuant software 2.0.1.0 with the Andromeda search engine. Searches were performed against the Uniprot database for Homo sapiens (taxon identifier: 9606, March 2020). At least two unique peptides were required for protein identification. False discovery rate determination was carried out using a decoy database and thresholds were set to 1 % FDR both at peptide-spectrum match and at protein levels. LFQ quantification was used as described for each sample. Statistical analysis of the MaxQuant result table proteinGroups.txt was done with Perseus 1.6.10.43. Putative contaminants and reverse hits were removed. Normalized LFQ intensities were log2-transformed, hits with less than 3 valid values in each group were removed and missing values were replaced from normal distribution. The -log10(p-values) were obtained by a two-sided one sample Student’s t-test over replicates with the initial significance level of p = 0.05 adjustment by the multiple testing correction method of Benjamini and Hochberg (FDR = 0.05) using the volcano plot function.

### Publication Abstract
Protein post-translational modifications (PTMs) play a critical role in the regulation of protein catalytic activity, localization, and protein-protein interactions. Attachment of PTMs onto proteins significantly diversifies their structure and function, resulting in proteoforms. However, the sole identification of post-translationally modified proteins, which are often cell type and disease-specific, is still a highly challenging task. Substoichiometric amounts and modifications of low abundant proteins necessitate the purification or enrichment of the modified proteins. Although the introduction of mass spectrometry-based chemical proteomic strategies has enabled the screening of protein PTMs with increased throughput, sample preparation remains highly time-consuming and tedious. Here, we report an optimized workflow for the enrichment of PTM proteins in a 96-well plate format, which could be extended to robotic automation. This platform allows us to significantly lower the input of total protein, which opens up the opportunity to screen specialized and difficult-to-culture cell lines in a high-throughput manner. The presented SP2E protocol is robust and time- and cost-effective, as well as suitable for large-scale screening of proteoforms. The application of the SP2E protocol will thus enable the characterization of proteoforms in various processes such as neurodevelopment, neurodegeneration, and cancer. This may contribute to an overall acceleration of the recently launched Human Proteoform Project.

### Keywords
Method development, Ampylation

### Affiliations
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Junior Group Dr. Kielkowski
LMU Munich, Department of Chemistry

### Submitter
Tobias Becker

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Pavel Kielkowski
LMU Munich, Department of Chemistry


