### Accession
PXD006820

### Title
Secretome analysis of hypoxia-induced 3T3-L1 adipocytes uncovers novel proteins potentially involved in obesity

### Description
In the obese state, as adipose tissue expands, adipocytes become hypoxic and dysfunctional, leading to changes in the pattern of secreted proteins. To better understand the role of hypoxia in the mechanisms linked to obesity, we comparatively analyzed the secretome of differentiated 3T3-L1 adipocytes exposed to normoxia or hypoxia for 24 h. Proteins secreted into the culture media were precipitated using trichloroacetic acid and then digested by trypsin. Peptides were labeled by dimethyl labeling and analyzed by reversed phase nanoscale liquid chromatography coupled to a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Among factors downregulated in hypoxic conditions, we identified Decorin, a member of the leucine-rich proteoglycan family, Tissue Inhibitor of Metalloproteinase-2, Thrombospondin 1 and 2, all multifunctional proteins involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) homeostasis, and angiogenesis. Most findings were confirmed by expression studies of the relative genes in parallel experiments in vitro, in differentiated 3T3-L1 adipocytes, and in vivo, in fat tissues from obese vs. lean rats. Our observations are compatible with the concept that hypoxia may be an early trigger for ECM remodeling and angiogenesis in adipose tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Adipocytes were maintained in either normoxic (21% O2) or hypoxic (2% O2) conditions for 24 hours. Conditioned media were collected. Proteins were precipitated, and resuspended in a buffer containing 6M urea at pH 8.0. Proteins were subjected to cysteine reduction and alkylation before being digested overnight by trypsin. Tryptic peptides were purified by C18 StageTips (EmporeTM-3M, C18 Extraction Disks) and subjected to either “light” (L) or “medium” (M) Dimethyl Labeling in forward/reverse labeling mode (L:M and M:L). Samples were fractionated by SCX StageTips (n= 6 fractions), and analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer using a Top-12 Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method. Chromatography was performed on a home made 75 μm i.d. column (length: 10 cm) on a 55 minutes gradient at 300 nL/min

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the software MaxQuant version 1.6.0.16, using default parameters for dimethyl labeled peptides, with the following exceptions: minimum peak length: 3; minimum ratio count: 1 unique + razor peptide. Raw data were searched using Andromeda as search engine, and the Swiss Prot mouse database as sequence database (October 2017, 51949 sequences).

### Publication Abstract
In the obese state, as adipose tissue expands, adipocytes become hypoxic and dysfunctional, leading to changes in the pattern of adipocyte-secreted proteins. To better understand the role of hypoxia in the mechanisms linked to obesity, we comparatively analyzed the secretome of murine differentiated 3T3-L1 adipocytes exposed to normoxia or hypoxia for 24 h. Proteins secreted into the culture media were precipitated by trichloroacetic acid and then digested with trypsin. The peptides were labeled with dimethyl labeling and analyzed by reversed phase nanoscale liquid chromatography coupled to a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer. From a total of 1508 identified proteins, 109 were differentially regulated, of which 108 were genuinely secreted. Factors significantly downregulated in hypoxic conditions included adiponectin, a known adipokine implicated in metabolic processes, as well as thrombospondin-1 and -2, and matrix metalloproteinase-11, all multifunctional proteins involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) homeostasis. Findings were validated by Western blot analysis. Expression studies of the relative genes were performed in parallel experiments in vitro, in differentiated 3T3-L1 adipocytes, and in vivo, in fat tissues from obese versus lean mice. Our observations are compatible with the concept that hypoxia may be an early trigger for both adipose cell dysfunction and ECM remodeling.

### Keywords
Obesity, Lc-ms/ms, Hypoxia, Secretome, Adipocytes

### Affiliations
Department of Health Sciences, University “Magna Græcia”  of Catanzaro, Viale Europa (Località Germaneto), 88100  Catanzaro, Italy
University of Catanzaro

### Submitter
Mariaconcetta Varano

### Lab Head
Dr Antonio Brunetti
Department of Health Sciences, University “Magna Græcia”  of Catanzaro, Viale Europa (Località Germaneto), 88100  Catanzaro, Italy


