### Accession
PXD003870

### Title
Interactomics of the RLTPR protein explain its essential role for costimulation via CD28

### Description
The RLTPR cytosolic protein has an essential role in CD28 costimulation but its mode of action and importance in human T cells remain elusive. Here, using mass spectrometry we showed that CD28, RLTPR and the CARMA1 cytosolic adaptor physically associate in mouse T cells. Although RLTPR is thought to function as an actin-uncapping protein, this property was dispensable for CD28 costimulation. Our findings underpin the convergent function of RLTPR in T cells and suggest that its scaffolding role predominates during CD28 costimulation.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification of protein complexe was done using Equal amount of postnuclear lysates incubated with prewashed Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads (IBA GmbH) for 1.5 h at 4 °C on a rotary wheel. Beads were then washed 5 times with 1 ml of lysis buffer in the absence of detergent and of protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Proteins were eluted from the Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads with 2.5 mM D-biotin. Protein extract were loaded on NuPAGE 4-12% bis-Tris acrylamide gels (Life Technologies) to stack proteins in a single band that was stained with Imperial Blue (Pierce, Rockford, IL) and cut from the gel. Gels pieces were submitted to an in-gel trypsin digestion56 with slight modifications. Briefly, gel pieces were washed and destained using 100 mM NH4HCO3. Destained gel pieces were shrunk with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile and dried at room temperature. Protein spots were then rehydrated using 10 mM DTT in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 for 45 min at 56 °C. This solution was replaced by 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 and the gel pieces were incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. They were then washed twice in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and finally shrunk by incubation for 5 min with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile. The resulting alkylated gel pieces were dried at room temperature. The dried gel pieces were reswollen by incubation in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 supplemented with trypsin (12.5 ng/l; Promega) for 1 h at 4°C and then incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were harvested by collecting the initial digestion solution and carrying out two extractions; first in 5% formic acid and then in 5% formic acid in 60% acetonitrile. Pooled extracts were dried down in a centrifugal vacuum system. Samples were reconstitued with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acide in 4% acetonitrile and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in an LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) online with a nanoLC Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). Peptides were separated on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column. First peptides were concentrated and purified on a pre-column from Dionex (C18 PepMap100, 2 cm x 100 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 5 µm particle size) in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile). In the second step, peptides were separated on a reverse phase column from Dionex (C18 PepMap100, 15 cm x 75 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 2µm particle size) at 300 nL/min flow rate. After column equilibration using 4% of solvent B (20% water - 80% acetonitrile - 0.1% formic acid), peptides were eluted from the analytical column by a two steps linear gradient (4-20% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid for 90 min and 20-45-45% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid for 30 min). For peptide ionisation in the nanospray source, spray voltage was set at 1.4 kV and the capillary temperature at 275 °C. The Orbitrap Velos was set up in data dependent mode to switch consistently between MS and MS/MS. MS spectra were acquired with the Orbitrap in the range of m/z 400-1700 at a FWHM resolution of 30 000 measured at 400 m/z. For internal mass calibration the 445.120025 ions was used as lock mass. The 10 abundant precursor ions were selected and collision-induced dissociation fragmentation was performed in the ion trap on the 10 most intense precursor ions measured to have maximum sensitivity and yield a maximum amount of MS/MS data. The signal threshold for an MS/MS event was set to 500 counts. Charge state screening was enabled to exclude precursors with 0 and 1 charge states. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1, exclusion list size 500 and exclusion duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Relative intensity-based label-free quantification (LFQ) was processed using the MaxLFQ algorithm from the freely available MaxQuant computational proteomics platform, version 1.5.2.8. The acquired raw LC Orbitrap MS data were first processed using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against a SwissProt mouse database (version 2014.07). This databasis was supplemented with a set of 245 frequently observed contaminants.  The following parameters were used for searches : (i) trypsin allowing cleavage before proline; (ii) two missed cleavages were allowed; (ii) monoisotopic precursor tolerance of 20 ppm in the first search used for recalibration, followed by 4.5 ppm for the main search and 0.5 Da for fragment ions from MS/MS ; (iii) cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.02146) as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation (+15.99491) and N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106) as variable modifications; (iv) a maximum of five modifications per peptide allowed; and (v) minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids and a maximum mass of 4,600 Da. The match between runs option was enabled to transfer identifications across different LC-MS/MS replicates based on their masses and retention time within a match time window of 0.7 min and using an alignment time window of 20min. The quantification was performed using a minimum ratio count of 1 (unique+razor) and the second peptide option to allow identification of two co-fragmented co-eluting peptides with similar masses. The false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide level and protein level were set to 1% and determined by searching a reverse database. For protein grouping, all proteins that cannot be distinguished based on their identified peptides were assembled into a single entry according to the MaxQuant rules. The statistical analysis was done with Perseus program (version 1.5.1.6) from the MaxQuant environment (www.maxquant.org). The LFQ normalised intensities were uploaded from the proteinGroups.txt file. First, proteins marked as contaminant, reverse hits, and “only identified by site” were discarded. Quantifiable proteins were defined as those detected in at least 100% of samples in at least one condition. Protein LFQ intensities were base 2 logarithmized to obtain a normal distribution. Missing values were replaced using data imputation by randomly selecting from a normal distribution centred on the lower edge of the intensity values that simulates signals of low abundant proteins using default parameters (a downshift of 1.8 standard deviation and a width of 0.3 of the original distribution). In this way, imputation of missing values in the controls allows statistical comparison of protein abundances that are present only in the immunoprecipitation samples. Multiple t-tests ANOVA and two-sample t-test were done using permutation based FDR-controlled at 0.05 and employing 250 permutations. The p value was adjusted using a scaling factor s0 with a value of 2. To determine whether a given detected protein was specifically associated with the bait, we compared the distributions of normalized log intensities between wild-type and RLTPROST backgrounds by computing the p value from a one-way ANOVA test along with the fold-change. Proteins were selected as specific partners of the bait when both the p-value was below p=0.05 and the corresponding enrichment was greater than 3-fold.

### Publication Abstract
The RLTPR cytosolic protein, also known as CARMIL2, is essential for CD28 co-stimulation in mice, but its importance in human T cells and mode of action remain elusive. Here, using affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry analysis, we showed that RLTPR acts as a scaffold, bridging CD28 to the CARD11/CARMA1 cytosolic adaptor and to the NF-&#x3ba;B signaling pathway, and identified proteins not found before within the CD28 signaling pathway. We further demonstrated that RLTPR is essential for CD28 co-stimulation in human T cells and that its noncanonical pleckstrin-homology domain, leucine-rich repeat domain, and proline-rich region were mandatory for that task. Although RLTPR is thought to function as an actin-uncapping protein, this property was dispensable for CD28 co-stimulation in both mouse and human. Our findings suggest that the scaffolding role of RLTPR predominates during CD28 co-stimulation and underpins the similar function of RLTPR in human and mouse T cells. Along that line, the lack of functional RLTPR molecules impeded the differentiation toward Th1 and Th17 fates of both human and mouse CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells. RLTPR was also expressed in both human and mouse B cells. In the mouse, RLTPR did not play, however, any detectable role in BCR-mediated signaling and T cell-independent B cell responses.

### Keywords
Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Rltpr

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
Marseille Proteomique, Inserm U1068, CNRS UMR 7258, Aix Marseille University UM105,

### Submitter
Luc Camoin

### Lab Head
Dr Luc Camoin
Marseille Proteomique, Inserm U1068, CNRS UMR 7258, Aix Marseille University UM105,


