### Accession
PXD012888

### Title
Single shot CZE-MS/MS for phosphoproteomics

### Description
The dependence of capillary zone electrophoresis separations on the charge state of analyte is useful for the analysis of many post-translational modifications in proteins. In this work, we coupled CZE to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid platform with advanced peak determination algorithm for phosphoproteomics analysis. A linear polyacrylamide coated capillary with very low electroosmotic flow was used for the separation. The optimal injection volume is between 100 nL and 150 nL of phosphopeptides dissolved in 30 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.2) buffer, which produces a dynamic pH junction sample injection. Larger injection volumes resulted in serious peak broadening and decreased numbers of phosphopeptide identifications. The optimized system identified 4405 phosphopeptides from 220 ng of enriched phosphopeptides from mouse brain, which represents the state-of-the-art result for single shot CZE-ESI-MS/MS based phosphoproteome analysis.

### Sample Protocol
4 mg of mouse brain tryptic peptides were dissolved in 80% acetonitrile and 6% TFA (IMAC wash solution) and enriched for phosphopeptides using Titanium(IV) immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography.  In brief, the beads were washed twice with IMAC wash solution, incubated with the sample on a shaker for 30 min, washed again three times with IMAC wash solution, once with 80% acetonitrile, once with 0.5 M glycolic acid/80% acetonitrile, and once again with 80% acetonitrile.  Phosphopeptides were eluted with 1% ammonium hydroxide/50% acetonitrile.  Phospho-depleted peptides, for protein analyses, were saved from the unbound portion following the incubation step.     the linear poly(acrylamide) (LPA) coated capillaries was prepared by surface-confined aqueous reversible-addition fragmentation transfer polymerization method. The fused silica capillary was pretreated by flushing 0.1 M NaOH for 2 h, flushing with water until the outflow reached pH ~7.0, flushing with 0.1 M HCl for 12 h, and flushing again with water until the outflow reached pH ~7.0. The capillary was finally dried with a nitrogen stream overnight at room temperature. Then, the capillary was filled with 50% cyanomethyl [3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl] trithiocarbonate solution in MeOH(v/v) and incubated in a water bath at 45 °C for 12 h. The capillary was then rinsed with MeOH to flush out the residual reagent and dried with a nitrogen stream. At this point, the inner wall of the capillary was modified by a layer of cyanomethyl [3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl] trithiocarbonate, which is the chain transfer agent for subsequent attachment of polymer to the wall during the SCARAFT polymerization reaction. For coating the capillary, a polymerization mixture was prepared by mixing acrylamide (0.56 M) and 4,4’-azobis(4-cyanovaleric acid) (5.42 × 10-4 M) in an acetate buffer (pH 5.2, 0.27 M acetic acid, and 0.73 M sodium acetate) at room temperature and stirring for about 10 min under nitrogen to form a homogeneous solution. The mixture then was introduced into the pretreated capillary and incubated at 60 °C for 7 hours. The coated capillary was flushed with H2O followed by MeOH to remove residuals in the capillary.

### Data Protocol
Database searching of the raw files was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo) with Sequest HT and MS Amanda 2.0 database search engines.39,40 Databases with taxonomy as mouse were downloaded from Uniprot. Searching the reversed database was performed to evaluate the false discovery rate. For the data obtained on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer, precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.05 Da. For data obtained on a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer, precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.4 Da. Full tryptic digestion was selected and allowed up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modifications. Oxidation (M), deamidated (NQ), acetylation (K), and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) were set as variable modifications. Database search results were evaluated with Percolator (version 2.04) software. On the peptide level, peptide confidence value as high was used to filter the peptide identification, and the corresponding false discovery rate on peptide level was less than 1%. On the protein level, protein grouping was enabled. PhosphoRS  was used for determining phosphorylation site probabilities.  Raw MS files were also analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0.).MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot mouse protein database. The database also included common contaminants. MaxQuant analysis included an initial search with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, main search precursor mass tolerance of 6 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm. The search included: trypsin as enzyme, variable modifications of oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ) and phospho (STY), and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Minimal peptide length was set to six amino acids and the maximum number of missed cleavages was set to two. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for both peptide and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
The dependence of capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE) separations on the charge state of the analyte is useful for the analysis of many post-translational modifications in proteins. In this work, we coupled CZE to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid platform with an advanced peak determination algorithm for phosphoproteomics analysis. A linear-polyacrylamide-coated capillary with very low electroosmotic flow was used for the separation. The optimal injection volume was between 100 and 150 nL of a solution of phosphopeptides in 30 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.2) buffer, which produces a dynamic pH junction sample injection. Larger injection volumes resulted in serious peak broadening and decreased numbers of phosphopeptide identifications. The optimized system identified 4405 phosphopeptides from 220 ng of enriched phosphopeptides from mouse brain, which represents the state-of-the-art result for single-shot CZE-ESI-MS/MS-based phosphoproteome analysis. We found that the migration time for phosphopeptides is much longer than that for non-phosphopeptides and increased along with the number of phosphorylation sites on the peptides, as expected for the additional negative charges associated with the phosphate groups. We also investigated the phosphorylation site motifs; a number of motifs appeared in the CZE-ESI-MS/MS data but not in LC-ESI-MS/MS data, which suggested the complementary performance of the techniques. The data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD012888.

### Keywords
Orbitrap fusion lumos tribrid, Phosphoproteomics, Advanced peak determination algorithm, Cze

### Affiliations
Ningbo University
University of Notre Dame

### Submitter
Zhenbin Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhenbin Zhang
University of Notre Dame


