### Accession
PXD006818

### Title
S.lividans TK24 sigma-factor deletions

### Description
Characterization of S.lividans TK24 secreted proteome changes upon deletion of certain sigma factors.

### Sample Protocol
Secreted proteome was concentrated using TCA/acetone precipitation protocol, and proteins were digested in-solution. Culture volume normalized to cell dry mass was analyzed in an Orbitrap-QE mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant software platform. Protein quantitation was performed using iBAQ algorithm through MaxQuant software. Selection of differentially abundant proteins was performed using custom R scripts.

### Publication Abstract
Protein secretion is a central biological process in all organisms. Most studies dissecting bacterial secretion mechanisms have focused on Gram-negative cell envelopes such as that of <i>Escherichia coli</i> However, proteomics analyses in Gram negatives is hampered by their outer membrane. Here we studied protein secretion in the Gram-positive bacterium <i>Streptomyces lividans</i> TK24, in which most of the secretome is released in the growth medium. We monitored changes of the secretome as a function of growth phase and medium. We determined distinct protein classes of "house-keeping" secreted proteins that do not change their appearance or abundance in the various media and growth phases. These comprise mainly enzymes involved in cell wall maintenance and basic transport. In addition, we detected significant abundance and content changes to a sub-set of the proteome, as a function of growth in the different media. These did not depend on the media being minimal or rich. Transcriptional regulation but not changes in export machinery components can explain some of these changes. However, additional downstream mechanisms must be important for selective secretome funneling. These observations lay the foundations of using <i>S. lividans</i> as a model organism to study how metabolism is linked to optimal secretion and help develop rational optimization of heterologous protein production.

### Keywords
Streptomyces, Sigma factor

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Lab of Molecular Bacteriology, Rega Institute, KU Leuven
-

### Submitter
Konstantinos Tsolis

### Lab Head
Dr Tassos Economou
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Lab of Molecular Bacteriology, Rega Institute, KU Leuven


