### Accession
PXD026103

### Title
Targeted mass spectrometry enables quantification of novel pharmacodynamic biomarkers of ATM kinase inhibitors

### Description
ATM is a serine/threonine protein kinase that is responsible for initiation of DNA repair of double-stranded breaks and is a therapeutic target in cancer. A lack of analytically robust and multiplexed assays has hampered mechanistic studies of action and determination of optimal, robust pharmacodynamic biomarkers for clinical development of new therapies targeting ATM. Targeted mass spectrometry-based assays have been shown to be capable of enabling quantitative phosphosignaling studies and identification of novel phosphorylation sites. To identify new pharmacodynamic markers of ATM inhibition and expand the capabilities of targeted proteomics for quantitative profiling of the DNA damage response, we developed and fully analytically characterized a 51-plex assay quantifying protein expression and post-translational modification (phosphorylation) following induction of DNA damage. The linear range was over 3 orders of magnitude, the median inter-assay variability was 11% CV, and the assay is capable of being used in conjunction with other multiple reaction monitoring-based multiplexed assay panels. Proof-of-principle studies quantify signaling following DNA damage (ionizing radiation) in immortalized cell lines and primary human cells, identifying NUMA1 pS395 as a PD marker for ATM inhibition following DNA damage. Furthermore, the study shows the utility of using a quantitative multiplexed assay for studying cellular signaling dynamics, and the potential application to pharmacodynamic and mechanism of action studies, including development of new pharmacodynamic markers for clinical application.

### Sample Protocol
Two lymphoblast cell lines (LCLs), GM07057 (ATM +/+) and GM01526 (ATM -/-) were cultured in one of three SILAC medium (heavy, medium, and light). Expanded cells were treated with 10 Gy IR and harvested one hour post-IR; controls were harvested 1 hour post mock irradiation. The lysates were then mixed separately in two combinations. In the “forward” mix, IR-treated ATM +/+ LCLs were labeled with heavy SILAC medium, mock-treated ATM +/+ were medium labeled, and IR-treated ATM -/- were light labeled. In the “reverse” mix, IR-treated ATM -/- LCLs were heavy labeled, mock-treated ATM -/- were medium labeled, and IR-treated ATM +/+ were light labeled. 1.4 mg of each cell lysate was mixed, subjected to trypsin digestion, separated into 13 fractions by basic reverse phase HPLC, and phosphopeptides were enriched from each fraction by IMAC. The IMAC eluates were analyzed by LC-MS/MS for identification of phosphopeptides and relative quantification by light:medium:heavy peak area ratio.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS spectra were searched against version 3.68 of the human International Protein Index (IPI) sequence database using using MaxQuant/Andromeda. The search was performed with tryptic enzyme constraint set for up to two missed cleavages, oxidized methionine and phosphorylated serine, threonine and tyrosine set as a variable modification, and carbamidomethylated cysteine set as a static modification. Peptide MH+ mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm. The overall FDR was set at ≤1%. Any site with a probability greater than 0.8 was considered to be localized. Quantification of the Heavy:Medium:Light ratios was performed using MaxQuant software, with a minimum ratio count of 2 and using unique + razor peptides for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Phosphorylation, Lymphoblast, Atm

### Affiliations
Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center

### Submitter
Jacob Kennedy

### Lab Head
Dr Amanda Paulovich
Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center


