### Accession
PXD002935

### Title
Mouse heart mitochondria LC-MS/MS

### Description
Heart mitochondria proteome to identify changes induced by knock-out of Clpp.

### Sample Protocol
Hearts of WT and KO animals were lysed in 5 mL of Mitochondria Isolation Buffer (MIB). Subtilisin A was added and mixture was homogenized Sartorius at 1000 rpm with 10-12 strokes until the solution became homogenous.  After several centrifugation steps, the final mitochondria pellet was further purified on a sucrose density gradient by ultracentrifugation. Obtained purified mitochondria were resuspended in 10 mM Tris HCl, ph=7.5 and 5 mM EDTA.   Proteins were digested by the FASP (Filter aided sample preparation) protocol.    Generated peptides were desalted prior Liquid chromatography – tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis using STAGEtip technique. Eluate was concentrated in a speed vac to complete dryness and re-suspended in 10 µL acidified water (Buffer A: 0.1 % acetic acid).  LC-MS/MS instrumentation consisted out of an EASY n-LC (Proxeon, now Thermo Scientific) coupled via a nano-electrospray ionization source (Thermo Scientific) to a ion-trap based bench top LTQ Discovery instrument (Thermo Scientific). 4 µL of peptide mixture was loaded on to an in-house packed 15 cm column (3 µm C18 beads, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were separated by an binary buffer system: A) 0.1% acetic acid and B) 0.1% acetic acid in acetonitrile and the following gradient was applied: Within 220 min buffer B  content was raised in a linear shape from 7% to 20% and further increased within 60 min to 40%. Then, 95 % B was used to wash the column and held there for 20 min. The flow-rate was constant at 200 nl/min over the complete gradient. After each run, a blank run (5% B = const.) was performed to re-equilibrate the column. Eluting peptides from the column were ionized by an applied voltage of 1.8 kV. The capillary voltage was set to 44 V and Multipole RF Amplifier (Vp-p) was set to 400. For MS1 scans a resolution of 30.000 (400 m/z), a max. injection time of 500 ms, and  an AGC (Automatic gain control) target of 2e5 was used. In a data-dependent Top10 mode, the 10 most intense peaks were selected for MS2 level scans. A resolution of 7.500 (400 m/z), an AGC target of 1E54, an isolation window of 3.0 Th, and a maximal injection time of 200 ms was used. The normalized collision energy for CID scans was 35 and the activation time for MS2 scans was 30 ms. For both scan types the injection waveform setting was enabled.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed by MaxQuant 1.5.1.0 and the implemented Andromeda search engine. MS/MS spectra were correlated against the mouse Uniprot database (downloaded Feb. 2015) including a list of common contaminants. Search parameters were set as following: minimal peptide length: 7 amino acids, mass tolerances for MS/MS ITMS spectra was 0.5 Dalton. The FDR was estimated by the implemented decoy algorithm utilizing the revert-database on the peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and protein level to 1%.  The label-free-quantification, match between runs and re-quantify algorithms were enabled using default settings. Acetylation at the protein N-term and oxidation of methionine residues were defined as variable modification, and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and tested for differential expression using a two-sided t-test. To correct against multiple testing errors, the FDR was calculated by a permutation-based algorithm using a FDR cutoff of 5% and fudge- factor s0 of 0.1. To identify significant enriched GO terms we utilized the 1D enrichment tool in Perseus. Data visualization was done in the statistical environment R.

### Publication Abstract
Despite being one of the most studied proteases in bacteria, very little is known about the role of ClpXP in mitochondria. We now present evidence that mammalian CLPP has an essential role in determining the rate of mitochondrial protein synthesis by regulating the level of mitoribosome assembly. Through a proteomic approach and the use of a catalytically inactive CLPP, we produced the first comprehensive list of possible mammalian ClpXP substrates involved in the regulation of mitochondrial translation, oxidative phosphorylation, and a number of metabolic pathways. We further show that the defect in mitoribosomal assembly is a consequence of the accumulation of ERAL1, a putative 12S rRNA chaperone, and novel ClpXP substrate. The presented data suggest that the timely removal of ERAL1 from the small ribosomal subunit is essential for the efficient maturation of the mitoribosome and a normal rate of mitochondrial translation.

### Keywords
Heart mouse mitochondria clpp clpx

### Affiliations
Cecad Institute and University of Cologne Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 26 50931 Cologne Germany
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD)

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Krueger
Cecad Institute and University of Cologne Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 26 50931 Cologne Germany


