### Accession
PXD042074

### Title
Cryptococccus Rav1-mCherry LC-MS/MS

### Description
we performed in vivo pull-down experiment using the rav1Δ::RAV1-mCherry strain and RFP-trap agarose beads to precipitate Rav1-mCherry protein and its interacting partners.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation for LC-MS/MS : Rav1-mCherry strain was grown in 50 ml of YPD broth at 30°C for 16 h, subcultured into one litter of fresh YPD broth, and incubated until the culture reached an OD600 of 0.8. At this point, the cells were harvested by centrifugation, frozen in liquid nitrogen for more than 30 min, and then lyophilized. To extract total proteins, the lyophilized cells were treated with lysis buffer (without SDS) containing 50 mM Tris-Cl (pH 7.5), 1% sodium deoxycholate, 5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 0.2 mM sodium orthovanadate, 50 mM sodium fluoride (NaF), 1% Triton X-100, 0.5 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, and 2.5 × protease inhibitor cocktail solution (Merck Millipore). Total proteins were extracted as described previously (76). The RFP-Trap® Agarose (ChromoTek, USA) was added to the extracted whole cell lysates and incubated overnight while rotating at 4°C. Proteins bound to the agarose beads were washed three times and eluted with SDS sample buffer (50 mM Tris-Cl, 2% SDS, 10% glycerol, and 0.01% β-mercaptoethanol). Protein samples were loaded into 8% SDS-PAGE gel and run until the total band migration was about 1 cm. The gels were washed with distilled water and stained with the Coomassie Brilliant Blue G250 dye (CBB; Biosesang) overnight. The gel was washed three times with distilled water, and the CBB destaining buffer (10% methanol, 10% acetic acid, 80% distilled water) was added to remove any remaining coomassie blue buffers. The gel spots of interest for LC-MS/MS analysis were excised from the preparative gel and transferred into each 1.5 ml tube. The band was washed with 100 μL of distilled water; then, 100 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 7.8) and acetonitrile (6:4) were added to the band and shaken for 10 min. This process was repeated at least three times until the Coomassie brilliant blue G250 dye disappeared. The supernatant was decanted, and the band was dried in a speed vacuum concentrator (LaBoGeneAps, Lynge, Denmark) for 10 min. The solution was decanted and then digested with sequence-grade modified trypsin (Promega Co., Madison, WI, USA) (enzyme to substrate ratio = 1:50) at 37 °C with shaking for 16 h. Project description LC-MS/MS for Peptides Analysis  Nano LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with a Easy n-LC (Thermo Fisher San Jose, CA, USA). The capillary column used for LC-MS/MS analysis (150 mm × 0.075 mm) was obtained from Proxeon (Odense, Denmark) and the slurry packed in-house with a 5 μm, 100 A pore size Magic C18 stationary phase resin (Michrom BioResources, Auburn, CA). The mobile phase A for LC separation was 0.1% formic acid in deionized water and the mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The chromatography gradient was designed for a linear increase from 3% B to 25% B in 70min, 25% B to 60% B in 13:59 min, 60% B to 95% B in 1:59 min, 95% B in 8:59 min, and 3% B in 6 min. The flow rate was maintained at 700 nl/min. LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometry (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA, USA) was used for the peptide identification. Mass spectra were acquired using data-dependent acquisition with a full mass scan (350–1200 m/z) followed by 10 MS/MS scans. For MS1 full scans, the orbitrap resolution was 15,000 and the AGC was 2×105. For MS/MS in the LTQ, the AGC was 1×104.

### Data Protocol
The mascot server 2.6 (Matrixscience, USA) was used to identify peptide sequences present in a protein sequence database. Database search criteria were, database name; C. neoformans_H99_20210806 (15833 sequences; 8284938 residues), fixed modification ; carbamidomethylated at cysteine residues ; variable modification ; oxidized at methionine residues, acetylated at N-term residue, deaminated at asparagine or glutamine residues, maximum allowed missed cleavage; 2, MS tolerance; 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance; 0.8 Da. The peptides were filtered with a significance threshold of P<0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rav1-mcherry, Rfp trap agarose beads, Cryptococcus, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Biotechnology, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, Yonsei University, Seoul 03722, Korea

### Submitter
Jin-Tae Choi

### Lab Head
Dr Yong-Sun Bahn
Department of Biotechnology, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, Yonsei University, Seoul 03722, Korea


