### Accession
PXD003442

### Title
Integrated genomics and proteomics to define huntingtin CAG length-dependent molecular networks in HD mouse brains

### Description
To gain insight into how mutant Huntingtin (mHTT) CAG repeat length may modify Huntington’s disease (HD) pathogenesis, we profiled mRNA in over 600 brain and peripheral tissue samples from HD knock-in mice with increasing CAG repeat length. We find repeat length dependent transcriptional signatures are prominent in the striatum, less so in cortex, and minimal in the liver. Co-expression network analyses reveal 13 striatal and 5 cortical modules that are highly correlated with CAG length and age, and that are preserved in HD models and some in the patients. Top striatal modules implicate mHTT CAG length and age in graded impairment of striatal medium spiny neuron identity gene expression and in dysregulation of cAMP signaling, cell death, and protocadherin genes. Importantly, we used proteomics to confirm 790 genes and 5 striatal modules with CAG length-dependent dysregulation at both RNA and protein levels and validated 21 striatal module genes as modifiers of mHtt toxicities in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Striata were lysed in 100 µl lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.2, 75 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 5 mM EGTA, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, protease inhibitor cocktail Complete Mini (Roche, Mannheim, Germany). Tissues were crushed using forceps and extracts were sonicated using the beaker resonator BR30 (Bandelin Electronic, Germany). Samples were centrifuged at >14,000g, 4°C for 20 min to remove tissue/cell debris and the protein concentration of the supern atant was determined by Bradford Assay. For each sample 200 µg of protein were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. Subsequently, endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako) was added at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:200 and incubated for 4 h at room temperature. Samples were thereafter diluted 1:4 with 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.2 before adding trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 followed by overnight incubation. The resulting peptide mixtures were acidified by addition of TFA to a final concentration of 0.5% and subsequently desalted using C18 Sep-Pak columns (100 mg sorbent weight, Waters). Peptides were eluted with 50% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid, samples split into two aliquots (100 µg each), snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and lyophilized. Of each sample 100 µg of peptides were subsequently fractionated by high pH reversed phase chromatography78. Briefly, lyophilisates were reconstituted in 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10 (buffer “A”), and loaded onto an XBridge C18 200 × 4.6 mm analytical column (Waters) operated with the Äkta Explorer system (GE Healthcare). Peptides were eluted and separated at a flow rate of 1 mL per minute  applying a linear gradient with increasing acetonitrile concentration from 7% to 30% buffer “B” (buffer “A” supplemented with 80% acetonitrile) over 15 min followed by an increase to 55% over 5 min, a washing phase for 5 min at 100%  and a final equilibration pase at 0% B for 10 min. The collected 18 fractions of eluting peptides were combined in a concatenated way to generate 6 fractions for each individual sample[REF 78: Wang et al.]. Samples were frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized. After desalting via C18 Sep-Pak columns (100 mg sorbent weight, Waters), sample fractions were snap-frozen, lyophilized, and reconstituted in 0.1% FA for MS analysis.  Samples were loaded onto a reverse phase analytical column packed in-house with 1.9 µM C18 beads (Dr. Maisch) by an EASY nLC1000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at flow of 400 nL/min at 95% buffer A (5% DMSO, 0.1% FA). Peptides were resolved by a linear gradient over 96 min from 10% to 30 % buffer (5% DMSO, 80% acetonitrile) followed by an increase over 50% B in 13 min to 60% B in 6 min. Eluting peptides were electrosprayed via a nanoelectrospray ion source into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Q Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode acquiring full scans at a resolution of 70,000 and fragmentation spectra (MS/MS mode) of the ten most abundant peptide ions at a resolution of 17,500 in the Orbitrap mass analyzer.

### Data Protocol
All raw files acquired were processed with the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.2.10) using the Andromeda search engine for peptide and protein identification and quantification79. The experiments were collectively searched against a Uniprot mouse database (version 11/2014). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The minimum required peptide length was seven amino acids and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was selected for both protein and peptide identifications and a posterior error probability (PEP) less or equal to 1% for each peptide-to-spectral match was required. The match between runs option was enabled for a time window of 0.5 min. For protein quantification, the MaxLFQ feature of MaxQuant was enabled and used with default parameters. In particular, the minimum LFQ ratio count was set to 2 as suggested in Cox et al.

### Publication Abstract
To gain insight into how mutant huntingtin (mHtt) CAG repeat length modifies Huntington's disease (HD) pathogenesis, we profiled mRNA in over 600 brain and peripheral tissue samples from HD knock-in mice with increasing CAG repeat lengths. We found repeat length-dependent transcriptional signatures to be prominent in the striatum, less so in cortex, and minimal in the liver. Coexpression network analyses revealed 13 striatal and 5 cortical modules that correlated highly with CAG length and age, and that were preserved in HD models and sometimes in patients. Top striatal modules implicated mHtt CAG length and age in graded impairment in the expression of identity genes for striatal medium spiny neurons and in dysregulation of cyclic AMP signaling, cell death and protocadherin genes. We used proteomics to confirm 790 genes and 5 striatal modules with CAG length-dependent dysregulation at the protein level, and validated 22 striatal module genes as modifiers of mHtt toxicities in vivo.

### Keywords
Striatum, Mouse brain, Proteomics, Huntington disease, Label-free

### Affiliations
Evotec (Munchen) GmbH, Am Klopferspitz 19a, 82152 Martinsried, Germany
Evotec

### Submitter
Christoph Schaab

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph Schaab
Evotec (Munchen) GmbH, Am Klopferspitz 19a, 82152 Martinsried, Germany


