### Accession
PXD018110

### Title
Spatial proteomics defines the content of trafficking vesicles captured by golgin tethers

### Description
Intracellular traffic between compartments of the secretory and endocytic pathways is mediated by vesicle-based carriers. The proteomes of carriers destined for many organelles are ill-defined because the vesicular intermediates are transient, low-abundance and difficult to purify. Here, we combine vesicle relocalisation with organelle proteomics and Bayesian analysis to define the content of different endosome-derived vesicles destined for the trans-Golgi network (TGN). The golgin coiled-coil proteins golgin-97 and GCC88, shown previously to capture endosome-derived vesicles at the TGN, were individually relocalised to mitochondria and the content of the subsequently re-routed vesicles was determined by organelle proteomics. Our findings reveal 45 integral and 51 peripheral membrane proteins re-routed by golgin-97, evidence for a distinct class of vesicles shared by golgin-97 and GCC88, and various cargoes specific to individual golgins. These results illustrate a general strategy for analysing intracellular sub-proteomes by combining acute cellular re-wiring with high-resolution spatial proteomics

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture, transfection, CRISPR knockout cell lines and immunofluorescence. Cell lines HeLa (ATCC) and 293T Flp-In T-REx (ThermoFisher Scientific, R78007) were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM; Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS) and penicillin / streptomycin at 37 °C and 5% CO2. HEK 293T Flp-In TREx cell lines were transduced with pMX0267, pmX0269, pMX0266 and pJJS128 as previously described13. The Δtbc1d23 mutant and Δgolgin-97 / Δgolgin-245 mutant was previously described in 13 and Δgcc88 was generated using the same protocol with pJJS294. All cell lines were tested regularly to ensure that they were mycoplasma free (MycoAlert, Lonza). For immunofluorescence, cells were transfected with plasmid DNA using FuGENE 6 according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Promega). Cells were fixed with 4% formaldehyde in PBS and permeabilised in 0.5% (v/v) Triton X-100 in PBS. Cells were blocked for one hour in PBS containing 20% FCS and 0.25% Tween-20. If this protocol did not show good Golgi staining for a particular antibody, cells were permeabilised and blocked in 20% FCS and 0.1% saponin. Cells were probed in the same buffer as the primary and secondary antibodies. Each antibody used in immunofluorescence was diluted to a maximum concentration of 100X. All immunofluorescence experiments were repeated in triplicate. For quantitation of immunofluorescence experiments, a cell mask was defined by over-exposed DAPI. HA and GM130 was used to mark the mito-construct and the Golgi, respectively (NIS-Elements, Nikon). Then the mean intensity of the cargo channel in the mitochondria mask (excluding the areas that overlap with the Golgi mask) were divided by the mean intensity of the cargo channel of the Golgi mask for each quantified cell. The mitochondria and Golgi mask had a minimum threshold of 18% of the mean labelling of their respective markers to exclude poorly expressed constructs or out-of-focus Golgi. For quantification of Golgi localisation, the mean intensity of the cargo in the Golgi mask was divided by the mean intensity of GM130 in the Golgi mask. LOPIT-DC. LOPIT-DC was performed as previously described in Geladaki et al (doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-08191-w) with the following exceptions. 293T cells from at least 8X T175 flasks per treatment were passaged so that they were approximately 50% confluent after 24 hr. After this time, 1 μg ml-1 doxycycline was added to the medium and incubated for 48 h. The cells were collected through gentle pipetting and lysed as described previously in (doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-08191-w). The remaining cell debris following 3X 20 min 200 g spins of the cell homogenate were collected and used in a nuclear prep (OptiPrep Application Sheet S10) that became an additional TMT-labelled fraction (Fig. 1B). Liquid chromatography was performed on the concatenated RP-UPLC pre-fractionated TMTlabelled peptides on a fully automated Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano System (Thermo Scientific) fitted with a 100μm x 2cm PepMap100 C18 nano trap column (Aclaim PepMap, Thermo Scientific) and a 75μm×25cm, nanoEase C18 T3 column (Waters). Samples were separated using a binary gradient consisting of buffer A (2% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The HPLC system was coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanospray ion source. The mass spectrometer was operated in standard data dependent mode, performed MS full-scan at 380-1600 m/z range, with a resolution of 70000. This was followed by MS2 acquisitions of the 15 most intense ions with a resolution of 35000 and NCE of 33%. MS target values of 3e6 and MS2 target values of 1e5 were used. Isolation window of precursor was set at 0.7 Da and dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was enabled for 40s. Subsequent analysis of LOPIT-DC data through Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific) was optimised for MS2 as described previously described in Christoforou et al (doi: 10.1038/ncomms9992), and filtered for High FDR and master proteins. No imputation was performed. Proteins with a CRAPome FREQ ≥ 0.1 were filtered out from analysis (Mellacheruvu, D. et al. Nat Methods 10, 730-736 (2013)). Keratin, serum albumin and trypsin were filtered out from analysis. All LOPIT-DC experiments were repeated three independent times. The treatments of each replicate were performed concurrently on the same day.

### Data Protocol
Data processing The acquired MSMS raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1, Thermo Scientific). MSMS spectra were searched against Human reviewed, UniProt Fasta database, using Mascot (version 2.4, Matrix Science) search engine. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines and TMT6plex (peptide N-terminus and Lysine) were set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation (protein), Deamidated (NQ) and TMT6plex (STY) were selected as variable modifications. Two trypsin missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.03D Posterior localisation probabilities. The posterior probability that a protein belongs to a sub-cellular niche, henceforth referred to as the posterior localisation probability, is computed using the TAGM-MAP method (Crook, O.M., et al PLoS Comput Biol 14, e1006516 (2018)). Briefly, the parameters of the T-augmented Gaussian mixture model are learnt by maximising the log posterior of the parameters with respect to the data, to obtain maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimates of the parameters. The posterior localisation probability that a protein belongs to each organelle is then computed and the most probable sub-cellular niche is reported. Default prior choices are made as previously described (Crook, O.M., et al F1000Res 8, 446 (2019)). Proteins that are predicted to localise to the mitochondria and nucleus are discarded from subsequent analysis. Bayesian non-parametric two sample test. To detect perturbations in the quantitative protein profiles, we apply a Bayesian non-parametric two sample test (Stegle, O. et al J Comput Biol 17, 355-367(2010)). First, the data are transformed using the additive log ratio transform (Aitchison, J.D. The Statistical Analysis of Compositional Data. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological). 44, 139-177 (1982)). We then proceed to test whether the protein profiles are different between the control and treatment. Formally, we test against two contrasting models. The first model posits that the quantitative protein profiles in each experiment (control and treatment) are drawn from an identical shared distribution. Whilst the second supposes that there are independent models for each of the control and treatment. The log Bayes factor is used to objectively determine support for one model over the other, where larger log Bayes factors are considered support for the independent model (Kass, R.E., and Adrian E. Raftery Bayes factors. Journal of the american statistical association 90, 773-795 (1995)). A non-parametric prior over functions, the Gaussian process, is specified with squared exponential covariance (Rasmussen, C.E. Gaussian processes in machine learning. Summer School on Machine Learning. Pringer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2003)). The hyperparameters for the Gaussian process are given the default Gamma priors as specified in (Stegle, O. et al J Comput Biol 17, 355-367(2010)). The natural logarithm of the Bayes factors is reported. Mitochondrial Ratios. To determine the biological relevance of quantitative protein profiles that are shifted between treatment and control, we computed a mitochondrial ratio (MitoRatio) as follows. For each protein in each experiment, the squared Mahalanobis distance (Mahalanobis, P.C. On the generalized distance in statistics. National Institute of Science of India (1936).) to the mean of the quantitative profiles of the mitochondrial marker proteins is computed, where a robust estimate for the covariance is used (Hubert, M., and Michiel Debruyne Minimum covariance determinant. Computational statistics 2.1, 36-43 (2010)). Then, for each protein, the ratio of the distances in control and treatment is computed, proceeded by a log2 transform. Proteins that move closer to the mitochondria upon the treatment have larger mitochondrial ratios.

### Publication Abstract
Intracellular traffic between compartments of the secretory and endocytic pathways is mediated by vesicle-based carriers. The proteomes of carriers destined for many organelles are ill-defined because the vesicular intermediates are transient, low-abundance and difficult to purify. Here, we combine vesicle relocalisation with organelle proteomics and Bayesian analysis to define the content of different endosome-derived vesicles destined for the trans-Golgi network (TGN). The golgin coiled-coil proteins golgin-97 and GCC88, shown previously to capture endosome-derived vesicles at the TGN, were individually relocalised to mitochondria and the content of the subsequently re-routed vesicles was determined by organelle proteomics. Our findings reveal 45 integral and 51 peripheral membrane proteins re-routed by golgin-97, evidence for a distinct class of vesicles shared by golgin-97 and&#xa0;GCC88, and various cargoes specific to individual golgins. These results illustrate a general strategy for analysing intracellular sub-proteomes by combining acute cellular re-wiring with high-resolution spatial proteomics.

### Keywords
Organell protein relocalization, Hela, Lopit-dc, Golgin

### Affiliations
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology Francis Crick Avenue Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Kathryn Lilley

### Lab Head
Dr Sean Munro
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology Francis Crick Avenue Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK


