### Accession
PXD048225

### Title
Adaptive Laboratory Evolution of E. coli towards usage of fluoroindole

### Description
Although fluorine is abundant in the earth’s crust, it is scarcely found in biomolecules. Adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE) experiments were conducted to introduce organofluorine into living microorganisms. By cultivating Escherichia coli with fluorinated indole analogs, microbial cells evolved that relinquished their dependence on indole and are instead capable of utilizing either 6-fluoroindole (6Fi) or 7-fluoroindole (7Fi) for growth (TrpS-catalyzed in-situ conversion of fluoroindole into fluorotryptophan (FTrp) and TrpRS-catalyzed incorporation of FTrp in context of protein biosynthesis). Consistent and complete adaptation of microbial populations was achieved and the quantitative proteome-wide replacement of Trp by either 6FTrp or 7FTrp was confirmed by nano-LC-MSMS. The dataset comprises the ancestral strain TUB00, two positive controls W-TUB165 and Ind-TUB165 (adapted to grow on tryptophan and indole), three 6Fi adapted lineages 6TUB128-OC, 6TUB165-MB4, 6TUB165-MB3 and two 7Fi adapted lineages 7TUB165-OC and 7TUB165-MB.

### Sample Protocol
Final isolates (3 biological replicates, respectively) of the adapted strains 6TUB128-OC, 6TUB165-MB4, 6TUB165-MB3, 7TUB165-OC, 7TUB165-MB and positive controls Ind-TUB165, W-TUB165 as well as TUB00 were grown in the respective NMM supplemented with either 70 μM Trp, indole, 6Fi or 7Fi. Exponential growing cells were harvested by centrifugation (18000 g, 4 °C, 20 min) and pellets were stored at -20 °C. E. coli extracts were briefly run into an SDS-gel until the dye front had migrated about 5 mm into the gel and only the 3 mm behind the dye front were used for protein digestions. Following a protocol described by Kublik et. al.,(doi:10.1111/1462-2920.13200) the gel slices were washed with ddH2O, and the proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol to break disulfide bridges. To protect the reduced cysteine residues, carbamidylation using iodoacetamide was performed. Subsequently, an overnight trypsin digestion was initiated to generate peptides. The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel pieces and desalted using C18-tips through zip-tipping. These extracted peptide samples were then analyzed by nLC-MS/MS on a nanoUPLC system (nanoAcquity, Waters) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), as previously described in Seidel et. al. (doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01130).

### Data Protocol
The raw data obtained from LC-MS/MS were analysed using the Proteome Discoverer software (v2.4). MS/MS data were searched against the annotated complete genome of Escherichia coli str. K-12 substr. MG1655 (accession number NC_000913.3) for the identification of proteins using SequestHT as a search engine. Error tolerance for precursor ion mass and fragment ion mass was set to 3 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) and fluorination of tryptophan residues (+17.991 Da) were set as dynamic modification, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) was set as a fixed modification. The false discovery rate for PSMs, peptides and proteins was kept <1% using the ‘Target_Decoy_PSM_validator’, ‘Peptide validator’ and ‘Protein FDR validator’ nodes, respectively. Protein and peptide abundance values were calculated by intensity-based label-free quantification using the Minora node implemented in Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nanolc-ms/ms, Adaptive laboratory evolution (ale), 6-fluoroindole, 7-fluoroindole, E. coli, Xenonutrient

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ
Freie Universität Berlin; Department of Biology, Chemistry, Pharmacy; Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry; Berlin/Germany

### Submitter
Lorenz Adrian

### Lab Head
Dr Beate Koksch
Freie Universität Berlin; Department of Biology, Chemistry, Pharmacy; Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry; Berlin/Germany


