### Accession
PXD028433

### Title
Molecular Basis for CPC-Sgo1 Interaction: Implications for Centromere Localisation and Function of the CPCMolecular Basis for CPC-Sgo1 Interaction: Implications for Centromere Localisation and Function of the CPC

### Description
Sgo1 makes multipartite interactions with CPC subunits Previous studies have suggested that the Sgo1-CPC (Chromosomal Passenger Complex) interaction is mediated via the N-terminal coiled-coil of Sgo1 and Borealin. However, our structural data revealed that the very N-terminus of Sgo1 can interact with the BIR domain of Survivin. Together, these studies suggest that multi-partite interactions between Sgo1 and different CPC subunits could facilitate CPC-Sgo1 complex formation. To gain further structural insights, we performed chemical cross-linking of the CPCISB10-280-Sgo11-415 complex using a zero-length cross-linker, 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide (EDC), followed by mass spectrometry analysis. Cross-linking-mass spectrometry (CLMS) data showed that: (1) consistent with our previous observations,  the N-terminal region of Sgo1 (amino acids 1-34) makes extensive contacts with Survivin BIR domain (amino acids 18-89); (2) the N-terminal coiled-coil of Sgo1 (amino acids 10-120)  interacts with the CPC triple helical bundle; (3) consistent with previous findings, the N-terminal coiled-coil also contacts the Borealin dimerisation domain; and (4) the Sgo1 region beyond the N-terminal coil-coil region, which is predicted to be unstructured, contacts both Survivin and Borealin with most contacts confined to the Sgo1 central region spanning amino acids (aa) 180-300. Thus, our cross-linking results suggests that Sgo1 interacts with CPC, mainly via two regions, the N-terminal coiled-coil domain and the unstructured central region.

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking and MS analysis Cross-linking experiments of Sgo11-415 and CPCISB10-280 were performed using  EDC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in the presence of N-hydroxysulfosuccinimide (NHS, Thermo Fisher Scientific). 25 g of gel filtrated protein complex was cross-linked with 120 g EDC and 44 g of NHS in 25 mM HEPES pH 6.8, 150 mM NaCl for 1h 30min at room temperature. The cross-linking was stopped by the addition of 100 mM Tris-HCl and cross-linking products were briefly resolved using a 4-12 % Bis-Tris NuPAGE (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Bands were visualised by short Instant Blue staining (Abcam), excised, reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at room temperature, alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature and digested overnight at 37 °C using 13 ng/l trypsin (Promega). Digested peptides were loaded onto C18-Stage-tips. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) applying a “high-high” acquisition strategy. Peptide mixtures were injected for each mass spectrometric acquisition. Peptides were separated on a 75 µm x 50 cm PepMap EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific) fitted into an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific), operated at 50 ºC column temperature. Mobile phase A consisted of water and 0.1% v/v formic acid. Mobile phase B consisted of 80% v/v acetonitrile and 0.1% v/v formic acid. Peptides were loaded at a flow-rate of 0.3 μl/min and eluted at 0.2 μl/min using a linear gradient going from 2% mobile phase B to 40% mobile phase B over 139 (or 109) minutes, followed by a linear increase from 40% to 95% mobile phase B in 11 minutes. The eluted peptides were directly introduced into the mass spectrometer. MS data were acquired in the data-dependent mode with the top-speed option. For each three-second acquisition cycle, the mass spectrum was recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000. The ions with a precursor charge state between 3+ and 8+ were isolated and fragmented using HCD or EThcD. The fragmentation spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with single repeat count and 60-second exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric raw files were processed into peak lists using ProteoWizard (version 3.0.20338), and cross-linked peptides were matched to spectra using Xi software (version 1.7.6.3 https://github.com/Rappsilber-Laboratory/XiSearch) with in-search assignment of monoisotopic peaks. Search parameters were MS accuracy, 3 ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 10ppm; enzyme, trypsin; cross-linker, EDC; max missed cleavages, 4; missing mono-isotopic peaks, 2; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications, oxidation on methionine; fragments b and y type ions (HCD) or b, c, y, and z type ions (EThcD) with loss of H2O, NH3 and CH3SOH. 1% on link level False discovery rate (FDR) was estimated based on the number of decoy identification using XiFDR.

### Publication Abstract
Centromere association of the chromosomal passenger complex (CPC; Borealin-Survivin-INCENP-Aurora B) and Sgo1 is crucial for chromosome biorientation, a process essential for error-free chromosome segregation. Phosphorylated histone H3 Thr3 (H3T3ph; directly recognized by Survivin) and histone H2A Thr120 (H2AT120ph; indirectly recognized via Sgo1), together with CPC's intrinsic nucleosome-binding ability, facilitate CPC centromere recruitment. However, the molecular basis for CPC-Sgo1 binding and how their physical interaction influences CPC centromere localization are lacking. Here, using an integrative structure-function approach, we show that the "histone H3-like" Sgo1 N-terminal tail-Survivin BIR domain interaction acts as a hotspot essential for CPC-Sgo1 assembly, while downstream Sgo1 residues and Borealin contribute for high-affinity binding. Disrupting Sgo1-Survivin interaction abolished CPC-Sgo1 assembly and perturbed CPC centromere localization and function. Our findings reveal that Sgo1 and H3T3ph use the same surface on Survivin to bind CPC. Hence, it is likely that these interactions take place in a spatiotemporally restricted manner, providing a rationale for the Sgo1-mediated "kinetochore-proximal" CPC centromere pool.

### Keywords
Cpc-sgo1 interaction, Crosslinking mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
The University of Edinburgh
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, UK; Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany.

### Submitter
Juan Zou

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, UK; Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany.


