### Accession
PXD045094

### Title
Outer membrane vesicle of Pseudomonas aerugionsa

### Description
Objectives: This study aimed to investigate the microbiological characteristics of outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) derived from Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P. aeruginosa) to understand their mechanisms of inhibition of Acinetobacter baumannii (A. baumannii) in vitro. Methods: We assessed the inhibitory effects of P. aeruginosa on A. baumannii using a modified cross-streak assay. Subsequently, OMVs were extracted from P. aeruginosa strains using high-speed centrifugation, tangential flow filtration, ultrafiltration, and ultracentrifugation. Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and nanoparticle tracking assays (NTAs) were performed to confirm the presence of the extracted OMVs. P. aeruginosa-derived OMVs’ inhibitory activity against A. baumannii was tested using a modified time-kill assay. The proteomic analysis of OMVs revealed potential antibacterial protein clusters with diverse functions. Results: P. aeruginosa 022 (PA022) demonstrated inhibition of A. baumannii in the cross-streak assay. The protein levels of OMVs for PA022 and P. aeruginosa ATCC 27853 (PA ATCC 27853) were 1665 and 428.6 μg/mL, respectively. Additionally, PA 022 and PA ATCC 27853 exhibited variable patterns and sizes in the SDS-PAGE, TEM, and NTA. Furthermore, the growth inhibitory effect of PA022 OMVs on A. baumannii was evaluated using a modified time-kill assay. The proteomic analysis of OMVs revealed potential antibacterial protein clusters in PA 022 associated with virulence, motility, and post-translational modifications. Conclusion: Our study contributes to the understanding of P. aeruginosa OMVs characteristics and their inhibitory effect against A. baumannii, providing insights into the development of alternative therapeutic approaches against multi-drug resistance.

### Sample Protocol
To perform sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), 10 μL bacterial cells of PA ATCC 27853 and PA 022 were considered. The samples of two OMVs and two bacterial total proteins were boiled at 100 ℃ in a heat block for 10 min. Pre-stained protein markers (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) were used to determine protein size. Four samples were loaded onto 4–15% SDS-PAGE gels and subjected to electrophoresis. Subsequently, Coomassie blue was used for visualization.Gels were washed with 5% ACN (SigmaAldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) in 25mM NH4HCO3 (SigmaAldrich, St. Louis, MO). After cutting gels in to small pieces, they were de-stained twice using 50% ACN in 25 mM NH4HCO3, dehydrated with ACN, and then dried. Proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C using trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in 40 mM NH4HCO3. Tryptic peptides were extracted twice with 0.5% TFA in 50% ACN, followed by ACN. The extracted peptides were dried and desalted using C18 spin columns (Harvard Apparatus, Hollistin, MA, USA).LC-MS analysis was performed using a nanoElute LC systems (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) connected to the timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics), using a CaptiveSpray nanoelectrospray ion source (Bruker Daltonics). About 200 ng of peptide digest was injected to a capillary C18 column (25 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter, 1.6 μm particle size, IonOpticks, Fitzroy, VIC, AUS). The mobile phase was 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B). Gradient elution with solvent A and B was carried out using the following settings: 120 min gradient of 2-17% B (0-60 minutes), 17-25% B for 60-90 minutes, 25-37% B for 90-100 minutes, 37-80% B for 100-110 min and maintained for 10 min at a flow rate of 0.4 μl/min. Mass spectral data ranging from m/z 100 to 1700 were collected in PASEF mode. Ion mobility resolution was set to 0.60-1.60 V·s/cm over a ramp time of 100 ms, which ramped collisional energy stepwise. 10 PASEF MS/MS scans per cycle were used for Data-dependent acquisition.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed using Peaks software (version 10.5) and matched to tryptic peptide fragment from the Uniprot Pseudomonas protein database with a maximum number of allowed missed cleavages of three. Mass tolerance was set as 15 ppm and 0.05 Da for precursor and fragment mass respectively. The variable modification included methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 0.01 for peptide identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Outer membrane vesicle

### Affiliations
KOREA BASIC SCIENCE INSTITUTE
korea basic science institute

### Submitter
Jaekwan Kim

### Lab Head
Dr JaeKwan Kim
KOREA BASIC SCIENCE INSTITUTE


