### Accession
PXD026871

### Title
Rat, male,  brain, medial amygdala, LC-MSMS

### Description
Social isolation poses a severe mental and physiological burden on humans. Most animal models that investigate this effect are based on prolonged isolation, which does not mimic the milder conditions experienced by people in the real world. Here we show that in the medial amygdala, a brain structure that is crucial for social memory, acute social isolation causes social memory loss and significant changes in specific mRNAs and proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Lysates of medial amygdala samples were subjected to a solution tryptic digestion using the S-Trap method (ProtiFi), followed by a desalting step. The resulting peptides were analyzed using nanoflow liquid chromatography (nanoAcquity) coupled with high-resolution, high mass accuracy mass spectrometry (HF). Each sample was analyzed by the instrument separately in random order in the discovery mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant v1.6.0.16. The data was searched with the Andromeda search engine against the rat protein database, appended with common laboratory protein contaminants and the following modifications: fixed modification- cysteine carbamidomethylation; variable modifications- methionine oxidation; asparagine and glutamine deamidation; protein N-terminal acetylation. Decoy hits were filtered out, as well as proteins that were identified on the of basis one peptide only. Intensities indicated per protein detected per sample were log2 transformed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Lc-msms, Rat, Social isolation, Medial amygdala

### Affiliations
Sagol Department of Neurobiology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, University of Haifa, Israel
University of Haifa

### Submitter
Maya Lalzar

### Lab Head
Dr Shlomo Wagner
Sagol Department of Neurobiology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, University of Haifa, Israel


