### Accession
PXD043754

### Title
Human Histone Sulfated Tyrosine Identification

### Description
Tyrosine sulfation is a common posttranslational modification in mammals. To date, it has been thought to be limited to secreted and transmembrane proteins, but little is known about tyrosine sulfation on nuclear proteins.To search for tyrosine sulfation on nuclear proteins, we purified the nucleus of HepG2 cells and searched for Ysulf using HPLC–MS/MS.We noted a peptide that is highly indicative of sulfation on the tyrosine 99 residue of histone H3(H3Y99sulf).We synthesized the peptides with the same primary sequence and modifications as were identified in the HPLC–MS/MS analysis: The synthesized H3Y99sulf peptides and their in vivo counterparts showed similar chromatographic and mass spectrum profiles in the same HPLC–MS/MS system . These results demonstrate that H3Y99sulf is an undocumented histone modification

### Sample Protocol
Nuclei from HepG2 cells were obtained using the Nuclei Pure Prep Nuclei Isolation Kit (catalog no. NUC-201, Sigma-Aldrich) according to the protocol provided by the manufacturer.The peptide samples were loaded onto a C18 column (15-cm length × 0.075-mm ID, 2-μm particle size, Thermo Scientific, catalog no. 164940) connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated and eluted with a gradient of 8% to 98% HPLC buffer B (80% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% Formic acid (FA), v/v) in buffer A (0.1% FA in H2O, v/v) at a flow rate of 300 nl min−1 over 65 min. In the comparison between synthesized peptides and their counterparts in cells, the peptides were separated and eluted with a gradient of 1% to 98% HPLC buffer B (80% ACN in 0.1% FA, v/v) in buffer A (0.1% FA in H2O, v/v) at a flow rate of 800 nl min-1 over 30 min.

### Data Protocol
The eluted peptides were then ionized and analyzed with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Full mass spectrometry was acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over the range m/z 350 to 1,800 with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. The 20 most intense ions with charge 2–7 were fragmented with normalized collision energy of 28 and tandem mass spectra were acquired with a mass resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200.

### Publication Abstract
Tyrosine sulfation is a common posttranslational modification in mammals. To date, it has been thought to be limited to secreted and transmembrane proteins, but little is known about tyrosine sulfation on nuclear proteins. Here we report that SULT1B1 is a histone sulfotransferase that can sulfate the tyrosine 99 residue of nascent histone H3 in cytosol. The sulfated histone H3 can be transported into the nucleus and majorly deposited in the promoter regions of genes in chromatin. While the H3Y99 residue is buried inside octameric nucleosome, dynamically regulated subnucleosomal structures provide chromatin-H3Y99sulf the opportunity of being recognized and bound by PRMT1, which deposits H4R3me2a in chromatin. Disruption of H3Y99sulf reduces PRMT1 binding to chromatin, H4R3me2a level and gene transcription. These findings reveal the mechanisms underlying H3Y99 sulfation and its cross-talk with H4R3me2a to regulate gene transcription. This study extends the spectrum of tyrosine sulfation on nuclear proteins and the repertoire of histone modifications regulating chromatin functions.

### Keywords
Human, Histone sulfation, Liver, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Huazhong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Weixing Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Yugang Wang
Huazhong University of Science and Technology


