### Accession
PXD043031

### Title
Inhibition of DNMT1 methyltransferase activity via glucose-regulated O-GlcNAcylation alters the epigenome

### Description
The DNA methyltransferase activity of DNMT1 is vital for genomic maintenance of DNA methylation. We report here that DNMT1 function is regulated by O-GlcNAcylation, a protein modification that is sensitive to glucose levels, and that elevated O-GlcNAcylation of DNMT1 from high glucose environment leads to alterations to the epigenome. Using mass spectrometry and complementary alanine mutation experiments, we identified S878 as the major residue that is O-GlcNAcylated on DNMT1. Functional studies further revealed that O-GlcNAcylation of DNMT1-S878 results in an inhibition of methyltransferase activity, resulting in a general loss of DNA methylation that is preferentially at partially methylated domains (PMDs). This loss of methylation corresponds with an increase in DNA damage and apoptosis. These results establish O-GlcNAcylation of DNMT1 as a mechanism through which the epigenome is regulated by glucose metabolism and implicates a role for glycosylation of DNMT1 in metabolic diseases characterized by hyperglycemia.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant DNMT1 protein was reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide. To ensure coverage of the predicted O-GlcNAc site, the protein was separately digested with three complementary enzymes (Chymotrypsin, AspN, and LysC). Digested peptides were desalted using C18 stage tips (Pierce, Rockford, IL). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Peptides were separated on an Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) operated in nanoflow (300 nL/mi) mode using a  60-minute LC gradient and an EasySpray column (2 µm particle sizes: 500 mm x 75 μm I.D.). Full MS scans were acquired from 400 to 1600 m/z at 120,000 resolution. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 using HCD at 35% collision energy.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were submitted to Byonic (v2.16.11) for target decoy search against the human protein database (uniprot/swissprot, 2020) assuming static Cys carbamidomethylation and dynamic Met oxidation, Ser/Thr GlcNAc, and Ser/Thr phosphorylation. Only peptide passing the a false discovery rate threshold 0.01 were considered for downstream analysis. The sample was bracketed by E. coli QC runs, which were then correlated to ensure instrument quality. QC passed threshold (≥ 0.9) with an R2 of 0.98 (correlation value, R=0.99)

### Publication Abstract
The DNA methyltransferase activity of DNMT1 is vital for genomic maintenance of DNA methylation. We report here that DNMT1 function is regulated by <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation, a protein modification that is sensitive to glucose levels, and that elevated <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation of DNMT1 from high glucose environment leads to alterations to the epigenome. Using mass spectrometry and complementary alanine mutation experiments, we identified S878 as the major residue that is <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylated on human DNMT1. Functional studies in human and mouse cells further revealed that <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation of DNMT1-S878 results in an inhibition of methyltransferase activity, resulting in a general loss of DNA methylation that preferentially occurs at partially methylated domains (PMDs). This loss of methylation corresponds with an increase in DNA damage and apoptosis. These results establish <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation of DNMT1 as a mechanism through which the epigenome is regulated by glucose metabolism and implicates a role for glycosylation of DNMT1 in metabolic diseases characterized by hyperglycemia.

### Keywords
Hyperglycemia, Epigenetics, O-glcnacylation, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Department of Diabetes Complications and Metabolism, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope, Duarte, CA 91010
City of Hope

### Submitter
Heon Shin

### Lab Head
Dr Dustin E Schones
Department of Diabetes Complications and Metabolism, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope, Duarte, CA 91010


