### Accession
PXD001977

### Title
Alterations in the sputum proteome and transcriptome in smokers and early-stage COPD patients

### Description
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of the most prevalent lung diseases, and involves persistent airflow limitation and incorporates both emphysema and chronic bronchitis. Cigarette smoking has been identified as the main risk factor for disease development and progression. In a basic model of COPD, the disease is initiated when the physiologic response mechanisms to cigarette smoke exposure are overwhelmed; for example, because of long-term exposure effects or other aging-related changes. In this parallel-group case-controlled clinical study we asked to what extent the different transitions in a chronic-exposure-to-disease model are reflected in the proteome and cellular transcriptome of induced sputum samples from the lung. For this, we selected 60 age- and gender-matched individuals for each of four study groups: current healthy smokers, current-smoker COPD patients, former smokers, and never smokers (a total of 240 individuals). Induced sputum was collected, the cell-free supernatant was analyzed by quantitative proteomics (isobaric-tag based), and the cellular mRNA fraction was analyzed by microarray-based expression profiling. The sputum proteome of current smokers (healthy or COPD patients) clearly reflected the common physiological responses to smoke exposure, including alterations in mucin/trefoil proteins (e.g., MUC5AC and TFF1/3up-regulation), peptidase regulators (e.g., TIMP1 up-regulation), and a prominent xenobiotic/oxidative stress response (e.g., NQO1 and ALDH3A1 up-regulation). The latter response also was observed in the sputum transcriptome, which additionally demonstrated an immune-related polarization change (toward a M2 signature). The (long-term) former smoker group showed nearly complete reversal of the observable biological effects. Thirteen differentially abundant proteins between the COPD and healthy smoker groups were identified. These abundant proteins included previously reported COPD-associated proteins (e.g., TIMP1 (up-regulation) and APOA1 (down-regulation)) and novel proteins such as C6orf58 and BPIFB1 (LPLUNC1) (both up-regulated in the COPD group compared with the healthy smokers). In summary, our study demonstrates that sputum proteomics/transcriptomics can capture the complex and reversible physiological response to cigarette smoke exposure, which appears to be only slightly modulated in early-stage COPD patients. The study has been registered on ClinicalTrials.gov with identifier NCT01780298.

### Sample Protocol
Sputum samples from all 240 evaluable study subjects were processed in random order. A reference sample was included by mixing equal amounts of all 240 samples. Proteins were extracted by acetone precipitation, purified, and desalted. Following trypsin digestion, peptides were labeled using Tandem Mass Tag™ 6-plex (TMTsixplex™) reagents (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), and one labeled sample each representing the four study groups plus the reference sample were mixed in equal amounts. For this, the paired subjects in each TMT set were matched to the COPD sample by age, ethnicity, and gender (and a match ID was assigned to each set). These labeled mixes were then purified to remove unincorporated TMT™ reagents and subsequently analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass-spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using an EASY-nanoLC 1000 instrument connected online to a Q Exactive™ mass-analyzer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were fractionated on a 50 cm C18RP RSLC EASY-spray™ column (2 μm particle size; Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min with a 200 min gradient from nanoLC buffer A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) to 40% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid. Each sample set was analyzed in duplicate in fast and sensitive analysis mode as described previously.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data from both injections were merged and compared against the human reference proteome in the UniProt database (http://www.uniprot.org/, version January 2014). Proteome Discoverer™ 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) was used for the database searches with the SEQUEST™ HT and Mascot® 2.4 search algorithms. Peptide identification probability had to be ≥95%. The Percolator node of Proteome Discoverer™ was used to estimate peptide-level adjusted p-values (q-values), and the peptides were filtered for a q-value <0.05 (i.e., the false discovery rate (FDR) was controlled at the 5% level). The quantification of TMT™ reporter ions and the peptide-to-protein (group) assignments was performed with Proteome Discoverer™. Sample runs that failed the quality control were excluded. Quantitative data were filtered for “unique” quantitative results; e.g., by removing redundant results from multiple search engines, and TMT™ peptide-level data were exported and further processed in the R statistical environment [67]. A global variance stabilizing normalization was performed [68, 69]. Each TMT™ reporter ion set was normalized to its median, and protein expression values were calculated as the median of these normalized peptide-level quantitation values [70]. Only proteins quantified for at least 2/3 of the samples of each study group were considered for differential abundance analysis. For this, linear models were fit for the different study group comparisons with the match ID as a covariate. P-values from a moderated t-statistics were calculated with the empirical Bayes approach (Gentleman et al., 2004) and the Benjamini–Hochberg (BH) FDR method was used to correct for multiple testing effects. Proteins with a BH-adjusted p-values <0.05 were considered as differentially abundant.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of the most prevalent lung diseases. Cigarette smoking is the main risk factor for COPD. In this parallel-group clinical study we investigated to what extent the transitions in a chronic-exposure-to-disease model are reflected in the proteome and cellular transcriptome of induced sputum samples. We selected 60 age- and gender-matched individuals for each of the four study groups: current asymptomatic smokers, smokers with early stage COPD, former smokers, and never smokers. The cell-free sputum supernatant was analyzed by quantitative proteomics and the cellular mRNA fraction by gene expression profiling. The sputum proteome of current smokers clearly reflected the common physiological responses to smoke exposure, including alterations in mucin/trefoil proteins and a prominent xenobiotic/oxidative stress response. The latter response also was observed in the transcriptome, which additionally demonstrated an immune-cell polarization change. The former smoker group showed nearly complete attenuation of these biological effects. Thirteen differentially abundant proteins between the COPD and the asymptomatic smoker group were identified including TIMP1, APOA1, C6orf58, and BPIFB1 (LPLUNC1). In summary, our study demonstrates that sputum profiling can capture the complex and reversible physiological response to cigarette smoke exposure, which appears to be only slightly modulated in early-stage COPD.

### Keywords
Tmt; copd; sputum; clinical study

### Affiliations
Philip Morris International R&D, Philip Morris Products S.A., Quai Jeanrenaud 5, 2000 Neuchâtel, Switzerland
Philip Morris International R&D, Philip Morris Products S.A., Quai Jeanrenaud 5, 2000 Neuchatel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Bjoern Titz

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Hoeng
Philip Morris International R&D, Philip Morris Products S.A., Quai Jeanrenaud 5, 2000 Neuchatel, Switzerland


