### Accession
PXD006548

### Title
Potential molecular mechanisms of overgrazing-induced plant dwarf of sheepgrass (Leymus chinensis) analyzed using proteome data

### Description
Abstract Objective: This study was designed to reveal the potential molecular mechanisms of long-term overgrazing-induced dwarf of sheepgrass (Leymus chinensis). Methods: The electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) system was used to generate the proteomic data in dwarf sheepgrass from long-term overgrazed rangeland and normal sheepgrass from long-term enclosed rangeland. The differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between dwarf and normal sheepgrass were identified, following the analyses of potential functions and interactions of DEPs. Additionally, the expressions of DEPs were confirmed by high performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrum (HPLC-MS) system with multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) method. Results: A total of 51 up-regulated proteins and 53 down-regulated proteins were identified in the dwarf sheepgrass, compared with the normal controls. Some proteins like SAT5_ARATH and DAPA_MAIZE were enriched in the pathway of amino acid biosynthesis. In the protein-protein interaction network, RPOB2_LEPTE, A0A023H9M8_9STRA, ATPB_DIOEL, RBL_AMOTI and DNAK_GRATL interacted with each other. Furthermore, 4 modules were extracted from the PPI network. In addition, the HPLC-MS analysis confirmed the up-regulation of ATPB_DIOEL and the down-regulation of DNAK_GRATL in dwarf samples compared with the controls. Conclusion: The up-regulated ATPB_DIOEL and down-regulated DNAK_GRATL, as well as the proteins that interacted with them, such as RPOB2_LEPTE, A0A023H9M8_9STRA and RBL_AMOTI, may be associated with the long-term overgrazing-induced sheepgrass dwarf.

### Sample Protocol
Plant materials Sheepgrass [Leymus chinensis (Trin.) Tzvel.] plants were sampled from long-term overgrazed rangeland (n = 3, GZ group) and adjacent long-term enclosed rangeland that was enclosed since 1983 for long-term ecological observation and research (n = 3, NG group). The picture of sheepgrass plants in the GZ and NG groups is shown in Figure 1. Both of the rangelands were located at the Inner Mongolia Grassland Ecosystem Research Station (IMGERS) of Chinese Academy of Sciences (43°38’ N, 116°42’ E). The GZ site has been grazed by about 600 sheep and goats throughout the year for more than 30 years at the stocking rate of about 3 sheep unit per hectare. After cutting the aboveground portion of sheepgrass plants to 2 cm, the rhizome samples of sheepgrass were grown in an incubator at 25°C under long-day condition (16 h light and 8 h dark cycle) to form asexual buds. In this step, a modified Hoagland’s medium (pH 6.0, adjusted with NaOH) was utilized, consisting of Ca(NO3)2∙4H2O (945 mg/L), KNO3 (506 mg/L), NH4NO3 (80 mg/L), KH2PO4 (136 mg/L), MgSO4∙7H2O (493 mg/L), H3BO3 (6.2 mg/L), MnSO4∙4H2O (22.3 mg/L), ZnSO4∙7H2O (8.6 mg/L), KI (0.83 mg/L), CuSO4∙5H2O (0.025 mg/L), CoCL∙6H2O (0.025 mg/L), NaMoO4∙2H2O (0.25 mg/L), FeSO4∙7H2O (13.9 mg/L), and NaFe-EDTA (18.65 mg/L). Afterwards, asexual buds were separated from the parent body and grown under the same conditions for 50 d to obtain young seedlings. Subsequently, seedlings were washed with distilled water, and samples were collected from leaf using sterilized scissors and tweezers. Samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for further analysis.  Protein preparation and analysis  After liquid nitrogen grinding, the sample power was soaked in 30 mL acetone containing 10 % (w/v) trichloroacetic acid overnight. Following refrigerated high-speed centrifugation, sediment was washed with acetone three times and dried. Subsequently, the SDT-generated lysates underwent ultrasonication and centrifugation. The protein in supernatant was quantified using micro bicinchoninic acid method (Pierce). Afterwards, proteins were separated on the 12.5% sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Then, proteins were hydrolyzed into peptides using trypsin following a previous study (JR et al., 2009), and the peptides were quantified at 280 nm. The iTRAQ Reagent-8plex Multiplex Kit (AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA, USA) was used to label each peptide sample (70 µg). The labeled peptides were separated on a reversed-phase (RP)-C18 column (75 µm × 250 mm, 3 µm, Column Technology Inc., Fremont, CA, USA) in a capillary high performance liquid chromatographer (EASY nLC1000, Proxeon, Denmark) with a linear gradient of 0–55% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid–84% acetonitrile) in mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid aqueous solution) from 220 min to 228 min, followed by a linear gradient of 55-100% mobile phase B from 229 min to 240 min. Finally, the obtained fractions were analyzed on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (MS) (Thermo Finnigan, CA, USA) (full scan range: 300-1800 m/z; detection mode: positive ion; MS1 resolution: 70,000 at m/z 200; automatic gain control target: 3e6; maximum IT: 20 ms; dynamic exclusion: 25.0 s; number of scan ranges: 1). A total of 10 fragment maps were collected in each full scan for MS2 scan (activation type: higher energy collisional dissociation; isolation window: 2 m/z; resolution: 17,500 at m/z 200; microscans: 1; maximum IT: 60 ms; normalized collision energy: 29eV; underfill ratio: 0.1 %).

### Data Protocol
Data preprocessing  Raw proteomic data were converted to mzXML data using ReAdW software (available at http://tools.proteomecenter.org/wiki/index.php?title=Software:ReAdW). Match of mzXML data to Swiss-Prot/TrEMBL database (http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Differentially expressed protein, Sheepgrass, Dwarf, Overgrazing, Network

### Affiliations
Institute of Grassland Research, Chinese Academy of Agriculture Sciences, Hohhot, Inner Mongolia,010010, China P.R.
Institute of Grassland Research, Chinese Academy of Agriculture Sciences, Hohhot, Inner Mongolia,010010, China P.R. 

### Submitter
Weibo Ren

### Lab Head
Dr Weibo Ren
Institute of Grassland Research, Chinese Academy of Agriculture Sciences, Hohhot, Inner Mongolia,010010, China P.R.


