### Accession
PXD012379

### Title
Stylosanthes guianensis-LC-MS -  Physiological responses and proteomic changes reveal insights into Stylosanthes response to manganese toxicity

### Description
Manganese (Mn), an essential element for plants, can be toxic when present in excess. Stylo (Stylosanthes) is a pioneer tropical legume with great potential for Mn tolerance, but its Mn tolerance mechanisms remain poorly understood. In this study, the mechanisms underlying stylo response to Mn toxicity were investigated using two stylo genotypes with contrasting Mn tolerance. Results showed that stylo genotype RY5 exhibited Mn tolerance superior to that of genotype TF2001, showing lower reductions in leaf chlorophyll concentration, maximum quantum yield of photosystem II (Fv/Fm) value and plant dry weight under Mn toxicity. Furthermore, RY5 tolerance to Mn toxicity could be attributed to stimulation of antioxidant protection and regulation of Mn homeostasis. Subsequently, a label-free quantitative proteomic analysis was conducted to investigate the protein profiles in the leaves and roots of stylo in response to Mn toxicity. A total of 356 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified, including 206 proteins from leaves and 150 proteins from roots, which consisted of 71 upregulated, 62 downregulated, 127 strongly induced and 96 completely suppressed proteins. These DEPs were mainly involved in defense response, photosynthesis, carbon fixation, metabolism, cell wall modulation and signaling. The qRT-PCR analysis verified that 10 out of 12 corresponding gene transcription patterns correlated with their encoding proteins after Mn exposure. Furthermore, stylo plants coped with Mn toxicity may be through enhancement of defense response and phenylpropanoid pathway, adjustment of metabolic process, and modulation of protein synthesis and turnover. Taken together, this study increases our understanding of tropical legume responses to Mn toxicity.

### Sample Protocol
The label-free proteomic approach was conducted at Applied Protein Technology Company (APTBIO Ltd., China). For protein extraction, leaf and root proteins were extracted using the method described by Chen et al.(2015). Briefly, approximately 3 g samples were homogenized in modified Tris-HCl (pH 8.8) extraction buffer. After the homogenates were centrifuged, the supernatants were incubated with methanol at -20°C. After centrifugation, the resulting pellets were washed with acetone and ethanol. Finally, the resulting proteins were dissolved in SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0). The protein content of each sample was determined using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA). For filter-aided sample preparation, 200 μg of protein extract for each sample was mixed with UA buffer (8 M urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0). The detergent, DTT and other components in the mixture were removed by repeated ultrafiltration (Microcon units, 10 kD). Then, the proteins were alkylated with 100 μL of 100 mM iodoacetamide in UA buffer at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. The filters were washed three times with 100 μL of UA buffer and then twice with 100 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 buffer. The proteins were then digested with 4 μg trypsin (Promega, WI) in 40 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 buffer overnight at 37°C, and the resulting peptides were recovered by centrifugation. The peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 Empore™ SPE Cartridges (Sigma, Germany) and concentrated by vacuum centrifugation, which was followed by reconstitution in 40 μL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. For mass spectrometry, the peptide mixture was loaded onto a 2 cm × 100 μm reversed-phase C18 trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Schwerte, Germany) and separated on a 10 cm × 75 μm C18 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in mobile phases A (0.1% formic acid) and B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The gradient was increased to 55% of buffer B in 110 min and to 100% of buffer B in 5 min, with a hold at 100% of buffer B for 5 min. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Schwerte, Germany) coupled to an Easy nLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 120 min. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top 10 method, dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300-1800 m/z). The resolution was set to 70,000 for the MS scans and 17,500 for the data-dependent MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantification, the MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.17 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry in Martinsried, Germany) as described by Li et al. [32]. Database searches were conducted against Papilionoideae in UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org/), which contained 490,695 sequences when updated on July 6, 2017. The mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm, and the main search tolerance was 6 ppm, allowing for two missed trypsin cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and N-acetylation protein were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptide and protein identification (Supplemental Tables S1,S2). MaxQuant also added a list of common contaminants to the database to avoid false discoveries from contaminant proteins. Proteins identified at least twice in the three biological replicates were considered quantifiable proteins. Proteins with abundance changes of more than 2-fold and cutoff values of P<0.05 were defined as differentially expressed between the groups (Supplemental Table S3). The Blast2GO (version 3.3.5) program was used for protein mapping and functional annotation against the GO database. The online Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) was used to classify and group the identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Manganese toxicity, Label-free quantitative proteome, Stylosanthes

### Affiliations
Institute of Tropical Crop Genetic Resources, Chinese Academy of Tropical Agriculture Sciences

### Submitter
Zhijian Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Zhijian Chen
Institute of Tropical Crop Genetic Resources, Chinese Academy of Tropical Agriculture Sciences


