### Accession
PXD034457

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of RAP (RNA Antisense Purification) isolated RNPs (RiboNucleotide Particles) harboring the novel lncRNA mimi

### Description
In neurons, mRNAs and associated RNA-binding proteins assemble into ribonucleoprotein (RNP) granules essential to regulate mRNA trafficking, local translation, and turnover. Dysregulation of RNA-protein condensation can disturb synaptic plasticity. We report that the novel lncRNA mimi is a constitutive and essential component of large cytoplasmic condensates (RNP granules) in fly neurons. In order to identify direct mimi RNA binders we employ RAP assisted purification of mimi RNPs subsequent to UV-crosslinking of adult fly brain tissue (non UV irradiated samples serve as control). Applying relative Max Quant LFQ quantification (Max LFQ) we carry out a differential proteomic analysis of mimi RNP complexes in UV-irradiated versus non irradiated fly brains.

### Sample Protocol
5’biotin-conjugated DNA probes with Internal Spacer18, targeting mimi RNA, were utilized for hybridization assisted mimi RNP purification (RAP) from UV irradiated fly head powder. UV-crosslinked and non-crosslinked (control) RAP samples (four biological replicates, respectively) were eluted by RNase treatment and samples were finally adjusted to 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.9 and 0.1% SDS prior to paramagnetic bead-based single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) purification as described in the following. Briefly, samples were reduced (DTT; 12 mM final concentration) at 45 °C for 30 min, followed by cysteine alkylation (2 iodoacetamide; 40 mM final concentration) for 30 min at room temperature (RT) in the dark. 100 µg SP3 beads (1:1 mixture of GE Life Sciences carboxylate-modified Sera-Mag Speed Beads A (hydrophilic) and B (hydrophobic), respectively) were added together with acetonitrile (70% final concentration) and incubated on a shaker for 15 min at RT. In all further steps, magnetic beads were collected on an in-house fabricated Neodymium (Supermagnete, Germany) magnetic rack. Beads suspension was washed twice with ethanol (70%) and once with 100% acetonitrile. Proteolytic digestion was carried out in 50 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. First, we added 100 ng endoproteinase LysC (Wako Pure Chemical Corporation) incubating 2 h at 37 °C followed by addition of 500 ng trypsin (Promega) with over-night incubation at 37 °C. After digestion, peptides were sonicated for 1 min (water bath sonicator) and spun down. For peptide clean-up bead suspension was vacuum concentrated to 5 µl, adjusted to >90% acetonitrile concentration and washed twice with neat acetonitrile, incubating 15 min at RT each time. Lastly, samples were eluted by addition of ultra HPLC-grade water (Pierce) in two steps and a final step employing 0.1% TFA pooling the eluates. Pooled eluates were concentrated in vacuo and resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid prior to nanoLC-MS. Nano-scale LC-MS Top12-DDA analysis was done on a Q Exactive Plus MS system interlinked to an EASY-nLC1200 nUHPLC. Chromatographic separation of tryptic peptides was conducted on a 25 cm in-house packed fused-silica emitter microcolumn (75 μm ID × 360 µm OD SilicaTip PicoTip; New Objective) packed with 1.9 μm reverse-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ beads (Dr. Maisch, Germany). SP3 purified samples were measured in two technical replicates utilizing a 60 min gradient nLC-MS method. The gradient was: 5 min: 10%, 40 min: 40%, 4 min: 80% (250 nl/min flow rate). This was followed by a “wash out step”: 5 min: 80%B buffer and a 5 min inverse gradient from 80% to 2% B buffer (flow rates 450 nl/min).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (v. 1.6.14.0) employing standard parameters was used to identify peptides and final proteins identification role-up (both at 1%FDR). MS raw data were searched simultaneously with the target-decoy standard settings against the Uniprot Drosophila melanogaster database (Uniprot_reviewed+Trembl including canonical isoforms; downloaded on August 5th, 2020) and an in-house curated FASTA file containing commonly observed contaminant proteins. For mimi-RAP experiments the inter-sample relative abundance was determined using the MaxQuant MaxLFQ algorithm with enabling the match between runs option (matching time window of 0.5 min). Downstream analysis was carried out using an in-house modified R script employing the DEP package as base (PMID: 29446774.). Briefly, contaminants, reverse, and only identified by site entries were filtered out. At least 2 valid quantitation values in any group (bait or control) were required. Data were vsn (variance-stabilizing normalization)-transformed and missing values imputed by drawing values from a normal distribution (width 0.5, downshift 1.8). Statistical analysis was done using limma (with trend=TRUE), and the obtained p-values were corrected for multiple hypotheses by Benjamini-Yekutieli. Differentially enriched proteins were classified by having an adjusted p-value ≤ 0.05 and a log2 fold change > |0.5| (UV versus control). Samples S01 to S04 are control (RAP_nonXL; without UV irradiation) and samples S05 to S08 represent UV crosslinked mimi RNPs (RAP_UVXL).

### Publication Abstract
RNA binding proteins and messenger RNAs (mRNAs) assemble into ribonucleoprotein granules that regulate mRNA trafficking, local translation, and turnover. The dysregulation of RNA-protein condensation disturbs synaptic plasticity and neuron survival and has been widely associated with human neurological disease. Neuronal granules are thought to condense around particular proteins that dictate the identity and composition of each granule type. Here, we show in <i>Drosophila</i> that a previously uncharacterized long noncoding RNA, <i>mimi</i>, is required to scaffold large neuronal granules in the adult nervous system. Neuronal ELAV-like proteins directly bind <i>mimi</i> and mediate granule assembly, while Staufen maintains condensate integrity. <i>mimi</i> granules contain mRNAs and proteins involved in synaptic processes; granule loss in <i>mimi</i> mutant flies impairs nervous system maturity and neuropeptide-mediated signaling and causes phenotypes of neurodegeneration. Our work reports an architectural RNA for a neuronal granule and provides a handle to interrogate functions of a condensate independently of those of its constituent proteins.

### Keywords
Rap rna protein complex isolation; uv crosslinking; fly brain; neurons; lncrna mimi; fne; rbp9, Elav; drosophila; relative lfq (label free quantification) quantitative proteomics;

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit, Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics
Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics Proteomics Unit Stuebeweg 51 79108 Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Gerhard Mittler

### Lab Head
Dr Gerhard Mittler
Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics Proteomics Unit Stuebeweg 51 79108 Freiburg, Germany


