### Accession
PXD030298

### Title
Identification and Tetramer Structure of SPD_0310 Hemin-storage Protein Linked to Streptococcus pneumoniae Iron Homeostasis and Virulence

### Description
We found that the homologous proteins of SPD_0310 of Streptococcus pneumoniae widely exists in Gram-positive bacteria. SPD_0310 has heme binding ability. In the GST pull-down experiment, we found that it can interact with several proteins.

### Sample Protocol
The GST-gel beads (Sigma-Aldrich) were combined with SPD_0310-GST fusion protein and GST, respectively, then incubated with the whole proteins of S. pneumoniae D39 for 10 h at 4 °C. Next, the protein-gel beads (mixture) were centrifugated at 2000 g for 3 min, to remove the supernatant. Then, the mixture was washed with 1 × PBS for three times, incubated with SDS-PAGE loading buffer and boiled for 10 min, and then detected by 12 % SDS-PAGE gel. The samples of different lanes were digested in-gel and desalinated using desalting column (Bio-Rad, Shanghai, China) and the Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column of HPLC system (Thermo), respectively. The samples after lyophilization were redissolved using 0.1% (v:v) formic acid. Detailed procedures were performed in accordance with our previous study.

### Data Protocol
The candidate proteins interacting with SPD_0310 were identified by mass spectrometer (Triple-TOF 5600, AB SCIEX, USA). The identified piptides were performed to search against the NCBInr database of S. pneumoniae D39 using the MASCOT 2.2.04 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA). The specific parameters were shown as follows: (1) enzyme, trypsin; (2) fixed modification carbamido methyl; (3) unique peptides ≥ 2; (4) peptide length ≥ 8 aa; (5) variable modification oxidation; (6) contaminants, trypsin and keratins. Next, the identified candidate proteins were expressed and purified using GST system to confirm their interaction with SPD_0310.

### Publication Abstract
Iron and iron-containing compounds are essential for bacterial virulence and host infection. Hemin is an important supplement compound for bacterial survival in an iron-deficient environment. Despite strong interest in hemin metabolism, the detailed mechanism of hemin transportation in Gram-positive bacteria is yet to be reported. The results of our study revealed that the homologous proteins of SPD_0310 were significantly conservative in Gram-positive bacteria (<i>P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;</i>0.001), and these proteins were identified as belonging to an uncharacterized protein family (UPF0371). The results of thermodynamic and kinetic studies have shown that SPD_0310 has a high hemin-binding affinity. Interestingly, we found that the crystal structure of SPD_0310 presented a homotetramer conformation, which is required for hemin binding. SPD_0310 can interact with many hemin-binding proteins (SPD_0090, SPD_1609, and GAPDH) located on the cell surface, which contributes to hemin transfer to the cytoplasm. It also has a high affinity with other iron transporters in the cytoplasm (SPD_0226 and SPD_0227), which facilitates iron redistribution in cells. More importantly, the knockout of the <i>spd_0310</i> gene (&#x394;<i>spd_0310</i>) resulted in a decrease in the iron content and protein expression levels of many bacterial adhesion factors. Moreover, the animal model showed that the &#x394;<i>spd_0310</i> strain has a lower virulence than the wild type. Based on the crystallographic and biochemical studies, we inferred that SPD_0310 is a hemin intermediate transporter which contributes to iron homeostasis and further affects the virulence of Streptococcus pneumoniae in the host. Our study provides not only an important theoretical basis for the in-depth elucidation of the hemin transport mechanism in bacteria but also an important candidate target for the development of novel antimicrobial agents based on metal transport systems. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Iron is an essential element for bacterial virulence and infection of the host. The detailed hemin metabolism in Gram-positive bacteria has rarely been studied. SPD_0310 belongs to the UPF0371 family of proteins, and results of homology analysis and evolutionary tree analysis suggested that it was widely distributed and highly conserved in Gram-positive bacteria. However, the function of the UPF0371 family remains unknown. We successfully determined the crystal structure of apo-SPD_0310, which is a homotetramer. We found that cytoplasmic protein SPD_0310 with a special tetramer structure has a strong hemin-binding ability and interacts with many iron transporters, which facilitates hemin transfer from the extracellular space to the cytoplasm. The results of detailed functional analyses indicated that SPD_0310 may function as a hemin transporter similar to hemoglobin in animals and contributes to bacterial iron homeostasis and virulence. This study provides a novel target for the development of antimicrobial drugs against pathogenic Gram-positive bacteria.

### Keywords
Gst pull-down, Spd_0310, Streptococcus pneumoniae

### Affiliations
Guangdong medical University,dongguan, GUANGDONG
Jinan University, Guangzhou

### Submitter
Kun Cao

### Lab Head
Dr Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology
Jinan University, Guangzhou


