### Accession
PXD028931

### Title
In-depth matrisome and glycoproteomic analysis of glioblastoma human brain tissue

### Description
Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and malignant primary brain tumor. The extracellular matrix (ECM), also known as the matrisome, helps determine glioma invasion, adhesion, and growth. Little attention, however, has been paid to glycosylation of the ECM components that constitute the majority of glycosylated protein mass and presumed biological properties. To acquire a comprehensive understanding of the biological functions of the matrisome and its components, including proteoglycans and glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), in GBM tumorigenesis, and to identify potential biomarker candidates, we studied the alterations of GAGs, including heparan sulfate (HS) and chondroitin sulfate (CS), the core proteins of proteoglycans, and other glycosylated matrisomal proteins in GBM subtypes vs. control human brain tissue samples. We scrutinized the proteomics data to acquire in-depth site-specific glycoproteomic profiles of the GBM subtypes that will assist in identifying specific glycosylation changes in GBM. We observed an increase in CS 6-O sulfation and a decrease in HS 6-O sulfation, accompanied by an increase in unsulfated CS and HS disaccharides in GBM vs. control samples. Several core matrisome proteins, including proteoglycans (decorin, biglycan, agrin, prolargin, glypican-1, CSPG4), tenascin, fibronectin, hyaluronan link protein 1 and 2, laminins, and collagens, were differentially regulated in GBM vs. controls. Interestingly, a higher degree of collagen hydroxyprolination was also observed for GBM vs. controls. Further, two proteoglycans, CSPG4 and agrin, were significantly lower, about 6–fold for IDH-mutant compared to the WT GBM samples. Differential regulation of O-glycopeptides for proteoglycans, including brevican, neurocan, and versican, was observed for GBM subtypes vs. controls. Moreover, an increase in levels of glycosyltransferase and glycosidase enzymes was observed for GBM when compared to control samples. We also report distinct protein, peptide, and glycopeptide features for GBM subtypes comparisons. Taken together, our study informs understanding of the alterations to key matrisomal molecules that occur during GBM development.

### Sample Protocol
In total, 43 tissue microarray (TMA) cores were used, 39 consisted of GBM subtypes (11 classical, 9 mesenchymal, and 19 proneural) and 4 of control cores. An on slide tissue digestion protocol was used to digest and extract biomolecules from the TMA slides.A chemical inkjet chip printer (Shimadzu CHIP-1000) was used for printing enzymes to tissue surfaces. This device is capable of applying minimal 500 pL solutions to tissue surfaces. The printer scans an image of the TMA slide, which enables the user to designate the cores to be analyzed. Next, 1 μL enzyme solution was applied to each designated core using a user-defined printing pattern. To ensure exhaustive digestion, the enzyme printing process was repeated 4 times. The time interval for the repeated enzyme printing was 2 hr. After the 4th enzyme printing, the TMA slides were incubated in a humidified digestion chamber at 37°C, overnight. Briefly, a mixture of 0.5 mU /μL heparin lyases I, II, and III was applied first, followed by overnight incubation. Second, a 1 mU/μL chondroitinase ABC enzyme solution was applied to the same spot. Finally, 100 ng/μL trypsin solution was applied to the spots.Liquid extraction surface analysis (LESA) was used for automated extraction of compounds from tissue surfaces with minimized disturbance to tissue.The robot took 1 μL extraction buffer and delivered the solution to the designated core to form a 1.5 μm liquid micro junction. The digested products were resolved in the liquid micro junction and extracted from the tissue surface. This extraction process was repeated 5 times to enable maximum sample recovery from tissue surfaces.The extracted peptides were desalted and dried under vaccum centrifugation, and stored in -20 until further LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-MS/MS data were converted into mzXML format using ProteoWizard msConvert. The data were searched using PeaksDB and PeaksPTM using Peaks Studio version X+ (Bioinformatics Solutions, Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada ) against the Uniprot/Swissprot database for homo sapiens with a 1% false discovery rate and at least two unique peptides. A 10-ppm error tolerance for the precursor (MS1) and 0.02 Da mass error tolerance for fragment ions (MS2) were specified. A maximum of 3 missed cleavages per peptide was allowed for the database search, permitting non-tryptic cleavage at one end. Trypsin was specified as the enzyme and carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. A peaksPTM search was queued after the peaksDB search, using advanced settings of a larger set of variable modifications, including hydroxylation P, oxidation M, hydroxylation K, hydroxylation-Hex K, hydroxylation-Hex-Hex K, HexNAc ST, HexHexNAc ST, phosphorylation STY, ubiquitination K, deamidation N, methoxy K, and nitrotyrosine Y. The final protein list generated was a combination of peaskDB and peaksPTM searches. The label-free quantification was achieved using the PEAKS Studio Quantification- label-free module with a setting of mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and a retention time shift tolerance of 2.0 min.

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and malignant primary brain tumor. The extracellular matrix, also known as the matrisome, helps determine glioma invasion, adhesion, and growth. Little attention, however, has been paid to glycosylation of the extracellular matrix components that constitute the majority of glycosylated protein mass and presumed biological properties. To acquire a comprehensive understanding of the biological functions of the matrisome and its components, including proteoglycans (PGs) and glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), in GBM tumorigenesis, and to identify potential biomarker candidates, we studied the alterations of GAGs, including heparan sulfate (HS) and chondroitin sulfate (CS), the core proteins of PGs, and other glycosylated matrisomal proteins in GBM subtypes versus control human brain tissue samples. We scrutinized the proteomics data to acquire in-depth site-specific glycoproteomic profiles of the GBM subtypes that will assist in identifying specific glycosylation changes in GBM. We observed an increase in CS 6-O sulfation and a decrease in HS 6-O sulfation, accompanied by an increase in unsulfated CS and HS disaccharides in GBM versus control samples. Several core matrisome proteins, including PGs (decorin, biglycan, agrin, prolargin, glypican-1, and chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan 4), tenascin, fibronectin, hyaluronan link protein 1 and 2, laminins, and collagens, were differentially regulated in GBM versus controls. Interestingly, a higher degree of collagen hydroxyprolination was also observed for GBM versus controls. Further, two PGs, chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan 4 and agrin, were significantly lower, about 6-fold for isocitrate dehydrogenase-mutant, compared to the WT GBM samples. Differential regulation of O-glycopeptides for PGs, including brevican, neurocan, and versican, was observed for GBM subtypes versus controls. Moreover, an increase in levels of glycosyltransferase and glycosidase enzymes was observed for GBM when compared to control samples. We also report distinct protein, peptide, and glycopeptide features for GBM subtypes comparisons. Taken together, our study informs understanding of the alterations to key matrisomal molecules that occur during GBM development. (Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD028931, and the peaks project file is available at Zenodo with DOI 10.5281/zenodo.5911810).

### Keywords
Heparan sulfate, Glycosaminoglycans, Proteoglycans, Glycomics, Proteomics, Glioblastoma, Extracellular matrix, Glycosylation, Chondroitin sulfate, Glycoproteins, Matrisome, Mass-spectrometry

### Affiliations
Boston University
Dept. of Biochemistry, Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry, Boston University  2Bioinformatics Program, Boston Universty

### Submitter
Manveen Sethi

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph Zaia
Dept. of Biochemistry, Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry, Boston University  2Bioinformatics Program, Boston Universty


