### Accession
PXD023428

### Title
Autophagy in PDGFRα+ Mesenchymal Cells is Essential for Intestinal Stem Cell Survival: MALDI data

### Description
Autophagy defects are a risk factor for Inflammatory Bowel Diseases (IBD) through unknown mechanisms. Whole-body conditional deletion of essential autophagy gene (ATG) Atg7 in adult mice (Atg7Δ/Δ) causes tissue damage and death within three months due to neurodegeneration without substantial effect on intestine. In contrast, we report here that whole-body conditional Atg5 deletion in adult mice (Atg5Δ/Δ) caused death within five days due to rapid autophagy inhibition, elimination of ileum stem cells, and loss of barrier function. Atg5Δ/Δ mice lost PDGFRα+ mesenchymal cells (PMCs) and Wnt signaling essential for stem cell renewal, which were partially rescued by exogenous Wnt. To assess the metabolic consequences of ATG5 loss in PMCs and the ileum, we performed Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI) coupled to imaging mass spectrometry (IMS)  (MALDI-IMS) to distinguish between a specific metabolic defect in PMCs and an effect on the entire ileum.

### Sample Protocol
Ileum tissues were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80C until imaging mass-spectrometry and/or IHC/IF staining. Desiccated tissue sections mounted on ITO glass slides were sprayed with 7mg/ml N-(1-Naphthyl) ethylenediamine dihydrochloride (NEDC, Sigma #222488) in 70% MeOH using an HTX TM-Sprayer (HTX Technologies, LLC). The sprayer temperature was set to 85°C, with a flow rate of 0.1ml/min, a velocity of 1000mm/min, track spacing of 2mm, pressure of 10 psi and a 3 liter/min gas flow rate. Twenty passes of matrix were applied to slides with 10s of drying time between each pass. Following matrix coating, slides were immediately processed on MALDI-MSI.

### Data Protocol
For MALDI-FTICR measurements, the matrix-coated slides were immediately loaded into a slide adaptor and then into a solariX XR FTICR mass spectrometer equipped with a 9.4T magnet and Paracell (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The resolving power of the Paracell was R = 120,000 at m/z 500. The laser focus was set to ‘small’ and the x-y raster width was set to 20-50µm using Smartbeam-II laser optics. A spectrum was accumulated from 200 laser shots at 1000 Hz and the ions were accumulated using the “cumulative accumulation of selected ions mode” (CASI) within an m/z range of 70-400 before being transferred to the ICR cell for a single scan. Conventional procedures for IHC/IF were used and data acquired from both modalities were used to determine metabolite levels using antibodies directed against PMCs. The Identity of metabolites of was determined by m/z comparison and comparison to isotopic labeling of purified chemical standards spotted on tissue slices. Relative quantification of metabolite data was conducted using in house software (MATLAB).

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy defects are a risk factor for inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs) through unknown mechanisms. Whole-body conditional deletion of autophagy-related gene (Atg) Atg7 in adult mice (Atg7&#x394;/&#x394;) causes tissue damage and death within 3 mo due to neurodegeneration without substantial effect on intestine. In contrast, we report here that whole-body conditional deletion of other essential Atg genes Atg5 or Fip200/Atg17 in adult mice (Atg5&#x394;/&#x394; or Fip200&#x394;/&#x394;) caused death within 5 d due to rapid autophagy inhibition, elimination of ileum stem cells, and loss of barrier function. Atg5&#x394;/&#x394; mice lost PDGFR&#x3b1;+ mesenchymal cells (PMCs) and Wnt signaling essential for stem cell renewal, which were partially rescued by exogenous Wnt. Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization coupled to mass spectrometry imaging (MALDI-MSI) of Atg5&#x394;/&#x394; ileum revealed depletion of aspartate and nucleotides, consistent with metabolic insufficiency underlying PMC loss. The difference in the autophagy gene knockout phenotypes is likely due to distinct kinetics of autophagy loss, as deletion of Atg5 more gradually extended lifespan phenocopying deletion of Atg7 or Atg12. Thus, autophagy is required for PMC metabolism and ileum stem cell and mammalian survival. Failure to maintain PMCs through autophagy may therefore contribute to IBD.

### Keywords
Pdgfrα+ mesenchymal cells, Maldi, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey

### Submitter
Yang Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Eileen White
Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey


