### Accession
PXD016128

### Title
Hodgkin lymphoma-educated macrophages

### Description
Comparative proteome analysis of HL and DLBCL educated human macrophages by SWATH-MS.

### Sample Protocol
The 25µg of the protein lysate were further processed according the GASP (Gel-assisted sample preparation) protocol; peptide identification (IDA, information dependent acquisition) and SWATH measurements by LC-MS/MS on TripleTOF5600 (AB Sciex).

### Data Protocol
data searched ProteinPilotTM 5.0 (AB Sciex) against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (swissprot-human_170928) database with the following adjustments: sample type “Identification”, Cys alkylation “Acrylamide”, digestion “Trypsin”, taxonomy “Homo sapiens”, search effort “RapidID”, special factors “Gel-based ID” and detected protein threshold “0.05 (10%)” with false discovery rate (FDR) analysis. SWATH data processed using PeakView 2.2 software (AB Sciex)  The results were further processed with excel (comparison HL vs DLBCL vs MCSF educated macrophages). Raw values were normalized to total intensity. The comparison with the transcriptome date was done via the R-package limma

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages (M&#x3c6;) are abundantly present in the tumor microenvironment and may predict outcome in solid tumors and defined lymphoma subtypes. M&#x3c6; heterogeneity, the mechanisms of their recruitment, and their differentiation into lymphoma-promoting, alternatively activated M2-like phenotypes are still not fully understood. Therefore, further functional studies are required to understand biological mechanisms associated with human tumor-associated M&#x3c6; (TAM). Here, we show that the global mRNA expression and protein abundance of human M&#x3c6; differentiated in Hodgkin lymphoma (HL)-conditioned medium (CM) differ from those of M&#x3c6; educated by conditioned media from diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) cells or, classically, by macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF). Conditioned media from HL cells support TAM differentiation through upregulation of surface antigens such as CD40, CD163, CD206, and PD-L1. In particular, RNA and cell surface protein expression of mannose receptor 1 (MRC1)/CD206 significantly exceed the levels induced by classical M-CSF stimulation in M2-like M&#x3c6;; this is regulated by interleukin 13 to a large extent. Functionally, high CD206 enhances mannose-dependent endocytosis and uptake of type I collagen. Together with high matrix metalloprotease9 secretion, HL-TAMs appear to be active modulators of the tumor matrix. Preclinical in&#xa0;ovo models show that co-cultures of HL cells with monocytes or M&#x3c6; support dissemination of lymphoma cells via lymphatic vessels, while tumor size and vessel destruction are decreased in comparison with lymphoma-only tumors. Immunohistology of human HL tissues reveals a fraction of cases feature large numbers of CD206-positive cells, with high MRC1 expression being characteristic of HL-stage IV. In summary, the lymphoma-TAM interaction contributes to matrix-remodeling and lymphoma cell dissemination.

### Keywords
Swath, Cd206, Macrophages, Lymphoma

### Affiliations
Chair of the Department of Functional Genomics Institute of Functional Genomics, University of Regensburg, Am Biopark 9, 93053 Regensburg, Germany
Institute of Functional Genomics, University Regensburg

### Submitter
Katharina Limm

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Peter Oefner
Chair of the Department of Functional Genomics Institute of Functional Genomics, University of Regensburg, Am Biopark 9, 93053 Regensburg, Germany


