### Accession
PXD026978

### Title
Sex-specific social behavior and amygdala proteomic deficits in Foxp2+/- mutant mice

### Description
In humans, mutations in the transcription factor encoding gene, FOXP2, are associated with language and Autism Spectrum (ASD) Disorders, the latter characterized by deficits in social interactions. However, little is known regarding the function of Foxp2 in male or female social behavior. Our previous studies in mice revealed high expression of Foxp2 within the medial subnucleus of the amygdala (MeA), a limbic brain region highly implicated in innate social behaviors such as mating, aggression, and parental care. Here, using a comprehensive panel of behavioral tests in male and female Foxp2+/- heterozygous mice, we investigated the role Foxp2 plays in MeA-linked innate social behaviors. We reveal significant deficits in olfactory processing, social interaction, mating, aggressive and parental behaviors. Interestingly, some of these deficits displayed in a sex-specific manner. To examine the consequences of Foxp2 loss of function specifically in the MeA, we conducted a proteomic analysis of microdissected MeA tissue and found sex differences in a host of proteins implicated in neuronal communication, connectivity and dopamine signaling. Consistent with this, we discovered that MeA Foxp2-lineage cells were responsive to dopamine with differences between males and females. Thus, our findings reveal a central and sex-specific role for Foxp2 in social behavior and MeA function.

### Sample Protocol
MeA tissue from 3 animals (2 amygdala/animal for a total of 6) was pooled together and considered a single sample. A total of n=2 samples were analyzed for each sex (male and female) and genotype (Foxp2+/- and control). MeA tissue samples were homogenized in 8M urea and sonicated for 30 seconds. The resultant lysate was centrifuged at 16K rpm for 30 min at 4 ºC and cleared supernatant was collected. Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (PierceTM, Thermo Scientific), and 100 μg of protein lysate was processed for each sample. The proteins were treated with TCEP and Iodoacetamide as described in TMT Isobaric Mass Tags labeling protocol (Thermo Scientific), extracted with methanol:chloroform, air dried, dissolved in 50mM TEAB, and digested overnight with sequencing grade Trypsin (Thermo Scientific) at 37 ºC. The resulting peptides were labeled with TMT Label Reagent (Sixplex kit, Thermo Scientific), each with one specific tag (as per manufacturer’s protocol). Following labeling, the samples were pooled together, desalted and fractionated to eight fractions using Pierce high-pH fractionation kit (Thermo Scientific). The peptide mixtures from each fraction were sequentially analyzed by LC-MS/MS using nano-LC system (Easy nLC1000) connected to Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The platform is configured with nano-electrospray ion source (Easy-Spray, Thermo Scientific), Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 nanoViper trap column (3 μm particle size, 75 μm ID x 20 mm length), EASY-Spray C18 analytical column (2 μm particle size, 75 μm ID x 500 mm length). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using linear gradients of 7-25 % Acetonitrile (in aqueous phase and 0.1% Formic Acid) for 80 min, followed by 45% for 25 min, and static flow at 90% for 15 min. The mass spectrometry data was collected in a data-dependent manner switching between one full scan MS mode (m/z 380-1400, resolution 60K, AGC 3e6, max ion time 20 ms), and 10 MS/MS scans (resolution 15K, AGC 1e5, max ion time 120 ms, nCE 32) of the top 10 target ions. The ions were sequenced once and dynamically excluded from the list for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data sets were analyzed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer Software (version 2.3), and searched against the Mouse UniProt database using Sequest HT algorithm at precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. The peptides and proteins were filtered using a Percolator at a target FDR of 0.01 (thus at 99% confidence level). The relative quantitation of proteins was determined based on intensities of reporter mass tags.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Medial amygdala (mea), Sex-specific differences, Social behavior, Aggression, Proteomics, Foxp2

### Affiliations
Children's National Medical Center
Center for Neuroscience Research, Children's National Hospital, Washington, DC. 20010 USA

### Submitter
Maria Jesus Herrero

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua Corbin
Center for Neuroscience Research, Children's National Hospital, Washington, DC. 20010 USA


