### Accession
PXD037774

### Title
Venom proteome of the parasitoid wasp Theocolax elegans

### Description
venom proteins from Theocolax elegans were  analyzed by LC-MS/MS and the  peptide fragments were identified by searching against the protein set.

### Sample Protocol
Mated female wasps of Theocolax elegans aged 2–5 days were anesthetized at 4°C for 10 min, and then dissected in sterile PBS. The venom reservoir was separated and washed three times, and then transferred into 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes. After centrifugation at 12,000 g for 10 min, the supernatant was transferred into a new 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube . The solution containing 100 µg venom proteins was digested into peptides with trypsin and analyzed on a liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry system. Subsequently, samples were loaded on Thermo scientific EASY Column (2cm*100μm 5μm-C18), and then separated on a hermo scientific EASY column(75μm*100mm 3μm-C18). Buffer A was water with 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B was 84% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. The Buffer B gradient was: 0–110 min, from 0% to 55%; 110–115 min, from 55% to 100%; 115–120 min, 100%.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from proteome were generated and the identified peptide fragments was searched against the official protein sets of Theocolax elegans using the MaxQuant. The parameters were set as follows: Enzyme: Trypsin; missed cleavage sites: 2; fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C); variable modification: Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term). Finally, proteins from the venom reservoirs matched in protein set were identified with a strict filtration standard (FDR<0.01).

### Publication Abstract
The ectoparasitoid wasp Theocolax elegans is a cosmopolitan and generalist pteromalid parasitoid of several major storage insect pests, and can effectively suppress a host population in warehouses. However, little molecular information about this wasp is currently available. In this study, we assembled the genome of T. elegans using PacBio long-read sequencing, Illumina sequencing, and Hi-C methods. The genome assembly is 662.73&#x2009;Mb in length with contig and scaffold N50 values of 1.15&#x2009;Mb and 88.8&#x2009;Mb, respectively. The genome contains 56.4% repeat sequences and 23,212 protein-coding genes were annotated. Phylogenomic analyses revealed that T. elegans diverged from the lineage leading to subfamily Pteromalinae (Nasonia vitripennis and Pteromalus puparum) approximately 110.5 million years ago. We identified 130 significantly expanded gene families, 34 contracted families, 248 fast-evolving genes, and 365 positively selected genes in T. elegans. Additionally, 260 olfactory receptors and 285 venom proteins were identified. This genome assembly provides valuable genetic bases for future investigations on evolution, molecular biology and application of T. elegans.

### Keywords
Venom, Lc-ms/ms, Parasitoid wasp

### Affiliations
Zhejiang university
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Shan Xiao

### Lab Head
Dr Gongyin Ye
Zhejiang university


