### Accession
PXD041681

### Title
Changes in the proteome of platelets from patients with critical progression of COVID-19

### Description
Platelets, the smallest cells in human blood known for their role in primary haemostasis, are also able to interact with pathogens and play a crucial role in the immune response. In severe coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) cases, platelets become over-activated, resulting in the release of granules, exacerbating inflammation and contributing to the cytokine storm. Here we utilize label-free shotgun proteomics approach to further elucidate the role of platelets in COVID-19 progression and to identify predictive biomarkers for disease outcome. Platelet proteome of the severely ill COVID-19 patients varied significantly from to healthy controls. Significant changes in the levels of proteins associated with protein folding were detected. In addition, a number of proteins with isomerase activity were found in the patient samples, which appear to exert an influence on platelet activity via non-genomic properties of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and nuclear factor κ-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NFkB). We also performed a comparison of proteins found exclusively in controls, survivors and non-survivors. CRP, CA-1, SAA2 and SEPPINA3 were found to be biomarker candidates in platelets, showing a significant increase in ICU patients.

### Sample Protocol
Platelets preparation for MS-analysis Highly purified platelets (HPPs) were isolated from blood plasma via density gradient centrifugation. Isolated platelets were lysed in Urea buffer (7 M urea, 2 M Thiourea, 50 mM Tris in distilled water, pH 8.2, EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail) in ultrasonic bath. 10 µg of protein (according to Bradford Assay) were taken for the further preparation steps. Protein disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DDT) and free sulfhydryl groups were alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA). Proteins were precipitated with four sample volumes of pre-chilled 100% ace-tone at -20°C overnight. Pelleted proteins were resuspended in 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate (Ambic) and digested with trypsin (SERVA Electropho-resis, Heidelberg, Germany) at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50 at 37°C overnight. The digestion was stopped with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Global proteome profiling using data dependent acquisition The peptide concentration in the digested samples was determined by amino acid analysis (AAA). According to AAA, 200 ng of platelet protein were analyzed with nanoLC-MS/MS. Briefly, extracted peptides were first injected and pre-concentrated with an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) using trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 300 μm × 5 mm, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; flow rate 30 μL/min). Subsequently, the peptides were separated on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 μm × 50 cm, nano Viper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) by a gradient from 5–30% solvent B over 98 min (solvent A: 0.1% FA in water; solvent B: 0.1% FA, 84% Acetonitrile in water; flow rate 400 nL/min; column oven temperature 60°C). Separated peptides were ionized by elec-trospray ionization (ESI) and injected into an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). The capillary temperature was set to 275°C and the spray voltage to 1500 V. The lock mass polydimethylcyclosiloxane (445.120 m/z) was used for internal recalibration. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with 2 s cycle time, performing HCD fragmentation at 28% NCE. The mass range for MS1 measurements was set to 350–1400 m/z with an orbitrap resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z (AGC 3e6, 80 ms maximum injection time, 1.3 m/z wide isolation window, 30 s dynamic exclusion). The fragment analysis was performed in an orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z (AGC 3e6, 80 ms maxi-mum injection time).

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant (v.2.0.3.1, https://maxquant.org/). Spectra were searched against human reference proteome (UP000005640) of the UniProtKB database (release 2021_11) with the following parameters: enzyme = trypsin, maxi-mum missed cleavages = 2, first search peptide tolerance = 20 ppm, main search peptide tolerance = 4.5 ppm, fragment match tolerance = 20 ppm and de novo tolerance = 10 ppm. Methionine oxidation was set as variable modifications; cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed. PSM identification was performed using reversed decoy-based false discovery rate of 0.01. The minimum number of peptides and razor peptides for protein identification was 1; the minimum number of unique peptides was 0. Protein identification was performed at a protein false discovery rate of 0.01. Proteins were quantified using MaxQuant label-free quantification (LFQ) with at least one unique peptide at the minimum ratio count of 2. The “classic” normalization was applied to the LFQs.

### Publication Abstract
Platelets, the smallest cells in human blood, known for their role in primary hemostasis, are also able to interact with pathogens and play a crucial role in the immune response. In severe coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) cases, platelets become overactivated, resulting in the release of granules, exacerbating inflammation and contributing to the cytokine storm. This study aims to further elucidate the role of platelets in COVID-19 progression and to identify predictive biomarkers for disease outcomes. A comparative proteome analysis of highly purified platelets from critically diseased COVID-19 patients with different outcomes (survivors and non-survivors) and age- and sex-matched controls was performed. Platelets from critically diseased COVID-19 patients exhibited significant changes in the levels of proteins associated with protein folding. In addition, a number of proteins with isomerase activity were found to be more highly abundant in patient samples, apparently exerting an influence on platelet activity via the non-genomic properties of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and the nuclear factor &#x3ba;-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF&#x3ba;B). Moreover, carbonic anhydrase 1 (CA-1) was found to be a candidate biomarker in platelets, showing a significant increase in COVID-19 patients.

### Keywords
Ecmo, Carbonic anhydrase 1, Acute-phase proteins, Covid-19, Glucocorticoid re-ceptor, Proteomics, Inflammation, Nfkb, Platelets

### Affiliations
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Medical Faculty, Ruhr University Bochum, 44801 Bochum, Germany
Ruhr University Bochum, Medical Faculty, Medizinisches Proteom-Center

### Submitter
Svitlana Rozanova

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Katrin Marcus-Alic
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Medical Faculty, Ruhr University Bochum, 44801 Bochum, Germany


