### Accession
PXD034419

### Title
Proteomic analysis of two citrus rootstocks subjected to multiple abiotic stress conditions

### Description
Drought, heat and high light irradiation are abiotic stresses that negatively affect plant development and reduce crop productivity. The confluence of these three factors is common in nature, causing extreme situations for plants that compromise their viability. Drought and heat stress increase the saturation of the photosystem’s reaction centers, increasing sensitivity to high light irradiation. In addition, these stress conditions affect PSII integrity, alter redox balance of the electron transport chain and decrease photosynthetic rate. Here, we studied the effect of drought, high light and heat stress factorial stress combination on the photosynthetic apparatus of two citrus rootstocks, Carrizo citrange (Citrus sinensis × Poncirus trifoliata) and Cleopatra mandarin (Citrus reshni). Proteomic data, together with transcriptomic, showed the main responses of citrus plant to multiple abitoic stress conditions. The enhancement of KEGG pathways such as RNA metabolic processes and the accumulation of family proteins like HSPs were key responses to face the combination of these abiotic stress factors.

### Sample Protocol
Comparative proteomic analyses were performed with three biological replicate leaf samples (300 mg of fresh weight per sample) of Carrizo citrange and Cleopatra mandarin plants subjected to individual stresses WS, HL or HS and to their factorial combinations (HL+HS, WS+HL, WS+HS and WS+HL+HS). Total protein extraction was performed according to Damerval et al., 1986 with some modifications. Samples, previously macerated to a fine powder with liquid nitrogen, were lyophilized and then, resuspended in 1 mL of chilled solution containing 10% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA; Sigma-Aldrich) in acetone (Merck) and 20 mM DTT (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, USA), and the mixture was vortexed for 5 min at 4°C and kept at -20°C for 1 h, followed by centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 20 min at 4°C. The resulting pellets were washed three times with cold acetone containing 20 mM DTT and centrifuged for 5 min in each wash step. The pellets were air dried, resuspended in buffer containing 7 M urea (GE Healthcare), 2 M thiourea (GE Healthcare), 2% Triton X-100 (GE Healthcare), 1% DTT (GE Healthcare), and 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF; Sigma-Aldrich), vortexed, and incubated on ice for 30 min. Following incubation, the samples were centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 20 min at 4°C. The supernatants containing total proteins were collected, and the protein concentration was measured using a 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare). Before the digestion step, the extracted proteins (100 μg from each biological replicate) were first precipitated using methanol/chloroform (Nanjo et al. 2012). Then, the samples were resuspended in a solution of 7 M urea (GE Healthcare) and 2 M thiourea (GE Healthcare), and protein digestion was performed with trypsin (50 ng µL-1; V5111, Promega, Madison, USA) using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Oliveira et al. 2020). The digested samples were transferred to Total Recovery Vials (Waters) for mass spectrometry analysis. Nano-LC-electrospray ionization (ESI)-MS/MS analysis was performed using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled to a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters). First, a chromatography step was performed by loading 1 μg of the digested samples according to Oliveira et al., 2020 to normalize the relative protein quantification results. To ensure standardized molar values for all conditions, the normalization among samples was based on stoichiometric measurements of the total ion counts (TICs) from MSE scouting runs prior to the analyses using ProteinLynx Global SERVER v. 3.0 (PLGS; Waters). After sample normalization, the peptide mixtures were separated via liquid chromatography using a nanoAcquity UPLC 5 µm C18 trap column (180 µm × 20 mm; Waters) at 5 µL min-1 for 3 min, followed by a nanoAcquity HSS T3 1.8 µm analytical reverse-phase column (75 µm × 150 mm; Waters) at 400 nL min-1 at 45°C. A binary gradient of mobile phase A containing water (Tedia; Fairfield, USA) and 0.1% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) and mobile phase B containing absolute acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.1% formic acid was used for peptide elution. Gradient elution started with 7% B, followed by 7 to 40% B until 91.12 min, 40 to 99.9% B until 92.72 min, holding at 99.9% B until 106 min, then a decrease to 7% B until 106.1 min and holding at 7% B until the end of the run at 120 min. Mass spectrometry was performed with the following settings: positive and resolution mode (V mode), 35,000 full width at half maximum ion mobility separation (IMS), and data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode (HDMSE). IMS was performed using a wave velocity of 600 m s-1. The helium and IMS gas flow rates were 180 and 90 mL/min, respectively. The transfer collision energy was ramped from 19 to 55 V in high-energy mode, with cone and capillary voltages of 30 and 2750 V, respectively, and a source temperature of 70°C. For the time of flight (TOF) parameters, the scan time was set to 0.5 s in continuum mode, with a mass range of 50 to 2000 Da. Human [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B (Sigma-Aldrich; 100 fmol µL-1) was used as an external standard, and lock mass acquisition was performed every 30 s. Mass spectral acquisition was performed for 90 min using MassLynx v4.0 software.

### Data Protocol
Spectral processing and database searching were performed using the ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS; version 3.0.2) (Waters). The Apex3D parameters were set to a low-energy threshold of 150 counts, an elevated-energy threshold of 50 counts, and an intensity threshold of 750 counts. In addition, the analysis settings included the following: one missed cleavage, minimum fragment ion per peptide equal to 3, minimum fragment ions per protein equal to 7, minimum peptide per protein equal to 2, automatic peptide and fragment tolerance, a fixed modification of carbamidomethyl and variable modifications of oxidation and phosphoryl. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to a maximum of 1%. For proteins identifications, was used the sweet orange (Citrus sinensis) proteins sequence database from National Center for Biotechnology Information Search database (NCBI; https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). Comparative label-free quantification analysis was performed using ISOQuant software v.1.7 (Distler et al. 2013). The following parameters were used to identify proteins: a 1% FDR, a peptide score greater than six, a minimum peptide length of six amino acids, and at least two peptides per protein were required for label-free quantitation using the TOP3 approach, followed by the multidimensional normalized process within ISOQuant. To ensure the quality of the results after data processing, only the proteins that were present or absent (for unique proteins) in all three runs of biological replicates were considered in the differential accumulation analysis using Student’s t-test (two-tailed; P < 0.05). Functional annotation analysis was performed using OmicsBox software (https://www.biobam.com/omicsbox) and UniProtKB (https://www.uniprot.org). The protein sequences were submitted to a BLAST search against the NCBI nonredundant green plant protein database (taxa: 33090, Viridiplantae).

### Publication Abstract
Drought, heat and high irradiance are abiotic stresses that negatively affect plant development and reduce crop productivity. The confluence of these three factors is common in nature, causing extreme situations for plants that compromise their viability. Drought and heat stresses increase the saturation of the photosystem reaction centers, increasing sensitivity to high irradiance. In addition, these stress conditions affect photosystem II (PSII) integrity, alter redox balance of the electron transport chain and decrease the photosynthetic rate. Here, we studied the effect of the stress combinations on the photosynthetic apparatus of two citrus genotypes, Carrizo citrange (Citrus sinensis&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;Poncirus trifoliata) and Cleopatra mandarin (Citrus reshni). Results obtained showed that physiological responses, such as modulation of stomatal aperture and transpiration rate, aimed to reduce leaf temperature, are key to diminishing heat impact on photosynthetic apparatus and increasing tolerance to double and triple combinations of drought, high irradiance and high temperatures. By using transcriptomic and proteomic analyses, we have demonstrated that under these abiotic stress combinations, Carrizo plants were able to increase expression of genes and proteins related to the photosystem repairing machinery (which better maintained the integrity of PSII) and other components of the photosynthetic apparatus. Our findings reveal crucial physiological and genetic responses in citrus to increase tolerance to the combination of multiple abiotic stresses that could be the basis for breeding programs that ensure a sustainable citrus production.

### Keywords
Citrus, Stress conditions, Tolerance

### Affiliations
Universitat Jaume I
Departamento de Ciencias Agrarias Y del Medio Natural, Universitat Jaume I, Campus Riu Sec, 12071 Castello de la Plana, Spain

### Submitter
Aurelio Gómez-Cadenas

### Lab Head
Dr Aurelio Gómez Cadenas
Departamento de Ciencias Agrarias Y del Medio Natural, Universitat Jaume I, Campus Riu Sec, 12071 Castello de la Plana, Spain


