### Accession
PXD035852

### Title
Fine-tuning of mTOR signaling by the UBE4B-KLHL22 E3 ubiquitin ligase cascade in brain development

### Description
Abstract Spatiotemporal regulation of the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway is pivotal for establishment of brain architecture. Dysregulation of mTOR signaling is associated with a variety of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Here, we discover that the UBE4B-KLHL22 E3 ubiquitin ligase cascade regulates mTOR activity in neurodevelopment. In a mouse model with UBE4B conditionally deleted in the nervous system, animals display severe growth defects, spontaneous seizures, and premature death. Loss of UBE4B in the brains of mutant mice results in depletion of neural precursor cells (NPCs), impairment of neurogenesis, and enlargement of neuronal soma. Mechanistically, UBE4B polyubiquitinates and degrades KLHL22, an E3 ligase previously shown to degrade the GATOR1 component DEPDC5. Deletion of UBE4B causes upregulation of KLHL22 and hyperactivation of mTOR, leading to defective proliferation and differentiation of NPCs. Suppression of KLHL22 expression reverses the elevated activity of mTOR caused by acute local deletion of UBE4B in the dentate gyrus (DG). Prenatal treatment with the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin rescues neurogenesis defects in Ube4b mutant mice. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that UBE4B and KLHL22 are essential for maintenance and differentiation of the precursor pool through fine-tuning of mTOR activity.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry experiments were performed using a Q Exactive HF-X instrument (Thermo Fisher) coupled with Easy-nLC 1200 system. Mobile phase A and B were water and 80% acetonitrile, respectively, with 0.1% formic acid. Protein digests were loaded directly onto an analytical column (75 µm × 15 cm, 1.9 µm C18, 1 µm tip) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. All samples were separated using a linear gradient of 2–40% B over 38 min. Survey scans of peptide precursors were performed from 350 to 1 500 m/z at 60 000 FWHM resolution with a 1 × 106 ion count target and a maximum injection time of 20 ms. The instrument was set to run in top-speed mode with 1-s cycles for the survey and the MS/MS scans. After a survey scan, tandem MS was then performed on the most abundant precursors exhibiting a charge state from 2 to 7 of greater than 5 × 104 intensity by isolating them in the quadrupole at 1.6 m/z. Higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation was applied with 27 collision energy and resulting fragments detected in the Orbitrap detector at a resolution of 15 000. The maximum injection time limited was 45 ms and dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s with a 10-ppm mass tolerance around the precursor.

### Data Protocol
Label-free analysis was performed using MaxQuant (https://maxquant.org/maxquant/, version 1.6.2.0) with the following parameters: carbamidomethyl of cysteine as fixed modification; main search peptide of 10 ppm; label-free quantification enabled. The reference database was taken from UniProtKB (http://www.uniprot.org/; accessed November 2019) for recommended protein name, gene name, and protein function. For quality control, all known contaminants (i.e., keratins, trypsin), and proteins detected in less than half of the samples, were removed from each sample set of proteins identified. The up/down-regulation of proteins were identified with adjusted LFQ intensities ratio with the following formula:  Proteins with an adjusted LFQ intensities ratio ≥0.2 were considered up-regulated. In contrast, an adjusted LFQ intensities ratio ≤-0.15 indicated the down-regulation. In addition to this criterion, only in Figures 2A and 2B, peptides with a number >5 and an increase in absolute intensity consistent with LFQ intensity were selected to reduce false positives.

### Publication Abstract
Spatiotemporal regulation of the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway is pivotal for establishment of brain architecture. Dysregulation of mTOR signaling is associated with a variety of neurodevelopmental disorders. Here, we demonstrate that the UBE4B-KLHL22 E3 ubiquitin ligase cascade regulates mTOR activity in neurodevelopment. In a mouse model with UBE4B conditionally deleted in the nervous system, animals display severe growth defects, spontaneous seizures and premature death. Loss of UBE4B in the brains of mutant mice results in depletion of neural precursor cells and impairment of neurogenesis. Mechanistically, UBE4B polyubiquitylates and degrades KLHL22, an E3 ligase previously shown to degrade the GATOR1 component DEPDC5. Deletion of UBE4B causes upregulation of KLHL22 and hyperactivation of mTOR, leading to defective proliferation and differentiation of neural precursor cells. Suppression of KLHL22 expression reverses the elevated activity of mTOR caused by acute local deletion of UBE4B. Prenatal treatment with the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin rescues neurogenesis defects in Ube4b mutant mice. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that UBE4B and KLHL22 are essential for maintenance and differentiation of the precursor pool through fine-tuning of mTOR activity.

### Keywords
Mouse brain, Ms, Ube4b

### Affiliations
ZJU
Zhejiang university

### Submitter
Xin Shu

### Lab Head
Dr Xiang_Xing Kong
ZJU


