### Accession
PXD030633

### Title
Cellular Protein Client Recovery by Human Hsp40s DNAJB1 and DNAJB8

### Description
We applied TMT-AP-MS to study protein clients between wild type and different mutations of DNAJB1 and DNJAB8 in HEK293T cells. We also applied heat to see how the interactome changes between different types of bait.

### Sample Protocol
Several TMT experiments were performed. For either six plex or four plex TMT-AP-MS experiments, 10 cm plates of HEK293T cells were transfected with either 5 μg Flag-DNAJB8-H31Q plasmid, Flag-DNAJB1-H32Q, wild type DNAJB8, wild type DNAJB1, or GFP. Cell plates were harvested 46 hours post transfection. For experiments measuring changes in the proteome after heat, cells were heated 46-48 hours post transfection.  Cells were lysed in RIPA Buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS) with protease inhibitors. Lysates were pre-cleared with 15 μL Sepharose-4B beads for 30 min at 4 C, and incubated with 15 μL M2 anti-Flag dynabeads and rotated overnight at 4 °C. The beads were washed well with RIPA buffer and eluted by boiling for 5 min in 30 μL Laemmli concentrate (120 mM Tris pH 6.8, 60% glycerol, 12% SDS, brilliant phenol blue to color). Proteins in eluates were precipitated from methanol/chloroform, air-dried, resuspended in 1% Rapigest in water, brought to 50 μL in 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, reduced with 10 mM TCEP for 30 min at 37 °C, alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at ambient temperature, and digested overnight with 0.5 µg sequencing grade trypsin at 37 °C with agitation (600 rpm). TMT isotopic labels were resuspended (100 ug/80 µL acetonitrile) and 40 µL of label was added to each 60 µL sample of digested peptides. Samples were then labeled for 1 hour at ambient temperature, followed by quenching with 0.4% ammonium bicarbonate at ambient temperature for 1 hour. Samples were pooled, acidified, centrifuged for 30 min at 21,100 x g to remove any insoluble debris, and then dried by centrifugal evaporation to 10 µL. Solutions were then brought to 200 µL in Buffer A, incubated at 37 °C for 1 hour, and centrifuged for 30 min at 21,100 x g. Solution was transferred to new low-binding tube and the process of heat-spinning was repeated three more times to complete elimination of Rapigest.  We used a two-dimensional LC/MS/MS setup with an LTQ Orbitrap Velos hybrid mass spectrometer interfaced with an Easy-nLC 1000. Buffer A is 0.1% formic acid, 5% acetonitrile in water. Buffer B is 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water. Buffer C is 500 mM ammonium acetate in Buffer A. Samples were loaded onto a triphasic loading column for analysis. Triphasic loading columns were prepared by polymerizing a Kasil 1624 frit into a 150 µm diameter fused silica capillary. The column was then packed with 2.5 cm of reversed-phase 5 µm Aqua C18 resin, followed by 2.5 cm of 5 µm strong cation exchange resin, and again with 2.5 cm of reversed-phase 5 µm Aqua C18 resin. Analytical columns were prepared in the same fashion as before. Analysis was performed using a 11-cycle chromatographic run, with progressively increasing ammonium acetate salt bumps injected prior to each cycle (0% C, 10% C, 20% C, 30% C, 40% C, 50% C, 60% C, 70% C, 80% C, 100% C, 90% C+ 10% B; balance of each buffer A), followed by acetonitrile gradient (5 min from 1% B to 7% B, 60 min to 55% B, 15 min to 100% B, 5 min at 100% B, 5 min to 1% B; 300 nL/min flow rate). Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (3.0 kV) and scanned from 110 to 2000 m/z in the Orbitrap with resolution 30,000 in data dependent acquisition mode. The top ten peaks with charge states of 2+, 3+, or 4+ from each full scan were fragmented by HCD using a stepped collision energy of 36%, 42%, and 48%, a 100 msec activation time, and a resolution of 7500. Dynamic exclusion parameters were 1 repeat count, 30 msec repeat duration, 500 exclusion list size, 120 sec exclusion duration, and 2.00 Da exclusion width.

### Data Protocol
MsConvert and FragPipe were two programs used to analyze each mass spec run. For each run, MS/MS spectra were extracted using MSConvert (version 3.0.21144-1f7ddf52b) with Peak Picking Filtering. MS/MS spectra was then searched by FragPipe against a Uniprot human proteome database (06/11/2021 release) containing 40858 human sequences (longest entry for each protein). MS/MS spectra were also searched against 20429 select decoys (e.g albumen, porcine trypsin, contaminats etc.). FragPipe searches allowed for static modification of cysteine residues (57.02146 Da, acetylation)and N-termini, and lysine residues (229.1629 Da, TMT-tagging), half tryptic peptidolysis specificity, and mass tolerance of 20 ppm for precursor mass and 20 ppm for product ion masses. Spectra matches were assembled and filtered by MSFragger (version 3.2). The stringency of spectral matching was chosen such that <1% of identified peptides were from the decoy database. Decoy proteins, contaminants, and keratins were filtered from the final protein list. Quantitation in FragPipe was performed by averaging TMT reporter ion intensities for all spectra associated with an individual peptide and deconvolution of isotopic impurity as reported in the lot analysis supplied by Thermo Fisher. Only unique peptides were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Heat, Ap-ms, Cross-linking, Hsp40, Dnjab8

### Affiliations
Professor of Chemistry, UCR, analytical department
University of California, Riverside

### Submitter
Joseph Genereux

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph Genereux
Professor of Chemistry, UCR, analytical department


