### Accession
PXD021647

### Title
Mitochondrial structure and bioenergetics in Pseudoxanthoma elasticum

### Description
Aim of the present study was to integrate structural and bioenergenetic features to deeply investigate mitochondria of control and of PXE fibroblasts cultured in standard conditions, to explore their role in the development of the fibroblasts’ pathologic phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondrial proteins (50 g) were reduced in 1-4 dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide in the dark and digested overnight at 37 °C with trypsin. Three biological replicates were prepared for each cell pool and two repeated analysis (technical replicates) were performed for each biological replicate. Mitochondrial peptides were analysed using a UHPLC ultimate 3000 system coupled online to a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer. A reverse-phase C18 column was used to perform peptide chromatographic separation. Elution was conducted using a mobile phase A of 0,1% formic acid in ultrapure water and a mobile phase B of 0,1% formic acid in acetonitrile. For separation, a linear binary gradient was applied: 2–3% B in 5 min, to 28% B in the next 59 min, and then 90% B in 7 min. The column was maintained at 30 °C and the flow rate employed was 0.3 mL/min. The precursor ion detection was done in a m/z-range from 200 to 2000, the acquisition range for fragment ions was m/z from 200 to 2000. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 2.0.7 Software.

### Data Protocol
Raw ms/ms data were converted by msConvert ProteoWizard in MGF file using default settings and uploaded to MASCOT server (v.2.4.0) for MS/MS Ion Search.  Search was performed using Uniprot (2018_05) restricted to Homo sapiens (ID 9606). Parameters for identification included: i) trypsin as enzyme with 1 as maximum missed cleavage; ii) mass error tolerances for precursor and fragment ions set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; iii) peptide charge (2+, 3+, 4+); iv) protein mass no restriction; v) carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as fixed modification while deamination of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine were considered as dynamic modification. Label free quantitation using spectral counting emPAI was performed by MASCOT. Only confident peptide identified with a false discovery rate ≤ 1% and protein with at least one unique peptide were exported.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Pseudoxanthoma elasticum</i> (PXE) is a genetic disease considered as a paradigm of ectopic mineralization disorders, being characterized by multisystem clinical manifestations due to progressive calcification of skin, eyes, and the cardiovascular system, resembling an age-related phenotype. Although fibroblasts do not express the pathogenic <i>ABCC6</i> gene, nevertheless these cells are still under investigation because they regulate connective tissue homeostasis, generating the "arena" where cells and extracellular matrix components can promote pathologic calcification and where activation of pro-osteogenic factors can be associated to pathways involving mitochondrial metabolism. The aim of the present study was to integrate structural and bioenergenetic features to deeply investigate mitochondria from control and from PXE fibroblasts cultured in standard conditions and to explore the role of mitochondria in the development of the PXE fibroblasts' pathologic phenotype. Proteomic, biochemical, and morphological data provide new evidence that in basal culture conditions (1) the protein profile of PXE mitochondria reveals a number of differentially expressed proteins, suggesting changes in redox balance, oxidative phosphorylation, and calcium homeostasis in addition to modified structure and organization, (2) measure of oxygen consumption indicates that the PXE mitochondria have a low ability to cope with a sudden increased need for ATP <i>via</i> oxidative phosphorylation, (3) mitochondrial membranes are highly polarized in PXE fibroblasts, and this condition contributes to increased reactive oxygen species levels, (4) ultrastructural alterations in PXE mitochondria are associated with functional changes, and (5) PXE fibroblasts exhibit a more abundant, branched, and interconnected mitochondrial network compared to control cells, indicating that fusion prevail over fission events. In summary, the present study demonstrates that mitochondria are modified in PXE fibroblasts. Since mitochondria are key players in the development of the aging process, fibroblasts cultured from aged individuals or aged <i>in vitro</i> are more prone to calcify, and in PXE, calcified tissues remind features of premature aging syndromes; it can be hypothesized that mitochondria represent a common link contributing to the development of ectopic calcification in aging and in diseases. Therefore, ameliorating mitochondrial functions and cell metabolism could open new strategies to positively regulate a number of signaling pathways associated to pathologic calcification.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Ultrastructure, Proteome, Pxe, Fibroblast

### Affiliations
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia

### Submitter
Francesco Demetrio Lofaro

### Lab Head
Dr Federica Boraldi
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia


