### Accession
PXD035984

### Title
The CKS1/CKS2 proteostasis axis is crucial to maintain hematopoietic stem cell function

### Description
Long-term hematopoietic stem cells are rare, highly quiescent stem cells of the hematopoietic system with life-long self-renewal potential and the ability to transplant and reconstitute the entire hematopoietic system of conditioned recipients. Most of our understanding of these rare cells has relied on cell surface identification, epigenetic and transcriptomic analyses. Our knowledge of protein synthesis, folding, modification and degradation – broadly termed protein homeostasis or “proteostasis” – in these cells is still in its infancy. Here we report the requirement of the small phospho-binding adaptor proteins, the cyclin dependent kinase subunits (Cks1 and Cks2), for maintaining ordered hematopoiesis and long-term hematopoietic stem cell reconstitution. Cks1 and Cks2 are critical regulators of a myriad of key intracellular signalling pathways that govern hematopoietic stem cell biology and together they balance protein homeostasis and restrain reactive oxygen species to ensure healthy hematopoietic stem cell function.

### Sample Protocol
Pellets of LSK cells from individual mice were lysed in 100 µL of urea buffer (8 M urea in 20 mM HEPES, pH: 8.0), lysates were further homogenized by sonication (30 cycles of 30s on 30s off; Diagenode Bioruptor Plus) and insoluble material was removed by centrifugation. Protein amount was quantified using BCA (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were pooled 2 in 1 and diluted in urea buffer to obtain 4 µg of protein in a volume of 200 µL. Therefore, each replicate sample originates from 2 independent mice and can be considered as completely independent biological replicates. Protein samples were subjected to cysteine alkylation by sequential incubation, at 25°C and agitation, with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DDT) for 1h and 16.6 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) for 30 min. Then, 600 µL of 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0) were added to the protein suspensions to reduce the urea concentration to 2 M. Trypsin beads (50% slurry of TLCK trypsin; Thermo-Fisher Scientific; Cat. #20230) were equilibrated with 3 washes with 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0) and 100 µL of equilibrated trypsin beads were added to the protein suspensions. Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C and trypsin beads were removed by centrifugation (2000 xg at 5°C for 5 min). The resulting peptide solutions were desalted using carbon C18 spin tips (Glygen; Cat. #TT2MC18). Briefly, spin tips were activated and equilibrated twice with 200 µL of Elution Solution (70% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and Wash Solution (1% ACN, 0.1% TFA), respectively. Samples were loaded and spin tips were washed twice with 200 µL of Wash Solution. For peptide elution, 50 µl of Elution Solution was added 4 times to the spin tips. In each desalting step, spin tips were centrifuged at 1,500xg at 5°C for 3 min. Finally, eluted peptides were dried in a SpeedVac and peptide pellets were stored at −80°C.  Proteins in each sample were identified and quantified using Mass spectrometry. Briefly, peptide pellets were resuspended in 3 µL of reconstitution buffer (20 fmol/µL enolase in 3% ACN, 0.1% TFA), and 2 µL were loaded onto an LC-MS/MS system consisting of a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through an EASY-Spray source (Cat. # ES081, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phases for the chromatographic separation of the peptides consisted in Solvent A (3% ACN: 0.1% FA) and Solvent B (99.9% ACN; 0.1% FA). Peptides were loaded in a micro-precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC; Cat. # 160454, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated in an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC; Cat. # 164569, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a gradient running from 3% to 23% over 120 min. The UPLC system delivered a flow of 2 µL/min (loading) and 300 nL/min (gradient elution). The Q-Exactive Plus operated a duty cycle of 2.1s. Thus, it acquired full scan survey spectra (m/z 375–1500) with a 70,000 FWHM resolution followed by data-dependent acquisition in which the 15 most intense ions were selected for HCD (higher energy collisional dissociation) and MS/MS scanning (200–2000 m/z) with a resolution of 17,500 FWHM. A dynamic exclusion period of 30s was enabled with a m/z window of ±10 ppms.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification from MS data was automated using the Mascot Daemon (v2.6.1) platform in which Mascot Distiller (v2.5.1) generated peak list files (MGFs) from RAW data and the Mascot search engine matched the MS/MS data stored in the MGF files to peptides using the SwissProt Database restricted to mouse taxon (SwissProt_2016Oct.fasta; 16,838 sequences). Searches had a FDR of ~1% and allowed 2 trypsin missed cleavages, mass tolerance of ±10 ppm for the MS scans and ±25 mmu for the MS/MS scans, carbamidomethyl Cys as a fixed modification and PyroGlu on N-terminal Gln and oxidation of Met as variable modifications. Identified peptides were quantified using Pescal software in a label free procedure based on extracted ion chromatograms (XICs). Thus, the software constructed XICs for all the peptides identified across all samples with mass and retention time windows of ±7 ppm and ±2 min, respectively and calculated the area under the peak. Individual peptide intensity values in each sample were normalized to the sum of the intensity values of all the peptides quantified in that sample. Data points not quantified were given a peptide intensity value equal to the minimum intensity value quantified in the sample divided by 10. Protein intensity values were calculated by adding the individual normalized intensities of all the peptides comprised in a protein, and protein score values were expressed as the maximum Mascot protein score value obtained across samples.

### Publication Abstract
Long-term hematopoietic stem cells are rare, highly quiescent stem cells of the hematopoietic system with life-long self-renewal potential and the ability to transplant and reconstitute the entire hematopoietic system of conditioned recipients. Most of our understanding of these rare cells has relied on cell surface identification, epigenetic, and transcriptomic analyses. Our knowledge of protein synthesis, folding, modification, and degradation-broadly termed protein homeostasis or "proteostasis"-in these cells is still in its infancy, with very little known about how the functional state of the proteome is maintained in hematopoietic stem cells. We investigated the requirement of the small phospho-binding adaptor proteins, the cyclin-dependent kinase subunits (CKS1 and CKS2), for maintaining ordered hematopoiesis and long-term hematopoietic stem cell reconstitution. CKS1 and CKS2 are best known for their roles in p27 degradation and cell cycle regulation, and by studying the transcriptome and proteome of <i>Cks1</i> <sup><i>-/-</i></sup> and <i>Cks2</i> <sup><i>-/-</i></sup> mice, we demonstrate regulation of key signaling pathways that govern hematopoietic stem cell biology including AKT, FOXO1, and NF&#x3ba;B, together balancing protein homeostasis and restraining reactive oxygen species to ensure healthy hematopoietic stem cell function.

### Keywords
Proteostasis, Mouse, Cks1, Cks2, Proteomics, Lsk cells., Hematopoietic stem cells

### Affiliations
Cell Signalling
Cell Signaling and Proteomics Group, Center for Genomics and Computational Biology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London EC1M 6BQ, UK.

### Submitter
Pedro Casado-Izquierdo

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro R. Cutillas
Cell Signaling and Proteomics Group, Center for Genomics and Computational Biology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London EC1M 6BQ, UK.


