### Accession
PXD030915

### Title
Spatiotemporal profiling of the bovine oviduct fluid proteome around the time of ovulation

### Description
Unraveling the composition and regulation of the oviduct fluid (OF) is crucial to understand the microenvironment in which sperm capacitation, fertilization and early embryo development take place. Therefore, our aim was to determine the spatiotemporal changes in the OF proteome according to the anatomical region of the oviduct (ampulla vs. isthmus), the proximity of the ovulating ovary (ipsilateral vs. contralateral side) and the peri-ovulatory stage (pre-ovulatory or Pre-ov vs. post-ovulatory or Post-ov). Oviducts from adult cyclic cows were collected at a local slaughterhouse and pools of OF were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS and label-free protein quantification (n=32 OF pools for all region  stage  side conditions). A total of 3,760 proteins were identified in the OF, of which 37% were predicted to be secreted. The oviduct region was the major source of variation in protein abundance, followed by the proximity of the ovulating ovary and finally the peri-ovulatory stage. Differentially abundant proteins between regions, stages and sides were involved in a broad variety of biological functions, including protein binding, response to stress, cell-to-cell adhesion, calcium homeostasis and the immune system. This work highlights the dynamic regulation of oviduct secretions and provides new protein candidates for interactions between the maternal environment, the gametes and the early embryo.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis, 10 µg of proteins per sample were prepared using the PreOmics iST-BCT kit (PreOmics GmbH, Martinsried, Germany) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, proteins were lysed, denatured, reduced and alkylated for 10 min at 95° then Trypsin/LysC digested for 60 min at 37 °C. Purification and elution of peptides were then carried out for 1 h at room temperature. Samples were then purified from salts, contaminants and other detergents, using reversed phase SDBS spin cartridge (PreOmics GmbH, Martinsried, Germany). The resulting peptide mixtures were loaded on a 75 µm × 250 mm IonOpticks Aurora 2 C18 column (Ion Opticks Pty Ltd., Bundoora, Australia). A gradient of basic reversed-phase buffers (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid, 98% H2O MilliQ, 2% acetonitrile; Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid, 100% acetonitrile) was run on a NanoElute HPLC System (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min at 50 °C. The liquid chromatography (LC) run lasted for 120 min (2% to 15% of buffer B during 60 min; up to 25% at 90 min; up to 37% at 100 min; up to 95% at 110 min and finally 95% for 10 min to wash the column). The column was coupled online to a TIMS TOF Pro (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany) with a CaptiveSpray ion source (Bruker Daltonik). The temperature of the ion transfer capillary was set at 180 °C. Ions were accumulated for 114 ms, and mobility separation was achieved by ramping the entrance potential from −160 V to −20 V within 114 ms. The acquisition of the MS and MS/MS mass spectra was done with average resolutions of 60,000 and 50,000 full width at half maximum (mass range 100–1700 m/z), respectively. To enable the PASEF method, precursor m/z and mobility information was first derived from full scan TIMS-MS experiments (with a mass range of m/z 100–1700). The quadrupole isolation width was set to 2 and 3 Th and, for fragmentation, the collision energies varied between 31 and 52 eV depending on the precursor mass and charge. TIMS, MS operation and PASEF were controlled and synchronized using the control instrument software OtofControl 6.2 (Bruker Daltonik). LC-MS/MS data were acquired using the PASEF method with a total cycle time of 1.31 s, including 1 TIMS MS scan and 10 PASEF MS/MS scans. The 10 PASEF scans (100 ms each) containing, on average, 12 MS/MS scans per PASEF scan. Ion mobility-resolved mass spectra, nested ion mobility vs. m/z distributions, as well as summed fragment ion intensities were extracted from the raw data file with DataAnalysis 5.3 (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany). Signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio were increased by summations of individual TIMS scans. Mobility peak positions and peak half-widths were determined based on extracted ion mobilograms (±0.05 Da) using the peak detection algorithm implemented in the DataAnalysis software. Features detection were also performed using DataAnalysis 5.3 software and exported in .mgf format.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using the MASCOT software (version 2.5.1; Matrix Science, London, UK) against the Uniprot Bos taurus database (May 2019, 37514 sequences) using its automatic decoy database search to calculate a false discovery rate (FDR). The parameters used for database searches included trypsin as enzyme (one missed cleavage allowed), carbamidomethylcysteine as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Monoisotopic mass was considered and mass tolerance was set at 15 ppm for MS ions and 0,05 Da for MS/MS ions. Mascot results from the target and decoy databases were incorporated to Scaffold Q+ software (version 5.0.1, Proteome Software, Portland, USA, www.proteomesoftware.com). Threshold for peptide and protein identification were set to 95.0 % as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm and the Protein Prophet algorithm. All proteins containing at least two unique peptides (False discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01%) were considered for protein quantification. The abundance of proteins was assessed using the Spectrum Count quantitative method and the “weighted spectra” option of the Scaffold software, as previously described. The weighted spectra option of Scaffold is based on the assignment of each peptide to a weight according to whether they are shared or not between identified proteins. The normalization of data was achieved by multiplying each spectrum count in each sample by the average count over the sample’s total spectrum count.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ipsilateral, Pre-ovulatory, Contralateral, Cattle, Ampulla, Post-ovulatory, Proteomics, Oviduct fluid, Isthmus, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Protim, Irset, Inserm U1085
UMS Biosit - CNRS 3480 - Inserm 018 Campus de Beaulieu - Bâtiment. 24 - CS2407 263 Avenue du Général Leclerc 35042 RENNES CEDEX FRANCE

### Submitter
E Com

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Pineau
UMS Biosit - CNRS 3480 - Inserm 018 Campus de Beaulieu - Bâtiment. 24 - CS2407 263 Avenue du Général Leclerc 35042 RENNES CEDEX FRANCE


