### Accession
PXD008385

### Title
Obesity-mediated regulation of the cardiac acetylome

### Description
Lysine residues undergo diverse and reversible post-translational modifications including acetylation. Acetylation of lysine residues have traditionally been studied as epigenetic modifiers of histone tails within chromatin that provides an important mechanism for regulating gene expression. In the heart, histone acetylation acts as a key regulator of cardiac remodeling and function. However, recent studies have shown that thousands of proteins (~4,500) can be acetylated at multiple acetylation sites (~15,000 sites). These data suggest that the acetylome rivals phosphorylation in prevalence as a post-translational modification. Based on this, we examined the impact of obesity on the regulation of lysine acetylation in the left ventricle of male c57BL/6J mice. We report that obesity contributed to a significant increase in heart enlargement and fibrosis. Of interest, immunoblot analysis demonstrated that lysine acetylation was markedly altered in response to diet-induced obesity and that this phenomena was cardiac tissue specific. Mass spectral analysis was performed in which 3264 proteins were identified in the left ventricle. Of these, 254 proteins were acetylated, 16 of which were significantly impacted by obesity. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis identified the Cardiovascular Disease network as significantly regulated by obesity, 54 of the 254 acetylated proteins impact this pathway. This network includes LIM domain-binding protein 3 (LDB3), aconitate hydratase (ACO2), and dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase (DLD), which are all significantly impacted by obesity and known to regulate cardiac function. Combined, these findings suggest a critical role for the cardiac acetylome in obesity-mediated remodeling and ultimately have the potential to elucidate novel targets that regulate cardiac pathology.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Isolation and Enzymatic Digestion – Isolated protein samples were digested and desalted according to Lundby et al. [1] (N= 5).  Protein concentrations were then determined using a bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Proteins were then reduced and alkylated and subjected to methanol-chloroform precipitation prior to digestion with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako, Richmond, VA). Followed by digestion with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) and desalting and concentration using C18 Sep-Pak Cartridges (Waters).  TMT Isobaric Labeling - Peptides were mass tagged using Thermo-Fisher’s TMT 10-plex isobaric label kit (Cat # 90061) following the included protocol and pooled for analysis.   Basic Reversed-Phase Fractionation – Pooled TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated by basic pH reversed-phase (BPRP) fractionation on an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Scientific) using an integrated fraction collector. Elution was performed using a 10 minute gradient of 0-20% solvent B followed by a 50 minute gradient of solvent B from 20-45% (Solvent A 5.0% Acetonitrile, 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, Solvent B 90.0% Acetonitrile, 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0) on a Zorbax 300Extend-C18 column (Agilent) at a flow rate of 0.4 ml/min. A total of 24 fractions were collected at 37 second intervals in a looping fashion for 60 minutes then combined to produce a total of 12 fractions. Peptide elution was monitored at a wavelength of 220nm using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 variable wavelength detector (Thermo Scientific). Each fraction was then centrifuged to near dryness and desalted using C18 Sep-Pak Cartridges followed again by centrifugation to near dryness and reconstitution with 20 ul of 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid.  Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry- BPRP fractions were then separated using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) on a self-packed UChrom C18 column (100 um x 35 cm). Separation was performed using a 180-minute gradient of solvent B from 2-27% (Solvent A 0.1% Formic Acid, Solvent B Acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic Acid) at 50 C using a digital Pico View nanospray source (New Objectives, Woburn, MA) that was modified with a custom-built column heater and an ABIRD background suppressor (ESI Source Solutions, Woburn, MA). Briefly, the self-packed column tapered tip was pulled with a laser micropipette puller P-2000 (Sutter Instrument Co, Novato, CA) to an approximate id of 10um. The column was then packed with 1-2 cm of 5um Sepax GP-C18 (120A) (Sepax Technologies, Newark, DE) followed by 40 cm of 1.8 um Sepax GP-C18 (120A) at 9000 psi using a nano LC column packing kit (nanoLCMS, Gold River, CA).  Mass spectral analysis was performed using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). TMT analysis was performed using an MS3 multi-notch approach [2]. The MS1 precursor selection range is from 400-1400 m/z at a resolution of 120K and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 2.0 x 105 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Quadrupole isolation at 0.7 Th for MS2 analysis using CID fragmentation in the linear ion trap with a collision energy of 35%. The AGC was set to 4.0 x 103 with a maximum injection time of 150ms.  The instrument was operated in a top speed data-dependent mode with a most intense precursor priority with dynamic exclusion set to an exclusion duration of 60s with a 10ppm tolerance. MS2 fragment ions were captured in the MS3 precursor population. These MS3 precursors were then isolated within a 2.5 Da window and subjected to high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) with a collision energy of 55%. The ions were then detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 with an AGC of 5.0 x 104 and a maximum injection time of 150 ms.  The data was then analyzed using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, version v.27, rev. 11.) and Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA. version 2.1).

### Data Protocol
The abundance data of these 3,928 proteins were normalized at the protein level, following the TMT Thermo-Fisher protocol and manual (Thermo Proteome Discoverer User Guide, Software Version 2.1), using the sum of the abundances of a pool of the nine mouse samples included on the multiplex to enable similar future experiments.The average coefficient of variation across normalized protein abundances measured 25.3% in CD samples and 22.3% in HFD samples before quality control.  A filtering step was used to reduce the overall coefficient of variation (CV) in individual protein abundance values. Specifically, within the four CD replicates, if exactly one outlier was 1.15 standard deviations or more from the mean, it was removed. The maximum standard deviation that is attainable in a sample with four replicates is 1.5; 20% of the 15,712 of the abundances measured in the CD samples were 1.15 standard deviations or more from the mean protein abundance value. Similarly, within the five HFD samples, if exactly one outlier was 1.15 standard deviations or more from the mean, it was removed. The maximum standard deviation that isattainable in a sample with five replicates is 1.79; 14.4% of the 19,640 of the abundances measured in the HFD samples were 1.15 standard deviations or more from the mean protein abundance value and thus removed.We found that these thresholds allow us toidentify gross outlying individual data points within replicates and decrease CV’s easily (only 17% of all data points were excluded) without excluding values of entire samples. This simple quality control method identified grossly outlying replicates and decreased the average CV in CD to 14.8% and 15.3% in HFD. Log2-transformed data followed a normal distribution.Before testing for statistical significant differences between CD and HFD cohorts,proteins were further filtered by only considering those with abundance levels forthree out of four CD samples and three out of five HFD samples, and at least two peptides associated to the proteinin each sample. This filtering protocol left 2,515 proteins of which 145 were acetylated. Normalized data were first log2-transformed to follow a normal distribution.Simple Student’s t-tests were performed on the normalized and quality-controlled data to assess differencesin means of abundance levels between CD and HFD cohorts. A correction for the false discovery rate on the 2,515 hypothesis tests was made (FDR, Benjamini-Hochberg).  Sixty-four of the 2,515 proteins show statistically significant differences with adjustedp-values of p<0.1. When the same process was performed on only the 145 acetylated proteins, 24 of the 145 acetylated proteins had p-values with p<0.05, and five acetylatedproteins had adjusted p-values with p<0.05. Principal Components (PCA) was performed on zero-centered, log2-transformed, normalized, and quality-controlled abundances on the 24 acetylated proteinsusing singular value decomposition,and showsa separation between high fat and control fat diets. Simple hierarchical clustering was performed on the log2-transformed, normalized, and quality controlled abundances of the 24 acetylated proteins, using the Pearson Correlation Coefficient as the similarity metric and the average agglomerative method.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine residues undergo diverse and reversible post-translational modifications (PTMs). Lysine acetylation has traditionally been studied in the epigenetic regulation of nucleosomal histones that provides an important mechanism for regulating gene expression. Histone acetylation plays a key role in cardiac remodeling and function. However, recent studies have shown that thousands of proteins can be acetylated at multiple acetylation sites, suggesting the acetylome rivals the kinome as a PTM. Based on this, we examined the impact of obesity on protein lysine acetylation in the left ventricle (LV) of male c57BL/6J mice. We reported that obesity significantly increased heart enlargement and fibrosis. Moreover, immunoblot analysis demonstrated that lysine acetylation was markedly altered with obesity and that this phenomenon was cardiac tissue specific. Mass spectral analysis identified 2515 proteins, of which 65 were significantly impacted by obesity. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis&#xae; (IPA) further demonstrated that these proteins were involved in metabolic dysfunction and cardiac remodeling. In addition to total protein, 189 proteins were acetylated, 14 of which were significantly impacted by obesity. IPA identified the Cardiovascular Disease Pathway as significantly regulated by obesity. This network included aconitate hydratase 2 (ACO2), and dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase (DLD), in which acetylation was significantly increased by obesity. These proteins are known to regulate cardiac function yet, the impact for ACO2 and DLD acetylation remains unclear. Combined, these findings suggest a critical role for cardiac acetylation in obesity-mediated remodeling; this has the potential to elucidate novel targets that regulate cardiac pathology.

### Keywords
Heart, Mouse, Cardiovascular disease, Acetylation

### Affiliations
Pharmacology
Department of Pharmacology, University of Nevada, Reno School of Medicine

### Submitter
Craig Ulrich

### Lab Head
Dr Craig Ulrich
Department of Pharmacology, University of Nevada, Reno School of Medicine


