### Accession
PXD003845

### Title
Ratios of SILAC labels in E. Coli

### Description
3 raw datasets corresponding to known mixtures of lysine and arginine in E. Coli.

### Sample Protocol
A lysine and arginine auxotrophic E. coli strain, SLE1, was purchased from the Caenorhabditis Genetics Center (CGC) and grown in M9 Minimal Media (Cold Spring Harbor Protocols). Each culture was grown with a mixture of SILAC isotopes at the desired mixing ratio, lysed, and fractionated via SDS-PAGE. Gel pieces were excised and destained with 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 40% acetonitrile (destain buffer) at room temperature. Following detaining, samples were reduced by incubation with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 10 minutes at 60o C. After reduction, samples were alkylated by 10 mM iodoacetoamide for 20 minutes. Following reduction and alkylation, samples were washed with destain buffer and incubated with 100% acetonitrile on ice until dehydrated. After dehydration, samples were resuspended in 10 μg/ml trypsin until the samples were rehydrated. After this, excess trypsin was removed and the sample was digested overnight. Elution of digested peptides was performed by adding 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and incubated at 25o C on a shaker for 20 minutes. After 20 minutes, the supernatant was removed and the eluted peptides were lyophilized and stored at -20o C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide samples were analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with Easy-nLC II nanoflow liquid chromatography systems (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Southern Denmark). The peptide digests from each fraction were reconstituted in Solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and loaded onto a trap column (75 µm × 2 cm) packed in-house with Magic C18 AQ (Michrom Bioresources, Inc., Auburn, CA, USA) (5 µm particle size, pore size 100 Å) at a flow rate of 5 µl/min with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water). Peptides were resolved on an analytical column (75 µm × 20 cm) at a flow rate of 350 nl min−1 using a linear gradient of 7–30% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile) over 60 min. Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out in a data dependent manner with full scans (350–1,800m/z) acquired using an Orbitrap mass analyzer at a mass resolution of 120,000 in Elite at 400 m/z. The twenty most intense precursor ions from a survey scan were selected for MS/MS from each duty cycle and detected at a mass resolution of 15,000 at a m/z of 400 in the Orbitrap analyzer. All the tandem mass spectra were produced by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) method. Dynamic exclusion was set for 30 s with a 10 p.p.m. mass window. The automatic gain control for full FT MS was set to 1 million ions and for FT MS/MS was set to 0.05 million ions with a maximum ion injection times of 100 ms and 200 ms, respectively. Lock-mass from ambient air (m/z 445.1200025) was used for the internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis on the Proteome Discoverer platform (version 2.0) was performed using MASCOT (version 2.2.0) (22) and SEQUEST (23) as the search algorithms. For both MaxQuant and Proteome Discovered, the search parameters allowed for two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation at cysteine as a fixed modification; N-terminal acetylation, deamidation at asparagine and glutamine, oxidation at methionine, and the appropriate SILAC labeling provided as variable modifications. For C. elegans data, the variable modifications of phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified. MS data was acquired on the LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer, the monoisotopic peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to 0.1 Da. The false discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative mass spectrometry data necessitates an analytical pipeline that captures the accuracy and comprehensiveness of the experiments. Currently, data analysis is often coupled to specific software packages, which restricts the analysis to a given workflow and precludes a more thorough characterization of the data by other complementary tools. To address this, we have developed PyQuant, a cross-platform mass spectrometry data quantification application that is compatible with existing frameworks and can be used as a stand-alone quantification tool. PyQuant supports most types of quantitative mass spectrometry data including SILAC, NeuCode, (15)N, (13)C, or (18)O and chemical methods such as iTRAQ or TMT and provides the option of adding custom labeling strategies. In addition, PyQuant can perform specialized analyses such as quantifying isotopically labeled samples where the label has been metabolized into other amino acids and targeted quantification of selected ions independent of spectral assignment. PyQuant is capable of quantifying search results from popular proteomic frameworks such as MaxQuant, Proteome Discoverer, and the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline in addition to several standalone search engines. We have found that PyQuant routinely quantifies a greater proportion of spectral assignments, with increases ranging from 25-45% in this study. Finally, PyQuant is capable of complementing spectral assignments between replicates to quantify ions missed because of lack of MS/MS fragmentation or that were omitted because of issues such as spectra quality or false discovery rates. This results in an increase of biologically useful data available for interpretation. In summary, PyQuant is a flexible mass spectrometry data quantification platform that is capable of interfacing with a variety of existing formats and is highly customizable, which permits easy configuration for custom analysis.

### Keywords
Silac, E. coli

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Departments of Biological Chemistry, Pathology and Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA ( lab head )

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Departments of Biological Chemistry, Pathology and Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA ( lab head )


