### Accession
PXD004985

### Title
Salmon liver proteomics -  Liver proteome response of pre-harvest Atlantic salmon following exposure to elevated temperature

### Description
Atlantic salmon production in Tasmania (Southern Australia) occurs near the upper limits of the species thermal tolerance. Summer water temperatures can average over 19°C over several weeks and have negative effects on performance and health. Liver tissue exerts important metabolic functions in thermal adaptation. With the aim of identifying the mechanisms underlying liver plasticity in response to chronic elevated temperature in Atlantic salmon, label-free quantitative shotgun proteomics was used to explore quantitative protein changes after 43 days of exposure to elevated temperature.  A total of 277 proteins were differentially (adjusted p-value <0.05) expressed between the control (15°C) and elevated (21°C) temperature treatments. As predicted identified by Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA), transcription and translation mechanisms, protein degradation via the proteasome, and cytoskeletal components were down-regulated at elevated temperature. In contrast, an up-regulated response was predicted identified for NRF2-mediated oxidative stress, endoplasmic reticulum stress, and amino acid degradation. The proteome response was paralleled by reduced fish condition factor and hepato-somatic index at elevated temperature . The present study provides further evidence of the interplay among different cellular machineries in a scenario of heat-induced energy deficit and oxidative stress, and refines present understanding of how Atlantic salmon cope with chronic exposure to temperature near the upper limits of thermal tolerance.

### Sample Protocol
Liver tissue was extracted with 7M urea and 2M thiourea and protein samples cleaned up using ethanol precipitation.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant and Andromeda for RAW data processing, database searching and label-free protein quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Thermal stress, Proteomics, Aquaculture

### Affiliations
Proteomics facility manager
University of Tasmania

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Wilson
Proteomics facility manager


