### Accession
PXD017248

### Title
CD11d is a novel antigen on chicken PBMC

### Description
Using Immunoprecipitation (IP) and mass spectrometry analysis, we aimed at identifying the target of a self-made monoclonal antibody to an unknown molecule on the outer membranes of chicken peripheral blood derived mononuclear cells (PBMC).

### Sample Protocol
PBMC were isolated from chicken whole blood (3 healthy chickens) by density gradient centrifugation. Cells were lysed in CHAPS buffer (TBS containing 50 mM Tris and 150 mM NaCl, 2% CHAPS, Roche complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor) and protein concentration was determined with Bradford protein assay. IP was performed with 1 mg chicken PBMC protein per 40 µl Protein G Sepharose Beads (GE Healthcare, Freiburg, Germany), using mouse anti-chicken PBMC antibody (clone 8F2, self-made monoclonal antibody, isotype IgG1; neat) and appropriate isotype control for each chicken sample separately. Immunoprecipitates were eluted with Laemmli-buffer and digested by a modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol (Grosche et.al, MCP, 2016, DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M115.052183).  Acidified eluted peptides were analyzed in the data-dependent mode on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) online coupled to a UItimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC (Dionex). Samples were automatically injected and loaded onto the C18 trap column, eluted after 5 min and separated on the C18 analytical column (Acquity UPLC M-Class HSS T3 column, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm; Waters) by a 90 min non-linear acetonitrile gradient at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 60,000 and after each MS1 cycle, the 10 most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data was loaded into Progenesis QI software for proteomics for MS1 intensity based label-free quantification (v3.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters), and analyzed as described (Grosche et.al, MCP, 2016, DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M115.052183). MSMS spectra were exported and searched against the UniProt chicken database (35,128 sequences) using the Mascot search engine (version 2.6.2). Search settings were: enzyme trypsin, 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance, one missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and asparagine and glutamine de-amidation allowed as variable modifications. A Mascot-integrated decoy database search was performed with an average false discovery rate of <1%. Peptide assignments were re-imported into the Progenesis QI software. The abundances of all unique peptides allocated to each protein were summed up. The resulting normalized abundances of the individual proteins were used for calculation of fold-changes of protein ratios between 8F2- and isotype control IP samples. Only proteins quantified by at least two unique peptides were used for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
In life sciences, antibodies are among the most commonly used tools for identifying, tracking, quantifying and isolating molecules, mainly proteins. However, it has recently become clear that antibodies often fall short with respect to specificity and selectivity and in many cases target proteins are not even known. When commercial availability of antibodies is scarce, e.g. for targeting proteins from farm animals, researchers face additional challenges: they often have to rely on cross-reactive antibodies, which are poorly characterized for their exact target, their actual cross-reactivity and the desired application. In this study, we aimed at identifying the true target of mouse monoclonal antibody 8F2, which was generated against chicken PBMC and used for decades in research, while it's actual target molecule remained unknown. We used 8F2 antibody for immunoprecipitation in chicken PBMC and subsequently identified its true target as CD11d, which was never described in chicken lymphocytes before, by quantitative LC-MSMS. The most abundant interactor of CD11d was identified as integrin beta 2. The existence of this alpha integrin was therefore clearly proven on protein level and provides a first basis to further assess the role of CD11d in chickens in future studies. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD017248. SIGNIFICANCE: Our studies determined CD11d as the true target of a previously uncharacterized mouse monoclonal antibody 8F2, generated against chicken peripheral blood derived mononuclear cells (PBMC). This is therefore now first member of alpha integrins in chickens, that existence was now clearly identified on protein level. The additional identification of CD11d interactors provides information on integrin-dependent regulation of signaling networks, allowing further functional studies.

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Chicken, Pbmc, Cd11d

### Affiliations
LMU Munich, Veterinary Sciences, Chair of Physiology, Lena-Christ-Straße 48, 82152 Planegg/Martinsried,  Germany
Chair of Physiology, Department of Veterinary Sciences, LMU Munich

### Submitter
Roxane Degroote

### Lab Head
Dr Cornelia Annette Deeg
Chair of Physiology, Department of Veterinary Sciences, LMU Munich


