### Accession
PXD035196

### Title
Ptbp2 modulates axon growth in motoneurons through axonal localization and translation of Hnrnpr

### Description
The neuronal RNA-binding protein Ptbp2 regulates neuronal differentiation by modulating alternative splicing programs in the nucleus. Such programs contribute to axonogenesis by adjusting the levels of protein isoforms involved in axon growth and branching. While its functions in alternative splicing have been described in detail, cytosolic roles of Ptbp2 for axon growth have remained elusive. Here, we show that Ptbp2 is located in the cytosol and in axons of motoneurons, and that depletion of Ptbp2 affects axon growth.  We identified Ptbp2 as a major interactor of the 3' UTR of Hnrnpr mRNA. Axonal localization of Hnrnpr mRNA and local synthesis of hnRNP R protein are strongly reduced when Ptbp2 is depleted, leading to defective axon growth. Ptbp2 regulates hnRNP R translation by mediating the association of Hnrnpr with ribosomes in a manner dependent on the translation factor eIF5A2. Our data thus, suggest a mechanism whereby Ptbp2 modulates axon growth by fine-tuning the mRNA transport and local synthesis of an RNA-binding protein.

### Sample Protocol
RNA pulldown assay Templates for the in vitro transcription (IVT) reaction were PCR-amplified from the pcDNA3.1 plasmid containing the short 3' UTR with the KAPA HiFi HotStart ReadyMix kit (Roche, KK2601) using primers that included the T7 promoter sequence in the forward primer for generating sense RNA or reverse primer for generating antisense RNA. IVT was performed with the T7 RNA Polymerase kit (Thermo Scientific, EP0111) with a 1:10 ratio of biotin-16-UTP (Jena Bioscience, NU-821-BIO16) and 0.25 U/50 μl inorganic pyrophosphatase (Thermo Scientific, EF0221) and left overnight at 37°C. Afterward, the DNA template was digested by the addition of 4 U of TURBO DNase (Ambion, AM2238) and incubation for 30 min at 37°C. RNA was then purified on a NucleoSpin RNA column (Macherey-Nagel) and an aliquot was subjected to agarose gel electrophoresis for size confirmation. Cell culture pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (150 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 0.1% NP-40) containing 50 U/ml RNase Inhibitor, incubated for 20 min on ice, and cleared by centrifugation at 19,400 × g for 15 min at 4°C. 4 μg biotinylated RNA was incubated with 40 μl pre-washed streptavidin beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 88817) for 15 min at 4°C with intermittent shaking at 800 rpm to allow streptavidin-biotin binding. Beads were then washed and the lysate was added. After incubation at 4°C for 2 h on a rotating mixer, beads were collected and washed four times with lysis buffer (the last two washes with buffer without NP-40). For SDS-PAGE and Coomassie staining, proteins were eluted from the beads by resuspension in 1× Laemmli buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 1% SDS, 6% glycerol, 1% β-mercaptoethanol, 0.004% bromophenol blue) and boiling. For mass spectrometry analysis, beads of four technical replicates were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until use.  Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS Beads were thawed and resuspended in 20 µl of 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 2 mM MgCl2, 375 U/ml Benzonase and incubated for 1 h to degrade the RNA. Beads were kept in solution by shaking at 750 rpm throughout all steps. Proteins were denatured by adding 150 µl of 8M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 solution, and 5 µl of 30 µM DTT and then digested by LysC treatment (0.25 µg/sample) at room temperature. Samples were diluted 4-fold in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and chloroacetamide at a final concentration of 5 mM was added to alkylate cysteines. Trypsin (0.25 µg/sample) was added and samples were digested overnight at room temperature in the dark. The digestion was terminated by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (final 1% v/v) and the beads were pelleted by centrifugation. Half of the supernatant was further processed by desalting chromatography on three discs of C18 material using the STAGE-tip format45. Briefly, STAGE-tips were washed with 100 µl buffer B (50% v/v acetonitrile, 0.5% v/v acetic acid), conditioned with 100 µl methanol, washed twice with 100 µl buffer A (2% v/v acetonitrile, 0.5% v/v acetic acid), loaded with sample peptides, washed twice with 100 µl buffer A and subjected to peptide elution by 60 µl of buffer B. The eluate was evaporated to dryness in a vacuum concentrator. Finally, peptides were re-suspended in 10 µl 2% v/v acetonitrile, 0.5% v/v acetic acid, 0.1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid and stored at -20°C. 2 µl were later used for mass spectrometry.  LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via in-house packed columns [75-μm inner diameter, 50 cm length, and 1.9 μm C18 particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH)] in a gradient of buffer A (0.5% formic acid) to buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid). The gradient started at 5% B, increasing to 30% B in 65 min, further to 95% B in 10 min, staying at 95% B for 5 min, decreasing to 5% B in 5 min and staying at 5% B for 5 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and a temperature of 60°C. A Quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF-X; Thermo Fisher Scientific) was directly coupled to the LC via a nano-electrospray source. The Q Exactive HF-X was operated in a data-dependent mode. The survey scan range was set from 300 to 1,650 m/z, with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. Up to the 12th, most abundant isotope patterns with a charge of two to five were isolated and subjected to collision-induced dissociation fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27, an isolation window of 1.4 Th, and an MS/MS resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200. Dynamic exclusion to minimize resequencing was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data processing and bioinformatics analysis To process MS raw files, we employed the MaxQuant software version 1.6.0.1546, searching against the UniProtKB mouse FASTA database using canonical and isoform protein sequences. Default search parameters were utilized unless stated differently. A false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off of 1% was applied at the peptide and protein level. The search feature “Match between runs”, which allows the transfer of peptide identifications in the absence of sequencing after nonlinear retention time alignment, was enabled with a maximum retention time window of 0.7 min.

### Publication Abstract
The neuronal RNA-binding protein Ptbp2 regulates neuronal differentiation by modulating alternative splicing programs in the nucleus. Such programs contribute to axonogenesis by adjusting the levels of protein isoforms involved in axon growth and branching. While its functions in alternative splicing have been described in detail, cytosolic roles of Ptbp2 for axon growth have remained elusive. Here, we show that Ptbp2 is located in the cytosol including axons and growth cones of motoneurons, and that depletion of cytosolic Ptbp2 affects axon growth. We identify Ptbp2 as a major interactor of the 3' UTR of Hnrnpr mRNA encoding the RNA-binding protein hnRNP R. Axonal localization of Hnrnpr mRNA and local synthesis of hnRNP R protein are strongly reduced when Ptbp2 is depleted, leading to defective axon growth. Ptbp2 regulates hnRNP R translation by mediating the association of Hnrnpr with ribosomes in a manner dependent on the translation factor eIF5A2. Our data thus suggest a mechanism whereby cytosolic Ptbp2 modulates axon growth by fine-tuning the mRNA transport and local synthesis of an RNA-binding protein.

### Keywords
Neuron, Hnrnpr, Interactome, Axon, Ptbp2

### Affiliations
Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


