### Accession
PXD014946

### Title
Ablation of SOCS3 in Cardiomyocytes Exacerbates Cardiac hypertrophy and Dysfunction by Increasing GRP78-medieated ER Stress after pressure overload

### Description
To explore the mechanisms for SOCS3 in cardiomyocytes to regulate cardiac hypertrophic remodeling after pressure overload, we therefore performed proteomic analysis to identify novel protein targets or pathways in left ventricular samples from SOCS3 knockout (SOCS3cko) mice and their WT littermates.

### Sample Protocol
The primary experimental procedures for proteomics analysis included protein extraction, trypsin digestion, HPLC Fractionation, LC–MS/MS analysis and data analysis supported by Jingjie PTM BioLab (Hangzhou) Co. Ltd. The sample was grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and lysed in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail), followed by 1 min of sonication on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, China). The lysate was centrifuged at 12,000×g at 4 °C for 10 min and the supernatant was collected. Protein concentration was determined with BCA kit (Biyuntian, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma, USA) at 56 °C for 30 min and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma, USA) at room temperature in the dark for additional 15 min. Then samples were diluted to urea concentration less than 2M with 100 mM NH4HCO3. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for another 4 h digestion. The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column. Peptides were eluted and separated with a stepwise gradient of increasing acetonitrile (8% to 32%, pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. The peptides were combined to 10 fractions and dried in a vacuum concentrator, and then analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Dried peptide samples were re-dissolved in Solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and loaded to EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC (Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The gradient was from 5% to 25% mobile solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) for 0-26 min, 25% to 40% for 26-34 min, 40% to 80% for 34-37 min and holding at 80% for 37-40 min, all at a flow rate of 400 nL/min.

### Data Protocol
The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage was 2.0 kV. The scanning m/z was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Then, peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with max injection time 200 ms and 30.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4.  The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissProt Mouse database (16717 accessions) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, while oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) were specified as variable modifications. Label-free quantification method was LFQ, FDR was adjusted to < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Pressure overload-induced hypertrophic remodeling is a critical pathological process leading to heart failure (HF). Suppressor of cytokine signaling-3 (SOCS3) has been demonstrated to protect against cardiac hypertrophy and dysfunction, but its mechanisms are largely unknown. Using primary cardiomyocytes and cardiac-specific SOCS3 knockout (SOCS3cko) or overexpression mice, we demonstrated that modulation of SOCS3 level influenced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, apoptosis and cardiac dysfunction induced by hypertrophic stimuli. We found that glucose regulatory protein 78 (GRP78) was a direct target of SOCS3, and that overexpression of SOCS3 inhibited cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and apoptosis through promoting proteasomal degradation of GRP78, thereby inhibiting activation of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and mitophagy in the heart. Thus, our results uncover SOCS3-GRP78-mediated ER stress as a novel mechanism in the transition from cardiac hypertrophy to HF induced by sustained pressure overload, and suggest that modulating this pathway may provide a new therapeutic approach for hypertrophic heart diseases.

### Keywords
Mouse, Socs3 knockout mice, Heart tissues

### Affiliations
Department of Cardiology, Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases, First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China
Dalian Medical University

### Submitter
Shuang Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Huihua Li
Department of Cardiology, Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases, First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China


