### Accession
PXD025841

### Title
An infection-activated redox switch in the lysosomal protease legumain promotes tumor growth

### Description
Oxidative stress is a hallmark of tumorigenic infections, yet the underlying oxidation events that contribute to tumor growth remain poorly understood. By using chemical proteomics to map cysteine reactivity in human gastric cells, we determined that infection with the cancer-causing bacterium Helicobacter pylori induces oxidation of the lysosomal protease legumain at Cys219. The site-specific loss of Cys219 reactivity dysregulates intracellular legumain processing and localization in H. pylori-infected cells and increases tumor growth and mortality in a xenograft model. These findings establish a link between cysteine oxidation and tumorigenic signaling during bacterial infection and underscore the importance of oxidative post-translational modifications in tumor growth.

### Sample Protocol
For Cysteine Reactivity by ABPP: Combined H. pylori-infected (SILAC-light) and uninfected (SILAC-heavy) AGS (human gastric adenocarcinoma) cell lysates were labeled with Iodoacetamide-alkyne, appended to chemically cleavable biotin-azide tags through copper catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC), and enriched on streptavidin-agarose beads. Proteins were then denatured, reduced, and alkylated, followed by on-bead trypsin digestion and release of labeled peptides by sodium hydrosulfite cleavage. For Protein Abundance by SILAC: Proteins were precipitated from combined H.pylori-infected (SILAC-light) or uninfected (SILAC-heavy) AGS cell lysates with TCA, then denatured, reduced, and alkylated before in-solution trypsin digestion. LC/LC-MS/MS was performed using standard MudPIT protocols on a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap Discovery mass spectrometer coupled to an Agilent 1200 series HPLC.

### Data Protocol
The tandem MS data was analyzed by the SEQUEST algorithm. MS datasets were independently searched with light and heavy SILAC parameter files; for these searches, static modifications on lysine and arginine for either light (+0.0 and +0.0) or heavy (+8.0142 and +10.0083) peptides were used. For protein abundance analysis, a static modification of cysteine residues (+57.0215 m/z, iodoacetamide alkylation) was assumed, while for cysteine reactivity, a differential modification on cysteine of (+258.1481 m/z, iodacetamide-alkyne labeling) was also specified. MS2 spectra matches were assembled into protein identifications and filtered using DTASelect2.0. Quantification of L/H ratios were calculated using the cimage quantification package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Redox-signaling, Cysteine oxidation, Helicobacter pylori

### Affiliations
Chemistry Department, Boston College, USA
Boston College

### Submitter
Daniel Bak

### Lab Head
Dr Eranthie Weerapana
Chemistry Department, Boston College, USA


