### Accession
PXD021552

### Title
Comparative physiological and proteomic analysis reveals different involvement of proteins during artificial aging of Siberian wildrye (Elymus sibiricus L.) seeds

### Description
In total, 5134 protein groups were identified, among which 4169 proteins were quantified. The fold-change cutoff was set when proteins with quantitative ratios above 1.3 or below 1/1.3 and P value<0.05 are deemed significant. Among the quantified proteins, 70 proteins are up-regulated and 104 proteins are down-regulated in group L4/CK.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction Sample was first grinded by liquid nitrogen, then the powder was transferred to 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 20% TCA for 2 h at 4 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 3 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM IAA for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.  TMT Labeling  After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 10-plex TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent (defined as the amount of reagent required to label 100 μg of protein) were thawed and reconstituted in 24 μL ACN. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  Table 7. Labeling information Sample Groups Labeling information CK-1 126 CK-2 127N CK-3 128N L4-1 128C L4-2 129N L4-3 129C L7-1 130N L7-2 130C L7-3 131 HPLC Fractionation The sample was then fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 9 over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. Quantitative Proteomic Analysis by LC-MS/MS Materials and Reagents Name Company H2O Thermo ACN (acetonitrile) Thermo FA (formic acid) Fluka Mass Spectrometer:  Thermo ScientificTM Orbitrap FusionTM LC-MS/MS Analysis Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase analytical column (Thermo). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 9% to 25% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) over 26 min, 25% to 38% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 700 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system.  The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Orbitrap FusionTM (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 35; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold intensity greater than 5E3 in the MS survey scan with 30.0 s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the orbitrap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1550. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. 4.1 Plant materials The seeds of Siberian wildrye (Elymus sibiricus L. cv ‘Chuancao No.2’) were harvested in Hongyuan county, Aba prefecture, Sichuan province of China in September 2018 (102.5441 E, 32.7734 W, 3500 m), which is located in southeast of Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau. The original germination rate and moisture content was 95.01 % ± 0.32 and 8.31 % ± 0.25, respectively. The seeds with similar size and weight were selected and then stored at -20 ℃. 4.2. Artificial aging treatment  Artificial aging treatment (AAT) and germination test were employed with the method described in the previous research with little modified [55]. Briefly, 150 g seeds which were packed in an aging chamber (LH-160, Zhejiang TOP Yunnong Technology Co., Ltd, China) maintained at 45±1 ℃ and 90±1% relative humidity (RH), for 0 h, 36 h and 72 hours. Finally, the 0 h, 36 h and 72 h aged seeds, were stored at -80 °C for further analysis. All samples were three biological repeats.

### Data Protocol
Database Search The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against wheat (Triticum aestivum) database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and oxidation on Met and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. For quantification method, TMT-10plex was selected. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. QC Validation of MS Data Firstly, we checked the mass error of all the identified peptides. The distribution of mass error is near zero and most of them are less than 0.02 Da which means the mass accuracy of the MS data fit the requirement. Secondly, the length of most peptides distributed between 8 and 16, which agree with the property of tryptic peptides, that means sample preparation reach the standard. GO Annotation Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Firstly, Converting identified protein ID to UniProt ID and then mapping to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Then proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotationbased on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. Domain Annotation Identified proteins domain functional description were annotated by InterProScan (a sequence analysis application) based on protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) domain database was used.  KEGG Pathway Annotation Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)database was used to annotate protein pathway. Firstly, using KEGG online service tools KAAS to annotated protein’s KEGG database description. Then mapping the annotation result on the KEGG pathway database using KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper. Subcellular Localization There, we used wolfpsort a subcellular localization predication soft to predict subcellular localization. Wolfpsort an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences. Enrichment of pathway analysis Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to identify enriched pathways by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. Correction for multiple hypothesis testing was carried out using standard false discovery rate control methods. The pathway with a corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website. Enrichment of protein domain analysis For each category proteins, InterPro (a resource that provides functional analysis of protein sequences by classifying them into families and predicting the presence of domains and important sites) database was researched and a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. Correction for multiple hypothesis testing was carried out using standard false discovery rate control methods and domains with a corrected p-value < 0.05 were considered significant. Functional Enrichment-based Clustering Clustering Method: All the compare groups obtained after enrichment were collated along with their P values, and then filtered for those groups which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P value < 0.05. This filtered P value matrix was transformed by the function x = −log10 (P value). Finally these x values were z-transformed for each category. These z scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Cluster membership was visualized by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package.

### Publication Abstract
Seed aging has an important effect on the germplasm preservation and industrialized production of Siberian wildrye (<i>Elymus sibiricus</i>) in the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau. However, so far its underlying molecular mechanisms still largely remain unknown. To shed light on this topic, one-year stored seeds of <i>E. sibiricus</i> were exposed to artificial aging treatments (AAT), followed by seed vigor characteristics and physiological status monitoring. Then global proteomics analysis was undertaken by the tandem mass tags (TMT) technique, and the proteins were quantified with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry on three aging time points (0 h, 36 h and 72 h). Finally, we verified the expression of related proteins by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). Our results demonstrated that the seed vigor decreased remarkably in response to artificial aging, but the relative ion-leakage and malondialdehyde content, superoxide anion and hydrogen peroxide showed the opposite situation. Proteomic results showed that a total of 4169 proteins were identified and quantified. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis indicated that a series of key pathways including carbohydrate metabolism, lipid metabolism, and antioxidant activity were severely damaged by aging treatments. Numerous key proteins such as glyceraldehyde triphosphate glyceraldehyde dehydrogenase, succinate dehydrogenase, lipoxygenase, peroxidase, glutathione-s-transferase and late embryogenesis abundant proteins were significantly down-regulated. However, the up-regulation of the heat shock protein family has made a positive contribution to oxidative stress resistance in seeds. This study provides a useful catalog of the <i>E. sibiricus</i> proteomes with insights into the future genetic improvement of seed storability.

### Keywords
Reactive oxygen species, Isobaric tandem mass tag labeling, Parallel reaction monitoring, Seed aging, Siberian wildrye

### Affiliations
Sichuan Agricultural University

### Submitter
xiong LEI

### Lab Head
Dr Xiong lei
Sichuan Agricultural University


