### Accession
PXD018737

### Title
Formaldehyde derivatization, a Side Reaction During Filter-Aided Sample Preparation

### Description
The filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method has been commonly used for proteomic sample preparation due to its high efficiency and convenience. Herein, we report an overlooked side reaction during FASP method, resulting in a mass increment of 12 Da. We confirmed that the side reaction is caused by formaldehyde released from the spin filter and devel-oped a pretreatment step to reduce the side reaction. We further examined spin filters from different vendors and offered suggestions for different experimental purpose. Our findings would benefit the deep screening of labeling proteomics analy-sis and offer a new direction to improve performance of filter devices used for different biological and proteomics studies.

### Sample Protocol
Reduction and Alkylation. The protein solution was reduced by 5 mM DTT at 37 °C for 45 min and then alkylated by 15 mM IAM in dark for 1 h at room temperature. All reactions were carried out in a Thermomixer Comfort (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) with a vortex of 800 rpm. The excess IAM was quenched by adding 5 mM DTT. In-solution Digestion. The samples were digested overnight at 37 °C with tryp-sin at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w). Digestion was quenched by adding formic acid (FA) to a final con-centration of 1% (v/v). FASP Digestion. The FASP method was adapted for the following proce-dures as previously described.6,11 The samples were trans-ferred to Microcon® YM-30 filters and centrifuged at 10,000 g for three-time buffer displacement with digestion buffer. After buffer displacement, digestion was carried out at 37 °C overnight using trypsin (enzyme/protein as 1:50 (w/w)). After digestion, all filtrates were collected. Dimethylation Labeling. All labeling reactions and quenching steps were carried out in a fume hood. The dimethylation labeling method was adapted from Liao et al.23,24. Briefly, the peptides dis-solved in 100 mM Na2HPO4 (pH 6.0) were mixed with 40 mM NaBH3CN, followed by the addition of 10 mM for-maldehyde (CH2O) or formaldehyde (13CD2O). The mixture was incubated at 25 °C for 1 h. After reaction, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.2) was added to the mixture to quench the reac-tion.  MALDI-TOF MS Analysis. MALDI MS was performed using a Bruker Ultraflex TOF/TOF MS (Bruker, Bremen, Germany). The peptide samples were mixed with matrix solution (5 mg/mL CHCA in 70% ACN, 0.1% TFA), and desalted with 1% TFA on the target.25 All spectra were obtained in positive reflector mode, and analyzed using the Bruker FlexAnalysis Soft-ware (version 3.3). Nanoflow LC-ESI-MS/MS.  LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis was performed using a nanoflow EASY-nLC 1000 system coupled to an LTQ Or-bitrap Elite mass spectrometer. Samples were loaded onto and then analyzed on a home-packed analytical column (75 μm i.d. × ~25 cm; 1.9 μm, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). The mobile phases consisted of Solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and Solvent B (0.1% for-mic acid in ACN). The peptides were eluted using the fol-lowing gradients: 2-5% B in 5 min, 5-28% B in 98 min, 28-35% B in 5 min, 35-90% B in 2 min, and 90% B for 13 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Data-dependent analysis was employed in MS analysis: the 15 most abundant ions in each MS scan were automatically selected and fragmented in HCD mode. All experiments were carried out in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an in-house Mascot server (version 2.3, Matrix Science, London, UK)26. Caenorhabditis elegans database (201811, 27,577 se-quences) was downloaded from UniProt. Data were searched using the following parameters: up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed; 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/ MS fragment ions; carbami-domethylation on cysteine as fixed modifications; oxida-tion on methionine as variable modifications. The incorpo-rated Target Decoy PSM Validator in Proteome Discoverer and the mascot expectation value was used to validate the search results and only the hits with FDR ≤ 0.01 and MASCOT expected value ≤ 0.05 were accepted for discussion.

### Publication Abstract
The filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method has been commonly used for proteomic sample preparation due to its high efficiency in removing impurities. Herein, we report an overlooked +12 Da side modification during FASP method using Microcon spin filters. We confirmed that the side modification is caused by formaldehyde released from the spin filter and found that the side modification leads to 10.5% and 9.5% loss in proteome-level peptide and protein identification, respectively. We evaluated different pretreatment procedures to reduce the side reaction. Furthermore, on the basis of the evaluation results of different brands of spin filters, we recommend Nanosep spin filters for different proteomic studies, especially for amine-labeling proteomic studies. Our results would benefit researchers employing the spin filters to improve their results and also help spin filter manufacturers to improve the product quality. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD018737.

### Keywords
Side reaction, Filter-aided sample preparation, Formaldehyde derivatization

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China

### Submitter
Zhen Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Xumin Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China


