### Accession
PXD011763

### Title
Nitric oxide-dependent anaerobic ammonium oxidation

### Description
Nitric oxide (NO) has several important functions in biology and atmospheric chemistry as a toxin, signaling molecule, ozone depleting agent and the precursor of the greenhouse gas nitrous oxide (N2O). Even though NO is a potent oxidant, and was available on earth earlier than oxygen, its direct use by microorganisms for growth was not demonstrated before. Using physiological experiments, metatranscriptomics and metaproteomics, here we show that anaerobic ammonium-oxidizing (anammox) bacterium Kuenenia stuttgartiensis grow by coupling ammonium oxidation to NO reduction, and produce only N2. Such a metabolism could have existed on early earth, and has implications in controlling N2O and NO emissions both from natural and manmade ecosystems, where anammox bacteria contribute significantly to N2 release to the atmosphere.

### Sample Protocol
On day 20 equal amount of biomass (50 ml) were harvested from all three reactors and pelleted by centrifugation for 20 min at 13000 g. Pelleted cells were resuspended in 3 ml KH2PO4 (20 mM, pH 7) solution and 2 ml KH2PO4 with EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche, Switzerland) was added. Resuspended cells were then lysed with 8M urea in 10mM Tris-HCl (pH 8) solution for 30 min at room temperature and sonicated in a bath sonicator for 60 seconds. Cell remnants were pelleted by centrifugation for 20 min at 13000 g at 4 °C. The supernatants containing protein were transferred to new tubes and stored at -80 °C until further analyses. Protein concentrations were measured using the Biuret method as described previously (30). Samples were subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion as described elsewhere (31). Briefly, proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT for 30 minutes at room temperature prior to alkylation by 50 mM chloroacetamide. Proteins were pre-digested using LysC in a 1:50 LysC:protein ratio for 3 hours at room temperature after which the sample was diluted 1:3 with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin was added in a 1:50 trypsin:protein ratio for overnight digestion at 37°C. After digestion, all samples were centrifuged to spin down all droplets and 2% trifluoroacetic acid was added 1:1 to the samples. Subsequent peptide mixtures were desalted and concentrated using C18 Omix tips (Agilent technologies). Each sample was analyzed four times by C18 reversed phase liquid chromatography with online tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Measurements were performed using a nanoflow ultra-high-pressure liquid chromatograph (nano-Advance; Bruker Daltonics) coupled online to an orthogonal quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (maXis 4G ETD; Bruker Daltonics) via an electrospray ionization source (Captive sprayer; Bruker Daltonics). Five microliters of tryptic digest were loaded onto the trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75µm x 2 cm, nanoViper, 3µm 100Å C18 particles; Thermo Scientific) using 0.1% formic acid at 7000 nl/min for 3 minutes. Next, peptides were separated on a C18 reversed phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75µm x 15 cm, nanoViper, 2µm 100Å C18 particles; Thermo scientific) at 40°C using a linear gradient of 5-35% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid in 60 minutes at 600 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode to acquire line spectra in the mass range of 150 – 2200 m/z. Data dependent acquisition of MS/MS spectra (AutoMSn) was performed using a 3 second duty cycle at 2 Hz acquisition rate for full MS spectra and a variable number of MS/MS experiments at precursor intensity scaled spectra rate (3Hz MS/MS spectra rate @ 2000 counts, 20Hz MS/MS spectra rate @ 100.000 counts). Precursor ions within the range of 400-1400 m/z with chargestate z ≥ 2+ were selected for MS/MS analysis with active exclusion enabled.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative quantitation was performed using the MaxQuant software (v.1.6.2.10) (32) and the Andromeda database search algorithm. Extracted MS/MS spectra were searched against the NCBI RefSeq K. stuttgartiensis proteome database with added sequences of known contaminant proteins. The following settings were used for peptide and protein identification: carbamidomethyl (Cys) as fixed modification, oxidation (Met) and deamidation (NQ) as variable modifications, predefined MS and MS/MS settings for TOF instruments, minimal peptide length 6 amino acids and a maximum allowed false discovery rate of 1% at both the peptide and protein level. Label free quantitation (LFQ) was performed with the match between runs and re-quantify options using at least 2 razor + unique peptides. Retention time alignment was performed with a time alignment window of 20 minutes and a retention time match window of 0.5 minutes. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) values were used for subsequent data analysis. Proteins quantified in at least 3 out of 4 measurements for any growth condition were analyzed for differential expression using the analysis of variance (ANOVA) method with Bonferroni multiple testing correction.  Proteins with adjusted p-value p < 0.05 were considered to be significantly regulated.

### Publication Abstract
Nitric oxide (NO) has important functions in biology and atmospheric chemistry as a toxin, signaling molecule, ozone depleting agent and the precursor of the greenhouse gas nitrous oxide (N<sub>2</sub>O). Although NO is a potent oxidant, and was available on Earth earlier than oxygen, it is unclear whether NO can be used by microorganisms for growth. Anaerobic ammonium-oxidizing (anammox) bacteria couple nitrite reduction to ammonium oxidation with NO and hydrazine as intermediates, and produce N<sub>2</sub> and nitrate. Here, we show that the anammox bacterium Kuenenia stuttgartiensis is able to grow in the absence of nitrite by coupling ammonium oxidation to NO reduction, and produce only N<sub>2</sub>. Under these growth conditions, the transcription of proteins necessary for NO generation is downregulated. Our work has potential implications in the control of N<sub>2</sub>O and NO emissions from natural and manmade ecosystems, where anammox bacteria contribute significantly to N<sub>2</sub> release to the atmosphere. We hypothesize that microbial NO-dependent ammonium oxidation may have existed on early Earth.

### Keywords
Kuenenia stuttgartiensis, Lc-ms/ms, Anammox

### Affiliations
Translational Metabolic Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Radboudumc
Radboudumc

### Submitter
Hans Wessels

### Lab Head
Dr Alain J van Gool
Translational Metabolic Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Radboudumc


