### Accession
PXD034007

### Title
Tumour mutations in long noncoding RNAs enhance cell fitness

### Description
Tumour DNA contains thousands of somatic single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in non-protein-coding elements, yet their functional significance remains poorly understood. Amongst the most highly mutated elements are long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), functional transcripts with known roles in carcinogenesis. To search for driver mutations in lncRNAs, we apply an integrative driver discovery algorithm to SNVs from 2583 primary tumours and 3527 metastases to reveal 54 potential “driver lncRNAs”. Our algorithm confirms a particularly high mutation rate in the iconic cancer lncRNA, NEAT1, which has been ascribed by recent studies to passenger effects. We directly test the functionality of NEAT1 SNVs using in cellulo mutagenesis, identifying discrete regions where mutations reproducibly increase cell proliferation in diverse cell backgrounds, both cancerous and normal. In particular, mutations in the 5’ region alter ribonucleoprotein assembly and boost the population of subnuclear paraspeckles, thus mechanistically linking mutations to cellular proliferation. We then used RNA-pull down followed by mass spectrometry to identify the protein interactor changing between the wild type and mutant form of NEAT1.

### Sample Protocol
RNA pulldown samples: biotinylated NEAT1 RNA fragment in both wild type (WT) and mutated form – tethered to protein partners (from cellular extract, bound to Streptavidin Magnetic Beads. The sample preparation was performed following the protocol described in Huarte’s lab(Marin-Bejar, O. and M. Huarte,2016)In vitro folding of 10 pmol wild-type and mutant NEAT1 biotinylated RNAs was performed. RNAs were first denatured by heating to 65 °C for 10 min and then slowly cooled down to 4°C. The reaction was carried in a total volume of 40 ?l RNA Structure Buffer (10 mM tris-HCl, 10 mM MgCl2, and 100 mM NH4C1). Subsequently, properly in vitro folded RNAs were mixed with 2 mg precleared protein lysate, as well as 20 ?g/ml yeast tRNA (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the reaction volume was increased to 2 ml with NT2 Buffer. Samples were incubated with gentle rotation at 4 °C for 1.5 hours. 30 ?l of Streptavidin Mag Sepharose® (Sigma-Aldrich) were washed trice with NT2 Buffer. Washed Streptavidin Magnetic Beads were added to each binding reaction and further incubated at 4 °C for 1 h to precipitate the RNA-protein complexes. Beads were then washed with NT2 Buffer three times, followed by two additional washes in NT2 Buffer without detergents. Beads were stored at -20°C for 24h and then subjected to mass spectrometry analysis.  Proteins on the affinity pulldown beads were re-suspended in 8M Urea / 50mM Tris-HCl pH8, reduced 30min at 37°C with DTT 0.1M / 100mM Tris-HCl pH8, alkylated 30min at 37°C in the dark with IAA 0.5M / 100mM Tris-HCl pH8, dilute with 4 volumes of 20mM Tris-HCl pH8 / 2mM CaCl2 prior to 6 hours digestion at 37°C with 100 ng sequencing grade trypsin (Promega). Samples were centrifuged and the magnetic beads trapped by a magnet holder in order to extract the peptides in the supernatant. The digests were analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS (PROXEON coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer, ThermoFisher Scientific) with three injections of 5 μl digests. Peptides were trapped on a µPrecolumn C18 PepMap100 (5μm, 100 Å, 300 μm×5mm, ThermoFisher Scientific, Reinach, Switzerland) and separated by backflush on a C18 column (5 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm×15 cm, C18) by applying a 60-minute gradient of 5% acetonitrile to 40% in water, 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 350 nl/min. The Full Scan method was set with resolution at 60,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1E06 and maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. The data-dependent method for precursor ion fragmentation was applied with the following settings: resolution 15,000, AGC of 1E05, maximum ion time of 110 milliseconds, mass window 1.6 m/z, collision energy 28, under fill ratio 1%, charge exclusion of unassigned and 1+ ions, and peptide match preferred, respectively.

### Data Protocol
MS data was interpreted with MaxQuant [maxq](version 1.6.14.0) against a SwissProt [uniprot] human database (release September 2020) to which common contaminants were added. The following settings were used: allowed mass deviation for precursor ions of 10 ppm for the first search, maximum peptide mass of 5500Da, strict trypsin cleavage rule allowing for 3 missed cleavages, fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines, variable oxidation of methionines and acetylation of protein N-termini. Match between runs was activated with a matching time window of 0.7 min, but only allowed between replicates.  Peptides were normalised by variance stabilisation [vsn], imputed and combined to form Top3 [top3] intensities. MaxQuant's Label Free Quantification (LFQ) values were also reported. Missing peptides, respectively LFQ intensities, were replaced by the lowest value found in the sample. Outliers of pairs of replicates were marked as such if their studentised residuals from the replicates linear regression were in the extreme 1%.   Reference: [maxq] J.Cox and M.Mann, Nature Biotechnology 26 (2008), p1367-1372, MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification, doi:10.1038/nbt.1511  [uniprot] The uniprot consortium, Nucleic Acids Res. 47: D506-515 (2019), UniProt: a worldwide hub of protein knowledge, doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky1049  [top3] J. C. Silva, M. V. Gorenstein, G.-Z. Li, J. P. C. Vissers and S. J. Geromanos, Molecular & Cellular Proteomics January 1 (2006), p144-156, Absolute quantification of proteins by LCMSE: a virtue of parallel MS acquisition, DOI 10.1074/mcp.M500230-MCP200  [vsn] Huber W., A. von Heydebreck, H. Sültmann, A. Poustka and M. Vingron, Bioinformatics 18 Suppl. 1 (2002), S96–S104, Variance stabilization applied to microarray data calibration and to the quantification of differential expression

### Publication Abstract
Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are linked to cancer via pathogenic changes in their expression levels. Yet, it remains unclear whether lncRNAs can also impact tumour cell fitness via function-altering somatic "driver" mutations. To search for such driver-lncRNAs, we here&#xa0;perform a genome-wide analysis of fitness-altering single nucleotide variants (SNVs) across a cohort of 2583 primary and 3527 metastatic tumours. The resulting 54 mutated and positively-selected lncRNAs are significantly enriched for previously-reported cancer genes and a range of clinical and genomic features. A number of these lncRNAs promote tumour cell proliferation when overexpressed in in vitro models. Our results also highlight a dense SNV hotspot in the widely-studied NEAT1 oncogene. To directly evaluate the functional significance of NEAT1 SNVs, we use in cellulo mutagenesis to introduce tumour-like mutations in the gene and observe a significant and reproducible increase in cell fitness, both in vitro and in a mouse model. Mechanistic studies reveal that SNVs remodel the NEAT1 ribonucleoprotein and boost subnuclear paraspeckles. In summary, this work demonstrates the utility of driver analysis for mapping cancer-promoting lncRNAs, and provides experimental evidence that somatic mutations can act through lncRNAs to enhance pathological cancer cell fitness.

### Keywords
Driver gene; cancer; long non-coding rnas

### Affiliations
1.Department of Medical Oncology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of Bern, 3010 Bern, Switzerland. 2.Department for BioMedical Research, University of Bern, 3008 Bern, Switzerland. 3. Conway Institute for Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, University College Dublin, Dublin D04 V1W8, Ireland.
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Rory Johnson
1.Department of Medical Oncology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of Bern, 3010 Bern, Switzerland. 2.Department for BioMedical Research, University of Bern, 3008 Bern, Switzerland. 3. Conway Institute for Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, University College Dublin, Dublin D04 V1W8, Ireland.


