### Accession
PXD033693

### Title
Proximity labelling identifies pro-migratory endocytic recycling cargo and machinery of the Rab4 and Rab11 families

### Description
Endocytic recycling controls the return of internalised cargos to the plasma membrane to coordinate their positioning, availability and downstream signalling. The Rab4 and Rab11 small GTPase families regulate distinct recycling routes, broadly classified as fast recycling from early endosomes (Rab4) and slow recycling from perinuclear recycling endosomes (Rab11), and both routes handle a broad range of overlapping cargos to regulate cell behaviour. We adopted a proximity labelling approach, BioID, to identify and compare the protein complexes recruited by Rab4a, Rab11a and Rab25 (a Rab11 family member implicated in cancer aggressiveness), revealing statistically robust protein-protein interaction networks of well characterised and new cargos and trafficking machinery in migratory cancer cells. Gene ontological analysis of these interconnected networks revealed that these endocytic recycling pathways are intrinsically connected to cell motility and cell adhesion. Using a knock sideways relocalisation approach we were further able to confirm novel links between Rab11/25 and the ESCPE-1 and retromer multiprotein sorting complexes and identify new endocytic recycling machinery associated with Rab4, Rab11 and Rab25 that regulate cancer cell migration in 3D-matrix.

### Sample Protocol
A2780 [DNA3/RAB25] ovarian cancer cell lines were cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute-1640 (RPMI-1640) medium (R0883, Sigma). A2780 cells transiently or stably expressing BioID fusion proteins were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium without biotin (R9002-01, US Biological), made up according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Telomerase immortalised fibroblasts were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagles Medium (D5796, Sigma). All cell culture medium was supplemented with 10% v/v foetal bovine serum (FBS), 1% antibiotic-antimycotic (Sigma), and 2 mM L-glutamine (Sigma). Cells were maintained at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere with 5% (v/v) CO2.  Biotin (Sigma) was added to cell culture medium to give the final concentrations indicated for a total of 16 h. The lentiviral vector pCDH tagBFP T2A myc-BirA*-Bax was used as a base for the BioID lentiviral vectors generated for this study. Rab4a, Rab11a and Rab25 were expanded by pcr using primers to introduce XhoI/SalI restriction sites, and ligated to replace myc-BirA*-Bax and generate constructs. Lentiviral particles were produced in HEK293T cells, via a polyethylenimine (PEI)-mediated transfection with pCDH plasmid, pM2G and psPAX2 for 72 h before medium containing viral particles was collected and subjected to centrifugation for 4 min at 1400 rpm and filtration through a 0.45 μm filter. A2780 cells were re-suspended in the filtered virus-containing media before plating, and the virus was left on cells for 24 h, after which it was removed and replaced with normal growth media. Cells expressing expression BioID fusion protein constructs were plated onto tissue culture plates as at a density to ensure near-confluency the following day. More than 4 h after cells were plated biotin (Sigma) was added to cell culture medium concentrations, and cells were incubated in the presence of biotin for 16 h. BioID cell lysis was carried out at room temperature using a protocol adapted from (Roux et al., 2012). Briefly, cells were PBS washed before addition of the BioID lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 0.4% SDS, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, supplemented with the protease inhibitors; 100 μg/ml leupeptin (Sigma), 100 μg/ml aprotinin (Sigma), 0.5 mM AEBSF (Calbiochem), 500 μM ALLN (Calbiochem) and 50 μM PD150606 (Calbiochem). Cell lysates were collected using a cell scraper and subjected needle lysis. Triton X-100 (Sigma) was added to the cell lysates to a final concentration of 2% before needle lysis and addition of an equal volume of 50 mM Tris pH 7.4. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at (16,000xg for 10 min at 4°C). Cell lysates were incubated with 15 μl of MagReSyn® Streptavidin microspheres (per 10 cm plate; ReSyn Biosciences), overnight at 4°C with rotation. Beads were washed twice in wash buffer 1 (2% SDS), once in wash buffer 2 (0.1% deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4) and once in wash buffer 3 (0.5% NP-40, 0.5% deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM Tris pH 8.1). Bound proteins were eluted by the addition of 40 μl of 2x sample buffer saturated with biotin (250 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 2% SDS, 10% glycerol, 0.2% Bromophenol blue, 20mM DTT, with >1mM biotin) at 70 °C for 5 min. 10-25% of eluted samples were retained for western blot analysis and the remaining sample was used for mass spectrometry analysis. Eluted proteins from BioID experiments were subjected to SDS-PAGE at 100 V for 8 min. Gels were stained with InstantBlue™ Protein Stain (Expedeon) for 10 min and subsequently washed in ddH2O at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. ‘Gel-top’ protein bands were excised and transferred to a 96-well perforated plate containing ddH2O and then centrifuged to remove liquid. Gel pieces were de-stained sequentially using 50% acetonitrile (ACN)/50% 25 mM NH4HCO3, followed by 100% ACN. De-stained gel pieces were dried using a vacuum centrifuge and proteins reduced (10 mM DTT in 25 mM NH4HCO3) and then alkylated (55 mM iodoacetamide/25 mM NH4HCO3) in the absence of light. Gel pieces washed alternately in 25 mM NH4HCO3 then 100% ACN and dried using a vacuum centrifuge and trypsin (1.25 ng/μl in 25 mM NH4HCO3) digested overnight. Peptides were collected in 96-well collection plates by centrifugation washed in 99.8% ACN, 0.2% formic acid (FA) then 50% ACN, 0.1% FA. Peptide solutions were dried to completion using a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 5% ACN/0.1% FA. Desalting of peptides was carried out using POROS Oligo R3 beads (ThermoFisher). Beads were washed with 50% ACN then 0.1% FA and peptides eluted twice with 50% ACN/0.1% FA. Peptide solutions were dried to completion using a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 20 μl 5% ACN, 0.1% FA for mass spectrometry analysis.  Peptides were analysed using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using an Orbitrap Elite™ (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10). Default MaxQuant parameters were used, with fixed modifications of cysteine carbamidomethylation and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, protein N-terminus acetylation and lysine biotinylation. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was selected and match between runs was turned on. Data were searched against a human SwissProt/UniProt database (downloaded March 2018). LFQ intensities from MaxQuant analysis were analysed by SAINTexpress (version 3.6.3), using default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
Endocytic recycling controls the return of internalised cargoes to the plasma membrane to coordinate their positioning, availability and downstream signalling. The Rab4 and Rab11 small GTPase families regulate distinct recycling routes, broadly classified as fast recycling from early endosomes (Rab4) and slow recycling from perinuclear recycling endosomes (Rab11), and both routes handle a broad range of overlapping cargoes to regulate cell behaviour. We adopted a proximity labelling approach, BioID, to identify and compare the protein complexes recruited by Rab4a, Rab11a and Rab25 (a Rab11 family member implicated in cancer aggressiveness), revealing statistically robust protein-protein interaction networks of both new and well-characterised cargoes and trafficking machinery in migratory cancer cells. Gene ontological analysis of these interconnected networks revealed that these endocytic recycling pathways are intrinsically connected to cell motility and cell adhesion. Using a knock-sideways relocalisation approach, we were further able to confirm novel links between Rab11, Rab25 and the ESCPE-1 and retromer multiprotein sorting complexes, and identify new endocytic recycling machinery associated with Rab4, Rab11 and Rab25 that regulates cancer cell migration in the 3D matrix.

### Keywords
Bioid, Human, Rab4a, Endocytosis, Rab25, Rab11a

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Senior Lecturer, Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, Division of Cell Matrix Biology and Regenerative Medicine, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road, Manchester M13

### Submitter
Craig Lawless

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Caswell
Senior Lecturer, Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, Division of Cell Matrix Biology and Regenerative Medicine, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road, Manchester M13


### SDRF
- organism: Homo sapiens
- organism part: not available
- cell type: BirA, RAB11A, RAB25, RAB4A
- disease: not available
- label: label free sample
- instrument: LTQ Orbitrap Elite
- modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl
- modification parameters: Oxidation
- modification parameters: Acetyl
- modification parameters: Biotinylation

