### Accession
PXD024502

### Title
Loss of enteric neuronal Ndrg4 promotes colorectal cancer via increased release of Nid1 and Fbln2

### Description
The N-Myc Downstream-Regulated Gene 4 (NDRG4), a prominent biomarker for colorectal cancer (CRC), is specifically expressed by enteric neurons. Considering that nerves are important members of the tumor microenvironment, we here establish different Ndrg4 knockout (Ndrg4-/-) CRC models and an in-direct co-culture of primary enteric nervous system (ENS) cells and intestinal organoids to identify whether the ENS, via NDRG4, affects intestinal tumorigenesis. Linking immunostainings and gastrointestinal motility (GI) assays, we show that absence of Ndrg4 does not trigger any functional or morphological GI-abnormalities. However, combining in vivo, in vitro and quantitative proteomics data, we uncover that Ndrg4 knockdown is associated with enlarged intestinal adenoma development and that organoid growth is boosted by the Ndrg4-/- ENS cell secretome, which is enriched for Nidogen-1 (Nid1) and Fibulin-2 (Fbln2). Moreover, NID1 and FBLN2 are expressed in enteric neurons, enhance tumorigenic capacities of CRC cells and are enriched in human CRC secretomes. Hence, we provide evidence that the ENS, via loss of Ndrg4, is involved in colorectal pathogenesis and that ENS-derived Nidogen-1 and Fibulin-2 enhance colorectal carcinogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
NanoLC-MS/MS analysis of secretomes For the ENS cell secretomes, all LC–MS/MS analyses were performed on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Dried peptide samples were resuspended in 0.5% formic acid in 2.0% acetonitrile and loaded onto an in-house made 30cm×75µm ID column filled with CSH130 C18 2.5µm particles (Waters). Peptides were separated using an Easy NanoLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, buffer A = 0.1% formic acid and buffer B = 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) using a gradient of 0-28% buffer B for 120 min, with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Each data collection cycle consisted of 1 full MS scan (375-1400 m/z) followed by 10 data-dependent MS/MS scans. Peak lists were automatically created from raw data files using the Mascot Distiller software (version 2.3, MatrixScience). The Mascot search algorithm (version 2.2, MatrixScience) was used for searching against the Uniprot protein sequence database (taxonomy: Mus musculus, version: November 2017). The peptide tolerance was set to 10ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was set to 20ppm. A maximum number of two missed cleavages by trypsin were allowed and carbamidomethylated cysteine and oxidized methionine were set as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. The Mascot score cut-off value for a positive protein hit was set to 65. Individual peptide MS/MS spectra of single peptide hits with Mascot scores below 40 were checked manually and either interpreted as valid identifications or discarded. Typical contaminants, also present in immunopurifications using beads coated with pre-immune serum or antibodies directed against irrelevant proteins were omitted.   The preparation and subsequent nanoLC-MS/MS analysis of human (tumor) tissue secretomes was performed similarly as described before (Celis et al, 2004; de Wit et al., 2014). In brief, CRC and adjacent normal colon tissue was cut into cubes of approximately 1mm3 and incubated in 100μl PBS for 1 hour at 37°C. The soluble fractions, referred to as “tissue secretome” were processed for LC–MS/MS analyses on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). The Uniprot protein sequence database (taxonomy: Homo Sapiens, version: November 2017) was used for protein identification.

### Data Protocol
Statistical analysis  Experimental in vivo and in vitro data were analyzed by a two-tailed, unpaired t-test (n>3) or Mann-Whitney U test (n=3) for the comparison of the mutant (Ndrg4-/-) and wild-type (Ndrg4+/+) group. Differences between the number of Ndrg4+/+ and Ndrg4-/- mice developing polyps were assessed using Chi-square statistics with Yates correction. Differences in the number of intestinal organoids evolving to nonviable structures were evaluated with logistic regression analysis. A quantitative differential protein expression analysis was performed between the mass spectrometry data of the Ndrg4-/- and Ndrg4+/+ ENS cell secretome (n=4) by calculating the normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAF) (Paoletti et al, 2006) for all proteins and samples. NSAF values were compared using the Mann-Whitney U test. For the comparison between the paired normal colon and CRC secretome data (n=17), a paired BetaBinominal test, taking into account the sample origin (i.e. comparing protein signatures between tissues derived from the same patient) was performed (de Wit et al., 2014; Pham & Jimenez, 2012). Murine and human secretome processing and statistical analyses were performed with the statistical programming language R version 3.5.2 (https://www.r-project.org/) and the ibb R package (Pham & Jimenez, 2012).  Differences in the proliferation and migration rate were assessed between groups at singular time-points using a One-Way ANOVA and Dunnet Post Hoc Test to compare each treatment with the PBS control condition. Unless stated otherwise, all data were analyzed using IBM SPSS statistics 25, represented as mean ± SEM, and considered statistically significant at p<0.050.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ndrg4, Extracellular matrix proteins, Nidogen-1, Fibulin-2

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center


