### Accession
PXD005466

### Title
Secretome cervical cancer LC-MS/MS

### Description
The molecular processes and proteomic markers leading to tumour development (TD) in cervical cancer (CC) are either unknown or only partially understood. TD affects metabolic and regulatory mechanisms that can be identified as proteomic changes. To identify which proteins are differentially expressed and to understand the mechanisms underlying cancer progression, we analysed the tumour proteome dynamics of CC cell lines. This analysis revealed two proteins that were up-regulated during TD: GSTM3 and GSTP1. These proteins are involved in cell maintenance, survival and stress responses during TD.  We demonstrated that the GSTM3/HPV18 E7 interaction regulates stress adaptation. Furthermore, knockdown of GST proteins showed that they are involved in proliferation and evasion of apoptosis via the NF-kB and MAP kinase pathways during TD. These data indicate the critical role of GST proteins in the regulation and progression of cancer. Hence, we suggest GSTs as novel biomarkers and potential therapeutic targets for CC patients.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines were cultered with advanced RPMI 1640 serum-free until 70-80 % of confluence. The medium was removed and were rinsed three times until fill the flask with saline solution sterile: NaCl 0.9% (w/v). After washings was added RPMI 1640 medium without phenol red fresh (Gibco) and incubated for 20h. Later the medium was removed and centrifuged at 2,000 g for 5 min. The supernatant was passed through a 0.22 μm pore-size membrane PVDF (Millex, Millipore) and stored –70°C until further use. Subsequently, secreted proteins were lyophilized and resuspended in 1 mL ultrapure water. Proteins isolation was performed through phenol extraction as described above (Hurkman and Tanaka, 1986).

### Data Protocol
The 1D SDS-PAGE were stained with Coomassie Blue stain, and the bands containing 30 µg of proteins were cut. Each lane was cut into 30-40 slices and digested with trypsin and analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS (Q-TOF Synapt G2 MS; Waters). Assignment of MS/MS data was performed using MASCOT distiller (Matrix Science) search against the swissprot database

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hela, Hsp70, Hsp60, Siha, Secreted proteins

### Affiliations
UNAM
Programa de Genómica Funcional de Procariontes, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas-UNAM. Av. Universidad s/n, Col. Chamilpa, Cuernavaca, Morelos. CP 62210. México.

### Submitter
ALBERTO  CHECA-ROJAS

### Lab Head
Dr Sergio Encarnación Guevara
Programa de Genómica Funcional de Procariontes, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas-UNAM. Av. Universidad s/n, Col. Chamilpa, Cuernavaca, Morelos. CP 62210. México.


