### Accession
PXD025195

### Title
An androgen signaling axis uses a writer and a reader of ADP-ribosylation to control protein complex assembly

### Description
Androgen signaling through the androgen receptor (AR) regulates multiple pathways in both normal and prostate cancer cells. Androgen regulates diverse aspects of the AR life cycle, including its post-translational modification, but understanding how specific modifications influence AR activity has been mostly elusive. Here, we show that androgen regulates AR through a pathway mediated by the mono-ADP ribosyltransferase, Parp7. We show that Parp7 ADP-ribosylates AR on multiple cysteines, and that a subset of these sites mediates agonist-specific recruitment of the E3 ligase Dtx3L/Parp9. Tandem macrodomains in Parp9 selectively recognize ADP ribosylated AR, and Dtx3L/Parp9 affects expression of a subset of AR-regulated genes. Parp7, ADP-ribosylation of AR, and AR-Dtx3L/Parp9 complex assembly are inhibited by 60 Olaparib, a compound used clinically to inhibit poly-ADP-ribosyltransferases Parp1/2. Our study reveals the components of a new androgen signaling axis that uses a writer and reader of ADP-ribosylation to modulate AR activity.

### Sample Protocol
For the first MS experiment, the solution sample was reduced with 10 mM DTT followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide – each at room temperature for 1 hr. 0.5 μg of Promega alkylated trypsin was added to each tube for overnight digestion. The samples were quenched with 3 μL of acetic acid and reduced in volume to 20 μL. The samples were spun before loading to remove any possible precipitate. The LC-MS system consisted of a Thermo Electron Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer system with a Protana nanospray ion source interfaced to a self-packed 8 cm x 75 μm id (Phenomenex Jupiter 10 μm C18 reversed-phase) capillary column. 10 μL of the extract was injected and the peptides eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1 M acetic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.5 μL/min over 1.3 hours. The nanospray ion source was operated at 2.5 kV. The digest was analyzed using the rapid switching capability of the instrument acquiring a full scan mass spectrum to determine peptide molecular weights followed by product ion spectra (20) to determine amino acid sequence in sequential scans. The instrument control software was set for dynamic exclusion – repeat 1, repeat duration 30, exclusion duration 60, list size 200. The data were analyzed by database searching using the Sequest search algorithm against human androgen receptor. Search parameters – parent 10 ppm, fragment 0.7 Da, dynamic modifications (Met oxidation, Cys carbamidomethyl, Cys ADPribosyl). Any potentially modified peptides were manually examined. Initial searches against common modification sites (E,D,R,K) yielded no obvious results. Four sites – C125, C284, C327 and C406 were identified after consideration of Cys as a potential modification target. Examination of all spectra showed low mass ions 348 (AMP), 428 (ADP), 542(ADP-ribose), and 524 (ADP-ribose –water). For the second MS experiment, the IP’ed AR was treated with NUDT16 (Daniels et al, 2017). The sample was reduced with 10mM DTT in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, then alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate (both room temperature for 0.5h). The sample was then digested overnight at 37°C with 0.1μg (trypsin, chymotrypsin, Glu-C) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Ribosylated peptides were enriched using TiO column. The LC-MS system consisted of a Thermo Electron Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer system with an Easy Spray ion source connected to a Thermo 75μmx 15cm C18 Easy Spray column. 80% of the extract (each digest separate) was injected and the peptides eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1 M formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.3μL/min over 1.0 hour. The nanospray ion source was operated at 1.9kV. The digest was analyzed using the rapid switching capability of the instrument acquiring a full scan mass spectrum to determine peptide molecular weights followed byproduct ion spectra (10HCD) to determine amino acid sequence in sequential scans. This mode of analysis produces approximately 20000 MS/MS spectra of ions ranging in abundance over several orders of magnitude. Not all MS/MS spectra are derived from peptides. The data were analyzed by database searching using the Sequest search algorithm against the investigator’s sequence.

### Data Protocol
DATABASE SEARCHING-- All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (XCorr Only) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version IseNode in Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388). Sequest (XCorr Only) was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Oxidation of methionine, carbamidomethyl of cysteine, phospho of serine and phosphoRibosyl of aspartic acid were specified in Sequest (XCorr Only) as variable modifications. CRITERIA FOR PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION-- Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.10.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 60.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Peptide identifications were also required to exceed specific database search engine thresholds. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Androgen signaling through the androgen receptor (AR) directs gene expression in both normal and prostate cancer cells. Androgen regulates multiple aspects of the AR life cycle, including its localization and post-translational modification, but understanding how modifications are read and integrated with AR activity has been difficult. Here, we show that ADP-ribosylation regulates AR through a nuclear pathway mediated by Parp7. We show that Parp7 mono-ADP-ribosylates agonist-bound AR, and that ADP-ribosyl-cysteines within the N-terminal domain mediate recruitment of the E3 ligase Dtx3L/Parp9. Molecular recognition of ADP-ribosyl-cysteine is provided by tandem macrodomains in Parp9, and Dtx3L/Parp9 modulates expression of a subset of AR-regulated genes. Parp7, ADP-ribosylation of AR, and AR-Dtx3L/Parp9 complex assembly are inhibited by Olaparib, a compound used clinically to inhibit poly-ADP-ribosyltransferases Parp1/2. Our study reveals the components of an androgen signaling axis that uses a writer and reader of ADP-ribosylation to regulate protein-protein interactions and AR activity.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Androgen receptor, Mono-adp ribosyltransferase

### Affiliations
Center for Cell Signaling Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Genetics University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA
University of Virginia

### Submitter
JJ Park

### Lab Head
Dr Bryce M. Paschal
Center for Cell Signaling Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Genetics University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA


