### Accession
PXD022337

### Title
A Comparative Proteome and Phosphoproteome Reveal the Molecular Mechanism of the Difference between Imitative Wild Variety and Cultivated Variety of Dendrobium huoshanense C. Z. Tang et S. J. Cheng

### Description
This project intends to conduct comparative proteomics research on wild and cultivated varieties of Dendrobium huoshanense that are similar in plant shape and in the same growth and development stage through proteomics and protein modification omics combined with the differences in metabolites in Dendrobium huoshanense. Full-scan proteomic data of Dendrobium; compare the protein expression levels of wild and cultivated varieties to find relevant candidate proteins, and perform functional annotation and KEGG analysis of metabolic pathways for candidate proteins with different expressions to further analyze the material basis differences between wild and cultivated varieties Provide research objects of molecular biology.

### Sample Protocol
Cultivated variety of D. huoshanense was grown at 25˚C during day and 23˚C at night . Materials of imitative wild variety were collected from D. huoshanense cultivating at a hill under forest of Taipingfan town, Huoshan County, Anhui, China with the same cultivating for 3 years.Sample was first grinded by liquid nitrogen, then the powder was transferred to 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (including 1% TritonX-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 50 μM PR-619，3 μM TSA，50 mM NAM and 2 mM EDTA). An equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0) was added; then, the mixture was further vortexed for 5 min. After centrifugation (4 °C, 10 min, 5 000g), the upper phenol phase was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. Proteins were precipitated by adding at least four volumes of ammonium sulfate-saturated methanol and incubated at -20 °C for at least 6 h. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with ice-cold methanol once, followed by ice-cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Dendrobium huoshanense database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Imitative wild variety, Proteome, Cultivated variety, Phosphoproteome, Dendrobium huoshanense

### Affiliations
Anhui University of Traditional Chinese Medicine
Anhui University of Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
Shihai Xing

### Lab Head
Dr Shihai Xing
Anhui University of Traditional Chinese Medicine


