### Accession
PXD031970

### Title
Identification of tissue-specific SPD-5 and PLK-1 proximity interactors by direct and indirect TurboID

### Description
In this set of proof of principle experiments we compare the proximity interactomes obtained for two C. elegans centrosomal proteins, SPD-5 and PLK-1, by direct TurboID and indirect, GFP nanobody-targeted, TurboID in a range of different tissues, embryos, germ cell precursors and ciliated neurons.

### Sample Protocol
For each experiment samples were prepared in triplicate for sample and control conditions. For direct TurboID, these were worms expressing endogenous promoter-driven GFP:TurboID:SPD-5/PLK-1 and ciliated neuron promoter-driven TurboID:GFP:SPD-5, as well as corresponding control strains lacking the SPD-5/PLK-1 coding sequence. For indirect TurboID, these were worms expressing a GFP nanobody-TurboID fusion under different tissue-specific promoters with and without (control) endogenously tagged GFP:SPD-5/PLK-1:GFP. Samples were prepared differently for embryos, where TurboID was performed on insoluble cytoskeletal fractions prepared from crude embryo extracts, and germ cell precursors and ciliated neurons, where whole worm lysates were used. For full details on C. elegans growth conditions, extract preparation and streptavidin pulldowns please see the published version of our manuscript or the pre-print available on biorXiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.12.20.473533).

### Data Protocol
Raw data with FAIMS were split for each CV and converted to mzxml-format using freely available software (https://github.com/coongroup/FAIMS-MzXML-Generator) for further analysis.  MS data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.17.0, https://www.maxquant.org/maxquant/) and the Uniprot Caenorhabditis elegans reference proteome (www.uniprot.org), as well as a database of most common contaminants. The search was performed with full trypsin specificity and a maximum of two missed cleavages at a protein and peptide spectrum match false discovery rate of 1%. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues were set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. For label-free quantification the “match between runs” feature and the LFQ function were activated - all other parameters were left at default. MaxQuant output tables were further processed in R using Cassiopeia_LFQ (https://github.com/moritzmadern/Cassiopeia_LFQ). Reverse database identifications, contaminant proteins, protein groups identified only by a modified peptide, protein groups with less than two quantitative values in one experimental group, and protein groups with less than 2 razor peptides were removed for further analysis. Missing values were replaced by randomly drawing data points from a normal distribution modeled on the whole dataset (data mean shifted by -1.8 standard deviations, width of distribution of 0.3 standard deviations). Differences between groups were statistically evaluated using the LIMMA package (Ritchie et al., 2015) at 5% FDR (Benjamini-Hochberg).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
C. elegans; centrosome; interaction mapping; turboid

### Affiliations
Max Perutz Labs, University of Vienna, Austria
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Laboratories Support GmbH

### Submitter
WeiQiang Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Dammermann
Max Perutz Labs, University of Vienna, Austria


