### Accession
PXD036259

### Title
Acetylation and phosphorylation changes to cardiac proteins in experimental HFpEF due to metabolic risk reveal targets for treatment

### Description
Aims: Despite the high prevalence of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF), the pathomechanisms remain elusive and specific therapy is lacking. Disease-causing factors include metabolic risk, notably obesity. However, proteomic changes in HFpEF are poorly understood, hampering therapeutic strategies. We sought to elucidate how metabolic syndrome affects cardiac protein expression, phosphorylation and acetylation in the Zucker diabetic fatty/Spontaneously hypertensive heart failure F1 (ZSF1) rat HFpEF model, and to evaluate some changes regarding their potential for treatment. Main methods: ZSF1 obese and lean rats were fed a Purina diet up to the onset of HFpEF in the obese animals. We quantified the proteome, phosphoproteome and acetylome of ZSF1 obese versus lean heart tissues by mass spectrometry and singled out targets for site-specific evaluation. Key findings: We found the acetylome of ZSF1 obese versus lean hearts more severely altered (21% of proteins changed) than the phosphoproteome (9%) or proteome (3%). Proteomic alterations, confirmed by immunoblotting, indicated low-grade systemic inflammation and endothelial remodeling in obese hearts, but low nitric oxide-dependent oxidative/nitrosative stress. Altered acetylation in ZSF1 obese hearts mainly affected pathways important for metabolism, energy production and mechanical function, including hypo-acetylation of mechanical proteins but hyper-acetylation of proteins regulating fatty acid metabolism. Hypo-acetylation and hypo-phosphorylation of elastic titin in ZSF1 obese hearts explained myocardial stiffening. Significance: Cardiometabolic syndrome alters posttranslational modifications, notably acetylation, in experimental HFpEF. Pathway changes implicate a HFpEF signature of low-grade inflammation, endothelial dysfunction, metabolic and mechanical impairment, and suggest titin stiffness and mitochondrial metabolism as promising therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
Experimental animal model and phenotype The ZSF1 rat is available as a lean (no HFpEF) and an obese variant (HFpEF), which have almost the same genetic background. Male and oophorectomized female rats were purchased at 5 weeks of age from Charles River Laboratories (Kingston, USA). Eight week-old ZSF1 lean and obese rats were fed a Purina diet (#5008) for 12-14 weeks up to the onset of the HFpEF phenotype in the ZSF1 obese group. As demonstrated recently (1), the ZSF1 obese, but not the lean, rats clearly show a HFpEF phenotype, with no obvious sex-dependent differences; therefore, sex differences are not reported in the present study. Heart tissues of these ZSF1 rats were analyzed when animals reached about 20 weeks of age. All animal experiments were conducted in accordance with national and European ethical regulation and were approved by the Austrian governmental agency.  Quantitative proteome analysis Mass spectrometry was performed to quantify the proteome, phosphoproteome, and acetylome of ZSF1 obese versus ZSF1 lean rat heart tissues.  In-solution digestion and purification of peptides: Snap-frozen cardiac tissue was prepared and digested as previously described (2). For phosphoproteome or acetylome analyses, peptides were purified using High-Select™ TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific; A32993) and PTMScan® Acetyl-Lysine Motif [Ac K] Kit (Cell Signaling; #13416), respectively, according to the manufacturer’s protocols.  (1) Abdellatif M, Trummer-Herbst V, Koser F, et al. Nicotinamide for the treatment of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Sci Transl Med. 2021; 13:eabd7064.  (2) Nolte H, Hölper S, Selbach M, Braun T, Krüger M. Assessment of serum protein dynamics by native SILAC flooding (SILflood). Anal Chem. 2014;86:11033-37.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography (LC)–MS/MS analysis and data processing: Peptides were analyzed using an Easy nLC 1000 ultra-high performance liquid chromatograph coupled to a QExactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) and evaluated using MaxQuant software and the implemented Andromeda search engine 1.5.3.8. Mass spectrometric analysis using MaxQuant software was performed as described.2 Statistical data analysis, data visualization, gene ontology (GO) annotations and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analyses were performed using Perseus (version 1.5.5.3), Instant Clue, DAVID (v6.8) and REVIGO software (2-5).  (2) Nolte H, Hölper S, Selbach M, Braun T, Krüger M. Assessment of serum protein dynamics by native SILAC flooding (SILflood). Anal Chem. 2014;86:11033-37.  (3) Loescher CM, Breitkreuz M, Li Y, et al. Regulation of titin-based cardiac stiffness by unfolded domain oxidation (UnDOx). Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2020;117:24545-56.  (4) Huang DW, Sherman BT, Lempicki RA. Systematic and integrative analysis of large gene lists using DAVID Bioinformatics Resources. Nature Protoc. 2009;4:44-57.  (5) Supek F, Bošnjak M, Škunca N, Šmuc T. REVIGO summarizes and visualizes long lists of gene ontology terms. PLoS One. 2011;6:e21800.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Diastolic dysfunction; proteomics; obesity; meta-inflammation; stiffness

### Affiliations
Institue of Physiology II, University of Münster, Münster, Germany
Institute of Physiology II, University of Münster, Münster

### Submitter
Franziska Koser

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang A. Linke
Institue of Physiology II, University of Münster, Münster, Germany


