### Accession
PXD022177

### Title
Chronically elevated exogenous glucose elicits antipodal effects on the proteome signature of differentiating human pancreatic progenitors

### Description
The past decade revealed that cell identity changes, such as dedifferentiation or transdifferentiation, accompany the insulin-producing β-cell decay in most diabetes conditions. Mapping and controlling the mechanisms governing these processes is thus extremely valuable for managing the disease progression. Extracellular glucose is known to impact cell identity by impacting the redox balance. Here we use global proteomics and pathway analysis to map the response of differentiating human pancreatic progenitors to chronically increased in vitro glucose levels. We show that exogenous high glucose levels impact different protein subsets in a concentration-dependent manner. In contrast, regardless of concentration, high exogenous glucose elicits an antipodal effect on the proteome landscape, inducing both beneficial and detrimental changes in regard to achieving the desired islet cell fingerprint. Furthermore, we identified that only a subgroup of these effects and pathways are regulated by changes in redox balance. Our study highlights a complex yin-yang action of exogenous glucose on differentiating pancreas progenitors with a distinct proteome signature.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 11-plex labelling TMT reagents were re-suspended in ACN. Desalted peptides were re-suspended in 50 μL of 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 15 μL of ACN, and 5 μL of the TMT reagents were added to the respective peptide samples, gently vortexed, and incubated for 1.5 h at RT. To prevent unwanted labelling, the reaction was quenched by adding 10 μL of 5% hydroxylamine and incubated for 15 min at RT. Equal amounts of the TMT-labelled samples were combined and concentrated to near dryness, followed by desalting via C18 solid phase extraction.  Off-line basic pH reversed phase fractionation The combined labelled peptide samples were pre-fractionated by basic pH reversed phase HPLC as described previously50, using an Agilent (P/N 770995-902) 300Extend-C18, 5 μm, 250 mm x 4.6 mm id column, connected to an Agilent Technology off-line LC-system. Solvent A was 5% ACN, 10 mM NH4HCO3 pH8, and solvent B was 90% ACN, NH4HCO3 pH 8. The samples were re-suspended in 500 μL solvent A and loaded onto the column. Column flow was set to 0.8 mL/min and the gradient length was 70 min, as follows: from 0-35 min solvent 50% A/ 50% B, and from 35-50 min 100% B, and from 50-70 min 100% A. The labelled peptides were fractionated into 24 fractions. Each fraction was acidified with 1% formic acid, concentrated by vacuum centrifugation to near dryness, and desalted by StageTip. Each fraction was dissolved in 5% ACN/ 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis..  LC-MS3 analysis  From each of the 24 fractions, ∼5 μg was dissolved in 5% aqueous formic acid (FA) /5% acetonitrile prior to LC-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were fractionated on a 75-μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with ∼35 cm of Accucore resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å, ThermoFisher Scientific). For each analysis, we loaded ~1 μg onto the column.  Peptides were separated using a 2.5 hr gradient of 6 to 26% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid at a flow rate of ∼350 nL/min. Each analysis used the multi-notch MS3-based TMT method52 on a Tribrid-type mass spectrometer, which has been shown to reduce ion interference compared to MS2 quantification50. Alternating samples were analyzed on a FAIMS-equipped Fusion mass spectrometer {Schweppe, 2019 #53873} or a real-time search-enabled  Lumos mass spectrometer {Erickson, 2019 #57037}.  The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis; resolution 120,000; mass range 400−1400 m/z; automatic gain control (AGC) target 2 × 105; maximum injection time 100 ms). Precursors for MS2/MS3 analysis were selected using a Top10 method. MS2 analysis consisted of collision-induced dissociation (quadrupole ion trap analysis; AGC 4 × 103; normalized collision energy (NCE) 35; maximum injection time 150 ms). Following acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, we collected an MS3 spectrum in which multiple MS2 fragment ions were captured in the MS3 precursor population using isolation waveforms with multiple frequency notches52. MS3 precursors were fragmented by high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and analysed using the Orbitrap (NCE 55; AGC 5 × 104; maximum injection time 150 ms, resolution was 60,000 at 400 m/z).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based in-house software pipeline53, and spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all entries from the human Uniprot database (March 11, 2014). This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Sequest searches and linear discriminant analysis53,54. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR)55,56. PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously53, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the summed signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion. The search space for each reporter ion was limited to a range of 0.003 m/z to prevent overlap between the isobaric reporter ions. For protein-level comparisons, PSMs were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Moreover, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs using in-house software, as described previously53. PSMs with poor quality, MS3 spectra with more than eight TMT reporter ion channels missing, MS3 spectra with TMT reporter summed signal-to-noise ratio that is less than 100, or no MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation57. Protein quantitation values were exported for further analysis in Microsoft Excel and GraphPad Prism (version 8). Each reporter ion channel was summed across all quantified proteins and normalized assuming equal protein loading of all 10 samples.

### Publication Abstract
The past decade revealed that cell identity changes, such as dedifferentiation or transdifferentiation, accompany the insulin-producing &#x3b2;-cell decay in most diabetes conditions. Mapping and controlling the mechanisms governing these processes is, thus, extremely valuable for managing the disease progression. Extracellular glucose is known to influence cell identity by impacting the redox balance. Here, we use global proteomics and pathway analysis to map the response of differentiating human pancreatic progenitors to chronically increased in vitro glucose levels. We show that exogenous high glucose levels impact different protein subsets in a concentration-dependent manner. In contrast, regardless of concentration, glucose elicits an antipodal effect on the proteome landscape, inducing both beneficial and detrimental changes in regard to achieving the desired islet cell fingerprint. Furthermore, we identified that only a subgroup of these effects and pathways are regulated by changes in redox balance. Our study highlights a complex effect of exogenous glucose on differentiating pancreas progenitors characterized by a distinct proteome signature.

### Keywords
Human, Ipscs, Glucose

### Affiliations
University of Bergen
Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Thomas Aga Legøy

### Lab Head
Dr Simona Chera
Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Norway


