### Accession
PXD015468

### Title
A conserved signaling complex controls warm temperature-mediated plant growth

### Description
The model plant Arabidopsis thaliana responds to mild high temperature by increased elongation growth of organs to enhance cooling capacity, in a process called thermomorphogenesis. Our understanding of the genetic regulation of thermomorphogenesis has increased in recent years. However, hardly anything is known about molecular mechanisms outside A. thaliana and cellular signaling pathways have been underexplored. Therefore, we mapped changes in protein phosphorylation in A. thaliana and crops exposed to warm temperature. Based on these results, we identified and characterized a novel, functionally conserved signaling complex of MITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE KINASE KINASE KINASEs (MAP4KS) in warm temperature-mediated growth regulation in plants. This contributes to our understanding of warm temperature signaling, and can help guarantee food security under a changing climate.

### Sample Protocol
For the A. thaliana time course experiment, 1 g of seedlings was used for the phosphoproteome analysis, and 1 mg of proteins was processed for phosphopeptide enrichment using a previously described procedure (Vu et al, 2016, J Proteome Res, 15, 4304-17). For the comparative phosphoproteome analysis of Col-0 and tot3-2 seedlings (1 g of plant material), 3 mg total protein extract was used and phosphopeptide enrichment was conducted on four biological replicates for Col-0 and tot3-2, respectively, according to an improved procedure (Vu et al, 2018, J Exp Bot, 69, 4609-24). For the soybean samples,  2 g of leaf material was used for the phosphoproteome analysis, and 3 mg of protein extract was used for phosphopeptide enrichment on four biological replicates for high and low temperature treatment, respectively. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as described previously (7, 8).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the TAIR10 database for Arabidopsis thaliana (34509 entries, version November, 2014) or with The UniProt database (74864 entries, Proteome ID: UP000008827) for Glycine max (Soybean) with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.7.4 or version 1.5.4.1, respecitvely), a program package allowing MS1-based label-free quantification (9, 10). Next, the ‘Phospho(STY).txt’ output file generated by the MaxQuant search was loaded into the Perseus data analysis software (version 1.5.5.3) available in the MaxQuant package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Arabidopsis, High temperature

### Affiliations
(1) Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, B-9052 Ghent, Belgium;  (2) VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, B-9052 Ghent, Belgium.
VIB

### Submitter
Lam Dai Vu

### Lab Head
Dr Ive De Smet
(1) Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, B-9052 Ghent, Belgium;  (2) VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, B-9052 Ghent, Belgium.


