### Accession
PXD004022

### Title
Proteomic analysis of mitochondria isolated from the frontal cortex and hippocampus of apolipoprotein E knockout mice treated with Alda-1, an activator of mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH2)

### Description
Recently, it has been shown that mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress play  important roles in the pathogenesis of neurodegeneration. Mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH2), an enzyme responsible for the detoxification of reactive aldehydes – the end products of lipid peroxidation, is considered to exert protective function in mitochondria. The aim of our study was to use the methods of differential proteomics in concert with molecular and morphological techniques to elucidate the changes in the frontal cortex and hippocampus of apolipoprotein E knockout (apoE-/-) mice (an animal model of the early stages of Alzheimer’s disease) upon treatment with Alda-1 – a small molecular weight activator of ALDH2.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins isolated from mitochondria-enriched fraction were processed as recommended by iTRAQ protocol. After labeling with iTRAQ reagents peptides were purified with C18 MacroSpin Columns (Harvard Apparatus) and then subjected to SCX fractionation using 11 consecutive salt steps (5mM, 10mM, 20mM, 40mM, 60mM, 80mM, 100mM, 1 50mM, 200mM, 300mM, 500mM ammonium acetate in 5% ACN, 0.1% FA). Samples were concentrated on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 RP C18 75 µm i.d. x 2 cm column, Thermo Scientific Dionex). Each fraction was then injected on-line on PepMap100 RP C18 75 µm i.d. x 15 cm column (Thermo Scientific Dionex) and peptides were separated in 90 min 7-55% B phase linear gradient (A phase – 2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid; B phase – 80% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min by UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific Dionex) and applied on-line to a Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific, USA) dual-pressure ion-trap mass spectrometer. The main working nanoelectrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex, Thermo Scientific) parameters were as follows: ion spray voltage 1.7 kV and capillary temperature 250°C. Spectra were collected in full scan mode (400 – 1500 Da, 50ms AT), followed by five Higher energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) (20ms AT), MS/MS scans (each consists of 2 microscans, 100ms AT) of five most intense ions from the preceding survey full scan under dynamic exclusion criteria.

### Data Protocol
Collected data were analyzed by the X!Tandem(The GPM Organization) and Comet search algorithms and validated with PeptideProphet and iProphet under Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) suite of software (Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, USA). Search parameters were set as follows: taxonomy: mouse (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot), enzyme: trypsin, missed cleavage sites allowed: 2, fixed modification: Methylthio(C), variable modifications: Methionine oxidation(M), iTRAQ8plex(K), iTRAQ8plex(N-term), iTRAQ8plex(Y); parent mass error – 1.5 to + 3.0 Da and peptide fragment mass tolerance: 0.7 Da. Quantitative information of the peptides data was extracted from the HCD MS2 data by Libra software under Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP). Peptide False Discovery Rate (FDR) was estimated by Mayu (TPP) and peptide identifications with FDR below 2% were considered as correct matches. DanteR software(Taverner et al., 2012)was used for statistical analysis of iTRAQ-labeled peptides. In brief, data was normalized using linear regression and ANOVA was performed at peptide level using a robust linear model. Peptides were ordered using median and minimum number of peptides was set to 2 and maximum to 500. Finally, p-values were adjusted by using the Benjamini& Hochberg False Discovery Rate (FDR) correction.

### Publication Abstract
The role of different genotypes of apolipoprotein E (apoE) in the etiology of Alzheimer's disease is widely recognized. It has been shown that altered functioning of apoE may promote 4-hydroxynonenal modification of mitochondrial proteins, which may result in mitochondrial dysfunction, aggravation of oxidative stress, and neurodegeneration. Mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH2) is an enzyme considered to perform protective function in mitochondria by the detoxification of the end products of lipid peroxidation, such as 4-hydroxynonenal and other reactive aldehydes. The goal of our study was to apply a differential proteomics approach in concert with molecular and morphological techniques to elucidate the changes in the frontal cortex and hippocampus of apolipoprotein E knockout (apoE<sup>-/-</sup>) mice upon treatment with Alda-1-a small molecular weight activator of ALDH2. Despite the lack of significant morphological changes in the brain of apoE<sup>-/-</sup> mice as compared to age-matched wild type animals, the proteomic and molecular approach revealed many changes in the expression of genes and proteins, indicating the impairment of energy metabolism, neuroplasticity, and neurogenesis in brains of apoE<sup>-/-</sup> mice. Importantly, prolonged treatment of apoE<sup>-/-</sup> mice with Alda-1 led to the beneficial changes in the expression of genes and proteins related to neuroplasticity and mitochondrial function. The pattern of alterations implies mitoprotective action of Alda-1, however, the accurate functional consequences of the revealed changes require further research.

### Keywords
Brain, Mitochondria, Alzheimer’s disease, Aldh2, Apolipoprotein e

### Affiliations
Jagiellonian University Medical College
Chair of Pharmacology, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, Poland

### Submitter
Aneta Stachowicz

### Lab Head
Dr Rafał Olszanecki
Chair of Pharmacology, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, Poland


