### Accession
PXD029954

### Title
Altered Subgenomic RNA Abundance in SARS-CoV-2 B.1.1.7 Infections

### Description
SARS-CoV-2 lineage B.1.1.7 viruses are more transmissible, may lead to greater clinical severity, and result in modest reductions in antibody neutralization. Subgenomic RNA(sgRNA) is produced by discontinuous transcription of the SARS-CoV-2 genome. Applying our tool(periscope) to ARTIC Network Nanopore genomic sequencing data from 4400 SARS-CoV-2 positive clinical samples, we show that normalised sgRNA is significantly increased in B.1.1.7(alpha) infections(n=879). This increase is seen over the previous dominant circulating UK lineage, B.1.177(n=943), which is independent of genomic reads, E-gene cycle-threshold and days since symptom onset at sampling. A noncanonical sgRNA which could represent ORF9b is found in 98.4% of B.1.1.7 SARS-CoV-2 infections compared with only 13.8% of other lineages, with a 16-fold increase in median sgRNA abundance. We demonstrate that ORF9b protein levels are increased 6-fold in B.1.1.7 compared to a B lineage virus during in vitro culture. We hypothesise that this enhanced presence of ORF9b in B.1.1.7 viruses is a direct consequence of a triple nucleotide mutation in nucleocapsid(28280:GAT>CAT,D3L) creating a transcription regulatory-like sequence complementary to a region 3’ of the genomic leader. These findings provide a unique insight into the biology of B.1.1.7 and support monitoring of sgRNA profiles in sequence data to evaluate emerging potential variants of concern.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative mass spectrometry analysis 20 μl of Laemmli buffer cell lysates from infected cells were alkylated with 25mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 minutes at 37°C. TEAB was added to a final concentration of 50 mM, and protein was trapped and washed on S-trap micro spin columns (ProtiFi, LLC) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein was digested using 5 μg trypsin sequence grade (Pierce) at 47°C for 1 hour and 37°C for 1 hour. Eluted peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 40 μl 0.5% formic acid for  LC-MS/MS analysis.  Peptides were analysed using nanoflow LC‐MS/MS using an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher) hybrid mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray source, coupled to an Ultimate RSLCnano LC System (Dionex). Peptides were desalted online using a nano trap column, 75 μm I.D.X 20mm (Thermo Fisher) and then separated using a 130‐min gradient from 3 to 35% buffer B (0.5% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) on an EASY‐Spray column, 50 cm × 50 μm ID, PepMap C18, 2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size (Thermo Fisher). The Orbitrap Elite was operated with a cycle of one MS (in the Orbitrap) acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400, with the top 20 most abundant multiply charged (2+ and higher) ions in a given chromatographic window subjected to MS/MS fragmentation in the linear ion trap. An FTMS target value of 1e6 and an ion trap MSn target value of 1e4 were used with the lock mass (445.120025) enabled. Maximum FTMS scan accumulation time of 500 ms and maximum ion trap MSn scan accumulation time of 100 ms were used. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat duration of 45 s with an exclusion list of 500 and an exclusion duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were analysed with MaxQuant version 1.6.10.43 (PMID: 19029910). Data were searched against a combined sequence database including the Human and SARS-CoV-2 UniProt reference proteomes using the following search parameters: digestion set to Trypsin/P, methionine oxidation and N‐terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, match between runs enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and a 20‐min alignment time window, label‐free quantification (LFQ)  was enabled with a minimum ratio count of 2, minimum number of neighbours of 3 and an average number of neighbours of 6. A protein FDR of 0.01 and a peptide FDR of 0.01 were used for identification level cut‐offs based on a decoy database searching strategy. SARS-CoV-2 protein identification and quantification data were extracted and normalised to the levels of proteins encoded by the ORF1ab gene. Nsp1, Nsp2 and Nsp3 were quantified across all replicate samples at each time point, and strain and, therefore, the summed intensity of these proteins were used as a normalisation factor for other SARS-CoV-2 proteins. Statistical analysis of the normalised LFQ data was performed using Prism 7 using unpaired 2-way t-tests.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, B.1.1.7, Coronavirus

### Affiliations
University of Sheffield
School of Biosciences University of Sheffield United Kingdom

### Submitter
Mark Collins

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Collins
School of Biosciences University of Sheffield United Kingdom


