### Accession
PXD026702

### Title
LC-MSMS of the MHC-I immunopeptidome of human iPSCs

### Description
The development of cancer immunotherapeutics is limited by the discovery of actionable tumor-specific antigens (TSAs), which need to be presented at high levels on cancer cells, but not presented by normal tissues or presented at levels below the threshold for T-cell recognition to prevent autoimmunity. Accumulating evidence indicates that pluripotent stem cells (PSCs), namely embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and induced PSCs (iPSCs), express a class of pluripotency-associated MHC-I-associated peptides (paMAPs) that can be recognized by tumor-specific T cells. Hence, being strictly confined to the embryonic stage of development and absent from healthy adult tissues, paMAPs shared by iPSCs and tumors would represent ideal targets for the development of TSA-based vaccines against a wide range of cancers. We performed immunopeptidomic analyses of human iPSCs and we identified a set of paMAPs that could serve for the design of TSA-based vaccines against many cancers.

### Sample Protocol
iPSCs were grown in mTeSR1 medium (STEMCELL) on Matrigel or in DEF-CS™ 500 Basal Medium with Additives (Takara Bio) on coated (COAT-1, Takara Bio) cell culture vessels. For IFN-γ-treated iPSCs, 40 ng/mL recombinant human IFN-γ (Gibco) was added to the culture medium for 72 hours to enhance MHC-I levels on the cell surface prior to immunopeptidome analyses. iPSCs were washed with DPBS (Gibco) and pellets were stored at -80°C until further processing.   iPSC pellets were thawed and resuspended in PBS pH 7.2 up to 1 ml and solubilized by adding 1 mL of detergent buffer containing 0.5% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (Thermo Fisher)/0.4 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma)/2% (w/v) Octyl β-D-glucopyranoside (Sigma)/2 mM EDTA (Promega) supplemented with Protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). Solubilized cell pellets were incubated for 60 minutes with tumbling at 4°C and then spun at 16600xg for 20 minutes at 4°C. Supernatants were transferred into new tubes containing 1 mg of W6/32 antibody covalently-cross-linked protein A magnetic beads per sample and incubated with tumbling for 180 minutes at 4°C. Samples were placed on a magnet to recover bound MHC I complexes to magnetic beads. Magnetic beads were first washed with 8 × 1 mL PBS, then with 1 × 1 mL of 0.1X PBS and finally with 1 × 1 mL of water. MHC I complexes were eluted from the magnetic beads by acidic treatment using 0.2% formic acid (FA). To remove any residual magnetic beads, eluates were transferred into 2.0 mL Costar mL Spin-X centrifuge tube filters (0.45 µm, Corning) and spun for 2 minutes at 855xg. Filtrates containing peptides were separated from MHC I subunits (HLA molecules and β-2 microglobulin) using home-made stage tips packed with two 1 mm diameter octadecyl (C-18) solid phase extraction disks (EMPORE). Stage tips were pre-washed first with methanol then with 80% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and finally with 0.2% FA. Samples were loaded onto the stage tips and washed with 0.2% FA. Peptides were eluted with 30% ACN in 0.1%TFA, dried using vacuum centrifugation and then stored at -20°C until MS analysis.   Dried peptide extracts were resuspended in 4% formic acid and loaded on a homemade C18 analytical column (15 cm x 150 µm i.d. packed with C18 Jupiter Phenomenex) with a 56-min gradient (hiPSC22, hiPSC22_IFN) or 106-minute gradient (all other samples) from 0% to 30% acetonitrile (0.2% formic acid) and a 600 nL/min flow rate on an EasynLC II system. Samples were analyzed with a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in positive ion mode with Nanospray 2 source at 1.6 kV. Each full MS spectrum, acquired with a 60,000 resolution was followed by 20 MS/MS spectra, where the most abundant multiply charged ions were selected for MS/MS sequencing with a resolution of 30,000, an automatic gain control target of 2 x 104, an injection time of 100 ms (hiPSC22_IFN) or 800 ms (all other samples) and collisional energy of 25%.

### Data Protocol
All liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS (LC-MS/MS) data were searched against the relevant database using PEAKS 10.5 (Bioinformatics Solution Inc.). For peptide identification, tolerance was set at 10 ppm and 0.01 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. The occurrences of oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Previous reports showed that mouse vaccination with pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) induces durable anti-tumor immune responses via T&#xa0;cell recognition of some elusive oncofetal epitopes. We characterize the MHC I-associated peptide (MAP) repertoire of human induced PSCs (iPSCs) using proteogenomics. Our analyses reveal a set of 46 pluripotency-associated MAPs (paMAPs) absent from the transcriptome of normal tissues and adult stem cells but expressed in PSCs and multiple adult cancers. These paMAPs derive from coding and allegedly non-coding (48%) transcripts involved in pluripotency maintenance, and their expression in The Cancer Genome Atlas samples correlates with source gene hypomethylation and genomic aberrations common across cancer types. We find that several of these paMAPs were immunogenic. However, paMAP expression in tumors coincides with activation of pathways instrumental in immune evasion (WNT, TGF-&#x3b2;, and CDK4/6). We propose that currently available inhibitors of these pathways could synergize with immune targeting of paMAPs for the treatment of poorly differentiated cancers.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mhc class i, Induced pluripotent stem cells, Immunopeptidome

### Affiliations
IRIC
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Department of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, Québec, Canada H3T 1J4

### Submitter
Courcelles Mathieu

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Thibault
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Department of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, Québec, Canada H3T 1J4


