### Accession
PXD023460

### Title
Proteomic analysis of of the exoproteome of a clathrin mutant

### Description
Fungi are the most important plant pathogens on agricultural and horticultural crops. Study of these pathogens remains essential to understand pathogenic process and control plant diseases. In this context, a random insertional mutagenesis strategy, based on the Agrobacterium tumefaciens-mediated transformation (ATMT), was used to create a mutant library of the grey mould fungus Botrytis cinerea. A nonpathogenic mutant altered in the expression of a gene encoding clathrin heavy chain was selected. Clathrin heavy chain is well conserved from yeast to human and is described to be mainly involved in intracellular coat vesicles formation for endocytosis and post-Golgi trafficking of proteins. The characterization of the mutant was performed to precise the role of this protein in the infectious process of this typical necrotrophic fungus.  Using a proteomic approach, a secretion defect of numerous proteins including known virulence factors, as Plant Cell Wall Degrading Enzymes and elicitors was observed. This study demonstrated for the first time the essential role of clathrin in the infectious process of a fungal pathogen.

### Sample Protocol
Exoproteome extracts were loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel and proteins were visualized by Colloidal Blue staining. Migration was stopped when samples had just entered the resolving gel and the unresolved region of the gel cut into only one segment. Each SDS-PAGE band was cut into into 1 mm x 1 mm gel pieces and protein were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. Online nanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Q-Exactive hybrid quadruplole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). Ten microliters of each peptide extract were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After 5 min desalting, peptides were online separated on a 75 µm ID x 25 cm C18 Acclaim PepMap® RSLC column (Thermo Scientific, USA) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 108 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8 kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 3.1 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 350-1600) were recorded at a resolution of R = 70000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 3 x 106 ions collected within 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and top 12 ions were selected from fragmentation in HCD mode. MS/MS scans with a target value of 1 x 105 ions were collected with a maximum fill time of 100 ms and a resolution of R = 17500. Additionally, only +2 and +3 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Others settings were as follows: no sheath and no auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 200°C; normalized HCD collision energy of 27% and an isolation width of 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) were done in Proteome Discoverer 2.4. MS Amanda 2.0, Sequest HT and Mascot 2.4 algorithms were used for protein identification in batch mode by searching against the Ensembl Botrytis cinerea B05.10 database (13749 entries, release 47). Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da. Oxidation (M), acetylation (K) and deamidation (N, Q) were searched as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) as static modification. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% false discovery rate at peptide level. Minora feature detector node (LFQ) was used along with the feature mapper and precursor ions quantifier. The normalization parameters were selected as follows : (1) Unique peptides (2) Precursor abundance based on intensity (3) Normalization mode : total peptide amount (4) Protein abundance calculation : summed abundances (5) Protein ratio calculation : pairwise ratio based and (6) Hypothesis test : t-test (background based). Quantitative data were considered for master proteins, quantified by a minimum of 2 unique peptides, a fold changes above 2 and a statistical p-value lower than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Clathrin mutant, Quantitative proteome, Virulence, Phytopathogneic fungus

### Affiliations
Functional genomics of plant pathogenic fungi UMR 5240 Microbiology Adaptation Pathogeny CNRS-UCB-INSA-Bayer CropScience BAYER SAS, Bayer CropScience 14 Impasse Pierre Baizet, BP 99163 69263 Lyon Cedex 09, France
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Nathalie Poussereau
Functional genomics of plant pathogenic fungi UMR 5240 Microbiology Adaptation Pathogeny CNRS-UCB-INSA-Bayer CropScience BAYER SAS, Bayer CropScience 14 Impasse Pierre Baizet, BP 99163 69263 Lyon Cedex 09, France


