### Accession
PXD026073

### Title
Identification of cellular binders of human MX2 through a 3-labels SILAC based experiment using 293T cells protein over-expression and affinity purification

### Description
3 labels SILAC experiment searching for binding interactors of human MX2 through comparison of binding protein ratios against human MX1, mutant MX2 R11-13A or mock-transfected 293T cells. Also comparison of binders from a chimeric GFP protein bearing the amino-terminal domain of MX2 against GFP.

### Sample Protocol
For the identification of MX2 interacting proteins, groups of five 15 cm dishes of 293T cells variously labelled with “light”, “medium” or “heavy” arginine and lysine amino acids were transfected with 20 µg/dish of pCTAP-A vectors expressing either MX1, MX2, MX2 R11-13A, GFP or GFP (NTDMX2), or empty vector. At 48 h, cells were lysed and over-expressed proteins isolated by streptavidin-affinity purification using the InterPlay Mammalian TAP System (Agilent Technologies). Samples obtained from “light”, “medium” and “heavy” conditions were pooled together and resolved using 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gels and stained with SimplyBlue (Thermo Fisher). In-gel reduction, alkylation and trypsin digestion were subsequently conducted. Peptides were extracted from the gel by a series of washes of acetonitrile and water and subsequently lyophilised. Resulting samples were resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Chromatographic separations were performed using an EASY nLC-II nanoflow system (Thermo Fisher). Reversed phase chromatography was used to resolve peptides, using a 75 μm C18 PepMap column and three step linear gradient of acetonitrile in CH2O2 (0.1%) at 300 nl/min. The eluate was ionised by electrospray ionisation using an Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher, UK) operating under Xcalibur v2.2. The instrument was programmed to acquire in automated data-dependent switching mode, selecting precursor ions based on their intensity for sequencing by collision-induced fragmentation using a Top20 CID method. The MS/MS analyses were performed using collision energy profiles that were selected based on the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) and the charge state of the peptide.

### Data Protocol
Database searching was carried out using MaxQuant v1.4.3.14 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry) against the Uniprot human database (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640). Parameters for single protein identification were set including cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, with N-terminus acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The minimum peptide length allowed was 7 and a maximum number of modifications per peptide of 5. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%. Additional analyses were conducted using Perseus software (version 1.4.1.3), obtaining sample relative abundancy of identified proteins after removal of potential contaminants and reverse proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Mx2, Mx1, Interferon

### Affiliations
Department of Infectious Diseases, School of Immunology and Microbial Sciences, King's College London
King's College London

### Submitter
Gilberto Betancor

### Lab Head
Dr Michael H Malim
Department of Infectious Diseases, School of Immunology and Microbial Sciences, King's College London


