### Accession
PXD030279

### Title
Nutraceutical potential of small chickpea grain associated with significant stress response revealed by proteomics and metabolomics

### Description
The main goal in cereal crops like chickpea is to improve yield due to the continually increasing demand for food. Therefore, there is a bias towards big seed genotypes in the grain marker because of the protein, lipid, and carbohydrate content. Although significant advance has been made in understanding the molecular foundation of grain size, limited efforts have focused on determining small grains nutraceutical values. This study carried out comparative proteomics and metabolomics of five chickpeas genotypes, including small and big commercial premium grains locally produced.

### Sample Protocol
In order to extract the proteins, the plant tissue was triturated to obtain a fine powder, using a mortar and liquid nitrogen. The extraction buffer included 0.5 M Trizma base (pH 8; Sigma, T1503), 50 mM EDTA (pH 8; Sigma, EDS), 700 mM sucrose, 100 mM KCl (Sigma, P9541), 2% β-mercaptoethanol (Sigma, M6250), 1 mM PMSF (Sigma, 78830), 1% SDS (Sigma, L3771) and a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, P9599). For each 100 mg of sam-ple in Eppendorf tubes, 1 mL of extraction solution was added, and it was vortexed for 5 min, with 1-min rest intervals. Subsequently, 1 mL of phenol solution (Sigma, P4557) was added in the fume hood to tubes sealed with parafilm to avoid spillage. The tubes were briefly vortexed and placed on ice with shaking for 20 min. Then they were centrifuged at 4 °C and 15,000 x g for 30 min. The upper phenolic phase was recovered. The volume of each tube was increased to 2 mL with acetone supplemented with 0.07% β-mercaptoethanol (Sigma, M6250), and they were allowed to precipitate overnight at -20 °C. The next day, the tubes were centrifuged at 4 °C and 3,000 x g for 30 min. The super-natant was discarded, and the samples were allowed to dry in the vacuum concentrator. The pellet was resuspended in 300 µL of 1x PBS (Sigma, P5493) supplemented with 1% SDS (Sigma, L3771) by vortexing for 15 min. The tubes were centrifuged at 24 °C, and 15,000 x g for 10 min, and the supernatant was recovered in new tubes. The quantification of the total protein was carried out with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, 23227), and the quality of the extract was verified by SDS-PAGE. Samples were stored at -80 °C until use.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the MASCOT (v.2.4.1, Matrix, Sci-ence, Boston, MA) search engine implemented in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Search parameters included 10 ppm and 0.6 Da mass tolerance, trypsin diges-tion with two missed cleavages allowed. Static modifications included cysteine carbami-domethylation, N-terminal TMT6plex, and lysine TMT6plex. Dynamic modifications in-cluded methionine oxidation and asparaginearginine/glutamine deamidation. StrictThe global false discovery rate (FDR) was stablished for peptides and proteins in the respective node of analysis in Protein Discoverer Suiteup to 1%. Differentially abundant proteins were determined as a fold change ≥1.5 for those up-accumulated or ≤0.66 for those down-accumulated, and P < 0.05 was used to identify statistical significance.

### Publication Abstract
Legumes are an essential source of nutrients that complement energy and protein requirements in the human diet. They also contribute to the intake of bioactive compounds such as polyphenols, whose content can vary depending on cultivars and genotypes. We conducted a comparative proteomics and metabolomics study to determine if there were significant variations in relevant nutraceutical compounds in the five genotypes of Kabuli-type chickpea grains. We performed an isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT) couple to synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-MS3 method along with a targeted and untargeted metabolomics approach based on accurate mass spectrometry. We observed an association between the overproduction of proteins involved in starch, lipid, and amino acid metabolism with gibberellin accumulation in large grains. In contrast, we visualized the over-accumulation of proteins associated with water deprivation in small grains. It was possible to visualize in small grains the over-accumulation of some phenolics such as vanillin, salicylic acid, protocatechuic acid, 4-coumaric acid, 4-hydroxybenzoic acid, vanillic acid, ferulic acid, and kaempferol 3-<i>O</i>-glucoside as well as the amino acid l-phenylalanine. The activated phenolic pathway was associated with the higher antioxidant capacity of small grains. Small grains consumption could be advantageous due to their nutraceutical properties.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Aba, Proteomics, Sps, Nutraceutical properties, Chickpea, Proteometabolomics

### Affiliations
Instituto de Ecolog'ia A.C.
INECOL A.C.

### Submitter
Miguel Elizalde

### Lab Head
Dr Miguel elizalde
INECOL A.C.


