### Accession
PXD000560

### Title
Chasing protein arginine phosphorylation: development of a selective enrichment method using a trapping mutant phosphatase

### Description
Proof-of-principle pull-down experiments using a YwlE trapping mutant phosphatase to selective capture arginine phosphorylated proteins. Phosphoarginine is an acid labile protein modification that was demonstrated to exist in bacteria and probably also in higher eukaryotes. Due to the high abundance of Ser, Thr, and Tyr modification, specific enrichment of this type of phosphorylation is required to detect this modification in complex samples and distinguish them from other protein phosphorylations.  For this purpose, the phosphoarginine-specific phosphatase YwlE (G.stearothermophilus) was modified by introduction of mutations in catalytically-active amino acids C9 and D118, as well as the surface residue F39. The efficiency of these mutants to enrich arginine phosphorylated proteins from B. subtilis cell extracts was tested in comparison to a shotgun phosphoproteomics approach. Phosphatase trapping mutants were expressed in E.coli with a C-terminal histidine-tag. B.subtilis ywle cultures were grown in LB medium and heat shocked to induce arginine phosphorylation by the protein arginine kinase McsB. Cells were lysed under native conditions and incubated with the trapping mutant. Phosphorylated proteins were enriched by Ni2+/NTA chromatography to isolate the trapping mutant and bound substrates. Sample were prepared for bottom up proteomic analysis by reduction of disulfides, subsequent alkylation of free cysteines and tryptic digestion on the beads. Phosphopeptides were enriched from the resulting peptide mixtures using an optimized TiO2-based enrichment protocol and subsequently submitted to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
YwlE pull-downs (of either the YwlE C9A, D117A or C9A F39Bpa mutants) were performed using total proteins extracts of Bacillus subtilis YwlE knock-out strain submmitted to heat stress. On bead trypsin digestion was performed, followed by peptide purification by solid phase extraction and a phosphoarginine-optimized TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment. Samples were then measured in an Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific) instrument using CID and ETD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were extracted by the Protein Discoverer software suite (version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Scientific) and searched against a combined forward/reversed database of B. subtilis (strain 168) Uniprot Reference Proteome with common contaminants added using MASCOT (version 2.2.07, Matrix Science). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Phosphorylation of serine, threonine, tyrosine and arginine as well as oxidation of methionine were selected as variable modifications. Maximum of two missed cleavage sites was allowed, whereas fully tryptic cleavage of both termini was required. The peptide mass deviation was set to 5 ppm; fragment ions were allowed to have a mass deviation of 0.8 Da. False discovery rates were assessed using the Percolator tool within the Protein Discoverer package. Phosphorylation localization was performed by the phosphoRS software within the Protein Discoverer software suite

### Publication Abstract
Arginine phosphorylation is an emerging post-translational protein modification implicated in the bacterial stress response. Although early reports suggested that arginine phosphorylation also occurs in higher eukaryotes, its overall prevalence was never studied using modern mass spectrometry methods, owing to technical difficulties arising from the acid lability of phosphoarginine. As shown recently, the McsB and YwlE proteins from Bacillus subtilis function as a highly specific protein arginine kinase and phosphatase couple, shaping the phosphoarginine proteome. Using a B. subtilis &#x394;ywlE strain as a source for arginine-phosphorylated proteins, we were able to adapt mass spectrometry (MS) protocols to the special chemical properties of the arginine modification. Despite this progress, the analysis of protein arginine phosphorylation in eukaryotes is still challenging, given the great abundance of serine/threonine phosphorylations that would compete with phosphoarginine during the phosphopeptide enrichment procedure, as well as during data-dependent MS acquisition. We thus set out to establish a method for the selective enrichment of arginine-phosphorylated proteins as an initial step in the phosphoproteomic analysis. For this purpose, we developed a substrate-trapping mutant of the YwlE phosphatase that retains binding affinity toward arginine-phosphorylated proteins but cannot hydrolyze the captured substrates. By testing a number of active site substitutions, we identified a YwlE mutant (C9A) that stably binds to arginine-phosphorylated proteins. We further improved the substrate-trapping efficiency by impeding the oligomerization of the phosphatase mutant. The engineered YwlE trap efficiently captured arginine-phosphorylated proteins from complex B. subtilis &#x394;ywlE cell extracts, thus facilitating identification of phosphoarginine sites in the large pool of cellular protein modifications. In conclusion, we present a novel tool for the selective enrichment and subsequent MS analysis of arginine phosphorylation, which is a largely overlooked protein modification that might be important for eukaryotic cell signaling.

### Keywords
Arginie phosphorylation, Trapping mutant phosphatase

### Affiliations
The Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP) Institute of Molecular Biotechnology (IMBA)
Mass spectrometry

### Submitter
Debora Broch Trentini

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Mechtler
The Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP) Institute of Molecular Biotechnology (IMBA)


