### Accession
PXD010239

### Title
Identification of proteins in the Salmonella SPI-1 type III secretion injectisome needle complex

### Description
We determined the cryo-EM structure of the type III secretion injectisome needle complex. We used LC-MS/MS to idensitfy the constituent proteins showing the predominant presence of the major inner- and outer basal body proteins (PrgH+PrgK and InvG respectively), export apparatus protein SpaP and SpaR, and the rod and needle filament proteins PrgJ and PrgI.

### Sample Protocol
Digested proteins were loaded onto a Bruker Impact II Q-ToF mass spectrometer. Peptide separation was carried out on a 50 cm in-house packed 75 μm C18 column by a Proxeon EasynLC UPLC system, using 120 minute water:acetonitrile gradients. Eluted peptides were ionized in positive ion mode, collecting MS/MS spectra for the top 15 peaks >500 counts, with a 30 second dynamic exclusion list.

### Data Protocol
Data files were loaded into MaxQuant v1.5.1.0 for analysis. Identification used a 0.006 da MS tolerance and 40 ppm MSMS tolerance, and a Salmonella specific protein database containing all annotated Salmonella proteins extracted from Uniprot.

### Publication Abstract
The bacterial type III secretion system, or injectisome, is a syringe shaped nanomachine essential for the virulence of many disease causing Gram-negative bacteria. At the core of the injectisome structure is the needle complex, a continuous channel formed by the highly oligomerized inner and outer membrane hollow rings and a polymerized helical needle filament which spans through and projects into the infected host cell. Here we present the near-atomic resolution structure of a needle complex from the prototypical Salmonella Typhimurium SPI-1 type III secretion system, with local masking protocols allowing for model building and refinement of the major membrane spanning components of the needle complex&#xa0;base in addition to an isolated needle filament. This work provides significant insight into injectisome structure and assembly and importantly captures the molecular basis for substrate induced gating in the giant outer membrane secretin portal family.

### Keywords
Injectisome, Type iii secretion system, Bacteria

### Affiliations
The University of British Columbia
Department of Biochemistry, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada

### Submitter
Liam Worrall

### Lab Head
Dr Natalie Strynadka
Department of Biochemistry, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada


