### Accession
PXD036369

### Title
Sex differences in the role of K63 polyubiquitination in the amygdala during fear memory formation

### Description
This project examined sex differences in the role of K63 polyubiquitination in the amygdala during context fear memory formation in male and female rats.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were basolateral amygdala (BLA) tissue dissected from male and female Sprague-Dawley rats that underwent fear conditioning (Trained) or remained naïve. Samples were homogenized in denaturing lysis buffer (0.05% SDS) with 70mM NEM, briefly centrifuged and supernatant collected. Normalized samples were mixed with a K63 polyubiquitin-specific Tandem Ubiquitin Binding Entity (TUBE; Life Sensors) bound to magnetic streptavidin beads and incubated at 4C. Samples were then washed and protein eluted in 1x sample buffer at 95C, 800 rpm for 5 minutes.  Samples were processed utilizing S-Trap micro columns (Protofi) and trypsin. Recovered peptides were analyzed via LC-ESI-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribid instrument (Thermo) running each sample in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed and processed utilizing Proteome Discoverer v. 2.5 (Thermo) merging the results from a Sequest HT search and a Mascot server v. 2.7 (Matrix Science) search of the rat reference proteome downloaded from UniProt and a common contaminants database provided with Proteome Discoverer. Simultaneous searching of a decoy database allowed for determination of a false discovery rate. Protein quantities were the sum of the intensities of the associated peptides. Values were normalized to streptavidin amount and averaged for duplicate runs prior to statistical analyisis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Consolidation, Amygdala, Memory, Sex differences, K63

### Affiliations
Virginia Tech
Associate Professor, School of Animal Sciences Core Faculty, School of Neuroscience Associate Professor of Health Sciences Co-Director, Molecular and Cellular Biology (MCB) Graduate Program Virginia Tech

### Submitter
Keith Ray

### Lab Head
Dr Timothy J. Jarome, Ph.D.
Associate Professor, School of Animal Sciences Core Faculty, School of Neuroscience Associate Professor of Health Sciences Co-Director, Molecular and Cellular Biology (MCB) Graduate Program Virginia Tech


