### Accession
PXD024767

### Title
1. Site-specific O-glycosylation analysis of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein produced in insect and human cells

### Description
2. Enveloped viruses hijack not only host translation processes, but also its glycosylation machinery and to a variable extent cover viral surface proteins with tolerogenic host-like structures. SARS-CoV-2 surface protein S presents as a trimer on the viral surface and is covered by a dense shield of N-linked glycans, and a few O-glycosites have been reported. The biosynthetic nature of O-glycosylation is highly variable and is affected by initiating enzyme repertoires in different tissues and cell types, and therefore warrants a more thorough investigation. Here, we used our well-established O-glycoproteomic workflows to map the precise positions of O-linked glycosylation sites on three different entities of protein S – insect cell or human cell-produced ectodomains, or insect cell-derived receptor binding domain (RBD). In total 25 O-glycosites were identified, with similar patterns in the two ectodomains of different cell origin, and a distinct pattern of the monomeric RBD. Strikingly, 16 out of 25 O-glycosites were located within three amino acids from known N-glycosites. However, O-glycosylation was primarily found on peptides that were unoccupied by N-glycans, and otherwise had low overall occupancy. This suggests possible complimentary functions of O-glycans in immune shielding and negligible effects of O-glycosylation on subunit vaccine design for SARS-CoV-2

### Sample Protocol
3. We expressed pre-fusion stabilized S ectodomains in both Drosophila S2 or human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293F (Freestyle) cells, where both constructs included a mutated S1/S2 cleavage site, as well as stabilizing mutations (986P, 987P) in the S2 region. Furthermore, we expressed a soluble monomeric receptor binding domain (RBD) in insect cells. We then mapped mucin type O-glycosylation sites on the recombinantly expressed S proteins using ETciD and HCD nLC-MS/MS workflow on a Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. We applied an in-gel digestion approach, where after pre-treatment with PNGase F, proteins were digested with chymotrypsin or Glu-C followed by trypsin in parallel to achieve deeper sequence coverage.

### Data Protocol
The search was performed with Proteome discoverer 2.2 software using Sequest HT, which included protease-specific search settings. Furthermore, Asn deamidation, as well as HexNAc and Hex-HexNAc glycosylation on Ser/Thr/Tyr were set as variable modifications. HEK 293F product was also analysed using Thermo Fisher Q Exactive HF-X instrument equipped with HCD MS2 fragmentation. Here, sample aliquots were digested under five different protease conditions including chymotrypsin, a combination of trypsin and chymotrypsin, trypsin, elastase and subtilisin. All samples were then pooled and deglycosylated by Endo H followed by PNGase F in O18-water, and analysed in duplicates. Search was performed using Integrated Proteomics Pipeline-IP2 with no enzyme specificity, and included HexNAc/Hex-HexNAc variable modifications on Ser/Thr, as well as N-deglycosylation-specific variable modifications on Asn

### Publication Abstract
Enveloped viruses hijack not only the host translation processes, but also its glycosylation machinery, and to a variable extent cover viral surface proteins with tolerogenic host-like structures. SARS-CoV-2 surface protein S presents as a trimer on the viral surface and is covered by a dense shield of N-linked glycans, and a few O-glycosites have been reported. The location of O-glycans is controlled by a large family of initiating enzymes with variable expression in cells and tissues and hence is difficult to predict. Here, we used our well-established O-glycoproteomic workflows to map the precise positions of O-linked glycosylation sites on three different entities of protein S-insect cell or human cell-produced ectodomains, or insect cell derived receptor binding domain (RBD). In total 25 O-glycosites were identified, with similar patterns in the two ectodomains of different cell origin, and a distinct pattern of the monomeric RBD. Strikingly, 16 out of 25 O-glycosites were located within three amino acids from known N-glycosites. However, O-glycosylation was primarily found on peptides that were unoccupied by N-glycans, and otherwise had low overall occupancy. This suggests possible complementary functions of O-glycans in immune shielding and negligible effects of O-glycosylation on subunit vaccine design for SARS-CoV-2.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Lc-ms, Etd, O-glycosylation, N-glycosylation

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine
University of Copenhagen, Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Copenhagen Center for Glycomics

### Submitter
Sergey Vakhrushev

### Lab Head
Dr Sergey Vakhrushev
University of Copenhagen, Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Copenhagen Center for Glycomics


