### Accession
PXD035654

### Title
Interaction network of the Cysteine Repeat Modular protein complex of Toxoplasma gondii

### Description
Apicomplexa are obligate intracellular parasites. While most species are restricted to specific hosts and cell types, Toxoplasma gondii can invade every nucleated cell derived from warm-blooded animals. This broad host range suggests that this parasite can recognize multiple host cell ligands or structures, leading to the activation of a central protein complex, which should be conserved in all apicomplexans. During invasion, the unique secretory organelles (micronemes and rhoptries) are sequentially released and several micronemal proteins have been suggested to be required for host cell recognition and invasion. However, to date only few micronemal proteins have been demonstrated to be essential for invasion. Cysteine Repeat Modular Proteins (CRMPs) are a family of apicomplexan specific proteins. In Toxoplasma gondii, two CRMPs are present in the genome. The Kringle domain containing protein (CRMPA) and the GCC2 GCC3 domain containing protein (CRMPB). Here we demonstrate that both proteins form a complex that contains additional micronemal proteins. Disruption of this complex results in a block of rhoptry secretion and parasites being unable to invade the host cell. In conclusion, this complex is a central invasion complex conserved in all apicomplexans.

### Sample Protocol
The goal of this TurboID dataset is to compare the stability of the complex and the hierarchy of interaction in absence of CRMPA or CRMPB and compare it to the presence of all complex members. For this three parasite strains are compared: 1. CRMPA-TurboID with CRMPB floxed, 2. CRMPB-TurboID with CRMPA floxed and 3. WT (expressing DiCre). Parasites were cultured in the presence ( 72 h) or absence of rapamycin and were mechanically released and filtered, then parasites were incubated at 37 °C for 30 min in 1 ml of DMEM media with 150 µM of Biotin. Samples were centrifuged at 1500 g for 5 min and washed with PBS (0°C) three times, then stored at -80 °C.  For TurboID pulldown, the pellet was lysed for 30 min on ice in1 ml of RIPA buffer with 1% Triton-X-100 and 1:100 protease inhibitor. Per sample 100 µl were washed 3 times with 1 ml of PBS using the magnet system. Beads were resuspended with cleared lysed parasites in RIPA buffer and incubated 1h at RT while gently mixing. Beads were washed 5 times with 1 ml RIPA buffer without Triton. Beads were washed three times with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and 5% of the volume was separated for western blot controls. For mass spectrometry beads were incubated with 10 ng/µL trypsin in 1 M urea 50mM NH4HCO3 for 30 minutes, washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and the supernatant digested overnight (ON) in presence of 1mM DTT. Digested peptides were alkylated and desalted prior to LCMS analysis. For LC-MS/MS purposes, desalted peptides were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo), separated in a 15-cm analytical column (75 μm ID with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 2.4 μm from Dr. Maisch) with a 50-min gradient from 4 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo) operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 350–1200) were acquired with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). The 20 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1x105, and fragmented at 30% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; heated capillary temperature, 275°C; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 2.0.1.0 was used to identify proteins and quantify by iBAQ with the following parameters: Database UP000005641_Toxoplasmagondii_20201123.fasta ; MS tol, 10 ppm; MS/MS tol, 20 ppm Da; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 min. peptide Length, 7; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2.

### Publication Abstract
Apicomplexa are obligate intracellular parasites. While most species are restricted to specific hosts and cell types, Toxoplasma gondii can invade every nucleated cell derived from warm-blooded animals. This broad host range suggests that this parasite can recognize multiple host cell ligands or structures, leading to the activation of a central protein complex, which should be conserved in all apicomplexans. During invasion, the unique secretory organelles (micronemes and rhoptries) are sequentially released and several micronemal proteins have been suggested to be required for host cell recognition and invasion. However, to date, only few micronemal proteins have been demonstrated to be essential for invasion, suggesting functional redundancy that might allow such a broad host range. Cysteine Repeat Modular Proteins (CRMPs) are a family of apicomplexan-specific proteins. In T. gondii, two CRMPs are present in the genome, CRMPA (TGGT1_261080) and CRMPB (TGGT1_292020). Here, we demonstrate that both proteins form a complex that contains the additional proteins MIC15 and the thrombospondin type 1 domain-containing protein (TSP1). Disruption of this complex results in a block of rhoptry secretion and parasites being unable to invade the host cell. In conclusion, this complex is a central invasion complex conserved in all apicomplexans.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma, Crmps, Turboid, Dicre, Invasion

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Department of Experimental Parasitology LMU München  Lena-Christ-Str. 48  82152 Planegg-Martinsried   Telefon: +49 (0) 89 2180 - 3622  Fax: +49 (0) 89 2180 - 3623  E-Mail: markus.meissner@lmu.de

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. rer. nat. Markus Meissner
Department of Experimental Parasitology LMU München  Lena-Christ-Str. 48  82152 Planegg-Martinsried   Telefon: +49 (0) 89 2180 - 3622  Fax: +49 (0) 89 2180 - 3623  E-Mail: markus.meissner@lmu.de


