### Accession
PXD039544

### Title
N-terminal acetylome analysis reveals an expanded substrate profile for the NatC N-terminal acetyltransferase complex in yeast

### Description
N-terminal acetylation is a conserved protein modification among eukaryotes, and the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a valuable model system for studying this modification. The enzymes responsible for the bulk of protein N-terminal acetylation in S. cerevisiae are the N-terminal acetyltransferases NatA, NatB and NatC. Thus far, proteome-wide identification of the in vivo protein substrates of yeast NatA and NatB has been performed by N-terminomics. Here, we used S. cerevisiae deleted for the NatC catalytic subunit Naa30 and identified 57 yeast NatC substrates by N-terminal combined fractional diagonal chromatography (COFRADIC) analysis. Interestingly, in addition to the canonical N-termini starting with ML, MI, MF and MW, yeast NatC substrates also included MY, MK, MM, MA, MV and MS. However, for some of these substrate types, such as MY, MK, MV and MS, we also uncovered (residual) non-NatC NAT activity, most likely due to the previously established redundancy between yeast NatC and NatE/Naa50. Thus, we have revealed a complex interplay between different NATs in targeting methionine-starting N-termini in yeast. Furthermore, our results showed that ectopic expression of human NAA30 rescued known NatC phenotypes in naa30∆ yeast, as well as partially restored the yeast NatC Nt-acetylome. Thus, we demonstrate an evolutionary conservation of NatC from yeast to human thereby underpinning future disease models to study pathogenic NAA30 variants. Overall, this work offers increased biochemical and functional insights into NatC-mediated N-terminal acetylation and provides a basis for future work to pinpoint the specific molecular mechanisms that link lack of NatC-mediated N-terminal acetylation to phenotypes of NatC deletion yeast

### Sample Protocol
Total lysates from WT, naa30∆ and naa30∆-[hNAA30] strains were collected at exponential growth phase and subjected to glass bead lysis as described previously (Arnesen, Van Damme et al. 2009). Additionally, subcellular fractionation was performed on all three strains to improve proteome coverage and to enrich different subcellular compartments according to previously established protocols (Rieder and Emr 2001, Rieder and Emr 2001), with some minor adjustments. First, the yeast cell wall was removed by resuspension of the yeast pellets in 40 mM β-mercaptoethanol and 0.25 mg/ml Zymolyase 100T containing spheroplast buffer (1.4 M sorbitol, 50 mM potassium phosphate KPi [pH 7.5]). The resulting spheroplasts were dissolved in resuspension buffer (0.8 M sorbitol, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM triethanolamine [titrated to pH 7.2 with 80% acetic acid], supplemented with 1 tablet Roche complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor per 100 ml) and lysed by repetitive pipetting (10x) through a 10-µl pipette tip attached to a 1-ml pipette tip and incubation on ice for 15 min followed by fractionation by successive differential centrifugation at 4 °C with increasing speed and duration (300 ×g for 4 min; 2000 ×g for 10 min; and 100,000 ×g for 1 h 30 min).  Material from three compartments were saved for downstream N-terminal COFRADIC: i) low-speed pelleted organelle-enriched fraction (P (pellet) 2000 ×g); ii) high-speed pelleted organelle enriched fraction (P 100,000 ×g); and iii) cytosolic fraction (S (soluble fraction) 100,000 ×g). During further sample processing, P 2000 ×g and P 100,000 ×g were each divided into a soluble and less-soluble fraction that were analyzed separately, as performed previously (Aksnes, Van Damme et al. 2015). Samples were subjected to N-terminal COFRADIC analysis to identify Nt-acetylated N-termini and quantify their degree of Nt-acetylation (Van Damme, Hole et al. 2011, Van Damme, Lasa et al. 2012). More specifically, primary free amines modification of the isolated proteomes were in vitro N-acetylated using an N-hydroxysuccinimide ester of 13C2D3-acetate (heavy N-acetylation). While in vitro heavy N-acetylation allows to distinguish between natural and in vitro N-terminal acetylation, it additionally allows to assess the degree or stoichiometry of N-terminal acetylation (Van Damme, Hole et al. 2011). Subsequent steps of the N-terminal COFRADIC procedure were performed as described in (Willems, Ndah et al. 2017). Reverse phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) fractions enriched for protein N-termini were all introduced into the Ultimate 3000 (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) in-line connected to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was performed as described in (Willems, Ndah et al. 2017).

### Data Protocol
Peak lists (MGF format) were created from raw proteomic files using the Mascot Distiller software (version 2.5.0, Matrix Science). Where possible, grouping of spectra with 0.005 Da precursor tolerance was allowed with a maximum intermediate retention time of 30 s and a maximum intermediate scan count of five. There was no de-isotoping and the relative signal-to-noise limit was set at two. These peak lists were then searched with the Mascot search engine (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science). Spectra were searched against the Swiss-Prot database (taxonomy S. cerevisiae, version 20130626). Free amines in all proteome samples were labeled with heavy acetyl isotopes. Lys heavy acetylation (+47.036 Da), Cys carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) and Met oxidation (+15.995 Da) were set as fixed modifications.  Variable modifications included Nt light/heavy acetylation (+42.011 Da or 47.036 Da) and pyro-Glu formation from Gln (-17.026 Da). Mass tolerance on precursor ions was set to 10 ppm (with Mascot’s C13 option set to 1) and on fragment ions to 0.5 Da. Endoproteinase semi-Arg-C/P (Arg-C specificity with Arg-Pro cleavage allowed) was set as enzyme, allowing no missed cleavages. The peptide charge was set to 1+, 2+, 3+ and instrument setting was put to ESI-TRAP. Only N-terminal peptides that were ranked one and scored above the threshold score, set at 99% confidence, have a minimum amino acid length of seven, and which were compliant with the rules of N-terminal acetylation or initiator methionine (iMet) processing were withheld (Helsens, Van Damme et al. 2011). Quantification of the degree of NTA was performed as described previously (Van Damme, Hole et al. 2011). All data management was done in ms_lims (Helsens, Colaert et al. 2010).

### Publication Abstract
N-terminal acetylation is a conserved protein modification among eukaryotes. The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a valuable model system for studying this modification. The bulk of protein N-terminal acetylation in S.&#xa0;cerevisiae is catalyzed by the N-terminal acetyltransferases NatA, NatB, and NatC. Thus far, proteome-wide identification of the in&#xa0;vivo protein substrates of yeast NatA and NatB has been performed by N-terminomics. Here, we used S.&#xa0;cerevisiae deleted for the NatC catalytic subunit Naa30 and identified 57 yeast NatC substrates by N-terminal combined fractional diagonal chromatography analysis. Interestingly, in addition to the canonical N-termini starting with ML, MI, MF, and MW, yeast NatC substrates also included MY, MK, MM, MA, MV, and MS. However, for some of these substrate types, such as MY, MK, MV, and MS, we also uncovered (residual) non-NatC NAT activity, most likely due to the previously established redundancy between yeast NatC and NatE/Naa50. Thus, we have revealed a complex interplay between different NATs in targeting methionine-starting N-termini in yeast. Furthermore, our results showed that ectopic expression of human NAA30 rescued known NatC phenotypes in naa30&#x394; yeast, as well as partially restored the yeast NatC Nt-acetylome. Thus, we demonstrate an evolutionary conservation of NatC from yeast to human thereby underpinning future disease models to study pathogenic NAA30 variants. Overall, this work offers increased biochemical and functional insights into NatC-mediated N-terminal acetylation and provides a basis for future work to pinpoint the specific molecular mechanisms that link the lack of NatC-mediated N-terminal acetylation to phenotypes of NatC deletion yeast.

### Keywords
N-alpha-acetyltransferase 30 (naa30), N-terminomics., Natc, N-terminal acetylation, N-terminal acetylome, N-terminal cofradic, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Medical Protein Chemistry
iRIP Unit, Laboratory of Microbiology, Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Ghent University, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
An Staes

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Van Damme
iRIP Unit, Laboratory of Microbiology, Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Ghent University, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium


