### Accession
PXD011254

### Title
LOPIT-DC subcellular map of U-2 OS cells

### Description
Generation of a high-resolution subcellular localisation map for the proteome of the human cancer cell line U-2 OS, using the newly developed LOPIT-DC method. Comparison of the results generated using LOPIT-DC with data generated using the well-established hyperLOPIT method and data mining regarding multi-localising proteins, signalling pathways, isoforms and large protein complexes. Integration of the two methods using transfer learning.

### Sample Protocol
Subcellular fractionation using subsequent steps of differential centrifugation, followed by TMT-labelling of peptides and SPS-MS3 mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer v1.4, pRoloc R-based analysis suite.

### Publication Abstract
The study of protein localisation has greatly benefited from high-throughput methods utilising cellular fractionation and proteomic profiling. Hyperplexed Localisation of Organelle Proteins by Isotope Tagging (hyperLOPIT) is a well-established method in this area. It achieves high-resolution separation of organelles and subcellular compartments but is relatively time- and resource-intensive. As a simpler alternative, we here develop Localisation of Organelle Proteins by Isotope Tagging after Differential ultraCentrifugation (LOPIT-DC) and compare this method to the density gradient-based hyperLOPIT approach. We confirm that high-resolution maps can be obtained using differential centrifugation down to the suborganellar and protein complex level. HyperLOPIT and LOPIT-DC yield highly similar results, facilitating the identification of isoform-specific localisations and high-confidence localisation assignment for proteins in suborganellar structures, protein complexes and signalling pathways. By combining both approaches, we present a comprehensive high-resolution dataset of human protein localisations and deliver a flexible set of protocols for subcellular proteomics.

### Keywords
Cancer subcellular map, Spatial proteomics, Hyperlopit, Lopit-dc

### Affiliations
University of Cambridge, Cambridge Centre for Proteomics
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Aikaterini Geladaki

### Lab Head
Dr Kathryn Lilley
University of Cambridge, Cambridge Centre for Proteomics


