### Accession
PXD045481

### Title
Impact of media supplementation on a transcriptional activity of porcine embryos produced in vitro

### Description
The production of embryos in vitro caused a revolution in the field of assisted reproduction technologies, which currently allows the manipulation and selection of embryos before implantation. One of the key aspects of this process is the maturation of oocytes in a controlled in vitro environment. In this article, we focused on the impact of precisely chemically modified FLI maturation medium and its potential in improving the efficiency of in vitro production of porcine embryos. Based on our findings, we demonstrated the positive influence of FLI medium in the evaluation of in vitro maturation, in vitro embryo production, EGA detection, transcriptomic profile and proteomic analysis, which was confirmed by the positive activation of the embryonal genome in the 4blastoembry stage of parthenogenetically activated embryos.

### Sample Protocol
For the nano HPLC-Chip-MS/MS analysis, samples of 20 matured oocytes from DMEM and FLI media were used. Oocytes in each group were lysed in 200 μL of SDT lysis buffer. Immediately after lysis, samples were cooled down to 4 °C and centrifuged at 16 000 x g for 5 min. The supernatant was transferred to 3 kDa molecular weight cut-off filter plates (Amicon Ultra-0.5 ml 3K, Millipore) and spun at 14 000 x g for 40 min. For the extraction of tryptic peptides from the complex protein mixture, a modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol was used according to 20. Detergent removal by buffer exchange was performed in two sequential washes of filter plates with 200 µL of 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5 (UA), each followed by centrifugation at 14 000 x g for 40 min. Flow-through was removed from the collection tubes. Proteins were then alkylated in 100 µL of 0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA by mixing at 600 rpm in a thermo-mixer for 1 min and incubating without mixing for 20 min. After centrifugation at 14 000 x g for 30 min, two additional washes using 100 µL of 0.05 M NH4HCO3, with 10 min at 14 000 x g after each wash, were included to remove excess urea and prepare the proteins for digestion. Protein digestion was performed by adding 2 µg of trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega) in 0.05 M NH4HCO3 and incubating at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were recovered by spinning the filter plates upside down at 14 000 x g for 40 min. The mixture was vacuum dried and the pellet was resuspended in 50 µL of mobile phase (97% water, 3% acetonitrile).

### Data Protocol
The tryptic peptides were loaded into the 40 nL enrichment column (filled with Zorbax SB C18, 5 μm) of an Agilent 1260 ChipCube MS Interface by an Agilent 1260 Capillary Pump (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, USA). After loading and desalting of the sample in the chip enrichment column peptides were eluted in a forward flush and transferred to the analytical column at a flow rate of 600 nL/min by an Agilent 1260 Nano pump with an increasing percentage of organic phase. The mobile phase consisted of an aqueous (A) or acetonitrile (B) solution of formic acid (0.1%, v/v). The chromatographic separation was achieved with a gradient elution using the following sequence: 0 min, 3% B; 2 min, 3% B; 25 min, 50% B; 30 min, 50% B; 35 min, 95% B; 40 min, 95% B; 45 min, 3% B followed by a post-period of 10 min for column re-equilibration. The analytical column was connected to a Q-TOF Agilent 6500 Series mass spectrometer. A 1750V tension was applied to the electrodes of the nanospray ionization chamber. High-purity nitrogen (99.99999%) was used as the collision gas and the collision energy was settled as a function of the precursor ion mass and charge. MS/MS spectra were acquired by automatic switching between MS and MS/MS mode (auto MS/MS mode). Acquired MS/MS data were analyzed using the SpectrumMill search engine (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, USA). Database searches were performed against the self-built database from the UniProt porcine proteome (UP000008227). The following autovalidation criteria of SpectrumMill software were used to validate the identified proteins and peptides: the minimum score for proteins was 10 and minimum scores for spectra resulting from fragmentation of 2+, 3+, and 4+ precursor ions were 8, 7 and 9, respectively, with a scored peak intensity value of at least 60%. The subject of proteomic analysis was the comparison of proteomic profiles of oocytes maturated in two different culture media, DMEM and FLI. A group of 20 oocytes from each media was used for analysis. Assays were performed in 4 replicates. In the DMEM experimental group, we identified 82 proteins, in the FLI group, 53 proteins were detected and 29 proteins were common.  Identified proteins were divided into 3 groups depending on their biological activity and molecular function described in the UniProt database. In the first group (GE), proteins involved in gene expression (DNA replication, transcription, translation, etc.) were selected. The second group of proteins (CM) consisted of cytoskeletal and microtubular proteins, as well as proteins involved in meiotic spindle formation. In the third group (ZP), zona pellucida proteins were enlisted.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dmem, Porcine, Fli, Oocyte, Maturation medium

### Affiliations
Department of Zoology and Anthropology, Faculty of Natural Sciences and Informatics, Constantine the Philosopher University in Nitra
Constantine teh Philosopher University in Nitra
Faculty of Natural Sciences and Informatics
Department of Zoology and Anthropology

### Submitter
Martin Morovic

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Morovic
Department of Zoology and Anthropology, Faculty of Natural Sciences and Informatics, Constantine the Philosopher University in Nitra


