### Accession
PXD022561

### Title
Multi-omics profiling of human pancreatic islet dysregulation from normoglycemia to type 2 diabetes

### Description
Type-2 diabetes (T2D) mellitus results from a complex interplay of genetic and environmental factors leading to deficient insulin secretion from pancreatic islet beta cells. Here, we provide a the first comprehensive study of the human islet state of metabolically profiled pancreatectomized living human donors in relationship to glycemic control integrating clinical traits with multiple in situ islet and pre-operative blood omics datasets across the glycemia continuum from non diabetic healthy to overt T2D levels. Our transcriptomics and proteomics data suggest that progressive dysregulation of islet gene expression associated with increasing glucose intolerance is a disharmonic process resembling a non-linear trajectory of mature beta cell states towards  trans-differentiation. Furthermore, we identify a unique islet gene set altered already in early-onset glucose intolerance and that, which correlates well across HbA1c levels - the gold-standard in clinical monitoring. Our findings reach beyond conventional clinical thresholds and can serve as direct or indirect prognostic markers for beta cell failure.

### Sample Protocol
Pooled pancreatic islet cells with an approximate surface area of 80,000 μm2 were collected via Laser Capture Microdissection (LCM) onto adhesive cap tubes. Isolates were reconstituted in a 20 µl lysis buffer (PreOmics, Germany) and transferred into PCR tubes. Samples were boiled at 95°C for 1min to denature proteins and reduce and alkylate cysteines without shaking in a thermocycler (Eppendorf GmbH) followed by sonication at maximum power (Bioruptor, Diagenode, Belgium) for 10 cycles of 30sec sonication and 30sec cooldown each. Sample liquid was briefly spun down and boiled again for 10min without shaking. 20µl of 100mM TrisHCl pH 8.5 (1:1 v/v) and 20ng Trypsin/LysC were added to each sample, followed by overnight digestion at 30°C without shaking. Next day, 40µl 99% Isopropanol 5% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (1:1 v/v) was added to the solution and mixed by sonication. Samples were then subjected to stage-tip cleanup via styrenedivinylbenzene reversed-phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS). Sample liquid was loaded on one 14-gauge stage-tip plug. Peptides were cleaned up with 2x200µl 99% Isopropanol 5% TFA and 2x200µl 99% ddH2O 5% TFA in an in-house made Stage-tip centrifuge at 2,000xg, followed by elution in 40µl 80% Acetonitrile, 5% Ammonia and dried at 45°C in a SpeedVac centrifuge (Eppendorf, Concentrator plus) according to the ‘in-StageTip’ protocol (PreOmics, Germany). Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% TFA, 2% ACN, 97.9% ddH2O.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against the human Uniprot databases (UP000005640_9606.fa, UP000005640_9606_additional.fa) MaxQuant (Version 1.6.7), which extracts features from four-dimensional isotope patterns and associated MS/MS spectra7. False-discovery rates were controlled at 1% both on peptide spectral match (PSM) and protein level. Peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids were considered for the search including N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, while limiting the maximum peptide mass to 4,600 Da. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin cleaving c-terminal to arginine and lysine. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Maximum precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance were searched as default for TIMS-DDA data, while the main search peptide tolerance was set to 20ppm. The median absolute mass deviation for the data was 0.68ppm. Peptide identifications by MS/MS were transferred by matching four-dimensional isotope patterns between the runs with a 0.7-min retention-time match window and a 0.05 1/K0 ion mobility window3. Label-free quantification was performed with the MaxLFQ algorithm and a minimum ratio count of 14.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Type ii diabetes, Systems biology, Proteomics, Multiomics, Pancrease

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Dept. Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Dept. Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


