### Accession
PXD023818

### Title
Label-Free Phosphoproteomics Profiling of Fission Yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe

### Description
The phosphorylation of proteins modulates various functions of proteins and plays an important role in regulation of cell signaling. In the recent years, the label-free quantitative (LFQ) phos-phoproteomics has become the powerful tool to analyze the phosphorylation of proteins within the complex samples. Despite the great progress, the studies of protein phosphorylations are still limited in throughput, robustness, and reproducibility, hampering analyses that involve multiple perturbations, such as those needed to follow the dynamics of phosphoproteomes. To address these challenges, we introduce here the LFQ phosphoproteomics workflow that is based on Fe-IMAC phosphopeptide enrichment followed by strong anion exchange (SAX) and porous graphitic carbon (PGC) fractionation strategies. We applied this workflow to analyze the whole-cell phosphoproteome of the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Using the strategy, we identified 8353 phosphosites from which 1274 were newly identified. This provides the sig-nificant addition to the S. pombe phosphoproteome. Results of our study highlight that combining of PGC and SAX fractionation strategies substantially increases the robustness and specificity of LFQ phosphoproteomics. Overall, the presented LFQ phosphoproteomics workflow opens the door for studies that would get better insight into the complexity of the protein kinase functions of the fission yeast S. pombe.

### Sample Protocol
The overnight culture of the fission yeast S. pombe was grown at 25°C till OD660=0.8. The cells were collected by filtration, washed once with 100 mL ice-cold milli-Q H2O, and immediately frozen in a liquid nitrogen. The yeast cell powders were made by grinding yeast cells in cryogenic grinder SPEX 6770 Freezer/Mill. One gram of the yeast cell powder was lysed in 1.5 mL ice-cold lysis buffer (8 M urea, 25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.5 and 150 mM NaCl) in the presence of phosphatase inhibitors (2.5 mM β-glycerol phosphate, 1 mM KF, 1 mM Na3VO4, and 1 mM Na2H2P2O7), or in 1.5 mL ice-cold 0.5% sodium deoxycholate buffer. The samples were reduced and alkylated. After five-fold dilution with 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5, TPCK trypsin was added (1:30, w/w) and incubated 16 hours at 37°C followed. The digestion was stopped by addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were oxidized with 200 mM H2O2 and incubated for 30 min at 30°C. The samples were then centrifuged at 14100g for 5 min and the peptides were desalted using C18 SPE. The desalted eluates were dried by vacuum centrifugation and peptides were precipitated with ethyl acetate and dried repetitively.  Fe-IMAC Column Phosphopeptide Enrichment For phosphopeptide enrichment, the sample was dissolved in 1 mL of Fe-IMAC solvent A (30% ACN, 0,07% (v/v) TFA) and loaded onto a Fe-IMAC column (9x50 mm ProPac IMAC-10) connected to an FPLC chromatographic system (NGC Discover 100 Pro). Prior to use, the column was charged with iron ions. The flow rate of the system was 1 mL/min. After column connection to the FPLC sys-tem and initial equilibration for 9 min, the samples were applied (20 min run) and un-bound peptides were washed out with Fe-IMAC solvent A for 32 min. Subsequently, phosphopeptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 0% to 45% Fe-IMAC solvent B (0,5% (v/v) NH4OH) for 48 min. After increase to 100% Fe-IMAC solvent B and a 5-min holding step, the column was re-equilibrated with Fe-IMAC solvent A for 32 min. Fractions were collected according to the UV signal (280 nm), and the concentration of pep-tides in individual fractions was measured by spectrophotometer DS-11. The fractions were dried by vacuum centrifugation and dissolved in 1 ml of 1% TFA.  Porous Graphitic Carbon Separation For separation of phosphopeptides to fractions, an analytical column (Hypercarb Porous Graphite Carbon LC column, 2.1x100 mm) connected to an HPLC chromatographic system (Accela LC system) was used. The flow rate of the system was 150 μL/min. After equilibration for 3 min with 100% solvent A (0,1% TFA), the samples were applied to the column and unbound peptides were washed out with 100% solvent A for 3 min, followed by elution with a linear gradient from 0% to 100% solvent B (100% Acetonitrile) for 27 min. After increase to 100% solvent B and a 10-min holding step, the col-umn was washed out with solvent C (95% methanol) for 3 min. The fractions were collected in 1-min intervals. Based on the chromatogram, the sample was divided into 8 fractions, dried by vacuum centrifugation, and measured.  Hydrophilic Strong Anion Exchange Separation For hydrophilic strong anion exchange (hSAX) separation, the Accela LC system equipped with a ProPac SAX-10 LC column (4x250 mm) was used. The samples were dissolved in 100 μL of hSAX solvent A (5 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5). The flow rate of the system was 1 mL/min. After the samples application and subsequent equilibration with hSAX solvent A (3 min), peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 0% to 40% hSAX solvent B (5mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, 1 M NaCl) for 17 min. After elution, hSAX solvent B was increased to 100% (10 min) and held constant for 10 min. A switch to 100% hSAX solvent A for 3 min was followed by column re-equilibration with 100% solvent A for 10 min. The fractions were collected in 1-min intervals. Based on the chromatogram, the sample was divided into 9 fractions which were desalted using C18 SPE, dried by vacuum centrifugation, and measured.  LC-MS/MS analysis LC-MS/MS analysis of phosphopeptides was performed on LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer equipped with Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC system and nano-spray source. Phosphopeptides were redissolved in 2% ACN/0,1% TFA and loaded onto a trap column (μ-Precolumn, 300-μm i.d. x 5mm, C18 PepMap 100, 5 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min in 100% solvent A (0.05% TFA, 2% ACN in MS-grade water). The phosphopeptides were then transferred to an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC Column, 0.075x500 mm) and separated using a concave gradient from 4% to 50% solvent B (0.08% FA, 80% ACN in MS-grade H2O) at a flow rate of 0.300 μL/min. The peptides were ionized using 2.3-kV spray voltage and capillary temperature of 250°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode using the Top15 strategy for the selection of precursor ions for the HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
he resulting raw data files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) with a built-in Andromeda search engine. The search was performed against the target-decoy version of the Schizosaccharomyces pombe UP2485 proteome FASTA (UniProt). The specific parameters for searching were: carbamidomethyl (C) and oxidation (M) as a fixed modification; N-terminal Acetylation (protein N-term) and phosphorylation (STY) as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme, the maximum number of missed cleavage sites permitted was two and the minimum peptide length required was six. The false discovery rate (FDR) of identification was estimated by searching a da-tabase with reversed sequences. The peptide and protein FDRs were all set to 0.01. The statistical analysis of MaxQuant output tables was performed by the Perseus software platform (version 1.5.5.3). Output tables from MaxQuant with protein groups and phosphosites were loaded, data were filtered for the reverse peptides, the contaminants, the peptides identified only by the site (protein groups), and for the localization probability of phosphosite greater than 75% (phosphosites). Also filtering for valid values was implemented. For further analysis, three valid values were needed in at least one group (PGC or SAX). After that, the visualization tools, such as Histogram, MultiScatter plot, Numeric Venn diagrams, and Principal Component Analysis, were used. Missing values were then replaced with downshift 1,8 and width 0,3. For the statistical analysis, following tests were used: ANOVA test (Use for truncation: Permutation-based FDR, FDR value: 0,01), Fisher exact test (Use for truncation: Benjamini-Hochberg FDR, Threshold value: 0,02) and Volcano plot with T-test (FDR value: 0,01 and S0 value: 2).

### Publication Abstract
The phosphorylation of proteins modulates various functions of proteins and plays an important role in the regulation of cell signaling. In recent years, label-free quantitative (LFQ) phosphoproteomics has become a powerful tool to analyze the phosphorylation of proteins within complex samples. Despite the great progress, the studies of protein phosphorylation are still limited in throughput, robustness, and reproducibility, hampering analyses that involve multiple perturbations, such as those needed to follow the dynamics of phosphoproteomes. To address these challenges, we introduce here the LFQ phosphoproteomics workflow that is based on Fe-IMAC phosphopeptide enrichment followed by strong anion exchange (SAX) and porous graphitic carbon (PGC) fractionation strategies. We applied this workflow to analyze the whole-cell phosphoproteome of the fission yeast <i>Schizosaccharomyces pombe</i>. Using this strategy, we identified 8353 phosphosites from which 1274 were newly identified. This provides a significant addition to the <i>S. pombe</i> phosphoproteome. The results of our study highlight that combining of PGC and SAX fractionation strategies substantially increases the robustness and specificity of LFQ phosphoproteomics. Overall, the presented LFQ phosphoproteomics workflow opens the door for studies that would get better insight into the complexity of the protein kinase functions of the fission yeast <i>S. pombe</i>.

### Keywords
Lfq phosphoproteomics, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Sax, Pgc

### Affiliations
Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences
Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia

### Submitter
Peter Barath

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Barath
Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia


