### Accession
PXD010237

### Title
S-Trap is an ultrafast sample preparation approach for shotgun proteomics

### Description
The success of shotgun proteomic analysis depends largely on how samples are prepared. Current approaches such as gel-, solution- or filter-based, although being extensively employed in the field, are time-consuming and less effective with respect to the repetitive sample processing, recovery, and overall yield. As an alternative, suspension trapping (S-Trap) filter is commercially available very recently in the format of single or 96-well filter plate. In contrast to conventional filter aided sample preparation (FASP) approach, which utilizes a molecular weight cutoff (MWCO) membrane as the filter and requires hours of processing before digestion-ready proteins can be obtained, S-Trap employs a three-dimensional porous material as filter media, and traps particulate protein suspension with subsequent depletion of interfering substances and in-filter digestion. Due to the large (sub-micron) pore size, each centrifugation cycle of S-Trap filter only takes around 1 minute, which significantly reduces the total processing time from approximately 3 hours by FASP to less than 15 minutes, suggesting an ultrafast sample preparation approach for shotgun proteomics. Here, for the first time, we comprehensively evaluate the performance of individual S-Trap filter and 96-well filter plate in the context of global protein identification and quantitation using whole cell lysate and clinically relevant sputum samples.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysate samples were digested using S-Trap, FASP and PVDF methods; LCMS/MS experiments were performed using Q Exactive (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo) and MaxQuant software suite.

### Publication Abstract
The success of shotgun proteomic analysis depends largely on how samples are prepared. Current approaches (such as those that are gel-, solution-, or filter-based), although being extensively employed in the field, are time-consuming and less effective with respect to the repetitive sample processing, recovery, and overall yield. As an alternative, the suspension trapping (S-Trap) filter has been commercially available very recently in the format of a single or 96-well filter plate. In contrast to the conventional filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) approach, which utilizes a molecular weight cut-off (MWCO) membrane as the filter and requires hours of processing before digestion-ready proteins can be obtained, the S-Trap employs a three-dimensional porous material as filter media and traps particulate protein suspensions with the subsequent depletion of interfering substances and in-filter digestion. Due to the large (submicron) pore size, each centrifugation cycle of the S-Trap filter only takes 1 min, which significantly reduces the total processing time from approximately 3 h by FASP to less than 15 min, suggesting an ultrafast sample-preparation approach for shotgun proteomics. Here, we comprehensively evaluate the performance of the individual S-Trap filter and 96-well filter plate in the context of global protein identification and quantitation using whole-cell lysate and clinically relevant sputum samples.

### Keywords
Proteomics; sample preparation; fasp; suspension trapping; klebsiella pneumoniae; sputum; tuberculosis.

### Affiliations
University of Delaware
J. Craig Venter Institute, 9605 Medical Center Drive, Rockville, Maryland

### Submitter
Yanbao Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Yanbao Yu
J. Craig Venter Institute, 9605 Medical Center Drive, Rockville, Maryland


