### Accession
PXD021602

### Title
Cell type-selective secretome profiling in vivo

### Description
Secreted polypeptides are a fundamental biochemical axis of intercellular and endocrine communication. However, a global understanding of composition and dynamics of cellular secretomes in intact mammalian organisms has been lacking. Here, we introduce a proximity biotinylation strategy that enables labeling, detection, and enrichment of secreted polypeptides in a cell type-selective manner in mice. We generate a proteomic atlas of hepatocyte, myocyte, pericyte, and myeloid cell secretomes by direct purification of biotinylated secreted polypeptides from blood. Our secretome dataset validates known cell type-protein pairs, reveals secreted polypeptides that distinguish between cell types, and identifies new cellular sources for classical plasma proteins. Lastly, we uncover a dynamic and previously undescribed nutrient-dependent reprogramming of the hepatocyte secretome characterized by increased unconventional secretion of the cytosolic enzyme BHMT. This secretome profiling strategy enables dynamic and cell-type dissection of the plasma proteome and the secreted polypeptides that mediate intercellular signaling.

### Sample Protocol
60 μl of eluted and boiled streptavidin-purified plasma samples were cooled to room temperature for 3 min and digested using a mini S-trap protocol provided by the manufacturer (Protifi), described as follows44. Cysteines were alkylated using iodoacetamide (Sigma A3221) added to a final concentration of 30 mM and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Samples were acidified with phosphoric acid (to 1.2% final volume, vortexed to mix) and 420 μl 100 mM TEAB in 90% MeOH was added to each. Samples were loaded onto micro S-trap columns, flow through was discarded, and the centrifugation step was repeated until all the solution passed through the column. Following washing with 100 mM TEAB in 90% methanol, 1 μg trypsin (Promega) was added to the S-trap for 90 minutes at 47 °C. After trypsinization, peptides were eluted from S-traps with 50 mM TEAB (40 μl), 0.2% formic acid (40 μl), 50% acetonitrile + 0.2% formic acid (40 μl), and a last wash of 0.2% formic acid in water (40 μl) by centrifugation at 1,000 x g for 60 s. Eluted peptide samples were lyophilized, resuspend in 0.2% formic acid and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS. All samples were resuspended in 20 μl 0.2% formic acid in water and 5 μl were injected on column for each sample. Peptides were separated over a 50 cm EasySpray reversed phase LC column (75 µm inner diameter packed with 2 μm, 100 Å, PepMap C18 particles, ThermoFisher). The mobile phases (A: water with 0.2% formic acid and B: acetonitrile with 0.2% formic acid) were driven and controlled by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RPLC nano system (ThermoFisher). An integrated loading pump was used to load peptides onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 5 um particles, 20 mm length, ThermoFisher) at 5 µL/min, which was put in line with the analytical column 6 minutes into the gradient for the total protein samples. Gradient elution was performed at 300 nL/min. The gradient increased from 0% to 5% B over the first 6 minutes of the analysis, followed by an increase from 5% to 25% B from 6 to 86 minutes, an increase from 25% to 90% B from 86 to 94 minutes, isocratic flow at 90% B from 94 to 102 minutes, and a re-equilibration at 0% for 18 minutes for a total analysis time of 120 minutes. Precursors were ionized using an EASY-Spray ionization source (ThermoFisher) source held at +2.2 kV compared to ground, and the column was held at 45 °C. The inlet capillary temperature was held at 275 °C. Survey scans of peptide precursors were collected in the Orbitrap from 350-1500 Th with an AGC target of 1,000,000, a maximum injection time of 50 ms, and a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z. Monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled for peptide isotopic distributions, precursors of z = 2-5 were selected for data-dependent MS/MS scans for 2 seconds of cycle time, and dynamic exclusion was set to 45 seconds with a ±10 ppm window set around the precursor monoisotope. An isolation window of 0.7 Th was used to select precursor ions with the quadrupole. MS/MS scans were collected using HCD at 30 normalized collision energy (nce) with an AGC target of 50,000 and a maximum injection time of 54 ms. Mass analysis was performed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z and an automatically determined mass range.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant45 version 1.6.10.43 and tandem mass spectra were searched with the Andromeda search algorithm46. Oxidation of methionine, biotinylation of lysine, and protein N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. 20 ppm, 4.5 ppm, and 20 ppm were used for first search MS1 tolerance, main search MS1 tolerance, and MS2 product ion tolerance, respectively. Cleavage specificity set to Trypsin/P with 2 missed cleavage allowed. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were made against a target-decoy mouse reference proteome database downloaded from Uniprot (17,030 entries). Peptides were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR), two peptides were required for a protein identification, and a 1% protein FDR was applied. Proteins were quantified and normalized using MaxLFQ47 with a label-free quantification (LFQ) minimum ratio count of 2. The match between runs feature was enabled. Quantitative comparisons were performed using Perseus v 1.6.2.248. For quantitative comparisons, protein intensity values were log2 transformed prior to further analysis, proteins with at least two measured values in a condition were retained, and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution with width 0.3 and downshift value of 1.8 (i.e., default values). Significance calculations for pairwise comparisons (Figure 3) were performed using a two-tailed t-test with a permutation-based FDR with 250 randomizations, an FDR of 0.05, and an S0 value of 1. For hierarchical clustering, significance was first determined using ANOVA with a permutation-based FDR with 250 randomizations, an FDR of 0.05, and an S0 value of 1. Only significant hits were retained and were then normalized by Z-score calculations before clustering using Euclidean distance. Gene Ontology (GO) term enrichment for Figure 3 was performed using DAVID49 with a background of 500 mouse plasma proteins50. For calculating tissue expression data from BioGPS (Figure 3), expression profiles across 191 tissues/cells lines that are available in BioGPS were collected for 64 of the 66 enriched proteins in AAV-TBG-Mem and AAV-TBG-ER (two were not available in BioGPS). For each protein, the median expression value across all tissues/cell lines was calculated, as was the total signal observed for a protein (i.e., the sum of signal in all 191 tissues/cells). To generate Figure 3f, the fraction of signal for each of the tissues/cell types for a protein was calculated by dividing the tissue/cell type signal by the total signal observed for that protein. Thus, fractions show proportions between 0 and 1, with numbers closer to 1 indicating more signal in a given tissue/cell type. For Figure 3g, the signal in liver for each protein was compared to that protein’s media expression value across all tissue/cell types. If signal in liver was greater than or equal to the media expression value, that protein was categorized as having a liver annotation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Lc-ms/ms, Mice, Turboid

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Assistant Professor of Pathology Stanford ChEM-H Institute Scholar Stanford University

### Submitter
Nicholas Riley

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan Z. Long
Assistant Professor of Pathology Stanford ChEM-H Institute Scholar Stanford University


