### Accession
PXD038204

### Title
The global downregulation of protein synthesis observed during hepatogenic maturation is associated with a decrease in TOP mRNA translation The global downregulation of protein synthesis observed during hepatogenic maturation is associated with a decrease in TOP mRNA translation

### Description
Translational regulation is of paramount importance for proteome remodeling during stem cell differentiation both at the global and transcript-specific levels. In this study, we characterized translational remodeling during hepatogenic differentiation of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) by polysome profiling. We demonstrate that protein synthesis increases during exit from pluripotency, and is then globally repressed during later steps of hepatogenic maturation. This global downregulation of translation is accompanied by a decrease in the protein abundance of components of the translation machinery, which involves a global reduction in translational efficiency of terminal oligopyrimidine tract (TOP) mRNA encoding translation-related factors. Despite global translational repression during hepatogenic differentiation, key hepatogenic genes remain efficiently translated, and the translation of several transcripts involved in hepato-specific functions and metabolic maturation are even induced. We conclude that, during hepatogenic differentiation, a global decrease in protein synthesis is accompanied by a specific translational rewiring of hepato-specific transcripts.

### Sample Protocol
Hepatogenic differentiation 52.103 cells/cm2 were seeded on Growth Factor reduced Matrigel coated surfaces in culture medium supplemented with 10M ROCK inhibitor Y27632 for the first 24h. Cells were then cultivated in regular culture medium for an additional 24h until colonies reach 80% confluency. Standard differentiation was conducted by incubating cells with Liver Differentiation Medium (LDM: 57% DMEM LG, 40% MCDB Water pH 7.2, 1% Penicillin streptomycin, 0.1μM L-ascorbic acid, 0.25x ITS, 0.25x LA-BSA, 50μM B-mercaptoethanol, 1μM Dexamethasone) supplemented with the corresponding cytokine cocktails and supplements: 50ng/ml Activin A, 50ng/ml WNT3a and 0.6% DMSO from  D0 to D2, 50ng/ml Activin A and 0.6% DMSO from D2 to D4, 50ng/ml BMP4 and 0.6% DMSO from D4 to D8, 20ng/ml aFGF and 0.6% DMSO from D8 to D12, 20ng/ml HGF and 2% DMSO from D12 to D20. For HC3X differentiation, LDM-AA was prepared by supplementing 100ml LDM with 16ml MEM-NEAA and 8ml MEM-AA prior pH7.2 adjustment and used from D12 to D14 medium change. LDM-AAGLY was prepared by supplementing LDM-AA with 20g/l glycine and used from D14 onward. LDM, LDM-AA, and LDM-AAGLY were then supplemented with the same cytokine cocktails and supplement as for standard differentiation including doxycycline for the induction of HC3X transgenes (HNF1, PROX1, FOXA3) from D4 onward (2% DMSO was omitted in LDM-AAGLY medium from D14-D20 in HC3X differentiation). Media were replaced every other day during the 20 days of differentiation for both protocols. Label-free mass spectrometry analysis For proteomic analysis, cells were lysed as mentioned in “Western blot analysis”. Lysates were prepared by a modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol (Distler et al., 2014; Wiśniewski, Zougman, Nagaraj, & Mann, 2009) using modified trypsin (Promega V511A 11439101) on microcon filters (Millipore Microcon 30 MRCFOR030 Ultracel PL-30). The digest was analyzed using nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS tims TOF Pro (Bruker) coupled with an UHPLC nanoElute (Bruker). For peptide separation, a 25cm C18 column with integrated CaptiveSpray insert (Aurora, Ionopticks) was used using 0.1% formic acid H2O as liquid chromatography mobile phase A and 0.1% formic acid Acetonitrile as phase B. The digest (1 µl) was injected, and the organic content of the mobile phase was increased linearly from 2% B to 15 % in 60 min, from 15 % B to 25% in 30 min, from 25% B to 37 % in 10 min and from 37% B to 95% in 5 min. Data acquisition on the tims TOF Pro was performed using Hystar 5.1 and timsControl 2.0. tims TOF Pro data were acquired using 160 ms TIMS accumulation time, mobility (1/K0) range from 0.7 to 1.4 Vs/cm².  Mass-spectrometric analysis were carried out using the parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) acquisition method (Meier et al., 2015). One MS spectra followed by six PASEF MSMS spectra per total cycle of 1.16 s. Two injections per sample were done.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using PEAKS Studio X Pro with ion mobility module and Q module for label-free quantification (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON). Protein identification parameters were set to 15ppm for parent mass error tolerance and 0.05 Da as fragment mass error tolerance. The peak lists were searched against the Homo Sapiens taxonomy with isoforms from UNIREF 100 (173190 sequences). Peptide spectrum matches and protein identifications were normalized to less than 1.0% false discovery rate. For the quantitation, mass error and ion mobility tolerance were set respectively to 15 ppm and 0.08 1/k0. ANOVA was used as the significance testing method. Modified peptides were excluded and only proteins with at least two peptides were used for the quantitation. Total ion current was used to calculate the normalization factors.

### Publication Abstract
Translational regulation is of paramount importance for proteome remodeling during stem cell differentiation at both the global and the transcript-specific levels. In this study, we characterized translational remodeling during hepatogenic differentiation of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) by polysome profiling. We demonstrate that protein synthesis increases during exit from pluripotency and is then globally repressed during later steps of hepatogenic maturation. This global downregulation of translation is accompanied by a decrease in the abundance of protein components of the translation machinery, which involves a global reduction in translational efficiency of&#xa0;terminal oligopyrimidine tract (TOP) mRNA encoding translation-related factors. Despite global translational repression during hepatogenic differentiation, key hepatogenic genes remain efficiently translated, and the translation of several transcripts involved in hepatospecific functions and metabolic maturation is even induced. We conclude that, during hepatogenic differentiation, a global decrease in protein synthesis is accompanied by a specific translational rewiring of hepatospecific transcripts.

### Keywords
Hepatocyte differentiation, Stem cells, Top mrna, Translational regulation

### Affiliations
University of Namur - Narilis - URBC 61 rue de Bruxelles 5000 Namur Belgium
University of Namur - MaSUN

### Submitter
Marc Dieu

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Patricia Renard
University of Namur - Narilis - URBC 61 rue de Bruxelles 5000 Namur Belgium


