### Accession
PXD035798

### Title
Chronic stress targets mitochondrial respiratory efficiency in the skeletal muscle of C57BL/6 mice.

### Description
Episodes of chronic stress can result in psychic disorders like post-traumatic stress disorder, but also promote the development 
of metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes. We hypothesize that muscle, as main regulator of whole-body energy expenditure, 
is a central target of acute and adaptive molecular efects of stress in this context. Here, we investigate the immediate efect 
of a stress period on energy metabolism in Musculus gastrocnemius in our established C57BL/6 chronic variable stress (Cvs) 
mouse model. Cvs decreased lean body mass despite increased energy intake, reduced circadian energy expenditure (EE), 
and substrate utilization. Cvs altered the proteome of metabolic components but not of the oxidative phosphorylation system 
(OXPHOS), or other mitochondrial structural components. Functionally, Cvs impaired the electron transport chain (ETC) 
capacity of complex I and complex II, and reduces respiratory capacity of the ETC from complex I to ATP synthase. Complex I-OXPHOS correlated to diurnal EE and complex II-maximal uncoupled respiration correlated to diurnal and reduced 
nocturnal EE. Bioenergetics assessment revealed higher optimal thermodynamic efciencies (ƞ-opt) of mitochondria via 
complex II after Cvs. Interestingly, transcriptome and methylome were unafected by Cvs, thus excluding major contributions to supposed metabolic adaptation processes. In summary, the preclinical Cvs model shows that metabolic pressure by 
Cvs is initially compensated by adaptation of mitochondria function associated with high thermodynamic efciency and 
decreased EE to manage the energy balance. This counter-regulation of mitochondrial complex II may be the driving force 
to longitudinal metabolic changes of muscle physiological adaptation as the basis of stress memory.

### Sample Protocol
C57BL/6 male mice (12 weeks old) were housed (5-6 animals per cage) within standard laboratory conditions (12h light/12h night cycles, 22-24°C, with ad libitum access to tap water and standard chow food (R/M-H extrudate: 58% carbohydrates, 9% fat, 33% protein; ssniff Spezialdiäten GmbH, Soest, Germany). All procedures were approved (LANUV, NRW, Germany (81-02.04.2017.A421) and carried out in accordance to the ‘Principle of laboratory animal care’ (NIH publication No. 85-23, revised 1996) and the German law on the protection of animals. One group of C57BL/6 animals was exposed to our established chronic stress protocol (Cvs) (PMID: 34624498)). In brief, stressors were: (i) individual caging on a shaker (100 rpm, 1h); (ii) 30 min restrain; (iii) individual caging; without bedding (4°C, 1h) (iv) swimming in warm water (30°C, 20 min); and (v) overnight housing in a large cage. The control group was untreated and only subjected to gentle handling during the weaning and ranking phase until 15 weeks of age. After the mice were sacrificed by CO2 asphyxiation, blood was collected by cardiac puncture, muscle biopsies (m. gastrocnemius) were immediately removed for isolation of mitochondrial fractions. Muscle tissue for methylome and RNA analyses was snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further processing. Muscle mitochondrial fractions were isolated from freshly dissected liver biopsies using differential centrifugation protocol as previously described (PMID: 35743314 ) with modifications according to (PMID:13115340; 25741892) for muscle tissue. Proteome analysis was conducted with the purified mitochondria obtained from discontinuous sucrose gradient centrifugation and subjected to mass spectrometry by LC-MS/MS in a label-free proteome analysis approach with 5 animals per group as previously described (PMID: 32184434).

### Data Protocol
Protein profiling isolated mitochondria was performed using LC-MS instrumentation consisting of an Ultimate 3000 separation liquid chromatography system (Thermofisher Scientific, Germering, Germany) combined with an EASY-spray ion source and Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific) as previously described53. Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap C18-LC-column (ID: 75 μm, 2 cm length; Thermofisher Scientific) and separated via EASY-Spray C18 column (ES802; ID: 75 μm, 25 cm length; Thermofisher Scientific). Each LC-MS run lasted 150 min and MS data were acquired with both data-dependent (DDA) and data-independent (DIA, 34 windows) MS/MS scan approaches. DDA runs were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermofisher Scientific) and Sequest HT search (trypsin digestion, max. 2 miscleavages, 5–144 peptide length, max. 10 peptides per spectrum, carbamidomethylation as static and N-terminal acetylation/methionine oxidation as dynamic modifications) against the SwissProt FASTA database (Mus musculus).

### Publication Abstract
Episodes of chronic stress can result in psychic disorders like post-traumatic stress disorder, but also promote the development of metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes. We hypothesize that muscle, as main regulator of whole-body energy expenditure, is a central target of acute and adaptive molecular effects of stress in this context. Here, we investigate the immediate effect of a stress period on energy metabolism in Musculus gastrocnemius in our established C57BL/6 chronic variable stress (Cvs) mouse model. Cvs decreased lean body mass despite increased energy intake, reduced circadian energy expenditure (EE), and substrate utilization. Cvs altered the proteome of metabolic components but not of the oxidative phosphorylation system (OXPHOS), or other mitochondrial structural components. Functionally, Cvs impaired the electron transport chain (ETC) capacity of complex I and complex II, and reduces respiratory capacity of the ETC from complex I to ATP synthase. Complex I-OXPHOS correlated to diurnal EE and complex II-maximal uncoupled respiration correlated to diurnal and reduced nocturnal EE. Bioenergetics assessment revealed higher optimal thermodynamic efficiencies (&#x19e;-opt) of mitochondria via complex II after Cvs. Interestingly, transcriptome and methylome were unaffected by Cvs, thus excluding major contributions to supposed metabolic adaptation processes. In summary, the preclinical Cvs model shows that metabolic pressure by Cvs is initially compensated by adaptation of mitochondria function associated with high thermodynamic efficiency and decreased EE to manage the energy balance. This counter-regulation of mitochondrial complex II may be the driving force to longitudinal metabolic changes of muscle physiological adaptation as the basis of stress memory.

### Keywords
Mouse, Mitochondrial function, Isolated mitochondria, Chronic variable stress, Gastrocnemius muscle

### Affiliations
 Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry
German Diabetes Center (DDZ)
Leibniz Center for Diabetes Research 
at Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf

Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry, German Diabetes center (DDZ), Leibniz Center for Diabetes Research at the Heinrich-Heine University Duesseldorf, Germany

### Submitter
Birgit Knebel

### Lab Head
Dr Birgit Knebel
Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry, German Diabetes center (DDZ), Leibniz Center for Diabetes Research at the Heinrich-Heine University Duesseldorf, Germany


