### Accession
PXD023167

### Title
Systematic profiling of protein complex dynamics reveals DNA-PK phosphorylation of IFI16 en route to herpesvirus immunity

### Description
Rapid and dynamically shifting protein-protein interactions (PPIs) underlie the capacity of cells to recognize viral infections and ignite the downstream cascades that constitute the innate-immune response. Herpesviruses share an ancient history of coevolution with their hosts and have developed reciprocal methods to suppress or hijack immune response proteins — underscoring the biological complexity of host-pathogen interactions during the immune response. Accordingly, conventional approaches to studying PPIs downstream of innate immune sensing fail to capture both the global scope and the dynamic on-off behavior of protein complexes as they are altered throughout cellular space and time. To overcome this barrier, we have applied Thermal Proteome Profiling Mass Spectrometry (TPP-MS) to systemically characterize PPIs that coordinate the innate-immune response to Herpes Simplex Virus 1 (HSV-1) infection in primary human fibroblasts. Further, by advancing the power of thermal protein co ggregation analysis (TPCA) to infer associations de novo and to globally track these PPIs, we developed a time-resolved portrait of cellular and viral protein associations with IFI16, a nuclear DNA sensor that serves as a central platform for HSV-1 immune responses. Our TPCA analysis, along with high-resolution microscopy and molecular virological techniques, linked IFI16 sensing of viral DNA in the nuclear periphery to the master DNA damage response (DDR) regulatory kinase, DNA-PK — the activation of which we show to be necessary for the antiviral and inflammatory responses to infection. Finally, phospho-peptide enrichment and MS analysis of DNA-PK substrates revealed IFI16 to be targeted by DNA-PK after both DNA damage and viral infection. Functional analysis of this DDR-dependent IFI16 phosphorylation revealed the specific modified residue required for IFI16-driven cytokine responses.  Altogether, our study represents the first systems-wide characterization of the global dynamics of PPIs during HSV-1 infection and uncovers a missing link in the immune signaling pathway that places IFI16 and DNA-PK at the center of herpesvirus innate immunity.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to collection, 2 x 106 HFF cells were either infected (at MOI 5 PFU/cell) or left uninfected and collected at indicated timepoints. Cells were suspended in 1X PBS, washed, pelleted, and 50 µL of cell suspension was aliquoted into 10 PCR tubes. Cells were subjected to heat denaturation at 10 temperatures ranging from 37°C to 64°C at 3°C intervals with a thermal cycler. Cells were sheared with a syringe needle, heat denatured proteins were pelleted by centrifugation, and the soluble proteins were reduced and alkylated followed by trypsin digestion. Peptides were labeled with the isobaric labeling TMT 10-plex reagent, with each TMT channel labeling each of the 10 temperatures and an 11th channel of an equal digestion mixture of the uninfected cells and the latest infection time point. TMT test mixes were prepared from equal volume additions of each of the 11 channels and desalted by Stage-Tip desalting and were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis to determine TMT labeling efficiency and to determine the appropriate mixing ratios for sigmoidal curve fitting. Each of the 11 channels where then mixed according to these derived ratios and desalted and fractionated with a Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation column and the resulting fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with an EASYSpray ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were resolved for nLC-MS analysis with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nRSLC (ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with an EASYSpray C18 column (2 µm particle size, 75 µm diameter, 500 mm length, ThermoFisher Scientific, ES903). Peptides were separated with a 90-minute gradient of 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water (Solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in 97% LC-MS grade acetonitrile and 2.9% LC-MS grade water (Solvent B). Peptides were resolved with a linear gradient of 6 to 18% Solvent B for 60 minutes, followed by a linear gradient of 18 to 29% Solvent B for 30 minutes, at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. MS and MS/MS spectra were automatically obtained in a full MS/data-dependent MS2 method. The MS1 method operated with a full scan range of 350-1800 m/z with a resolution of 120,000, a target AGC of 3e6 with a maximum injection time (MIT) of 30 ms, and spectra was recorded in profile. For the data dependent MS2 scans, higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) was performed on the top 20 most intense precursor ions, with a 25 second dynamic exclusion duration. MS2 isolation windows were set to 1.2 m/z, with a target AGC of 1e5 and a MIT of 72 ms, a fixed first mass of 100 m/z, a resolution of 45,000, a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 34, and centroided spectral data was recorded. These setting were used for both TMT test mix samples and the fractionated TMT samples except the MS2 isolation windows for the fractionated TMT samples was set to 0.8 m/z.

### Data Protocol
All TPCA TMT MS/MS spectra were compared with protein sequences from a combined human and herpesvirus HSV-1 UniProt-SwissProt database downloaded in November 2018 and December 2018, respectively, combined with common contaminants, using the SEQUEST algorithm in Proteome Discoverer v2.3 (ThermoFisher Scientific). A spectral recalibration node was used for off-line recalibration of the mass accuracy. The database was constrained to fully tryptic peptides, with a max missed cleavage of 2, and a static cysteine carbamidomethylation modification and dynamic TMT labeling on the peptide N-terminus and lysine for the test mix searches, or static TMT labeling at these sites for the fractionated samples for quantitative analysis. Additional dynamic modifications included methionine oxidation, asparagine deamination, and protein N-terminal methionine loss and acetylation. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 4 ppm, and fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The false discovery rate (FDR) of the matched spectra was determined using Percolator (FDR of 1%) using a reversed sequence database search. For the reporter ion quantifier node, the integration tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and the integration method was set to most confident centroid. In the consensus workflow reporter ions quantifier node, the co-solation threshold and average reporter S/N threshold was set to 30 and 8, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Thermal proteome profiling; herpes simplex virus 1; protein complexes; protein interactions; ifi16; dna sensing; dna-pk; dna damage response; innate immunity

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Department of Molecular Biology, Cristea Lab, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, US

### Submitter
Josiah Hutton

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana M. Cristea
Department of Molecular Biology, Cristea Lab, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, US


