### Accession
PXD045393

### Title
Multiple phosphorylation sites regulate the activity of the repressor Mig1 in Candida albicans

### Description
The highly conserved heterotrimeric protein kinase SNF1 is important for metabolic adaptations in the pathogenic yeast Candida albicans. A key function of SNF1 is to inactivate the repressor protein Mig1 and thereby allow the expression of genes that are required for the the utilization of alternative carbon sources when the preferred carbon source glucose is absent or becomes limiting. However, how SNF1 controls Mig1 activity in C. albicans has remained elusive. Using a phosphoproteomic approach, we found that Mig1 is phosphorylated at multiple serine residues. Replacement of these serine residues by nonphosphorylatable alanine residues strongly increased the repressor activity of Mig1 in cells lacking a functional SNF1 complex, indicating that additional protein kinases are involved in the regulation of Mig1. Unlike wild-type Mig1, whose levels strongly decreased when the cells were grown on sucrose or glycerol instead of glucose, the levels of a mutant Mig1 protein lacking nine phosphorylation sites remained high under these conditions. Despite the increased protein levels and the absence of multiple phosphorylation sites, cells with a functional SNF1 complex could still sufficiently inhibit the hyperactive Mig1 to enable wild-type growth on alternative carbon sources. In line with this, phosphorylated forms of the mutant Mig1 were still detected in the presence and absence of a functional SNF1, demonstrating that Mig1 contains additional, unidentified phosphorylation sites and that downstream protein kinases are involved in the control of Mig1 activity by SNF1.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were disrupted by using mortar and pestle with liquid nitrogen. Cell debris were homogenized in lysis buffer (1% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 100 mM TEAB (triethyl ammonium bicarbonate), one tablet each of cOmplete Ultra Protease Inhibitor Cocktail and PhosSTOP). After addition of 0.5 µl Benzonase nuclease (250 U/μl) the samples were incubated at 37°C in a water bath sonicator for 30 min. Proteins were separated from unsolubilized debris by centrifugation (15 min, 18000 x g). Each 1.5 mg of total protein per sample was diluted with 100 mM TEAB to gain a final volume of 1.5 ml. Subsequently, cysteine thiols were reduced and carbamidomethylated in one step for 30 min at 70°C by addition of 30 µL of 500 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) and 30 µl of 625 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA). The samples were further cleaned up by 20% trichloroacetic acid (20 min, 20000x g, 4°C) and washed with 90% acetone (20 min, 20000x g, 4°C). Protein precipitates were resolubilized in 5% trifluoroethanol of aqueous 100 mM TEAB and digested overnight (18 h) with a Trypsin+LysC mixture (Promega) at a protein to protease ratio of 25:1. Each sample was divided in 3 x 0.5 mg used for the phosphopeptide enrichment and 150 µg initial protein used for the reference proteome analyis. Samples were evaporated in a SpeedVac. The reference proteome sample was resolubilized in 30 µL of 0.05% TFA in H2O/ACN 98/2 (v/v) filtered through 10 kDa MWCO PES membrane spin filters (VWR). The filtrate was transferred to HPLC vials and injected into the LC-MS/MS instrument. Phosphopeptides were enriched by using TiO2+ZrO2 TopTips (Glygen Corp.). TopTips were loaded with 0.5 mg protein isolate using 3 TopTips per biological replicate after equilibration with 200 µl Load and Wash Solution 1, LWS1 (1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 20% lactic acid, 25% acetonitrile (ACN), 54% H2O). TopTips were centrifuged at 1500 rpm (200 x g) for 5 min at room temperature. After washing with 200 µl LWS1, the TiO2/ZrO2 resin was washed with 25% ACN and subsequently the phosphopeptides were eluted with 200 µl NH3· H2O (NH4OH), pH 12. The alkaline solution was immediately evaporated using a SpeedVac. The phosphoproteome samples were resolubilized in 50 µL of 0.05% TFA in H2O/ACN 98/2 (v/v) filtered through 10 kDa MWCO PES membrane spin filters (VWR). The filtrate was also transferred to HPLC vials and injected into the LC-MS/MS instrument. Each sample was measured in duplicate (2 analytical replicates of 3 biological replicates of a reference proteome fraction and a phosphoproteome fraction. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system connected to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide trapping for 5 min on an Acclaim Pep Map 100 column (2 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm) at 5 µL/min was followed by separation on an analytical Acclaim Pep Map RSLC nano column (50 cm x 75 µm, 2µm). Mobile phase gradient elution of eluent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water) mixed with eluent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 90/10 acetonitrile/water) was performed using the following gradient: 0-5 min at 4% B, 30 min at 7% B, 60 min at 10% B, 100 min at 15% B, 140 min at 25% B, 180 min at 45% B, 200 min at 65% B, 210-215 min at 96% B, 215.1-240 min at 4% B. Positively charged ions were generated at spray voltage of 2.2 kV using a stainless steel emitter attached to the Nanospray Flex Ion Source. The instrument was operated in data-dependent MS2 Top15 mode. Precursor ions were monitored at m/z 300-1500 at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (full width at half maximum) using a maximum injection time (ITmax) of 120 ms and an AGC (automatic gain control) target of 3e6. Precursor ions with a charge state of z=2-5 were filtered at an isolation width of m/z 1.6 amu for further HCD fragmentation at 27% normalized collision energy (NCE). MS2 ions were scanned at 15,000 FWHM (ITmax=100 ms, AGC= 2e5) using a fixed first mass of m/z 120 amu. Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 30 s and the minimum AGC target for Precursor ions selected for HCD fragmentation was set to 1e3.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the CGD database available at http://www.candidagenome.org/download/sequence/C_albicans_SC5314/Assembly22/current/C_albicans_SC5314_A22_current_orf_trans_all.fasta.gz (21/04/22; YY/MM/DD) using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 (Thermo) and the algorithms of Mascot v2.4.1 (Matrix Science, UK), Sequest HT, and MS Amanda 2.0, and MS Fragger 2.4. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the tryptic digestion. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Modifications were defined as dynamic Met oxidation, phosphorylation of Ser, Thr, and Tyr, protein N-term acetylation with and without Met-loss as well as static Cys carbamidomethylation. A strict false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% (peptide and protein level) and an ion score (Mascot) >30, or an Xcorr score >4 (Sequest), or an MS Amanda score >300, or an MS Fragger score >8 was required for positive protein hits. The Percolator node of PD2.4 and a reverse decoy database was used for q-value validation of spectral matches. Only rank 1 proteins and peptides of the top scored proteins were counted. Label-free protein quantification was based on the Minora algorithm of PD2.4 using the precursor abundance based on intensity and a signal-to-noise ratio >5. Normalization was performed by using the total peptide amount method. Imputation of missing quan values was applied by using abundance values of 75% of the lowest abundance identified per sample. For the reference proteome analysis used for master protein abundance correction of the phosphoproteome data, phosphopeptides were excluded from quantification. Differential protein and phosphopeptide abundance were defined as a fold change of >2, pvalue/ABS(log4ratio) <0.05 and at least identified in 2 of 3 replicates of the sample group with the highest abundance. The ptmRS node of PD2.4 was used for calculation of phosphosite probabilities.

### Publication Abstract
The SNF1 protein kinase signaling pathway, which is highly conserved in eukaryotic cells, is important for metabolic adaptations in the pathogenic yeast <i>Candida albicans</i>. However, so far, it has remained elusive how SNF1 controls the activity of one of its main effectors, the repressor protein Mig1 that inhibits the expression of genes required for the utilization of alternative carbon sources when glucose is available. In this study, we have identified multiple phosphorylation sites in Mig1 that contribute to its inactivation. Mutation of these sites strongly increased Mig1 repressor activity in the absence of SNF1, but SNF1 could still sufficiently inhibit the hyperactive Mig1 to enable growth on alternative carbon sources. These findings reveal features of Mig1 that are important for controlling its repressor activity. Furthermore, they demonstrate that both SNF1 and additional protein kinases regulate Mig1 in this pathogenic yeast.

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Snf1, Mig1, Phosphoproteomics, Kinases

### Affiliations
Department for Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute - Leibniz-HKI, Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Department for Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute - Leibniz-HKI, Jena, Germany


