### Accession
PXD012090

### Title
comparative proteomics of deer antler

### Description
we used proteomic technology to disclose the difference of antler regeneration between red deer and sika deer. Through functional analysis, we obtained differentially expressed proteins and the pathway involved in antler regeneration between two groups

### Sample Protocol
We collected antlers from red deer and sika deer. And then the proteins were extracted from antlers. We run LC-MS/MS to get antler proteom profile. The bioinformatics software was used to do GO and KEGG annotation.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed by the peptide search engine Andromeda in MaxQuant software, which searched the data against the UniProt database. The correlated parameters were defined as follows: digest enzyme of trypsin, max missed cleavage of 2, fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl, variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, the precursor mass window in the main search of 6 ppm and MS/MS tolerance of 20 ppm. The cutoff value of the false discovery rate was defined as 0.01 to identify peptides and proteins. And protein abundance was calculated using label free quantification algorithm. To define differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), fold change thresholds were set at 2.0 or 0.5 with p-value <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Deer antler; proteomics; regeneration

### Affiliations
changchun university of chinese medicine

### Submitter
Hang Su

### Lab Head
Dr Hang Su
changchun university of chinese medicine


