### Accession
PXD036771

### Title
Mig6 mediates adaptive and acquired resistance to ALK and ROS1 fusion kinase inhibition through feedback activation of EGFR: Cuto28

### Description
ALK and ROS1 fusions defines subsets of lung adenocarcinoma. Although ALK/ROS1 inhibitors improved therapeutic outcome of patients harboring those oncogenic fusions, complete responses were rare, and resistance eventually develops from the residual tumor. To under the mechanisms contributing to residual tumor formation, we performed phosphoproteomics to explore the signaling adaption shortly after ALK/ROS1 inhibition. We found the phosphorylation of Mig6, a potent inhibitor for EGFR, was decreased following ALK/ROS1 inhibition, impairing Mig6 binding and inhibition on EGFR. Furthermore, Mig6 mRNA and protein levels were decreased rapidly by ALK/ROS1 inhibitors, potentiating EGFR activity to support cell survival. We also uncovered a novel mechanism mediated by Mig6 to regulate EGFR activity without impacting EGFR phosphorylation, but rather altering signaling adaptor SHC1 binding to EGFR. Mig6 expression was also lost following long-term exposure to ALK/ROS1 inhibitors to support EGFR-mediated acquired resistance. Finally, a Mig6 EGFR-binding domain truncation mutation was identified in a patient-derived ROS1 cell line, rendering its resistance to ROS1 inhibitors but sensitivity to HER family inhibitors. Our work established a rationale to evaluate combinations of ALK/ROS1 and EGFR inhibitors to limit residual tumor formation, therefore preventing or delaying subsequent resistance emergence.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in denaturing buffer containing 8 M urea, 20 mM HEPES (pH 8), 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate and 1 mM β-glycerophosphate. Bradford assays determined the protein concentration for each sample. Aliquots of 1 mg and 200 µg were prepared for tyrosine-phosphorylation and global phosphorylation, respectively. An additional pooled sample with 10 mg total protein served as bulk or boosting sample. Protein disulfides were reduced with 4.5 mM DTT at 60 °C for 30 minutes and then cysteines were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 20 minutes in the dark at room temperature. Trypsin digestion was carried out at room temperature overnight with enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:20, and tryptic peptides were acidified with aqueous 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted with C18 Sep-Pak cartridges according to the manufacturer’s procedure. Following lyophilization, peptide pellets were re-dissolved in immunoaffinity purification (IAP) buffer containing 50 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate and 50 mM NaCl. Phosphotyrosine-containing peptides (pY) were immunoprecipitated with p-Tyr-1000 beads (Cell Signaling Technology #8803S), according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  The entire pY samples were TMT labeled. For global phosphorylation, 200 µg of each tryptic digest were TMT labeled. Label incorporation was verified to be >95% by LC-MS/MS and spectral counting. The samples were then pooled and lyophilized.  The TMT channel layouts were: Plex 1:  126C DMSO 1 Rep1; 127N Afatinib 1 Rep1; 127C DMSO 1 Rep2; 128N Afatinib 1 Rep2; 128C DMSO 1 Rep3; 129N Afatinib 1 Rep3; 129C Crizotinib Rep1; 130N Crizotinib +Afatinib Rep1; 130C Crizotinib Rep2; 131N Crizotinib +Afatinib Rep2; 131C Crizotinib Rep3; 132N Crizotinib +Afatinib Rep3; 132C blank for Bulk 1; 133Nblank for Bulk 1+2; 133C Bulk 1; 134N Bulk 1+2 Plex 2:  126C DMSO 2 Rep1; 127N Afatinib 2 Rep1; 127C DMSO 2 Rep2; 128N Afatinib 2 Rep2; 128C DMSO 2 Rep3; 129N Afatinib 2 Rep3; 129C Entrectinib Rep1; 130N Entrectinib + Afatinib Rep1; 130C Entrectinib Rep2; 131N Entrectinib + Afatinib Rep2; 131C Entrectinib Rep3; 132N Entrectinib + Afatinib Rep3; 132C blank for Bulk 2; 133N blank for Bulk 1+2; 133C Bulk 2; 134N Bulk 1+2  Afatinib-treated and bulk samples are used for cross comparison between batches. After lyophilization, TMT-labeled peptides were redissolved in 200 µL of aqueous 20 mM Ammonium Formate, (pH 10.0). The high pH reversed phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC) separation was performed on a XBridge 4.6 mm x 100 mm column packed with BEH C18 resin, 3.5 µm particle size, 130 Å pore size (Waters). bRPLC Solvent A was aqueous 2% ACN with 5 mM Ammonium Formate, pH 10.0. Peptides were eluted by: 5% bRPLC B (aqueous 90% acetonitrile with 5 mM Ammonium Formate, pH 10.0) for 10 minutes, 5% - 15% B in 5 minutes, 15-40% B in 47 minutes, 40-100% B in 5 minutes and 100% B held for 10 minutes, followed by re-equilibration at 1% B. The flow rate was 0.6 ml/min, and 12 concatenated fractions were collected. Vacuum centrifugation (Speedvac, Thermo) dried the samples.  TMT-labeled peptides were re-dissolved in immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) loading buffer containing aqueous 0.1% TFA and 85% acetonitrile. Phosphopeptides were enriched using IMAC resin (Cell Signaling Technology # 20432) on a Kingfisher (Thermo).  IMAC resin was washed with loading buffer. Peptides were incubated with 10 L of resin for 30 minutes at room temperature with gentle agitation. The IMAC resin was washed twice with loading buffer followed by wash buffer (aqueous 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA). Phosphopeptides were eluted with aqueous 50% ACN, 2.5% Ammonia. The volume was reduced to 20 µl via vacuum centrifugation. A nanoflow ultra high performance liquid chromatograph and nanoelectrospray orbitrap mass spectrometer (RSLCnano and Q Exactive HF-X, Thermo) were used for LC-MS/MS.  The sample was loaded onto a pre-column (C18 PepMap100, 2 cm length x 100 µm ID packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) and washed for 8 minutes with aqueous 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid.  Trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column, (C18 PepMap100, 25 cm length x 75 µm ID, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo).  A 120-minute gradient was programmed as: 95% solvent A (aqueous 2% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for 8 minutes, solvent B (aqueous 90% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 38.5% in 90 minutes, then solvent B from 50% to 90% B in 7 minutes and held at 90% for 5 minutes, followed by solvent B from 90% to 5% in 1 minute and re-equilibration for 10 minutes using a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Spray voltage was 1900 V. Capillary temperature was 275 °C. S lens RF level was set at 40. Top 20 tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner. The resolution for MS and MS/MS were set at 60,000 and 45,000 respectively. Dynamic exclusion was 15 seconds for previously sampled peaks.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant  (version 1.6.14.0) was used to identify peptides using the UniProt human database (March 2020) and quantify the TMT reporter ion intensities. Up to 2 missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance was 20 ppm first search and 4.5 ppm main search. Reporter ion mass tolerance was set to 0.003 Da. Minimal Precursor intensity fraction 0.75. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as fixed modification. Phosphorylation on Serine/Threonine/Tyrosine and Methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Both peptide spectral match (PSM) and protein false discovery rate (FDR) were set at 0.05. Match between runs feature was activated to carry identifications across samples.   For data upload to PRIDE/ProteomeXchange, similar database searches were performed with Mascot (www.matrixscience.com) in Proteome Discoverer (Thermo).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lung cancer, Drug resistance, Kinase inhibitor, Anaplastic lymphoma kinase

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
University of Colorado-Anschutz Campus

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Doebele
University of Colorado-Anschutz Campus


