### Accession
PXD011950

### Title
Effect of xenosiderophores on Pseudomonas aeruginosa proteome

### Description
P. aeruginosa was described to sense xenosiderophores in the extracellular environment, leading to a regulation of genes encoding the siderophore uptake proteins. Data presented here allowed to characterize the proteomic response of P. aeruginosa in presence of different xenosiderophores. PAO1 strain was grown under iron-starvation conditions with or without addition of xenosiderophores. Proteomic analyses were performed on bacterial lysates in biological triplicates.

### Sample Protocol
PAO1 strain was grown under iron-stravation conditions with or without addition of xenosiderophores. 5.108 cells were lysed and disrupted by sonication. A 10-µg aliquot of protein (according to a Bradford assay) was precipitated overnight with 5 volumes of cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol. After washing twice the protein pellets with cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 80% methanol, proteins were further resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were further reduced (5mM dithiothreitol, 10 min, 95°C) and alkylated (10mM iodoacetamide, 30 min, RT, in the dark). After a quenching step (5 mM dithiothreitol), proteins were digested overnight with 150ng of sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, MA, USA). Each sample was further analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a QExactive+ mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nanoLC-1000 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA).

### Data Protocol
MS data were searched against the UniProtKB database (Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain PAO1, taxon 208964, release 2016_12, 5564 forward protein sequences) with a decoy strategy. The fasta sequences from human keratins, the porcine trypsin and 82 common contaminants were added to the Pseudomonas aeruginosa sequences as well as their corresponding decoy entries (Database toolbox from MSDA, https://msda.unistra.fr/). We used the Mascot algorithm (local server, version 2.5.1, Matrix Science) to perform the database search with a decoy strategy using the following parameters: enzyme = trypsin/P; maximum missed cleavages = 3; variable modifications = carbamidomethylation of cysteine, oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-term; precursor mass tolerance = 10ppm; product mass tolerance = 0.02 Da. The resulting .dat Mascot files were then imported into Proline v1.4 package (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/) for further post-processing. Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM) and protein sets (based on score). Raw Spectral Count values were then imported into R (R v3.2.5).

### Publication Abstract
Bacteria secrete siderophores to access iron, a key nutrient poorly bioavailable and the source of strong competition between microorganisms in most biotopes. Many bacteria also use siderophores produced by other microorganisms (exosiderophores) in a piracy strategy. <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i>, an opportunistic pathogen, produces two siderophores, pyoverdine and pyochelin, and is also able to use a panel of exosiderophores. We first investigated expression of the various iron-uptake pathways of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> in three different growth media using proteomic and RT-qPCR approaches and observed three different phenotypic patterns, indicating complex phenotypic plasticity in the expression of the various iron-uptake pathways. We then investigated the phenotypic plasticity of iron-uptake pathway expression in the presence of various exosiderophores (present individually or as a mixture) under planktonic growth conditions, as well as in an epithelial cell infection assay. In all growth conditions tested, catechol-type exosiderophores were clearly more efficient in inducing the expression of their corresponding transporters than the others, showing that bacteria opt for the use of catechol siderophores to access iron when they are present in the environment. In parallel, expression of the proteins of the pyochelin pathway was significantly repressed under most conditions tested, as well as that of proteins of the pyoverdine pathway, but to a lesser extent. There was no effect on the expression of the heme and ferrous uptake pathways. Overall, these data provide precise insights on how <i>P. aeruginosa</i> adjusts the expression of its various iron-uptake pathways (phenotypic plasticity and switching) to match varying levels of iron and competition.

### Keywords
Xenosiderophores, Shotgun proteomics, Pseudomonas

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, UMR 7242, ESBS, 300 Bd Sebastien Brant, F-67413 Illkirch, France

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Isabelle SCHALK
Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, UMR 7242, ESBS, 300 Bd Sebastien Brant, F-67413 Illkirch, France


