### Accession
PXD009882

### Title
Evaluation of promoter sequences for the secretory production of a Clostridium thermocellum cellulase in Paenibacillus polymyxa

### Description
Due to the high capacity of their secretion machinery Gram-positive bacteria from the genus Bacillus are important expression hosts for the high-yield production of enzymes in industrial biotechnology. However, to date strains from only a few Bacillus species are used for enzyme production at the industrial scale. In this work, we introduce with Paenibacillus polymyxa DSM 292 a member of a different genus as a novel host for secretory protein production. The model gene cel8A from Clostridium thermocellum was chosen as an easily detectable reporter gene with industrial relevance to demonstrate efficient heterologous expression and secretion in P. polymyxa. The yield of the secreted cellulase Cel8A was increased by optimizing the expression medium and testing  various promoter sequences on the expression plasmid pBACOV. To identify promising new promoter sequences from the genome of P. polymyxa itself, quantitative mass spectrometry was used to analyze the secretome. The most strongly secreted host proteins were identified and the promoters regulating the expression of the corresponding genes were selected. Eleven promoter sequences were cloned and tested, including well-characterized promoters from B. subtilis and B. megaterium. The best result was achieved with the promoter of the hypothetical protein PPOLYM_03468 from P. polymyxa, which in combination with the improved expression medium enabled the production of 5,475 U/l Cel8A which represents a 6.2-fold increase compared to the reference promoter PaprE. The set of promoters described in this work covers a broad range of promoter strengths useful for heterologous expression in the new host P. polymyxa.

### Sample Protocol
P. polymyxa DSM 292 carrying pBACOV-SPLipB-cel8A was incubated in 20 ml medium 2 (37 °C, 180 rpm). After 24 h, 2 ml of the culture were harvested by centrifugation (21,100 x g, 5 min, 4 °C). The supernatantwas collected without disrupting the cell pellet and stored at −20 °C until use for LC-MS/MS. For in-gel digestion, three biological replicates of 30 µl supernatant were mixed with LDS sample buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Subsequently, the samples were reduced with 25 mM dithiothreitol, boiled for 10 minutes at 95 °C and alkylated with 55 mM chloroacetamide. Proteins were run into a 4–12 % NuPAGE gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for about 1 cm to concentrate the sample prior to in-gel tryptic digestion. In-gel trypsin digestion was performed according to standard procedures (Shevchenko et al. 2006). The finally derived peptides were dried to completeness, re-suspended in 12 µl of buffer A (0.1 % FA) and 5 µl of sample were injected per MS measurement. Tryptic peptides were analyzed via LC-MS/MS on a nanoLC-Ultra 1D+ (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) coupled online to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Using a flow rate of 5 µl/min, peptides were first loaded onto a 2 cm trap column (75 µm inner diameter, ReproSil-Pur 120 ODS-3 5 µm, Dr. Maisch). Subsequently, peptides were separated on a 40 cm analytical column (75 µm inner diameter, ReproSil-Gold 120 C18 3 µm, Dr. Maisch) using a flow rate of 300 nl/min and a gradient from 4 % to 32 % buffer B (0.1 % FA and 5 % DMSO in acetonitrile) in 120 min (buffer A now also contained 5 % DMSO).  The eluate from the analytical column was sprayed via a stainless steel emitter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a source voltage of 2.2 kV into the mass spectrometer. The transfer capillary was heated to 275 °C. The Q-Exactive HF was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, automatically switching between MS1 and MS2 spectrum acquisition. MS1 spectra were acquired over a mass-to-charge (m/z) range of 360-1,300 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 (at m/z 200) using a maximum injection time of 50 ms and an AGC target value of 3e6. Up to 20 peptide precursors were isolated (isolation window 1.7 m/z, maximum injection time 25 ms, AGC value 1e5), fragmented by HCD using 25 % NCE and analyzed at a resolution of 15,000 with a scan range from 200 to 2,000 m/z. Precursor ions that were singly-charged, unassigned or with charge states >6+ were excluded. The dynamic exclusion duration of fragmented precursor ions was 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.7.4, Cox and Mann 2008) by searching the MS data against a P. polymyxa DSM 292 protein database (5348 protein sequences) derived from the P. polymyxa DSM 292 genome sequence using the search engine Andromeda (Cox et al. 2011). The Cel8A protein sequence was manually added to the reference database (including the signal peptide sequence), to make it identifiable within the P. polymyxa DSM 292 background proteome. The MaxQuant search was performed using two variable modifications, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation. As a fixed modification, carbamidomethylation on cysteines was specified. Trypsin (Trypsin/P) was specified as proteolytic enzyme with up to two allowed missed cleavage sites. Label-free quantification (Cox et al. 2014) and match-between-runs (matching time window 0.7 minutes, alignment time window 20 minutes) was enabled and results were filtered for a minimal length of seven amino acids and 1 % peptide and protein FDR. To investigate the concentration of the identified proteins relative to each other (i.e. to down-rank the proteins according to their abundance in the sample), we estimated absolute protein intensities using the intensity-based absolute quantification algorithm (iBAQ)(Schwanhäusser et al. 2011), which is implemented within MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Due to their high secretion capacity, Gram-positive bacteria from the genus Bacillus are important expression hosts for the high-yield production of enzymes in industrial biotechnology; however, to date, strains from only few Bacillus species are used for enzyme production at industrial scale. Herein, we introduce Paenibacillus polymyxa DSM 292, a member of a different genus, as a novel host for secretory protein production. The model gene cel8A from Clostridium thermocellum was chosen as an easily detectable reporter gene with industrial relevance to demonstrate heterologous expression and secretion in P. polymyxa. The yield of the secreted cellulase Cel8A protein was increased by optimizing the expression medium and testing several promoter sequences in the expression plasmid pBACOV. Quantitative mass spectrometry was used to analyze the secretome in order to identify promising new promoter sequences from the P. polymyxa genome itself. The most abundantly secreted host proteins were identified, and the promoters regulating the expression of their corresponding genes were selected. Eleven promoter sequences were cloned and tested, including well-characterized promoters from Bacillus subtilis and Bacillus megaterium. The best result was achieved with the promoter for the hypothetical protein PPOLYM_03468 from P. polymyxa. In combination with the optimized expression medium, this promoter enabled the production of 5475&#xa0;U/l of Cel8A, which represents a 6.2-fold increase compared to the reference promoter P<sub>aprE</sub>. The set of promoters described in this work covers a broad range of promoter strengths useful for heterologous expression in the new host P. polymyxa.

### Keywords
Medium optimization, Secretome analysis, Signal peptide, Cel8a, Strain development, Heterologous expression

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Technical University of Munich, Gregor-Mendel-Strasse 4, D-85354 Freising, Germany
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Technical University of Munich, Gregor-Mendel-Strasse 4, D-85354 Freising, Germany


