### Accession
PXD017341

### Title
Titin BioID -  protein and peptide pull-down

### Description
Proximity proteomics has greatly advanced the analysis of native protein complexes and subcellular structures in culture, but has not been amenable to study development and disease in vivo. Here, we generated a knock-in mouse with the biotin ligase (BioID) inserted at titin’s Z-disc region to identify protein networks that connect the sarcomere to signal transduction and metabolism. Our census of the sarcomeric proteome from neonatal to adult heart and quadriceps reveals how perinatal signalling, protein homeostasis and the shift to adult energy metabolism shape the properties of striated muscle cells. Mapping biotinylation sites to sarcomere structures refined our understanding of myofilament dynamics and supports the hypothesis that myosin filaments penetrate Z-discs to dampen contraction. Extending this proof of concept study to BioID fusion proteins generated with Crispr/CAS9 in animal models recapitulating human pathology will facilitate the future analysis of molecular machines and signalling hubs in physiological, pharmacological, and disease context.

### Sample Protocol
lysate of mouse tissue (heart and quadriceps)expressing BioID-Titin was used for streptavidin pull-down, on-bead tryptic digest and LC-MS/MS analyses. For enrichment of biotinylated peptides, protein extracts were digested with trypsin prior the pull-down with biotin antibody. Peptides were analysed with LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
RAW data were analysed with MaxQuant version 1.5.1.2, FDR for peptides and proteins was set 1%, variable modifications: methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, deamidation (NQ), biotinylation (K); fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C). Database: Uniprot Mouse-2017-1 including Titin-BioID sequence

### Publication Abstract
Proximity proteomics has greatly advanced the analysis of native protein complexes and subcellular structures in culture, but has not been amenable to study development and disease in vivo. Here, we have&#xa0;generated a knock-in mouse with the biotin ligase (BioID) inserted at titin's Z-disc region to identify protein networks that connect the sarcomere to signal transduction and metabolism. Our census of the sarcomeric proteome from neonatal to adult heart and quadriceps reveals how perinatal signaling, protein homeostasis and the shift to adult energy metabolism shape the properties of striated muscle cells. Mapping biotinylation sites to sarcomere structures refines our understanding of myofilament dynamics and supports the hypothesis that myosin filaments penetrate Z-discs to dampen contraction. Extending this proof of concept study to BioID fusion proteins generated with Crispr/CAS9 in animal models recapitulating human pathology will facilitate the future analysis of molecular machines and signaling hubs in physiological, pharmacological, and disease context.

### Keywords
Bioid, Biotinylation sites, Mouse, Titin

### Affiliations
Neuromuscular and Cardiovascular Cell Biology, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, Robert Rössle Str. 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany
Proteomics Platform, BIH@Charite

### Submitter
Marieluise Kirchner

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Gotthardt
Neuromuscular and Cardiovascular Cell Biology, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, Robert Rössle Str. 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany


