### Accession
PXD017896

### Title
Zebrafish early embryos isolated nuclei and whole blastomeres LC-MSMS

### Description
Nuclear pore complex (NPC) structure and maturity changed during early development before MBT in zebrafish embryos. Aiming to further confirm the difference of NPCs among different stages during MZT, we first isolated nuclei from 32-cell and 512-cell stage embryos as most zygotic genes have not been transcribed at these two stages yet. The lysates from identical number (about 12,500 nuclei per stage) isolated nuclei were then trypsin-digested and fractionated, followed by high-resolution LC-MS/MS analysis on the Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometers using a label-free assay. Whole blastomeres from 32-cell and 512-cell were also prepared with yolk removal to serve as total protein profile control, and the same amount lysates were analyzed by high-resolution LC-MS/MS with TMT labelled. Each sample for MS analysis had two repeats. Correlation analysis revealed that the abundance ratio from isolated Nuclei and whole deyolking balstomeres did not correlate well, but samples in Nuclei or Whole blastomeres were well correlated. This result indicates the convincible sample preparation as well as the variability in nuclei composition in early developmental period before MBT.

### Sample Protocol
For the quantitative proteomics analysis, isolated nuclei samples from 32-cell and 512-cell stage embryos, about 12,500 nuclei of each sample were used through label-free quantification method. Briefly, nuclei samples were lysed with 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), boiled for 10 min at 100 °C, and then sonicated for 30 min followed by digestion with trypsin. Peptides were purified on SDB-RP StageTips. LC-MS/MS runs were performed on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to the Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometers (Thermo Scientific). Deyolking whole blastomere samples from 32-cell and 512-cell stage embryos were lysed in PBS containing 8 M Urea and protease inhibitor. Then equal amounts of protein were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin, as well as desalted and labeled by different TMT reagents (ThermFisher). The TMT-labeled peptides were thereafter mixed and desalted with C18 cartridges.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were searched against the Uniprot zebrafish database using the SEQUEST search engine with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software. Proteomic analysis was carried out in two biological replicates. 512-cell to 32-cell abundance ratios or abundance were used for subsequent analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) are channels for nucleocytoplasmic transport of proteins and RNAs. However, it remains unclear whether composition, structure, and permeability of NPCs dynamically change during the cleavage period of vertebrate embryos and affect embryonic development. Here, we report that the comprehensive NPC maturity (CNM) controls the onset of zygotic genome activation (ZGA) during zebrafish early embryogenesis. We show that more nucleoporin proteins are recruited to and assembled into NPCs with development, resulting in progressive increase of NPCs in size and complexity. Maternal transcription factors (TFs) transport into nuclei more efficiently with increasing CNM. Deficiency or dysfunction of Nup133 or Ahctf1/Elys impairs NPC assembly, maternal TFs nuclear transport, and ZGA onset, while nup133 overexpression promotes these processes. Therefore, CNM may act as a molecular timer for ZGA by controlling nuclear transport of maternal TFs that reach nuclear concentration thresholds at a given time to initiate ZGA.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Whole blastomeres, Zebrafish, Isolated nuclei

### Affiliations
Tsinghua University
School of life science, Tsinghua university, China

### Submitter
Weimin Shen

### Lab Head
Dr Anming Meng
School of life science, Tsinghua university, China


