### Accession
PXD025569

### Title
Unbiased quantitative analysis of the cardiac phosphoproteome in response to acute β-adrenergic receptor stimulation in vivo

### Description
We utilised Super-SILAC mouse technology to perform an unbiased, quantitative analysis of the cardiac phosphoproteome in mice acutely treated in vivo with either saline or isoprenaline (ISO), a non-selective β-AR agonist. Using a customized mass spectrometry-based workflow (Figure 1), our study identified hundreds of phosphosites that are significantly regulated by β-AR stimulation, including both novel phosphoproteins and phosphosites that have not been previously identified as downstream effectors of β-AR stimulation and established downstream components of cAMP/PKA and CaMKII signaling pathways. Interestingly, our study revealed both up- and down-phosphorylation in comparable numbers, indicative of an intricate signaling network activated in response to β-AR stimulation.

### Sample Protocol
Heavy lysine (13C6-Lys)-labeled mouse hearts from two 10 weeks-old female mice were purchased from Silantes. Tissues were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at - 80 °C. Frozen tissues were dissolved in a lysis buffer containing 4% SDS, 0.1 M Tris-HCL, pH 8.0 supplementing with 1x Halt  Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Scientific), followed by 8 min (6.5 M/s, 20s on, 1 min on ice) of homogenization using a bead mill homogenizer (FastPrep-24, MP Biomedical). The crude extract was clarified by centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 15 min, followed by 15 min (4 °C, 15 s on, 15 s off) of sonication using a Bioruptor and final clarification by centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 15 min. The yield of the extracted protein was measured using BCA test (Pierce BCA Protein Assay, Thermo Scientific). Purified protein from the SILAC labeled mouse hearts was divided into equal aliquots of 1 mg and store at -80 °C for further use. Mouse protein samples were combined with protein from the 13C6-Lys-SILAC mouse heart standard at a 2:1 ratio. Protein mixtures were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine and 20 mM iodoacetamide at 37°C for 60 min, in the dark. Three volumes of cold (-20 °C) acetone were added to precipitate the proteins in solution at -20°C, overnight. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 14,000 × g and supernatant was decanted without disturbing the protein pellet. The pellet was resuspended in 0.1% Rapigest in 50 mM TEAB. Lysyl Endopeptidase (Wako, Japan) was added at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:100 and digested at 37 °C, overnight. Acidification was performed and the solution was incubated at  pH 3.0 at 37 °C for 30 minutes to decompose the Rapigest completely. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 14,000 × g supernatant was collected. A 30 μg aliquot of digested peptides from each mixed sample were used for global proteome analysis and the remaining portion was used for global phosphoproteome analysis. Phosphopeptides were enriched using a previously reported method. Peptide solutions were dried in a SpeedVac concentrator and resuspended in an incubation buffer containing 5% glycerol in 80% acetonitrile (ACN), 5% TFA. TiO2 beads (10 μm; GL Science) at a 1:8 peptide:bead ratio was weighed and washed three times each in 1 mL of  60% ACN, 0.1% TFA, 1 mL of  80% ACN, 5% TFA and 1 mL incubation buffer sequentially. The resuspended peptides were then incubated with TiO2 beads with end-over-end rotation at room temperature for 20 min. The peptide concentration was maintained at about 2 mg/mL during the incubation. After incubation, TiO2 beads were loaded onto the empty spin column (Hoefer Inc.) and washed three times with incubation buffer containing 80% ACN, 5% TFA and 60% ACN, 0.1% TFA. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 1.5% NH4OH (pH ≥10.5) and acidified immediately with TFA. The eluate was desalted on a C18 spin column before fractionation. Fractionation of the peptide and phosphopeptide mixtures was performed by reverse phase C18 chromatography (1100 series HPLC system, Agilent) into 18 global peptide samples and 14 enriched phosphopeptide samples using staggered pooling schemes  Peptide fractions were analyzed on a quadruple-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Scientific), coupled to a nanoflow liquid chromatography system (UltiMate 3000 UHPLC, Dionex, Thermo Scientific). Dried samples were redissolved in 2% ACN/ 0.1% formic acid (FA) and centrifuged for 14,000 g for 10 min to remove particles prior to injection. Peptides were pre-concentrated and desalted on a trap column (PepMap 100, C18, 5 μm, 0.3×5 mm, Thermo Scientific) at 10 μL/min in loading buffer (2% (vol/vol) ACN, 0.1% FA). Peptides were separated on a self-made capillary column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, 300 × 0.075 mm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) using a 90-min linear gradient from 8% to 36% buffer B (0.1% FA in 80% (v/v) ACN) versus a decreasing concentration of buffer A (0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  For protein expression analysis, the mass spectrometer was operated using a top20 data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with an isolation width of 1.4 m/z and an NCE setting of 28%. MS spectra from m/z 350–1600 were acquired at a resolution setting of 120,000 FWHM (m/z 200), and MS/MS spectra at a resolution setting of 15,000. AGC target values and maximum injection times for MS and MS/MS were set to 1 × 106 in 40 ms and 1 × 105 in 32 ms, respectively. Fixed first mass and dynamic exclusion values were set to 110 m/z and 20 s, respectively. For phosphopeptide analysis, the same settings were used, with the exceptions of MS/MS resolution setting and maximum injection times of 30,000 at m/z 200 and 128 ms, respectively, and a dynamic exclusion duration of 25 s to improve the MS/MS spectra quality for low abundance precursors. Each peptide fraction was analyzed twice as the injection replicates.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed using MaxQuant software (v1.6.5.0, MPI for Biochemistry) [18]. MS/MS spectra were searched against a UniProtKB mouse database containing 62,433 protein entries (downloaded on Apr 2019) supplemented with 246 frequently observed contaminants via the Andromeda search engine [19]. For phosphoproteome analysis, precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 6 and 20 ppm after initial recalibration, respectively. STY phosphorylation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and methionine oxidation were allowed as variable modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Enzyme specificity was set to Lys-C allowing N-terminal cleavage to proline. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids, with a maximum of two missed cleavages. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% on the peptide, modification site and protein level using a forward-and-reverse concatenated decoy database approach.  For SILAC quantitation, multiplicity was set to two for double (Lys+0, Lys+6) labeling. At least two ratio counts were required for peptide quantitation. Both the “match between runs” and “re-quantify” options of MaxQuant were enabled. For proteome analysis, variable modifications did not consist of STY phosphorylation and all the other parameter settings were identical with phosphoproteome analysis

### Publication Abstract
&#x3b2;-adrenergic receptor (&#x3b2;-AR) stimulation represents a major mechanism of modulating cardiac output. In spite of its fundamental importance, its molecular basis on the level of cell signalling has not been characterised in detail yet. We employed mass spectrometry-based proteome and phosphoproteome analysis using SuperSILAC (spike-in stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture) standardization to generate a comprehensive map of acute phosphoproteome changes in mice upon administration of isoprenaline (ISO), a synthetic &#x3b2;-AR agonist that targets both &#x3b2;1-AR and &#x3b2;2-AR subtypes. Our data describe 8597 quantitated phosphopeptides corresponding to 10,164 known and novel phospho-events from 2975 proteins. In total, 197 of these phospho-events showed significantly altered phosphorylation, indicating an intricate signalling network activated in response to &#x3b2;-AR stimulation. In addition, we unexpectedly detected significant cardiac expression and ISO-induced fragmentation of junctophilin-1, a junctophilin isoform hitherto only thought to be expressed in skeletal muscle. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD025569.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteome; mass spectrometry; β-adrenergic receptor; silac

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen


