### Accession
PXD030497

### Title
MS-based quantitative proteomic analysis of embryonic stem cells with normal and reduced expression of Rsl24d1.

### Description
Embryonic stem cell (ESC) fate decisions are regulated by a complex molecular circuitry that requires tight and coordinated gene expression regulations at multiple levels from chromatin organization to mRNA processing. Recently, ribosome biogenesis and translation have emerged as key pathways that efficiently control stem cell homeostasis. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the regulation of these pathways remain largely unknown to date. Here, we analyzed the expression, in mouse ESCs, of over 300 genes involved in ribosome biogenesis and we identified RSL24D1 as the most differentially expressed between self-renewing and differentiated ESCs. RSL24D1 is highly expressed in multiple mouse pluripotent stem cell models and its expression profile is conserved in human ESCs. RSL24D1 is associated with nuclear pre-ribosomes and is required for the maturation and the synthesis of 60S subunits in mouse ESCs. Interestingly, RSL24D1 depletion significantly impairs global translation, particularly of key pluripotency factors, including POU5F1 and NANOG, as well as components of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2). Consistently, RSL24D1 is required for mouse ESC self-renewal and proliferation. Taken together, we show that RSL24D1-dependant ribosome biogenesis is required to both sustain the expression of pluripotent transcriptional programs and silence developmental programs, which concertedly dictate ESC homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
1.2x10e5 mouse CGR8 ESCs (ECACC General Collection, 07032901) were cultured on 0.2% gelatin-coated 6-well plates using GMEM BHK-21 (Gibco) supplemented with 10% ESC-grade heat-inactivated Fetal Bovine Serum (HI-FBS), 1x non-essential amino acid (NEAA, Gibco), 2 mM sodium pyruvate (Gibco), 100μM β-mercaptoethanol (BME, Sigma-Aldrich), 103U/ml Leukemia Inhibitory Factor (LIF, StemCells Technologies). They were transfected with 20 nM siRNAs (either control or directed against RSL24D1 mRNA) using DharmaFECT 1 (Horizon Discovery) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Three replicates of control and RSL24D1-depleted cells were prepared. 48h after siRNA transfections, the cells were washed with ice-cold PBS before collection by trypsin treatment. After centrifugation, the cell pellet was lysed with 200µl of LYSE-NHS buffer (Preomics), before sonication with Bioruptor Next Gen (Diagenode) at 4°C and 20 kHz, and heating at 95°C for 10 min. Protein concentration in each sample was measured using BCA assay (Sigma-Aldrich). 50µg of each sample were then prepared using the iST-NHS kit (Preomics). Peptides resulting from LysC/trypsin digestion were labelled using TMTsixplex Isobaric Label Reagent kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) before mixing equivalent amounts for further processing. The peptide mix was then fractionated using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). Each fraction was then analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 180 min gradient. For this purpose, the peptides were sampled on a precolumn (300 μm x 5 mm PepMap C18, Thermo Scientific) and separated in a 200 cm µPAC column (PharmaFluidics).

### Data Protocol
The MS and MS/MS data were acquired by Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0), the UniProt database (Mus musculus taxonomy, 20211122 download) and the frequently observed contaminant database embedded in MaxQuant. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: C6H11NO (C, fixed), acetyl (Protein N-ter, variable) and oxidation (M, variable). Minimum peptide length and minimum number of razor peptides were respectively set to seven amino acids and one. Maximum false discovery rates - calculated by employing a reverse database strategy - were set to 0.01 at peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
Embryonic stem cell (ESC) fate decisions are regulated by a complex circuitry that coordinates gene expression at multiple levels from chromatin to mRNA processing. Recently, ribosome biogenesis and translation have emerged as key pathways that efficiently control stem cell homeostasis, yet the underlying molecular mechanisms remain largely unknown. Here, we identified RSL24D1 as highly expressed in both mouse and human pluripotent stem cells. RSL24D1 is associated with nuclear pre-ribosomes and is required for the biogenesis of 60S subunits in mouse ESCs. Interestingly, RSL24D1 depletion significantly impairs global translation, particularly of key pluripotency factors and of components from the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2). While having a moderate impact on differentiation, RSL24D1 depletion significantly alters ESC self-renewal and lineage commitment choices. Altogether, these results demonstrate that RSL24D1-dependant ribosome biogenesis is both required to sustain the expression of pluripotent transcriptional programs and to silence PRC2-regulated developmental programs, which concertedly dictate ESC homeostasis.

### Keywords
Ribosome biogenesis, Nanolc-ms/ms, Embryonic stem cell, Translational program, Pluripotency

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
EDyP


