### Accession
PXD001491

### Title
The metabolic background is a global player in Saccharomyces gene expression epistasis

### Description
The transcriptome, proteome and metabolome of 16 S.cerevisiae backgrounds, combinatorially perturbed in HIS3, LEU2, URA3 and MET15strains are compared. The project was jointly supervised by Kathryn Lilley and Markus Ralser. Transcriptome data has been deposited at ArrayExpress under accession <a href="http://www.ebi.ac.uk/microarray-as/aer/result?queryFor=Experiment&eAccession=E-MTAB-3991">E-MTAB-3991</a>. Metabolome data has been deposited at Metabolights with accession number <a href="http://www.ebi.ac.uk/metabolights/MTBLS168">MTBLS168</a>. The regulation of gene expression in response to nutrient availability is fundamental to the genotype–phenotype relationship. The metabolic–genetic make-up of the cell, as reflected in auxotrophy, is hence likely to be a determinant of gene expression. Here, we address the importance of the metabolic–genetic background by monitoring transcriptome, proteome and metabolome in a repertoire of 16 Saccharomyces cerevisiae laboratory backgrounds, combinatorially perturbed in histidine, leucine, methionine and uracil biosynthesis. The metabolic background affected up to 85% of the coding genome. Suggesting widespread confounding, these transcriptional changes show, on average, 83% overlap between unrelated auxotrophs and 35% with previously published transcriptomes generated for non-metabolic gene knockouts. Background-dependent gene expression correlated with metabolic flux and acted, predominantly through masking or suppression, on 88% of transcriptional interactions epistatically. As a consequence, the deletion of the same metabolic gene in a different background could provoke an entirely different transcriptional response. Propagating to the proteome and scaling up at the metabolome, metabolic background dependencies reveal the prevalence of metabolism-dependent epistasis at all regulatory levels. Urging a fundamental change of the prevailing laboratory practice of using auxotrophs and nutrient supplemented media, these results reveal epistatic intertwining of metabolism with gene expression on the genomic scale.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted as described in PMID: 17957260. Proteins were precipitated with 10% TCA, wahsed teice with 80% acetone. Resupsended in 0.1% Rapigest 50mM TEAB, quantified by BCA assay and digested at 1:20 protease to protein ratio as suggested by rapigest manufacturer.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed with PLGS 3.0. Identifications were transferred by synapter algorithm as described previously. PMID: 23510225

### Publication Abstract
The regulation of gene expression in response to nutrient availability is fundamental to the genotype-phenotype relationship. The metabolic-genetic make-up of the cell, as reflected in auxotrophy, is hence likely to be a determinant of gene expression. Here, we address the importance of the metabolic-genetic background by monitoring transcriptome, proteome and metabolome in a repertoire of 16 Saccharomyces cerevisiae laboratory backgrounds, combinatorially perturbed in histidine, leucine, methionine and uracil biosynthesis. The metabolic background affected up to 85% of the coding genome. Suggesting widespread confounding, these transcriptional changes show, on average, 83% overlap between unrelated auxotrophs and 35% with previously published transcriptomes generated for non-metabolic gene knockouts. Background-dependent gene expression correlated with metabolic flux and acted, predominantly through masking or suppression, on 88% of transcriptional interactions epistatically. As a consequence, the deletion of the same metabolic gene in a different background could provoke an entirely different transcriptional response. Propagating to the proteome and scaling up at the metabolome, metabolic background dependencies reveal the prevalence of metabolism-dependent epistasis at all regulatory levels. Urging a fundamental change of the prevailing laboratory practice of using auxotrophs and nutrient supplemented media, these results reveal epistatic intertwining of metabolism with gene expression on the genomic scale.

### Keywords
S. cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Cambridge Center For Proteomics
Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, U.K.

### Submitter
Pavel Shliaha

### Lab Head
Dr Kathryn Lilley
Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, U.K.


