### Accession
PXD018176

### Title
Ultraviolet Photodissociation of tryptic peptide backbones at 213 nm

### Description
We analyzed the backbone fragmentation behavior of tryptic peptides of a four protein mixture and of E. coli lysate subjected to Ultraviolet Photodissociation (UVPD) at 213 nm on a commercially available UVPD-equipped tribrid mass spectrometer. We obtained 15,178 high-confidence peptide-spectrum matches by additionally recording a reference beam-type collision-induced dissociation (HCD) spectrum of each precursor. Type a, b and y ions were most prominent in UVPD spectra and median sequence coverage ranged from 5.8% (at 5 ms laser excitation time) to 45.0% (at 100 ms). Overall sequence fragment intensity remained relatively low (median: 0.4% (5 ms) to 16.8% (100 ms) of total intensity) and remaining precursor intensity high. Sequence coverage and sequence fragment intensity ratio correlated with precursor charge density, suggesting that UVPD at 213 nm may suffer from newly formed fragments sticking together due to non-covalent interactions. UVPD fragmentation efficiency therefore might benefit from supplemental activation, as was shown for ETD. Aromatic amino acids, most prominently tryptophan, facilitated UVPD. This points at aromatic tags as possible enhancers of UVPD. Data are available via ProteomeXchange and on spectrumviewer.org/db/UVPD_213nm_trypPep

### Sample Protocol
HSA, ovotransferrin, myoglobin and creatine kinase were dissolved in 8 M urea with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to a concentration of 2 mg/mL each. Proteins were reduced by adding dithiothreitol at 2.5 mM followed by incubation for 30 min at 20 °C. Samples were derivatized using iodoacetamide at 5 mM concentration for 20 min in the dark at 20 °C, diluted 1:5 with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with trypsin (Pierce Biotechnology, Waltham, MA) at a protease-to-protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w) during a 16-h incubation period at 37 °C. Digestion was stopped by adding 10% TFA at a concentration of 0.5%.  E. coli K12 cells were cultured in LB medium, harvested at OD 0.6, pelleted, frozen using liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C. Cell pellets were then resuspended in ice-cold lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.5 and protease inhibitors (Roche)) and sonicated on ice at 30% amplitude, 30 s on/off for 10 cycles (total time 5 mins), using a Branson Digital Sonifier. Liquid was collected in a centrifuge tube (upper foaming with DNA proteins was discarded) and sample was clarified by centrifugation at 15,500 rpm for 30 mins.  Protein concentration was measured using the Pierce BCA protein assay. The soluble lysate was then run into the first centimeter of an SDS-PAGE gel, the protein band excised and subjected to an in-gel digestion protocol: reduction in 20 mM DTT for 30 min at room temperature, alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark, and digestion with 12.5 ng/μL trypsin overnight at 37 °C. Digests for all proteins were cleaned up using the StageTip protocol. Peptides were eluted using 80% v/v ACN, 0.1% v/v TFA, partially evaporated using a Vacufuge Concentrator (Eppendorf, Germany) to <5% ACN, and resuspended in mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid) prior to mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 Nano LC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with an EasySpray source and UVPD module (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) comprising a solid-state Nd:YAG laser head (CryLaS GmbH) that generates a pulsed 213 nm beam (fifth harmonic). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water, mobile phase B of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, and 19.9% water. Peptides (1 μg eq.) were loaded onto a 500 mm C-18 EasySpray column (75 μm ID, 2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) and eluted using the following non-linear gradient at 300 nl flow rate: 2-4% (1 min); 4-6% B (2 min); 6-37.5% B (97 min); 37.5-42.5% B (10 min); 42.5-47.5% B (5 min). MS1 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap using a scan range from 300-1500 m/z at 120,000 resolution. AGC Target was set to 8 × 105 and maximum injection time to 50 ms. Filters used were: Peptide monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS), intensity threshold of 5 × 104, precursor charge states 2-7+ and dynamic exclusion of 60s. MS2 spectra were acquired using top speed with a 3 s cycle time at 30,000 Orbitrap resolution. Precursors were isolated using the Quadrupole with an isolation window of 1.4 m/z. MS2 AGC target was set to ‘Standard’ using the ‘Auto’ maximum injection time mode. For each precursor two MS2 scans were acquired (Dual MS2), one with HCD at NCE 30%, the other utilizing UVPD at 213 nm with varying laser excitation times between experiments (5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40, 50 and 100 ms). As reference Dual MS2 with HCD-HCD, HCD-ETD and HCD-EThcD (Supplemental activation with 30% NCE) were acquired. For the ETD experiments calibrated charge-dependant reaction times were used. For each Dual MS2 method two replicas were acquired, resulting in a total of 22 acquisitions per sample.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were preprocessed using a custom python script (https://github.com/Rappsilber-Laboratory/preprocessing). Preprocessing included conversion to MGF format, m/z recalibration of both precursor and fragment peaks as well as splitting the primary (HCD) and secondary (UVPD, ETD, EThcD or HCD) MS2 spectra into separate MGF files. The primary MS2 spectra were denoised with the default MS2Denoise settings in MSconvert and then analyzed with xiSEARCH using the following settings: MS accuracy, 3 ppm; MS2 accuracy, 15 ppm; missing monoisotopic precursor peaks, 2; enzyme, trypsin; maximum missed cleavages, 4; maximum number of modifications, 3; ions: precursor, b- and y-type; modifications: carbamidomethylation on Cysteine as fixed and oxidation on Methionine as variable modification; False Discovery Rate was estimated separately for each fragmentation parameter set (2 acquisition replica per fragmentation parameter) using xiFDR on unique PSM level to 1% for the 4 PM and 0.1% for the E. coli lysate. Additionally, we excluded PSMs that were not identified in at least 6 of the 11 different fragmentation parameter set duplicates. This minimizes the number of false positives in our data set because of the improbability of any given random match to occur in more than half of the experiments. From the secondary peak list files the corresponding scans to the primary HCD PSMs were extracted and subsequently annotated with pyXiAnnotator (https://github.com/Rappsilber-Laboratory/pyXiAnnotator/) using the identifications from their primary counterparts. Secondary spectra were annotated with peptide, a-, b-, c-, x-, y- and z-type ions with a maximum tolerance of 15 ppm. Additionally, a hydrogen-loss was defined and the missing monoisotopic fragment peak feature was used to enable matching of ions with absence or presence of an extra hydrogen respectively (e.g. y－, a+). The mass spectrometry raw files, peak lists, search engine results and FASTA files have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository. Additionally, we have made all annotated spectra available through xiSPEC on spectrumviewer.org/db/UVPD_213nm_trypPep.

### Publication Abstract
We analyzed the backbone fragmentation behavior of tryptic peptides of a four-protein mixture and of <i>E. coli</i> lysate subjected to ultraviolet photodissociation (UVPD) at 213 nm on a commercially available UVPD-equipped tribrid mass spectrometer. We obtained 15&#x202f;178 unique high-confidence peptide UVPD spectrum matches by recording a reference beam-type collision-induced dissociation (HCD) spectrum of each precursor, ensuring that our investigation includes a broad selection of peptides, including those that fragmented poorly by UVPD. Type a, b, and y ions were most prominent in UVPD spectra, and median sequence coverage ranged from 5.8% (at 5 ms laser excitation time) to 45.0% (at 100 ms).&#xa0;Overall,&#xa0;the&#xa0;sequence fragment intensity remained relatively low (median: 0.4% (5 ms) to 16.8% (100 ms) of total intensity), and the remaining precursor intensity, high. The sequence coverage and sequence fragment intensity ratio correlated with the precursor charge density, suggesting that UVPD at 213 nm may suffer from newly formed fragments sticking together due to noncovalent interactions. The UVPD fragmentation efficiency therefore might benefit from supplemental activation, as was shown for ETD. Aromatic amino acids, most prominently tryptophan, facilitated UVPD. This points to aromatic tags as possible enhancers of UVPD. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD018176 and on&#xa0;spectrumviewer.org/db/UVPD-213nm-trypPep.

### Keywords
Fusion lumos, Myoglobin, Lc-msms, Ovotransferrin, Uvpd 213 nm, Creatine kinase, Hsa, Dual ms2, E. coli

### Affiliations
TU Berlin
1. Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany 2. Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH93BF, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Lars Kolbowski

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
1. Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany 2. Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH93BF, United Kingdom


