### Accession
PXD026257

### Title
Brain tissus of Oryzias melastigma under hypoxia, rep1

### Description
Hypoxia is amongst the most widespread and pressing problems in aquatic environments. Here we demonstrate that fish (Oryzias melastigma) exposed to hypoxia show reproductive impairments (retarded gonad development, decrease in sperm count and sperm motility) in F1 and F2 generations despite these progenies (and their germ cells) having never been exposed to hypoxia. We further show that the observed transgenerational reproductive impairments are associated with a differential methylation pattern of specific genes in sperm of both F0 and F2 coupled with relevant transcriptomic and proteomic alterations, which may impair spermatogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
For each generation, adult fish were harvested at 120 days post-hatching, at which time their sex was clearly distinguishable by their external secondary sex characteristics. The histology of F0–F2 testes was also examined (Supplementary Fig. 1). Spermatogonia (~5–10µm), primary spermatocytes (~6µm), secondary spermatocytes (~4µm) and spermatids (~2µm) were all found in sexually mature testes in all groups. An equal number of sexually mature male and female fish (n=55 each) were randomly sampled and killed after being anaesthetized in ice water. The testis was dissected under a stereo light microscope. The samples were stored at 80°C for further processing.

### Data Protocol
iTRAQ8plex data was processed and searched by Mascot on the Uniprot database (Organism 8090). The Mascot results were parsed and normalized by the isobar software which was designed to quantify the iTRAQ data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hypoxia

### Affiliations
The University of Hong Kong
City University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Tong Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Ball KP LAI
City University of Hong Kong


