### Accession
PXD041518

### Title
Investigation of Role of Eleven TonB Homologs in Carbohydrate Utilization by Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron

### Description
Key conserved features of these transporters include a 22 beta-strand barrel that traverses the outer membrane and houses a plug domain that occludes solute passage until the transporter is activated. Some B. theta TBDTs are also predicted to include two additional domains termed the N-terminal extension (NTE) and the Secretin and TonB N-terminus (STN) domain. The precise rearrangement of the plug domain to allow solute passage through the barrel is poorly understood but is facilitated by pairing to an inner membrane complex that harnesses proton motive force. This complex in E. coli includes the proteins TonB, ExbB, and ExbD. Recent structural analysis of this complex reveals the inner membrane spanning ExbB in a pentameric arrangement enclosed around a dimer of ExbD that extends into the periplasm. The structure of the complex with TonB has not been determined but other characterization of TonB suggests at least one copy of TonB interacts with the ExbBD complex via the TonB N-terminal membrane spanning -helix. This N-terminal -helix is followed by a linker region that spans the periplasm and a well-ordered C-terminal domain. The C-terminal domains of characterized TonB proteins share a common fold of three antiparallel -sheets with two -helices (28, 29). The final -strand at the C-terminus directly contacts the TBDT for -sheet pairing with the N-terminal extension of the TBDT plug domain called the TonBox.

### Sample Protocol
All strains were cultured in TYG and back diluted into MM containing glucose as described above. The MM-glucose grown cells were then back diluted 1:100 into 50mL of MM containing 5mg/ml glucose or maltose as indicated. The O.D.600 was monitored every 30-45 minutes and the cells were harvested at mid-log (O.D. ~0.7-0.8) by centrifugation at 5000 xg for 5 min. Cell pellet was frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. To prepare the membrane faction, cells were thawed and resuspended in 1mL 20mM KH2PO4 pH 7.3. The slurry was gently sonicated on ice. Intact cells were removed by centrifugation at 13,000 xg for 10 minutes at 4°C. The remaining soluble fraction was ultracentrifuged at 200,000 xg for 2 hrs at 4°C to pellet total membranes. The supernatant was removed, and the membrane pellet resuspended in the same buffer, followed by a second round of ultracentrifugation at 200,000 xg. The resulting membrane pellet was resuspended in 20mM KH2PO4, 0.1% Tween-20 pH 7.3. Total protein in the final sample was quantified using the Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific).  The total membrane samples were submitted to the Mass Spectrometry-Based Proteomics Resource Facility in the Department of Pathology at the University of Michigan (Ann Arbor, MI). Samples were then processed using the TMT10plex Mass Tag Labeling Kit (Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer instructions. The resulting labeled samples were analyzed by high resolution Orbitrap LC-MS/MS. The resulting proteomic mass spectrum data were searched against the Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron VPI-5482 proteome.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v2.1; ThermoScientific) was used for data analysis.  MS2 spectra were searched against UniProt B thetaiotaomicron protein database (4782 entries and the downloaded on 01/24/2019) using the following search parameters: MS1 and MS2 tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively; carbamidomethylation of cysteines (57.02146 Da) and TMT labeling of lysine and N-termini of peptides (229.16293 Da) were considered static modifications; oxidation of methionine (15.9949 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (0.98401 Da) were considered variable.  Identified proteins and peptides were filtered to retain only those that passed ≤1% FDR threshold.  Quantitation was performed using high-quality MS3 spectra (Average signal-to-noise ratio of 10 and <50% isolation interference).

### Publication Abstract
The human gut microbiota, including <i>Bacteroides</i>, is required for the degradation of otherwise undigestible polysaccharides. The gut microbiota uses polysaccharides as an energy source, and fermentation products such as short-chain fatty acids are beneficial to the human host. This use of polysaccharides is dependent on the proper pairing of a TonB protein with polysaccharide-specific TonB-dependent transporters; however, the formation of these protein complexes is poorly understood. In this study, we examine the role of 11 predicted TonB homologs in polysaccharide uptake. We show that two proteins, TonB4 and TonB6, may be functionally redundant. This may allow for the development of drugs targeting <i>Bacteroides</i> species containing only a TonB4 homolog with limited impact on species encoding the redundant TonB6.

### Keywords
Bacteroides. tonb, Glucose, Maltose

### Affiliations
Microbiology and Immunology
University of Michigan
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA

### Submitter
Nicole Koropatkin

### Lab Head
Dr Nicole M Koropatkin3
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA


