### Accession
PXD019082

### Title
A2M Q975C and C3 Q1013C disulfide mutants

### Description
Mutant A2M and C3 with disulfides replacing their thiol esters were disulfide mapped via pepsin digests.

### Sample Protocol
A2M Q975C and C3 Q1013C were prepared for mass spectrometry by acidification with 1% v/v acetic acid to roughly pH 3, addition of pepsin to a 1:20 w/w ratio of pepsin:sample, and overnight digestion at 37 oC. The digested peptides were then stage-tipped using homemade C18 resin-packed pipette tips. A total of 250 nanograms of peptide were analyzed by LC-MS/MS with an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) running in data-dependent acquisition mode. Samples prepared as above but reduced with 25 mM 3,3′,3′′-phosphanetriyltripropanoic acid (TCEP) for 30 min at 37 oC prior to stage tipping were also analyzed.

### Data Protocol
The resulting data were searched using the Mascot search engine with nonspecific protease settings and variable dehydro modification of cysteine residues to identify peptides covering C972 and C975 of A2M Q975C and C1010 and C1013 of C3 Q1013C.

### Publication Abstract
Most proteins in the &#x3b1;-macroglobulin (&#x3b1;M) superfamily contain reactive thiol esters that are required for their biological function. Here, we have characterized the human &#x3b1;2-macroglobulin (A2M) and complement component C3 mutants A2M Q975C and C3 Q1013C, which replace the CGEQ thiol ester motifs of the original proteins with the disulfide-forming sequence CGEC. Mass spectrometry showed that the intended disulfide was formed in both proteins. The correct folding and native conformation of A2M Q975C were shown by its assembly to a tetramer, an initially slow electrophoretic mobility with a demonstrable conformational collapse induced by proteolysis, functional protease trapping, and conformation-dependent interactions with low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1. However, A2M Q975C had a decreased capacity to inhibit trypsin and was more susceptible to cleavage by trypsin or thermolysin when compared to wild-type A2M. C3 Q1013C also folded correctly and was initially in a native conformation, as demonstrated by its cation exchange elution profile, electrophoretic mobility, and interaction with complement factor B, although it assumed a conformation that was distinct from native C3, C3b, or C3(H<sub>2</sub>O) when cleaved by trypsin. These results demonstrate that disulfides can substitute thiol esters and maintain the native conformations of A2M and C3. Additionally, they indicate that proteolysis is not the sole factor in the conformational changes of A2M and C3 and that thiol ester lysis also plays a role.

### Keywords
Human c3 a2m

### Affiliations
Aarhus University
MBG, Aarhus University, Denmark

### Submitter
Seandean Harwood

### Lab Head
Dr Jan J. Enghild
MBG, Aarhus University, Denmark


