### Accession
PXD039077

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the extracellular matrix of human atherosclerotic plaques shows marked changes between plaque types

### Description
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of death, with atherosclerosis a major underlying cause. While often asymptomatic for decades, plaque destabilisation and rupture can arise suddenly and cause acute arterial occlusion or peripheral embolisation resulting in acute myocardial infarction, stroke and lower limb ischaemia. Hard plaques are typically considered as stable, and soft plaques as unstable. Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodelling can result in plaque destabilisation, but the mechanisms that drive the development of unstable lipid-rich plaques with a thin fibrous cap, versus stable fibrotic plaques with a thick cap,  are not fully understood. We hypothesised that there would be significant differences in ECM composition between hard (stable) and soft (unstable and rupture-prone) plaques.   We identified and quantified >46700 proteins, including 367 ECM proteins, with unprecedented coverage and high reproducibility. We identified 575 proteins with differential abundances between hard (stable) and soft (unstable) plaques. Proteins involved in inflammation and ECM remodeling, including multiple proteases were enriched, and ECM proteins decreased, in soft plaques.   These data provide a unique insight into inflammatory mechanisms and ECM remodelling as an explanation for plaque destabilization. Furthermore they provide a first step towards identifying circulating biomarkers for individualised risk profiling of arteriosclerosis.

### Sample Protocol
Atherosclerotic plaques (7 hard, 7 soft, and 7 mixed, macroscopically defined) from patients with recent symptomatic carotid artery disease were compared. Plaques were solubilized in trifluoroacetic acid. After neutralization of the acid, solubilized proteins were digested to peptides, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Bruker timsTOF Pro using data-independent acquisition with parallel accumulation-serial fragmentation (DIA-PASEF) .

### Data Protocol
DIA-PASEF data were processed in DIA-NN in library-free mode. Peptides were identified by comparison with the UniProtKB protein database, including common contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death, with atherosclerosis the major underlying cause. While often asymptomatic for decades, atherosclerotic plaque destabilization and rupture can arise suddenly and cause acute arterial occlusion or peripheral embolization resulting in myocardial infarction, stroke and lower limb ischaemia. As extracellular matrix (ECM) remodelling is associated with plaque instability, we hypothesized that the ECM composition would differ between plaques. We analyzed atherosclerotic plaques obtained from 21 patients who underwent carotid surgery following recent symptomatic carotid artery stenosis. Plaques were solubilized using a new efficient, single-step approach. Solubilized proteins were digested to peptides, and analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry using data-independent acquisition. Identification and quantification of 4498 plaque proteins was achieved, including 354 ECM proteins, with unprecedented coverage and high reproducibility. Multidimensional scaling analysis and hierarchical clustering indicate two distinct clusters, which correlate with macroscopic plaque morphology (soft/unstable versus hard/stable), ultrasound classification (echolucent versus echogenic) and the presence of hemorrhage/ulceration. We identified 714 proteins with differential abundances between these groups. Soft/unstable plaques were enriched in proteins involved in inflammation, ECM remodelling, and protein degradation (e.g. matrix metalloproteinases, cathepsins). In contrast, hard/stable plaques contained higher levels of ECM structural proteins (e.g. collagens, versican, nidogens, biglycan, lumican, proteoglycan 4, mineralization proteins). These data indicate that a single-step proteomics method can provide unique mechanistic insights into ECM remodelling and inflammatory mechanisms within plaques that correlate with clinical parameters, and help rationalize plaque destabilization. These data also provide an approach towards identifying biomarkers for individualized risk profiling of atherosclerosis.

### Keywords
Stroke, Atherosclerosis, Cardiovascular disease, Extracellular matrix

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Lasse Gøbel Lorentzen

### Lab Head
Dr Michael J. Davies
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Denmark


