### Accession
PXD033703

### Title
The proteomic and transcriptomic landscapes altered by Rgg2/3 activity in Streptococcus pyogenes

### Description
Streptococcus pyogenes, otherwise known as Group A Streptococcus (GAS), is an important and highly adaptable human pathogen with the ability to cause both superficial and severe diseases. Understanding how S. pyogenes senses and responds to its environment will likely aid in determining how it causes a breadth of diseases. One regulatory network involved in GAS’s ability to sense and respond to the changing environment is the Rgg2/3 quorum sensing (QS) system, which responds to metal and carbohydrate availability and regulates changes to the bacterial surface. To better understand the impact of Rgg2/3 QS on S. pyogenes physiology, we performed RNA-seq and TMT (tandem mass tag)-LC-MS/MS analysis on cells in which this system was induced with SHP pheromone or disrupted. Primary findings confirmed that pheromone stimulation in wildtype cultures is limited to the induction of operons whose promoters contain previously determined Rgg2/3 binding sequences. However, a deletion mutant of rgg3, a strain that endogenously produces elevated amounts of pheromone, led to extended alterations of the transcriptome and proteome, ostensibly by stress-induced pathways. Under such exaggerated pheromone conditions, a connection was identified between Rgg2/3 and the stringent response. Mutation of relA, the bifunctional guanosine tetra- and penta-phosphate nucleoside synthetase/hydrolase, and alarmone synthase genes sasA and sasB, impacted culture doubling times and disabled induction of Rgg2/3 in response to mannose, while manipulation of Rgg2/3 signaling modestly altered nucleotide levels. Our findings indicate that excessive pheromone production or exposure places stress on GAS resulting in an indirect altered proteome and transcriptome beyond primary pheromone signaling. 

### Sample Protocol
Sample isolation for TMT-LC-MS/MS. To isolate samples for TMT-LC-MS/MS, the following procedure was used and adapted from Wilk et. al, 2018. Overnight cultures were diluted 1:100 into 50 mL CDM and grown at 37°C until OD600 ~0.05-0.10, at which time 100 nM SHP peptide was added to required cultures and cells were placed back at 37°C. When cells reached late exponential/early stationary phase (OD600 ~0.70-1.0), cultures were transferred to 15 mL conical tubes and centrifuged at 2700xg for 15 min at 4°C. After centrifugation, supernatants were separated from cell pellets into new 15 mL conical tubes.  Supernatants were then filtered through a 0.2 µM pore size filter via syringe (VWR) and Pierce Protease Inhibitor Tablets, EDTA-free (Thermo-Fisher, A32965) were added to 30 mL aliquots of filtered supernatants. Supernatants were placed on ice and subsequently concentrated using Amicon Ultra-4 Centrifugal Filter Units with a 10 kDA MW cutoff (Millipore-Sigma) by centrifugation continually at 2700xg for 15 min at 4°C until samples reached 1 ml volume. After samples were concentrated to 1 mL, samples were diluted three times with 5 mL ice-cold PBS and concentrated back down to 1 mL each time. After final concentration to 1 mL with ice-cold PBS, samples were collected, and further concentrated to 250 µL with Amicon Ultra-0.5 Centrifugal Filter Units with 10 kDA MW cutoff (Millipore-Sigma). Final concentrated supernatants were stored at -70°C until proceeding to further sample prep for TMT-LC/MS/MS.  Pellets from isolated samples were washed with 5 mL of ice-cold PBS and centrifuged at 2700xg for 15 min at 4°C. Supernatants were discarded and samples were washed twice in 5 mL of chilled TE buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0; 1 mM EDTA). After the second wash, pellets were resuspended in 1 mL of ice-cold Enzyme Buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0; 1 mM EDTA; 20% (w/v) sucrose; Pierce Protease Inhibitor Tablets, EDTA-free) with 100 units of Mutanolysin (Sigma-Aldrich, M9901. Resuspended pellets in enzyme mix were transferred to sterile microcentrifuge tubes and incubated at 37°C for 18 hours with shaking (200 rpm). After digestion with mutanolysin, tubes were centrifuged at 21,130xg for 5 min at room temperature. Supernatants (solubilized cell wall proteins) were collected and stored at -70°C until proceeding to further sample prep. After obtaining secreted and solubilized cell wall proteins, total protein concentrations of each sample were measured using the Bio-Rad DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad, 5000112) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 100 µg of each protein sample was then submitted to Mass Spectrometry Core in Research Resources Center of University of Illinois at Chicago.  Sample preparation and digestion for TMT-LC-MS/MS. Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) was performed with samples submitted to the Mass Spectrometry Core. In brief, protein samples were dissolved by 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 and then filtered with a 0.22 μM membrane (Millipore). The flow-through was collected and transferred into a 1.5 mL MicroconYM-30 centrifugal unit (Millipore). Protein reduction, alkylation and tryptic digestion were performed step by step in the centrifugal unit. After overnight digestion at 37°C, the peptides were eluted twice with 50 μL 0.1% formic acid (FA). The concentration of proteins and peptides collected in each step was measured using a Nanodrop ONE (Thermo-Fisher). The digested peptides were then desalted, dried, and stored at −80 °C until further use. Peptide labeling by TMT, sample fractionation, and TMT-LC-MS/MS data processing and analysis. For isobaric labeling, peptides per sample for 6-plex TMT were labeled using TMTsixplex Isobaric Mass Tagging Kit (Thermo-Fisher, #90064) according to the manufacturers' instructions. After labeling, excess reagents and detergents were removed by reversed phase solid phase extraction (Oasis HLB C18 SPE, Waters). The samples were dried and resulting pellets stored in − 80 °C.  Sample were then thawed and further fractionated by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using an Agilent 1260 HPLC (Agilent) and a Waters XBridge BEH C18 column (130Å, 3.5 μm, 4.6 x 150 mm). 90 fractions were collected and combined into 10 fractions, followed by desalting using Nestgroup C18 tips (Southborough, MA). Fractionated peptides were dried and redissolved in 0.1% FA for LC−MS/MS analysis. For LC-MS/MS, fractions were run on Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Velos Pro coupled with Agilent NanoLC system (Agilent) over a 60 min gradient on an Aglient Zorbax 300SB-C18 LC column (15 cm × 75 μm ID, Aglient). Samples were run via a 60 min linear gradient (0–35% acetonitrile with 0.1% FA) and data were acquired in a data dependent manner, in which MS/MS fragmentation was performed on the top 12 intense peaks of every full MS scan.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were converted into .mgf files using MSConvert. A database search was carried out using Mascot Server (v2.6, Matrix Science) and Mascot Daemon Toolbox (Matrix Science) for peptide matches and protein searches against the Streptococcus pyogenes NZ131 genomic database UniProtKB (Proteome ID: UP000001039). For TMT reporter ion detection, the fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Fixed modifications were defined as carbamidomethylation (57.02146) on cysteine and TMT modification (229.1629) on N-terminus and lysine. Miscleavage was set to 2. Search results from 18 runs were imported into Scaffold (Proteome Software) for quantitative analysis.  Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at 1% FDR probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (58) and as protein identification probability with 99% or greater confidence as determined by Scaffold. Scaffold performed quantitative analysis including extract of the TMT reporter ion intensities from the MS/MS, correction of isotope contamination, and normalization. As equal amounts of total protein were loaded across all TMT channels, reporter ion intensities in each of the channels were normalized by the sum of all reported ion intensities of the corresponding channel. Normalized reporter ion intensities were used for relative protein abundance calculations. Comparisons between groups were made by use of multiple-sample ANOVA test in MaxQuant 1.61 software. Statistical significance was set at adjusted q value < 0.05.  Upon receiving the final metadata from the Mass Spectrometry Core in Research Resources Center of University of Illinois at Chicago, the data was submitted to UIC Research Informatics Core. Differential protein expression analysis was then performed using limma package . A 1-way ANOVA was used to perform multigroup analysis, as well as pairwise comparisons. P-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the false discovery rate (FDR) correction of Benjamini and Hochberg. Protein level differences were considered statistically significant if q values < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Streptococcus pyogenes, otherwise known as Group A Streptococcus (GAS), is an important and highly adaptable human pathogen with the ability to cause both superficial and severe diseases. Understanding how S. pyogenes senses and responds to its environment will likely aid in determining how it causes a breadth of diseases. One regulatory network involved in GAS's ability to sense and respond to the changing environment is the Rgg2/3 quorum sensing (QS) system, which responds to metal and carbohydrate availability and regulates changes to the bacterial surface. To better understand the impact of Rgg2/3 QS on S. pyogenes physiology, we performed RNA-seq and tandem mass tag (TMT)-LC-MS/MS analysis on cells in which this system was induced with short hydrophobic peptide (SHP) pheromone or disrupted. Primary findings confirmed that pheromone stimulation in wild-type cultures is limited to the induction of operons whose promoters contain previously determined Rgg2/3 binding sequences. However, a deletion mutant of <i>rgg3</i>, a strain that endogenously produces elevated amounts of pheromone, led to extended alterations of the transcriptome and proteome, ostensibly by stress-induced pathways. Under such exaggerated pheromone conditions, a connection was identified between Rgg2/3 and the stringent response. Mutation of <i>relA</i>, the bifunctional guanosine tetra- and penta-phosphate nucleoside synthetase/hydrolase, and alarmone synthase genes <i>sasA</i> and <i>sasB</i>, impacted culture doubling times and disabled induction of Rgg2/3 in response to mannose, while manipulation of Rgg2/3 signaling modestly altered nucleotide levels. Our findings indicate that excessive pheromone production or exposure places stress on GAS resulting in an indirect altered proteome and transcriptome beyond primary pheromone signaling. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Streptococcus pyogenes causes several important human diseases. This study evaluates how the induction or disruption of a cell-cell communication system alters S. pyogenes's gene expression and, in extreme conditions, its physiology. Using transcriptomic and proteomic approaches, the results define the pheromone-dependent regulon of the Rgg2/3 quorum sensing system. In addition, we find that excessive pheromone stimulation, generated by genetic disruption of the Rgg2/3 system, leads to stress responses that are associated with the stringent response. Disruption of stringent response affects the ability of the cell-cell communication system to respond under normally inducing conditions. These findings assist in the determination of how S. pyogenes is impacted by and responds to nontraditional sources of stress.

### Keywords
Rgg2, Rgg3, Streptococcus pyogenes, Quorum sensing

### Affiliations
University of Illinois at Chicago

### Submitter
Britta Rued

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Federle
University of Illinois at Chicago


