### Accession
PXD025330

### Title
CEP128 mutations impair spermatogenesis in humans and mice

### Description
The centrosome is a conserved eukaryotic organelle essential to the reproductive process, and centrosomal proteins are necessary for the components of the centrosome. However, few centrosomal proteins have been genetically linked to fertility, and the related molecular mechanisms remain unknown. Here, we identified a novel homozygous missense mutation of CEP128 (c.665G>A [p.R222Q]) in two infertile males with cryptozoospermia from a consanguineous family. This variant abnormally increased CEP128 protein expression. Remarkably, mouse models harbouring the orthologous variant of CEP128 R222Q were sterile, showing anomalies in the sperm morphology, count and motility. To confirm the important role of CEP128 in male fertility, we also generated Cep128 knock-out (KO) male mice, which were infertile associated with the disrupted sperm quality. Importantly, the defective sperm flagella were obviously observed in the two mouse strains, while the number, morphology and ultrastructure of cilia in other organs were normal, suggesting that CEP128 mutations only affect ciliogenesis in testes. Mechanistically, the imbalance expression of CEP128, whatever increase or decrease, perturbed the normal expression of genes and/or the phosphorylation of TGF-β/BMP signaling members involved in spermatogenesis. Altogether, our findings unprecedentedly unveil a crucial role for CEP128 in male fertility and provide new insights into the functions of centrosomal proteins in human disease.

### Sample Protocol
Testicular tissue for proteomic analysis was obtained from 8-week-old mice and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis with a standard protocol. In brief: (1) The mouse testes were ground using liquid nitrogen and transferred to tubes containing lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) on ice, followed by sonication using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The supernatant was collected after centrifugation, and the protein concentration was determined; (2) After trypsin digestion and purification, peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol using the TMT kit; (3) The peptides were first separated into 60 fractions by a gradient of 8–32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) for 60 min and then pooled into four fractions. The IMAC microspheres with enriched phosphopeptides were then collected by centrifugation. After eluting the enriched phosphopeptides by vibration with elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH, the supernatant containing phosphopeptides was collected and lyophilized for LC-MS/MS analysis.(4) Released peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS identification and quantification on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) with a NSI source; (5) The raw data were processed using Domain Annotation (InterProScan), GO Annotation (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/), and KEGG Pathway Annotation (KEGG online service tools KAAS mapper).

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against human uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and Acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
Centrosomal proteins are necessary components of the centrosome, a conserved eukaryotic organelle essential to the reproductive process. However, few centrosomal proteins have been genetically linked to fertility. Herein we identify a homozygous missense variant of CEP128 (c.665&#x2009;G&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;A [p.R222Q]) in two infertile males. Remarkably, male homozygous knock-in mice harboring the orthologous CEP128<sup>R222Q</sup> variant show anomalies in sperm morphology, count, and motility. Moreover, Cep128 knock-out mice manifest male infertility associated with disrupted sperm quality. We observe defective sperm flagella in both homozygous Cep128 KO and KI mice; the cilia development in other organs is normal-suggesting that CEP128 variants predominantly affected the ciliogenesis in the testes. Mechanistically, CEP128 is involved in male reproduction via regulating the expression of genes and/or the phosphorylation of TGF-&#x3b2;/BMP-signalling members during spermatogenesis. Altogether, our findings unveil a crucial role for CEP128 in male fertility and provide important insights into the functions of centrosomal proteins in reproductive biology.

### Keywords
Cep128; infertility; spermatogenesis; centrosome

### Affiliations
sichuan university
West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan University

### Submitter
zhang zhiwei

### Lab Head
Dr Shen Ying
West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan University


