### Accession
PXD001220

### Title
Characterization of native protein complexes and protein isoform variation using size-fractionation-based quantitative proteomics.

### Description
Proteins form a diverse array of complexes that mediate cellular function and regulation. A largely unexplored feature of such protein complexes is the selective participation of specific protein isoforms and/or post-translationally modified forms. In this study, we combined native size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) with high-throughput proteomic analysis to characterize soluble protein complexes isolated from human osteosarcoma (U2OS) cells. Using this approach, we have identified over 71,500 peptides and 1,600 phosphosites, corresponding to over 8,000 proteins, distributed across 40 SEC fractions. This represents >50% of the predicted U2OS cell proteome, identified with a mean peptide sequence coverage of 27% per protein. Three biological replicates were performed, allowing statistical evaluation of the data and demonstrating a high degree of reproducibility in the SEC fractionation procedure. Specific proteins were detected interacting with multiple independent complexes, as typified by the separation of distinct complexes for the MRFAP1-MORF4L1-MRGBP interaction network. The data also revealed protein isoforms and post-translational modifications that selectively associated with distinct subsets of protein complexes. Surprisingly, there was clear enrichment for specific Gene Ontology terms associated with differential size classes of protein complexes. This study demonstrates that combined SEC/MS analysis can be used for the system-wide annotation of protein complexes and to predict potential isoform-specific interactions. All of these SEC data on the native separation of protein complexes have been integrated within the Encyclopedia of Proteome Dynamics, an online, multidimensional data-sharing resource available to the community.        U2OS cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% FCS, 100 U/l penicillin, and 100 μg/l streptomycin at 37 °C in 10% CO2 and passaged at ~80% confluence. U2OS cells expressing LAP1-tagged MRFAP1 were grown in the same medium but with the addition of 150 μg/ml hygromycin B and 15 μg/ml blasticidine HCl. The cells for each condition were harvested separately via trypsinization, washed in PBS, and lysed in IP buffer (1% Nonidet P-40, 50 mm Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 10% glycerol, 150 mm NaCl, complete protease inhibitor mixture (Roche Applied Science), PhosStop, 50 mm N-ethylmaleimide). The lysates were sonicated for 10 s at 10% power (three times in total) and then centrifuged for 10 min at 17,000g at 4 °C. Equal protein amounts of each sample were then combined with GFP-trap agarose beads from ChromoTek (Martinsried, Germany) that had been washed once in IP buffer (40 μl of 50% GFP-trap bead slurry per IP) and incubated for 2 h at 4 °C with rotation. The beads were then washed three times with IP buffer via centrifugation at 2,000g for 2 min at 4 °C.

### Sample Protocol
The beads were resuspended in 200 μl of PBS, transferred to a spin column (Thermo Scientific), and centrifuged dry at 500g for 1 min. LDS sample buffer that had been preheated to 65 °C was then added and incubated at 65 °C for 5 min. The eluate was collected via centrifugation at 500g for 1 min at room temperature. Total cell lysates were sonicated for 10 s, three times in total, at 10% power at 4 °C and then centrifuged at 17,000g for 10 min at 4 °C. Samples were filtered through 0.45-μm Ultrafree-MC centrifugal filter units (Millipore). Bradford assays were performed on the filtrates for protein quantitation. Using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific), lysates in PBS and inhibitors were injected (200 μl per injection) onto a Superose 6 10/300GL column (GE Life Sciences) equilibrated with PBS (pH 7.2). The flow rate was 0.2 ml min−1, and 40 200-μl fractions were collected using a low protein binding 96-deep-well plate Eppendorf (Hamburg, Germany). Tris-HCl (1 m pH 8.0) was added to each fraction to a final concentration of 0.1 m to adjust the pH to 8.0, and trypsin diluted in 0.1 m Tris-HCl was added at ratios of 1:50 to 1:100. The fractions were then incubated for 18 h at 37 °C. For peptide desalting, trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to a 1% (v/v) final concentration and peptides were purified using a Sep-Pak tC18 96-well μ-elution plate. Peptides were eluted in 200 μl of 50% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA, and a SpeedVac was used to dry them prior to resuspension in 5% (v/v) formic acid. Peptide concentrations were determined using the CBQCA assay after 25-fold dilution of peptide samples in 0.1 m borate buffer, pH 9.3. Cells were lysed in PBS containing inhibitors as above and supplemented with 4% SDS, 25 mm TCEP, and 50 mm N-ethylmaleimide. The column was equilibrated with 0.2% SDS, 100 mm NaCl, and 10 mm NaPO4. The lysate was otherwise injected onto the Superose 6 column as described above. Consecutive elution fractions were combined, heated to 65 °C for 10 min, subjected to chloroform methanol precipitation, and resuspended in 1X LDS with 25 mm TCEP for immunoblotting. Bradford protein quantitation assays were performed on the fractions. 20% SDS was added to each fraction to a 2% final concentration, and fractions were heated to 65 °C for 10 min. 100 μl of consecutive fractions were combined, and chloroform methanol precipitation was performed. Protein was then resuspended in equal volumes of 1X LDS, 25 mm TCEP so that the maximum concentration in the most concentrated fraction was 1 mg/ml and heated to 65°C for 10 min. Combined fractions were analyzed via EZQ quantitation assay (Invitrogen). 10 μl of each fraction was loaded per lane for SDS-PAGE. BCA protein quantitation (Thermo Scientific) was performed on denatured samples. Equal volumes (14 μl) of consecutive samples were combined and made up to a maximum of 0.1 mg/ml in 1X LDS/TCEP. 20 μl of sample was loaded per lane for SDS-PAGE. SDS-PAGE was performed using 4–12% (w/v) Bis-Tris NuPage gels using MES running buffer according to the manufacturer's instructions, but with the addition of 25 mm TCEP in the LDS sample buffer. SYPRO Ruby staining was performed as per the manufacturer's instructions (Invitrogen). For Western blotting, separated proteins were electrophoretically transferred to either an iBlot nitrocellulose membrane or an Odyssey nitrocellulose membrane, blocked with 3% nonfat milk in 0.1% Tween-20 in TBS, and incubated with primary antibody in 5% BSA in TBS Tween 20 overnight at 4 °C. After incubation, membranes were washed three times in TBS Tween 20 and incubated with either HRP-labeled or Alexa fluor 680/IrDye 800–labeled secondary antibodies in 3% nonfat milk in TBS Tween 20. Proteins were visualized using Immobillon chemiluminescent substrate (Millipore) and imaged with either a cooled charge-coupled device camera GE Life Sciences (Piscataway, NJ) for HRP-labeled secondary antibodies or a Licor Odyssey CLx imager for Alexa fluor 680/IrDye 800–labeled secondary antibodies. Using a Thermo Scientific Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system, 1 μg of peptides in 5% (v/v) formic acid (~10 μl) was injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA). After being washed with 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, peptides were resolved on a 150 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse-phase analytical column over a gradient from 2% acetonitrile to 80% acetonitrile over 100 min with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. The peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 1.2 kV using a fused silica emitter with an internal diameter of 5 μm from New Objective (Woburn, MA). Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on an LTQ-Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using collision-induced dissociation fragmentation of precursor peptides and fragment ion measurement in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
The RAW data produced by the mass spectrometer were analyzed using the quantitative proteomics software MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5). This version of MaxQuant includes an integrated search engine, Andromeda. The database supplied to the search engine for peptide identifications was the human UniProt database (June 7, 2011) containing 109,824 entries. The mass tolerance was set at 6 ppm for precursor ions, and the MS/MS mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da. The enzyme was set as trypsin with up to two missed cleavages. Deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met, pyro-Glu (with N-term Gln), and phosphorylation (STY) were set as variable modifications. N-ethylmaleimide on Cys was searched as a fixed modification. Identification was set to a false discovery rate of 1%. To achieve reliable identifications, all peptides identified were accepted based on the criteria that the number of hits in the “forward” database was at least 100-fold greater than the number of “reverse” database hits, thus resulting in a false discovery rate of less than 1%. The output from MaxQuant provided peptide level data as well as protein level data, grouped by protein isoforms. To create an elution profile for an individual protein isoform in each of the three replicates, the number of peptides observed in each fraction was summed to generate a count of peptides per fraction (spectral counts). The resulting spectral count profile minima and maxima were normalized within the limits of 0 and 1, respectively. The average of the three elution profiles was based on the normalized spectral peptide counts for each fraction. A minimum of two peptides were required for inclusion in our analysis. Further downstream data interpretation for this study was performed primarily using the R language (version 2.15.1). From the three biological replicates, it was required that a protein be identified in at least two replicates with a minimum of two peptides in each. Proteins labeled as either contaminants or reverse hits were removed from the analysis. These stringent criteria left a subset of 8,165 proteins with high data coverage across replicates (73.2%). For each protein, 120 quantitative measurements were recorded across the three replicates and 40 SEC fractions. The first six fractions were deemed to contain complexes outside the resolution range of the column and thus were excluded from further data analysis. To analyze reproducibility between replicates, the peptide count profile across the remaining 34 fractions for each replicate was correlated between replicates. A quality filter was applied to ensure that a minimum of two out of the three pairwise correlations had a positive correlation coefficient. The biological replicates were collapsed by averaging to obtain a resultant mean peptide count profile describing the behavior of each protein across the 34 fractions. The standard deviation for the three biological replicates per fraction was also calculated to provide standard error bars on the protein profile graphs. The protein count profiles across the 34 fractions were normalized using the maximum peptide count for that protein and then hierarchically clustered based on Euclidean distance measurement and a “complete” agglomeration method. The output of the clustering has been presented in a heatmap using the RColorBrewer library. The gene ontology analysis was carried out using the DAVID Functional Annotation Tool for Biological Processes. The full Homo sapiens proteome, supplied by DAVID, was selected as a background list. When cross-analyzing with the CORUM dataset, a set proportion of proteins in a complex were required to co-fractionate to provide sufficient evidence that a complex had been identified. To calculate this proportion, we used the equation max(0.3, 2/n) × 100, meaning 30% of the components or 2 divided by the number of proteins in the complex, whichever was greater, multiplied by 100. This approach ensured that for small complexes (i.e. containing six or fewer components), more than simply one or two of the component proteins needed to co-fractionate before we labeled the complex as identified.

### Publication Abstract
Proteins form a diverse array of complexes that mediate cellular function and regulation. A largely unexplored feature of such protein complexes is the selective participation of specific protein isoforms and/or post-translationally modified forms. In this study, we combined native size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) with high-throughput proteomic analysis to characterize soluble protein complexes isolated from human osteosarcoma (U2OS) cells. Using this approach, we have identified over 71,500 peptides and 1,600 phosphosites, corresponding to over 8,000 proteins, distributed across 40 SEC fractions. This represents &gt;50% of the predicted U2OS cell proteome, identified with a mean peptide sequence coverage of 27% per protein. Three biological replicates were performed, allowing statistical evaluation of the data and demonstrating a high degree of reproducibility in the SEC fractionation procedure. Specific proteins were detected interacting with multiple independent complexes, as typified by the separation of distinct complexes for the MRFAP1-MORF4L1-MRGBP interaction network. The data also revealed protein isoforms and post-translational modifications that selectively associated with distinct subsets of protein complexes. Surprisingly, there was clear enrichment for specific Gene Ontology terms associated with differential size classes of protein complexes. This study demonstrates that combined SEC/MS analysis can be used for the system-wide annotation of protein complexes and to predict potential isoform-specific interactions. All of these SEC data on the native separation of protein complexes have been integrated within the Encyclopedia of Proteome Dynamics, an online, multidimensional data-sharing resource available to the community.

### Keywords
Human, U2os cells

### Affiliations
College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee
School of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Vackar Afzal

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Angus Lamond
College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee


