### Accession
PXD028494

### Title
RNA and phosphoprotein profiles of TP53- and PTEN-knockouts in MCF10A at baseline and responding to DNA damage

### Description
A wealth of proteogenomic data has been generated using cancer samples to deepen our understanding of the mechanisms of cancer and how biological networks are altered in association with somatic mutation of tumor suppressor genes, such as TP53 and PTEN. To generate functional signatures of TP53 or PTEN loss, we profiled the RNA and phosphoproteomes of the MCF10A epithelial cell line, along with its congenic TP53- or PTEN-knockout derivatives, upon perturbation with the monofunctional DNA alkylating agent methyl methanesulfonate (MMS) vs. mock-treatment. To enable quantitative and reproducible mass spectrometry data generation, the cell lines were SILAC-labeled (stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture), and the experimental design included label swapping and biological replicates. All data are publicly available and may be used to advance our understanding of the TP53 and PTEN tumor suppressor genes and to provide functional signatures for bioinformatic analyses of proteogenomic datasets.

### Sample Protocol
MCF10A breast epithelial and congenic TP53- and PTEN-deletion cell lines were cultured and SILAC-labeled in various groupings using heavy and light SILAC growth media (Thermo). The cell lines were cultured a minimum of three passages to ensure incorporation of heavy or light amino acids. The cells were exposed to methyl methanesulfonate (MMS) or mock treatment for 3 hours, after which they were lysed using a urea lysis buffer including protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Protein concentrations were determined by Micro BCA and the lysates were reduced, alkylated, and proteolytically digested using Lys-C and trypsin. After desalting, the tryptic digests were fractionated by high-pH reverse phase (RP) liquid chromatography and the fractions were concatenated into 12 samples per cell line lysate. The phosphopeptides in each fraction were enriched using immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) with Ni-NTA-agarose beads (Qiagen), and the samples were desalted using StageTips (Thermo Scientific). Phosphopeptide-enriched samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated in positive ion mode. The LC system was configured in a vented format with Magic C18-AQ, 5µm (Michrom BioResources) as the trap and analytical column resins, and the peptide samples were separated using a 150 minute gradient. MS/MS analysis consisted of 1 full scan MS from 400-1800 m/z at resolution 120,000, data dependent MS/MS scans using 35% normalized collision energy of the 20 most abundant ions, and dynamic exclusion for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS spectra from the analyses were searched against UniProt database UP000005640_9606_human using MaxQuant/Andromeda (tryptic enzyme constraint at up to two missed cleavages, oxidized methionine and phosphorylated serine, threonine, and tyrosine as variable modifications, carbamidomethylated cysteine as a static modification, and peptide MH+ mass tolerances at 20 ppm). The overall FDR was set at ≤1%. Any site with a probability greater than 0.8 was considered to be localized. Quantification of the Heavy:Light ratios was performed using MaxQuant software, with a minimum ratio count of 2 and using unique + razor peptides for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mms, Imac, Phosphoproteomics, Mcf10a, Lc-ms/ms, Silac, Knockout

### Affiliations
Clinical Reserach Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center

### Submitter
Jacob Kennedy

### Lab Head
Dr Amanda G
Clinical Reserach Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center


