### Accession
PXD046355

### Title
Bile proteome reveals biliary regeneration during normothermic preservation of human donor livers

### Description
Liver transplantation is the only treatment option for patients with end-stage liver disease. However, a persistent disparity remains between supply and demand for donor organs suitable for transplantation, resulting in a waiting list mortality of up to 20%. This has resulted in an increasing use of high-risk grafts from suboptimal, extended criteria donors, including livers from donation after circulatory death (DCD) donors, and donors with significant comorbidities such as advanced age, diabetes mellitus and livers with high fat content. While cold storage remains sufficient for livers considered optimal for transplantation, ECD grafts are more vulnerable to cold ischemic damage, resulting in many of these grafts being rejected.  As an alternative to cold storage, ex-situ normothermic machine perfusion (NMP) has become an increasingly popular method for preservation, transportation and assessment of ECD livers prior to transplantation. This allows for functional assessment of the graft and provides the opportunity to assess key processes that can be used to determine organ viability. The use of both hepatocellular and biliary viability criteria in selection of suboptimal livers from ECD donors has led to the successful transplantation of these grafts with a low incidence of post-transplant cholangiopathies. However, the mechanisms of biliary injury, and recovery thereof, following static cold storage remains poorly understood. Insight into these mechanisms may further improve preservation and selection of ECD livers. Therefore, we performed an in-depth proteomics analysis of bile samples collected from human ECD livers during NMP to identify potential mechanisms linked to biliary injury, function and regeneration over the course of the perfusion, and to assess whether biliary protein profiles can distinguish between transplantable and non-transplantable grafts.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation One-hundred microliters of crude bile was centrifuged at 15,000 x g for 15 minutes to remove debris. Protein concentrations were determined using a micro-BCA protein assay kit (Cat #23235, Thermo Scientific), and were digested using in-gel digestion. Briefly, 50g of protein was combined with 6.25l 4x Loading Buffer (Abcam) and topped up to 25L using 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Samples were heated to 80oC for 5 minutes, cooled, added to a gel (4-12% Bis-Tris plus, Thermo Scientific) and run for 5 minutes at 100V. The gels were then stained for 1 hour using Coomassie Blue stain (InstantBlue, Abcam), and destained in MilliQ water overnight. The protein containing gel bands where then cut from the gel and further destained/dehydrated using steps of 30% acetonitrile (ACN) in 100mM ABC, 50% ACN in 100mM ABC, and 100% ACN before being dried. The proteins were reduced and alkylated using 10mM DTT at 57oC for 30minutes, and 55mM IAA in the dark at room temperature for 30minutes, respectively. The gel pieces were then dehydrated using 100% ACN and dried. The proteins were then digested using sequencing-grade trypsin (Cat #V5111, Promega) at a trypsin-to-protein ratio of 1:100, and left to digest at 37oC overnight. The digested peptides were extracted from the gel pieces using 5% formic acid, 75% ACN. Solid-phase extraction C18 columns (S-Pure, Waters) were used for sample clean-up. The extracted peptides were then dried in a vacuum concentrator (Concentrator plus, Eppendorf), after which peptides were resuspended in 50l 0.1% formic acid ready for analysis by mass spectrometry (MS). An overview of the proteomics workflow can be seen in Fig. 1B.  Mass spectrometry Mass spectrometric analyses were performed on a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (Orbitrap Exploris 480, Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic separation of the peptides was performed by liquid chromatography (LC) on a nano-HPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex) using a nano-LC column (Acclaim PepMapC100 C18, 75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm, 100 Å, Dionex, buffer A: 0.1% v/v formic acid in milliQ-H2O, buffer B: 0.1% v/v formic acid in acetonitrile). Six microliters of trypsin-digested bile sample was injected from a cooled autosampler (5°C), using buffer A as a transport liquid, and loaded onto a trap column (µPrecolumn cartridge, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, 300 µm x 5 mm, Dionex). Peptides were separated on the nano-LC column using a linear gradient from 2-80% buffer B over 120mins at a flow rate of 300nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and data-independent acquisition mode (DIA) using isolation windows of 12m/z with a precursor mass range of 300-1200. The orbitrap resolution was set to 120,000 and DIA scan resolution at 30,000.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data was searched using Spectronaut software (version 14, Biognosys) using library-free data independent acquisition (DIA) analysis workflows. Oxidation and deamidation were set as variable modificaitons and carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Data was searched against human protein sequences using the UPR_homoSapiens_30-09-2021 FASTA file (20,386 entries). Identified DIA protein group quantitation values were processed using Perseus software (v1.6.6.4). The data were log2 transformed and missing values replaced using imputation based on normal distribution of values. Volcano plots were made using parametric Students T-tests (assuming normal distribution of data) with a permutation-based FDR of 0.05 to assess multiple comparisons. Heat maps were generated using R after log2 transformed values were converted to z-score, with hierarchical clustering of proteins and samples.  Biological pathway and functional enrichment analysis was performed in CytoScape 3.9.1 (National Resource for Network Biology) software using STRING protein databases (https://string-db.org/). Visualization of volcano plots, principal component analyses, correlation analysis and box plots were made using GraphPad Prism 8 (San Diego, CA, USA) software. Receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve and binary logistic regression analyses was performed using SPSS version 28 (IBM) software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Regeneration, Liver, Machine perfusion, Proteomics, Bile

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Groningen and University of Groningen
University Medical Center Groningen

### Submitter
Adam Thorne

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent E
University Medical Center Groningen and University of Groningen


