### Accession
PXD026300

### Title
Shotgun Immunoproteomic Approach for the Discovery of Linear B Cell Epitopes in Biothreat Agents Francisella tularensis and Burkholderia pseudomallei

### Description
Peptide-based subunit vaccines are coming to the forefront of current vaccine approaches, with safety and cost-effective production among their top advantages. Peptide vaccine formulations consist of multiple synthetic linear epitopes that together trigger desired immune responses that can result in robust immune memory. The advantages of peptide epitopes are their simple structure, ease of synthesis, and ability to stimulate immune responses by means that do not require complex 3D conformation. Identification of linear epitopes is currently an inefficient process that requires thorough characterization of previously identified full-length protein antigens, or laborious techniques involving genetic manipulation of organisms. In this study, we apply a newly developed generalizable screening method that enables efficient identification of B cell epitopes in the proteomes of pathogenic bacteria. As a test case, we used this method to identify epitopes in the proteome of Francisella tularensis (Ft), a Select Agent with a well-characterized immunoproteome. Our screen identified many peptides mapping to known antigens, including verified and predicted outer membrane proteins and extracellular proteins, validating the utility of this approach. We then used the method to identify seroreactive peptides in the less characterized immunoproteome of Select Agent Burkholderia pseudomallei (Bp). This screen revealed known Bp antigens as well as proteins that have not been previously identified as antigens. The present workflow is easily adaptable to detecting peptide targets relevant to the immune systems of other mammalian species, including humans (depending upon the availability of convalescent sera from patients), and could aid in accelerating the discovery of B cell epitopes and development of vaccines to counter emerging biological threats.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and peptide preparation   Ft-ΔclpB and Bp82 were grown to log phase in 300 mL of MH broth or LB broth, respectively, at 37℃ with shaking (250 rpm). The bacteria were harvested by centrifugation at 3200 x g for 10 min at 4°C, washed once with 10 mL of PBS, and the pellet flash frozen using dry ice. The bacteria in the pellet were lysed by subjecting them to two freeze-thaw cycles (alternating between room temperature and dry ice). For protein extraction, the lysate was mixed with Bper Complete Bacterial Protein Extraction Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat# 89822), and the mixture incubated at room temperature for 15 min with rotational shaking. The mixture was then subjected to two rounds of sonication (1 sec pulses, timed output 10 sec, at 50% power) using a Heat Systems Ultrasonics sonicator (model W-385), and centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 10 min. Proteins were precipitated with acetone and washed twice with ethanol. Air-dried protein pellets were solubilized using 8M urea and Protease Max surfactant (Promega, V2071), then digested with trypsin (Promega, V5111) using the in-solution digestion protocol provided by the manufacturer (Promega, TB373). Completion of the trypsinization reaction was confirmed by DNA gel assay. The trypsin-digested proteins were filtered using 10K MWCO concentrators (Pierce) at 10,000 x g for 20 min at 20°C, and the filtrates (purified peptides) stored at -20°C.    Affinity purification of immunoreactive peptides   Magnetic beads coated with protein G (Invitrogen, cat#10007D) were used to capture antibodies from sera from infected mice, following the manufacturer’s “Dynabeads Protein G immunoprecipitation” protocol (MAN0017348). The antibody-coated beads were then incubated with purified peptides at room temperature for 45 min. Following three PBS washes, immunoreactive peptides were eluted from the beads using citrate buffer (pH 3). Input, unbound, and eluate fractions were flash frozen with dry ice and stored at -20°C. As a negative control, antibodies from uninfected (PBS treated) mice were used to detect any background resulting from nonspecific binding of peptides to beads or antibodies.    Mass spectrometry (MS)   The input, unbound, and eluate fractions recovered from antibody-coated beads (see preceding section) were desalted using an Empore SD solid phase extraction plate; lyophilized; reconstituted in 0.1% TFA; and analyzed via LC-MS/MS by MS Bioworks (Ann Arbor, Michigan), using a Waters M-Class UPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75 μm analytical column at 350 nL/min. Both columns were packed with Luna C18 resin (Phenomenex). A 2 hr gradient was employed. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data dependent HCD mode, with MS and MS/MS performed in the Orbitrap at 60,000 FWHM resolution and 15,000 FWHM resolution, respectively. The instrument was run with a 3 sec cycle for MS and MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science) with the following parameters: Enzyme: Trypsin/P; Database: UniProt F. tularensis SCHU S4 or UniProt B. pseudomallei strain 1026b (forward and reverse appended with common contaminants and mouse IgG sequences); Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C); Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (N-term), Pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Deamidation (N/Q); Mass values: Monoisotopic; Peptide Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm; Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02 Da; Max Missed Cleavages: 2; Mascot DAT files were parsed into Scaffold Proteome Software for validation, filtering and to create a non-redundant list per sample. Data were filtered using 1% protein and peptide FDR and requiring at least one unique peptide per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Peptide-based subunit vaccines are coming to the forefront of current vaccine approaches, with safety and cost-effective production among their top advantages. Peptide vaccine formulations consist of multiple synthetic linear epitopes that together trigger desired immune responses that can result in robust immune memory. The advantages of linear compared to conformational epitopes are their simple structure, ease of synthesis, and ability to stimulate immune responses by means that do not require complex 3D conformation. Prediction of linear epitopes through use of computational tools is fast and cost-effective, but typically of low accuracy, necessitating extensive experimentation to verify results. On the other hand, identification of linear epitopes through experimental screening has been an inefficient process that requires thorough characterization of previously identified full-length protein antigens, or laborious techniques involving genetic manipulation of organisms. In this study, we apply a newly developed generalizable screening method that enables efficient identification of B-cell epitopes in the proteomes of pathogenic bacteria. As a test case, we used this method to identify epitopes in the proteome of <i>Francisella tularensis</i> (Ft), a Select Agent with a well-characterized immunoproteome. Our screen identified many peptides that map to known antigens, including verified and predicted outer membrane proteins and extracellular proteins, validating the utility of this approach. We then used the method to identify seroreactive peptides in the less characterized immunoproteome of Select Agent <i>Burkholderia pseudomallei</i> (Bp). This screen revealed known Bp antigens as well as proteins that have not been previously identified as antigens. Although B-cell epitope prediction tools Bepipred 2.0 and iBCE-EL classified many of our seroreactive peptides as epitopes, they did not score them significantly higher than the non-reactive tryptic peptides in our study, nor did they assign higher scores to seroreactive peptides from known Ft or Bp antigens, highlighting the need for experimental data instead of relying on computational epitope predictions alone. The present workflow is easily adaptable to detecting peptide targets relevant to the immune systems of other mammalian species, including humans (depending upon the availability of convalescent sera from patients), and could aid in accelerating the discovery of B-cell epitopes and development of vaccines to counter emerging biological threats.

### Keywords
B cell epitope, Antigen, Immunoproteome, Francisella, Peptide vaccine, Burkholderia

### Affiliations
LLNL

### Submitter
Magdalena Franco

### Lab Head
Dr Magdalena Franco
LLNL


