### Accession
PXD035124

### Title
Directed growth and fusion of membrane-wall microdomains requires CASP-mediated inhibition and displacement of secretory foci

### Description
Casparian strips (CS), the main extracellular diffusion barrier in plant roots, are precisely localized cell wall lignin-impregnations, contrasting animal tight-junctions. The CS membrane domain (CSD) proteins 1-5 (CASP1-5) define and accumulate at the CS associated membrane domains displaying matrix adhesion and protein exclusion. A full CASP knock-out (caspQ) now reveals that CASPs are not needed for localization of lignification or lignin-polymerizing enzymes, since correctly aligned spots still form in the mutant. Ultra-structurally, however, these spots appear as highly disorganized secretory foci, with neither exclusion zone nor membrane attachment and excessive cell wall growth. Biotin proximity labelling identifies RabA-GTPases as potential CASP-interactors. We confirm their localisation and function at the CSD, similar to exocyst subunits, known Rab effectors. Our work reveals that CASPs enforce displacement of initial secretory foci through exclusion of vesicle tethering factors, thereby ensuring rapid fusion of microdomains and effective sealing of the cell wall space.

### Sample Protocol
For each sample, 160 mg of surface-sterilized seeds were imbibed in 0.2% agar and sown in described media containing mesh using 1mL pipette along two lines per square plate. Seedlings were grown for 6 days at 22ºC continuous light, before transferring to 50 µM biotin containing half-strength MS media, under sterile conditions using the mesh to transfer whole seedling population of each plate. Seedlings were grown for another 24h in biotin containing plates at 28ºC. Roots (app. 1g) were collected with razor blade, weighted and immediately frozen in 2mL eppis containing a metal bead in liquid nitrogen. Roots were ground using Tissue Lyzer II (Qiagen) with 2 cycles, 30sec, maximum speed, with a freezing step in-between. Protein extraction and biotinylated-protein purification was done adapting available protocols as follows: Ground roots were resuspended with Volume (2x weight) of RIPA buffer containing protease inhibitors (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% (wt/vol) SDS, 0.5% (wt/vol) sodium deoxycholate and 1% (vol/vol) Triton X-100 in Millipore water, adjusted pH to 7.5 with HCl, 1mM PMSF and 2.5x PIC-Complete (Roche) in cold by short vortexing and spin down at 6’000 g for 10min at 4º C.  Supernatants were collected and dialyzed to remove free biotin with PD-10 columns (GE Healthcare) following manufacturer’s instructions. Dialysed extracts were then incubated with Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin C1 (Invitrogen) overnight. Next day, beads were separated from protein extract using a magnetic rack, and washed with following sequence of buffers: 2x with cold RIPA buffer, 1x with cold KCl 1 M, 1x with cold  , 1x with cold 100 mM Na2CO3, 1x with room temperature 2M Urea in 10 mM Tris pH 8 and 2x with cold extraction buffer. For checking success of purification, 2% of the beads were boiled in 50 ml 4x Laemmli buffer supplemented with 20 mM DTT and 2 mM biotin at 95°C for 5 min for immunoblots (purified). The rest of the beads was spun down to remove the remaining wash buffer, added 1x PBS and stored at -80°C until further processing.  For proteomic analyses magnetic beads were washed with 500 ul of 2M urea / 50 mM TEAB (pH 7.8) and resuspended in 100 ul of the same solution suplemented with 1 mM DTT and 0.5 ug trypsin. After 1 h of incubation at 25°C, the supernatant was collected, beads washed with 100 ul of 2 M urea / 50 mM TEAB and this second supernatant pooled with the first one. After addition of 4 mM DTT (final concentration), the samples were reduced 30 min at 25°C, and then alkylated with 20 mM chloroacetamide (final concentration) during 45 min at 25°C in the dark. After addition of 0.5 ug of trypsin, the samples were digested overnight at 25°C. The solutions were then acidified with 10 ul of 20% trifluoroacetic acid, desalted on a Sep-Pak tC18 Waters plate and eluted with 150 ul of 80% acetonitrile / 0.1% formic acid. Tryptic peptides fractions were dried and resuspended in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, for mass spectrometry analyses. Tryptic peptide mixtures were injected on an Ultimate RSLC 3000 nanoHPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) interfaced to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were loaded onto a trapping microcolumn Acclaim PepMap100 C18 (20 mm x 100 m ID, 5 m, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) before separation on a reversed-phase custom packed nanocolumn (75 m ID × 40 cm, 1.8 m particles, Reprosil Pur, Dr. Maisch). A flowrate of 0.25 l/min was used with a gradient from 4 to 76% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (total time: 140 min). Full survey scans were performed at a 120’000 resolution, and a top speed precursor selection strategy was applied to maximize acquisition of peptide tandem MS spectra with a maximum cycle time of 0.6s. HCD fragmentation mode was used at a normalized collision energy of 32%, with a precursor isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the ion trap. Peptides selected for MS/MS were excluded from further fragmentation during 60s.

### Data Protocol
Tandem MS data were processed by the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4) incorporating the Andromeda search engine. An Arabidopsis thaliana reference proteome database from UniProt (November 2019 version, 39’362 sequences), supplemented with sequences of common contaminants, was used. Trypsin (cleavage at K,R) was specified as the enzyme definition, allowing 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. All identifications were filtered at 1% FDR at both the peptide and protein levels with default MaxQuant parameters. For protein quantitation the iBAQ values were used. MaxQuant data were further processed with Perseus software (version 1.6.14.0) for the filtering, log2-transformation and normalization of values, data imputation, statistical analyses and GO annotations.

### Publication Abstract
Casparian strips (CS) are aligned bands of lignin-impregnated cell walls, building an extracellular diffusion barrier in roots. Their structure profoundly differs from tight junctions (TJ), analogous structures in animals. Nonetheless, CS membrane domain (CSD) proteins 1-5 (CASP1-5) are homologues of occludins, TJ components. CASP-marked membranes display cell wall (matrix) adhesion and membrane protein exclusion. A full CASP knock-out now reveals CASPs are not needed for localized lignification, since correctly positioned lignin microdomains still form in the mutant. Ultra-structurally, however, these microdomains are disorganized, showing excessive cell wall growth, lack of exclusion zone and matrix adhesion, and impaired exocyst dynamics. Proximity-labelling identifies a Rab-GTPase subfamily, known exocyst activators, as potential CASP-interactors and demonstrate their localization and function at the CSD. We propose that CASP microdomains displace initial secretory foci by excluding vesicle tethering factors, thereby ensuring rapid fusion of microdomains into a membrane-cell wall band that seals the extracellular space.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Casp, Fusion, Turboid

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
University of Lausanne, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, Department of Plant Molecular Biology, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Patrice Waridel

### Lab Head
Dr Niko Geldner
University of Lausanne, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, Department of Plant Molecular Biology, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland


