### Accession
PXD001426

### Title
EBprot: Bayesian Analysis of Labelling-based Quantitative Proteomics Data

### Description
Labelling-based proteomics is a powerful method for detection of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between biological samples. The current data analysis platform relies on protein-level ratios, where peptide-level ratios are averaged to yield a single summary ratio for each protein. In shotgun proteomics, however, some proteins are quantified with more peptides than others, and this reproducibility information is incorporated into the differential expression (DE) analysis. Here we propose a novel probabilistic framework EBprot that directly models the peptide-to-protein hierarchy and rewards the proteins with reproducible quantification over multiple peptides. To evaluate its performance with known DE states, we first verified that the peptide-level analysis of EBprot provides more accurate estimation of the false discovery rates and better receiver-operating characteristic than other protein ratio analyses using simulation datasets, and confirmed the superior classification performance in a UPS1 mixture spike-in dataset. To illustrate the performance of EBprot in realistic applications, we applied EBprot to a SILAC dataset for lung cancer subtype analysis and an iTRAQ dataset for time course phosphoproteome analysis of EGF-stimulated HeLa cells, each featuring a different experimental design. Through these various examples, we show that the peptide-level analysis of EBprot provides a competitive advantage over alternative methods for the DE analysis of labelling-based quantitative datasets.

### Sample Protocol
HCT116 cells were SILAC-labeled by culturing them in SILAC DMEM (Invitrogen) containing either 13C- and 15N-labeled lysine and arginine (K8R10; heavy) (Cambridge Isotopes) or 12C- and 14N-labeled lysine and arginine (K0R0; light) (Sigma-Aldrich), 10% dialyzed FBS (Thermo Scientific) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Gibco) at 37°C in a humidity-saturated 5% CO2 atmosphere. The cells were cultured for approximately six doublings to ensure complete incorporation before harvesting. Cells were washed once with PBS before lysis using 8M urea in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate. Protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay (Bio-rad). The lyophilized UPS1 (Sigma-Aldrich) was reconstituted in a buffer containing 8M urea and 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. 100fmol, 300fmol and 600fmol of UPS1 proteins were spiked into a constant cell lysate mix containing 2ug of light- and 2ug of heavy-labeled HCT116 Parental. Reduction, followed by alkylation, was carried out on the samples with 5mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich) and 10mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) respectively, at room temperature for 30 minutes. In-solution digestion was performed using Lys-C (Promega) at 37°C for 16 hours, followed by trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 8 hours. Desalting was carried out on self-packed C18 stage-tips. The eluted peptides were separated by reverse-phase chromatography on Thermo Scientific Easy-Spray column (PepMapr RSLC, C18, 2mm, 100_A, 75mm _ 50cm) using Thermo Scientific nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography system (Easy-nLC 1000). Easy-nLC 1000 was coupled to Thermo Scientific Q Exactive benchtop Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The UPS1 datasets were searched against the human sequence database from UniProt Knowledgebase (2014) with a total of 88,479 sequences. Database searches were performed with tryptic specificity allowing maximum two missed cleavages and labeled arginine and lysine. Carbamidomethlyation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification with N-acetylation and oxidized methionine permitted as a variable modification. SILAC peptide and protein quantification was performed with MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5. The proteins were considered identified when supported by at least one unique peptide with a minimum length of seven amino acids. Maximum false discovery rates were set to 0.01 for both protein and peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Labeling-based proteomics is a powerful method for detection of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). The current data analysis platform typically relies on protein-level ratios, which is obtained by summarizing peptide-level ratios for each protein. In shotgun proteomics, however, some proteins are quantified with more peptides than others, and this reproducibility information is not incorporated into the differential expression (DE) analysis. Here, we propose a novel probabilistic framework EBprot that directly models the peptide-protein hierarchy and rewards the proteins with reproducible evidence of DE over multiple peptides. To evaluate its performance with known DE states, we conducted a simulation study to show that the peptide-level analysis of EBprot provides better receiver-operating characteristic and more accurate estimation of the false discovery rates than the methods based on protein-level ratios. We also demonstrate superior classification performance of peptide-level EBprot analysis in a spike-in dataset. To illustrate the wide applicability of EBprot in different experimental designs, we applied EBprot to a dataset for lung cancer subtype analysis with biological replicates and another dataset for time course phosphoproteome analysis of EGF-stimulated HeLa cells with multiplexed labeling. Through these examples, we show that the peptide-level analysis of EBprot is a robust alternative to the existing statistical methods for the DE analysis of labeling-based quantitative datasets. The software suite is freely available on the Sourceforge website http://ebprot.sourceforge.net/. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001426 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001426/).

### Keywords
Hierarchical mixture model, Differential expression, Stable isotope labelling, Quantitative analysis

### Affiliations
IMCB
NUS

### Submitter
Rachel Li

### Lab Head
Dr Hyung Won Choi
NUS


