### Accession
PXD029296

### Title
Exploring the mechanism of action of Canmei formula against colorectal adenoma through multi-omics technique

### Description
Background: Canmei formula (CMF) is a traditional Chinese medicine compound with definite effect on the prevention and treatment of colorectal adenoma (CRA). It can prevent the transformation of intestinal inflammation to cancer.  This study explored the mechanism of action of CMF in anti-CRA using multi-omics techniques.   Method: Mice were randomly divided into 4 groups: blank group (Control), high-fat diet (HFD) + AOM/DSS colorectal adenoma model (ADH) groups, Canmei formula treatment group (ADH-CMF) and sulfasalazine treatment group (Sul). Except for the blank group, ADH model was established in the other 3 groups by intraperitoneal injection with AOM reagent, and then mice was given 2.5%DSS in free drinking water and high-fat diet. The mice in the blank group and ADH group were intragastrically perfused with normal saline, and the mice in the other 2 groups were treated with corresponding drugs for 20 weeks. During this period, the changes of physical signs of mice in each group were observed. The differentially expressed genes and proteins in the Control group, ADH group and ADH-CMF group were detected by RNA-seq transcriptome sequencing and Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) quantitative proteomics. After the combined analysis and verification. The key targets were analyzed by gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG).   Results : A total of 2548 differential genes were obtained by transcriptomics analysis, and 45 differential proteins were obtained by proteomics analysis. The results of proteomics data and experimental verification showed that CMF mainly acted on the Phospholysine Phosphohistidine Inorganic Pyrophosphate Phosphatase (LHPP) target. GO analysis showed that the targets of CMF were involved in the biological processes such as cellular process, metabolic process and biological regulation. KEGG analysis showed that those genes were involved in oxidative phosphorylation, cell senescence, and Metabolic pathways. Studies have shown that Lhpp overexpression of Lhpp impeded Colorectal cancer cell growth and proliferation in vitro, and was associated with a change in PI3K/AKT activity.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins were extracted from intestinal tissues, digested with trypsin, and labelled with TMT reagents. ThThe proteins were extracted from intestinal tissues, digested with trypsin, and labelled with TMT reagents. The pooled peptides were separated into 15 fractions using a C18 column (Waters BEH C18 4.6×250 mm, 5 µm) on a Rigol L3000 HPLC.

### Data Protocol
When the protein abundance ratio is 1.2 times or more, and P < 0.05, the protein can be considered as differential protein. Venny was used to screen highly expressed differentially expressed proteins (Control group vs ADH group and ADH group vs ADH-CMF group) and low expression of differentially expressed proteins (Control group vs ADH group and ADH group vs ADH-CMF group).e pooled peptides were separated into 15 fractions using a C18 column (Waters BEH C18 4.6×250 mm, 5 µm) on a Rigol L3000 HPLC. When the protein abundance ratio is 1.2 times or more, and P < 0.05, the protein can be considered as differential protein. Venny was used to screen highly expressed differentially expressed proteins (Control group vs ADH group and ADH group vs ADH-CMF group) and low expression of differentially expressed proteins (Control group vs ADH group and ADH group vs ADH-CMF group).

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> Canmei formula (CMF) is a traditional Chinese medicine compound with definite effect on the prevention and treatment of colorectal adenoma (CRA). CMF can prevent the transformation of intestinal inflammation to cancer. This study explored the mechanism of action of CMF in anti-CRA using multi-omics techniques. <b>Method:</b> The mice were randomly divided into four groups: blank group (Control), high-fat diet (HFD) + AOM/DSS colorectal adenoma model (ADH) groups, Canmei formula treatment group (ADH-CMF) and sulfasalazine treatment group (Sul). Except for the blank group, ADH model was established in the other three groups by intraperitoneal injection with AOM reagent, and then mice were given 2.5% DSS in free drinking water and high-fat diet. The mice in the blank group and ADH groups were intragastrically perfused with normal saline, and the mice in the other two groups were treated with corresponding drugs for 20&#xa0;weeks. During this period, the changes of physical signs of mice in each group were observed. The differentially expressed genes and proteins in the Control group, ADH group and ADH-CMF group were detected by RNA-seq transcriptome sequencing and Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) quantitative proteomics. After the combined analysis and verification, the key targets were analyzed by gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG). Moreover, the changes of intestinal flora in mice of the three groups were examined. <b>Results:</b> A total of 2,548 differential genes were obtained by transcriptomics analysis, and 45 differential proteins were obtained by proteomics analysis. The results of proteomics data and experimental verification showed that CMF mainly affected the Phospholysine Phosphohistidine Inorganic Pyrophosphate Phosphatase (LHPP) target. GO analysis showed that the targets of CMF were involved in the biological processes such as cellular process, metabolic process and biological regulation. KEGG analysis showed that those genes were involved in oxidative phosphorylation, cell senescence, and metabolic pathways. Studies have shown that LHPP overexpression impeded colorectal cancer cell growth and proliferation <i>in vitro</i>, and was associated with a change in PI3K/AKT activity. The results of 16S DNA high-throughput sequencing showed that CMF could effectively regulate the abundance of Bifidobacterium, Candidatus_Saccharimonas and Erysipelatoclostridium in the intestinal flora at the genus level. <b>Conclusion:</b> CMF regulates LHPP via the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway. CMF affects the abundance of specific intestinal flora and can regulate the disorder of intestinal flora to achieve the role of prevention and treatment of CRA.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Colorectal adenoma

### Affiliations
Yueyang Hospital of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine
China State Institute of Pharmaceutical Industry

### Submitter
xiaoling fu

### Lab Head
Dr National Pharmaceutical Engineering Research Cente
China State Institute of Pharmaceutical Industry


