### Accession
PXD028850

### Title
TET1 interactome in mESCs (via ChIP-MS)

### Description
Precise regulation of DNA methylation in mammals is critical for genome stability and epigenetic regulation. The discovery of the ten-eleven translocation (TET) proteins catalyzing the oxidation from 5-methylcytosine (5mC) to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC), 5-formylcytosine (5fC), and 5-carboxylcytosine (5caC) revolutionized the perspective on the complexity and regulation of DNA modifications. Despite accumulating knowledge about the role of TET1, it remains unclear to what extent these can be attributed to its catalytic activity. Here, we use genome engineering and quantitative multi-omics approaches to dissect the role and mechanism of TET1 in mESCs. Our study identifies TET1 as an essential interaction hub for multiple chromatin modifying complexes and as a global regulator of histone modifications. Strikingly, we find that the majority of transcriptional regulation depends on non-catalytic functions of TET1. Moreover, we show that the establishment of H3K9me3 and H4K20me3 at ERV1, ERVK, and ERVL is mediated by TET1 independent of DNA demethylation. We provide evidence that repression of endogenous retroviruses depends on the interaction between TET1 and SIN3A. In summary, we demonstrate that the non-catalytic functions of TET1 are critical for regulation of gene expression and the silencing of endogenous retroviruses in mESCs.

### Sample Protocol
Chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled to Mass Spectrometry (ChIP-MS) of TET1 was performed in triplicates for WT and TET1 KO mESCs under Serum+LIF condition. For the pulldown a direct TET1 antibody (09-872-I, Sigma-Aldrich) was employed. ChIP-MS was performed as described previously, but without MNase digestion (Qin et al., 2021). Briefly, for each replicate a 15 cm cell culture dish was cultured for 2 days and 15x106 cells were crosslinked by 1% paraformaldehyde. Cells were lysed by the IP buffer (1.7% Triton X-100, 100 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 5 mM EDTA pH 8.0, 0.3% SDS and freshly added 1x protease inhibitor cocktail) by pipetting and resting for 10 min on ice. Chromatin was sheared by sonication for 15 min in a Bioruptor Plus (30 s on/off cycles, Diagenode). Shearing efficiency was checked after overnight reverse crosslinking and proteinase K digestion of samples on a 1% agarose gel. Protein concentrations were estimated by BCA assay (Thermo) and samples were diluted to 1.3 mg/mL in 1 mL. 1.7 µg of the antibody was added to each replicate and samples were incubated O/N at 4°C under constant rotation. The next day magnetic protein A/G beads (20 µL slurry volume/sample, Sigma) were added to each sample to wash out unspecific interactors. After two low salt (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 140 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100), one high salt (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100) and two TBS washes, proteins were incubated in 2 mM DTT and subsequently 40 mM CAA (both diluted in 2 M Urea and 50 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.5). Then proteins were on-bead digested by Trypsin (20 µg/mL) O/N at 25°C. The next day, protease activity was stopped by 1% TFA and peptides were cleaned-up on Stage Tips consisting of three layers of C18 material (Empore) (Rappsilber et al., 2007). After elution from Stage Tips peptides were speedvac dried and resuspended in 20 µL of A* buffer (0.1% TFA and 2% acetonitrile). Peptide concentrations were estimated by nanodrop measurements at 280 nm. 300 ng of each peptide solution was analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap ExplorisTM 480, Thermo Fisher Scientific) after nanoflow liquid chromatography on an in-house packed 50 cm column (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μM resin, Dr Maisch GmbH) coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) over a linear acetonitrile gradient for 120 min. Data-dependent acquisition was employed and thereby the most abundant 12 peptides were selected for MS/MS scans. The target value for full scan MS spectra was set to 3x106 and the resolution was at 60,000. The m/z range was adjusted to 400-1,650 m/z and the maximum injection time was limited to 20 ms.

### Data Protocol
Subsequent data analysis of raw MS files was first accomplished by the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.0.7) (Cox and Mann, 2008). Protein sequences were acquired over the Uniprot data base (reviewed and unreviewed, version 2020) as a FASTA file. The MaxQuant analysis comprised the “Match between runs” option, a false discovery rate for both peptides (minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins of 1% and determination of proteins amounts by the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al., 2014). Downstream analysis was then performed with the Perseus software package (version 1.6.0.9). A two-sided Student’s t-test of the log2 transformed LFQ intensities was performed to obtain significantly enriched proteins. By definition, a permutation-based false discovery rate of 5% and a fold change cut-off of log2=1 was applied.

### Publication Abstract
DNA methylation (5-methylcytosine (5mC)) is critical for genome stability and transcriptional regulation in mammals. The discovery that ten-eleven translocation (TET) proteins catalyze the oxidation of 5mC to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC), 5-formylcytosine (5fC), and 5-carboxylcytosine (5caC) revolutionized our perspective on the complexity and regulation of DNA modifications. However, to what extent the regulatory functions of TET1 can be attributed to its catalytic activity remains unclear. Here, we use genome engineering and quantitative multi-omics approaches to dissect the precise catalytic vs. non-catalytic functions of TET1 in murine embryonic stem cells (mESCs). Our study identifies TET1 as an essential interaction hub for multiple chromatin modifying complexes and a global regulator of histone modifications. Strikingly, we find that the majority of transcriptional regulation depends on non-catalytic functions of TET1. In particular, we show that TET1 is critical for the establishment of H3K9me3 and H4K20me3 at endogenous retroviral elements (ERVs) and their silencing that is independent of its canonical role in DNA demethylation. Furthermore, we provide evidence that this repression of ERVs depends on the interaction between TET1 and SIN3A. In summary, we demonstrate that the non-catalytic functions of TET1 are critical for regulation of gene expression and the silencing of endogenous retroviruses in mESCs.

### Keywords
Dna methylation, Epigenetics, Tet1, Mouse embryonic stem cells

### Affiliations
Faculty of Biology and Center for Molecular Biosystems (BioSysM), Human Biology and BioImaging, LMU Munich & Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Department of Biology II and Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich (CIPSM), Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Enes Ugur

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Bultmann
Department of Biology II and Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich (CIPSM), Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany


