### Accession
PXD001440

### Title
Systems-wide analysis of BCR signalosomes and downstream phosphorylation and ubiquitylation

### Description
In this study, we have analyzed BCR induced dynamic composition of the BCR signalosome and global changes in BCR induced phosphoproteome and ubiquitylation events using high resolution LC-MS/MS

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labelled A20 cells were used for our experiments. Medium labelled and heavy labelled were stimulated with biotin tagged or unlabeled anti-IgG for 5 and 15 minutes respectively, and, light labelled cells were kept unstimulated. BCR signalosomes were pulled-down using streptavdin conjugated beads followed by in-gel based protein digestion and LC-MS/MS. For analyzing phosphoproteome and ubiquitylome cell lysates were mixed at a ratio of 1:1:1 and were subjected to acetone precipitation. Acetone precipitates were dissolved in 8M Urea and were treated with DTT and CAA. Proteins were subsequently digested with Lys-C and Trypsin followed by desalting with C18 columns. Elated peptides were subjected to first di-Gly immunoprecipitation followed by enrichment of phopsphopeptides with Titanium dioxide beads. Peptides were fractionated using SCX and were further desalted with C18 state-tips. Samples were run on a high resolution LC-MS/MS (Q-Exactive, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Samples were fractionated using SCX and were subjected to LC-MS/MS using Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Raw files were analyzed using Max-quant version 1.3.9.21.

### Publication Abstract
B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling is essential for the development and function of B cells; however, the spectrum of proteins involved in BCR signaling is not fully known. Here we used quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics to monitor the dynamics of BCR signaling complexes (signalosomes) and to investigate the dynamics of downstream phosphorylation and ubiquitylation signaling. We identify most of the previously known components of BCR signaling, as well as many proteins that have not yet been implicated in this system. BCR activation leads to rapid tyrosine phosphorylation and ubiquitylation of the receptor-proximal signaling components, many of which are co-regulated by both the modifications. We illustrate the power of multilayered proteomic analyses for discovering novel BCR signaling components by demonstrating that BCR-induced phosphorylation of RAB7A at S72 prevents its association with effector proteins and with endo-lysosomal compartments. In addition, we show that BCL10 is modified by LUBAC-mediated linear ubiquitylation, and demonstrate an important function of LUBAC in BCR-induced NF-&#x3ba;B signaling. Our results offer a global and integrated view of BCR signaling, and the provided datasets can serve as a valuable resource for further understanding BCR signaling networks.

### Keywords
B-cells, Bcr signaling, A20 b cell line

### Affiliations
The NNF Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Shankha Satpathy

### Lab Head
Dr Chunaram Choudhary
The NNF Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, Denmark


