### Accession
PXD018264

### Title
Multi-protease analysis of Pleistocene bone proteomes

### Description
Palaeoproteomics of skeletal tissues has the potential to provide new insights into the evolutionary relationships between globally distributed hominin fossils across the Pleistocene. The use of alternative or additional proteases has the potential to increase both proteome size and protein. However, the potential of alternative proteases beside trypsin remains unexplored systematically in palaeoproteomic studies. Here, we present a comparison of the bone proteome size and protein sequence recovery of six different proteases from four Pleistocene bone specimens. We observe that the majority of the preserved bone proteome is inaccessible to trypsin. We also note that for proteins recovered consistently across several proteases, protein sequence coverage can be increased significantly by combining peptide identifications from two or more proteases. Our results thereby demonstrate that the proteolysis of Pleistocene proteomes by several proteases has clear advantages when addressing evolutionary questions in palaeoproteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Bone samples were demineralized in 0.5 M EDTA. Soluble proteins were buffer-exchanged to ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8), and combined with proteins recovered from the insoluble pellet via Tris incubation at 60 °C. Extracted proteins were reduced (TCEP), alkylated (CAA), and then divided into six equal fractions. After protein solubilisation, six different proteases (Chymotrypsin, Elastase, GluC, LysN, Pepsin, Trypsin) were added to each fraction in a protease:protein ratio of 1:50. Proteolysis conditions followed manufacturers protocols. After proteolysis, generated peptides were immobilized on C18 Stage-Tips in triplicate. Peptides were eluted from StageTips using 30 μl 40% ACN 0.1% formic acid, dried down in a vacuum centrifuge, and rehydrated with 10 μl of 0.1% TFA and 5% ACN solution. Five µl of each sample was then separated on an in-house made 15 cm column (75 μm inner diameter) packed with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Germany) on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). The column was connected to a Q-Exactive HF-X orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The same procedure was followed for a set of extraction blanks, while MS data acquisition also included a set of injection blanks.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data was searched in MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) against the horse and human proteomes (downloaded from UniProt on 07/07/2018 and 11/09/2018, respectively). For the Equidae, searches were performed separately for each protease. For the hominin, a single search was performed including all data files, grouped per protease. Injection replicates were kept separate during MQ data analysis. Each search was performed twice, once using semi-specific proteolysis mode and once using specific proteolysis mode. For each search, default settings of 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the final search were used, and a fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm.  Variable post-translational modifications (PTMs) we selected included oxidation (M), deamidation (N and Q), proline hydroxylation (P), and carbamidomethylation (C). Peptide matches were accepted with a minimum score of 40. Peptide and protein FDR were both set to 1.0%.

### Publication Abstract
Ancient protein analysis is providing new insights into the evolutionary relationships between hominin fossils across the Pleistocene. Protein identification commonly relies on the proteolysis of a protein extract using a single protease, trypsin. As with modern proteome studies, alternative or additional proteases have the potential to increase both proteome size and protein sequence recovery. This could enhance the recovery of phylogenetic information from ancient proteomes. Here we identify 18 novel hominin bone specimens from the Kleine Feldhofer Grotte using MALDI-TOF MS peptide mass fingerprinting of collagen type I. Next, we use one of these hominin bone specimens and three Late Pleistocene Equidae specimens identified in a similar manner and present a comparison of the bone proteome size and protein sequence recovery obtained after using nanoLC-MS/MS and parallel proteolysis using six different proteases, including trypsin. We observe that the majority of the preserved bone proteome is inaccessible to trypsin. We also observe that for proteins recovered consistently across several proteases, protein sequence coverage can be increased significantly by combining peptide identifications from two or more proteases. Our results thereby demonstrate that the proteolysis of Pleistocene proteomes by several proteases has clear advantages when addressing evolutionary questions in palaeoproteomics. SIGNIFICANCE: Maximizing proteome and protein sequence recovery of ancient skeletal proteomes is important when analyzing unique hominin fossils. As with modern proteome studies, palaeoproteomic analysis of Pleistocene bone and dentine samples has almost exclusively used trypsin as its only protease, despite the demonstrated advantages of alternative proteases to increase proteome recovery in modern proteome studies. We demonstrate that Pleistocene bone proteomes can be significantly expanded by using additional proteases beside trypsin, and that this also improves sequence coverage of individual proteins. The use of several alternative proteases beside trypsin therefore has major benefits to maximize the phylogenetic information retrieved from ancient skeletal proteomes.

### Keywords
Proteases, Neanderthals, Bone, Pleistocene

### Affiliations
Postdoc
Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen
Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Frido Welker

### Lab Head
Dr Enrico Cappellini
Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen


