### Accession
PXD029596

### Title
Thymine DNA glycosylase (TDG) regulates cell cycle–driven p53 transcriptional control in pluripotent cells

### Description
Cell cycle progression is linked to transcriptome dynamics and variations in the response of pluripotent cells to differentiation cues, through mostly unknown determinants. Here, we characterized the cell cycle–associated transcriptome and proteome of mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) in naïve ground state. We found that the thymine DNA glycosylase (TDG) is a cell cycle–regulated co-factor of the tumour suppressor p53. Further, TDG and p53 co-bind ESC-specific cis-regulatory elements and thereby control transcription of p53-dependent genes during self-renewal. We determined that the dynamic expression of TDG is required to promote the cell cycle–associated transcriptional heterogeneity. Moreover, we demonstrated that transient depletion of TDG influences cell fate decisions during the early differentiation of mESCs. Our findings reveal an unanticipated role of TDG in promoting molecular heterogeneity during the cell cycle, and highlight the central role of protein dynamics for the temporal control of cell fate during development.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates were reduced, alkylated and digested to peptide mixes according to the filter-aided sample preparation PMID: 19377485 method using LysC 1:10 ratio(w:w; enzyme:substrate) at 37º C overnight followed by trypsin 1:10 ratio (w:w; enzyme:substrate) at 37 º C for 8 hours. Tryptic peptide mixtures were desalted using a C18 UltraMicroSpin column. Samples were analyzed in an Orbitrap hybrid Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to a Proxeon nano-LC equipped with a C18 reversed-phase chromatography column using a 120 min gradient (water/acetonitrile). The instrument was operated in DDA mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 120,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 300-2,000 with detection in the Orbitrap. Following each survey scan the top twenty most intense ions were selected for fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 35%. Fragment ion spectra produced via collision-induced dissociation (CID) were acquired in the linear ion trap. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite and data were searched with Mascot search engine against SwissProt Mouse where the most common contaminants were added PMID: 20641139. A precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm at the MS1 level was used, and up to three miscleavages for trypsin were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Oxidation of methionine and protein acetylation at the N-terminal were defined as variable modification. Carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fix modification. The identified peptides were filtered using a FDR < 5 % using Percolator.  For quantification, peptides observed in one single biological replicate were not considered and values completely missing in one condition were imputed with a minimal value extracted +/- error. Areas of the three most abundant peptides per protein were log2-transformed and used to calculate protein fold-changes and q-values using Qlucore Omics Explorer 3.5 software (Qlucore, Lund, Sweden).  For the Protein vs. RNA bubble plot, the biological processes from the proteins identified by mass spectrometry were retrieve, using GoTermMapper tool (http://go.princeton.edu/cgi-bin/GOTermMapper). For the biological processes encompassing more than 100 proteins, the difference in the log2(average expression) for protein and RNA between G1- a S-G2/M was calculated.   

### Publication Abstract
Cell cycle progression is linked to transcriptome dynamics and variations in the response of pluripotent cells to differentiation cues, mostly through unknown determinants. Here, we characterized the cell-cycle-associated transcriptome and proteome of mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) in naive ground state. We found that the thymine DNA glycosylase (TDG) is a cell-cycle-regulated co-factor of the tumor suppressor p53. Furthermore, TDG and p53 co-bind ESC-specific cis-regulatory elements and thereby control transcription of p53-dependent genes during self-renewal. We determined that the dynamic expression of TDG is required to promote the cell-cycle-associated transcriptional heterogeneity. Moreover, we demonstrated that transient depletion of TDG influences cell fate decisions during the early differentiation of mESCs. Our findings reveal an unanticipated role of TDG in promoting molecular heterogeneity during the cell cycle and highlight the central role of protein dynamics for the temporal control of cell fate during development.

### Keywords
Cell cycle, Embryonic stem cells, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
UPF
CRG, UPF

### Submitter
Eva Borràs

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabido
CRG, UPF


