### Accession
PXD022221

### Title
Regulating hippocampal levels of AlzheimerÃ‚Â´s disease-related proteins with a brain-penetrating somatostatin peptide

### Description
Plaques consisting of amyloid-ÃŽÂ² (AÃŽÂ²) in the brain are characteristic for patients with AlzheimerÃ‚Â´s disease. AÃŽÂ² is enzymatically generated of the amyloid precursor protein. Furthermore, neprilysin, an AÃŽÂ²-degrading enzyme, and its main activator the neuropeptide somatostatin (SST) are downregulated in AlzheimerÃ‚Â´s disease. In the fusion protein SST-scFv8D3, SST is recombinantly fused to a blood-brain barrier transporter. The aim of this study was to study the effect of SST-scFv8D3 on the proteome of different brain regions in order to elucidate the anti-AlzheimerÃ‚Â´s disease effects of this construct. SST-scFv8D3 and phosphate buffered saline (PBS) respectively were injected into transgenic mice of an AlzheimerÃ‚Â´s disease model with the Swedish mutation (AÃŽÂ²PP KM670/671NL) every 36 hours (three times in total). Homogenates of the hippocampus, the cerebellum and the rest of the cerebrum were lysed. Afterwards, filter aided tryptic digestion was performed. The resulting peptides were analyzed using LC-UDMSE. The data was searched against a randomized mouse database and label-free quantification analysis was done. In total 1869 proteins were found. Only the proteome of the hippocampus was affected by the treatment with SST-scFv8D3. 55 proteins were significantly up and 105 down regulated compared to the PBS treated mice. Among these were mitochondrial and synaptic proteins as well as some involved in neuronÃ‚Â´s development indicating anti-Alzheimer disease effects of SST-scFv8D3 and supporting the future use of SST-scFv8D3 as a treatment option.

### Sample Protocol
APPswe transgenic mice with the Swedish mutation (AÃŽÂ²PP KM670/671NL) were treated with SST-scFv8D3 and PBS respectively every 36 hours (three injections in total). 24 hours after the last injection the brains were isolated and the hippocampal area, rest of the cerebrum and the cerebellum were separately homogenized and lysed by using tip sonication. 20 Ã‚Âµg of total protein of each sample were used for filter aided sample preparation including reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamid and tryptic digestion (enzyme-to-protein ratio 1:50 (w/w)) for 16 h at 37 Ã‚Â°C. Trifluoroacetic acid was added to a final concentration of 1 %. The samples were dried down at 45 Ã‚Â°C and reconstituted in 3 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid in water to a final concentration of 150 ng protein/Ã‚ÂµL. The resulting peptides were analyzed on a nanoAcquity UPLC system coupled to a Synapt G2-S HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA). 300 ng protein/Ã‚ÂµL were injected in trapping mode on a C18, 5 Ã‚Âµm, 180 Ã‚Âµm x 20 mm trap column (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA). The analytical column was a HSS-T3 C18 1.8 Ã‚Âµm, 75 Ã‚Âµm x 250 mm column (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA). The oven temperature was set to 40 Ã‚Â°C. Mobile phase A contained 0.1 % formic acid and 3 % dimethyl sulfoxide in water and mobile phase B 0.1 % formic acid and 3 % dimethyl sulfoxide in acetonitrile. At a flow rate of 0.3 Ã‚ÂµL/min a gradient was run from 3 % mobile phase B to 40 % (v/v). Positive resolution mode and UDMSE  were used. Through the reference channel of the instrument a lock mass solution consisting of 0.1 Ã‚ÂµM [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B and leu-enkephalin (1 Ã‚ÂµM) was introduced every 60 s.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS raw data was processed using ProteinLynx Global Server 3.0.3 and searched against a randomized UniProt mouse database. The following parameter were used: false discovery rate of 0.01, trypsin as digest reagent, carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification, acetyl lysine, C-terminal amidation, asparagine deamidation, glutamine deamidation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications, one missed cleavage per peptide, one minimum fragment ion matches per peptide, three minimum fragment ion matches per protein and two minimum peptide matches per protein. ISOQuant 1.8 was used for label-free quantification analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease is the most common neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the pathological aggregation of amyloid-&#x3b2; (A&#x3b2;) peptide. A potential therapeutic intervention in Alzheimer's disease is to enhance A&#x3b2; degradation by increasing the activity of A&#x3b2;-degrading enzymes, including neprilysin. The somatostatin (SST) peptide has been identified as an activator of neprilysin. Recently, we demonstrated the ability of a brain-penetrating SST peptide (SST-scFv8D3) to increase neprilysin activity and membrane-bound A&#x3b2;42 degradation in the hippocampus of mice overexpressing the A&#x3b2;-precursor protein with the Swedish mutation (APPswe). Using LC-MS, we further evaluated the anti-Alzheimer's disease effects of SST-scFv8D3. Following a triple intravenous injection of SST-scFv8D3, the LC-MS analysis of the brain proteome revealed that the majority of downregulated proteins consisted of mitochondrial proteins regulating fatty acid oxidation, which are otherwise upregulated in APPswe mice compared to wild-type mice. Moreover, treatment with SST-scFv8D3 significantly increased hippocampal levels of synaptic proteins regulating cell membrane trafficking and neuronal development. Finally, hippocampal concentrations of growth-regulated &#x3b1; (KC/GRO) chemokine and degradation of neuropeptide-Y were elevated after SST-scFv8D3 treatment. In summary, our results demonstrate a multifaceted effect profile in regulating mitochondrial function and neurogenesis following treatment with SST-scFv8D3, further suggesting the development of Alzheimer's disease therapies based on SST peptides.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Brain, Amyloid-ãžâ², Sst-scfv8d3, Alzheimerã‚â´s disease, Tryptic digestion, Mice, Neprilysin

### Affiliations
Uppsala University
Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences Uppsala University

### Submitter
Erik Jansson

### Lab Head
Dr Erik T. Jansson
Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences Uppsala University


