### Accession
PXD027640

### Title
The Mediator complex in the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum contains evolutionarily novel subunits

### Description
The eukaryote Mediator is a large and conserved multi-subunit protein complex that directly contacts RNA polymerase II and impinges on multiple aspects of gene expression. The genome of the human malaria parasite P. falciparum has been predicted to encode several Mediator subunits. We provide physical evidence for the presence of a Mediator complex in P. falciparum by using co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry to identify interaction partners of the highly conserved Mediator subunit, PfMed31. We identify 11 of 14 predicted Mediator subunits as well as the products of two uncharacterized genes, PF3D7_0526800 and PF3D7_1363600, which strongly associate with PfMed31. As expected, several additional interaction partners have known roles in the transcriptional control of gene expression and mRNA processing. Intriguingly, multiple interaction partners are implicated in endoplasmic reticulum function and the ER stress (ERS) response suggesting crosstalk between the ERS response and transcriptional machineries. Our results establish for the first time the physical presence of the Mediator complex within P. falciparum, and strongly suggest that it plays both conserved and unique roles in the control of gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
PfMed31 interactome / Mediator complex in P. falciparum were pull down by using co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry to identify interaction partners of the highly conserved Mediator subunit.

### Data Protocol
The protein complex was identified by LC-MS/MS (Q-Exactive). Raw data files were converted to mgf format using ProteinDiscoverer version 1.4.  The data in mgf format were search using an in-house Mascot server version 2.41. Label-free quantificaiton was used to measure the protein abundance using emPAI value.

### Publication Abstract
The eukaryotic Mediator is a large and conserved multisubunit protein complex that directly contacts RNA polymerase II and impinges on multiple aspects of gene expression. The genome of the human malaria parasite <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> has been predicted to encode several Mediator subunits. We provide physical evidence for the presence of a Mediator complex in <i>P. falciparum</i> by using coimmunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry to identify interaction partners of the highly conserved Mediator subunit PfMed31. We identify 11 of 14 predicted Mediator subunits and the products of two uncharacterized genes, PF3D7_0526800 and PF3D7_1363600, which are strongly associated with PfMed31. As expected, several additional interaction partners have known roles in the transcriptional control of gene expression and mRNA processing. Intriguingly, multiple interaction partners are implicated in endoplasmic reticulum function and the ER stress (ERS) response, suggesting crosstalk between the ERS response and the transcriptional machinery. Our results establish for the first time the physical presence of the Mediator complex within <i>P. falciparum</i> and strongly suggest that it plays both conserved and unique roles in the control of gene expression. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD027640.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum; interactome

### Affiliations
Nanyang Technological University

### Submitter
SoFong Cam Ngan

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Featerstone
Nanyang Technological University


