### Accession
PXD005006

### Title
Proteomic profiling of enteroid cultures skewed towards development of specific epithelial lineages

### Description
Recently, three-dimensional small intestinal organoids (enteroids) have been developed from cultures of intestinal stem cells which differentiate in vitro to generate all the differentiated epithelial cell types associated with the intestine and mimic the structural properties of the intestine observed in vivo. Small-molecule drug treatment can skew organoid epithelial cell differentiation towards particular lineages, and these skewed enteroids may provide useful tools to study specific epithelial cell populations, such as goblet and Paneth cells. However, the use and characterisation of enteroid models has not yet been fully explored, such that the extent to which differentiated epithelial cell populations in these skewed enteroids represent their in vivo counterparts is not fully understood. In this study, we have performed label-free quantitative proteomics to determine whether skewing murine enteroid cultures towards the goblet or Paneth cell lineages results in changes in abundance of proteins associated with these cell lineages in vivo. Our data confirm that skewed enteroids recapitulate important features of the in vivo gut environment, confirming that they can serve as useful models for the investigation of normal and disease processes in the intestine. Furthermore, by comparison of our mass spectrometry data with histology data contained within the Human Protein Atlas, we identify putative novel markers for goblet and Paneth cells.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction For mass spectrometry, a minimum of 50 organoids per treatment group were extracted from Matrigel® using Cell Recovery Solution (BD Bioscience). Proteins were extracted in solution using rinsed in PBS. Buffer (50mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.2% w/v Rapigest, (Waters) was added to washed samples before sonication using a sonicating water bath (Jencons) for 3 x 10 minutes with ice. Samples were heated at 80⁰C for 10 minutes. Protein content was determined using the Coomassie plus protein assay kit (Pierce) and normalised between samples using 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were reduced with 3 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma) at 60⁰C for 10 minutes, then alkylated with 9 mM iodoacetimde (Sigma) at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark. Proteomic grade trypsin (Sigma) was added at a protein: trypsin ratio of 50:1 and samples incubated at 37⁰C overnight. Rapigest was removed by adding TFA to a final concentration of 1% (v/v) and incubating at 37⁰C for 2 hours. Peptide samples were centrifuged at 12,000g for 60 min (4⁰C) to remove precipitated Rapigest.   Mass spectrometry Trypsin digested peptide mixtures (2µl) were analysed by on-line nanoflow liquid chromatography using the nanoACQUITY-nLC system (Waters MS technologies, Manchester, UK) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer with the manufacturer’s nanospray ion source. The analytical column (nanoACQUITY UPLCTM BEH130 C18 15cm x 75µm, 1.7µm capillary column) was maintained at 35⁰C and a flow-rate of 300nl/min. The gradient consisted of 3-40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 150 min then a ramp of 40-85% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 5min. Full scan MS spectra (m/z range 350-2000) were acquired by the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 (m/z 400). The target value was 10.00E+05. Analysis was performed in data dependant mode. The top 20 most intense ions from MS1 scan (full MS) with charge state ≥ 2 were selected for tandem MS by collision induced dissociation (CID) with normalised collision energy of 35% and all product spectra were acquired in the LTQ ion trap. The target value was 3.00E+04, activation q = 0.25, activation time of 10 ms, and one microscan. The ion selection threshold was 500 counts, and the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 500 ms for full scans and 250 ms for CID. Dynamic exclusion duration of 30 s was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were imported into Progenesis LC-MS (version 4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics). Runs were time aligned using default settings and using an auto selected run as reference. Peaks were picked by the software and filtered to include only peaks with a charge state of between +2 and +6. Peptide intensities were normalised against the reference run by Progenesis LC-MS; these intensities were used to highlight differences in protein expression between control and treated samples with supporting statistical analysis (ANOVA p-values) calculated by the Progenesis LC-MS software. Spectral data were transformed to .mgf files with Progenesis LC-MS and exported for peptide identification using the Mascot (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science) search engine. Tandem MS data were searched against the mouse predicted proteome (Uniprot release September 2013; 16,618 sequences; 9,298,626 residues). Mascot search parameters were as follows; precursor mass tolerance set to 10ppm and fragment mass tolerance set to 0.8 Da. Two missed tryptic cleavages were permitted. Carbamidomethylation (cysteine) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (methionine) set as a variable modification. Mascot search results were further processed using the machine learning algorithm Percolator. The false discovery rate was < 1%. Individual ion scores > 13 indicated identity or extensive homology (p < 0.05).  Protein identification results were imported into Progenesis LC–MS as .xml files.

### Publication Abstract
Recently, 3D small intestinal organoids (enteroids) have been developed from cultures of intestinal stem cells which differentiate in vitro to generate all the differentiated epithelial cell types associated with the intestine and mimic the structural properties of the intestine observed in vivo. Small-molecule drug treatment can skew organoid epithelial cell differentiation toward particular lineages, and these skewed enteroids may provide useful tools to study specific epithelial cell populations, such as goblet and Paneth cells. However, the extent to which differentiated epithelial cell populations in these skewed enteroids represent their in vivo counterparts is not fully understood. This study utilises label-free quantitative proteomics to determine whether skewing murine enteroid cultures toward the goblet or Paneth cell lineages results in changes in abundance of proteins associated with these cell lineages in vivo. Here, proteomics data confirms that skewed enteroids recapitulate important features of the in vivo gut environment, demonstrating that they can serve as useful models for the investigation of normal and disease processes in the intestine. Furthermore, comparison of mass spectrometry data with histology data contained within the Human Protein Atlas identifies putative novel markers for goblet and Paneth cells.

### Keywords
Differentiation; mass spectrometry; gastrointestinal system; stem cells

### Affiliations
Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool
Infection Biology

### Submitter
Stuart Armstrong

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Hiscox
Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool


