### Accession
PXD034024

### Title
Substrate trapping approach identifies TRIM25 ubiquitination targets involved in diverse cellular and antiviral processes

### Description
The tripartite motif (TRIM) family of E3 ubiquitin ligases is well known for its roles in antiviral restriction and innate immunity regulation, in addition to many other cellular pathways. In particular, TRIM25-mediated ubiquitination affects both carcinogenesis and antiviral response. While individual substrates have been identified for TRIM25, it remains unclear how it regulates diverse processes. Here we characterized a mutation, R54P, critical for TRIM25 catalytic activity, which we successfully utilized to “trap” substrates. We demonstrated that TRIM25 targets proteins implicated in stress granule formation (G3BP1/2), nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (UPF1), and nucleoside synthesis (NME1). R54P abolishes TRIM25 inhibition of alphaviruses independently of the host interferon response, suggesting that this antiviral effect is a direct consequence of ubiquitination. Consistent with that, we observed diminished antiviral activity upon knockdown of several TRIM25-R54P specific interactors including NME1. Our findings highlight that multiple substrates mediate the cellular and antiviral activities of TRIM25, illustrating the multi-faceted role of this ubiquitination network in diverse biological processes.

### Sample Protocol
Dried pellets were processed at the UCLA Proteomics Core. Protein samples were reduced and alkylated using  5mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine and 10mM iodoacetamide, respectively, and then proteolyzed by the sequential addition of trypsin and lys-C proteases at 37˚C as described. 464 77 Digested peptides were resuspended  in 5% formic acid and fractionated online using a 25cm long, 75 μM inner diameter fused silica capillary packed in-house with bulk C18 reversed phase resin (length, 25 cm; inner diameter, 75 μM; particle size, 1.9 μm; pore size, 100 Å; Dr. Maisch GmbH).78 467 The 140-minute water-acetonitrile gradient was delivered using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min (Buffer A: water with 3%  DMSO and 0.1% formic acid and Buffer B: acetonitrile with 3% DMSO and 0.1% formic acid). Fractionated peptides were ionized and analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitation was performed using the MaxQuant software package.79 472 The EMBL Human reference proteome (UP000005640 9606) was utilized for all database searches. Statistical analysis of MaxQuant output data was performed with the artMS Bioconductor80 package which performs the relative quantification of protein abundance using the MSstats Bioconductor package (default parameters). Intensities were normalized across samples by median-centering the log2-transformed MS1 intensity distributions. The abundance of proteins missing from one condition but found in more than 2 biological replicates of the other condition for any given comparison were estimated by imputing intensity values from the lowest observed MS1-intensity across samples and p-values were randomly assigned to those between 0.05 and 0.01 for illustration purposes. Significant hits were defined as interactors that possessed a log2FoldChange of >1.5 and a -log10Pvalue > 1.3.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Lcms, Trim25

### Affiliations
UCLA

### Submitter
Yasaman Jami-Alahmadi

### Lab Head
Dr Melody Li
UCLA


