### Accession
PXD028898

### Title
Multi-omics analysis of microglial extracellular vesicles from human Alzheimer’s Disease brain reveals disease-associated signatures

### Description
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia in the elderly population without a cure or early diagnostics currently available. Despite the demonstrated ability of extracellular vesicles (EVs) to spread tau and Aβ pathology in AD models and their potential utility as a diagnostic and treatment-monitoring tool, our knowledge of human brain EV subpopulations, their molecular composition and roles in disease progression is very limited. Genome-wide association studies linked multiple AD genetic risk factors to microglia-specific pathways suggesting a potential role of microglia-derived EVs in AD progression. Here we are presenting a method for isolation of microglial CD11b-positive small EVs from cryopreserved human brain tissue and multi-omics analysis of the EVs from the parietal cortex of 4 late-stage AD (Braak V-VI) and 3 age-matched normal/low pathology (NL) cases. We identified a total of 1000 proteins by quantitative proteomics, analyzed 594 individual lipid species by targeted lipidomics, and 105 miRNAs using a NanoString miRNA expression panel. We found significant reduction in abundance of homeostatic microglia markers, P2RY12 and TMEM119, and increased levels of disease associated microglia markers, FTH1 and TREM2, in microglial EVs from AD brain compared to NL cases. Protein tau abundance was also significantly higher in AD brain-derived microglial EVs. These changes were accompanied by upregulation of synaptic and neuron-specific proteins in the AD group. Levels of free-cholesterol were elevated in microglial EVs from AD brain. Lipidomic analysis also revealed a pro-inflammatory lipid profile, endolysosomal dysfunction and significant AD-associated decrease in levels of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA)-containing polyunsaturated lipids of different classes, suggesting a potential defect in acyl-chain remodeling. Several immune pathways and senescence were among the top pathways controlled by 4 miRNAs significantly upregulated in the AD group. Our data suggest that loss of the homeostatic microglia signature in late AD stages may accompany endolysosomal impairment and release of undigested neuronal and myelin debris, including tau, through extracellular vesicles. These data validate a method of isolation of small cell-type specific EVs from human brain tissue, suggests new potential EV-associated markers and disease-related pathways, and provides a framework for future large-scale multi-omics study.

### Sample Protocol
Human brain parietal cortex samples were prepared as described in (Gylys & Bilousova, 2017).  On the day of EV isolation, the cryopreserved brain tissue was centrifuged at 1000xg for 2min (4oC) to remove cryopreservation buffer. The tissue was gently dissociated using an adult brain dissociation kit and GentleMACS dissociator (Miltenyi Biotec) according to manufacturer’s instructions (0.5 g of tissue per one enzymatic reaction). After the dissociation step, the cell suspension was passed through MACS Smart strainer (70 µm; Miltenyi Biotec). Small EV fractions were purified by sequential centrifugation steps including sucrose density gradient ultracentrifugation followed by washing steps as described (Vella, et al., 2017). Final F2 pellets were resuspended in 25mM trehalose in PBS, pH 7.4 with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (ThermoFisher) and used for immunoprecipitation (IP) of microglial EVs using antibodies for myeloid cell-specific marker CD11b (BioLegend; Clone M1/70) or for control IP reactions with isotype control rat IgG2b antibodies (BioLegend; Clone RTK4530). F2 fractions were incubated with human-specific FcR blocking reagent (Milteny biotec) for 5 min on ice (5µl of the blocking reagent per 100 µl of F2), followed by 1:20 dilution with 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) in PBS, pH 7.4. We used 1.25 mg of antibody-coupled Dynabeads per 2ml of 1:20 diluted F2 sample. IP reactions were incubated overnight at 4oC with rotation, followed by 4 consecutive 10 minute washes with rotation: first wash with 0.1% BSA/PBS, second wash with 25mM citrate-phosphate buffer, pH5 to reduce amount of non-specifically bound material as we have previously described (Heinzelman, Bilousova, Campagna, & John, 2016) followed by two washes with PBS, pH 7.4.  Dynabeads with bound microglial EVs were aliquoted based on the original weight of the cortical tissue (microglial EVs from 1g of tissue per aliquot) and frozen at -80oC for downstream analysis. Exosome fractions were diluted in lysis buffer (Final concentration; 200 uL, 12 mM sodium lauroyl sarcosine, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB)), 1x Halt™ Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA)), then subjected to bath sonication (10 min, Bioruptor Pico, Diagenode Inc. (Denville, NJ)) and heated (95 °C, 5 min). Samples were treated with tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (10 uL, 55 mM in 50 mM TEAB, 30 min, 60 °C) followed by treatment with chloroacetamide (10 uL, 120 mM in 50 mM TEAB, 30 min, 25 °C in the dark). They were then diluted 5-fold with aqueous 50 mM TEAB and incubated overnight with Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (1 ug in 10 uL of 50 mM TEAB; Promega, Madison, WI) following which an equal volume of ethyl acetate/trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, 100/1, v/v) was added. After vigorous mixing (5 min) and centrifugation (13,000 x g, 5 min), the supernatants were discarded, and the lower phases were dried in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator. The samples were then desaltedaccording to Rappsilber's protocol (Rappsilber, et al., 2007). The collected eluent was dried in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator. The samples were then chemically modified using a TMT10plex Isobaric Label Reagent Set (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as per the manufacturer's protocol. The TMT-labeled peptides were dried and reconstituted in solvent A (50 uL), pooled according to protein content (1:1 ratio), and desalted using the modified Rappsilber’s protocol. The eluants were then dried and reconstituted in water/acetonitrile/FA (solvent A, 10 uL, 98/2/0.1, v/v/v), and aliquots (5 uL) were injected onto a reverse phase nanobore HPLC column (AcuTech Scientific, C18, 1.8um particle size, 360 um x 20 cm, 150 um ID), equilibrated in solvent E and eluted (500 nL/min) with an increasing concentration of solvent B (acetonitrile/water/FA, 98/2/0.1, v/v/v: min/% B; 0/0, 5/3, 18/7, 74/12, 144/24, 153/27, 162/40, 164/80, 174/80, 176/0, 180/0) using an Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The effluent from the column was directed to a nanospray ionization source connected to a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) acquiring mass spectra utilizing the Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) MS3 method, alternating between a full scan in the Orbitrap (mass range 400–1400 m/z, automatic gain control (AGC) target 4 × 10 5 ; 50 ms maximum injection time (IT), FWHM resolution 120,000 at m/z 200) and MS2/MS3 analysis using a Top10 method. MS2 analysis consisted of collision-induced dissociation (CID) (AGC 1.8 × 10 4 ; normalized collision energy (NCE) 35%; maximum injection time 50 ms; isolation width 0.7 Da, dynamic exclusion 30 s). MS3 precursors were fragmented by high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and analyzed using the Orbitrap (NCE 65%; AGC 1.2 × 10 5 ; maximum injection time 105 ms, mass range 100-500 m/z).

### Data Protocol
The raw data were searched against the Uniprot human reviewed protein database using SEQUEST-HT (Search parameters: Trypsin(semi)enzyme with a maximum of two miscleavages, precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.6 Da, dynamic modification of methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da), serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966 Da), asparigine/glutamine deamidation (+0.984 Da), lysine/N-termini acetyl (42.011 Da), lysine/N-termini TMT 10 (229.163 Da) were selected, static modification of cysteine carbamidomethyl (+57.02 Da). Decoy database searching was used to generate high confidence peptides (FDR < 1%) in Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.4, Thermo Scientific), which provided measurements of abundance for the identified peptides. Tryptic peptides containing amino acid sequences unique to individual proteins were used to identify and provide relative quantification between proteins in each sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alzheimer’s disease, Omics analysis, Extracellular vesicles, Exosomes, Microglia

### Affiliations
Drug Discovery Lab, Department of Neurology, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
University of California, Los Angeles

### Submitter
Whitaker Cohn

### Lab Head
Dr Tina Bilousova
Drug Discovery Lab, Department of Neurology, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA


