### Accession
PXD011157

### Title
Virulence factors produced by Staphylococcus aureus biofilms have a moonlighting function contributing to biofilm integrity

### Description
We comprehensively profiled intracellular and ECM proteomes of S. aureus flow biofilms and complemented these data by metabolic footprint analysis and phenotypic assays. We show that S. aureus biofilms produce high amounts of secreted, moonlighting virulence factors stabilizing the ECM. Mechanistically, we propose that these alkaline virulence factors get protonated in an acidified ECM (due to the release of acids upon fermentation) mediating electrostatic interactions with anionic cell surface components and metabolites, which leads to cell aggregation and ECM stabilization.

### Sample Protocol
Intracellular protein extracts from the planktonic and biofilm cell pellets were prepared as already described with slight modifications: cells were resuspended in 1 mL TE-buffer followed by mechanical disruption using 500 µL glass beads (0.1 to 0.11 mm, Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Göttingen, Germany) in 3 homogenization cycles at 6.5 m/s for 30 s. Cell debris and glass beads were removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g and 4 °C for 10 min. Insoluble and aggregated proteins were removed by an additional centrifugation step at 20,000 g and 4 °C for 30 min. The resulting intracellular protein extracts were stored at -70 °C for further analysis. Planktonic extracellular, biofilm ECM, and flow-through proteins were enriched using StrataClean beads as described by Bonn et al., 2014 with slight modifications. Briefly, 20 µL aliquots of the beads were washed twice with 500 µL TE-buffer for StrataClean beads (TESC, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM EDTA, pH 8) with intermitted centrifugation at 6,000 g and room temperature (RT) for 2 min. Subsequently, beads were primed by incubation in 200 µL HCl at 100 °C for 6 h and washed twice with 1 mL TESC-buffer. For protein enrichment, beads were incubated with culture supernatants at 4 °C on a rotating tube shaker overnight. Loaded beads were pelleted at 10,000 g and 4 °C for 15 min, washed twice with 500 µL PBS buffer (137 mM NaCl, 0.2 mM KCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 1.8 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.4) and dried in a vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany) for 20 min. Protein amounts of 25 µg per sample were boiled for 10 min at 95 °C and subsequently separated on a 4-12 % SDS-polyacrylamide gradient gel. Protein bands were cut from the gel and trypsin-digested. Therefore, peptides were loaded on a self-made analytical column (Aeris PEPTIDE 3.6 μm XB – C18 (phenomenex), OD 360 μm, ID 100 μm, length 20 cm) and eluted by a binary nonlinear gradient of 5-75 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % acetic acid over 80 min with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on ThermoFisher Scientific instruments (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) either using an EASY-nLC 1000 coupled to an Orbitrap Velos (intracellular samples) or using an EASY-nLC II system coupled to an Orbitrap Velos Pro (extracellular/ECM samples). For MS analysis, a full scan in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30.000 was followed by CID MS/MS experiments of the twenty most abundant precursor ions acquired in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Database search, as well as label-free quantification (LFQ) and intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ), was performed using the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.6.0.16, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) running the built-in Andromeda search engine (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). The database used was downloaded from UniProt on January 24th, 2018 (Proteome ID UP000008816) and contains 2889 protein sequences of S. aureus NCTC8325 (representing the parental strain S. aureus HG001 was derived from). The entry for protein RsbU was replaced by the corresponding sequence of S. aureus Newman since rsbU has been repaired in strain HG001 by Herbert and colleagues. Common laboratory contaminants and reversed sequences were included by MaxQuant. Database search parameters were set as follows: Trypsin/P specific digestion (KR) with two allowed missed cleavages, peptide tolerance 20 ppm, fragment ion tolerance 4.5 Da, methionine oxidation (15.99 Da) as a variable modification, peptide spectral match FDR 1 % and protein FDR 1 %. LFQ was performed using the following settings: LFQ minimum ratio count 2 considering unique and razor peptides for quantification. Match between runs was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Results were filtered for proteins identified with 2 or more unique peptides in at least 2 out of 3 biological replicates. LFQ intensities of intra- and extracellular/ECM proteome data were used to calculate log2 ratios between biofilm and planktonic samples.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> is the causative agent of various biofilm-associated infections in humans causing major healthcare problems worldwide. This type of infection is inherently difficult to treat because of a reduced metabolic activity of biofilm-embedded cells and the protective nature of a surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM). However, little is known about <i>S. aureus</i> biofilm physiology and the proteinaceous composition of the ECM. Thus, we cultivated <i>S. aureus</i> biofilms in a flow system and comprehensively profiled intracellular and extracellular (ECM and flow-through (FT)) biofilm proteomes, as well as the extracellular metabolome compared with planktonic cultures. Our analyses revealed the expression of many pathogenicity factors within <i>S. aureus</i> biofilms as indicated by a high abundance of capsule biosynthesis proteins along with various secreted virulence factors, including hemolysins, leukotoxins, and lipases as a part of the ECM. The activity of ECM virulence factors was confirmed in a hemolysis assay and a <i>Galleria mellonella</i> pathogenicity model. In addition, we uncovered a so far unacknowledged moonlighting function of secreted virulence factors and ribosomal proteins trapped in the ECM: namely their contribution to biofilm integrity. Mechanistically, it was revealed that this stabilizing effect is mediated by the strong positive charge of alkaline virulence factors and ribosomal proteins in an acidic ECM environment, which is caused by the release of fermentation products like formate, lactate, and acetate because of oxygen limitation in biofilms. The strong positive charge of these proteins most likely mediates electrostatic interactions with anionic cell surface components, eDNA, and anionic metabolites. In consequence, this leads to strong cell aggregation and biofilm stabilization. Collectively, our study identified a new molecular mechanism during <i>S. aureus</i> biofilm formation and thus significantly widens the understanding of biofilm-associated <i>S. aureus</i> infections - an essential prerequisite for the development of novel antimicrobial therapies.

### Keywords
Biofilm, Ecm, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
University of Greifswald; Institute of Microbiology; Dep. of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Riedel, Katharina
University of Greifswald; Institute of Microbiology; Dep. of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology


