### Accession
PXD021996

### Title
A novel structure of GPI anchored proteins

### Description
GPI anchors many proteins to the cell surface. GPI precursor has three mannoses, all of which are modified by ethanolamine-phosphate (EthN-P). It has been believed that EthN-P on the third mannose is always used as a bridge to the protein and EthN-P on the second mannose is removed after GPI is attached to the protein. Based on the finding that PIGB-knockout cells lacking the third mannose and PIGO-knockout cells lacking EthN-P linked to the third mannose expressed low levels of CD59 and DAF, GPI-APs and that those residual GPI-APs were lost by further knockout of PIGG. Using mass-spectrometry we determined that CD59 expressed on PIGB-knockout cells is attached to GPI via EthN-P linked to the second mannose. This linkage structure is also found in wild type cells. Our data modifies the current view of GPI anchors and provides mechanistic basis of inherited GPI deficiency caused by PIGG mutations.

### Sample Protocol
HFGF-CD59 proteins were solubilized by PI-PLC-treatment from the wild type and the PIGB-KO cells, affinity-purified from the supernatants and subjected to SDS-PAGE and in-gel trypsin digestion. The C-terminal peptide linked to GPI glycan was determined by LC-ESI- MS. Data were obtained by nanocapillary reversed-phase LC-MS/MS using a C18 column (0.1 x 150 mm) on a nanoLC system (Advance, Michrom BioResources) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
In-house MASCOT Server (Matrix Science) and Xcalibur Software (Thermo Fisher) were used for analysis of mass data. In the MS/MS profiles, those that contained characteristic fragments derived from GPI anchors, such as fragment ions of m/z 422+ and 447+, were selected, and fragments in the selected profiles were assigned to determine the GPI structures. Based on the profiles of the MS/MS fragments, the peak areas of the parental MS fragments corresponding to predicted GPI-peptides were measured in total ion chromatogram and the ratio in the total GPI peptide fragments was calculated.

### Publication Abstract
Glycosylphosphatidylinositols (GPIs) are glycolipids that anchor many proteins (GPI-APs) on the cell surface. The core glycan of GPI precursor has three mannoses, which in mammals, are all modified by ethanolamine-phosphate (EthN-P). It is postulated that EthN-P on the third mannose (EthN-P-Man3) is the bridge between GPI and the protein and the second (EthN-P-Man2) is removed after GPI-protein attachment. However, EthN-P-Man2 may not be always transient, as mutations of PIGG, the enzyme that transfers EthN-P to Man2, result in inherited GPI deficiencies (IGDs), characterized by neuronal dysfunctions. Here, we show that EthN-P on Man2 is the preferential bridge in some GPI-APs, among them, the Ect-5'-nucleotidase and Netrin G2. We find that CD59, a GPI-AP, is attached via EthN-P-Man2 both in PIGB-knockout cells, in which GPI lacks Man3, and with a small fraction in wild-type cells. Our findings modify the current view of GPI anchoring and provide a mechanistic basis for IGDs caused by PIGG mutations.

### Keywords
Human, Gpi anchor, Lc-esi- ms, Pigg

### Affiliations
RIMD, Osaka university,Japan
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases
Osaka University

### Submitter
Yoshiko Murakami

### Lab Head
Dr Taroh Kinoshita
RIMD, Osaka university,Japan


