### Accession
PXD044303

### Title
Reconstruction of Metabolic Pathways, Protein Expression, and Homeostasis Machineries across Maize Bundle Sheath and Mesophyll Chloroplasts: Large-Scale Quantitative Proteomics Using the First Maize Genome Assembly

### Description
Chloroplasts in differentiated bundle sheath (BS) and mesophyll (M) cells of maize (Zea mays) leaves are specialized to accommodate C4 photosynthesis. This study provides a reconstruction of how metabolic pathways, protein expression, and homeostasis functions are quantitatively distributed across BS and M chloroplasts. This yielded new insights into cellular specialization. The experimental analysis was based on high-accuracy mass spectrometry, protein quantification by spectral counting, and the first maize genome assembly. A bioinformatics workflow was developed to deal with gene models, protein families, and gene duplications related to the polyploidy of maize; this avoided overidentification of proteins and resulted in more accurate protein quantification. A total of 1,105 proteins were assigned as potential chloroplast proteins, annotated for function, and quantified. Nearly complete coverage of primary carbon, starch, and tetrapyrrole metabolism, as well as excellent coverage for fatty acid synthesis, isoprenoid, sulfur, nitrogen, and amino acid metabolism, was obtained. This showed, for example, quantitative and qualitative cell type-specific specialization in starch biosynthesis, arginine synthesis, nitrogen assimilation, and initial steps in sulfur assimilation. An extensive overview of BS and M chloroplast protein expression and homeostasis machineries (more than 200 proteins) demonstrated qualitative and quantitative differences between M and BS chloroplasts and BS-enhanced levels of the specialized chaperones ClpB3 and HSP90 that suggest active remodeling of the BS proteome. The reconstructed pathways are presented as detailed flow diagrams including annotation, relative protein abundance, and cell-specific expression pattern. Protein annotation and identification data, and projection of matched peptides on the protein models, are available online through the Plant Proteome Database.

### Sample Protocol
Maize Genotype, Plant Growth, and Purification of BS and M Chloroplast Fractions. WT-T43 (W22) maize (Zea mays) plants were grown for 12 to 14 d in a growth chamber (16 h of light/8 h of dark, 400 μ mol photons m−2 s−1) until the fourth leaf was emerging. M and BS chloroplasts were purified from the top 4-cm section of the third leaf and harvested about 2 h after the onset of the light period, using several hundred leaf tips, following procedures described previously (Majeran et al., 2005). Purified M and BS chloroplasts were broken with a Dounce homogenizer, and thylakoid and envelope membranes were collected by 20 min of centrifugation at 80,000g. The supernatant, representing the enriched soluble stromal cross-contamination of M and BS chloroplast fractions, was collected. Cross-contamination was assessed from the presence of the M and BS markers (PPDK and Rubisco, respectively) as visualized on stained one-dimensional SDS-PAGE gels, as described (Majeran et al., 2005). Protein concentrations were determined with the Bradford essay (Bradford, 1976). Out of more than eight BS-M chloroplast preparations, the best three were selected. For chloroplast Stroma and Membrane Proteome Analysis by NanoLC-LTQ-Orbitrap, a total of 150 μ g of each BS and M stromal preparation was separated by SDS-Tricine-PAGE (12% acrylamide). Each gel lane was then cut into 12 slices, proteins were digested with trypsin, and the extracted peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-LTQ-Orbitrap MS using data-dependent acquisition and dynamic exclusion, as described (Majeran et al., 2008). Each sample was analyzed twice with different amounts injected to ensure maximum protein coverage. The complete analysis was carried out in three independent biological replicates. In total, 144 MS runs were carried out, with extensive blanks between each sample analysis to avoid carryover of peptides that could bias quantification. Purification and MS analysis of the BS and M membranes has been described (Majeran et al., 2008).

### Data Protocol
Processing of the MS Data, Database Searches, and Upload into PPDB Peak lists (.mgf format) were generated using DTA supercharge (version 1.19) software (http://msquant.sourceforge.net/) and searched with Mascot version 2.2 (Matrix Science) against maize genome release 4a.53 (with 53,764 models) from http://www.maizesequence.org/ supplemented with the plastid-encoded proteins (111 protein models) and mitochondria-encoded proteins (165 protein models). For off-line calibration, first a preliminary search was conducted with the precursor tolerance window set at ± 30 ppm. Peptides with the ion scores above 40 were chosen as benchmarks to determine the offset for each LC-MS/MS run. This offset was then applied to adjust precursor masses in the peak lists of the respective .mgf file for recalibration using a Perl script (B. Zybailov, unpublished data). The recalibrated peak lists were searched against the maize genome data set with organellar genes (with 54,380 entries) and in parallel against ZmGI version 16.0 (with 56,364 entries), including sequences for known contaminants (e.g. keratin, trypsin) concatenated with a decoy database where all the sequences were randomized. Each of the peak lists were searched using Mascot version 2.2 (maximum P of 0.01) for full tryptic peptides using a precursor ion tolerance window set at ± 6 ppm, variable Met oxidation, fixed Cys carbamidomethylation, and a minimal ion score threshold of 30 for maize genome and 44 for ZmGI; this yielded a peptide false discovery rate below 1%, with peptide false positive rate calculated as: 2 × (decoy_hits)/total_hits. The false protein identification rate of protein identified with two or more peptides was zero. To reduce the false protein identification rate of proteins identified by one peptide, the Mascot search results were further filtered as follows: ion score threshold was increased to 40 for maize genome and 50 for ZmGI, and mass accuracy on the precursor ion was required to be within ± 3 ppm. Precursor ion masses below 700 D were discarded. All filtered results were uploaded into PPDB (http://ppdb.tc.cornell.edu/; Sun et al., 2009). All mass spectral data (the .mgf files reformatted as PRIDE XML files) are available via the PRIDE database at http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/.

### Publication Abstract
Chloroplasts in differentiated bundle sheath (BS) and mesophyll (M) cells of maize (Zea mays) leaves are specialized to accommodate C(4) photosynthesis. This study provides a reconstruction of how metabolic pathways, protein expression, and homeostasis functions are quantitatively distributed across BS and M chloroplasts. This yielded new insights into cellular specialization. The experimental analysis was based on high-accuracy mass spectrometry, protein quantification by spectral counting, and the first maize genome assembly. A bioinformatics workflow was developed to deal with gene models, protein families, and gene duplications related to the polyploidy of maize; this avoided overidentification of proteins and resulted in more accurate protein quantification. A total of 1,105 proteins were assigned as potential chloroplast proteins, annotated for function, and quantified. Nearly complete coverage of primary carbon, starch, and tetrapyrole metabolism, as well as excellent coverage for fatty acid synthesis, isoprenoid, sulfur, nitrogen, and amino acid metabolism, was obtained. This showed, for example, quantitative and qualitative cell type-specific specialization in starch biosynthesis, arginine synthesis, nitrogen assimilation, and initial steps in sulfur assimilation. An extensive overview of BS and M chloroplast protein expression and homeostasis machineries (more than 200 proteins) demonstrated qualitative and quantitative differences between M and BS chloroplasts and BS-enhanced levels of the specialized chaperones ClpB3 and HSP90 that suggest active remodeling of the BS proteome. The reconstructed pathways are presented as detailed flow diagrams including annotation, relative protein abundance, and cell-specific expression pattern. Protein annotation and identification data, and projection of matched peptides on the protein models, are available online through the Plant Proteome Database.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Maize, Genome assembly

### Affiliations
ISB
School of Integrative Plant Science Plant Biology Section, Cornell University

### Submitter
Zhi Sun

### Lab Head
Professor Klaas Wijk
School of Integrative Plant Science Plant Biology Section, Cornell University


### SDRF
- organism: Zea mays
- organism part: chloroplast membranes, chloroplast stroma
- cell type: not applicable
- disease: not applicable
- label: label free sample
- instrument: LTQ Orbitrap
- modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl

