### Accession
PXD006892

### Title
Aurora A kinase phosphorylates Hec1 to regulate metaphase kinetochore-microtubule dynamics.

### Description
Precise regulation of kinetochore-microtubules is essential for successful chromosome segregation. Central to this regulation is Aurora B kinase, which phosphorylates kinetochore substrates to promote microtubule turnover. A critical target of Aurora B is the N-terminal “tail” domain of Hec1/NDC80, which is a component of the NDC80 complex, a force-transducing link between kinetochores and microtubules. While Aurora B is regarded as the “master regulator” of kinetochore-microtubule attachment, it is likely that other mitotic kinases contribute to Hec1phosphorylation. Here we show that Aurora A kinase phosphorylates the tail domain of Hec1 at Serine 69, a previously uncharacterized phosphorylation target site, and plays an important role in controlling kinetochore-microtubule attachment dynamics. Using phospho-specific antibodies, Hec1 phospho-deficient mutants, and kinase inhibitors, we demonstrate that Aurora A is required for the regulation of kinetochore-microtubule dynamics of metaphase chromosomes and identify Hec1 Serine 69 as a critical Aurora A substrate for this regulation. Additionally, we demonstrate that Aurora A kinase associates with INCENP during mitosis and that INCENP is competent to drive accumulation of the kinase to the centromere region of mitotic chromosomes. These findings reveal that both Aurora A and Aurora B contribute to kinetochore-microtubule attachment dynamics, and they uncover an unexpected role for Aurora A in mitosis.

### Sample Protocol
For MS analysis, beads were resuspended in denaturing buffer (100mM Tris-HCl, 10mM DTT, 2M urea) for 20 minutes at RT to reduce cysteines which were subsequently alkylated by Iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma) at a final concentration of 50mM for 20 min in the dark at RT. Proteins were digested with 50ng/µl modified sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) for 2h at RT on a shaker after which the beads were removed by centrifugation for 5 min at 1500 x g. After an additional elution of the beads with denaturing buffer, both supernatants were combined and 10ng/µl modified sequencing grade trypsin was added and left at RT for 16h. 10% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added and the solution was transferred to C18-columns (Millipore). The bound peptides were eluted from the C18-columns with 98% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.5% formic acid (FA) and dried in a speed-vac after which they were re-suspended in 2% ACN and 0.5% FA before loading for LC/MS/MS. Peptides were separated on an in-house packed C18 capillary column (75umX25cm, 3um particle size, 100 Å) using a 120-min gradient of 7% to 32% acetonitrile in 0.5% FA at a flowrate of 300nl/min delivered by an Easy nano-LC1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and sprayed directly into a LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full MS scans (from m/z 400-1750) were acquired with a resolution of R= 60.000 at m/z 400. The 15 most intense ions in the MS scan were selected for fragmentation by CID and measured in the linear ion trap with a target setting of 500 ions.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5) (Cox and Mann, 2008) with carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as fixed modification, acetylation of protein N-terminus as well as oxidation of methionine and Camthiopropanoyl on lysine set as variable modifications. Up to two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerance for the precursor ions was set to 10 ppm and for the MS/MS 0.5 Da and FDR was set to 1%. For label free quantification, the 'LFQ' and 'match between runs' options were enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Precise regulation of kinetochore-microtubule attachments is essential for successful chromosome segregation. Central to this regulation is Aurora B kinase, which phosphorylates kinetochore substrates to promote microtubule turnover. A critical target of Aurora B is the N-terminal "tail" domain of Hec1, which is a component of the NDC80 complex, a force-transducing link between kinetochores and microtubules. Although Aurora B is regarded as the "master regulator" of kinetochore-microtubule attachment, other mitotic kinases likely contribute to Hec1 phosphorylation. In this study, we demonstrate that Aurora A kinase regulates kinetochore-microtubule dynamics of metaphase chromosomes, and we identify Hec1 S69, a previously uncharacterized phosphorylation target site in the Hec1 tail, as a critical Aurora A substrate for this regulation. Additionally, we demonstrate that Aurora A kinase associates with inner centromere protein (INCENP) during mitosis and that INCENP is competent to drive accumulation of the kinase to the centromere region of mitotic chromosomes. These findings reveal that both Aurora A and B contribute to kinetochore-microtubule attachment dynamics, and they uncover an unexpected role for Aurora A in late mitosis.

### Keywords
Human aurora a kinase hec1

### Affiliations
Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, 3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research




### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr Susanne Lens
Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, 3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands


