### Accession
PXD025562

### Title
In-cell structures of a conserved supramolecular array at the mitochondria-cytoskeleton interface in mammalian sperm

### Description
Mitochondria-cytoskeleton interactions modulate cellular physiology by regulating mitochondrial transport, positioning, and immobilization. However, there is very little structural information defining mitochondria-cytoskeleton interfaces in any cell type. Here, we use cryo-focused ion beam milling-enabled cryo-electron tomography to image mammalian sperm, where mitochondria wrap around the ciliary cytoskeleton. We find that mitochondria are tethered to their neighbors through inter-mitochondrial linkers and are anchored to the cytoskeleton through ordered arrays on the outer mitochondrial membrane. We use subtomogram averaging to resolve in-cell structures of these arrays from three mammalian species, revealing they are conserved across species despite variations in mitochondrial dimensions and cristae organization. We find that the arrays consist of boat-shaped particles anchored on a network of membrane pores whose arrangement and dimensions are consistent with voltage dependent anion channels. Proteomics and in-cell cross-linking mass spectrometry suggest that the conserved arrays are composed of glycerol kinase-like proteins. Ordered supramolecular assemblies may serve to stabilize similar contact sites in other cell types where mitochondria need to be immobilized in specific subcellular environments, such as in muscles and neurons.

### Sample Protocol
All proteomics and cross-linking mass spectrometry experiments were performed on Percoll-washed pig sperm prepared as described above. For cross-linking, approximately 300 x 106 cells were used from 3 different animals. Briefly, pelleted sperm cells were resuspended in 540 µL of PBS supplemented with disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO, Thermo Fisher Scientific) to a final concentration of 1 mM. The reaction mix was incubated for 30 min at 25°C with 700 rpm shaking in a ThemoMixer C (Eppendorf) and subsequently quenched for 20 min by adding Tris-HCl (final concentration 50 mM). Cross-linked cells were spun down at 13 800g for 10 min at 4°C, after which the supernatant was removed. Cells were then lysed according to a protocol modified from (Potel et al., 2018). Cells were resuspended in 1 mL of lysis buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 7 M Urea, 1% Triton X-100, 5 mM TCEP, 30 mM CAA, 10 U/ml DNase I, 1 mM MgCl2, 1% benzonase (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany), 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, phosphoSTOP phosphatases inhibitors, and cOmpleteTM Mini EDTA-free protease inhibitors). Cells were sonicated on ice for 2 min using an ultrasonic processor (UP100H, Hielscher) at 80% amplitude. The proteins were then precipitated according to (Wessel and Flügge, 1984) and the dried protein pellet resuspended in digestion buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 1% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma-Aldrich), 5 mM TCEP, and 30 mM CAA). Trypsin and Lys-C proteases were added to a 1:25 and 1:100 ratio (w/w) respectively and protein digestion performed overnight at 37°C. The final peptide mixtures were desalted with solid-phase extraction C18 columns (Sep-Pak, Waters) and fractionated with an Agilent 1200 HPLC pump system (Agilent) coupled to a strong cation exchange (SCX) separation column (Luna SCX 5 µm – 100 Å particles, 50 x 2mm, Phenomenex), resulting in 25 fractions.

### Data Protocol
The 3 raw files obtained with classical bottom-up approach were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.17 with all the automatic settings adding Deamidation (N) as dynamic modification against the Sus scrofa reference proteome (Uniprot version of 08/2020 with 49,795 entries). With this search, we were able to calculate intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values and created a smaller FASTA file to use for analysis of cross-linking experiments (table as Supplementary information). Raw files for cross-linked cells were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer software suite version 2.4.1.15 (ThermoFisher Scientific) with the incorporated XlinkX node for analysis of cross-linked peptides as described in (Klykov et al., 2018). Data were searched against the smaller FASTA created in house with “MS2_MS3 acquisition strategy”. For the XlinkX search, we selected full tryptic digestion with 3 maximum missed cleavages, 10 ppm error for MS1, 20 ppm for MS2, and 0.5 Da for MS3 in Ion Trap. For modifications, we used static Carbamidomethyl (C) and dynamic Oxidation (M), Deamidation (N) and Met-loss (protein N-term). The crosslinked peptides were accepted with a minimum score of 40, minimum score difference of 4 and maximum FDR rate set to 5%; further standard settings were used

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria-cytoskeleton interactions modulate cellular physiology by regulating mitochondrial transport, positioning, and immobilization. However, there is very little structural information defining mitochondria-cytoskeleton interfaces in any cell type. Here, we use cryofocused ion beam milling-enabled cryoelectron tomography to image mammalian sperm, where mitochondria wrap around the flagellar cytoskeleton. We find that mitochondria are tethered to their neighbors through intermitochondrial linkers and are anchored to the cytoskeleton through ordered arrays on the outer mitochondrial membrane. We use subtomogram averaging to resolve in-cell structures of these arrays from three mammalian species, revealing they are conserved across species despite variations in mitochondrial dimensions and cristae organization. We find that the arrays consist of boat-shaped particles anchored on a network of membrane pores whose arrangement and dimensions are consistent with voltage-dependent anion channels. Proteomics and in-cell cross-linking mass spectrometry suggest that the conserved arrays are composed of glycerol kinase-like proteins. Ordered supramolecular assemblies may serve to stabilize similar contact sites in other cell types in which mitochondria need to be immobilized in specific subcellular environments, such as in muscles and neurons.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Boar sperm, Proteomics, Crosslinking, Cryo-electron tomography

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry & Proteomics, Bijvoet Centre for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
UCL Mass Spectrometry Science Technology Platform, Division of Biosciences, University College London, London

### Submitter
Riccardo Zenezini Chiozzi

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry & Proteomics, Bijvoet Centre for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


