### Accession
PXD020262

### Title
Genetic regulation of the ATP synthase in neurons modulates cognition

### Description
The mitochondrial ATP synthase produces ATP by oxidative phosphorylation and integrates different signals to regulate cellular functions and fate. The ATPase inhibitory factor 1 (IF1) is a structurally-disordered protein that inhibits the ATP synthase, contributing to metabolic reprogramming and signalling through mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (mtROS). mtROS regulate kinases and transcription factors in mitohormetic responses that favour adaptation to toxic insults2. IF1 is tissue-specifically expressed and in human and mouse brain is in molar excess over the ATP synthase. Herein, we have used genetic approaches to ablate or overexpress IF1 in neurons to investigate its role in brain functions. IF1 inhibits a fraction of the ATP synthase under physiological conditions and regulates respiration, mtROS production and mitochondrial structure. Transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic analyses indicate that IF1 regulates synaptic transmission and cognition. Ablation of IF1 impairs short-term memory whereas IF1 overexpression increases basal synaptic transmission and learning by mtROS-dependent activation of the extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2 (ERK 1/2). Overall, we show that IF1 dose plays a fundamental role in the regulation of neuronal function by controlling the fraction of inhibited ATP synthase that acts as source of mitohormetic mtROS, further emphasizing the ATP synthase/IF1 as promising targets to treat cognitive disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Digestion of protein extracts. Hippocampal protein extracts (n = 2 mice per genotype) were fractionated in a conventional SDS-PAGE gel (1.5 mm-thick, 1.2-cm wide wells, 4% stacking and 10% resolving). The run was stopped as soon as the front entered 3 mm into the resolving gel, so that the whole proteome became concentrated in the stacking/resolving gel interface. The unseparated protein bands were visualized by Coomassie staining, excised and cut into cubes (2 x 2 mm)80. The gel pieces were distained in 1:1 acetonitrile:water, disulphide bonds from cysteinyl residues were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56ºC and then thiol groups were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were digested in situ with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) as previously described81 with minor modifications. Digestion was stopped by the addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid and whole supernatants were dried down and desalted onto OMIX Pipette tips C18 (Agilent Technologies).  iTRAQ labelling. The resultant peptide mixture (100 μg) was labelled using chemicals from the iTRAQ reagent 8plex Multi-plex kit (reagents 115, 116, 117, 118, 119 and 121) (Applied Biosystems) essentially as described82. Briefly, peptides were dissolved in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) adjusted to pH 8. Each iTRAQ reagent was dissolved in 50 μl of isopropanol, added to the respective peptide mixture and then incubated at room temperature for 2 h. Labelling was stopped by the addition of 0.1% formic acid. Whole supernatants were dried down, the 6 samples were mixed to obtain the “6plex-labeled mixture” and the mixture was desalted onto OMIX Pipette tips C18 (Agilent Technologies).  Reverse phase-liquid chromatography-MS/MS analysis. The desalted 6plex-labeled mixture was dried, resuspended in 10 μl of 0.1% formic acid and analysed by RP-LC-MS/MS in an Easy-nLC II system coupled to an ion trap LTQ Orbitrap-Velos-Pro hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) as recently described in detail83. The peptides were concentrated (on-line) by reverse phase chromatography using a 0.1 mm × 20 mm C18 RP precolumn (Proxeon), and then separated using a 0.075 mm × 250 mm C18 RP column (Proxeon) operating at 0.3 μl/min. Peptides were eluted using a 240-min dual gradient from 5 to 25% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) in 180 min followed by gradient from 25 to 40% solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water) over 240 min. Electrospray ionization (ESI) was performed using a Nano-bore emitters Stainless Steel ID 30 μm (Proxeon) interface. The instrument method consisted of a data-dependent top-20 experiment with an Orbitrap MS1 scan at a resolution (m/Δm) of 30,000 followed by either twenty high energy collision dissociation (HCD) MS/MS mass-analysed in the Orbitrap at 7,500 (Δm/m) resolution. MS2 experiments were performed using HCD to generate high resolution and high mass accuracy MS2 spectra. The minimum MS signal for triggering MS/MS was set to 500. The lock mass option was enabled for both MS and MS/MS mode and polydimethylcyclosiloxane ions (protonated (Si(CH3)2O))6; m/z 445.120025) were used for internal recalibration of the mass spectra. Peptides were detected in survey scans from 400 to 1600 amu (1 μscan) using an isolation width of 2 u (in mass-to-charge ratio units), normalized collision energy of 40% for HCD fragmentation, and dynamic exclusion applied during 30-s periods. Precursors of unknown or +1 charge state were rejected.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. Protein identification from raw data was carried out using the SEQUEST algorithm (Proteome Discoverer 1.4, Thermo Scientific) and PEAKS 8 Studio (Bioinformatics Solutions). Database search was performed against the mouse reference proteome (UniProt) with the following constraints: tryptic cleavage after Arg and Lys, up to two missed cleavage sites, tolerances of 20 ppm for precursor ions and 0.05 Da for MS/MS fragment ions and the searches were performed allowing optional Met oxidation, Cys carbamidomethylation and iTRAQ reagent labelling at the N-terminus of Lys residues. Search against decoy database (integrated decoy approach) using false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01. All proteins were identified with at least two high confidence peptides. Quantitation of iTRAQ labelled peptides was performed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 and PEAKS 8 software using ANOVA test and a significance threshold of  7. Enrichment analyses were performed as described above for the transcriptome.

### Publication Abstract
The mitochondrial ATP synthase emerges as key hub of cellular functions controlling the production of ATP, cellular signaling, and fate. It is regulated by the ATPase inhibitory factor 1 (IF1), which is highly abundant in neurons. Herein, we ablated or overexpressed IF1 in mouse neurons to show that IF1 dose defines the fraction of active/inactive enzyme in vivo, thereby controlling mitochondrial function and the production of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (mtROS). Transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic analyses indicate that IF1 dose regulates mitochondrial metabolism, synaptic function, and cognition. Ablation of IF1 impairs memory, whereas synaptic transmission and learning are enhanced by IF1 overexpression. Mechanistically, quenching the IF1-mediated increase in mtROS production in mice overexpressing IF1 reduces the increased synaptic transmission and obliterates the learning advantage afforded by the higher IF1 content. Overall, IF1 plays a key role in neuronal function by regulating the fraction of ATP synthase responsible for mitohormetic mtROS signaling.

### Keywords
Mouse, Itraq, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Departamento de Biología Molecular, Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid 
Departamento de Biología Molecular, Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid

### Submitter
Pau B. Esparza-Molto

### Lab Head
Dr Jose M. Cuezva
Departamento de Biología Molecular, Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid


