### Accession
PXD022637

### Title
Sex and Insulin Resistance Define a Cell Autonomous Supernetwork of Protein Phosphorylation

### Description
Insulin resistance is an important factor in the pathophysiology of many metabolic disorders. The aim of this study was to uncover the cell autonomous determinants of insulin resistance using induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived myoblasts (iMyos). Here, we found that iMyos from insulin resistant non-diabetic individuals show impaired insulin signaling, defective insulin-stimulated glucose uptake and glycogen synthase activity compared to insulin sensitive individuals. Global phosphoproteomic analysis uncovered a large network of altered protein phosphorylations in insulin resistance, mostly outside the canonical insulin-signaling cascade. More surprisingly, we observed striking differences in the phosphoproteomic signature from male versus female subjects, including changes in DNA and RNA processing, GTPase signaling, and SUMOylation/ubiquitination. These findings unravel cell autonomous mechanisms underlying insulin resistance and demonstrate a previously unrecognized supernetwork of cell signaling differences in males and females that must be considered in understanding the molecular basis of sex-based differences in normal physiology and disease.

### Sample Protocol
The basal and insulin stimulated iMyos were processed as previously described (36). In brief, cells were washed with ice cold PBS, lysed in SDC digestion buffer containing 4% SDC, 100 mM Tris pH8.5 and were snap frozen. The samples were boiled, sonicated for 20 cycles in Biorupter plus (Diagenode), vortexed, and protein concentration was determined by BCA assay. For each sample, 750 g of protein was alkylated with 10 mM CAA and reduced with 40mM TCEP by incubating for 20 min on ice in dark. Then, the samples were mixed with LysC and Trypsin (1:100 ratio) proteases and incubated overnight at 37°C, 1200 rpm in ThermoMixer.The resulting digested peptides were further mixed in ThermoMixer for 30 seconds at 1500 rpm along with 750 μl ACN and 250μl TK buffer (36% TFA and 3mM KH2PO4). Any debris was cleared by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 15 min and the supernatant was transferred to 2 ml Deep Well Plate (Eppendorf). For the phosphopeptide enrichment step, TiO2 beads (prepared in 80%ACN, 6%TFA buffer) were added (1:10 ratio protein/beads) and incubated at 40°C, 2000 rpm, for 5 min in ThermoMixer. The TiO2 bound phosphopeptides were pelleted by centrifugation, transferred to clear tubes, and washed 4 times using a wash buffer containing 60% ACN, 1% TFA to remove nonspecific or non-phosphorylated peptides. The beads were suspended in a transfer buffer (80% ACN, 0.5% Acetic acid). Then, transferred on top of single layer C8 Stage Tips (stop-and-go-extraction tips) and centrifuged until dryness. The phosphopeptides were eluted with elution buffer (40% ACN, 20% NH4OH) and concentrated in a SpeedVac for 20 min at 45°C. This was followed by phosphopeptides acidification by the addition of 100 μl of 1% TFA. The acidified peptides were loaded on to equilibrated styrene divinylbenzene–reversed phase sulfonated (SDBRPS) Stage Tips for desalting and further cleanup. These SDBRPS StageTips were washed once in isopropanol/1% TFA and twice with 0.2% TFA. Finally, the desalted phosphopeptides were eluted with 60 μl of elution buffer (80%, 1.25% NH4OH). The dried elutes were resuspended in MS loading buffer (3% ACN, 0.3% TFA) and stored at -20°C until MS measurement.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw data files were processed using Maxquant software environment (version 1.5.5.2) with the built in Andromeda search engine for identification and quantification of phosphopeptides. The data were searched using a target-decoy approach with a reverse database against Uniprot Human (August 2016 version) reference proteome fasta file with a false discovery rate of less than 1% at the level of proteins, peptides, and modifications. A few minor changes to the default settings used are as follows: oxidized methionine (M), acetylation (protein N-term), and in the case of phosphopetide search phospho (STY) was selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed, a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids and enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin. In addition, the match between the run algorithm was enabled. The Maxquant output phospho (STY) table was processed using Perseus(version 1.5.2.11) software suite. Prior to the analysis, contaminants marked as potential contaminants and reverse hits were filtered out. Phosphopeptides that had more than 80% valid values in at least one group were selected for downstream analysis. Missing values were replaced by random numbers that were drawn from normal distributions with means that are 1.6 times sample standard deviations downshifted from the sample means and standard deviations that are 0.6 times the sample deviations. Values were log2- transformed and further normalized to make all samples have the same median. The statistical significance of phosphopeptides was assessed with empirical Bayesian linear modeling using the limma package with default priors. P-values were corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR). Hierarchical cluster analysis was performed using a variable cut height approach based on the Euclidean distance of the significant phosphopeptides. Clusters were defined according to the hierarchical tree. Gene sets based on canonical pathways from the MsigDB Collections and the human kinase substrates analysis from the PhosphositePlus and RegPhos were tested using the Fisher exact test.

### Publication Abstract
Insulin resistance is present in one-quarter of the general population, predisposing these people to a wide range of diseases. Our aim was to identify cell-intrinsic determinants of insulin resistance in this population using induced pluripotent stem cell-derived (iPSC-derived) myoblasts (iMyos). We found that these cells exhibited a large network of altered protein phosphorylation in vitro. Integrating these data with data from type 2 diabetic iMyos revealed critical sites of conserved altered phosphorylation in IRS-1, AKT, mTOR, and TBC1D1 in addition to changes in protein phosphorylation involved in Rho/Rac signaling, chromatin organization, and RNA processing. There were also striking differences in the phosphoproteome in cells from men versus women. These sex-specific and insulin-resistance defects were linked to functional differences in downstream actions. Thus, there are cell-autonomous signaling alterations associated with insulin resistance within the general population and important differences between men and women, many of which also occur in diabetes, that contribute to differences in physiology and disease.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Sex, Insulin resistance, Diabetes, Insulin signaling

### Affiliations
Director,  Dept of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Dept Proteomics and Signal Transduction, MaxPlanck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Ashokkumar Jayavelu

### Lab Head
Dr Prof.Matthias Mann
Director,  Dept of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


