### Accession
PXD016242

### Title
Integrated meta-omic analysis of a lignocellulose-degrading microbial community

### Description
Microbial communities that degrade lignocellulosic biomass are typified by high levels of species- and strain-level complexity, as well as synergistic interactions between both cellulolytic and non-cellulolytic microorganisms. Here we deconvoluted a highly efficient cellulose-degrading and methanogenic consortium (SEM1b) that is co-dominated by Clostridium (Ruminiclostridium) thermocellum and multiple heterogenic strains affiliated to C. proteolyticus. A time-series analysis was performed over the entire lifetime span of the microbial community and comprised of metagenomic, metatranscriptomic, metabolomics, metaproteomic and 16S rRNA gene analysis for 8 time points, in triplicate. Metagenomic analysis of SEM1b recovered metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) for each constituent population, whereas in parallel two novel strains of C. proteolyticus were isolated and sequenced. Both the recovered MAGs and the isolated strains were used as a database for further functional meta-omics. Absolute quantitative metatranscriptomics was performed thanks the spike-in of an in vitro transcribed RNA as an internal standard and label-free quantification was used for the metaproteomic analysis. The present dataset has been used for several publications. The first aim of the project was to characterize the interactions between uncultured populations in a lignocellulose-degrading community. Furthermore, because of the in-depth multi-omics characterization of the community, the dataset was used to develop new approaches for meta-omics integration as well as to assess the protein-to-RNA ratio of multiple microbial populations simultaneously. Modifications of multi-omics toolkits allowed us to assess the linearity between transcriptome and proteome for each population over time and reveal deeper functional-related trends and integrative co-dependent metabolisms that drive the overall phenotype of microbial communities.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from eight time points in triplicate during the time series analysis. To do so, 30ml of cultures containing cells and substrate were centrifuged at 500 x g for 5 minutes to pellet the substrate. The supernatant was centrifuged at 9000 x g for 15 minutes to collect the cells. Cell lysis was performed by resuspending the cells in 1ml lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 2mM EDTA) and keeping them on ice for 30 minutes. Cells were disrupted in 3 x 60 seconds cycles using a FastPrep24 (MP Biomedicals, USA). Debris were removed by centrifugation at 16000 x g for 15 minutes. The supernatants containing the proteins were kept at -20°C until further processing. Extracted proteins were quantified using the Bradford’s method. 50µg of each sample were denatured using SDS sample buffer, loaded on an Any-kD Mini-PROTEAN gel (Bio-Rad Labaoratories, USA) and separated by SDS-PAGE for 20 minutes at 270V. Each gel lane was cut into 16 slices and the reduction, alkylation and tryptic digestion of the proteins into peptides were performed in-gel as described previously (DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0126694). The tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel and desalted using C18 ZipTips (Merck Millipore, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions prior to mass spectrometry analysis. Peptides were analyzed using a nanoLC-MS/MS system consisting of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific, Germany) connected to a Q-Exactive hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source. Samples were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, Thermo Scientific) and back flushed onto a 50-cm analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm ID, Thermo Scientific). At the start, the columns were in 96% solution A [0.1% (v/v) formic acid], 4% solution B [80% (v/v) acetonitril, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid]. Peptides were eluted using a 90 minutes gradient developing from 4% to 13% (v/v) solution B in 2 minutes, 13% to 45% (v/v) B in 70 minutes and finally to 55% B in 5 minutes before the wash phase at 90% B, all at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The Q-Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode and the 10 most intense peptide precursors ions were selected for fragmentation. The selected precursor ions were then excluded for repeated fragmentation for 20 seconds. The resolution was set to R = 70,000 and R = 35,000 for MS and MS/MS, respectively. For optimal acquisition of MS/MS spectra, automatic gain control target values were set to 50,000 charges and a maximum injection time of 128 ms. In total of 384 raw MS files (8 samples x 3 biological replicates x 16 fractions) were produced.

### Data Protocol
The total of 384 raw MS files were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.6.1 and proteins were identified and quantified using the MaxLFQ algorithm. The data was searched against sample-specific meta-omic database supplemented with open-reading frames previously generated from two isolated Coprothermobacter strains (DOI: 10.1038/s41396-018-0290-y) and common contaminants such as human keratin and bovine serum albumin. In addition, reversed sequences of all protein entries were concatenated to the database for estimation of false discovery rates. The tolerance levels for matching to the database was 6 ppm for MS and 20 ppm for MS/MS. Trypsin was used as digestion enzyme, and two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionines, deamidation of asparagines and glutamines and formation of pyro-glutamic acid at N-terminal glutamines were allowed as variable modifications. The ‘match between runs’ feature of MaxQuant, which enables identification transfer between samples based on accurate mass and retention time, was applied with a match time window of one minute and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. The false discovery rate was estimated by using a target-decoy approach where reversed sequences of the protein entries were generated while preserving the C-terminal residues (KR) and concatenated to the database. All identifications were filtered in order to achieve a protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
While the field of microbiology has adapted to the study of complex microbiomes via modern meta-omics techniques, we have not updated our basic knowledge regarding the quantitative levels of DNA, RNA and protein molecules within a microbial cell, which ultimately control cellular function. Here we report the temporal measurements of absolute RNA and protein levels per gene within a mixed bacterial-archaeal consortium. Our analysis of this data reveals an absolute protein-to-RNA ratio of 10<sup>2</sup>-10<sup>4</sup> for bacterial populations and 10<sup>3</sup>-10<sup>5</sup> for an archaeon, which is more comparable to Eukaryotic representatives' humans and yeast. Furthermore, we use the linearity between the metaproteome and metatranscriptome over time to identify core functional guilds, hence using a fundamental biological feature (i.e., RNA/protein levels) to highlight phenotypical complementarity. Our findings show that upgrading multi-omic toolkits with traditional absolute measurements unlocks the scaling of core biological questions to dynamic and complex microbiomes, creating a deeper insight into inter-organismal relationships that drive the greater community function.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Microbial community

### Affiliations
Norwegian University of Life Sciences
Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science Norwegian University of Life Sciences Post Office Box 5003 1432, Ås Norway

### Submitter
Magnus Arntzen

### Lab Head
Dr Phil Pope
Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science Norwegian University of Life Sciences Post Office Box 5003 1432, Ås Norway


