### Accession
PXD041168

### Title
Acute deletion of the glucocorticoid receptor in hepatocytes disrupts postprandial lipid metabolism

### Description
Hepatic lipid metabolism is highly dynamic, and disruption of several circadian transcriptional regulators results in hepatic steatosis. This includes genetic disruption of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) as the liver develops. To address the functional role of GR in the adult liver, we used an acute hepatocyte-specific GR knockout model (hepGRKO) to study temporal hepatic lipid metabolism governed by GR at several pre- and postprandial timepoints. Lipidomics analysis revealed significant temporal lipid metabolism, with GR disruption resulting in impaired regulation of specific triglycerides, non-esterified fatty acids, and sphingolipids. This correlated with increased number and size of lipid droplets and mildly reduced mitochondrial respiration, most noticeably in the postprandial phase. Proteomics and transcriptomics analyses suggest that dysregulated lipid metabolism originates from pronounced induced expression of enzymes involved in fatty acid synthesis, -oxidation, and sphingolipid metabolism. Integration of GR cistromic data suggests that induced genes are a result of regulatory actions secondary to direct GR effects on transcription. 

### Sample Protocol
For quantitative comparison of liver proteomes of hepGRKO and GRfl/fl mice sacrificed at zeitgeber times 12, 14, and 18, approximately 40 mg of perfused liver tissue was split in two and homogenized in denaturing buffer (either 8 M guanidine hydrochloride in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate or 5 % SDS) by 3-10 seconds of sonication at 20 % intensity, and heated to 95 °C for 5 min. Protein concentrations were measured using PierceTM BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 10 μg of protein (5 μg from each lysate) was pooled together in a 1:1 volume of denaturing buffer before diluting 4x with water for a final concentration of 1 M guanidine hydrochloride (and 0.625% SDS). Protein aggregation capture on microparticles (65) was accomplished using 70% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN), 40 μg of magnetic HILIC beads (ReSyn Biosciences (Pty) Ltd.) and 30 min of incubation with shaking at room temperature. The bead-bound protein aggregates were retained using a magnet while washing once with pure ACN and once with 70% (v/v) ethanol. Protein aggregates were resuspended in 100 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 2 mM DTT for 30 min and alkylated with 11 mM chloracetamide for 30 min in the dark. After proteolytic digestion with 1:200 of LysC (Wako) for 1 hour at 37 °C, samples were digested with 1:100 of trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C, before adding trifluoroacetic acid (final pH 2.0-2.5). Samples were loaded onto C18 StageTips for desalting and eluted using 60 % ACN in 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid. Eluates were vacuum-dried to 2-3 μL in a speed-vac and finally re-diluted to 10 μL using 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid. Approximately 800 ng of digested and purified protein extract was loaded onto an LC-MS/MS system consisting of an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an EASY-nLC 1000 nanoflow liquid chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For reverse-phase chromatography we used a 20 cm analytical column with an inner diameter of 75 μm packed in-house with ReproSil Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH) and an ACN/water solvent system containing 0.5% acetic acid at a flow rate of 0.25 μL/min. Peptide separation was achieved using a step-gradient from 3 to 8% ACN for 7 min, followed by a slow gradient to 35% ACN for 86 min, a ramp to 45% ACN for 15 min and a plateau of 95% ACN for 5 min. The Orbitrap Exploris 480 was operated in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode by sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra. Briefly, after a full MS survey scan from 350 to 1400 m/z at 120,000 resolution with a maximum ion injection time of 45 ms and a normalized automatic gain control target of 300%, precursor ions in the 360.5-1000.5 m/z range were fragmented by higher-collisional dissociation at a collision energy of 28% in 50 sequential scans using a sliding 13 m/z isolation window, a 1 m/z overlap between windows, a resolution of 30,000 and a maximum ion injection time of 54 ms.

### Data Protocol
The acquired DIA raw files were analyzed in the SpectronautTM 14.10 software (Biognosys) using default settings, single-hit protein filtering, and our in-house generated spectral library (reference below). Finally, the report table containing quantitative values for identified proteins in each run was exported for subsequent data analysis.  Ægidius HM, Veidal SS, Feigh M, Hallenborg P, Puglia M, Pers TH, et al. Multi-omics characterization of a diet-induced obese model of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. Sci Rep. 2020 Jan 24;10(1):1148.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatic lipid metabolism is highly dynamic, and disruption of several circadian transcriptional regulators results in hepatic steatosis. This includes genetic disruption of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) as the liver develops. To address the functional role of GR in the adult liver, we used an acute hepatocyte-specific GR knockout model to study temporal hepatic lipid metabolism governed by GR at several preprandial and postprandial circadian timepoints. Lipidomics analysis revealed significant temporal lipid metabolism, where GR disruption results in impaired regulation of specific triglycerides, nonesterified fatty acids, and sphingolipids. This correlates with increased number and size of lipid droplets and mildly reduced mitochondrial respiration, most noticeably in the postprandial phase. Proteomics and transcriptomics analyses suggest that dysregulated lipid metabolism originates from pronounced induced expression of enzymes involved in fatty acid synthesis, &#x3b2;-oxidation, and sphingolipid metabolism. Integration of GR cistromic data suggests that induced gene expression is a result of regulatory actions secondary to direct GR effects on gene transcription.

### Keywords
Mouse, Liver, Glucocorticoid receptor knockout mice, Lc-ms/ms, Lipid metabolism, Circadian rhythm, Dia

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Denmark
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Felix Boel Pedersen

### Lab Head
Dr Blagoy Blagoev
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Denmark


