### Accession
PXD022955

### Title
The proteolytically inactive orthocaspase of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 plays an important role during oxidative stress

### Description
Caspases are proteases, best known for their involvement in the execution of apoptosis – a subtype of programmed cell death, which occurs only in animals. These proteases are composed of two structural building blocks: a proteolytically active p20 domain and a regulatory p10 domain. Although structural homologues appear in representatives of all other organisms, their functional homology, i. e. cell death depending on their proteolytical activity, is still much disputed. Additionally, pseudo-caspases and pseudo-metacaspases, in which the catalytic histidine-cysteine diad is substituted with non-proteolytic amino acid residues, were shown to be involved in cell death programmes. Here, we present the involvement of a pseudo-orthocaspase (SyOC), a prokaryotic caspase-homologue lacking the p10 domain, in oxidative stress in the model cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. To study the in vivo impact of this pseudo-protease during oxidative stress its gene expression during exposure to H2O2 was monitored by RT-qPCR. Furthermore, a knock-out mutant lacking the pseudo-orthocaspase gene was designed and its survival and growth rates were compared to wild type cells as well as its proteome. Deletion of SyOC led to cells with higher tolerance towards oxidative stress, the protein therefore might be involved in a pro-death pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Synechocystis 6803 WT and ΔOC knock-out mutant line previously grown in BG-11 medium, were treated with 3.5 mM H2O2 for one hour. Then 30 ml of cell culture were harvested by centrifugation at 5000×g for 20 min at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet was resuspended in 1 ml of lysis buffer (7 M Urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS (w/v), 2% ASB-14 (w/v), 1% DM (w/v), 200 mM KCl, 100 mM of HEPES pH 7.0, 5 mM DTT) and complete™ protease inhibitor cocktail (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) (according the manufacturer’s recommendations). Then cells in lysis buffer were collected in MN Bead Tubes Type A (Macherey-Nagel, Dueren, Germany) and broken using a bead-beater in a cold (4°C) room. Cell debris and other insoluble proteins were removed by centrifugation at 21,000×g for 30 min at 4°C. Finally, all samples were cleaned using a 0.2 µm non-pyrogenic sterile filter and collected in a new tube. The total protein concentration was determined using the BioRad RC DC protein assay kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Total extract was fast frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further analysis.  Samples were processed using the S-trap micro spin column system (Protifi, Huntington, NY) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines, with the following changes. Lysis buffer was added to the samples in order to introduce SDC, and Tris was used in place of TEAB in all buffers. After elution from the S-trap spin columns, the samples were dried and resolubilized in 1% formic acid (FA) for mass spectrometric injection of 1 µg on column.  Mass spectrometry: RP-nanoLC−MS/MS  Data were acquired using an Ultimate3000 system (Thermo) coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were first trapped (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5μm, 100A) before being separated on an analytical column (Agilent Poroshell EC-C18, 2.7μm, 50 cm×75μm). Trapping was performed for 2 min in solvent A (0.1 M FA in water), and the gradient was as follows: 9−13% solvent B (0.1 M FA in 80% ACN) in 3 min, 13−44% in 95 min, 44−95% in 3 min, and finally 100% for 4 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode. Full-scan MS spectra from m/z 375−1600 were acquired at a resolution of 60 000 at m/z 400 after accumulation to a target value of 3×106. Up to 15 most intense precursor ions were selected for fragmentation. HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 27 after accumulation to a target value of 1×105. MS/MS was acquired at a resolution of 30 000.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.614.0). The database search was performed against the Synechocystis 6803 Uniprot database (UP000001425 3507) entries using Andromeda as search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation, protein N-term acetylation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Trypsin was specified as enzyme and up to two miss cleavages were allowed. Filtering was done at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the protein and peptide level. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed and quantified data were processed and analyzed using R and Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016) to remove potential contaminants and reverse peptides, log2-transform and normalize to column median as per standard methods.

### Publication Abstract
Caspases are proteases, best known for their involvement in the execution of apoptosis-a subtype of programmed cell death, which occurs only in animals. These proteases are composed of two structural building blocks: a proteolytically active p20 domain and a regulatory p10 domain. Although structural homologs appear in representatives of all other organisms, their functional homology, i.e., cell death depending on their proteolytical activity, is still much disputed. Additionally, pseudo-caspases and pseudo-metacaspases, in which the catalytic histidine-cysteine dyad is substituted with non-proteolytic amino acid residues, were shown to be involved in cell death programs. Here, we present the involvement of a pseudo-orthocaspase (SyOC), a prokaryotic caspase-homolog lacking the p10 domain, in oxidative stress in the model cyanobacterium <i>Synechocystis</i> sp. PCC 6803. To study the <i>in vivo</i> impact of this pseudo-protease during oxidative stress its gene expression during exposure to H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> was monitored by RT-qPCR. Furthermore, a knock-out mutant lacking the pseudo-orthocaspase gene was designed, and its survival and growth rates were compared to wild type cells as well as its proteome. Deletion of SyOC led to cells with a higher tolerance toward oxidative stress, suggesting that this protein may be involved in a pro-death pathway.

### Keywords
Orthocaspases, Metacaspases, Pseudo-enzymes, Cyanobacteria., Programmed cell death, Stress

### Affiliations
Dept of Chemistry, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Franziska Voellmy

### Lab Head
Dr Christiane Funk
Dept of Chemistry, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.


