### Accession
PXD025518

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of the Shandrin Mammoth by EVA Technology and High-Resolution Mass Spectrometry:  What is its Gut Telling Us?

### Description
The investigation about archaeological samples, which are of inestimable value, requires minimally destructive or nondestructive sampling techniques. One of the most promising and recent non-invasive techniques is known under the acronym EVA, an ethylene vinyl acetate film which avoids contamination and proteins damages. This paper reports the results of the first-ever analysis of proteins extracted from the EVA film applied to a tissue sample some 40000 years old. In particular, the gut sample of a woolly mammoth (Mammuthus primigenus), discovered in 1972 close to the Shandrin River (Yakutia, Russia), via a shotgun MS-based approach was investigated. Proteomic and peptidomic analysis allowed the exploration of the mammoth dietary plants and its gut bacteria. The results were validated through the level of deamidation and other post-translational modifications of the peptides of the samples, which were used to discrimitate the “original” endogenous peptides from contaminant ones. Overall, the results of the metaproteomic analysis here reported are in accordance with the previous paleobotanical studies and with the reconstructed habitat of the Shandrin mammoth.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Collection and preparation for proteomics analyses  An EVA diskette was gently humidified with ultrapure water and then placed on sample gut cavities for 60 min. A section of the EVA diskette (5mm X 5mm) was cut with a scalpel and the proteins trapped in its film were eluted sequentially with 200 μL of volatile buffers (formate at pH 3, followed by ammonia at pH 10) and finally with volatile solvents (acetonitrile) so as to collect positively and negatively charged as well as hydrophobic proteins.  The dried eluate was suspended in 50mM AMBIC and the proteins were quantified by a fluorimetric assay using the Qubit Protein Assay kit with the Qubit 1.0 Fluorometer (ThermoFisher Scientifc, Milan, Italy).  The eluate was reduced by DTT (1:50, 3 h at room temperature) and alkylated by IAA (two times the concentration of DTT, 1h in the dark at 20°C). The sample was finally digested by porcine trypsin at an enzyme–substrate ratio of 1:50 (overnight, 37 °C). The resulting peptide mixture solutions were dried under vacuum (Concentrator Plus, Eppendorf), re-dissolved in 50 µL of 5% aqueous FA, filtered by ultracentrifugation (750 µL, 0.2 µm Nonsterile Micro-Centrifugal Filters, Sepachrom, Rho, Milan), and analyzed by UHPLC/high resolution nanoESI–MS/MS. An empty diskette of EVA film was used as control sample. It was processed and analyzed by proteomics on the same way of the EVA diskette placed in contact with the surface of mammoth gut sample.   Mass spectrometry analysis Mass spectrometry data were acquired via a Thermo Fisher Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid® (Q-OT-qIT) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Liquid chromatography was carried out using a Thermo Scientific Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Sunnyvale, CA). One microliter of peptide mixture was loaded onto an Acclaim ®Nano Trap C18 Column (100 µm i.d. x 2 cm, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å). After washing the trapping column with solvent A (H2O + 0.1% FA) for 3 min at a flow rate of 7 μL/min, the peptides were eluted from the trapping column onto a PepMap® RSLC C18 EASY-Spray column (75 µm i.d. x 50 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å) and separated by elution at a flow rate of 0.25 µL/min at 40°C by a linear gradient of solvent B (ACN + 0.1% FA) in A, 5% for 3 min, followed by 5% to 65% in 85 min, 65% to 95% in 5 min, finishing by holding 95% B 5 min, 95% to 5% in 10 min and re-equilibrating at 5% B for 15 min. The eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization using the following parameters: source voltage, 1.75 kV; ion transfer tube temperature, 275 °C; m/z range 200-1600 (Resolution @ 200 m/z: 120 K). Tandem MS was performed with low-resolution in the ion trap for those precursors with charge state 2÷4; HCD fragmentation: normalized C.E. of 35. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles. MS/MS spectral quality was enhanced enabling the parallelizable time option. MS data acquisition was carried out by utilizing the Xcalibur v. 3.0.63 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). To avoid cross-contamination with other biological samples all solvents were prepared freshly and ancient samples were not processed or analyzed in one batch with modern references. To avoid carryover during nLC-MS/MS runs, from three to five blank runs were performed before each analysis using the same gradient program. Spectra acquired in the last blank run were searched against the SwissProt database without species origin restrictions.

### Data Protocol
Database Search, protein identification, and deamidation calculation  nLC–MS/MS data were processed by MaxQuant (MQ) software 1.6.3.4 (https://www.maxquant.org/). The raw data were analyzed and searched against three different databases separately: i) a proteins database, referred in the text as Proboscidea database (30304 entries, February 2021) including Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL sequences of Loxodonta africana, Elephas maximus, Mammut americanum and Mammuthus prigimegius; ii) a Viridiplantae database (Swiss-Prot; 40656 entries, February 2021); and iii) a Bacteria and Nematoda database including 334868 and 5099 Swiss-Prot entries from bacteria and nematode, respectively (February 2021). Moreover, the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (c-RAP; https://www.thegpm.org/crap/) contaminant database was enabled in the database search.  The first step of database search was carried out using the following parameters: a) tryptic peptides with a maximum of 3 missed cleavage sites; b) cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification; c) oxidation of methionine, the transformation of N-terminal glutamine and N-terminal glutamic acid residue to pyroglutamic acid form, and the deamidation of asparagine and glutamine as variable modifications. Match type was “match from and to”. The decoy mode was “revert”. PSM, Protein and Site decoy fraction FDR were set at 0.01 as threshold for peptide and protein identifications. Minimum score for modified and unmodified peptides was set at 40. All the other parameters were set as default.  In the data analysis only peptides with intensity over the Max Quant threshold were considered. Then, the unassigned spectra were examined by an additional search function of Max Quant, named “dependent peptide search”, which allows the identification of potential PTMs related to aging and photo-oxidation damages.  On the light of the results obtained by the first step of database search, each database was investigated to identify additional PTMs and improve peptides identifications. All the parameters were the same of the previous step; in particular, the following PTMs were investigated, as variable modifications: i) oxidation, di-oxidation, formation of kynurenine, and formation of oxo-lactone, for tryptophan residues; ii) oxidation, di-oxidation, iodination and di-iodination, and formation of dopaquinone, for tyrosine residues; iii) acetylation of lysine; iv) di-oxidation of methionine; v) tri-oxidation of cysteine. Finally, to be sure of the species assigned by the software to each protein identified, all the identified peptides underwent BLASTp (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool for protein) searches through the NCBI database (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) to validate species identifications and to rule out conserved peptides between species. A protein was considered identified if a minimum of two peptides were matched. The metaproteomics analysis was performed by consulting the open-source web application Unipept (Unipept 4.3; http://unipept.ugent.be), using all the peptides identified with a score>40 and an intensity over the MaxQuant threshold, regardless of the initially assigned protein.  An estimation of the percentage of deamidation for each sample was calculated with the aid of a freely available command-line script for Python 2.x (https://github.com/dblyon/deamidation), which use the MaxQuant “evidence.txt” file. The calculations were done separately for potentially original peptides and potential contaminants peptides as previously reported in Mackie et al. 2018.

### Publication Abstract
During the last decade, paleoproteomics allowed us to open a direct window into the biological past, improving our understanding of the phylogenetic relationships of extant and extinct species, past human diseases, and reconstruction of the human diet. In particular, meta-proteomic studies, mainly carried out on ancient human dental calculus, provided insights into past oral microbial communities and ancient diets. On the contrary, very few investigations regard the analysis of ancient gut microbiota, which may enable a greater understanding of how microorganisms and their hosts have co-evolved and spread under the influence of changing diet practices and habitat. In this respect, this paper reports the results of the first-ever meta-proteomic analysis carried out on a gut tissue sample some 40,000&#xa0;years old. Proteins were extracted by applying EVA (ethylene-vinyl acetate) films to the surface of the gut sample of a woolly mammoth (Mammuthus primigenus), discovered in 1972 close to the Shandrin River (Yakutia, Russia), and then investigated via a shotgun MS-based approach. Proteomic and peptidomic analysis allowed in-depth exploration of its meta-proteome composition. The results were validated through the level of deamidation and other diagenetic chemical modifications of the sample peptides, which were used to discriminate the "original" endogenous peptides from contaminant ones. Overall, the results of the meta-proteomic analysis here reported agreeing with the previous paleobotanical studies and with the reconstructed habitat of the Shandrin mammoth and provided insight into its diet. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;PXD025518&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;.

### Keywords
Non-invasive technique, Mammoth, Paleoproteomic, High-resolution mass spectrometry, Deamidation

### Affiliations
University of Catania
Laboratory of Organic Mass Spectrometry, Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Catania, Catania, Italy

### Submitter
Vincenzo Cunsolo

### Lab Head
Dr Salvatore FotiLaboratory of Organic Mass Spectrometry, Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Catania, Viale A. Doria 6, 95125, Catania, Italy
Laboratory of Organic Mass Spectrometry, Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Catania, Catania, Italy


