### Accession
PXD011796

### Title
Proteomic analysis of neutrophil extracellular traps (healthy control, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus)_C4PR_LIV

### Description
Neutrophil Extracellular Traps (NETs) are chromatin-derived extracellular structures that are expelled from neutrophils in response to infectious or inflammatory stimuli. NET DNA structures are decorated with proteins including histones, myeloperoxidase and neutrophil elastase. NETs are implicated in the development of auto-immunity in diseases including rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) through the externalisation of intracellular neoepitopes e.g. dsDNA and nuclear proteins in SLE and citrullinated peptides in RA. The aim of this work was to use quantitative proteomics to identify and measure NET proteins produced by neutrophils from healthy individuals, and from patients with RA and SLE.

### Sample Protocol
Ultra-pure neutrophils (>99%) from healthy individuals (n=3) and patients with RA or SLE (n=6 each) were incubated ±PMA (50nM, Protein Kinase C super-activator) or A23187 (3.8μM, calcium ionophore activator of peptidyl-arginine deiminase-4 (PAD4)) for 4h. Following two wash steps, NETs were liberated by nuclease digestion. NET proteins were concentrated onto Strataclean beads and digested on-bead with trypsin. Peptides were resolved on 1h gradients. Data-dependent LC-MS/MS analyses were conducted on a QExactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitative analysis was performed using Progenesis QI for proteomics. Exported peak lists were searched in Mascot against the UniProt Human reviewed database using a peptide mass tolerance of 10ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.01Da.Fixed modifications included carbamidomethyl cysteine and variable modifications oxidation of methionine. A peptide false discovery rate of 1% was set in Mascot before re-importing into Progenesis.

### Publication Abstract
Neutrophil Extracellular Traps (NETs) are implicated in the development of auto-immunity in diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) through the externalization of intracellular neoepitopes e.g., dsDNA and nuclear proteins in SLE and citrullinated peptides in RA. The aim of this work was to use quantitative proteomics to identify and measure NET proteins produced by neutrophils from healthy controls, and from patients with RA and SLE to determine if NETs can be differentially-generated to expose different sets of neoepitopes. Ultra-pure neutrophils (&gt;99%) from healthy individuals (<i>n</i> = 3) and patients with RA or SLE (<i>n</i> = 6 each) were incubated &#xb1; PMA (50 nM, PKC super-activator) or A23187 (3.8 &#x3bc;M, calcium ionophore) for 4 h. NETs were liberated by nuclease digestion and concentrated onto Strataclean beads prior to on-bead digestion with trypsin. Data-dependent LC-MS/MS analyses were conducted on a QExactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer, and label-free protein quantification was carried out using Progenesis QI. PMA-induced NETs were decorated with annexins, azurocidin and histone H3, whereas A23187-induced NETs were decorated with granule proteins including CAMP/LL37, CRISP3, lipocalin and MMP8, histones H1.0, H1.4, and H1.5, interleukin-8, protein-arginine deiminase-4 (PADI4), and &#x3b1;-enolase. Four proteins were significantly different between PMA-NETs from RA and SLE neutrophils (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05): RNASE2 was higher in RA, whereas MPO, leukocyte elastase inhibitor and thymidine phosphorylase were higher in SLE. For A23187-NETs, six NET proteins were higher in RA (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05), including CAMP/LL37, CRISP3, interleukin-8, MMP8; Thirteen proteins were higher in SLE, including histones H1.0, H2B, and H4. This work provides the first, direct comparison of NOX2-dependent (PMA) and NOX2-independent (A23187) NETs using quantitative proteomics, and the first direct comparison of RA and SLE NETs using quantitative proteomics. We show that it is the nature of the stimulant rather than neutrophil physiology that determines NET protein profiles in disease, since stimulation of NETosis in either a NOX2-dependent or a NOX2-independent manner generates broadly similar NET proteins irrespective of the disease background. We also use our proteomics pipeline to identify an extensive range of post-translationally modified proteins in RA and SLE, including histones and granule proteins, many of which are known targets of auto-antibodies in each disease.

### Keywords
Systemic lupus erythematosus, Pma, Neutrophil extracellular traps, Rheumatoid arthritis, A23187

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Arthritis Research UK Career Development Fellow Institute of Aging and Chronic Disease University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Deborah Simpson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Helen L Wright
Arthritis Research UK Career Development Fellow Institute of Aging and Chronic Disease University of Liverpool


