### Accession
PXD017345

### Title
SugarPy facilitates the universal, discovery-driven analysis of intact glycopeptides

### Description
Protein glycosylation is a complex post-translational modification with crucial cellular functions in all domains of life. Currently, large-scale glycoproteomics approaches rely on glycan database dependent algorithms and are thus unsuitable for discovery-driven analyses of glycoproteomes. Therefore, we devised SugarPy, a glycan database independent Python module, and validated it on the glycoproteome of human breast milk. We further demonstrated its applicability by analyzing glycoproteomes with uncommon glycans stemming from the green algae Chalmydomonas reinhardtii and the archaeon Haloferax volcanii. Finally, SugarPy facilitated the novel characterization of glycoproteins from Cyanidioschyzon merolae.

### Sample Protocol
Concentrated supernatant samples and the whey fraction isolated from human breast milk were subjected to DTT and iodoacetamide treatment prior to trypsin digestion (FASP protocol). Human samples underwent additional enrichment of glycopeptides by ZIC-HILIC. Resuspended peptides were separated by HPLC and subsequently subjected to measurements on a QExactive+ mass spectrometer. Here, three different measurements were performed. (i) Peptides were additionally accelerated by enabling in-source collision induced dissociation (IS-CID) after ionization which induced a fragmentation of the glycan moiety and results in a glycan Y-fragmentation series observable in MS1. Furthermore, peaks differing by the mass of one N-acetylhexosamine were slected for HCD fragmentation via the mass tag option, resulting in MS2 spectra with peptide fragment ions. (ii) Peptides were not accelerated additionally (not fragmented (NF) measurements) but subjected to a standard Top12 measurement without enabling mass tags (NCE 30). (iii) stepped collision energy was applied (NCE 20, 30, 40) while all other conditions were equal to (ii). Samples from Haloferax volcanii have been analyzed previously (PXD011015).

### Data Protocol
(i) Data processing was performed employing Ursgal for peptide identification and SugarPy for glycan identification. For the principle underlying the SugarPy algorithm as well as the filtering modes resulting in the search result files see the corresponding publication (Schulze et al., "SugarPy facilitates the universal, discovery-driven analysis of intact glycopeptides"). Briefly, protein database searches have been performed using X!Tandem, MS-GF+ and MSFragger, allowing for the potential modification of Asn with sugars according to the corresponding organism. Results were filtered for identified glycosylated petide sequences, which were than used as an input for SugarPy in order to identify the full glycopeptides on MS1 level. (ii) and (iii) NF measurements were used for a validation of SugarPy glycopeptides. Hereby, glycopeptides identified by SugarPy were checked for the occurence of corresponding isotope envelopes in MS1, their selection for HCD fragmentation and the presence of glycopeptide specific ions in MS2 spectra. Furthermore, these measurements were analyzed with SugarQb and pGlyco for comparison.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Computational proteomics, Glycoproteomics, Human breast milk, Archaea, Is-cid, Lc-ms/ms, Glycosylation, Microalgae, Sugarpy

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania
Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology, University of M端nster, 48143 M端nster, Germany

### Submitter
Stefan Schulze

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hippler
Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology, University of M端nster, 48143 M端nster, Germany


