### Accession
PXD015457

### Title
Isotopically Labeled Desthiobiotin Azide (isoDTB) Tags Enable Global Profiling of the Bacterial Cysteinome

### Description
In the presented datasets, we use newly developed isotopically labeled desthiobiotin azide (isoDTB) tags to residue-specifically quantify cysteines in a variety of bacterial strains and a human cell line with consistently high coverage. We e.g. quantify 59% of all cysteines in essential proteins in Staphylococcus aureus. We discover 88 cysteines with high reactivity, which correlates with functional importance. Furthermore, we identify 268 cysteines that are engaged by covalent ligands. Overall, a comprehensive map of the bacterial cysteinome is obtained.

### Sample Protocol
In a typical workflow, two samples of 1.00 mL freshly prepared lysate of the indicated bacterial strain or human MDA-MB-231 cells were incubated with 20 µL of 50 mM IA-alkyne, each, and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. One sample was clicked to the heavy and one to the light isoDTB tag by adding 120 µL of a solution consisting of 60 µL 0.9 mg/mL TBTA ligand in 4:1 tBuOH/DMSO, 20 µL 12.5 mg/mL CuSO4 in water, 20 µL 13 mg/ml TCEP in water and 20 µL 5 mM of the respective isoDTB tag in DMSO. After incubation of the samples at room temperature for 1 h, the light- and heavy-labeled samples were combined into 8 mL of cold acetone in order to precipitate all proteins. The protein precipitates were centrifuged at 3,500 rpm at 25 °C for 10 min. The supernatant was removed, and precipitates resuspended in 1 mL cold methanol by sonification. After centrifugation at 20,000 xg at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was removed. This wash step with methanol was repeated one more time. The pellets were dissolved in 300 µL 8 M urea in 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) by sonification. 900 µL 0.1 M TEAB were added to obtain a concentration of 2 M urea. This solution was added to 1.2 mL of washed high capacity streptavidin agarose beads (50 µL initial slurry, Fisher Scientific, 10733315) in 0.2% nonyl phenoxypolyethoxylethanol (NP40). The samples were rotated at room temperature for 1 h in order to assure binding to the beads. The beads were centrifuged (1 min, 1,000 xg) and the supernatant was removed. The beads were resuspended in a volume of 600 µL 0.1% NP40 in PBS and transferred to a centrifuge column (Fisher Scientific, 11894131). Beads were washed two times with 0.1% NP40 in PBS, three times with PBS and three times with ddH2O. The beads were resuspended in 600 µL 8 M urea in 0.1 M TEAB, transferred to a Protein LoBind tube and centrifuged (1 min, 1,000 xg). The supernatant was removed, and the beads were resuspended in 300 µL 8 M urea in 0.1 M TEAB. 15 µL of dithiothreitol (DTT; 31 mg/mL in water) were added and the beads incubated at 37 °C with shaking at 200 rpm for 45 min. Free thiol groups were modified by adding 15 µL of iodoacetamide (74 mg/mL in water) and incubation at 25 °C with shaking at 200 rpm for 30 min. Remaining iodoacetamide was quenched by adding 15 µL DTT (31 mg/mL in water) and incubation at 25 °C with shaking at 200 rpm for another 30 min. 900 µL TEAB were added to the samples after alkylation to obtain a urea concentration of 2 M. Samples were centrifuged (1 min, 1,000 xg) and the supernatant removed. The beads were resuspended in 200 µL 2 M urea in 0.1 M TEAB. 4 µL 0.5 mg/mL trypsin (Promega, V5113) were added and samples incubated at 37 °C with shaking at 200 rpm overnight. After the digestion, samples were diluted by adding 400 µL of 0.1% NP40 in PBS and transferred to a centrifuge column (Fisher Scientific, 11894131).  Beads were washed three times with 0.1% NP40 in PBS, three times with PBS (MS grade) and three times with water (MS grade). Peptides were eluted by adding 200 µL 0.1% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile in water to the column. 100 µL of the elution buffer were added two times more to the column and peptides eluted into a Protein LoBind tube by centrifuging at 3,000 xg for 3 min. The solvent was removed in a vacuum concentrator by rotating at 30 °C for approximately 5 h. Samples were dissolved in 30 µL 1% formic acid in water by sonification for 5 min. Samples were filtered (Merck, UVC30GVNB) washed with the same solvent and transferred into MS sample vials. Samples were stored at −20 °C until measurement.

### Data Protocol
10 µL of the samples were analyzed using a Qexactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC system (Dionex). Samples were loaded on an Acclaim C18 PepMap100 trap column (75 µm ID x 2 cm) and washed with 0.1% TFA. The subsequent separation was carried out on an Acclaim C18PepMapRSLC column (75 µm ID x 50 cm) with a flow of 300 µL/min and buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water and B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Analysis started with washing in 5% B for 7 min followed a gradient from 5% to 40% buffer B in 105 min, an increase to 60% B in 10 min and another increase to 90% B in 10 min. 90% B was held for 10 min, then decreased to 5% in 0.1 min and held at 5% for another 9.9 min. The Qexactive Plus mass spectrometer was run in a TOP10 data-dependent mode. In the orbitrap, full MS scans were collected in a scan range of 300-1500 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 and an AGC target of 3e6 with 80 ms maximum injection time. The most intense peaks were selected for MS2 measurement with a minimum AGC target of 1e3 and isotope exclusion and dynamic exclusion (exclusion duration: 60 s) enabled. Peaks with unassigned charge or a charge of +1 were excluded. MS2 spectra were collected at a resolution of 17,500 aiming at an AGC target of 1e5 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Isolation was conducted in the quadrupole using a window of 1.6 m/z. Fragments were generated using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy: 27%) and finally detected in the orbitrap. We utilized a workaround in order to quantify peptides that have several cysteines but are only modified at one of them with the isoDTB tags. We utilized “U”, which normally stands for selenocysteine, as a placeholder amino acid for the modified cysteine. To do so, we deleted all selenocysteine-containing proteins from the FASTA databases. We then individually replaced each cysteine in the FASTA database with a “U”. For each individual replacement, we created an entry in the FASTA database, which was named in the format “Uniprot code”_”C””number of the cysteine”. The unmodified sequence was deleted from the FASTA database, except if the protein did not contain any cysteine, in which case the unmodified entry was renamed to “Uniprot Code”_”C0” and kept in the database. During MaxQuant analysis, we define the labels in a way to not only add the modification with the tag, but also to transfer the placeholder “U” back to a cysteine. All used FASTA databases are deposited within this dataset. MS raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0). Standard settings were used with the following changes and additions: The modified FASTA databases with individual substitutions of cysteines with the placeholder “U” were used. Labels were set on the placeholder amino acid “U” for the light isoDTB tag as light label (C28 H46 N10 O6 S1 Se-1) and the heavy isoDTB tag as heavy label (C24 13C4 H46 N8 15N2 O6 S1 Se-1). A multiplicity of 2 was set and a maximum number of labeled amino acids of 1. The digestion enzyme was set to Trypsin/P with maximum number of missed cleavages of 2. No variable modifications were included. The “Re-quantify” option was enabled. Carbamidomethyl (C2 H3 NO) was used as fixed modification on cysteine. Contaminants were included. Peptides were searched with a minimum peptide length of 7 and a maximum peptide mass of 4600. “Second peptides” and “Dependent peptides” were disabled and the option “Match between run” was enabled with a Match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment window of 20 min. An FDR of 0.01 was used for Protein FDR, PSM FDR and XPSM FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Rapid development of bacterial resistance has led to an urgent need to find new druggable targets for antibiotics. In this context, residue-specific chemoproteomic approaches enable proteome-wide identification of binding sites for covalent inhibitors. Described here are easily synthesized isotopically labeled desthiobiotin azide (isoDTB) tags that shortened the chemoproteomic workflow and allowed an increased coverage of cysteines in bacterial systems. They were used to quantify 59&#x2009;% of all cysteines in essential proteins in Staphylococcus aureus and enabled the discovery of 88 cysteines that showed high reactivity, which correlates with functional importance. Furthermore, 268 cysteines that are engaged by covalent ligands were identified. Inhibition of HMG-CoA synthase was verified and will allow addressing the bacterial mevalonate pathway through a new target. Overall, a broad map of the bacterial cysteinome was obtained, which will facilitate the development of antibiotics with novel modes-of-action.

### Keywords
Protein modifications, Antibiotics, Covalent inhibitors, Proteomics, Isotopic labeling

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich
Department of Chemistry Technical University of Munich Germany

### Submitter
Stephan M. Hacker

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Stephan M. Hacker
Department of Chemistry Technical University of Munich Germany


