### Accession
PXD004724

### Title
Label-free Proteomic Analysis of Exosomes Derived from Inducible Hepatitis B Virus-Replicating HepAD38 Cell Line

### Description
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a major health problem worldwide. Recent evidence suggests that various viruses can manipulate the infection process by secretion of specific viral and cellular components into exosomes, small nanometer-sized (30-150 nm) vesicles secreted from various cells. However, the impact of HBV replication on hepatocytes produced exosomes has not been fully delineated. In this work, an HBV-inducible cell line HepAD38 was used to directly compare changes in the protein content of exosomes secreted from HepAD38 cells with or without HBV replication. Exosomes were isolated from conditioned medium of HepAD38 cell cultures and the purity of exosomes were confirmed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and Western immunoblotting assays. Ion-intensity based label-free LC−MS/MS quantitation technologies were applied to analyze protein content of HBV-exosomes and HBV-free-exosomes. A total of 1412 exosomal proteins were identified, in which the abundance of 35 proteins were significantly altered. Strikingly, 5 subunit proteins from the 26S proteasome complex, including PSMC1, PSMC2, PSMD1, PSMD7 and PSMD14 were consistently enhanced in HBV-exosomes. Bioinformatic analysis of differential exosomal proteins revealed the significant enrichment of components involved in proteasomal catabolic process. Proteasome activity assays further suggested that HBV-exosomes had enhanced proteolytic activity compared to HBV-free-exosomes. Furthermore, Human peripheral monocytes incubated with HBV-exosomes induced a significant lower level of IL-6 secretion compared to HBV-free-exosomes. Irreversible inhibition of proteasomal activity within exosome restored the IL-6 induction in monocytes. These results suggest that transmission of proteasome subunit proteins by HBV-exosomes might modulate the innate sensing of pro-inflammatory molecules in the recipient monocytes. These results revealed the composition and potential function of exosomes produced during HBV replication, thus provide a new perspective on the role of exosomes in HBV-host interaction.

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes were prepared from HepAD38 culture supernatants by ultracentrifugation and subsequent immunoprecipitation. A protein amount of 5 µg per exosome sample was loaded on an 18% Tris-glycine polyacrylamide gel (Anamed Elektrophorese, Groß-Bieberau, Germany) and allowed to run slightly into the gels (15 min, 100 V). The protein bands were stained with Coomassie dye and cut from the gels. Trypsin digestion of proteins was performed overnight at 37 °C (Serva Electrophoresis, Heidelberg, Germany) and the peptides were extracted from digested bands with 20 μL of 50% ACN in 0.1% TFA (1:1), vacuum dried and subsequently dissolved in 0.1% TFA. The peptide concentration was determined by amino acid analysis as previously described [9].  The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled online to a QExactive mass spectrometer (both from Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). 300 ng of peptide sample were injected and pre-concentrated on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 300 μm×5 mm, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; flow rate 30 μL/min). Subsequently, the peptides were separated on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 μm×50 cm, nano Viper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) by a gradient from 5% to 40% solvent B over 120 min (solvent A: 0.1% FA, solvent B: 0.1% FA, 84% ACN; flow rate 400 nL/min; column oven temperature 60 °C). The MS instrument was operated in a data-dependent mode. The 10 most abundant precursor ions detected in the full MS survey scan (m/z range of 350−1,400, R = 70,000) were isolated with a 2 m/z mass window for further high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS/MS analysis with a resolution of 35,000. Spectra were acquired under automatic gain control (AGC) for survey spectra (AGC: 3×106) and MS/MS spectra (AGC: 2×105). In all cases, one microscan was recorded using dynamic exclusion of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Ion intensity based label-free quantification technique allows the determination of precursor ion abundances at MS level across samples. The peptide identification was performed using Proteome Discoverer Software (ver. 1.4.0.288, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, U.S.A.) [10]. The mass spectra were searched against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (2014_10; 546,790 entries) restricted to Homo sapiens using Mascot (ver. 2.3.0.2). HBV genome type D protein sequences were downloaded from Uniprot website and used for HBV peptide identification in relevant samples. The mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. One tryptic miscleavage was considered as well as chemical modification of methionine (oxidation) and cysteine (propionamide). The percolator function implemented in Proteome Discoverer was used to estimate peptide confidence and only peptides which passed a false discovery rate < 1% were considered for analysis. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at >95% probability and contained at least two identified peptides [11]. The peptide quantification was performed using Progenesis QI software (ver. 2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd., Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.). Equal amount of peptides (25 ng) from the 12 samples(6 replicates×2 groups) were mixed before LC-MS/MS analysis and the resulted data were used as reference in Progenesis analysis. All runs were aligned to the reference run and a master list of features considering m/z values and retention times was generated. The peptide identifications were exported from Proteome Discoverer and imported in Progenesis QI software where they were matched to the respective features. Relative ratio quantification was performed using quantities of unique peptides and required a minimum of two unique peptides. Proteins quantified with p-value ≤ 0.05 and a fold change of ≥ 1.5 were considered to be significantly differential and used for further evaluation. The statistical analysis of label-free discovery study was analyzed by means of unpaired ANOVA implemented in the Progenesis QI software.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a major health problem worldwide. Recent evidence suggests that some viruses can manipulate the infection process by packing specific viral and cellular components into exosomes, small nanometer-sized (30-150 nm) vesicles secreted from various cells. However, the impact of HBV replication on the content of exosomes produced by hepatocytes has not been fully delineated. In this work, an HBV-inducible cell line HepAD38 was used to directly compare changes in the protein content of exosomes secreted from HepAD38 cells with or without HBV replication. Exosomes were isolated from supernantants of HepAD38 cells cultured with or without doxycycline (dox) and their purity was confirmed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and Western immunoblotting assays. Ion-intensity based label-free LC-MS/MS quantitation technologies were applied to analyze protein content of exosomes from HBV replicating cells [referred as HepAD38 (dox<sup>-</sup>)-exo] and from HBV nonreplicating cells [referred as HepAD38 (dox<sup>+</sup>)-exo]. A total of 1412 exosomal protein groups were identified, among which the abundance of 35 proteins was significantly changed following HBV replication. Strikingly, 5 subunit proteins from the 26S proteasome complex, including PSMC1, PSMC2, PSMD1, PSMD7 and PSMD14 were consistently enhanced in HepAD38 (dox<sup>-</sup>)-exo. Bioinformatic analysis of differential exosomal proteins confirmed the significant enrichment of components involved in the proteasomal catabolic process. Proteasome activity assays further suggested that HepAD38 (dox<sup>-</sup>)-exo had enhanced proteolytic activity compared with HepAD38 (dox<sup>+</sup>)-exo. Furthermore, human peripheral monocytes incubated with HepAD38 (dox<sup>-</sup>)-exo induced a significantly lower level of IL-6 secretion compared with IL-6 levels from HepAD38 (dox<sup>+</sup>)-exo. Irreversible inhibition of proteasomal activity within exosomes restored higher production of IL-6 by monocytes, suggesting that transmission of proteasome subunit proteins by HepAD38 (dox<sup>-</sup>)-exo might modulate the production of pro-inflammatory molecules in the recipient monocytes. These results revealed the composition and potential function of exosomes produced during HBV replication, thus providing a new perspective on the role of exosomes in HBV-host interaction.

### Keywords
Hbv; exosomes; hepatocyte; proteasome; label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Fudan University
Key Laboratory Medical molecular Virology, MoE/MoH Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University 138 Yi Xue Yuan Road, Shanghai, China, 200032

### Submitter
Xiaofang Jia

### Lab Head
Dr Zhenghong Yuan
Key Laboratory Medical molecular Virology, MoE/MoH Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University 138 Yi Xue Yuan Road, Shanghai, China, 200032


