### Accession
PXD029851

### Title
A novel structure of GPI anchored proteins NTNG2

### Description
GPI anchors many proteins to the cell surface. GPI precursor has three mannoses, all of which are modified by ethanolamine-phosphate (EthN-P). It has been believed that EthN-P on the third mannose is always used as a bridge to the protein and EthN-P on the second mannose is removed after GPI is attached to the protein. In fact, several GPI-anchored proteins are not appreciably reduced on cells defective in PIGG, which transfers EthN-P to the second mannose. Nevertheless, mutations in PIGG cause neuronal abnormalities. Here, we show that EthN-P on the second mannose is used as a preferential bridge for several GPI-anchored proteins. Our data modifies the current view of GPI anchors and provides mechanistic basis of PIGG deficiencies.

### Sample Protocol
Transiently expressed HA-NTNG2 proteins on Expi293F cells were solubilized by PI-PLC-treatment, affinity-purified from the supernatants and subjected to SDS-PAGE and in-gel chymotrypsin digestion. The C-terminal peptide linked to GPI glycan was determined by LC-ESI- MS. Data were obtained by nanocapillary reversed-phase LC-MS/MS using a C18 column (0.1 x 150 mm) on a nanoLC system (Advance, Michrom BioResources) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
In-house MASCOT Server (Matrix Science) and Xcalibur Software (Thermo Fisher) were used for analysis of mass data. In the MS/MS profiles, those that contained characteristic fragments derived from GPI anchors, such as fragment ions of m/z 422+ and 447+, were selected, and fragments in the selected profiles were assigned to determine the GPI structures. Based on the profiles of the MS/MS fragments, the peak areas of the parental MS fragments corresponding to predicted GPI-peptides were measured in total ion chromatogram and the ratio in the total GPI peptide fragments was calculated.

### Publication Abstract
Glycosylphosphatidylinositols (GPIs) are glycolipids that anchor many proteins (GPI-APs) on the cell surface. The core glycan of GPI precursor has three mannoses, which in mammals, are all modified by ethanolamine-phosphate (EthN-P). It is postulated that EthN-P on the third mannose (EthN-P-Man3) is the bridge between GPI and the protein and the second (EthN-P-Man2) is removed after GPI-protein attachment. However, EthN-P-Man2 may not be always transient, as mutations of PIGG, the enzyme that transfers EthN-P to Man2, result in inherited GPI deficiencies (IGDs), characterized by neuronal dysfunctions. Here, we show that EthN-P on Man2 is the preferential bridge in some GPI-APs, among them, the Ect-5'-nucleotidase and Netrin G2. We find that CD59, a GPI-AP, is attached via EthN-P-Man2 both in PIGB-knockout cells, in which GPI lacks Man3, and with a small fraction in wild-type cells. Our findings modify the current view of GPI anchoring and provide a mechanistic basis for IGDs caused by PIGG mutations.

### Keywords
Pigg pigb pigo ntng2

### Affiliations
RIMD, Osaka university,Japan
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases
Osaka University

### Submitter
Yoshiko Murakami

### Lab Head
Dr Taroh Kinoshita
RIMD, Osaka university,Japan


