### Accession
PXD019066

### Title
EDEM1 interaction proteomics in HEK293T cells

### Description
Misfolded or unfolded proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) are sent to proteasomal degradation via the Endoplasmic Reticulum Associated Degradation (ERAD) pathway. We provide here a proteomic analysis of the interaction partners for one of the ER mannosidases involved in ERAD, ER degradation-enhancing alpha-mannosidase-like protein 1 (EDEM1) and its mutant, a previously described version of EDEM, lacking its N-terminal disordered region (Δ-EDEM1). Moreover, we also performed a whole proteome analysis  for cells overexpressing both, WT and Δ-EDEM1 and investigated the proteins which  co-fractionate in a sucrose gradient for both EDEM1 and Δ-EDEM1 and their associated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins extracted from HEK293T cells, CTRL and overexpressing EDEM1 or EDEM1 were either subject to overnight trypsin digestion after reduction and alkylation or affinity enriched with an anti-EDEM1 antibody, before capturing the immuno-enriched complexes on protein A-Sepharose beads. Protein complexes were recovered using Soft Elution Buffer and separated in SDS-PAGE (Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate and PolyAcrylamide Gel Electrophoresis), before in gel trypsin digestion.  For proteomic analysis proteins from sucrose gradient fractions were precipitated with Trichloroacetic acid  (TCA), separated by SDS-PAGE and further subjected to trypsin in gel digestion. Alternatively, for EDEM1 and EDEM1 proteome analysis, the extracted proteins were digested directly in solution. Peptides resulting from digestion were extracted, concentrated and further subject to C18 reversed-phase separation using low-flow liquid chromatography connected online to a mass spectrometer. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed using data dependent acquisition strategies, involving the selection for CID (Collision Induced Fragmentation) of top 5, 10 or 15 most abundant ions from the survey scan, depending on the complexity of the sample. All the mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a hybrid instrument LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data was searched against the human version of the UniProtKB database. Trypsin was selected as the protease, oxidation to Methionine (Met) was considered as a dynamic modification and Cysteine (Cys) carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Data were searched either using the SEQUEST/SEQUESTHT algorithms integrated into Proteome Discoverer v1.4 or the MaxQuant’s Andromeda algorithm, using 10 ppm for the precursor mass deviation (SEQUEST/SEQUESTHT searches) or 20 ppm for the first search peptide tolerance and 6 ppm for the main search peptide tolerance in the Andromeda settings. For both search strategies the fragment ions maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 0.5 Da. For False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimation, the target-decoy double search strategy was performed using the reversed sequences of the database. The results were filtered to 1% FDR (PSM level) and protein level for MaxQuant results. For Proteome Discoverer searches only results with peptide mass deviation of up to 5 ppm were further retained.

### Publication Abstract
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated degradation (ERAD) is the main mechanism of targeting ER proteins for degradation to maintain homeostasis, and perturbations of ERAD lead to pathological conditions. ER-degradation enhancing &#x3b1;-mannosidase-like (EDEM1) was proposed to extract terminally misfolded proteins from the calnexin folding cycle and target them for degradation by ERAD. Here, using mass-spectrometry and biochemical methods, we show that EDEM1 is found in auto-regulatory complexes with ERAD components. Moreover, the N-terminal disordered region of EDEM1 mediates protein-protein interaction with misfolded proteins, whilst the absence of this domain significantly impairs their degradation. We also determined that overexpression of EDEM1 can induce degradation, even when proteasomal activity is severely impaired, by promoting the formation of aggregates, which can be further degraded by autophagy. Therefore, we propose that EDEM1 maintains ER homeostasis and mediates ERAD client degradation via autophagy when either dislocation or proteasomal degradation are impaired.

### Keywords
Proteasomal degradation, Erad, Edem1, Er-phagy, Ltq-orbitrap velos pro

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy (IBRA)
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry, Splaiul Independentei 296, 060031 Bucharest 17, Romania;

### Submitter
Cristian Munteanu

### Lab Head
Dr Ștefana M. Petrescu
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry, Splaiul Independentei 296, 060031 Bucharest 17, Romania;


