### Accession
PXD009078

### Title
Identification of ADAM12S-interacting proteins in HeLa cells

### Description
ADAM12 is an A Disintegrin And Metalloproteinases (ADAMs). It is composed of signaling sequence, prodomain, metalloproteinase, disintegrin, cysteine-rich, EGF-like, transmembrane domains, and a cytoplasmic tail. ADAM12 is highly expressed in multiple cancers and is a diagnostic and prognostic biomarker for the proliferation, migration, and invasion of cancer cells. ADAM12 has several isoforms resulted from splicing variants with different subcellular localization and biological functions. Two most important isoforms are the prototype membrane-anchored long isoform ADAM12L and the secreted short isoform ADAM12S. Both of them contain the N-terminal 704 amino acids while their C-termini are different with each other. ADAM12S has extra 34 amino acids at its C-terminus, which replace the 171-amino acid transmembrane and cytoplasmic tail in ADAM12L. In this work, we use immunoprecipitation and quantitative proteomics to identify the interacting proteins of the short form of ADAM12 (ADAM12S).

### Sample Protocol
Ten 10-cm plates of HeLa cells expressing the control pCDF or pCDF-ADAM12S-FLAG plasmids were cultured in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM, Hyclone) supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum, 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 µg/mL streptomycin (Hyclone). Cells were lysed in modified RIPA buffer (150 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, 1 mM EDTA) with freshly added protease inhibitor cocktail (Selleck, B14012). Cell lysates were incubated with prewashed FLAG M2 affinity gel at 4 C for 12 h. The gel was washed 6 times with ice-cold TBST and proteins were eluted with FLAG peptides. Purified proteins were separated on SDS-PAGE and digested with trypsin in-gel after reduction and alkylation. The tryptic peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTip and analyzed on an OrbiTrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were searched using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 against a UniProt protein database containing 89796 entries with the addition of 247 common contaminants. The false discovery rate for protein identification was set to < 1% based on the decoy database search strategy. Protein quantification was carried out with spectral counting. Two biological replicates were performed to obtain confident protein identification and quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hela, Adam12s, Label free quantification, Lc-ms/ms, Interacting proteins

### Affiliations
College of Pharmaceutical Sciences Soochow University Yunxuan Building 1328 199 Ren'ai Road, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, China
soochow university

### Submitter
lipeng xiong

### Lab Head
Dr Guoqiang Xu
College of Pharmaceutical Sciences Soochow University Yunxuan Building 1328 199 Ren'ai Road, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, China


