### Accession
PXD016978

### Title
Stimulation of the atypical chemokine receptor 3 inhibits connexin 43 gap junctional intercellular communication

### Description
The atypical chemokine receptor 3 (ACKR3) plays a pivotal role in directing the migration of various cellular populations and its over-expression in various tumors promotes cell proliferation and invasiveness. The intracellular cellular pathways transducing ACKR3-dependent effects remain poorly characterized, an issue we addressed by characterizing the the interactome of recombinant ACKR3 expressed in HEK293T cells. Among the ACKR3-interacting proteins identified, we focused on the gap junction protein Connexin 43 (Cx43).

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells transiently transfected with empty or ACKR3 encoding plasmid were lysed in ice-cold lysis buffer containing 1% n-Dodecyl-β-D-Maltopyranosid (DDM, Antrace, Ref D310), 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM CaCl2, phosphatase inhibitors (NaF, 10 mM; Na+-vanadate, 2 mM; Na+-pyrophosphate, 1 mM; and β-glycerophosphate, 50 mM) and the cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Merck, Ref 11836145001). Samples were maintained under gentle agitation for 1 h at 4°C and centrifuged for 15 min at 15,000 x g to eliminate insoluble material. Equal protein amounts (5 mg) were incubated with agarose-conjugated anti-HA antibody overnight at 4°C. Samples were then washed twice with an ice-cold solution of 0.5 M of NaCl and phosphatase inhibitors and three times with 150 mM NaCl and phosphatase inhibitors. Immunoprecipitated proteins were then eluted in Laemmli sample buffer. Immunoprecipitated proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Protein Staining Solution (Euromedex, Ref 10-0911). Gel lanes were cut into 7 gel pieces and destained with 50 mM TriEthylAmmonium BiCarbonate (TEABC, Merck, Ref T7408) followed by three washes in 100% acetonitrile. After reduction (with 10 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM TEABC at 60 °C for 30 min) and alkylation (with 55 mM iodoacetamide TEABC at room temperature for 60 min), proteins were digested in-gel using trypsin (500 ng/band, Gold, Promega, Ref V5280). Digest products were dehydrated in a vacuum centrifuge and reduced to 3 µL. The generated peptides were analyzed online by nano-flow liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham USA) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Desalting and pre-concentration of samples were performed on-line on a Pepmap® pre-column (0.3 mm × 10 mm, Dionex). A gradient consisting of 0-40% B for 60 min and 80% B for 15 min (A = 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile in water; B = 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile) at 300 nL/min was used to elute peptides from the capillary reverse-phase column (0.075 mm × 150 mm, Acclaim Pepmap 100® C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Eluted peptides were electrosprayed online at a voltage of 1.8 kV into the Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. A cycle of one full-scan mass spectrum (MS1, 400-2,000 m/z) at a resolution of 120,000 (at 400 m/z), followed by 20 data-dependent tandem-mass (MS2) spectra was repeated continuously throughout the nanoLC separation. All MS2 spectra were recorded using normalized collision energy (33%, activation Q 0.25 and activation time 10 ms) with an isolation window of 2 m/z. Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (v 2.2). For all full scan measurements with the Orbitrap detector a lock-mass ion from ambient air (m/z 445.120024) was used as an internal calibrant.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using the MaxQuant software package (v 1.5.5.1) and MS2 using the Andromeda search engine59 against the UniProtKB Reference proteome UP000005640 database for Homo sapiens (release 2017_10) and the contaminant database in MaxQuant. The following parameters were used: enzyme specificity set as Trypsin/P with a maximum of two missed cleavages, Oxidation (M) and Phosphorylation (STY) set as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification, and a mass tolerance of 0.5 Da for fragment ions. The maximum false peptide and protein discovery rate was specified as 0.01. Seven amino acids were required as minimum peptide length. When precursor peptides were present in MS1 spectra but not selected for fragmentation and identification by MS2 in given runs, peptide identification were based on accurate mass and retention times across LC-MS runs using the matching between runs tool in MaxQuant. Only proteins identified in all three biological replicates in at least one group (ACKR3 or mock) were considered for further analysis. Relative protein quantification in IP from ACKR3-expressing cells and Mock cells was performed using the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm. For statistical analysis, missing values were defined using the imputation tool of the Perseus software (v 1.5.6.072).

### Publication Abstract
The atypical chemokine receptor 3 (ACKR3) plays a pivotal role in directing the migration of various cellular populations and its over-expression in tumors promotes cell proliferation and invasiveness. The intracellular signaling pathways transducing ACKR3-dependent effects remain poorly characterized, an issue we addressed by identifying the interactome of ACKR3. Here, we report that recombinant ACKR3 expressed in HEK293T cells recruits the gap junction protein Connexin 43 (Cx43). Cx43 and ACKR3 are co-expressed in mouse brain astrocytes and human glioblastoma cells and form a complex in embryonic mouse brain. Functional in vitro studies show enhanced ACKR3 interaction with Cx43 upon ACKR3 agonist stimulation. Furthermore, ACKR3 activation promotes &#x3b2;-arrestin2- and dynamin-dependent Cx43 internalization to inhibit gap junctional intercellular communication in primary astrocytes. These results demonstrate a functional link between ACKR3 and gap junctions that might be of pathophysiological relevance.

### Keywords
Hek293t, Cx43, Chemiokines, Ackr3

### Affiliations
Neuroproteomics and signaling of neurological and psychiatric disorders, IGF, France
FPP CNRS

### Submitter
Oana Vigy

### Lab Head
Dr Philippe Marin
Neuroproteomics and signaling of neurological and psychiatric disorders, IGF, France


