### Accession
PXD007839

### Title
Human cardiac fibroblast membrane proteome

### Description
Cardiac Fibroblasts (CFs) are one of the main cell populations in the heart and play important roles in tissue homeostasis and in myocardial fibrosis. The study of these cells has been hampered by the lack of reliable membrane markers: none of the antigens currently used for characterization and isolation of CFs is unique for this cell type. This issue has also raised doubts regarding a distinct identity of cardiac fibroblasts when comparing to other myocardium cell populations with similar morphologies. In this work, we report a comprehensive description and functional analysis of human CFs (hCFs) enriched membrane fraction proteome by advanced proteomic mass spectrometry-based tools. A total number of 1478 proteins were identified, including a 916 membrane proteins (62%). We also report on the identification of a set of 37 membrane proteins specific for hCFs by direct comparison with proteome lists of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs), human dermal fibroblasts (hDFs) and human cardiac stem cells (hCSCs, hCSCs membrane proteome list is also available in this repository). The data reported in this work is a valuable source of information for further studies aiming at the discovery of a membrane molecular signature of hCFs.

### Sample Protocol
After cell culture reached 80% confluence, cells were harvested and frozen at -80 ºC until further analysis. Cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer and lysed with 30 passes through the 301/2 Gauge needle at 4 ºC. Enriched plasma membrane fractions were obtained as described by Gomes-Alves et al. Protein content of membrane fractions was measured using BCA™ Protein Assay Kit (Pierce). Membrane enriched fractions were prepared as described and resuspended in 0,32% (w/v) Rapigest SF Surfactant (Waters), followed by three rounds of vigorous agitation. Sample was subjected to reduction and alkylation, and digested with trypsin. TFA was added to a final concentration of 1%. Sample tryptic peptides were analyzed by NanoLC–MS/MS using TripleTOF 6600 (ABSciex). External calibration was performed using beta-galactosidase digest (ABSciex). The 40 most intense precursor ions from the MS spectra were selected for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired with the Analyst software TF 1.7 (ABSciex). The raw MS and MS/MS data were analyzed using Protein Pilot Software v.5.0 (ABSciex) for protein identification. The search was performed against Swissprot protein database (version 2015_05) with taxonomic restriction to Homo sapiens. Trypsin was selected as digestion type, Iodoacetamide was selected as source of Cys. Alkylation and the TripleTOF 6600 as the Instrument. The ID focus was on biological modifications and Amino acid substitutions. The search effort was set as thorough. The results quality was based on an FDR analysis and a detected protein threshold of 0.1 (Unused protein score) and 20% (Confidence). In order to access the hydrophobicity and number of transmembrane domains of the identified proteins, bioinformatics tools were used to calculate putative transmembrane domains (TMD) and GRAVY index (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TMHMM/ and http://www.bioinformatics.org/sms2/protein_gravy.html). Protein classification was performed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (IPA).

### Publication Abstract
Cardiac fibroblasts (CFs) are one of the main cell populations in the heart and play important roles in tissue homeostasis and myocardial fibrosis. The study of these cells has been hampered by the lack of reliable membrane markers: none of the antigens currently used for characterization and isolation of CFs is unique for this cell type. This issue has also raised doubts regarding a distinct identity of cardiac fibroblasts when compared to other myocardium cell populations with similar morphologies. In this work, we report a comprehensive description and functional analysis of human CFs (hCFs) membraneenriched fraction proteome by advanced mass spectrometry-based proteomic tools. A total number of 1478 proteins were identified, including 774 membrane proteins (52%). We also report the identification of a subset of 30 membrane proteins that in this workflow were only identified in hCFs by comparison with the membrane-enriched proteome lists of human cardiac stem cells, human mesenchymal stem cells, and human dermal fibroblasts. The data reported in this work are a valuable source of information for further studies aiming at defining a membrane molecular signature of human cardiac fibroblasts (hCFs), and a step forward in research regarding membrane proteins with key roles in hCF function in homeostasis and disease.

### Keywords
Myocardium, Human cardiac fibroblasts, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
ITQB-NOVA, Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Av. Da República, 2780-157 Oeiras, Portugal;iBET, Instituto de Biologia Experimental e Tecnológica, Apartado 12, 2780-901, Oeiras , Portugal
iBET/ ITQB-NOVA

### Submitter
Maria Sebastião

### Lab Head
Dr Paula Marques Alves
ITQB-NOVA, Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Av. Da República, 2780-157 Oeiras, Portugal;iBET, Instituto de Biologia Experimental e Tecnológica, Apartado 12, 2780-901, Oeiras , Portugal


