### Accession
PXD046416

### Title
A global survey of small RNA interactors identifies KhpA and KhpB as major RNA-binding proteins in Fusobacterium nucleatum

### Description
The common oral microbe Fusobacterium nucleatum has recently gained attention when it was found to colonize tumors throughout the human body. Fusobacteria are also interesting in regard to bacterial RNA biology as these early-branching species encode many small noncoding RNAs (sRNAs) but lack homologs of the common RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) CsrA, Hfq and ProQ. Here, to search for alternate sRNA-associated RBPs in F. nucleatum, we performed a systematic mass spectrometry analysis of proteins that copurified with 19 different sRNAs. Our approach recovered a 6S RNA-RNA polymerase complex in this species and discovered high enrichment of the KH domain proteins KhpA and KhpB with almost any tested sRNA, including the σE-dependent sRNA FoxI, a regulator of several envelope proteins. KhpA/B act as a dimer to bind sRNAs with low micromolar affinity and influence the cellular stability of several of their targets. RNA-seq analysis and cell biological assays suggest that KhpA/B have several physiological functions, including a strong requirement for ethanolamine utilization. Our RBP search and discovery of KhpA/B as major RBPs in F. nucleatum are important first steps in identifying key players of post-transcriptional control at the root of the bacterial phylogenetic tree.

### Sample Protocol
NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed similarly to Braun et al (2018) on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a PicoView Ion Source (New Objective) and coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on capillary columns (PicoFrit, 30 cm × 150 μm ID, New Objective) self-packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm (Dr. Maisch) and separated with a 30-min linear gradient from 3 to 30% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 400, and MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 7,500 at m/z 400 using HCD fragmentation with 30% normalized collision energy. A TOP5 data-dependent MS/MS method was used; dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 30 s; singly charged precursors were excluded from selection. Minimum signal threshold for precursor selection was set to 50,000. Predictive AGC was used with a target value of 1 × 106 for MS scans and 5 × 104 for MS/MS scans. Lock mass option was applied for internal calibration in all runs using background ions from protonated decamethylcyclopentasiloxane (m/z 371.10124)

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.7.4 (Cox & Mann, 2008). Database search was performed using Andromeda (integrated into MaxQuant) against the UniProt database for F. nucleatum ATCC 23726 (organism identifier: FUSN2),and a database containing common contaminants. The search was performed with tryptic cleavage specificity with three allowed miscleavages. Protein identification was under control of a false discovery rate of 1% on both protein and peptide levels. In addition to the MaxQuant default settings, the search was performed against the following variable modifications: protein N-terminal acetylation, Gln to pyro-Glu formation (N-terminal Gln), and oxidation of Met. For protein quantitation, the LFQ intensities were used (Cox et al, 2014). Proteins with less than 2 identified razor/unique peptides were dismissed.

### Publication Abstract
The common oral microbe Fusobacterium nucleatum has recently drawn attention after it was found to colonize tumors throughout the human body. Fusobacteria are also interesting study systems for bacterial RNA biology as these early-branching species encode many small noncoding RNAs (sRNAs) but lack homologs of the common RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) CsrA, Hfq and ProQ. To search for alternate sRNA-associated RBPs in F. nucleatum, we performed a systematic mass spectrometry analysis of proteins that co-purified with 19 different sRNAs. This approach revealed strong enrichment of the KH domain proteins KhpA and KhpB with nearly all tested sRNAs, including the &#x3c3;E-dependent sRNA FoxI, a regulator of several envelope proteins. KhpA/B act as a dimer to bind sRNAs with low micromolar affinity and influence the stability of several of their target transcripts. Transcriptome studies combined with biochemical and genetic analyses suggest that KhpA/B have several physiological functions, including being required for ethanolamine utilization. Our RBP search and the discovery of KhpA/B as major RBPs in F. nucleatum are important first steps in identifying key players of post-transcriptional control at the root of the bacterial phylogenetic tree.

### Keywords
Rbp; kh-domain; fusobacterium nucleatum; srna

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research (HIRI), Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (HZI), D-97080 Würzburg, Germany Institute of Molecular Infection Biology, University of Würzburg, D-97080 Würzburg, Germany
Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research (HIRI), Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (HZI), Würzburg, Germany

### Submitter
Falk Ponath

### Lab Head
Dr Jörg Vogel
Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research (HIRI), Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (HZI), Würzburg, Germany


