### Accession
PXD023196

### Title
Mass spectrometry spatial-omics on a single conductive slide

### Description
Mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) can analyze the spatial distribution of hundreds of different molecules directly from tis-sue sections usually placed on conductive glass slides to provide conductivity on the sample surface. Additional experiments are often required for molecular identification using consecutive sections on membrane slides compatible with laser capture microdissection (LMD). In this work, we demonstrate for the first time the use of a single conductive slide for both matrix assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI)-MSI and direct proteomics. In this workflow, regions of interest can be directly ablated with LMD while preserving protein integrity. These results offer an alternative for MSI based multimodal spatial-omics.

### Sample Protocol
Cardiac tissue from rat (frozen) and mouse (FFPE) were sectioned at 10µm and 4µm, respectively. The sections were placed on either a PEN membrane, ITO slide or IntelliSlideTM. Lipid mass spectrometry imaging was performed on the frozen rat cardiac tissue (on ITO slides or IntelliSlideTM) after covering with 15 layers of 7mg/mL norharmane in 2:1 chloroform:methanol using a Suncollect pneumatic sprayer (SunChrom). The sections were imaged at 75 µm raster size on a RapifleX tissueTyper (Bruker Daltonics GmbH, Bremen, Germany) in positive or negative ion reflector mode at a m/z range of 400-2000, summing 500 laser shots per pixel position with 70% of laser power and attenuator at 85%. The instrument was calibrated using red phosphorus. Metabolite mass spectrometry imaging was performed on FFPE mouse cardiac tissue after deparaffinization and application of 11 layers of 10mg/mL 9AA in 70% methanol using a Suncollect pneumatic sprayer (SunChrom) GmbH, Germany). All sections were imaged at 75 µm raster size on a RapifleX tissueTyper (Bruker Daltonics GmbH, Bremen, Germany) in negative ion reflector mode at a m/z range of 40-1000, summing 500 laser shots per position with 60% of laser power and attenuator at 85%. Instrument calibration was done using red phosphorus.  Laser capture microdissection was performed using a Leica LMD 7000 instrument (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany), before and after MALDI MSI. For FFPE tissues, the paraffin was removed and the tissue sections were dried in a desiccator. A total of 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, or 1.0mm2 dissected material was collected in triplicate, from FFPE and frozen material. The areas were dissected using the following laser settings: wavelength 349nm, power 40, aperture 30, speed 5, specimen balance 0, line spacing 5, head current 60%, and pulse frequency 501 Hz (settings A). A second set of laser parameters was also used for ITO and IntelliSlidesTM: wavelength 349nm, power 50, aperture 38, speed 17, specimen balance 0, line spacing 5, head current 60%, and pulse frequency 310 Hz (settings B). For PEN membrane slides ‘draw and cut’ was used and ‘draw and scan’ was used for ITO slides and IntelliSlidesTM. Dissected areas were collected in the caps of 0.2mL centrifuge tubes, prefilled with 20µL buffer (50mM ABC for frozen, 50mM citric acid for FFPE). LMD after MALDI MSI was performed on ITO slides and IntelliSlidesTM after matrix removal with 70% ethanol. A ROI was selected based on segmentation data and areas of 0.5mm2 were ablated from the ITO slide or IntelliSlideTM using laser settings B. The dissected material was further processed, for FFPE samples antigen retrieval was performed by heating to 99°C for an hour while shaking at 800rpm in a Thermoshaker. For both FFPE and frozen samples, RapiGestTM (final concentration 0.01%) was added and incubated for 10min at room temperature (RT=21°C), the pH of FFPE samples was adjusted by addition of ABC. All samples were reduced using DTT (final concentration 10mM) at 56°C for 40min at 800rpm and alkylated using IAM (final conc 20mM) at RT for 30min at 800rpm. DTT (final conc 10mM) was used to quench the excess of IAM at RT for 10min at 800rpm. Digestion using trypsin (final conc 15µg/ml) was performed overnight at 37°C and 800rpm. The second digestion step (trypsin final conc 5µg/ml) was performed in 80% ACN for 3 hours at 37°C and 800rpm. The digestion was stopped by adding TFA (final conc 0.5%) and an incubation step at 37°C for 45min and 800rpm. After centrifugation (15000g, 10min at 4°C, Thermo scientific Heraeus Biofuge stratos) the supernatant was collected and concentrated to a final volume of approximately 30µL using a speedvac (Hetovac VR-1 Hetosicc).  LC-MS/MS Analysis was performed for all samples. Peptide separation was performed on a Thermo Scientific (Dionex) Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation UHPLC system equipped with a PepSep C18 analytical column (15cm, ID 75µm, 1.9µm Reprosil, 120Å). An aliquot of 10µL of sample was desalted using an online installed C18 trapping column, the peptides were separated on the analytical column with a 90min linear gradient from 5% to 35% ACN with 0.1% FA at 300nL/min flow rate.  The UHPLC system was coupled to a Q ExactiveTM HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Mass spectra were acquired in positive ionization mode, full MS scan between m/z 250-1250 at resolution of 120.000 followed by MS/MS scans of the top 15 most intense ions at a resolution of 15.000 to obtain DDA results.

### Data Protocol
The triplicates were analyzed individually, and protein identification was done using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific). The search engine Sequest was used with the SwissProt Rattus norvegicus (SwissProt TaxID= 10116) or Mus musculus (SwissProt TaxID= 10090) database from October 2017. The following settings were used for the database search: Trypsin was used as enzyme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and a minimal peptide length of 6 amino acids. Mass tolerance for precursor of 10 ppm, for fragment of 0.02 Da. Dynamic modifications of methionine oxidation and protein N-terminus acetylation, static modifications of cysteine carbamidomethylation. The false discovery rate (FDR) was used to estimate the certainty of the identification, only proteins with a high protein FDR confidence were used for further analysis. Results on the number of proteins identified per triplicates are presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD). Comparisons were performed with the t-test or one-way ANOVA and p<0.05 was considered statistically significant. All statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism (version 5.00, GraphPad Software, Inc., San Diego, CA). Proteins commonly identified in the triplicates were used for gene ontology cellular component analysis. UniProt ID mapping was used to obtain the gene names which were then submitted to EnrichR, where cellular components with p-value <0.05 were considered for further analysis. The components were categorized based on a higher level in the Gene Ontology Cellular Component tree for a more concise and structured analysis. Pathway analysis was performed for the differentiation of the clusters after MSI. EnrichR used Reactome’s cell signaling database and pathways with p-value <0.05 were used for the analysis. MSI data were analyzed using SCiLS lab MVS, version 2020a (Bremen, Germany) after TIC normalization. A commonly used normalization procedure for ToF based MSI, when samples contain similar cell types. Segmentation by bisecting k-means with correlation distance was performed to obtain ROI information. mMass13 was used to generate a peak list (15 precision baseline correction with 25 relative offset, Savitzky-Golay smoothing with a window size of 0.2 m/z and 2 cycles, at last peaks were picked with a S/N threshold of 3.5, relative intensity threshold of 0.5% and picking height 75).

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) can analyze the spatial distribution of hundreds of different molecules directly from tissue sections usually placed on conductive glass slides to provide conductivity on the sample surface. Additional experiments are often required for molecular identification using consecutive sections on membrane slides compatible with laser capture microdissection (LMD). In this work, we demonstrate for the first time the use of a single conductive slide for both matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI)-MSI and direct proteomics. In this workflow, regions of interest can be directly ablated with LMD while preserving protein integrity. These results offer an alternative for MSI-based multimodal spatial-omics.

### Keywords
Lmd, Proteomics, Maldi-msi, Conductive slide

### Affiliations
Maastricht MultiModal Molecular Imaging (M4I) Institute, Division of Imaging Mass Spectrometry, Maastricht University, The Netherlands
Maastricht MultiModal Molecular Imaging (M4I) Institute, Division of Imaging Mass Spectrometry, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Stephanie Mezger

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald Martinus Alexander Heeren
Maastricht MultiModal Molecular Imaging (M4I) Institute, Division of Imaging Mass Spectrometry, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands


