### Accession
PXD031704

### Title
sAPP a neuroprotective protein in the brain has widespread effects on the proteome of human cortical neurons related to memory mechanisms.

### Description
Human glutamatergic neurons in culture were exposed to 1 nM secreted amyloid precursor protein alpha over a time course (0, 2, 6 and 24 h) and changes in the proteome were identified with SWATH-MS.

### Sample Protocol
After treatment with sAPPa, cells pellets were snap frozen and stored at -80' C then thawed in 200 uL digestion buffer (500 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% (w/v) SDS, 1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (SDC/DOC, Sigma) and homogenised with at least twenty grinds with a pestle. The homogenate was vortexed for 10 s and sonicated for 1 min. After centrifuging at 16,000 x g for 30 min at 20 °C the soluble fraction (supernatant) was retained, and contaminating DNA digested by addition of benzonase (100 U) followed by centrifuging at 16, 000 x g for 30 min at 20°C. The supernatant was transferred to a 10 kDa molecular weight cut off centrifugal filter cassette unit (Amicon Ultracell EMD Millipore).The filter unit was centrifuged at 13,600 x g for 20 min. Detergent depletion (SDS and DOC) was achieved by Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) by washing the sample five with 400 L urea buffer. Reduction of disulphide bonds was achieved by the addition of 5mM TCEP (Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine) and incubating for 5 min at RT. Iodoacetamide (10 mM) was added to the reduced solution (alkylation) and incubated for 5 min (dark, RT). The filter unit was centrifuged to elute the reducing reagents, and washed three times with 400 μL, 200 mM TEAB. Proteins were recovered from the cassette by inversion of the filter unit placed onto a new 1.6 mL microcentrifuge tube and centrifuging. To ensure complete recovery a further 50 mL TEAB buffer was added to the filter cassette, vortex mixed and inverted to collect the remaining protein solution by centrifugation.  Peptides were generated by digesting 100 μg protein with 5 μg Trypsin (1/20th trypsin) gently vortex and incubated over night at 37 °C. A 'tryptic boost' with half the volume (2.5 g) of the trypsin used for the overnight incubation, was added to the protein/peptide solution, gently vortexed and incubated for a further 5 h at 37 °C. Peptides were purified and concentrated by Solid Phase Extraction (SPE) on Sep-pac C18 cartridges (Waters). An aliquot of peptides from each experiment was pooled to generate a spectral library required for subsequent SWATH MS analysis.  High pH reverse phased fractionation on C18 cartridges (Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit, Thermo Fischer Scientific) resulted in fractionation of the pooled peptides. Each fraction was analysed in duplicate by data-dependent acquisition mass spectrometry using a 5600 + Triple Time-Of-Flight (TOF) mass spectrometer coupled to an Eksigent "ekspert nanoLC 415" uHPLC system (AB Sciex). Peptides were separated on a 75 μm ID silica emitter tip column that was in-house packed with Luna (Phenomenex) C18 bead material (3.2 μm, 100 Å) on a column length of 20 cm. The LC gradient between mobile phase A (1% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water) and mobile phase B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 90% (v/v) aqueous acetonitrile) was developed in four gradient steps at a flow rate of 400 nL/min: 1) metered sample injection through a 5 μl loop followed by 3 min equilibration at constant 5% phase B; 2) linear increase of phase B to 25% over 90 min; 3) linear increase of phase B to 40% (v/v) over 20 min; 4) linear increase of phase B to 95% over 10 min. The column was then washed at 95% phase B for 1 min and re-equilibrated in 5% phase B for 5 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode using the following instrument settings: The precursor ion measurement in the mass range of 400–1300 m/z was followed by collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragment ion measurements at rolling collision energy of the top 20 and top 30 precursors ions per cycle for the first and second technical replicate respectively. Three repeat measurements of each precursor were allowed during a period of 120 s. The ion accumulation time for the precursor and product ion scans were 250 and 120 ms respectively. For protein quantification, each individual sample was analysed in technical triplicates by SWATH-MS using the same instrumentation and LC-gradient settings as described for the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) analysis. For SWATH-MS the mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode performing a precursor ion scan in the mass range of 400–1300 m/z with an ion accumulation time of 50 ms followed by the acquisition of 33 consecutive fragment ion spectra from variable m/z isolation window sizes. The window sizes were calculated based on the precursor ion densities within the different m/z regions of a representative DDA analysis using the SWATH Variable Window Calculator application (AB Sciex). The ion accumulation time for each fragment ion spectrum was 100 ms in high sensitivity mode, which results in a total cycle time of about 3.4 s. Collision energy per window was set using automated rolling collision energy with a spread of 5 V.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, raw data of the DDA analyses was searched against the human reference sequence database (comprising 87570 sequence entries, downloaded from the NCBI server (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) using the ProteinPilot software version 4.5 (AB SCIEX). The following search parameters were entered: the cleavage enzyme was trypsin, biological modifications and single amino acid exchanges were allowed. Peptide identification at a false discovery rate (FDR) of ≤ 1% and a confidence of ≥ 95% were accepted as significant and loaded into the SWATH Acquisition MicroApp 2.0 which is integrated into the PeakView software (version 2.2, AbSciex) to build a spectral library. The spectral information from the individual SWATH-MS (DIA) raw data was then aligned to the library spectra using a time window of 12 min and a mass accuracy of 50 ppm for peak matching. The peak intensities of the 6 strongest fragment ions from each of the 10 strongest peptides per protein were then extracted from each DIA data set, where the threshold values of FDR ≤ 1% for matching peaks to the library spectra and confidence ≥ 99% for peptide identification were met in at least one sample. The intensity values were then imported into the MarkerView software (version 1.2, AB Sciex) for quantification. Global normalisation based on the total sum of peak intensities, unsupervised multivariate statistical analysis using principal component analysis (PCA) and Student’s t-test was performed in the MarkerView software for sample grouping and comparison. A t-test of the median value of the technical replicates was carried out comparing the sAPP group with the PBS control group, generating a dataset of proteins with significantly different relative abundances between the two groups (P ≤ 0.01, minimum 1.5-fold change). Any proteins with a coefficient of variance over 40% were also removed from the data set. The significantly differentially expressed proteins were investigated by searching the literature and by using STRING to identify functional association networks and identify potential interactions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
App, Alzheimer’s disease, Proteome., Human neuron, Sappa

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Otago, New Zealand
Department of Biochemistry, University of Otago

### Submitter
Torsten Kleffmann

### Lab Head
Dr Warren Tate
Department of Biochemistry, University of Otago, New Zealand


