### Accession
PXD041281

### Title
SARS-CoV-2 infection causes periodontal fibrotic pathogenesis through deregulating mitochondrial beta-oxidation

### Description
The global high prevalence of COVID-19 is a major challenge for health professionals and patients. SARS-CoV-2 virus has four kinds of structural protein components: the spike protein, envelope protein, membrane protein, and nucleocapsid protein. SARS-CoV-2 virus mutate predominantly in the spike proteins, whilst the other key viral components remain stable. Essentially the pathological functions of the SARS-CoV-2 virus on different cell types are still largely unknown. Previous studies have shown that the human oral cavity can potentially act as reservoir of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. However, the consequence of SARS-CoV-2 viral infection on human oral health has not been systematically examined. COVID-19 can cause severe oral mucosa lesions and is likely to be connected with poor periodontal conditions. Fibroblasts are the key component of periodontal ligament (PDL) and express the SARS-CoV-2 receptor: Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), whose expression level can increase upon bacterial infection hence potentially provide a direct route of SARS-CoV-2 infection to PDL fibroblasts. In this research, we aimed to study the pathogenicity of SARS-CoV-2 viral components on human fibroblasts. We found that by exposing to SARS-CoV-2, especially to the viral envelope and membrane proteins, the human periodontal fibroblasts could develop fibrotic pathogenic phenotypes, including hyperproliferation that was concomitant induced together with increased apoptosis and senescence. The fibrotic degeneration was mediated by a down-regulation of mitochondrial -oxidation in the fibroblasts. Fatty acid -oxidation inhibitor, etomoxir treatment could mirror the same pathological consequence on the cells, similar to SARS-CoV-2 infection. Our results therefore provide novel mechanistic insights into how SARS-CoV-2 infection can affect human periodontal health at the cell and molecular level with potential new therapeutic targets for COVID-19 induced fibrosis.

### Sample Protocol
HPLFs were seeded in 6cm dishes and performed viral infection and protein treatment for 6 h and 48 h. To collect protein after each time points, culture media was removed from the culture dishes and cells were washed in pre-cooled HBSS twice. HBSS was removed and replaced with ice-cold RIPA buffer (ThermoFisher, 89901) supplemented with Halt™ Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (ThermoFisher , 78440) at 1:100. The cells were detached from the dish using a cell scraper and then collected into an Eppendorf tube on ice then incubated for 30 min with frequent agitation for efficient cell lysis and solubilisation of proteins. Tubes were spun down at 15,000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C so the supernatant containing the protein could be collected and stored at -80°C until ready to load onto a gel. 15 µg protein samples were run on a Nupage 4-12% Bis-Tris protein gel at 200V for 45 min. Gel was rinsed with water before fixing in 40% ethanol and 10% acetic acid for 15 min with gentle agitation. After washing the gel twice in water, the gel was stained overnight in QC colloidal Coomassie Blue G-250 (Biorad, 161-0803). The gel was destained for 1 h with changes of water every 15 min until protein bands were visible. Every sample lane was cut into 4 fractions and each fraction further cut into 1-2 mm cubes for equilibration. In-gel digestion, sample cleanup and mass spectrometric analysis was carried out as described previously (Dunn, J et al, 2018). All samples were stored at -20°C or analyze directly using mass spectrometry

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using Max Quant software suite ( 2.0.3.0) followed by data analysis using Perseus (1.6.1.3).

### Publication Abstract
The global high prevalence of COVID-19 is a major challenge for health professionals and patients. SARS-CoV-2 virus has four structural protein components: the spike protein, envelope protein, membrane protein, and nucleocapsid protein. The SARS-CoV-2 virus mutates predominantly in the spike proteins, whilst the other key viral components usually remain stable. Essentially the pathological functions of the SARS-CoV-2 virus on different cell types are still largely unknown. Previous studies have shown that the human oral cavity can potentially act as reservoir of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. However, the consequence of SARS-CoV-2 viral infection on human oral health has not been systematically examined. COVID-19 can cause severe oral mucosa lesions and is likely to be connected with poor periodontal conditions. Fibroblasts are the major cell type inside periodontal ligament (PDL) and express the SARS-CoV-2 receptor: Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), whose expression level can increase upon bacterial infection hence potentially provide a direct route of SARS-CoV-2 infection to PDL fibroblasts. In this research, we aimed to study the pathogenicity of SARS-CoV-2 viral components on human fibroblasts. We found that by exposing to SARS-CoV-2, especially to the viral envelope and membrane proteins, the human periodontal fibroblasts could develop fibrotic pathogenic phenotypes, including hyperproliferation that was simultaneously induced with increased apoptosis and senescence. The fibrotic degeneration was mediated by a down-regulation of mitochondrial &#x3b2;-oxidation in the fibroblasts. Fatty acid &#x3b2;-oxidation inhibitor, etomoxir treatment could mirror the same pathological consequence on the cells, similar to SARS-CoV-2 infection. Our results therefore provide novel mechanistic insights into how SARS-CoV-2 infection can affect human periodontal health at the cell and molecular level with potential new therapeutic targets for COVID-19 induced fibrosis.

### Keywords
Infection, Periodontal, Covid19

### Affiliations
Plymouth University Peninsula Schools of Medicine and Dentistry
School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Plymouth, UK

### Submitter
Vikram Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Vikram Sharma
School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Plymouth, UK


