### Accession
PXD048758

### Title
SKAP2 acts downstream of CD11b/CD18 and regulates neutrophil effector function

### Description
Background: The importance of CD11b/CD18 expression in neutrophil effector functions is well known. Beyond KINDLIN3 and TALIN1, which are involved in the induction of the high-affinity binding CD11b/CD18 conformation, the signaling pathways that orchestrate this response remain incompletely understood.  Method: We performed an unbiased screening method for protein selection by biotin identification (BioID) and investigated the KINDLIN3 interactome. We used liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry as a powerful analytical tool. Generation of NB4 CD18, KINDLIN3 or SKAP2 knock out neutrophils was achieved using CRISPR-Cas9 technology and the cells were examined for their effector function using flow cytometry, live cell imaging, microscopy, adhesion or antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC). Results: Among the 325 proteins significantly enriched, we identified Src Kinase-Associated Phosphoprotein2 (SKAP2), a protein involved in actin polymerization and integrin-mediated outside-in signaling. CD18 immunoprecipitation in primary or NB4 neutrophils demonstrated the presence of SKAP2 in the CD11b/CD18 complex at steady state. Under this condition, adhesion to plastic, ICAM-1 or fibronectin was observed in the absence of SKAP2, which could be abrogated by blocking the actin-rearrangements with latrunculin B. Upon stimulation of SKAP2-deficient neutrophils, adhesion to fibronectin was enhanced whereas CD18 clustering was strongly reduced. This response corresponded with significantly impaired CD11b/CD18-dependent NADPH oxidase activity, phagocytosis and cytotoxicity against tumor cells.  Conclusion: Our results suggest that SKAP2 has a dual role. It may restrict CD11b/CD18-mediated adhesion only under resting conditions, but its major contribution lies in the regulation of dynamic CD11b/CD18-mediated actin-rearrangements and clustering as required for cellular effector functions of human neutrophils.

### Sample Protocol
Streptavidin- precipitated proteins were reduced on-bead in 1 M urea (Life technologies), 10 mM DTT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 100 mM TRIS-HCl pH 7.5 (Life technologies) for 20 min at 25°C, followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide (Life technologies) for 10 min at 25°C. Proteins were detached from the beads by incubation with 250 ng MS-grade trypsin (Promega) for 2 h at 25°C. Beads were removed and proteins were further digested for 16 h at 25°C with 350 ng MS-grade trypsin (Promega). Tryptic peptides were desalted and concentrated using in house prepared Empore-C18 StageTips and eluted with 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid in 80 % (v/v) acetonitrile. Sample volume was reduced by SpeedVac and supplemented with 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA to a final volume of 5 μL. 3 μL of each sample was injected for MS analysis.  To analyze the proteomic profile of NB4 total cell lysates, NB4 neutrophils were lysed as total lysates following the protocol described above for streptavidin-enriched samples. Three NB4 SKAP2KO pre-selected biological clones were used. Tryptic peptides were prepared according to the method described by Kulak et al[45], with some adjustments. Briefly, cells were lysed in, depending on cell numbers, 40 ul 1% Sodium Deoxy Cholate (SDC) (Sigma Aldrich) 10mM TCEP (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 40 mM ChloroAcetamide (Sigma Aldric), 100 mM TRIS-HCl pH 8.0 (Life Technologies), boiled at 95°C for 5 min and sonicated for 10 min in a BioRuptor Pico (Diagenode). A double volume of 100 mM TRIS-HCl pH 8.0 was added, in which 625 ng Trypsin/LysC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were digested overnight at 25°C. Next day, samples were acidified by addition of 1% (vol) trifluoroacetic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific), spun down to precipitate the SDC and supernatant containing the peptides was loaded on in-house prepared SDB-RPS STAGEtips (Empore). Tips were washed with 0,1% TFA and peptides were eluted in 5% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide (Sigma Aldrich, Germany), 80% v/v acetonitrile (BioSolve). Sample volume was reduced by SpeedVac and supplemented with 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA to a final volume of 10 μl. 3 μl of each sample was injected for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed using MaxQuant 1.6.2.10 with the human Uniprot database (downloaded March 2021). Output tables were analyzed in R/Bioconductor (version 4.1.0/3.13), ‘reverse’, ‘potential contaminants’ and ‘only identified by site’ peptides were filtered out and label free quantification values were log2 transformed. Proteins quantified in all samples within an experimental group were selected for further analysis. Missing values were imputed by a normal distribution (width=0.3, shift = 1.8), assuming these proteins were close to the detection limit. Statistical analyses were performed using moderated t-tests in the LIMMA package. A Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted P value <0.05 and absolute log2 fold change >1 was considered statistically significant and relevant. Gene Ontology overrepresentation analysis was performed using clusterprofiler.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neutrophils, Cd11b/cd18 integrin, Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (adcc), Src kinase associated phosphoprotein 2 (skap2), Adhesion, Phagocytosis, Filamentous actin

### Affiliations
Dept. of Molecular Hematology, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, the Netherlands, and Landsteiner Laboratory, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
Sanquin Research

### Submitter
Floris van Alphen

### Lab Head
Dr Hanke L. Matlung
Dept. of Molecular Hematology, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, the Netherlands, and Landsteiner Laboratory, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands


