### Accession
PXD043807

### Title
Deep spatial proteomics reveals region-specific features of severe COVID-19-related pulmonary injury

### Description
As a primary target of SARS-CoV-2, lung exhibits heterogeneous histopathological changes following infection. However, comprehensive insight into their protein basis with spatial resolution remains deficient, which hinders further understanding of COVID-19-related pulmonary injury. Here, we generated a region-resolved proteomic atlas of hallmark pathological pulmonary structures by integrating histological examination, laser microdissection, and ultrasensitive proteomics. Over 10,000 proteins were quantified across 71 post-mortem specimens. We identified a spectrum of pathway dysregulations in alveolar epithelium, bronchial epithelium, and blood vessels comparing with non-COVID-19 controls, providing evidence for transitional-state pneumocyte hyperplasia. Additionally, our data revealed the region-specific enrichment of functional markers in bronchiole mucus plug, pulmonary fibrosis, airspace inflammation, and alveolar type 2 cells, uncovering their distinctive features. Furthermore, we detected increased protein expression associated with viral entry and inflammatory response across multiple regions, suggesting potential therapeutic targets. Collectively, this study provides a unique perspective for deciphering COVID-19-caused pulmonary dysfunction by spatial proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
The microdissected tissue samples were lysed and de-crosslinked in 50 μL lysis buffer containing 1% n-dodecyl β-D-maltoside (DDM), 600 mM guanidine HCl, 150 mM NaCl, and 10 mM HEPES (pH 7.4). After brief centrifugation, the samples were sonicated in a non-contacting BioRuptor Pico system (Diagenode) for 30 cycles at 4 °C (30 s-on and 30 s-off) and then heated at 95 °C for 90 min. The obtained tissue lysates were processed using a modified SISPROT protocol as we previously described.19 In brief, the tissue lysate was acidified to pH 3 by adding 1% formic acid (FA) before loaded onto an activated SISPROT tip packed with 0.6 mg mixed POROS beads of SAX and SCX (Applied Biosystems) and one plug of C18 disk (Empore). After cleaning by acetonitrile (ACN), the enriched proteins were reduced by 10 mM TCEP, alkylated by 40 mM chloroacetamide, and digested by 10 ng trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C for 60 min. The digested peptides were then transferred to the C18 layer by 500 mM NaCl, desalted by 1% FA, eluted to glass inserts by 80% ACN, 0.5% HOAc, and vacuum-dried in a SpeedVac machine (Thermo Fischer). To increase the depth of protein identification, part of the spectral library was built by in-solution digestion of protein lysate extracted from FFPE tissue sections and high-pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation as described previously.19 Briefly, FFPE sections from different blocks were dewaxed and collected into one centrifuge tube by scalpel. The tissue was then lysed and de-crosslinked in 1% SDS, 300 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) by sonification and then heating at 95 °C for 60 min. One milligram of proteins was extracted, reduced, alkylated, and digested using a modified in-solution sample preparation protocol.94 One hundred micrograms of desalted peptides were fractioned on an microflow HPLC (1260, Agilent) using a XBridge peptide BEH C18 column (130 Å, 5 μm, 2.1 mm × 150 mm) within 60 min linear gradient from 2% to 30% ACN in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min and concatenated into 24 fractions. The fractions were then desalted using homemade C18 tips and vacuum-dried. All peptide samples were re-dissolved in 0.1% FA with spiked iRT peptides (Biognosys). For LMD samples, each sample was injected twice for ddaPASEF and diaPASEF analysis, respectively.

### Data Protocol
All MS raw files were searched by the Spectronaut software (version 16.2, Biognosys). For ddaPASEF-based spectral library generation, we utilized MS files from 24 peptide fractionation samples and 71 second injection of LMD samples. The combined raw files were searched against a combined Homo sapiens (UP000005640, 20,593 entries, downloaded on 1st Oct, 2022) and SARS-CoV-2 (UP000464024, 17 entries, downloaded on 1st Oct, 2022) UniProt fasta database using the Pulsar engine embedded in Spectronaut with all parameters set as default. The resulting library comprised 210,597 precursors accounting for 168,887 peptides and 11,438 protein groups. Next, a default library-based analysis pipeline was applied for protein identification and quantification of all DIA raw files.

### Publication Abstract
As a primary target of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, lung exhibits heterogeneous histopathological changes following infection. However, comprehensive insight into their protein basis with spatial resolution remains deficient, which hinders further understanding of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)-related pulmonary injury. Here, we generate a region-resolved proteomic atlas of hallmark pathological pulmonary structures by integrating histological examination, laser microdissection, and ultrasensitive proteomics. Over 10,000 proteins are quantified across 71 post-mortem specimens. We identify a spectrum of pathway dysregulations in alveolar epithelium, bronchial epithelium, and blood vessels compared with non-COVID-19 controls, providing evidence for transitional-state pneumocyte hyperplasia. Additionally, our data reveal the region-specific enrichment of functional markers in bronchiole mucus plugs, pulmonary fibrosis, airspace inflammation, and alveolar type 2 cells, uncovering their distinctive features. Furthermore, we detect increased protein expression associated with viral entry and inflammatory response across multiple regions, suggesting potential therapeutic targets. Collectively, this study provides a distinct perspective for deciphering COVID-19-caused pulmonary dysfunction by spatial proteomics.

### Keywords
Pathology, Covid-19, Autopsy, Spatial proteomics, Laser microdissection, Lung

### Affiliations
Southern University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Yiheng Mao

### Lab Head
Dr Ruijun Tian
Southern University of Science and Technology


