### Accession
PXD019032

### Title
A Cytoskeletal Protein Complex is Essential for Division of Intracellular Amastigotes of Leishmania mexicana (LAND-483 and LAND-536)

### Description
Previous studies in Leishmania mexicana have identified the cytoskeletal protein KHARON as being important for both flagellar trafficking of the glucose transporter GT1 and for successful cytokinesis and survival of infectious amastigote forms inside mammalian macrophages. KHARON is located in three distinct regions of the cytoskeleton: the base of the flagellum, the subpellicular microtubules, and the mitotic spindle. To deconvolve the different functions for KHARON, we have identified two partner proteins, KHAP1 and KHAP2, that associate with KHARON. KHAP1 is located only in the subpellicular microtubules, while KHAP2 is located at the subpellicular microtubules and the base of the flagellum. Both the KHAP1 and KHAP2 null mutants are unable to execute cytokinesis but are able to traffic GT1 to the flagellum. These results confirm that KHARON assembles into distinct functional complexes and that the subpellicular complex is essential for cytokinesis and viability of disease-causing amastigotes but not for flagellar membrane trafficking.

### Sample Protocol
Parasite culture: Wild type and genetically altered Leishmania mexicana MNYC/BZ/62/M379 promastigotes were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Thermo Scientific Hyclone), 0.1 mM xanthine, 5 microgram/ml of hemin, 100 units/mL penicillin (Gibco), and 100 microgram/ml streptomycin (Gibco). Promastigote cultures were maintained at 26 C without supplemental CO2.   For expression of HBH::KH, L. mexicana promastigotes were transfected according to standard electroporation techniques using a Bio-Rad Gene Pulser Xcell.   To construct HBH::KH, a donor plasmid was constructed encoding a cassette consisting of a blasticidin resistance marker, a self-cleaving viral TaV2A peptide, and the His6-biotinylation motif-His6 tandem-affinity purification tag, and then that construct was introduced as follows. Flanking 5’ and 3’ targeting sequences were generated by PCR, then the donor vector and the targeting sequences were ligated together to form a targeting plasmid, digested with Swa1, the resulting targeting construct was transfected into wild-type parasites. Stably transfected parasites were selected by drug resistance. The HBH::KH construct was transfected into heterozygous wild-type/delta-kh parasites so that the HBH::KH is the sole copy of KH present.  To create HIS::KH we first subcloned the 10xHIS tag, generated by annealing two long overlapping oligonucleotides, into the pX63-Neo expression vector using the EcoR1 site in the polylinker, then the KH ORF was PCR amplified from genomic DNA and cloned it into the Mfe1 and Xba1 sites of pX63-Neo-HIS to generate pX63-Neo-HIS::KH.  Tandem affinity purification of HBH::KH: L. mexicana wild-type and delta-kh/HBH::KH promastigotes were grown to a density of ~2 x 10**7 cells/ml. Approximately 1.5 x 10**9 cells were collected, washed once and resuspended in PBS. Cells were cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde (Ultra Pure EM grade, Polysciences), for 10 min at 26 C followed by another 5 min incubation after adding glycine to 125 mM to stop the crosslinking reaction. PBS was added in place of formaldehyde for non-cross-linked control samples. Cells were washed once with PBS, then resuspended in 1 ml of Buffer 1 (8 M urea, 300 mM NaCl, 0.5% Nonidet P-40, 50 mM NaH2PO4, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.0) on ice. Samples were sonicated 3 times on ice at 50% max amplitude for 10 sec with 30 sec between pulses. Two percent of this protein lysate was saved as the protein input. The remainder of the protein was incubated with 750 µl of HisPurTM Cobalt Resin (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL) on a rocker for 45 min at room temperature. The resins were washed five times with 1 ml of Buffer 1 (5 min each), five times with 1 ml of Buffer 1 at pH 6.4 (5 min each), and five times with 1 ml of Buffer 1 pH 6.4 with 10 mM imidazole (5 min each). Cobalt-bound protein complexes were eluted with 1 ml of Buffer 2 (Elution buffer: 45 mM NaH2PO4, 8 M urea, 270 mM NaCl, 150 mM imidazole). The eluates were incubated with 400 microliters of Pierce High Capacity Streptavidin-agarose Resin (Thermo Scientific Pierce) on a rocker overnight at 4 C. Streptavidin resins were washed and stored in 500 microliters of Tris, pH 8.0.  Sample Preparation: For each sample, 200 microliters of streptavidin agarose resin was washed twice in 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB), resuspended in 250 of the same buffer, 1 microgram of Pierce MS Grade trypsin added (Thermo Scientific), and samples were shaken overnight at 37 C. Peptides were then recovered from the supernatant, beads washed with 250 microliters of 100 mM TEAB buffer, the combined supernatants acidified by adding 50 microliters of 10% TFA, and samples solid phase extracted using C18 MicroSpin Tips (The Nest Group). Peptides were then assayed (Pierce Peptide Assay Kit, Thermo Scientific), and the 12.0 microgram and 12.6 microgram of peptide recovered in the control and cross-linked samples, respectively, were vacuum centrifuged to dryness and dissolved in 100 mM TEAB buffer.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis: Samples in the first experiment were labeled using 200 micrograms of 130C (control) or 131N (crosslinked) 10-plex reagents as recommended by the manufacturer (Thermo Scientific). One quarter of each volume of the labeled samples, containing essential equal amounts of peptide, were mixed in preparation for analysis. A repeat of the above experiment was performed, except using twice the volume of beads and subsequence volumes of reagents used during the preparation of peptides for TMT labeling. In the second experiment, C18 BioPureSPN MIDI columns (The Nest Group) were used for the solid phase extraction, and 32 microgram and 35 microgram of peptide were recovered from control and cross-linked samples, respectively. Twenty microgram of peptide from each sample from the second experiment was then labeled with 200 microgram of either 128C (control) or and 131N (cross-linked) 10-plex TMT reagents, and equal volumes of each mixed.   Three micrograms of TMT-labeled samples were reconstituted in 5% formic acid and separated by liquid chromatography (LC) using a Dionex NCS-3500RS UltiMate RSLCnano UPLC system (Thermo Scientific). Bound peptides (Acclaim PepMap 100-micron x 2 cm NanoViper C18, 5-micron trap (Thermo Scientific) were desalted using a mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at 5 microliter/min flow. After 5 min, the trap column was switched on-line to a PepMap RSLC C18, 2-micron, 75 micron x 25 cm EasySpray column (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were then separated using a 7.5–30% acetonitrile gradient over 90 min in mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at 300 nanoliter/min flow rate. Tandem mass spectrometry data was collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument configured with an EasySpray NanoSource (Thermo Scientific). Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution = 120,000), and data-dependent MS2 scans performed in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy = 35) following isolation with the instrument’s quadrupole. Reporter ion detection was performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution = 60,000) using MS3 scans following synchronous precursor isolation (SPS) of the top 10 ions in the linear ion trap, and higher-energy collisional dissociation in the ion-routing multipole (normalized collision energy = 65). The MSn scans used default automatic gain control ion targets provided in the TMT SPS template and variable numbers of MS2 scans between survey scans to automatically optimize data collection. Singly charged precursor ions were excluded and dynamic exclusion settings were 10 PPM m/z tolerances for 30 sec durations.  Data Analysis: RAW instrument files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Scientific) for each of the TMT experiments. Data was searched with the SEQUEST HT search engine with a Leishmania mexicana protein database downloaded from www.TriTrypDB.org in October 2013 (7,963 entries with an additional 179 common contaminant sequences). Searches were configured with static modifications for the TMT reagents (+229.163 Da) on lysines and N-termini, dynamic modifications for oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da), parent ion tolerance of 1.25 Da, fragment mass tolerance of 1.0005 Da, monoisotopic masses, and trypsin cleavage (max 2 missed cleavages). Searches used a reversed sequence decoy strategy to control peptide false discovery and identifications were validated by Percolator software. Search results and TMT reporter ion intensities were exported from Proteome Discoverer as text files and processed with in-house Python scripts. Only peptide spectral matches (PSMs) uniquely matching a single protein entry with q scores < 0.05, accurate masses within 10 PPM, and trimmed average reporter ion intensity peak height greater than 750 (first experiment) or 250 (repeat experiment) were used for quantification. The individual reporter ion intensities from all PSMs were summed to create total protein intensities. Candidates were determined using a Z-score test comparing the calculated ratios with those of similar intensities. A Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing correction was used to reduce the candidate false-discovery rate. More details and the scripts used for analysis can be found at htpps://github.com/pwilmart/Z-score_GUI.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein complex, Infectious disease, Protein targeting, Leishmania, Cytoskeleton, Cytokinesis

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, Oregon 97239, USA
OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Scott M. Landfear
Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, Oregon 97239, USA


