### Accession
PXD012788

### Title
Developing In Vivo Cross-linking Mass Spectrometry (XL-MS) to Decipher Protein Interaction Landscapes at the Proteome Scale

### Description
We have developed a new and robust in vivo cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) that utilizes a multifunctional MS-cleavable cross-linker to enable the efficient capture, enrichment, and identification of in vivo cross-linked peptides at the whole proteome scale.

### Sample Protocol
HEK 293RPN11-HTBH cell line was cross-linked in vivo with Alkyne-A-DSBSO. Cells were washed and lysed in denaturing lysis buffer #1 (8M urea, Tris-HCl pH 7.0) and passed through a 22-gauge needle. Supernatant was clarified by centrifugation at 21,000g and removed. Resulting cell pellet was resuspended in denaturing buffer #2 (8M urea, Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 50mM NaCl). Supernatant was clarified again at 21,000g and collected. Both supernatants were kept separate for further preparation. Cross-linked proteins were digested using a modified FASP protocol. Cross-linked proteins were reduced and alkylated on filter with TCEP for 30 minutes, followed by incubation with chloroacetamide in the dark for 30 minutes. Proteins were reconstituted in 8M urea, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and digested with Lys-C at 37˚C for 4 hrs. Urea concentration was reduced to 1.5 M and samples were further digested with trypsin at 37˚C overnight. Peptide digests were then collected and desalted using Waters Sep-Pak C18 cartridge. Biotin picolyl azie, BTTAA, CuSO4, and soidum ascorbate were added to dried peptide digests to a final concentration of µM, 500 µM and 250 µM, and 2.5 mM, respectively. Final mixture was rotated in the dark at room temperature for 2 hrs and incubated with 200 µL of streptavidin beads in binding buffer (25 mM sodium phosphate, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.5) for 2 hrs. Beads were washed extensively and eluted with 10% FA overnight at 37 ˚C, collected and dried. Samples were reconstituted in SEC mobile phase (0.1% formic acid and 30% ACN) and separated on a Superdex Peptide PC 3.2/30 column (300 x 3.2 mM) at a flow rate of 50 µL/min. Only the fractions with enriched inter-linked peptides were subjected to LC MSn and LC MS/MS analyses. LC MS/MS and LC MSn analyses were performed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) coupled on-line with an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Scientific). Each sample was analyzed five times with four MS3- and one MS2-based acquisition methods, respectively. For both methods, MS1 scans were measured in the Orbitrap with a scan range from 375 to 1500 m/z, resolution set to 120,000, and the AGC target set to 4×105. MS1 acquisition was performed in top speed mode with a cycle time of 5 s. For MS3 analysis, either 3+ or 4+ and up charged ions were selected for MS2. For each charge selection setting, 2 types of acquisition methods were employed: 1) ID-MS3 acquisition based on top 4 most intense ions in MS2, or 2) targeted ID-MS3 acquisition for DSBSO cross-links based on the mass difference (Δ=182.0071, C5H10O3S2) between characteristic ion pairs of DSBSO cross-linked peptides in MS2 (Δ= T-A=βT-βA). MS1 and MS2 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap whereas MS3 scans were detected in the ion trap. For MS2 scans, the resolution was set to 30,000, the AGC target 5e4, the precursor isolation width was 1.6 m/z, and the maximum injection time was 100 ms for CID. The CID-MS2 normalized collision energy was 25%. For MS3 scans, CID was used with a collision energy of 35%, the AGC target was set to 2×104, and the maximum injection time was set to 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
Monoisotopic masses and charges of parent ions and corresponding fragment ions, and ion intensities from cross-linker and peptide fragmentation in ID-MS3 spectra were extracted as MGF files using ProteoWizard MSConvert. MS3 spectra were subjected to protein database searching using a developmental version of Protein Prospector (v. 5.19.1) using Batch-Tag against a randomly concatenated decoy-containing Homo sapien database (SwissProt.2017.11.01.random.concat; 20,240 entries). The mass tolerances for parent ions were set to ±20 ppm and fragment ions were set to 0.6 Da. Trypsin was set as the enzyme with three maximum missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation was set as a constant modification for cysteine, while protein N-terminal acetylation, N-terminal conversion of glutamine to pyroglutamic acid, asparagine deamidation, and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications. Three additional modifications were added for uncleaved lysines and protein N-termini: alkene (C3H2O, +54.0106 Da), unsaturated thiol (C8H12S2O4, +236.0177 Da), and sulfenic acid (C8H14S2O5, +254.0283 Da), corresponding to remnant moieties of DSBSO after cross-link cleavage. The in-house software XL-Tools was used to automatically summarize and validate cross-linked peptides based on Protein Prospector database search results and MSn data36. For all MSn analyses, the FDR of cross-linked peptide identification was determined to be < 0.5%, which was calculated based on the total number of false inter-link hits (containing one or both decoy peptides) out of the total cross-links identified. DSBSO inter-link mass was defined as C11H16O6S2 (+308.0388 Da), and the connected alkene and thiol fragments were defined as C3H2O (+54.0106 Da) and C8H12S2O4 (+236.0177 Da). The MS1 precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm; MS2 fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation was set at a constant modification for cysteine, while methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification; maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 3.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Cross-linking mass spec, Enrichable, Ms-cleavable, Proteome wide, Click chemistry

### Affiliations
UCI Department of Physiology and Biophysics
UCI

### Submitter
Andrew Wheat

### Lab Head
Dr Lan Huang
UCI Department of Physiology and Biophysics


