### Accession
PXD035570

### Title
Incorporation of isotopically labeled amino acids in live mouse zygotes as means to understand the oocyte to embryo transition

### Description
A long-standing question in developmental and reproductive biology is when the mammalian embryo becomes sufficiently distinct from its oocyte precursor. Myriads of studies examined the messenger RNAs that change during the oocyte-to-embryo transition, whereas proteins have been much less studied, in spite of their greater vicinity to phenotype.  In the present study we modified the widely used embryo culture medium KSOM (PMID 12470333, PMID 10859270) to make it apt for our application. We replaced the serum albumin with polyvinylpyrrolidone and also replaced the natural Arginine and Lysine with their “heavy” isotopic variants Arginine 13C 15N and Lysine 13C 15N. Fertilized oocytes were retrieved from oviducts of gonadotropin-primed B6C3F1 females mated to CD1 males, and cultured at 37 degrees Celsius under 5% CO2 in KSOM containing 0.3 mM Arginine 13C 15N and 0.2 mM Lysine 13C 15N, which are the regular concentrations of these two amino acids in KSOM medium (PMID 12470333; PMID 10859270). After 4 days of culture, the embryos of the isotopic group had undergone blastocyst formation just like the control embryos cultured in normal medium. Samples of approx. 500 “heavy”-labeled blastocysts were collected zona-free and subjected to mass spectrometric analysis. The median labeling rate was 83%, ranging from 0% in proteins that did not incorporate any Arginine 13C 15N and Lysine 13C 15N, to 100% in proteins that were completely labeled.  Our study demonstrates that a commonly used, chemically defined medium can be adapted for Stable Isotope Labeling by/with Amino acids in Cell culture (SILAC) and combined with high-resolution mass spectrometry, in a preimplantation embryo setting. This allows to tackle long-standing questions in developmental and reproductive biology, such as the identification of putative maternal (0% labeled), putative embryonic (100% labeled) or shared proteins in live mammalian embryos.

### Sample Protocol
Fertilized oocytes were retrieved from oviducts of gonadotropin-primed B6C3F1 females mated to CD1 males, and cultured at 37 degrees Celsius under 5% CO2 in KSOM containing 0.3 mM Arginine 13C 15N and 0.2 mM Lysine 13C 15N, which are the regular concentrations of these two amino acids in KSOM medium (PMID 12470333; PMID 10859270). After 4 days of culture, the embryos of the isotopic group had undergone blastocyst formation just like the control embryos cultured in normal medium. Samples of approx. 600 “heavy”-labeled blastocysts were collected zona-free and subjected to mass spectrometric analysis. Briefly, after lysis in 60ul 4% SDS, 50mM Tris pH 8.5, proteins were acetone precipitated and subjected to a tryptic digest using the Preomics iST kit according to the manufacturers instructions. Desaltedtryptic peptides were then measured on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer online coupled to an EASY nLC 1200 HPLC system via a 50cm fused silca emitter column packed with HALO 2.6um C18 beads. Data were recorded along a gradient from 3-35% solvent B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid)in 220min, from 36-60% solvent B in 20min in DDA mode with a flow rate of 300 nl/min.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed by MaxQuant Software (version 2.0.3.0). The search was performed against the UniProt mouse database (release date 04/2019) concatenated with reversed sequence versions of all entries and supplemented with common contaminants. Parameters defined for the search were trypsin as digesting enzyme, allowing two missed cleavages, a minimum length of 6 amino acids, carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues as fixed modification, oxidation at methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation and deamidation on glutamine and asparagine as variable modifications. The search was performed with the settings for a general SILAC experiment (multiplicity = 2). Determination of iBAQ intensities was enabled. The maximum allowed mass deviation was 20 ppm for the MS and 0.5 Da for the MS/MS scans. Protein groups were regarded as identified with a false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1% for all peptide and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fertilization, Blastocyst, Proteomics, Development, Silac, Heavy amino acids, Mass spectrometry, Oocyte

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry, Max Planck Insitute for Molecular Biomedicine, Roentgenstr. 20, 48149 Münster, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany


