### Accession
PXD008167

### Title
Proteomic analyses of Pandoravirions

### Description
With its 2.5 Mb DNA genome packed in amphora-shaped particles of bacterium-like dimension (1.2 µm in length, 0.5 µm in diameter), the Acanthamoeba-infecting Pandoravirus salinus remained the most spectacular and intriguing virus since its description in 2013. Following its isolation from shallow marine sediment off the coast of central Chile, that of its relative Pandoravirus dulcis from a fresh water pond near Melbourne, Australia, suggested that they were the first representatives of an emerging worldwide-distributed family of giant viruses. This was further suggested when P. inopinatum discovered in Germany, was sequenced in 2015. We now report the isolation and genome sequencing of three new strains (P. quercus, P.neocaledonia, P. macleodensis) from France, New Caledonia, and Australia. Using a combination of transcriptomic, proteomic, and bioinformatic analyses, we found that these six viruses share enough distinctive features to justify their classification in a new family, the Pandoraviridae, distinct from that of other large DNA viruses.

### Sample Protocol
Pandoraviruses were purified after cell lysis by centrifugating the culture media for 5 min at 500 × g to remove the cellular debris and the virus was pelleted by centrifugation at 6,800 × g for 45 min. The viral pellet was then resuspended, washed twice in PBS buffer, layered on a discontinuous sucrose gradient [50%/60%/70%/80% (wt/vol)], and centrifuged at 5,000 × g for 45 min. The viral layer was recovered and washed twice in PBS buffer. Virion proteomes were prepared as previously described in (Legendre M et al., PNAS, 2015) for mass spectrometry-based label free quantitative proteomics. Briefly, extracted proteins from each preparation were stacked in the top of a 4–12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen) before R-250 Coomassie blue staining and in-gel digestion with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega). Resulting peptides were analysed by online nanoLC-MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) using a 120-min gradient. Three independent preparations from the same clone were analysed for each Pandoravirus to characterize particle composition. Characterization of different clones and technical replicates were performed for P. dulcis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using MaxQuant software (Cox J & Mann M, Nat Biotechnol, 2008) (version 1.5.5.1) in independent runs for each virus. Spectra were searched against the corresponding Pandoravirus protein sequences as well as A. castellanii protein sequences, and the frequently observed contaminants database embedded in MaxQuant. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide modifications selected during the searches were carbamidomethylation (C, fixed), acetyl (protein Nter, variable), and oxidation (M, variable). Minimum peptide length was set to 7 aa. The ‘match between run’ option was activated. Maximum false discovery rates were set to 0.01 at peptide and protein levels. Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) (Schwanhäusser B et al., Nature, 2011) values were calculated from MS intensities of ‘unique+razor’ peptides.

### Publication Abstract
With DNA genomes reaching 2.5&#x2009;Mb packed in particles of bacterium-like shape and dimension, the first two Acanthamoeba-infecting pandoraviruses remained up to now the most complex viruses since their discovery in 2013. Our isolation of three new strains from distant locations and environments is now used to perform the first comparative genomics analysis of the emerging worldwide-distributed Pandoraviridae family. Thorough annotation of the genomes combining transcriptomic, proteomic, and bioinformatic analyses reveals many non-coding transcripts and significantly reduces the former set of predicted protein-coding genes. Here we show that the pandoraviruses exhibit an open pan-genome, the enormous size of which is not adequately explained by gene duplications or horizontal transfers. As most of the strain-specific genes have no extant homolog and exhibit statistical features comparable to intergenic regions, we suggest that de novo gene creation could contribute to the evolution of the giant pandoravirus genomes.

### Keywords
Pandoravirus, Nanolc-ms/ms, Infectious particles

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


