### Accession
PXD009656

### Title
Respiratory complex II -  Alternative assembly of respiratory complex II connects energy stress to metabolic checkpoints

### Description
Alternative assembly of respiratory complex II connects energy stress to metabolic checkpoints

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis, cell pellets were lysed using 200 µl of sodium deoxycholate buffer (0.1% in 0.1M triethyl ammonium bicarbonate). Following reduction with 5 mM dithiothretiol and alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide, 100 g protein was digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 16 h. The sample was acidified using formic acid and centrifuged for 10 min to remove the precipitated sodium deoxycholate salt. Tryptic peptides were recovered and fractionated using High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Pierce) according to manufacturer’s instructions, with the exception that only six fractions were collected. To establish a reference spectral library for SWATH analysis, the fractionated sample was run by nanoLC-MS/MS using a 100 mm x 150 µm C18 column coupled to an Eksigent Ultra system over 90 min as described 75 using Information-Dependent Acquisition (IDA) on a 5600+ Triple TOF mass spectrometer (Sciex, Framingham, MA) using the Top 10 most intense multiply charged ions. MS/MS was conducted for 50 ms over the 100-1500 m/z range.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using ProteinPilot (v4.2) (Sciex) to search the UniProt Human protein database (20,198 entries, downloaded June 2015) and false-discovery controlled by searching a reversed-decoy Human database of identical size, selecting >99% confidence for protein identification. The Paragon group file was imported into PeakView software 2.1 using the SWATH MicroApp 2.0 to generate a sample specific spectral library. For SWATH data acquisition of individual samples we used the same MS set-up but adjusted the method to use 60 variable m/z windows (400-1250 m/z) for precursor ion selection. The MS/MS spectra were accumulated for 60 ms in the m/z 350-1500 m/z range.  To extract SWATH peak areas with PeakView software 2.1 we carried out retention time calibration with endogenous peptides and data processing using following settings; 100 maximal peptides per protein, maximal 6 transitions per peptide, peptide confidence threshold of 99%, transition false discovery rate < 1%, 10 min extraction window and fragment extraction tolerance of 75 ppm, exclusion of shared peptides. The protein peak areas were normalized to the total peak area and log-transformed peak areas and subjected to Student T-Test to compare relative protein peak area between samples. Proteins were considered to be differentially expressed with p<0.05 and protein fold change was ± 1.5 fold. DAVID 76 was used for functional enrichment analysis. The Benjamini method (adjusted p value) was used to control the family-wide false discovery rate for enrichment analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Cell growth and survival depend on a delicate balance between energy production and synthesis of metabolites. Here, we provide evidence that an alternative mitochondrial complex II (CII) assembly, designated as CII<sub>low</sub>, serves as a checkpoint for metabolite biosynthesis under bioenergetic stress, with cells suppressing their energy utilization by modulating DNA synthesis and cell cycle progression. Depletion of CII<sub>low</sub> leads to an imbalance in energy utilization and metabolite synthesis, as evidenced by recovery of the de novo pyrimidine pathway and unlocking cell cycle arrest from the S-phase. In vitro experiments are further corroborated by analysis of paraganglioma tissues from patients with sporadic, SDHA and SDHB mutations. These findings suggest that CII<sub>low</sub> is a core complex inside mitochondria that provides homeostatic control of cellular metabolism depending on the availability of energy.

### Keywords
Mitochondria; sdha; energy utilization

### Affiliations
APAF, Macquarie University
APAF

### Submitter
Xiaomin Song

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Molloy
APAF, Macquarie University


