### Accession
PXD011622

### Title
Typing complex meningococcal vaccines to understand diversity and population structure of key vaccine antigens

### Description
Vaccines to prevent capsular group B meningococcal disease have been based on proteins, as the polysaccharide capsule was deemed unsuitable due to its similarity to human tissues. Outer membrane vesicle (OMV) vaccines have been targeted at specific capsular group B epidemics in Cuba, Norway, and New Zealand, with the major immunogen determined as porin A (PorA). Subcapsular protein vaccines aim to increase breadth of coverage of meningococcal strains, by the inclusion of protein variants from many different clonal complexes (ccs). Using scalable and portable genomic techniques, it is possible to study the diversity of OMV and subcapsular proteins in relevant meningococcal populations. Shotgun proteomics identified 461 proteins in the OMVs derived from NZ98/254, a component of the Bexsero® vaccine, with a complex proteome comprised of outer membrane proteins and proteins from other cellular compartments. Amino acid sequences for 24 selected proteins were catalogued within the PubMLST Neisseria database as part of the OMV peptide Typing (OMVT) scheme. Of the 24 proteins included, there was variation in the extent of diversity and association with ccs from the most conserved peptides FbpA (NEISp0578) and putative periplasmic proteins (NEISp1063) to the most diverse TbpA (NEISp1690). There were 1752 OMVTs identified amongst 2492/3506 isolates. OMVTs were further grouped into clusters (identical at ≥18 peptide sequences), 45.3% of isolates were assigned to one of 27 OMVT clusters. Both OMVTs and clusters were strongly associated with cc, genogroup and recombinant Bexsero® antigens. The OMVT scheme represents an open-access, web-based tool for the systematic analysis of the multiple components of OMV vaccines, demonstrating that combinations of OMV proteins exist in discrete, non-overlapping combinations associated with both genogroup and Bexsero® Antigen Sequence type (BAST). This highly structured population of disease-causing meningococci is consistent with proposed effects of host immune  selection and competition between allelic variants on meningococcal population structure. This has implications for future vaccine assessment, and development, especially the choice of antigen combinations. The methodology is portable and will facilitate region-specific WGS interrogation, allowing informed choices about vaccine development or implementation.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic OMV sample preparation Two batches of OMV, from GSK, Siena Italy, were analysed in triplicate. Each replicate contained 100 µg of total protein in 0.5% SDS and 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, (TEAB), the pH 8.0 was reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine and alkylated with iodoacetamide before an overnight acetone precipitation. A 200 mM TEAB solution containing 2.5 µg trypsin (Promega) was directed added to the protein pellet and digestion was performed at 37oC overnight. The resulting peptides from each sample in a set were labelled with a different isobaric tag (TMTs 126 – 131, ThermoFisher) before being mixed into a single sixplex sample. An aliquot of labelled peptide mixture was injected on to a XBridge C18 column, (5 µm, 4.6 mm id and 25 cm long, Waters) for the first dimension high pH RP-HPLC separation under a linear gradient consisting mobile phase A (10 mM ammonium formate, pH 10.0) and up to 70% B (90% acetonitrile in mobile phase A) for 2 hours at flow rate of 0.5 mL/min, using a Jasco system consisting an autosampler, semi-micro HPLC pumps and UV detector. Eluted fractions were collected and concatenated into eight tubes and vacuum dried. Nano-LC-MS/MS Nano-LC and tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) was performed using a U3000 direct nano system coupled with nano-electrospray and LTQ-Orbitrap Discovery mass spectrometer (Thermo). Resuspending in 0.1% formic acid, the HPLC fractions containing mixture of sixplex labelled peptides were separated on a PepMap C18 reversed phase nano column (3 m, 100Ǻ, 50 cm length, Thermo) under a column flow rate of 0.3 µL/min using linear gradient of 5 – 25% for 180 min, 25 – 32% for 20 min and 32 – 90% for 10 min of 95% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. MS scan and MS/MS fragmentation were carried out in Orbitrap and LTQ, respectively using 2 cycles of top 3 data-dependent acquisition with dynamic exclusion mode enabled and total cycle time at approximately 30 milliseconds. The first cycle used collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation generating spectra for peptide sequencing, and the second High energy CID (HCD).

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analysis Mass spectra processing, database searching and quantitation were carried out using Thermo Proteome Discoverer 1.4 with built-in Sequest against Uniport N. meningitidis MC58 FASTA database, release 2014_03. Spectra from the 8 fractions were added together as one sample during searching. Initial mass tolerances by MS were set to 10 ppm. Up to two missed tryptic cleavages were considered. Methionine oxidation was set as dynamic modification whereas carboxymethylation on cysteine and TMT6plex labels on N-terminal amino acid and lysine side chain were set as static modifications. Positive protein identification was considered when matched to minimum of two peptides sequenced at rank 1 with high confidence.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> Protein-conjugate capsular polysaccharide vaccines can potentially control invasive meningococcal disease (IMD) caused by five (A, C, W, X, Y) of the six IMD-associated serogroups.&#xa0; Concerns raised by immunological similarity of the serogroup B capsule to human neural cell carbohydrates, meant that 'serogroup B substitute' vaccines target more variable subcapsular protein antigens.&#xa0; A successful approach using outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) as major vaccine components had limited strain coverage. In 4CMenB (Bexsero <sup>&#xae;</sup>), recombinant proteins have been added to ameliorate this problem.&#xa0; <b>Methods:</b>&#xa0;Scalable, portable, genomic techniques were used to investigate the Bexsero <sup>&#xae;</sup> OMV protein diversity in meningococcal populations. Shotgun proteomics identified 461 proteins in the OMV, defining a complex proteome. Amino acid sequences for the 24 proteins most likely to be involved in cross-protective immune responses were catalogued within the PubMLST.org/neisseria database using a novel OMV peptide Typing (OMVT) scheme. <b>Results:</b> Among these proteins there was variation in the extent of diversity and association with meningococcal lineages, identified as clonal complexes (ccs), ranging from the most conserved peptides (FbpA, NEISp0578, and putative periplasmic protein, NEISp1063) to the most diverse (TbpA, NEISp1690). &#xa0;There were 1752 unique OMVTs identified amongst 2492/3506 isolates examined by whole-genome sequencing (WGS). These OMVTs were grouped into clusters (sharing &#x2265;18 identical OMVT peptides), with 45.3% of isolates assigned to one of 27 OMVT clusters. OMVTs and OMVT clusters were strongly associated with cc, genogroup, and Bexsero <sup>&#xae;</sup> antigen variants, demonstrating that combinations of OMV proteins exist in discrete, non-overlapping combinations associated with genogroup and Bexsero <sup>&#xae;</sup> Antigen Sequence Type. This highly structured population of IMD-associated meningococci is consistent with strain structure models invoking host immune and/or metabolic selection. <b>Conclusions:</b> The OMVT scheme facilitates region-specific WGS investigation of meningococcal diversity and is an open-access, portable tool with applications for vaccine development, especially in the choice of antigen combinations, assessment and implementation.

### Keywords
Meningococcal, Lc-ms/ms, Outer membrane vesicle, Neisseria meningitidis, Shotgun proteomics, Vaccines

### Affiliations
NIBSC
National Institute for Biological Standards and Control

### Submitter
Jun Wheeler

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Wheeler
National Institute for Biological Standards and Control


