### Accession
PXD046787

### Title
Transcriptomics and proteomics revealed sex differences in human pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells

### Description
There is marked sexual dimorphism displayed in the onset and progression of pulmonary hypertension (PH). Females more commonly develop pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), however, females with PAH and other types of PH have better survival than males. Pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells play a crucial role in the pulmonary vascular remodelling and increased pulmonary vascular resistance of PH. Given this background, we hypothesized that there are sex differences in the pulmonary microvascular endothelium basally and in response to hypoxia that are independent of the sex hormone environment.

### Sample Protocol
Human pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells (HPMECs) from healthy male and female donors, cultured under physiological shear stress, were analysed using RNA sequencing and label-free quantitative proteomics. The samples were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Peptides were separated on C18 home-made column (C18-AQ Dr. Maisch Reprosil-Pur 100 x 0.075 mm x 3 μm) over 120 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min with a linear gradient of increasing ACN from 1% to 27%. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode; a high resolution (70,000) MS scan (300-1600 m/z) was performed to select the twelve most intense ions and fragmented using high energy C-trap dissociation for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from the Q-Exactive was processed using the MaxQuant(version 2.0.3.0) incorporating the Andromeda search engine.To identify peptides and proteins, MS/MS spectra were matched against Uniprot homo sapiens database (2021_03) containing 78,120 entries. All searches were performed using the default setting of MaxQuant, with trypsin as specified enzyme allowing two missed cleavages and a false discovery rate of 1% on the peptide and protein level. The database searches were performed with carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification and acetylation (protein N terminus) and oxidation (M) as variable modifications. For the generation of label free quantitative (LFQ) ion intensities for protein profiles, signals of corresponding peptide in different nano-HPLC MS/MS runs were matched by MaxQuant in a maximum time window of 1 min.

### Publication Abstract
Marked sexual dimorphism is displayed in the onset and progression of pulmonary hypertension (PH). Females more commonly develop pulmonary arterial hypertension, yet females with pulmonary arterial hypertension and other types of PH have better survival than males. Pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells play a crucial role in pulmonary vascular remodeling and increased pulmonary vascular resistance in PH. Given this background, we hypothesized that there are sex differences in the pulmonary microvascular endothelium basally and in response to hypoxia that are independent of the sex hormone environment. Human pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells (HPMECs) from healthy male and female donors, cultured under physiological shear stress, were analyzed using RNA sequencing and label-free quantitative proteomics. Gene set enrichment analysis identified a number of sex-different pathways in both normoxia and hypoxia, including pathways that regulate cell proliferation. In vitro, the rate of proliferation in female HPMECs was lower than in male HPMECs, a finding that supports the omics results. Interestingly, thrombospondin-1, an inhibitor of proliferation, was more highly expressed in female cells than in male cells. These results demonstrate, for the first time, important differences between female and male HPMECs that persist in the absence of sex hormone differences and identify novel pathways for further investigation that may contribute to sexual dimorphism in pulmonary hypertensive diseases.<b>NEW &amp; NOTEWORTHY</b> There is marked sexual dimorphism in the development and progression of pulmonary hypertension. We show differences in RNA and protein expression between female and male human pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells grown under conditions of physiological shear stress, which identify sex-different cellular pathways both in normoxia and hypoxia. Importantly, these differences were detected in the absence of sex hormone differences. The pathways identified may provide novel targets for the development of sex-specific therapies.

### Keywords
Human pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells, Sex differences, Hypoxia, Pulmonary hypertension

### Affiliations
Full Professor Of Physiology School of Medicine, University College Dublin, School of Medicine, Conway Institute Belfield Dublin 4
UCD

### Submitter
Eugene Dillon

### Lab Head
Dr Paul McLoughlin
Full Professor Of Physiology School of Medicine, University College Dublin, School of Medicine, Conway Institute Belfield Dublin 4


