### Accession
PXD022236

### Title
STALLION SPERM PROTEINS AFTER CRYOPRESERVATION

### Description
Using a split sample design 30 ejaculates from 10 different stallions were analyzed as fresh spermatozoa, and another aliquot from the same ejaculate was analyzed as a frozen thawed sample. The proteome was studied under both conditions using UHPLC/MS/MS and bioinformatic analysis conducted to identify discriminant variables between both conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Please provide a short description on the sample preparation steps, separation, enrichment strategies and mass spectrometry protocols includedSeparation and analysis of the samples were performed with a UHPLC/MS system consisting of an Agilent 1290 Infinity II Series UHPLC (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) equipped with an automated multisampler module and a High Speed Binary Pump, coupled to an Agilent 6550 Q-TOF Mass Spectrometer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) using an Agilent Jet Stream Dual electrospray (AJS-Dual ESI) interface. The HPLC and Q-TOF were controlled using MassHunter Workstation Data Acquisition software (Agilent Technologies, Rev. B.06.01). The sample was injected onto an Agilent AdvanceBio Peptide Mapping HPLC column (2.7 m, 150  2.1 mm, Agilent technologies), thermostatted at 55 C, at a flow rate of 0.4 ml/min. This column is suitable for peptide separation and analysis. The gradient program started with 2% of  B (buffer B: water/acetonitrile/formic acid, 10:89.9:0.1) that remained in isocratic mode for 5 min and then increased linearly up to 45 % B over 40 min, further increasing up to 95 % B over 15 min and remaining constant for 5 min. After this 65 min run, 5 min of post-time followed using the initial condition for the conditioning of the column for the next run. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode. The nebulizer gas pressure was set to 35 psi, whereas the drying gas flow was set to 10 l/min at a temperature of 250 C, and the sheath gas flow was set to 12l/min at a temperature of 300 ºC. The capillary spray, fragmentor and octopole RF Vpp voltages were 3500 V, 340 V and 750 V respectively. Profile data were acquired for both MS and MS/MS scans in extended dynamic range mode. MS and MS/MS mass range were 50-1700 m/z and scan rates were 8 spectra/sec for MS and 3 spectra/sec for MS/MS. Auto MS/MS mode was used with precursor selection by abundance and a maximum of 20 precursors selected per cycle. A ramped collision energy was used with a slope of 3.6 and an offset of -4.8. The same ion was rejected after two consecutive scans.

### Data Protocol
Please provide a couple of sentences on the bioinformatics pipeline used, main search parameters, quantitative analysis, software tools and versions included. Think something similar in scope to the Data Analysis section ofData processing and analysis was performed using Spectrum Mill MS Proteomics Workbench (Rev B.04.01, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Briefly, raw data were extracted under default conditions as follows: non fixed or variable modifications were selected; [MH]+ 50–10000 m/z; maximum precursor charge +5; retention time and m/z tolerance ± 60 seconds; minimum signal-to-noise MS (S/N) 25; finding 12C signals.  The MS/MS search against the appropriate and updated protein database (in this case: Uniprot/Horse) was performed with the following criteria: non fixed modifications were selected and as variable modifications: carbamidomethylated cysteines and tryptic digestion with 5 maximum missed cleavages were selected; ESI-Q-TOF instrument, minimum matched peak intensity 50%, maximum ambiguous precursor charge +5, monoisotopic masses, peptide precursor mass tolerance 20 ppm, product ion mass tolerance 50 ppm, and calculation of reversed database scores. Validation of peptide and protein data was performed using the auto-validation algorithm which is totally automated and used to validate the highest-scoring results; those which do not require manual review and are considered high-quality results. The auto-validation strategy used was auto-threshold, in which the peptide score is automatically optimized for a target % FDR (1.2%). Protein polishing validation was then performed in order to increase the sequence coverage of validated results with the restriction of a new maximum target protein FDR (0 %).    your manuscript

### Publication Abstract
Although cryopreservation is widely used in animal breeding, the technique is still suboptimal. The population of spermatozoa surviving the procedure experiences changes attributed to alteration in their redox regulation. In order to expand our knowledge regarding this particular aspect, the proteome in fresh and frozen thawed aliquots of equine spermatozoa was studied to identify the proteins most severely affected by the procedure. If alteration of redox regulation is a major factor explaining cryodamage, proteins participating in redox regulation should be principally affected. Using a split sample design, 30 ejaculates from 10 different stallions were analyzed as fresh spermatozoa, and another aliquot from the same ejaculate was analyzed as a frozen thawed sample. The proteome was studied under both conditions using UHPLC-MS/MS and bioinformatic analysis conducted to identify discriminant variables between both conditions. Data are available through the ProteomeXchange Consortium with identifier PXD022236. The proteins most significantly reduced were <i>Aldo-keto reductase family 1 member B</i> (<i>p</i> = 2.2 &#xd7; 10<sup>-17</sup>) and <i>Superoxide dismutase (Cu-Zn)</i> (<i>p</i> = 4.7 &#xd7; 10<sup>-14</sup>). This is the first time that SOD1 has been identified as a discriminating variable using bioinformatic analysis, where it was one of the most highly significantly different proteins seen between fresh and frozen thawed semen. This finding strongly supports the theory that alteration in redox regulation and oxidative stress is a major factor involved in cryodamage and suggests that control of redox regulation should be a major target to improve current cryopreservation procedures.

### Keywords
Spermatozoa, Cryopreservation, Horse

### Affiliations
UNIVERSIDAD DE EXTREMADURA
Departamento de Medicina Animal, Hospital Clínico Veterinario Universidad de Extremadura Avd de la Universidad s/n 10003 Cáceres SPAIN

### Submitter
FERNANDO JUAN  PEÑA VEGA 

### Lab Head
Dr FERNANDO JUAN PEÑA VEGA
Departamento de Medicina Animal, Hospital Clínico Veterinario Universidad de Extremadura Avd de la Universidad s/n 10003 Cáceres SPAIN


