### Accession
PXD009295

### Title
I/L-discrimination by MS3 of dimethylated peptides

### Description
A novel mass spectrometric method for discriminating isoleucine and leucine by MS3. The dimethylation of peptide N-termini leads to intense a1 ions in CID and MS3 fragmentation of the isoleucine/leucine a1-ion leads to spectra with fragments that can discriminate between the two isomers.  The method was applied to two antibodies in combination with a set of protease treatments using trypsin, thermolysin, chymotrypsin and pepsin to generate peptides exposing N-terminal I/L residues.

### Sample Protocol
The monoclonal antibodies SiluTMLite SigmaMAb Universal human Antibody Standard and Trastuzumab were digested with several proteases. 25µg of each monoclonal antibody was reduced in 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 20min at 56°C and alkylated in 20mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30min at room temperature (RT) in the dark. For trypsin (Promega, USA) chymotrypsin (Worthington, USA) digestions, the antibody was diluted with UHQ and 1 M triethylamonium bicarbonate (TEAB) to a final protein concentration of 1µg/µL in 100mM TEAB. For thermolysin digestion the antibody was diluted with UHQ and 1M TEAB, 50mM CaCl2 (Merck Millipore, Germany) to a final protein concentration of 1µg/µL in 100mM TEAB, 5mM CaCl2. The sample used for pepsin digestion was acidified by diluting with 0.1% formic acid (FA) to a final protein concentration of 1µg/µL (pH approximately 3). 50µL immobilized pepsin (Thermo Fischer Scientific, USA) was added to the acidified sample. Digestion for the remaining samples were carried out with an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:20 (w/w). The trypsin, chymotrypsin and pepsin digestion samples were incubated at 37°C overnight. The thermolysin digestion sample was incubated at 70°C for 2h. Following digestion, the trypsin, chymotrypsin and thermolysin digested samples were split in 2 samples, each containing 12.5µg peptides, in preparation for dimethyl labeling. The liquid from the pepsin digestion sample was transferred to a new tube and the remaining resin washed with 1M TEAB, which was then added to the pepsin digestion liquid. The pH of this sample was checked and corrected with 1M TEAB until pH=8, and the sample was split in 2 for dimethyl labeling.Chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich unless otherwise noted. The digested antibody peptides were diluted with 100mM TEAB to a final volume of 50µL. Light: 4µL 4% formaldehyde and 4µL 0.6M NaBH3CN was added. Intermediate: 4µL 4% formaldehyde-d2 and 2µL 0.6M NaBH3CN was added. The samples were incubated on a shaker at RT for 1h. The labeling was quenched with 16µL 1% ammonia solution and acidified with FA for micropurification on reversed phase stage-tips.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.0). The MS2 peak lists were searched using Mascot (v. 2.4.0) against a FASTA database containing the SiluMab and Trastuzumab antibody protein sequences and the protease sequences (10 entries). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines and light/medium dimethylation of N-termini and lysine residues were set as fixed modifications and oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set as None and peptide identification was performed with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 p.p.m. and fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Th.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Antibody, Leucine, Ms3, Isoleucine, I/l-discrimination, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Alphalyse
ALPHALYSE A/S Unsbjergvej 4 • 5220 Odense SØ • Denmark Phone:  +45 6310 6505

### Submitter
Jakob Bunkenborg

### Lab Head
Dr Jakob Bunkenborg
ALPHALYSE A/S Unsbjergvej 4 • 5220 Odense SØ • Denmark Phone:  +45 6310 6505


