### Accession
PXD036638

### Title
A role for complement in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis

### Description
The pathogenesis of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is multifactorial and characterized by progressive fibrosis and excessive accumulation of extracellular matrix in the interstitium of the lung, and driven by an imbalance between anti-fibrotic and pro-fibrotic factors leading to collagen deposition.  In the present study we wanted to identify proteins involved in these processes, and performed high-resolution proteomic profiling of bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) from IPF patients and controls. The proteomic analysis of BAL demonstrated that the complement system was highly differentially regulated in IPF patients as compared with controls.

### Sample Protocol
Samples:  -Bronchoalveolar lavage from Patients with Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis (n=22) -Bronchoalveolar lavage from Controls (n=10). Controls underwent bronchoscopy as part of planned surveillance >6 months after resection of carcinoid tumor. They were considered healthy without signs of lung disease or no previous or current medication that could interfere with the results   Sample preparation for the BAL samples was performed as described in Carvalho et al. The resulting peptide samples were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nEasy-LC coupled to QExactive Plus, Thermo) using a 60 min separation gradient.  Ref: Carvalho AS, Matthiesen R. Bronchoalveolar Lavage: Quantitative Mass Spectrometry-Based Proteomics Analysis in Lung Diseases. Methods Mol Biol 2017: 1619: 487-494.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant ver 1.6.1.0 was used for protein identification and label-free quantification, and Perseus ver 1.6.1.3 was used for statistical analysis based on normalized intensities (t-test with perm based FDR<0.05).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bronchoalveolar lavage, Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, Proteomics, Terminal complement complex, Interstitial lung disease

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


