### Accession
PXD006352

### Title
Cross-species complementation reveals conserved functions for EARLY FLOWERING 3 between monocots and dicots.

### Description
Plant responses to the environment are shaped by the external stimuli and internal signaling pathways. In both the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana and crop species, circadian clock factors have been identified as critical for growth, flowering and circadian rhythms. Outside of A. thaliana, however, little is known about the molecular function of clock genes. Therefore, we sought to compare the function of Brachypodium distachyon and Seteria viridis orthologs of EARLY FLOWERING3, a key clock gene in A. thaliana. To identify both cycling genes and putative ELF3 functional orthologs in S. viridis, a circadian RNA-seq dataset and online query tool (Diel Explorer) was generated as community resource to explore expression profiles of Setaria genes under constant conditions after photo- or thermo-entrainment. The function of ELF3 orthologs from A. thaliana, B. distachyon, and S. viridis were tested for complementation of an elf3 mutation in A. thaliana. Despite comparably low sequence identity versus AtELF3 (< 37%), both monocot orthologs were capable of rescuing hypocotyl elongation, flowering time and arrhythmic clock phenotypes. Molecular analysis using affinity purification and mass spectrometry to compare physical interactions also found that BdELF3 and SvELF3 could be integrated into similar complexes and networks as AtELF3, including forming a composite evening complex. Thus, we find that, despite 180 million years of separation, BdELF3 and SvELF3 can functionally complement loss of ELF3 at the molecular and physiological level.

### Sample Protocol
Wild type (Columbia-0) and elf3-2 plants carrying the CCA1::LUC reporter were described previously (Nusinow et al., 2011; Pruneda-Paz et al., 2009). Seeds were surface sterilized and plated on 1/2x Murashige and Skoog (MS) basal salt medium with 0.8% agar + 1% (w/v) sucrose. After 3 days of stratification, plates were placed horizontally in a Percival incubator (Percival Scientific, Perry, IA), supplied with 80 µmol m-2 sec-1 white light and set to a constant temperature of 22°C. Plants were grown under 12 h light / 12 h dark cycles (12L:12D) for 4 days (for physiological experiments) or for 10 days (for doing AP-MS) before assays. Protein extraction methods and protocols of doing AP-MS were described previously (Huang et al., 2016a; Huang and Nusinow, 2016a; Huang et al., 2016c). In brief, transgenic seedlings carrying the At/Bd/SvELF3-HFC constructs were grown under 12L:12D conditions for 10 days and were harvested at dusk (ZT12). 5 gram of seedlings were needed per replicate to make protein extracts, which underwent tandem affinity purification utilizing the FLAG and His epitopes of the fusion protein. Purified samples were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. The tryptic peptides were then injected to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) coupled with a U3000 RSLCnano HPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) with settings described previously (Huang et al., 2016a).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was done as previously described (Huang et al., 2016a). The databases searched were TAIR10 database (20101214, 35,386 entries) and the cRAP database (http://www.thegpm.org/cRAP/). Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and the Scaffold Local FDR was <1%. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability as assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Keller et al., 2002; Nesvizhskii et al., 2003).

### Publication Abstract
Plant responses to the environment are shaped by external stimuli and internal signaling pathways. In both the model plant <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> (<i>Arabidopsis</i>) and crop species, circadian clock factors are critical for growth, flowering, and circadian rhythms. Outside of <i>Arabidopsis,</i> however, little is known about the molecular function of clock gene products. Therefore, we sought to compare the function of <i>Brachypodium distachyon</i> (<i>Brachypodium</i>) and <i>Setaria viridis</i> (<i>Setaria</i>) orthologs of <i>EARLY FLOWERING 3,</i> a key clock gene in <i>Arabidopsis</i>. To identify both cycling genes and putative <i>ELF3</i> functional orthologs in <i>Setaria</i>, a circadian RNA-seq dataset and online query tool (Diel Explorer) were generated to explore expression profiles of <i>Setaria</i> genes under circadian conditions. The function of <i>ELF3</i> orthologs from <i>Arabidopsis, Brachypodium,</i> and <i>Setaria</i> was tested for complementation of an <i>elf3</i> mutation in <i>Arabidopsis</i>. We find that both monocot orthologs were capable of rescuing hypocotyl elongation, flowering time, and arrhythmic clock phenotypes. Using affinity purification and mass spectrometry, our data indicate that BdELF3 and SvELF3 could be integrated into similar complexes <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i> as AtELF3. Thus, we find that, despite 180 million years of separation, <i>BdELF3</i> and <i>SvELF3</i> can functionally complement loss of <i>ELF3</i> at the molecular and physiological level.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Arabidopsis, Orbitrap, Circadian signaling

### Affiliations
Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
Donald Danforth Plant Scinece Center

### Submitter
Bradley Evans

### Lab Head
Dr Dmitri A. Nusinow
Donald Danforth Plant Scinece Center


