### Accession
PXD013929

### Title
Lysine acetylproteome profiling reveals key acetylated proteins involved in heat shock response in the sea cucumber Apostichopus japonicus

### Description
Intestine of a total of 9 idividuals was sampled. The individuals were collected from 3 groups: Control (C), Heat stress 6h (HS6h) and Heat stress 48h (HS48h).After protein extraction,trypsin digestion and enrichment of Lys-acetylated peptides, the eluted peptides was applied with LC-MS/MS detection and data analysis.Lysine acetylproteome profiling reveals key acetylated proteins involved in heat shock response in the sea cucumber Apostichopus japonicus

### Sample Protocol
A. japonicus (100–120 g) were collected from an aquaculture farm in Weihai (Shandong, China) in April 2018. The sea cucumbers were transported to our lab in Qingdao and acclimated in tanks for 2 weeks. During acclimation, the temperature and the salinity of sea water was around 16 ºC and 30‰ respectively. The sea cucumbers was fed with a regular fodder, and half of water was changed daily.When acclimation finished, three individuals taken from the tank were regarded as the control group. The methods of heating and sampling were followed by our previous procedures. Briefly, the rate of heating was about 2 ºC/h, the moment water temperature reaching 26 ºC was regarded as the initial time. Then water temperature was maintained at 26 ± 0.5 ºC during the subsequent experiment. Three individuals were taken randomly after 6 h and 48 h stimulation. The intestine tissues of these individuals were immediately sampled and frozen in liquid nitrogen. All the samples were stored at -80 ºC.

### Data Protocol
The eluted peptides were cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed according to previous report. The MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant software and the processed data were searched against the A. japonicus genome database(Zhang et al., 2017). The quantification of the lysine acetylated peptides and proteins were identified according to the previous study. False discovery rate thresholds for peptide, protein, and modification site were specified at 1%. The changing fold > 1.2 (or < 0.83) and p-value < 0.05 were regarded as differential expressed proteins. The difference of acetylation level was also under the standard.

### Publication Abstract
Heat stress (HS) is an important factor for the survival of the marine organism <i>Apostichopus japonicus</i>. Lysine acetylation is a pivotal post-translational modification that modulates diverse physiological processes including heat shock response (HSR). In this study, 4028 lysine acetylation sites in 1439 proteins were identified in <i>A. japonicus</i> by acetylproteome sequencing. A total of 13 motifs were characterized around the acetylated lysine sites. Gene Ontology analysis showed that major acetylated protein groups were involved in "oxidation-reduction process", "ribosome", and "protein binding" terms. Compared to the control group, the acetylation quantitation of 25 and 41 lysine sites changed after 6 and 48 h HS. Notably, lysine acetyltransferase CREB-binding protein (CBP) was identified to have differential acetylation quantitation at multiple lysine sites under HS. Various chaperones, such as caseinolytic peptidase B protein homolog (CLBP), T-complex protein 1 (TCP1), and cyclophilin A (CYP1), showed differential acetylation quantitation after 48 h HS. Additionally, many translation-associated proteins, such as ribosomal proteins, translation initiation factor (IF), and elongation factors (EFs), had differential acetylation quantitation under HS. These proteins represented specific interaction networks. Collectively, our results offer novel insight into the complex HSR in <i>A. japonicus</i> and provide a resource for further mechanistic studies examining the regulation of protein function by lysine acetylation.

### Keywords
Acetylproteome, Intestine, Apostichopus japonicus, Heat stress

### Affiliations
Qingdao Agriculture University
Qingdao Agricultural University

### Submitter
Dongxue Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Dongxue Xu
Qingdao Agriculture University


