### Accession
PXD018296

### Title
mTORC1 and mTORC2 converge on the Arp2/3 complex to promote KrasG12D-induced acinar-to-ductal metaplasia and early pancreatic carcinogenesis

### Description
Oncogenic KrasG12D, a driver mutation of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), induces neoplastic transformation of acinar cells through acinar-to-ductal metaplasia (ADM). Here, we show that both functional complexes of mTOR (mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase, mTORC1 and mTORC2) are specifically activated in ADM. Murine models uncover that mTORC1 and mTORC2 cooperate to promote KrasG12D-driven ADM development. Proteomic analyses identify Arp2/3 complex, an actin nucleator, as the common downstream effector: mTORC1 is responsible for the protein synthesis of Rac1 and Arp3 while mTORC2 promotes the Arp2/3 complex activity via Akt/Rac1 signalling. Genetic ablation of Arp2/3 complex completely arrests KrasG12D-driven ADM development. The Arp2/3 complex-mediated y-branching of actin network promotes the basolateral spread of filamentous actin, which is indispensable for acinar cells-initiated carcinogenesis.  Induced by oncogenic KrasG12D, ADM is a metaplastic phenotype of acinar cells that requires extensive actin rearrangements. mTORC1 and mTORC2, downstream targets of KrasG12D, have well-established oncogenic functions in PDAC development. The actin-related protein 2/3 (Arp2/3) complex is the first identified actin nucleator. Regarded as textbook knowledge, it is activated by EGFR/Rac1 signalling to promote the polymerisation of branched actin filaments from pre-existing filaments in numerous biological contexts. Hereby, we identify that mTORC1 and mTORC2 attain a dual, yet non-redundant, regulatory role in promoting Arp2/3 complex function, which is responsible for generating basolateral filamentous actin in ADM. Thus, the role of Arp2/3 complex fills up the missing gap between putative oncogenic signals and actin dynamics underlying PDAC initiation.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic sample preparation:  Proteins were isolated from pancreatic tissues using urea lysis buffer containing 8 M Urea, 5 mM EDTA, 100 mM NH4HCO3, 1 mM DTT and protease inhibitor, as described in the section of proteins extraction from frozen tissue. In-gel trypsin digestion was performed according to standard procedures, as previously described. Briefly, the samples were run on a NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris Protein Gel (Thermofisher Scientific, US) for 3 minutes. Subsequently, the still not size-separated single protein band per sample was cut out of the gel, reduced (50 mM DTT), alkylated (55 mm CAA, chloroacetamid) and digested overnight with trypsin (trypsin-gold, Promega).   Mass spectrometric data acquisition: LC-MS/MS measurements were performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were delivered to a trap column (75 µm × 2 cm, self-packed with Reprosil-Pur C18 ODS-3 5 µm resin, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min in 0.1% formic acid in water. Peptides were separated on an analytical column (75 µm × 40 cm, self-packed with Reprosil-Gold C18, 3 µm resin, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch) using a 100 min linear gradient from 4-32% solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO in acetonitrile) and solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO in water) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, automatically switching between MS1 and MS2 spectra. MS1 spectra were acquired over a mass-to-charge (m/z) range of 360-1300 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 (at m/z 200) using a maximum injection time of 10 ms and an AGC target value of 3e6. Up to 20 peptide precursors were isolated (quadrupole isolation window width 1.7 m/z) and fragmented by HCD using a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25%. MS2 spectra were acquired over a scan range of 200 to 2000 m/z with a maximum injection time of 25 ms, a resolution of 15,000 and an AGC value of 1e5. Precursor ions that were singly-charged, unassigned or with charge states >6+ were excluded. The dynamic exclusion duration of selected precursor ions was 35 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification was performed using the software MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.305) with its built-in search engine Andromeda. MS2 spectra were searched against the canonical NCBI mouse proteome database (16,848 protein entries, downloaded 26.01.2017), supplemented with common contaminants (built-in option in MaxQuant). The MaxQuant analysis was performed using mainly default parameters. Those included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. Results were adjusted to 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level employing a target-decoy approach using reversed protein sequences. The minimal peptide length was defined as 7 amino acids. To compare relative protein abundances between the pancreas samples, label free quantification (LFQ) and data matching between samples were enabled (“match between run” with matching time window 0.7 min and alignment window 20 min). Each mouse cell line model was analyzed in biological triplicates.   Downstream differential abundance anlaysis: The quantitative proteomic results were further statistically analysed using the Perseus software (Version: 1.6.10.43, http://www.coxdocs.org/doku.php?id=perseus:start), to obtain mTORC1 and mTORC2 proteomic signatures and related KEGG pathways using the default setting. In brief, LFQ intensities (supplementary table 1) were transformed by Log2(x) and the missing values were imputed and replaced according to the normal distribution. For the principal component analysis (PCA), a multiple-sample test was applied to KrasG12D, KrasG12D; Rptor-/- and KrasG12D; Rictor-/- samples to yield differentially expressed proteins using ANOVA test followed by Permutation-based p-value correction (cut-off FDR: 0.05). This analysis identified 1095 proteins differentially expressed among three groups and 869 proteins with valid values across all samples were used for the final PCA (Supplementary Figure 5A). To obtain mTORC1- or mTORC2-specific proteomic signature, a two-sample test (Student’s T-test) was applied and p-value is followed by Permutation-based correction (cut-off FDR: 0.01, fold change S0=0.1) to generate a list of differentially expressed proteins between KrasG12D and KrasG12D; Rptor-/- samples as well as between KrasG12D and KrasG12D; Rictor-/- samples (Figure 4A, left panel). The list of upregulated proteins (KrasG12D vs. KrasG12D; Rptor-/- and KrasG12D vs. KrasG12D; Rictor-/-) was considered as specific proteomic signatures (Figure 4A, right panel) and they were subjected to KEGG pathway enrichment analysis. As such, p values were calculated by Fisher exact test and followed by Benjamini-Hochberg correction to generate final FDRs (Figure 4B)，as previously described.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pancreatic cancer; adm; arp2/3 complex; mtor; actin rearrangement

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technical University Munich (TUM) Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising GERMANY
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technical University Munich (TUM) Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising GERMANY


