### Accession
PXD018537

### Title
Cystic Fibrosis disease Urine exosomes

### Description
Cystic Fibrosis is a life limiting disease due to mutations in the Cystic Fibrosis Conductance Gene Regulator (CFTR). This is associated with a multiorgan disease combining pancreatic insufficiency, chronic infected bronchopathy and production of a salty sweat. Increased survival of patients leads to observation of new complications, including proximal tubule transport dysfunctions with increased output of glucose, amino acids, phosphate, calcium, uric acid, and low Molecular Weight proteins, which ultimately triggers tubulo-interstitial injury and chronic kidney disease. (Jouret et al. 2007)  Exosomes are membrane vesicles stemming from Multi-Vesicular Bodies. They reflect the biological state of the cell they stem from because they incorporate various bioactive molecules from their cell of origin, which can be transferred to target cells.  They are therefore ideal biomarkers for early diagnosis, prediction of disease progression or response to treatment. Urinary exosomes have been largely investigated in kidney or urothelial diseases and exosomal proteins proved to be biomarkers reflecting renal cellular biology.  We hypothetized that urinary exosomal proteins might be differentially expressed, according to the presence of the mutation in the CFTR gene and its correction.  We analyzed urinary exosomes of patients with CF and healthy controls based on their protein content determined by high resolution mass spectrometry, in combination with Gene Set Enrichment Analysis. These results were compared to those obtained in exosomes collected in patients treated with CFTR modulators.

### Sample Protocol
Exosome isolation  Exosomes were isolated by differential ultracentrifugations as previously published [Bouderioux]. Briefly, urine aliquot was centrifuged at 3000 g for 30 min to remove cell debris. Next, the supernatant was centrifuged at 10,000 g for 30 min at 4°C. The resulting supernatant was filtered through a 0.2-μm filter, followed by an ultracentrifugation at 200,000 g for 2 hours at 4°C (XL-70 ultracentifuge, Beckman-Coulter, Villpinte, France) to pellet the exosomes.  Extracellular vesicles isolated through differential ultracentrifugation (200kg) were further fractionated on a step sucrose gradient (sucrose layers of density ranging from 1.03 to 1.26).   The concentration of exosomal proteins was determined using DC (Detergent Compatible) protein assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were then frozen at - 80 °C and stored until further experiments.  Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis S-TrapTM micro spin column (Protifi, Hutington, USA) digestion was performed on 20µg of proteins from urinary exosomes according to manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, 5% SDS was added to the samples. Proteins were reduced with the addition of TCEP to a final concentration of 100mM and alkylated with the addition of iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 50mM. Aqueous phosphoric acid was added to a final concentration of 1.2%. Colloidal protein particulate was formed with the addition of 6 times the sample volume of S-Trap binding buffer (90% aqueous methanol, 100mM TEAB, pH7.1). The mixtures were put on the S-Trap micro 1.7mL columns and centrifuged at 4,000g for 30 seconds. The columns were washed four times with 150µL S-Trap binding buffer and centrifuged at 4,000g for 30 seconds with 180 degrees rotation of the columns between washes. Samples were digested with 1µg of trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight. Peptides were eluted with 40µL of 50mM TEAB followed by 40µL of 0.2% aqueous formic acid and by 35µL 50% acetonitrile containing 0.2% formic acid. Peptides were finally vacuum dried down. NanoLC-MS/MS protein identification and quantification Samples were resuspended in 20 µL of 10% ACN, 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water. For each run, 1 µL was injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000) (Thermo Scientific,Waltham MA, USA). Peptides were loaded onto a µ-precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm i.d.×5 mm, 5 µm) (Thermo Scientific), and were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (0.075 mm ID, Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 2 µm) (Thermo Scientific). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient 5% to 40% B (120 minutes), 40% to 80% (1 minutes). At 121 minutes, the gradient stayed at 80% for 5 minutes and, at 127 minutes, it returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 20 minutes before the next injection. Two blanks were run between each series to prevent sample carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top-10 acquisition method. Peptides were fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts with maximum injection time set to 60 ms, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with maximum injection time set to 60 ms. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds duration. Three replicates of each sample were analyzed by nanoLC/MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing Following LC-MS/MS acquisition The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.8.3 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the database of Homo sapiens from swissprot 07/2017. To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set an initial mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 aminoacids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 10%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously (Cox J., Mann M., 2008). The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Proteins were quantified according to the MaxQuant label-free algorithm using LFQ intensities [Luber, 2010 #1907; Cox, 2008 #1906]. Match between runs was not allowed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Urine, Cystic fibrosis, Label free, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
SFR Necker, Proteomic Plateform, INSERM, France

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Chiara Guerrera
SFR Necker, Proteomic Plateform, INSERM, France


