### Accession
PXD015426

### Title
Analysis of sectreted proteins from breast cancer cells

### Description
Analysis of sectreted proteins from pure media, LX and Heps breast cancer cells grown in conditioned media. All samples were prepared in biological triplicates.

### Sample Protocol
Cell media were collected and the proteins were precipitated by adding 100 % TCA (1/4, v/v, TCA/sample, Sigma, 250 g mixed with 113.5 ml of water). In brief, after incubation for 10 min at 4 °C samples were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min and the supernatant removed. The protein pellet was washed twice with ice cold acetone followed by centrifugation (10 min at 20,000 g) and dried at room temperature for 10 minutes. Subsequently, proteins were dissolved in 2 M urea, 10mM TCEP, 100 mM Tris, pH=8.5 by shaking at 1400 rpm at 25 °C  in Thermomixer (Eppendorf) followed by twenty cycles of sonication (30 sec on, 30 sec off, Bioruptor, Dianode). Then, proteins were reduced at 37 °C for 1 h and the total protein amount was determined by BCA assay (Thermo Scientific) according the manufacturer’s instructions. The proteins were then alkylated in 15mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at 37 °C. Proteins were digested using sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w, trypsin/protein; Promega, USA) overnight at 37 °C. After digestion, the samples were supplemented with TFA to a final concentration of 1 %. Peptides were cleaned up using iST Cartridges (Phoenix, PreOmics, Martinsried, Germany) following the manufactures instructions. After drying the samples under vacuum, the peptides were re-suspended in 0.1 % aqueous formic acid solution at a concentration of 0.5 mg/ml. 0.5 μg of peptides of each sample were subjected to LC-MS analysis using a dual pressure LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer connected to an electrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) as recently specified (1) and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. Peptide separation was carried out using an EASY nLC-1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 30cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using a linear gradient from 95 % solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 99.9 % water) and 5 % solvent B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid, 19.9 % water) to 10 % solvent B over 5 min to 35 % solvent B over 45min to 50 % B over 10 min to 95% solvent B over 2min and 95% solvent B over 18min at a flow rate of 0.2 μl/min. The data acquisition mode was set to obtain one high resolution MS scan in the FT part of the mass spectrometer at a resolution of 240,000 full width at half maximum (at 400 m/z, MS1) followed by MS/MS (MS2) scans in the linear ion trap of the 20 most intense MS signals. The charged state screening modus was enabled to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions and the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 sec. The ion accumulation time was set to 300 ms (MS1) and 50 ms (MS2). MS1 and MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 1E6 ions and 10,000 ions, respectively. The collision energy was set to 35%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum.

### Data Protocol
The generated raw files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics (Waters), Version 2.0) and analyzed using the default parameter settings. MS/MS-data were exported directly from Progenesis QI in mgf format and searched against a decoy database the forward and reverse sequences of the predicted proteome from homo sapiens including common contaminants like keratins (download date: 5/5/2015, total of 41,158 entries) using MASCOT (version 2.4.1). The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) as variable modification. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Results from the database search were imported into Progenesis QI and the final peptide measurement list containing the peak areas of all identified peptides, respectively, was exported. This list was further processed and statically analyzed using our in-house developed SafeQuant R script (2). The peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% using the number of reverse hits in the dataset.

### Publication Abstract
The persistence of undetectable disseminated tumour cells (DTCs) after primary tumour resection poses a major challenge to effective cancer treatment<sup>1-3</sup>. These enduring dormant DTCs are seeds of future metastases, and the mechanisms that switch them from dormancy to outgrowth require definition. Because cancer dormancy provides a unique therapeutic window for preventing metastatic disease, a comprehensive understanding of the distribution, composition and dynamics of reservoirs of dormant DTCs is imperative. Here we show that different tissue-specific microenvironments restrain or allow the progression of breast cancer in the liver-a frequent site of metastasis<sup>4</sup> that is often associated with a poor prognosis<sup>5</sup>. Using mouse models, we show that there is a selective increase in natural killer (NK) cells in the dormant milieu. Adjuvant interleukin-15-based immunotherapy ensures an abundant pool of NK cells that sustains dormancy through interferon-&#x3b3; signalling, thereby preventing hepatic metastases and prolonging survival. Exit from dormancy follows a marked contraction of the NK cell compartment and the concurrent accumulation of activated hepatic stellate cells (aHSCs). Our proteomics studies on liver co-cultures implicate the aHSC-secreted chemokine CXCL12 in the induction of NK cell quiescence through its cognate receptor CXCR4. CXCL12 expression and aHSC abundance are closely correlated in patients with liver metastases. Our data identify the interplay between NK cells and aHSCs as a master switch of cancer dormancy, and suggest that therapies aimed at normalizing the NK cell pool might succeed in preventing metastatic outgrowth.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Conditioned media, Secretome

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland


