### Accession
PXD022399

### Title
Small-molecule degraders of SUMO1 induce the protein ubiquitination and degradation through CAPRIN1-CUL1-FBXO42 ubiquitin ligase for cancer therapySmall-molecule degraders of SUMO1 induce the protein ubiquitination and degradation through CAPRIN1-CUL1-FBXO42 ubiquitin ligase for cancer therapy

### Description
Targeted protein degradation has been a long sought, but elusive, strategy for discovery of small-molecule degraders that activate E3 ubiquitin ligase-mediated ubiquitination and degradation of targeted proteins in cancer cells. Here, we report a cancer cell-based drug screen in the discovery of small-molecule degraders of SUMO1 that has been an otherwise undruggable protein. Genome-scale CRISPR-CAS9 screen combined with compound pulldown proteomics identified the binding partner CAPRIN1 and the SUMO1 substrate receptor FBXO42 of CUL1 E3 ligase. Upon binding of CAPRIN1, SUMO1 degraders induce CAPRIN1-FBXO42 interaction and recruitment of SUMO1 to the CAPRIN1-CUL1-FBXO42 E3 ligase for SUMO1 ubiquitination and degradation in cancer but not normal cells. SUMO1 degraders exhibit drug-like pharmacokinetics and profound anticancer activity against various cancer models. This cancer cell-based drug screen provides an alternative approach for the discovery of new small-molecule degraders of oncoproteins as a new generation of anticancer drugs.

### Sample Protocol
Magnetic beads that were affinity captured with proteins were first mixed with 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris.HCl (30 μL) to induce denaturation of the proteins. These proteins were next subjected to reduction of the protein Cys-Cys bonds using 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP), and alkylation with 10 mM chloroacetaminde (CAM) to protect the reduced Cys residues from potential subsequent re-coupling. The resulting samples were subsequently diluted with 100 mM Tris.HCl to achieve a final 2 M Urea concentration. Proteins were then subjected to an overnight proteolytic digestion using 0.5 μg equivalent of Mass Spectrometry Grade Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (Promega Corporation, Madison, WI 53711-5399, U.S.A.) to derive peptides. The magnetic beads were next separated on a magnetic stand to separate the supernatant peptide solution which was acidified with formic acid (2 μL) to quench the digestion.

### Data Protocol
Resulting RAW files were analyzed using Proteome Discover 2.2 (ThermoScientific). The MS/MS spectra were searched against in silico tryptic digest of a Homo sapiens (Human) proteins database (FASTA format) downloaded from the UniProt sequence database (v. June 2017) using the SEQUEST HT search engine. In order carry out the search, following specific search parameters were applied to vender provided basic “processing” and “consensus” workflow templates that correspond to Thermo Q-Exactive instruments: Trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme; searched for peptides with a maximum number of 2 missed cleavages; precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm; and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.2 Da. The only static modifications used for the search was, carbamidomethylation on cysteine(C) residues. Dynamic modifications used for the search were oxidation of methionines and acetylation of N-termini. Percolator False Discovery Rate was set to a strict setting of 0.01 and a relaxed setting of 0.05.  Resulting files from Proteome Discover 2.2 based search analyses were then uploaded to ScaffoldTM (2.2) s/w to isolate and visualize the data with 90% peptide probability threshold carrying at least one peptide. Using the tools available in ScaffoldTM (2.2) s/w and spectral counts assigned to each protein identified, Fisher's Exact Test [6] was performed with Benjamini-Hochberg correction [7] to identify/screen out statistically significant enriched proteins in experimental samples compared to the respective control samples.

### Publication Abstract
Discovery of small-molecule degraders that activate ubiquitin ligase&#x2013;mediated ubiquitination and degradation of targeted oncoproteins in cancer cells has been an elusive therapeutic strategy. Here, we report a cancer cell&#x2013;based drug screen of the NCI drug-like compounds library that enabled identification of small-molecule degraders of the small ubiquitin-related modifier 1 (SUMO1). Structure-activity relationship studies of analogs of the hit compound CPD1 led to identification of a lead compound HB007 with improved properties and anticancer potency in vitro and in vivo. A genome-scale CRISPR-Cas9 knockout screen identified the substrate receptor F-box protein 42 (FBXO42) of cullin 1 (CUL1) E3 ubiquitin ligase as required for HB007 activity. Using HB007 pull-down proteomics assays, we pinpointed HB007&#x2019;s binding protein as the cytoplasmic activation/proliferation-associated protein 1 (CAPRIN1). Biolayer interferometry and compound competitive immunoblot assays confirmed the selectivity of HB007&#x2019;s binding to CAPRIN1. When bound to CAPRIN1, HB007 induced the interaction of CAPRIN1 with FBXO42. FBXO42 then recruited SUMO1 to the CAPRIN1-CUL1-FBXO42 ubiquitin ligase complex, where SUMO1 was ubiquitinated in several of human cancer cells. HB007 selectively degraded SUMO1 in patient tumor&#x2013;derived xenografts implanted into mice. Systemic administration of HB007 inhibited the progression of patient-derived brain, breast, colon, and lung cancers in mice and increased survival of the animals. This cancer cell&#x2013;based screening approach enabled discovery of a small-molecule degrader of SUMO1 and may be useful for identifying other small-molecule degraders of oncoproteins.

### Keywords
Fbxo42, Ubiquitination, Crispr-cas9, Sumo1, Cul1 e3 ligase, Hct116, Sumoylation, E3 ubiquitin ligase, Caprin1, Cancer

### Affiliations
Indiana University School of Medicine
Associate Professor of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology,  Director Proteomics Core, Indiana University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Emma Doud

### Lab Head
Dr Amber Mosley
Associate Professor of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology,  Director Proteomics Core, Indiana University School of Medicine


