### Accession
PXD019930

### Title
Glycosylated cyclophellitol-derived activity-based probes and inhibitors for cellulases

### Description
Cellulases and related β-1,4-glucanases are essential components of lignocellulose-degrading enzyme mixtures. The detection of β-1,4-glucanase activity typically relies on monitoring the breakdown of purified lignocellulose-derived substrates or synthetic chromogenic substrates, limiting the activities which can be detected and complicating the tracing of activity back to specific components within complex enzyme mixtures. As a tool for the rapid detection and identification of β-1,4-glucanases, a series of glycosylated cyclophellitol inhibitors mimicking β-1,4-glucan oligosaccharides have been synthesised. These compounds are highly efficient inhibitors of HiCel7B, a well-known GH7 endo-β-1,4-glucanase. An elaborated activity-based probe facilitated the direct detection of β-1,4-glucanases within a complex fungal secretome without any detectable cross-reactivity with β-D-glucosidases. These probes and inhibitors add valuable new capacity to the growing toolbox of cyclophellitol-derived probes for the activity-based profiling of biomass-degrading enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
5 aliquots of 1 mL of xylan-grown Aspergillus niger secretome were thawed from -80°C, centrifuged at 12000xg for 15 min and combined. 0.5 mL of this was then subsampled into 9 separate Lo-Bind 2.0 mL tubes. To three tubes was added 55 μL of 1 mM compound 1 in water, and to the rest 55 μL of diH2O. All samples were incubated for 1 hour at 37°C prior to the addition of 60 μL of compound 15 in 10% DMSO to the samples treated with 1 and three of the samples not treated with 1. 10% DMSO was added to the remaining three samples. All of the samples were incubated for a further 2 hours at 37°C. Proteins were denatured by heating to 95°C for 5 minutes following the addition of 70 μL of 10x denaturing buffer (500 mM Na-HEPES, pH 7.5, 50 mM DTT, 5% SDS). Once cooled to RT, thiols were alkylated by the addition of 70 μL of 0.25 M iodoacetamide and incubation in the dark for 30 minutes. Samples were transferred to 5 mL Eppendorf tubes and proteins were precipitated by the addition of 3.2 mL of chilled acetone followed by incubation at -20°C for 1 hour. Proteins were collected by centrifugation (14000xg for 1 minute) and the supernatant was discarded. The pellet was washed with 3 mL of cold acetone and air-dried. The pellet was then resuspended in 50 μL of 8 M urea, 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.2 and diluted with 150 μL of 0.05% SDS in (PBS). This was shaken overnight at 20°C to dissolve. The samples were then diluted with a further 200 μL of 0.05% SDS in PBS and centrifuged to collect any insoluble residue. The supernatant was transferred to a 2 mL Eppendorf tube and mixed with 25 μL of Pierce Avidin Agarose beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) which had been washed twice with PBS. Following 3 hours of mixing by inversion, beads were collected by centrifugation for 2 minutes at 2500xg. The supernatant was removed and the beads were washed with 500 μL of 0.5% SDS in PBS once, 500 μL of 2% SDS at 65°C for 10 minutes once, 500 μL of 0.5% SDS in PBS again, then 500 μL of 2 M urea followed by two washes with 500 μL of ultrapure water. The beads were finally resuspended in 20 μL of on-bead digestion buffer and trypsinisation, StageTip desalting, LC-MS/MS data acquisition, and data processing were performed as described previously. 27

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified by searching against a database of A. niger NRRL3 proteins28 supplemented with streptavidin, avidin, yeast enolase and trypsin. The combined search results were filtered for a minimum of two unique peptides with a false-discovery rate of 4%. Label-free quantification were performed using Progenesis QI (Waters). Following chromatographic alignment, peaks were integrated and assigned. Protein abundance was estimated using the integrated intensity of non-conflicting peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Cellulases and related &#x3b2;-1,4-glucanases are essential components of lignocellulose-degrading enzyme mixtures. The detection of &#x3b2;-1,4-glucanase activity typically relies on monitoring the breakdown of purified lignocellulose-derived substrates or synthetic chromogenic substrates, limiting the activities which can be detected and complicating the tracing of activity back to specific components within complex enzyme mixtures. As a tool for the rapid detection and identification of &#x3b2;-1,4-glucanases, a series of glycosylated cyclophellitol inhibitors mimicking &#x3b2;-1,4-glucan oligosaccharides have been synthesised. These compounds are highly efficient inhibitors of HiCel7B, a well-known GH7 <i>endo</i>-&#x3b2;-1,4-glucanase. An elaborated activity-based probe facilitated the direct detection and identification of &#x3b2;-1,4-glucanases within a complex fungal secretome without any detectable cross-reactivity with &#x3b2;-d-glucosidases. These probes and inhibitors add valuable new capacity to the growing toolbox of cyclophellitol-derived probes for the activity-based profiling of biomass-degrading enzymes.

### Keywords
Cellulases, Activity-based probe, Cyclophellitol, Abpp

### Affiliations
Leiden Institute for Chemistry
Bio-organic chemistry, LIC, Leiden University, Einsteinweg 55, 2333CC, Leiden, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Bogdan Florea

### Lab Head
Dr Bogdan I Florea
Bio-organic chemistry, LIC, Leiden University, Einsteinweg 55, 2333CC, Leiden, The Netherlands


