### Accession
PXD006057

### Title
Inference and quantification of peptidoforms in large sample cohorts by SWATH-MS: 14-3-3 data set

### Description
This data set represent an experiment assessing protein-protein interaction dynamics of the 14-3-3 with a focus on phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
The data of the original publication was reanalyzed (Collins et al., PMID: 24162925).

### Data Protocol
Assay library generation using DDA data: All raw data was analyzed in a combined setting with MaxQuant (1.5.6.5) using primarily the default parameters: The non-redundant reviewed human protein FASTA was obtained from the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (2016-12-19) and appended with iRT peptide sequences and searched with static C (Carbamidomethyl), variable M (Oxidation) and variable STY (Phospho) modifications. “Match-between-runs” and the MaxLFQ algorithm were enabled. All specific parameters are provided in the file mqpar.xml in the ProteomeXchange repository.  To derive peptide query parameters, we selected the best scoring spectrum per peptidoform as reported by Andromeda in the file “msms.txt”. RT calibration was conducted using the spiked-in iRT-kit per run. OpenSwathAssayGenerator and OpenSwathDecoyGenerator (OpenMS 2.1) were run as described above. For all other analyses, we used the reported confidence values and intensities from the file “Phospho (STY)Sites.txt”.  OpenSWATH / PyProphet: OpenSwathWorkflow (OpenMS 2.1) was run with the following parameters -min_upper_edge_dist 1 - mz_extraction_window 0.05 -rt_extraction_window 600 - extra_rt_extraction_window 100 -min_rsq 0.95 -min_coverage 0.6 - use_ms1_traces -enable_uis_scoring -Scoring:uis_threshold_peak_area 0 - Scoring:uis_threshold_sn -1 -Scoring: stop_report_after_feature 5 -tr_irt hroest_DIA_iRT.TraML.   The following subset of scores was used on MS2-level: xx_swath_prelim_score library_corr yseries_score xcorr_coelution_weighted massdev_score norm_rt_score library_rmsd bseries_score intensity_score xcorr_coelution log_sn_score isotope_overlap_score massdev_score_weighted xcorr_shape_weighted isotope_correlation_score xcorr_shape. All MS1 and UIS scores were used for pyprophet. pyprophet was run individually on all files with the following parameters: --final_statistics.emp_p --qvality.enable --qvality.generalized -- ms1_scoring.enable --uis_scoring.enable --semi_supervised_learner.num_iter=20 --xeval.num_iter=20 --ignore.invalid_score_columns. TRIC was run with the following parameters: feature_alignment.py: --file_format openswath --fdr_cutoff 0.01 --max_fdr_quality 0.2 --mst:useRTCorrection True --mst:Stdev_multiplier 3.0 --method LocalMST  --max_rt_diff 30 --alignment_score 0.0001 --frac_selected 0 --realign_method lowess_cython --disable_isotopic_grouping

### Publication Abstract
Consistent detection and quantification of protein post-translational modifications (PTMs) across sample cohorts is a prerequisite for functional analysis of biological processes. Data-independent acquisition (DIA) is a bottom-up mass spectrometry approach that provides complete information on precursor and fragment ions. However, owing to the convoluted structure of DIA data sets, confident, systematic identification and quantification of peptidoforms has remained challenging. Here, we present inference of peptidoforms (IPF), a fully automated algorithm that uses spectral libraries to query, validate and quantify peptidoforms in DIA data sets. The method was developed on data acquired by the DIA method SWATH-MS and benchmarked using a synthetic phosphopeptide reference data set and phosphopeptide-enriched samples. IPF reduced false site-localization by more than sevenfold compared with previous approaches, while recovering 85.4% of the true signals. Using IPF, we quantified peptidoforms in DIA data acquired from &gt;200 samples of blood plasma of a human twin cohort and assessed the contribution of heritable, environmental and longitudinal effects on their PTMs.

### Keywords
14-3-3, Human, Ap-ms, Kinase, Benchmark, Phosphopeptides, Ipf, Ap-swath, Openswath

### Affiliations
Columbia University
ETH Zurich Prof. Dr. Ruedi Aebersold Institute of Molecular Systems Biology Head of Department of Biology HPT E 78 Auguste-Piccard-Hof 1 CH-8093 Zurich Switzerland

### Submitter
George Rosenberger

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
ETH Zurich Prof. Dr. Ruedi Aebersold Institute of Molecular Systems Biology Head of Department of Biology HPT E 78 Auguste-Piccard-Hof 1 CH-8093 Zurich Switzerland


