### Accession
PXD004151

### Title
C-terminal FLNc in vivo kinase assay

### Description
The Z-disc is a protein-rich structure critically important for myofibril development and integrity. Since a role of the Z-disc for signal integration and transduction was recently suggested, its precise phosphorylation landscape warranted in-depth analysis. We therefore established a site-resolved protein phosphorylation map of the Z-disc in skeletal myocytes and found that it is a phosphorylation hotspot in living cells, underscoring its functions in signalling and disease-related processes. In an exemplary fashion, we analysed the actin-binding multi-adaptor protein filamin C (FLNc), which is essential for Z-disc assembly and maintenance, and found that PKC phosphorylation at distinct serine residues in its hinge 2 region prevents its cleavage at an adjacent tyrosine residue by calpain 1. With this quantitative in vivo kinase assay, we show that the phosphorylation site S2625 in mouse FLNc is significantly down-regulated upon treatment of C2C12 myotubes with the PKCα inhibitor Gö6976.

### Sample Protocol
Light, medium and heavy SILAC labelling of C2C12 cells was performed with 13C6 L-arginine and 12C6 L-lysine, 12C6 L-arginine and D4 L-lysine and 13C615N4 L-arginine and 13C615N2 L-lysine, respectively. Labelled myoblasts were seeded into six well plates and differentiation was induced by reduction of the dialyzed FCS content to 2% in the absence of sodium pyruvate. Cells were differentiated for at least 4d. Prior to signalling experiments, cells were starved 16 h overnight and sarcomere formation was improved by electrical pulse stimulation. Tryptic digests were seperated via high-pH reversed phase chromatography and 2 fractions per biological replicate containing the FLNc peptide GASYSSIPK were futher enriched for phosphorylated isoform by titanium dioxide enrichment. Treatment of the biological replicates was performed as follows: experiment 1: light - control; medium - PMA; heavy - Gö6976; experiment 2: light - Gö6976; medium - control; heavy - PMA, experiment 3: light - PMA; medium - Gö6976; heavy - control

### Data Protocol
Andromeda integrated in MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 (Cox et al, 2011) was used to search peak list against the UniProt ProteomeSet mouse isoform database(release 02.01.2016, 58,238 protein entries).Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Search parameters were as follows: proteolytic enzyme: trypsin, max. number of missed cleavages: 2, and variable modifications: methionine oxidation and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and multiplicity was set to three with Arg0, Lys0, Arg8, Lys4, Arg10, Lys6. The resulting MaxQuant msms file was used for manual spectra quantification with Skyline (https://panoramaweb.org/labkey/invivo_mFLNc.url).

### Publication Abstract
The Z-disc is a protein-rich structure critically important for the development and integrity of myofibrils, which are the contractile organelles of cross-striated muscle cells. We here used mouse C2C12 myoblast, which were differentiated into myotubes, followed by electrical pulse stimulation (EPS) to generate contracting myotubes comprising mature Z-discs. Using a quantitative proteomics approach, we found significant changes in the relative abundance of 387 proteins in myoblasts <i>versus</i> differentiated myotubes, reflecting the drastic phenotypic conversion of these cells during myogenesis. Interestingly, EPS of differentiated myotubes to induce Z-disc assembly and maturation resulted in increased levels of proteins involved in ATP synthesis, presumably to fulfill the higher energy demand of contracting myotubes. Because an important role of the Z-disc for signal integration and transduction was recently suggested, its precise phosphorylation landscape further warranted in-depth analysis. We therefore established, by global phosphoproteomics of EPS-treated contracting myotubes, a comprehensive site-resolved protein phosphorylation map of the Z-disc and found that it is a phosphorylation hotspot in skeletal myocytes, underscoring its functions in signaling and disease-related processes. In an illustrative fashion, we analyzed the actin-binding multiadaptor protein filamin C (FLNc), which is essential for Z-disc assembly and maintenance, and found that PKC&#x3b1; phosphorylation at distinct serine residues in its hinge 2 region prevents its cleavage at an adjacent tyrosine residue by calpain 1. Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching experiments indicated that this phosphorylation modulates FLNc dynamics. Moreover, FLNc lacking the cleaved Ig-like domain 24 exhibited remarkably fast kinetics and exceedingly high mobility. Our data set provides research community resource for further identification of kinase-mediated changes in myofibrillar protein interactions, kinetics, and mobility that will greatly advance our understanding of Z-disc dynamics and signaling.

### Keywords
Flnc pkc gö6976

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany


### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg


