### Accession
PXD001464

### Title
Multiphasic chip performance characterization using human thyroid cancer cell line SW1736 and human plasma

### Description
Development of an online peptide fractionation system comprising a multiphasic LC chip that integrates reversed phase and strong cation exchange chromatography upstream of the MS based on the multi-dimensional protein identification technology (mudPIT). Chips were assessed in terms of chromatographic as well as protein and peptide identification reproducibility using five-step fractionation of 0, 2, 50, 500 and 1500 mM ammonium acetate. Further, a comparison of multiphase LC chip protein and peptide identification versus conventional reversed phase LC-MSMS was performed.

### Sample Protocol
Cultured cells were lysed and proteins denatured in 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) buffer (pH 7.8) for 5 min at 99 °C. After lysis nuclease was added and incubated for 30 min at room temperature to degrade DNA (1:10,000 enzyme/DNA). Human plasma proteins (non-immunodepleted) were denatured in 100 mM TEAB and 1% SDC for 5 min at 95 °C. In both, the cell lines and the plasma samples, cysteine residues were reduced in presence of 10 mM dithiothreitol at 60 °C and alkylated with 10 mM iodocetamide at room temperature in the dark. Trypsin was added in a 1:50 ration and proteins were enzymatically degraded overnight at 37 °C. By adding 1 µL formic acid the digest was quenched and the SDC precipitated and removed by centrifugation (14.000 rpm). Samples were lyophilized and reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS datasets were searched against the human SwissProt database (release April 2014) using the Mascot 2.4 algorithm (Matrix Sciences) after mascot generic file (mgf) generation with ProteinPilotTM software 4.2. Precursor mass accuracy was set to 50 ppm, fragment tolerance to 0.1 Da for charge stages 2+ – 4+ allowing up to 3 missed cleavages of fully tryptic peptides. Carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification. For MS/MS data from cell lysates protein N-termini acetylation, N-terminal formylation, Gln to PyroGlu of N-terminal Gln, phosphorylation and methionine oxidation were allowed as variable modifications. For plasma proteins protein N-termini acetylation, N-terminal formylation, Gln to PyroGlu of N-terminal Gln, and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Peptides were consider as present if peptide FDR < 1% (decoy database search), individual ion score > minimal score suggested by algorithm, spectrum hit rank 1 and dendrogram cut-off of 20. Spectral libraries for SWATH-MS quantitation were generated with ProteinPilotTM software 4.2 using the ParagonTM algorithm (AB SCIEX) in the thorough ID mode excluding biological modifications but allowing chemical modifications. MS/MS data were searched against the human SwissProt database (release March 2012) with carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification for cysteine residues. An Unused Score cut-off was set to 2.0 (99% confidence) and the FDR analysis was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Comprehensive proteomic profiling of biological specimens usually requires multidimensional chromatographic peptide fractionation prior to mass spectrometry. However, this approach can suffer from poor reproducibility because of the lack of standardization and automation of the entire workflow, thus compromising performance of quantitative proteomic investigations. To address these variables we developed an online peptide fractionation system comprising a multiphasic liquid chromatography (LC) chip that integrates reversed phase and strong cation exchange chromatography upstream of the mass spectrometer (MS). We showed superiority of this system for standardizing discovery and targeted proteomic workflows using cancer cell lysates and nondepleted human plasma. Five-step multiphase chip LC MS/MS acquisition showed clear advantages over analyses of unfractionated samples by identifying more peptides, consuming less sample and often improving the lower limits of quantitation, all in highly reproducible, automated, online configuration. We further showed that multiphase chip LC fractionation provided a facile means to detect many N- and C-terminal peptides (including acetylated N terminus) that are challenging to identify in complex tryptic peptide matrices because of less favorable ionization characteristics. Given as much as 95% of peptides were detected in only a single salt fraction from cell lysates we exploited this high reproducibility and coupled it with multiple reaction monitoring on a high-resolution MS instrument (MRM-HR). This approach increased target analyte peak area and improved lower limits of quantitation without negatively influencing variance or bias. Further, we showed a strategy to use multiphase LC chip fractionation LC-MS/MS for ion library generation to integrate with SWATH(TM) data-independent acquisition quantitative workflows. All MS data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001464.

### Keywords
Human plasma, Chip lc-msms, Thyroid cancer cell line, Multiphasic lc chip separation

### Affiliations
Macquarie University Australian Proteome Analysis Facility (APAF) Sydney, Australia
Australian Proteome Analysis Facility (APAF)

### Submitter
Christoph Krisp

### Lab Head
Dr Assoc Prof Mark P Molloy
Macquarie University Australian Proteome Analysis Facility (APAF) Sydney, Australia


