### Accession
PXD026528

### Title
A conservative point mutation in a dynamic antigen-binding loop of human immunoglobulin λ6 light chain promotes pathologic amyloid formation

### Description
Immunoglobulin light chain (LC) amyloidosis (AL) is a life-threatening human disease wherein free monoclonal LCs deposit in vital organs. To determine what makes some LCs amyloidogenic, we explored patient-based amyloidogenic and non-amyloidogenic recombinant LCs from the λ6 subtype prevalent in AL. Hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, structural stability, proteolysis, and amyloid growth studies revealed that the antigen-binding CDR1 loop is the least protected part in the variable domain of λ6 LC, particularly in the AL variant. N32T substitution in CRD1 is identified as a driver of amyloid formation. Substitution N32T increased the amyloidogenic propensity of CDR1 loop, decreased its protection in the native structure, and accelerated amyloid growth in the context of other AL substitutions. The destabilizing effects of N32T propagated across the molecule increasing its dynamics in regions ~30Å away from the substitution site. Such striking long-range effects of a conservative point substitution in a dynamic surface loop may be relevant to Ig function. Comparison of patient-derived and engineered proteins showed that N32T interactions with other substitution sites must contribute to amyloidosis. The results suggest that CDR1 is critical in amyloid formation by other λ6 LCs.

### Sample Protocol
Deuterium labeling:  λ6 IgG light-chains (LCs) were freshly diluted to 25 μM in biological replicates from the stock concentrations in 10 mM sodium phosphate, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.5, H2O.  Deuterium labeling was initiated with an 18-fold dilution (25.2 μL) of D2O labeling buffer (10 mM sodium phosphate, 150 mM NaCl, pD 7.5, 99.9% D2O) to 1.4 μL of each 25 μM protein solution.  After each labeling time (10 seconds, 1 minute, 10 minutes, 1 hour, 4 hours) at 20 °C, the labeling reaction was quenched with the addition of 26.6 μL of ice-cold quenching buffer (200 mM sodium phosphate, 4 M Gdn·HCl. 0.72 M TCEP, pH 2.37, H2O) and analyzed immediately by LC/MS.  The maximally deuterated versions of each protein that were used for back-exchange correction were prepared as follows. Protein solutions (15 μL at 25 μM) were lyophilized, resuspended in 7 M GdnHCl containing 50 mM DTT (15 μL), and heated at 90 °C for 5 min. After cooling to 20 °C, 25.2 μL of labeling buffer (as above) was added to 1.4 μL of cooled, denatured protein solution, and the exchange reaction was allowed to proceed at 50 °C for 10 min.  The now maximally deuterated protein samples were then cooled to 0 °C, exchange quenched with the addition of 26.6 μL of ice-cold quenching buffer (as above) and analyzed immediately by LC/MS.   LC/MS:  All LC steps were performed with a Waters HDX system containing an HDX unit and two Acquity M-class UPLC pumps.  Deuterated and control samples were digested online in the HDX cooling unit, where the digestion chamber was held at 15 °C, using an AffiPro Pepsin column (AffiPro, AP-PC-004, 2.1 mm × 20 mm). Peptides were trapped and desalted on a VanGuard Pre-Column trap [2.1 mm × 5 mm, ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 1.7 μm, (Waters, 186002346)] for 3 minutes at 100 μL/min.  Peptides were then eluted from the trap using a 5%–35% gradient of acetonitrile over 6 minutes at a flow rate of 100 μL/min, and separated using an ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3, 1.8 μm, 1.0 mm × 50 mm column (Waters, 186003535).  The main cooling chamber of the Waters HDX unit, which housed all the chromatographic elements, was held at 0.0 ± 0.1 °C for the entire time of the measurements.  The back pressure averaged ~12,950 psi at 0 °C and 5% acetonitrile 95% water, 0.1% formic acid.  To eliminate peptide carryover, a wash solution [1.5 M guanidinium chloride, 0.8% formic acid and 4% acetonitrile] was injected over the Pepsin column during each analytical run.  Mass spectra were acquired using a Waters Synapt G2-Si HDMSE mass spectrometer in ion mobility mode.  The mass spectrometer was calibrated with direct infusion of a solution of glu-fibrinopeptide (Sigma, F3261) at 200 femtomole/μL at a flow rate of 5 μL/min prior to data collection.  A conventional electrospray source was used, and the instrument was scanned over the range 50 to 2000 m/z.  The instrument configuration was: capillary voltage 3.2 kV, trap collision energy at 4 V, sampling cone at 40 V, source temperature of 80 °C, and desolvation temperature of 175 °C.  All experiments were done under identical experimental conditions.  The error of determining the deuterium levels in peptides was ± 0.20 Da in this experimental setup based on analysis of deuterated peptide standards.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using PLGS 3.0.1 (Waters, 720001408EN) using replicates of undeuterated control samples.  Raw MS data were imported into DynamX 3.0 (Waters, 720005145EN) and filtered with minimum consecutive products of 1 and minimum number of products per amino acid of 0.20. Those peptides meeting the filtering criteria were further processed automatically by DynamX followed by manual inspection of all spectra and data processing.  The amount of deuterium in each peptide was determined by subtracting the centroid mass of the undeuterated form of each peptide from the deuterated form, at each time point, for each condition.  Uptake graphs directly from DynamX show the deuteration time points and the maxD (indicated at the far right of the X-axis) versus the relative deuterium level (Da).  Correction for back exchange to report percent deuteration (%D), as described by Zhang & Smith 1993, Protein Sci. 2(4):522-531, was done according to the equation %Dlevel = [(mt – m0) / (mmaxD – m0)], where mt is the observed peptide centroid mass at a given labeling time-point t, m0 is the undeuterated peptide centroid mass, and mmaxD is the maximally deuterated peptide centroid mass.  These percent deuteration values were used to generate skyline plots, heat maps, and difference heat maps.  All data plotted on tertiary structures was back-exchange corrected.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Light chain amyloidosis; protein conformation; hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry; propagation of mutational effects; cdr loops

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University
Northeastern University

### Submitter
John R. Engen

### Lab Head
Dr John R. Engen
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University


