### Accession
PXD032742

### Title
Developmental disruption to the cortical transcriptome and synaptosome in a model of SETD1A loss-of-function

### Description
Large-scale genomic studies of schizophrenia implicate genes involved in the epigenetic regulation of transcription by histone methylation and genes encoding components of the synapse. However, the interactions between these pathways in conferring risk to psychiatric illness are unknown. Loss-of-function (LoF) mutations in the gene encoding histone methyltransferase, SETD1A, confer substantial risk to schizophrenia. Among several roles, SETD1A is thought to be involved in the development and function of neuronal circuits. Here, we employed a multi-omics approach to study the effects of heterozygous Setd1a LoF on gene expression and synaptic composition in mouse cortex across five developmental timepoints from embryonic day 14 to postnatal day 70. Using RNA sequencing, we observed that Setd1a LoF resulted in the consistent downregulation of genes enriched for mitochondrial pathways. This effect extended to the synaptosome, in which we found age-specific disruption to both mitochondrial and synaptic proteins. Using large-scale patient genomics data, we observed no enrichment for genetic association with schizophrenia within differentially expressed transcripts or proteins, suggesting they derive from a distinct mechanism of risk from that implicated by genomic studies. This study highlights biological pathways through which SETD1A loss-of-function may confer risk to schizophrenia. Further work is required to determine whether the effects observed in this model reflect human pathology.

### Sample Protocol
At embryonic timepoints, pregnant dams were killed and frontal brain regions immediately dissected from embryos. At postnatal timepoints, littermates were killed and frontal cortex dissected. Brain tissue was snap frozen before storage at -80°C until processing. Bilateral frontal cortices were homogenised using a Dounce homogenizer in Synaptic Protein Extraction Reagent (SynPER, Thermofisher). A fraction of the homogenised sample was taken forward for RNA extraction and the remaining used for synaptosome extraction. Synaptosome isolation Synaptosomes were isolated from homogenised cortical tissue using the SynPER protocol, as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, following homogenisation, samples were centrifuged at 1200g for 10 min (4°C) and the pellet discarded. The supernatant was centrifuged again at 15,000g for 20 minutes (4°C) to generate the synaptosome pellet. We resuspended the pellet in 2% SDS, 50 mM Tris pH 7.4 and heated at 70°C for 15 min to extract the protein. Samples were clarified by centrifugation at 20,000g for 10 min.  Quantitative mass spectrometry analysis 50 ug of synaptosome samples were solubilised with 5% SDS, 100 mM TEAB pH 8 and reduced using 10 mM TCEP with heating at 70°C for 15 minutes. Samples were alkylated with 20 mM Iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at 37°C. Protein was precipitated in solution, trapped and washed on S-trap micro spin columns (ProtiFi, LLC) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein was digested using 5 μg trypsin sequence grade (Pierce) at 47°C for 1 hour and 37°C for 1 hour. Eluted peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 0.5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were analysed using nanoflow LC‐MS/MS using an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher) hybrid mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray source, coupled to an Ultimate RSLCnano LC System (Dionex). Peptides were desalted online using a nano trap column, 75 μm I.D.X 20mm (Thermo Fisher) and then separated using a 120‐min gradient from 5 to 35% buffer B (0.5% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) on an EASY‐Spray column, 50 cm × 50 μm ID, PepMap C18, 2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size (Thermo Fisher). The Orbitrap Elite was operated with a cycle of one MS (in the Orbitrap) acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400, with the top 20 most abundant multiply charged (2+ and higher) ions in a given chromatographic window subjected to MS/MS fragmentation in the linear ion trap. An FTMS target value of 1e6 and an ion trap MSn target value of 1e4 were used with the lock mass (445.120025) enabled. Maximum FTMS scan accumulation time of 500 ms and maximum ion trap MSn scan accumulation time of 100 ms were used. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat duration of 45 s with an exclusion list of 500 and an exclusion duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against a mouse UniProt reference proteome (downloaded May 2020) using the following search parameters: digestion set to Trypsin/P, methionine oxidation and N‐terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, match between runs enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and a 20‐min alignment time window, label‐free quantification (LFQ)  was enabled with a minimum ratio count of 2, minimum number of neighbours of 3 and an average number of neighbours of 6. A protein FDR of 0.01 and a peptide FDR of 0.01 were used for identification level cut‐offs based on a decoy database searching strategy.

### Publication Abstract
Large-scale genomic studies of schizophrenia implicate genes involved in the epigenetic regulation of transcription by histone methylation and genes encoding components of the synapse. However, the interactions between these pathways in conferring risk to psychiatric illness are unknown. Loss-of-function (LoF) mutations in the gene encoding histone methyltransferase, SETD1A, confer substantial risk to schizophrenia. Among several roles, SETD1A is thought to be involved in the development and function of neuronal circuits. Here, we employed a multi-omics approach to study the effects of heterozygous Setd1a LoF on gene expression and synaptic composition in mouse cortex across five developmental timepoints from embryonic day 14 to postnatal day 70. Using RNA sequencing, we observed that Setd1a LoF resulted in the consistent downregulation of genes enriched for mitochondrial pathways. This effect extended to the synaptosome, in which we found age-specific disruption to both mitochondrial and synaptic proteins. Using large-scale patient genomics data, we observed no enrichment for genetic association with schizophrenia within differentially expressed transcripts or proteins, suggesting they derive from a distinct mechanism of risk from that implicated by genomic studies. This study highlights biological pathways through which SETD1A LOF may confer risk to schizophrenia. Further work is required to determine whether the effects observed in this model reflect human pathology.

### Keywords
Synaptosome, Setd1a, Schizophrenia, Development, Neuronal

### Affiliations
School of Biosciences University of Sheffield Sheffield, S10 2TN United Kingdom
University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Mark Collins

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Collins
School of Biosciences University of Sheffield Sheffield, S10 2TN United Kingdom


