### Accession
PXD010556

### Title
grape berry vacuole proteomic -  Quantitative Proteome Analysis Reveals Changes in the Protein Landscape During Grape Berry Development With a Focus on Vacuolar Transport Proteins

### Description
The vacuole occupies a large portion of plant cell volume, it is especially true to fruit tissues. Berry flesh cell vacuole serves as storage organelle for water, sugars, acids, secondary metabolites and others, which largely determining berry quality (Fontes et al., 2011a, b; Shiratake and Martinoia, 2007, Conde et al., 2006). However, the molecular basis of these compartmentation processes is still poorly understood. As in many species, the major bottle neck to study these aspects in grapevine is to obtain highly purified vacuoles with a good yield (Fontes et al., 2010). Up to date, several vacuole or tonoplast proteome researches were applied on a few plants mainly on Arabidopsis thaliana, vacuoles or tonoplast were derived from mesophyll cells (Carter et al., 2004, Endler et al., 2006, Schulze, et al., 2012) or cell culture (Jaquinod et al 2006, Shimaoka et al 2004), cauliflower buds (Schmidt et al., 2007) and sugar beet taproots (Jung et al., 2015). Though the grape berry protoplasts and intact vacuoles were successfully isolated from Cabernet Sauvignon berry suspension-cultured cells (Fontes et al., 2010), the vacuoles isolated from grape berry or different development and ripening stages of grape berry mesocarp tissues were not achieved.

### Sample Protocol
vacuoles were successfully isolated from protoplasts derived from Cabernet Sauvignon grape berry mesocarp tissue at five different development and ripening stages, vacuolar and tonoplast proteins were then subjected to a label-free quantitation proteome to construct a reference proteome map of the berry vacuole and to reveal proteomic changes along the development and ripening processes.

### Data Protocol
Tryptic peptide mixtures were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using Nano HPLC and Thermo fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific, http://www.thermoscientific.com/) as the mass analyzer. Resolve the components obtained by high pH reverse phase separation with 20 μl of 2% methanol and 0.1% formic acid. Centrifuge with 12,000rpm for 10min, take supernatant for loading. Load 10 μl supernatant with sandwich method. Loading Pump flow rate 350nl/min, 15min. Separation flow rate 350nl/min, a 95 min gradient elution program was used. Mobile phase A: 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water, B: 0.1% FA in acetonitrile. EASY-Spray source was performed on a Thermo Fusion high resolution mass spectrometer. Source parameters: spray voltage: 2.1 KV, capillary temperature: 250 °C. Full scan resolution: 70,000FWHM, full scan mass range: 350-1800m/z, MSMS scan resolution: 17,500 FWHM.

### Publication Abstract
The vacuole plays a central role in fruit growth and quality formation, yet its proteomic landscape is largely unknown. In the present study, a protocol for isolating intact vacuoles from grape flesh tissue was successfully established. Quantitative proteome analysis identified 2533 proteins from five sampling dates along Cabernet Sauvignon berry development from stage I to III; among them, 1443 proteins were identified on all five sampling dates in at least two biological replicates per sample and were designated core proteome, and 1820 were recruited as differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) by sequential pairwise comparisons using arbitrary fold change of &gt;1.5 and <i>P</i> &lt; 0.05. Metabolism consistently constituted the largest category of identified proteins for both core proteome and DAPs, together with a consistently high proportion of protein-fate category proteins, indicating that the classic lytic functions of vegetative cell vacuoles are maintained throughout berry development; accumulation of metabolites involved in high sugar and other berry qualities in the late developmental stage added to the conventional lytic role of the flesh cell vacuoles. Overall increases in abundance of the DAPs were seen in the transporter proteins, membrane fusion/vesicle trafficking, and protein-fate categories, and decreased abundance was seen for DAPs in the stress, energy and cytoskeleton categories as berry development progressed. A very pronounced proteomic change was revealed between late stage I and mid stage II, with 915 increased and 114 decreased DAPs, demonstrating a significant surge of the vacuolar proteome underlying the rather static phenotypical and physiological phase. We identified 161 transport proteins with differential abundance, including proton pumps, aquaporins, sugar transporters, ATP-binding cassette transporters and ion transport proteins, together with organic compound transport proteins, the highest number and variety of berry tonoplast transporters found in grape proteome efforts to date. We further found a pre-positive increment of 96 transport proteins from the middle of stage II, before the berry undergoes its dramatic physiological changes at and following v&#xe9;raison. Our results are the first to describe the proteome of a vacuole-enriched preparation, toward understanding the functions of the largest compartment in berry cells during grape growth and ripening.

### Keywords
Ripening, Grape, Vacuole

### Affiliations
College of Horticulture, China Agricultural University, China
China Agricultural University

### Submitter
kuang liuqing

### Lab Head
Dr Ma hui qin
College of Horticulture, China Agricultural University, China


