### Accession
PXD011646

### Title
Proteomics of Campylobacter glycosylation

### Description
N-linked glycosylation is an essential virulence determinant in Campylobacter jejuni, the major causative agent of gastroenteritis in the developed world. Glycosylation is encoded by the pgl gene cluster which encodes for the biosynthesis and attachment of a conserved heptasaccharide glycan to proteins in the C. jejuni periplasm. Over 80 membrane-associated proteins have been identified, however the functional role played by glycan attachment is almost completely unknown. We used quantitative proteomics by label-based and targeted strategies to examine glycosylation negative C. jejuni in comparison to wild-type. These technical approaches were considered as ‘discovery’ (label-based) and ‘validation’ data sets in our subsequent analysis. Inclusion of a glycosylation restored strain enabled us to further exploit the proteomics data to exclude non-specific protein abundance changes that could be considered as off-target effects. These data have provided a reference set of changes associated with protein N-glycosylation that could subsequently be tested by phenotypic analysis to determine the role of this modification in Campylobacter biology.

### Sample Protocol
All MS experiments were performed on separate biological triplicates. Proteins were extracted and digested with trypsin. In label-based experiments, peptides were labelled with TMT (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples labelled by TMT were then combined and desalted using HLB cartridges. All peptide samples were separated offline by HILIC for fractionation. HILIC fractions were then separated and analysed by RPLC-MS/MS using an Easy 1200 LC coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer. For the validation cohort, DIA-SWATH MS; both libraries and SWATH were performed on an Ekspert 425 nanoLC coupled to a TripleTOF® 6600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX).

### Data Protocol
Data files from TMT experiments were processed in ProteinDiscoverer (v. 2.2) and searched against UniProt C. jejuni NCTC11168 database UniProt (UP000000799; organism ID 192222; release May 24, 2018 last modification; 1623 proteins) with the SequestHT algorithm. Search parameters were static modifications; carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications; oxidation (M), TMT-6plex (peptide N-term, K) and using precursor and fragment ion tolerances of 20 ppm. Peptide level false discovery rate (FDR) were determined using Percolator (v. 2.08.01). Rank 1 peptide spectral matches (PSMs) corresponding to a 1% FDR were then exported, and reporter intensities normalized internally to total reporter ion signals across all channels. Peptides with ambiguous protein assignments were removed, as were peptides containing known N-glycosylation sites. Reporter signals for remaining PSMs were summed to find total reporter signals for identified proteins. For proteins with a minimum of 2 unique identified peptides, values were imported into Perseus (v. 1.6.1.1) for statistical analysis. SWATH library data files were processed in Protein Pilot (v. 5.0), searched against the UniProt C. jejuni NCTC11168 proteome (as above) using the Paragon algorithm. The group file was then imported into Peakview (v. 2.2.0.11391) using a total protein number corresponding to a global protein level FDR of 1%. SWATH files were processed against the resulting library using a peptide confidence threshold of 95%, 1% FDR and an extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) width of 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Campylobacter jejuni</i> is a major gastrointestinal pathogen generally acquired <i>via</i> consumption of poorly prepared poultry. <i>N</i>-linked protein glycosylation encoded by the <i>pgl</i> gene cluster targets &gt;80 membrane proteins and is required for both nonsymptomatic chicken colonization and full human virulence. Despite this, the biological functions of <i>N</i>-glycosylation remain unknown. We examined the effects of <i>pgl</i> gene deletion on the <i>C. jejuni</i> proteome using label-based liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and validation using data independent acquisition (DIA-SWATH-MS). We quantified 1359 proteins corresponding to &#x223c;84% of the <i>C. jejuni</i> NCTC 11168 genome, and 1080 of these were validated by DIA-SWATH-MS. Deletion of the <i>pglB</i> oligosaccharyltransferase (&#x394;<i>pglB</i>) resulted in a significant change in abundance of 185 proteins, 137 of which were restored to their wild-type levels by reintroduction of <i>pglB (</i>&#x394;<i>aaz.batpglB</i>::&#x394;<i>pglB</i>). Deletion of <i>pglB</i> was associated with significantly reduced abundances of <i>pgl</i> targets and increased stress-related proteins, including ClpB, GroEL, GroES, GrpE and DnaK. <i>pglB</i> mutants demonstrated reduced survival following temperature (4 &#xb0;C and 46 &#xb0;C) and osmotic (150 mm NaCl) shock and altered biofilm phenotypes compared with wild-type <i>C. jejuni</i> Targeted metabolomics established that <i>pgl</i> negative <i>C. jejuni</i> switched from aspartate (Asp) to proline (Pro) uptake and accumulated intracellular succinate related to proteome changes including elevated PutP/PutA (proline transport and utilization), and reduced DctA/DcuB (aspartate import and succinate export, respectively). &#x394;<i>pglB</i> chemotaxis to some substrates (Asp, glutamate, succinate and &#x3b1;-ketoglutarate) was reduced and associated with altered abundance of transducer-like (Tlp) proteins. Glycosylation negative <i>C. jejuni</i> were depleted of all respiration-associated proteins that allow the use of alternative electron acceptors under low oxygen. We demonstrate for the first time that <i>N</i>-glycosylation is required for a specific enzyme activity (Nap nitrate reductase) that is associated with reduced abundance of the NapAB glycoproteins. These data indicate a multifactorial role for <i>N</i>-glycosylation in <i>C. jejuni</i> physiology.

### Keywords
Tandem mass tag, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Data independant acquisiton, Glycosylation, Campylobacter

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
University of Sydney

### Submitter
Stuart Cordwell

### Lab Head
Dr Stuart Cordwell
The University of Sydney


