### Accession
PXD017767

### Title
Global acetylation profiling for the Arabidopsis thaliana the N-acetyltransferase NAA50 in the NatA complex.

### Description
N-terminal acetylation is one of the most abundant protein modifications in eukaryotes and is catalysed in humans by seven N-terminal acetyltransferases. AtNAA50 interreact with the NatA complex (NAA10 and NAA15) to form the NatE complex. In this study, we investigated the activity of this catalytic subunit using the global acetylome profiling test (GAP test).

### Sample Protocol
E. coli Rosetta cells over-expressing AtNAA50 were centrifuged at 5000 rpm 4°C and pellets frozen at -80°C. The cell pellets were resuspended in 50 mM Tris pH 8 plus 250 mM NaCl, subjected to sonication and cell debris were removed by centrifugation. The lysate (1 mg of material) was subjected to chemical acetylation of the free N-terminus amino groups with N-acetoxy-[2H3]-succinimide required for Stable Isotope Labelling Protein N-terminal Acetylation (SILProNAc) quantitation. After a desalting step, the samples were subjected to protein digestion with trypsin. Then, N-terminal peptides were enriched using strong cation exchange-LC (SCX-LC) and collected every 2 min during the 40 min separation gradients. Fractions 2-5, 6-8 and 9-11 were combined together and 10 µl of each pooled mixture were loaded on the pre-column (NS-MP-10, Nano-separation) of the Easy nLC II system (Thermo Scientific) followed by the separation on a C18 reverse phase column (Nikkyo Technos capillary column,) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min on 100 min gradient (5-35% Acetonitrile). The nano-LC was coupled to an Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific). The survey scan was acquired by Fourier-Transform MS scanning 400-2000 Da at 30,000 resolution using internal calibration (lock mass) using the Top-20 acquisition method with 20 seconds exclusion time. Each sample was acquired twice including or excluding singly charge ions for signal triggering to acquire

### Data Protocol
SILProNAQ processing was applied to determine proteins N-terminus and N-terminus acetylation quantitation using Mascot Distiller (Ver. 2.5.1, Matrix Science) and the EnCOUNTer script (Ver. 1b7). Extraction parameters were optimized for the OrbiTrap acquisition files with a minimum S/N of 1, precursor charges considered 1-5, Corr. Thr. > 0.7 and no grouping assignments. Protein identification were performed using the Mascot identification tool against the E. coli K12 strain reference proteome subset extracted from UniProtKB (Version 112). Trypsin/P rule was used with parent and fragment mass tolerance defined as 10 ppm and 0.7 respectively. Carbamidomethylcysteine and d3-acetyl on Lys were considered as fix modifications whereas Met-oxidation, protein NTA and d3-NTA were considered as variable modifications. All data were filtered at 1% protein false discovery rate and only peptides with score higher than 30 were retained for the final data processing.

### Publication Abstract
N<sup>&#x3b1;</sup>-terminal acetylation (NTA) is a prevalent protein modification in eukaryotes. In plants, the biological function of NTA remains enigmatic. The dominant <i>N</i>-acetyltransferase (Nat) in Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>) is NatA, which cotranslationally catalyzes acetylation of &#x223c;40% of the proteome. The core NatA complex consists of the catalytic subunit NAA10 and the ribosome-anchoring subunit NAA15. In human (<i>Homo sapiens</i>), fruit fly (<i>Drosophila melanogaster</i>), and yeast (<i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i>), this core NatA complex interacts with NAA50 to form the NatE complex. While in metazoa, NAA50 has <i>N</i>-acetyltransferase activity, yeast NAA50 is catalytically inactive and positions NatA at the ribosome tunnel exit. Here, we report the identification and characterization of Arabidopsis NAA50 (AT5G11340). Consistent with its putative function as a cotranslationally acting Nat, AtNAA50-EYFP localized to the cytosol and the endoplasmic reticulum but also to the nuclei. We demonstrate that purified AtNAA50 displays N<sup>&#x3b1;</sup>-terminal acetyltransferase and lysine-&#x3b5;-autoacetyltransferase activity in vitro. Global <i>N</i>-acetylome profiling of <i>Escherichia coli</i> cells expressing AtNAA50 revealed conservation of NatE substrate specificity between plants and humans. Unlike the embryo-lethal phenotype caused by the absence of AtNAA10 and AtNAA15, loss of NAA50 expression resulted in severe growth retardation and infertility in two Arabidopsis transfer DNA insertion lines (<i>naa50-1</i> and <i>naa50-2</i>). The phenotype of <i>naa50-2</i> was rescued by the expression of HsNAA50 or AtNAA50. In contrast, the inactive ScNAA50 failed to complement <i>naa50-2</i> Remarkably, loss of NAA50 expression did not affect NTA of known NatA substrates and caused the accumulation of proteins involved in stress responses. Overall, our results emphasize a relevant role of AtNAA50 in plant defense and development, which is independent of the essential NatA activity.

### Keywords
Silpronaq, Quantitative proteomics, N-terminal acetylation, N-acetylome, Encounter, Acetyltransferase, Gap test

### Affiliations
CNRS
Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, Univ Paris-Sud, CNRS, AgroParisTech, GQE - Le Moulon, 91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France

### Submitter
Willy Bienvenut

### Lab Head
Dr Willy Bienvenut
Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, Univ Paris-Sud, CNRS, AgroParisTech, GQE - Le Moulon, 91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France


