### Accession
PXD029443

### Title
Progressive axonopathy when oligodendrocytes lack the myelin protein CMTM5

### Description
Chemokine-like factor-like MARVEL-transmembrane domain containing protein 5 (CMTM5) is a tetraspan-transmembrane protein highly enriched in oligodendrocytes and central nervous system (CNS) myelin. We analyzed the proteome of myelin biochemically purified from mouse brains upon genetic disruption of the Cmtm5-gene specifically in myelinating cells. An ion mobility-enhanced version of data-independent acquisition (DIA) workflow with alternating low and elevated energy (referred to as UDMSE) was used to compare protein abundance in Cmtm5 cKO and CTRL samples by label-free quantification. Specifically, dynamic range enhancement (DRE)-UDMSE was applied as a dedicated data acquisition mode recently introduced for routine differential myelin proteome profiling. We found that Cmtm5 cKO mice displayed a largely similar myelin proteome composition as control mice and, together with other data such as electron micrographs, concluded that CMTM5 is not essential for myelin biogenesis and composition. However, oligodendroglial Cmtm5-deficiency causes an early-onset progressive axonopathy, presumably following a Wallerian-like pathomechanism. These results indicate that CMTM5 is involved in the function of oligodendrocytes to maintain axonal integrity rather than myelin biogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Enrichment of central nervous system (CNS) myelin from mouse brains by discontinuous sucrose density gradient centrifugation. Solubilization of myelin proteins in ASB-14 detergent followed by automated in-solution protein digestion according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol and analysis by LC-MS. 1D LC separation of peptides using a Waters nanoAcquity nanoUPLC system. Mass spectrometric analysis performed by data-independent acquisition (DIA) on a Waters Synapt G2-S quadrupole time-of-flight (QTOF) mass spectrometer equipped with ion mobility option.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification with Waters ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS). Retention time alignment, exact mass and retention time (EMRT) and ion mobility clustering, data normalization, isoform/homology filtering and calculation of absolute in-sample amounts for each detected protein according to the TOP3 quantification approach with ISOQuant. Statistical analysis and visualization of data with an RStudio pipeline employing the Bioconductor packages "limma" and "q-value".

### Publication Abstract
Oligodendrocytes facilitate rapid impulse propagation along the axons they myelinate and support their long-term integrity. However, the functional relevance of many myelin proteins has remained unknown. Here, we find that expression of the tetraspan-transmembrane protein CMTM5 (chemokine-like factor-like MARVEL-transmembrane domain containing protein 5) is highly enriched in oligodendrocytes and central nervous system (CNS) myelin. Genetic disruption of the <i>Cmtm5</i> gene in oligodendrocytes of mice does not impair the development or ultrastructure of CNS myelin. However, oligodendroglial <i>Cmtm5</i> deficiency causes an early-onset progressive axonopathy, which we also observe in global and tamoxifen-induced oligodendroglial <i>Cmtm5</i> mutants. Presence of the <i>Wld<sup>S</sup></i> mutation ameliorates the axonopathy, implying a Wallerian degeneration-like pathomechanism. These results indicate that CMTM5 is involved in the function of oligodendrocytes to maintain axonal integrity rather than myelin biogenesis.

### Keywords
Chemokine-like factor-like marvel-transmembrane domain containing protein (cmtm) family, Oligodendrocyte, Wallerian degeneration, Neurodegeneration, Myelin proteome, Central nervous system (cns), Mass spectrometry, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics Group Max Planck Institute of Experimental Medicine Hermann-Rein-Str. 3 37075 Goettingen, Germany Tel: +49-551-3899313 Fax: +49-551-3899323
Neuroproteomics Group, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Göttingen

### Submitter
Olaf Jahn

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Olaf Jahn
Proteomics Group Max Planck Institute of Experimental Medicine Hermann-Rein-Str. 3 37075 Goettingen, Germany Tel: +49-551-3899313 Fax: +49-551-3899323


