### Accession
PXD000596

### Title
Probing the complementarity of FAIMS and strong cation exchange chromatography in shotgun proteomics

### Description
This dataset contains the raw data from the JASMS paper with the same title and DOI:  10.1007/s13361-012-0544-2. We compared the results of shotgun proteomic experiments of a trypsin digest of SUM52 cell lysate using 2D-LC fractionated (strong cation exchange and reversed phase of 6 SCX fractions) with FAIMS based fractionation. The FAIMS fractionation was performed using two different methods, an internal stepping method where the compensation voltage (CV) is cycled through 6 different voltages during the LC run (the three most abundant ions are fragmented at each CV. To match with the other methods this was run in six replicates. The other method was termed external stepping, for this method individual LC runs were performed at the six CV’s used earlier (-25 V to -50 V in 5 V steps). The three most abundant ions were again fragmented. For all three of these methods data was collect using electron transfer dissociation (ETD) and collision induced dissociation (CID) giving a total of 6 datasets with 6 raw files in each. SUM52 breast cancer carcinoma cells were cultured in HPMi-1640 formulation, supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine, 1% Pen-Strep and 10% PBS at 37 oC in a 5% CO2 atmosphere. Lysis buffer contained Triton X-100 (0.5%), NaCl (0.15 M), PhosphoStop phosphatase inhibitor tablet (Roche) and Mini-complete protease inhibitor (Roche). The lysed cells were digested with trypsin at a ratio of 50:1 protein to enzyme. Part of the digest was fractionated with strong cation exchange using a Polysulfoethyl A column. All fractions and crude digest were desalted prior to mass spectrometry analysis. Approximately 1.66 µg of digest was loaded per LC-MS/MS run onto a 150mm Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column and separated over a 30 minute gradient from 3.2% acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid) to 44% acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid). The raw files were searched using proteome discoverer 1.2 against the human IPI database V3.81 supplemented with known contaminants and the reverse sequences. The files were searched with both sequest and mascot (v2.2.0). The MSF files were manually filtered using mascot significance scores and XCORR vs change state to give a 1% FDR, for filter setting see the linked paper. Included in the downloadable files is a xls file which documents the raw files listed and the names they had for the original searches, the names have been changed for clarity of the dataset.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
High field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS), also known as differential ion mobility spectrometry, coupled with liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) offers benefits for the analysis of complex proteomics samples. Advantages include increased dynamic range, increased signal-to-noise, and reduced interference from ions of similar m/z. FAIMS also separates isomers and positional variants. An alternative, and more established, method of reducing sample complexity is prefractionation by use of strong cation exchange chromatography. Here, we have compared SCX-LC-MS/MS with LC-FAIMS-MS/MS for the identification of peptides and proteins from whole cell lysates from the breast carcinoma SUM52 cell line. Two FAIMS approaches are considered: (1) multiple compensation voltages within a single LC-MS/MS analysis (internal stepping) and (2) repeat LC-MS/MS analyses at different and fixed compensation voltages (external stepping). We also consider the consequence of the fragmentation method (electron transfer dissociation or collision-induced dissociation) on the workflow performance. The external stepping approach resulted in a greater number of protein and peptide identifications than the internal stepping approach for both ETD and CID MS/MS, suggesting that this should be the method of choice for FAIMS proteomics experiments. The overlap in protein identifications from the SCX method and the external FAIMS method was ~25% for both ETD and CID, and for peptides was less than 20%. The lack of overlap between FAIMS and SCX highlights the complementarity of the two techniques. Charge state analysis of the peptide assignments showed that the FAIMS approach identified a much greater proportion of triply-charged ions.

### Keywords
Sum52, Etd, Scx, Faims, Cid

### Affiliations
School of Biosciences

### Submitter
Andrew Creese

### Lab Head


