### Accession
PXD005948

### Title
Yeast SWI/SNF complex -  Loss of Snf5 Induces Formation of an Aberrant SWI/SNF Complex

### Description
This project uses crosslinked based mass spectrometry (CXMS) to study the architecture of yeast SWI/SNF complex.

### Sample Protocol
SWI/SNF complexes with FLAG tagged subunits were purified by immunoaffinity chromatography using anti-FLAG M2 agarose beads. The complex was further purified over an SP Sepharose column to remove FLAG peptide before crosslinking with BS3. BS3 (Thermo Scientific) were added directly to purified 500 uL SWI-SNF solution (174 fmol/uL ) to a final concentration of 2 mM or 5 mM. The samples were crosslinked for 2 hours at RT and then quenched by addition of 20 uL of 1M ammonium bicarbonate.  The crosslinked proteins were then precipitated by addition of 100ul 100% TCA on ice for 1 hour and then centrifuged at 25,000g for 10 min. The pellets were directly re-suspended in freshly made 1M Tris-pH8.3, 8M Urea buffer.   TCEP was added to a final concentration of 5 mM. After incubating at 37ºC for 30 minutes, the samples were alkylated by addition of iodoacetamide to 10 mM. The solution then is diluted by 1M ammonium bicarbonate to 1M Urea and trypsin digested overnight. The digested peptides were first purified on C18 cartridges (The Nest group, Southborough, MA).  Eluted samples were then dried via Speedvac, resuspended in 50 uL Buffer A (25 mM ammonium formate, 20% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, pH 2.8)  and then fractionated using an in-house prepared  microcapillary strong cation exchange column (250 um X 15 cm; 5 um, 200 Å partisphere SCX, Whatman).  Peptides were loaded onto the microcapillary column equilibrated in Buffer A and washed with Buffer A. Bound peptides were eluted with 20 μl of Buffer A containing 30%, 50%, 70%, and 100% Buffer B (800 mM ammonium formate, 20% acetonitrile, pH 2.8), followed by 20 μl elutions with Buffer B containing 30% Buffer C (1 M ammonium acetate, 10% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, pH 8). All fractions were dried in a speedvac, and resuspended in 0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile.   Peptides were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Elite with HCD fragmentation and serial MS events that included one FTMS1 event at 30,000 resolution followed by 10 FTMS2 events at 15,000 resolution. Other instrument settings included: Charge state rejection: +1, +2, and +3, unassigned charges; Monoisotopic precursor selection enabled; Dynamic exclusion enabled: repeat count 1, exclusion list size 500, exclusion duration 30s; HCD normalized collision energy 35%, isolation width 3Da, minimum signal count 5000; MS mass range: > 1500, use m/z values as masses enabled; FTMS MSn AGC target 500,000, FTMS MSn Max ion time 300ms. HPLC uses a 90 min gradient from 5% ACN to 40% ACN.

### Data Protocol
The RAW files were converted to mzXML files. For crosslinked peptide searches, we used two different crosslink database searching algorithms: pLink  and in-house designed Nexus. Crosslinking data were analyzed using pLink with default settings (precursor monoisotopic mass tolerance: ±10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: ±20 ppm; up to 4 isotopic peaks; max evalue 0.1; static modification on Cysteines; 57. 0215 Da; differential oxidation modification on Methionines; 15. 9949 Da)  against a database containing 12 subunits of SWI/SNF complex. For Nexus searches,  the same protein database was used for the Nexus analysis with the following parameter settings: (a) up to three miscleavages; (b) static modification on Cysteines (+57.0215 Da); (c) differential oxidation modification on Methionines (+15.9949 Da); (d) differential modification on the peptide N-terminal Glutamic acid residues (-18.0106 Da) or N-terminal Glutamine residues (-17.0265 Da); (e) differential mono-BS3 modification on Lysine residue (+156.0806 Da). A 5% of FDR is used for both plink and Nexus.  After performing the pLink and the Nexus analysis, the search results are combined and each spectrum is manually evaluated for the quality of the match to each peptide using the COMET/Lorikeet Spectrum Viewer (TPP). The crosslinked peptides were considered confidently identified if at least 4 consecutive b or y ions for each peptide were observed and the majority of the observed ions are accounted for.

### Publication Abstract
The SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex is highly conserved from yeast to human, and aberrant SWI/SNF complexes contribute to human disease. The Snf5/SMARCB1/INI1 subunit of SWI/SNF is a tumor suppressor frequently lost in pediatric rhabdoid cancers. We examined the effects of Snf5 loss on the composition, nucleosome binding, recruitment, and remodeling activities of yeast SWI/SNF. The Snf5 subunit is shown by crosslinking-mass spectrometry (CX-MS) and subunit deletion analysis to interact with the ATPase domain of Snf2 and to form a submodule consisting of Snf5, Swp82, and Taf14. Snf5 promotes binding of the Snf2 ATPase domain to nucleosomal DNA and enhances the catalytic and nucleosome remodeling activities of SWI/SNF. Snf5 is also required for SWI/SNF recruitment by acidic transcription factors. RNA-seq analysis suggests that both the recruitment and remodeling functions of Snf5 are required in&#xa0;vivo for SWI/SNF regulation of gene expression. Thus, loss of SNF5 alters the structure and function of SWI/SNF.

### Keywords
Swi/snf bs3 crosslinking architecture

### Affiliations
Institute for Systems Biology
Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA, USA.

### Submitter
Jie Luo

### Lab Head
Dr Jeff Ranish
Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA, USA.


