### Accession
PXD022559

### Title
Subcellular fractionation of Tuwongella immobilis by differential solubilization and analysis by Maxquant LFQ-analysis

### Description
The Planctomycetes have unique cell architectures with heavily invaginated membrane networks, as here confirmed by three-dimensional models reconstructed from FIB-SEM images of Tuwongella immobilis and Gemmata obscuriglobus. We studied the subcellular proteomes of T. immobilis, and for comparison Escherichia coli, by differential solubilisation followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. More than one thousand proteins were identified in each species. The first Tris-soluble fraction contained mostly cytoplasmic proteins, whereas membrane proteins dominated the second Triton X-100 cell extract. About 50 proteins were exclusive to the third SDS-soluble extract in E. coli, mostly outer membrane and cell surface proteins. A 5-fold higher number of proteins were identified in this fraction in T. immobilis, including predicted cell surface proteins with a prepilin cleavage motif or a Planctomycetes-specific signal peptide. Surprisingly, 50% of the predicted cytoplasmic proteins were exclusively associated with the SDS-soluble protein fraction in T. immobilis. Proteins involved in signal transduction pathway and transcriptional regulation were highly overrepresented in this set, as were also enzymes involved in DNA repair and processing of stable RNAs. Some of these proteins are unique to the Planctomycetes, while others have evolved by gene duplication and domain shuffling. In cases where the paralogs showed different fractionation patterns, it was the most divergent gene copy that was uniquely associated with the SDS-soluble fraction. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that gene duplication and domain shuffling underlie the evolution of new gene functions in the Planctomycetes. We further suggest that repair and recycling of “ageing” molecules play a more important role in the Planctomycetes than in other bacteria due to their large cell sizes, long generation times and life styles.

### Sample Protocol
Subcellular fractionation was based on differential solubilization by separating Tris-soluble, Tris/Triton X-100-soluble and Tris/SDS-soluble proteins.  The total protein content of precipitated proteins was determined using the Bradford Protein Assay Kit (BioRad Laboratories), with bovine serum albumin as standard. Aliquots of 20 µg were taken out for digestion and the volume was adjusted to 20 µL with a solution of 9 M urea in 20 mM HEPES buffer (Sigma Aldrich). Three replicates from wild type and knock out, respectively, were prepared. Proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma Aldrich, working concentration 50 mM) for 15 min at 50 °C and alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma Aldrich, working concentration 25 mM) for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich) to a urea concentration of ~ 2 M whereafter 1 µg trypsin (Promega, mass spectrometry grade) was added (enzyme:protein ratio 1:20). Digestion was performed at 37 °C over night. Digestion was stopped by adding 35 µL (1/4 of total volume) of 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 20 % acetonitrile (can) and 78% water. Samples were desalted using C18 spin columns (Pierce). After elution peptides were vacuum centrifuged to dryness using a Speedvac system ISS110 (Thermo Scientific).  The nanoLC-MS/MS experiments were performed using a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with a nano electrospray ion source. The peptides were separated by reversed phase liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A set-up of pre-column and analytical column was used. The pre-column was a 2 cm EASYcolumn (1D 100 mm, 5 mm C18) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) while the analytical column was a 10 cm EASY-column (ID 75 mm, 3 mm, C18; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted with a 150 min linear gradient from 4% to 100% acetonitrile at 250 nL min-1. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode acquiring a survey mass spectrum with resolving power 70,000 (full width half maximum), m/z ¼ 400-1750 using an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3×106. The 10 most intense ions were selected for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (25% normalized collision energy) and MS/MS spectra were generated with an AGC target of 5×105 at a resolution of 17,500. The mass spectrometer worked in data-dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed using MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008) and the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). False discovery rate (FDR) was calculated based on reverse sequences from the target-decoy search and an FDR of 1% was accepted for protein and peptide identification, with a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids. The first search was performed setting the precursor mass tolerance to 20 ppm, whereas in the second search it was lowered to 4.5 ppm, choosing a mass tolerance of 0.5 Da for the fragments. Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme, allowing 2 maximum missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as static modification, while oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-terminal were set as variable modification. In different cases, carbamylation of arginine and lysine was included as variable modification, and acetylation of N-terminal was excluded. Data analysis and visualization was based on LFQ intensities for proteins that were identified in three biological replicates in at least one subcellular fraction.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Subcellular fractionation, Tuwongella immobilis

### Affiliations
Molecular Evolution, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Science for Life Laboratory, Biomedical Centre, Uppsala University, SE-751 24 Uppsala, Sweden

### Submitter
Christian Seeger

### Lab Head
Dr Siv Andersson
Molecular Evolution, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Science for Life Laboratory, Biomedical Centre, Uppsala University, SE-751 24 Uppsala, Sweden


