### Accession
PXD027214

### Title
A Composite DNA Element that Functions as a Maintainer Required for Epigenetic Inheritance of Heterochromatin

### Description
Epigenetic inheritance of heterochromatin requires DNA sequence-independent propagation mechanisms, coupling to RNAi, or input from DNA sequence, but how DNA contributes to inheritance is not understood. Here, we identify a DNA element (termed “maintainer”) that is sufficient for epigenetic inheritance of preexisting histone H3 lysine 9 methylation (H3K9me) and heterochromatin in Schizosaccharomyces pombe, but cannot establish de novo gene silencing in wild-type cells. This maintainer is a composite DNA element with binding sites for the Atf1/Pcr1 and Deb1 transcription factors and the Origin Recognition Complex (ORC), located within a 130-base pair region, and can be converted to a silencer in cells with lower rates of H3K9me turnover, suggesting that it participates in recruiting the H3K9 methyltransferase Clr4/Suv39h. These results suggest that, in the absence of RNAi, histone H3K9me is only heritable when it can collaborate with maintainer-associated DNA-binding proteins that help recruit the enzyme responsible for its epigenetic deposition.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was eluted from beads using 500 mM ammonium hydroxide and the eluate was dried via vacuum centrifugation. We added 20 µl of 8 M urea, 100 mM EPPS pH 8.5 to the bead. We added 5mM TCEP and incubated the mixture for 15 min at room temperature. We then added 10 mM of iodoacetamide for 15min at room temperature in the dark. We added 15 mM DTT to consume any unreacted iodoacetamide. We added 180µl of 100 mM EPPS pH 8.5. to reduce the urea concentration to <1 M, 1 µg of trypsin, and incubated at 37⁰C for 6 hrs. The solution was acidified with 2% formic acid and the digested peptides were desalted via StageTip, dried via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS processing. All label-free mass spectrometry data were collected using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled with a Famos Autosampler (LC Packings) and an Accela600 liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 100 μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with ∼20 cm of Accucore C18 resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each analysis, we loaded ~2 μg onto the column. Peptides were separated using a 1 hr method from 5 to 29% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid with a flow rate of ∼300 nL/min. The scan sequence began with an Orbitrap MS1 spectrum with the following parameters: resolution 70,000, scan range 300−1500 Th, automatic gain control (AGC) target 1 × 105, maximum injection time 250 ms, and centroid spectrum data type. We selected the top twenty precursors for MS2 analysis which consisted of HCD high-energy collision dissociation with the following parameters: resolution 17,500, AGC 1 × 105, maximum injection time 60 ms, isolation window 2 Th, normalized collision energy (NCE) 25, and centroid spectrum data type. The underfill ratio was set at 9%, which corresponds to a 1.5 × 105 intensity threshold. In addition, unassigned and singly charged species were excluded from MS2 analysis and dynamic exclusion was set to automatic.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based in-house software pipeline. MS spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all entries from the S. pombe uniprot database which was concatenated with a reverse database composed of all protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance. Product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Th. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) was set as a variable modification Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were altered to a 1% FDR (Elias and Gygi, 2007, 2010). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously (Huttlin et al., 2010). Briefly, target-decoy filtering was applied to control false discovery rates, employing a linear discriminant function for peptide filtering and probabilistic scoring at the protein level (Huttlin et al., 2010). We considered the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. As such, peptide-spectral matches were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% FDR and then further collapsed to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Furthermore, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. For quantification of differences between samples, we assigned a value of 0.5 to proteins with 0 peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Epigenetic inheritance of heterochromatin requires DNA-sequence-independent propagation mechanisms, coupling to RNAi, or input from DNA sequence, but how DNA contributes to inheritance is not understood. Here, we identify a DNA element (termed "maintainer") that is sufficient for epigenetic inheritance of pre-existing histone H3 lysine 9 methylation (H3K9me) and heterochromatin in Schizosaccharomyces pombe but cannot establish de novo gene silencing in wild-type cells. This maintainer is a composite DNA element with binding sites for the Atf1/Pcr1 and Deb1 transcription factors and the origin recognition complex (ORC), located within a 130-bp region, and can be converted to a silencer in cells with lower rates of H3K9me turnover, suggesting that it participates in recruiting the H3K9 methyltransferase Clr4/Suv39h. These results suggest that, in the absence of RNAi, histone H3K9me is only heritable when it can collaborate with maintainer-associated DNA-binding proteins that help recruit the enzyme responsible for its epigenetic deposition.

### Keywords
Maintainer, Methylation  pombe, Heterochromatin, H3k9me

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA USA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Danesh Moazed
Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA USA


