### Accession
PXD003883

### Title
Protein profiling of Chlamydia trachomatis growth forms

### Description
By comprehensive quantitative proteome analysis we characterize the three growth forms elementary body (EB), reticulate body (RB) and aberrant reticulate body (ARB) of Chlamydia trachomatis genital strain D/UW-3/CX

### Sample Protocol
Chlamydia cultures HeLa 229 cells were grown in RPMI medium supplemented with 5% fetal calf serum at 37˚C and 5% CO2. Cells were seeded in six well plates at 5x10e5 cells per well and the monolayers were infected by centrifugation after 24 h with Chlamydia trachomatis serovar D/UW-3/CX at a multiplicityy of infection of 4. Infected cells were incubated in the absence or presence of IFN-γ (2 ng/ml equalling to 40 IU/ml). Triplicate samples of the RB, EB and ARB forms (each originating from 12 plates) were harvested after 20, 40 and 40 hours post infection, respectively, by scraping infected Hela cells from the six-well plates, and inclusion forming units were determined by infecting monolayers of Hela cells seeded in 48-well plates. After sterile filtration the Trp content in the spent culture medium was determined after sterile filtration by the Bridge-It® L-Trp assay according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Mediomics, LLC, St. Louis, MO).  Preparation of protein extracts, normalisation and sample preparation Purification of RB, EB and ARB forms was performed by homogenizing the harvested Hela extracts in K-36 buffer (0.05 M K2HPO4/KH2PO4, 0.1 M KCl, 0.15 M NaCl, pH 7.0) with a Wheaton Dounce Homogenizer. Briefly, host material was removed by centrifugation at 500 g (15 min) and bacteria were collected at 35,000 g (30 min). RB, EB and ARB forms were further purified on Renografin cushions followed by ultracentrifugation (40,000 g, 30 min). The pellets were resuspended in sucrose-phosphate-glutamate (SPG) buffer, and centrifuged (35,000 g, 30 min). The pellets were collected and resuspended in 1 ml 2% SDS, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5 mM DTT (pH 7.8), sonicated 4x30s on ice and boiled for 10 min. The lysates were centrifuged (16,000 g, 20 min), and the supernatants were collected for the proteome analysis. The total protein content in the samples was determined by the 2D-Quant method (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden).   SDS-PAGE and in-gel digestion The chlamydial extracts were subject to SDS-PAGE followed by GeLC-MS/MS analysis. Briefly, 50 g of total protein was precipitated from each sample by 2-D Clean-up kit (GE Healthcare). The proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE using pre-cast 4-12% gradient gels (NuPAGE MES system, Invitrogen) and the gels were stained with Novexin Instant Blue (Expedeon Protein Solutions). For each Chlamydia growth form three SDS-PAGE lanes representing three biological replicates of each sample type were cut into 10 bands and the resulting bands were subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion. The peptides formed by the digestion were dried on a vacuum concentrator, reconstituted in 5 % formic acid, and desalted on pre-equilibrated homemade StageTips.  LC-MSMS analysis The tryptic peptides were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 precolumn (300 µm inner diameter, 5 mm long, 5 µm particle size, Dionex), and separated using an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 analytical column (75 µm inner diameter, 150 mm long, 3 µm particle size, Dionex) by a 90-minute gradient controlled by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system connected to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray source (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark).  The flow rate was 200 nL/minute; the mobile phases consisted of solvent A (2 % (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid) and solvent B (95 % (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid). The gradient went from 0 % to 45 % solvent B in 65 minutes, followed by 25 minutes with 100 % solvent B; then data acquisition was stopped and the column was re-equilibrated with solvent A.  MS data were acquired recording full scan spectra (250–1,800 mass/charge [m/z]) in the Orbitrap with 60,000 resolution at 400 m/z. MS/MS data were recorded in parallel in a data-dependent mode, fragmenting the 5 most abundant ions (charge state +2 or higher) by collision-induced dissociation in the LTQ ion trap at 35% collision energy. MS/MS spectra were recorded using dynamic exclusion (30 seconds) to minimize repeated fragmentation of the same peptides.

### Data Protocol
Recorded raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.2.2.5 for peptide quantitation by MS1-intensity and for protein identification using the Andromeda search engine. In addition, iBAQ values were calculated. The MaxQuant analysis was performed with the following settings: Variable modifications: oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-terminal), fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl (C). Multiplicity: 1 (no isotope labelling). Peptide FDR 1 %, Protein FDR 1 %, Minimum peptides: 1. Match between runs 1 min, Keep low-scoring version of identified peptides: on; all other settings were left at the default settings.  Proteins were identified by peptide-spectral matching searching against the following sequence files in FASTA format: Chlamydia trachomatis genome (NC_000117_D/UW-3/CX) including 895 sequences in amino acid format – downloaded from NCBI genomes 2015-03-20, Chlamydia trachomatis D-LC plasmid ORFs (8 entries), Homo sapiens UniProt reference proteome downloaded from UniProt 2014-01-07. I; in addition, searching against a file with common contaminants was included.

### Publication Abstract
Chlamydia trachomatis is one of the most common sexually transmitted bacterial pathogens in humans. The infection is often asymptomatic and can lead to chronic manifestations. The infectious elementary body and the replicating reticulate body are the two growth forms in the normal developmental cycle. Under the influence of interferon-&#x3b3;, the normal cycle is disrupted because of tryptophan degradation, leading to a third persistent form, the aberrant reticulate body.For the genital strain C. trachomatis D/UW-3/CX we established a quantitative, label-free proteomic approach, and identified in total 655 out of 903 (73%) predicted proteins, allowing the first quantitative comparison of all three growth forms. Inclusion membrane proteins and proteins involved in translation were more abundant in the reticulate body (RB)<sup>1</sup> and aberrant reticulate body (ARB) forms, whereas proteins of the type III Secretion System and the cell envelope were more abundant in the elementary body (EB) form, reflecting the need for these proteins to establish infection and for host interactions.In the interferon-&#x3b3; induced ARB proteome, the tryptophan synthase subunits were identified as biomarkers with a strong increase from less than 0.05% to 9% of the total protein content, reflecting an inherent defense strategy for the pathogen to escape interferon-&#x3b3; mediated immune pressure. Furthermore, the total tryptophan content in the ARB form was 1.9-fold lower compared with the EB form, and we demonstrate that modulation of the protein repertoire toward lower abundance of proteins with high tryptophan content, is a mechanism which contributes to establish and maintain chlamydial persistence. Thus, quantitative proteomics provides insights in the Chlamydia defense mechanisms to escape interferon-&#x3b3; mediated immune pressure.

### Keywords
Rb, Arb, Lc-msms, Chlamydia trachomatis, Eb

### Affiliations
Statens Serum Institut
Department of Autoimmunology and Biomarkers, Statens Serum Institut, Denmark

### Submitter
Ole Østergaard

### Lab Head
Dr Ole Østergaard
Department of Autoimmunology and Biomarkers, Statens Serum Institut, Denmark


