### Accession
PXD005814

### Title
Systematic Analysis of Cell-Type Differences in the Epithelial Secretome Reveals Insights Into Pathogenesis Of RSV-Induced Lower Respiratory Tract Infections

### Description
Lower respiratory tract infections (LRTI) from human Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) are a significant cause of morbidity in children. A component of LRTI pathogenesis is due to signals generated by infected lower airway cells that alter lymphocyte populations and trigger airway remodeling.  To obtain insights into this process, we applied an unbiased quantitative proteomics analysis of the RSV-induced epithelial secretory response in cells representative of the trachea (hBECs) vs small airway bronchiolar cells (hSAECs).  A workflow was standardized initially using telomerase immortalized human epithelial cells that showed high reproducibility and cell-type differences in proteomic signatures of both secreted proteins and isolated nanoparticles (exosomes).  Over half of secretome proteins were contained within exosomal, with the remainder originating from lysosomal and vaculolar compartments.  We applied this workflow to three independently derived primary human cultures.  577 differentially expressed proteins from control supernatants and 966 differentially expressed proteins from RSV-infected cell supernatants were identified at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR).  15 proteins were unique to RSV-infected hBECs regulated by epithelial-specific ets homology factor (EHF).  106 proteins were unique to RSV-infected hSAECs enriched in proteins regulated by the NFB transcription factor.  In this latter group, we independently validated the differential expression of Chemokine (C-C Motif) Ligand 20 (CCL20)/macrophage inducible protein (MIP)3, Thymic Stromal Lymphopoietin (TSLP) and chemokine (CC) ligand 3-like 1(CCL3-L1).  CCL20/MIP3 is the most active mucin inducing factor in the RSV infected hSAEC secretome, and is differentially expressed in smaller airways in a mouse model of RSV infection.  These studies provide insight into role of exosomal production in innate responses and regional differences in epithelial secretomes that participate in pathogenesis of RSV LRTI-induced airway remodeling.

### Sample Protocol
To obtain insights into this process, we applied an unbiased quantitative proteomics analysis of the RSV-induced epithelial secretory response in cells representative of the trachea (hBECs) vs small airway bronchiolar cells (hSAECs).

### Data Protocol
label freee quantification using MaxQuant and Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Lower respiratory tract infections from respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) are due, in part, to secreted signals from lower airway cells that modify the immune response and trigger airway remodeling. To understand this process, we applied an unbiased quantitative proteomics analysis of the RSV-induced epithelial secretory response in cells representative of the trachea versus small airway bronchiolar cells. A workflow was established using telomerase-immortalized human epithelial cells that revealed highly reproducible cell type-specific differences in secreted proteins and nanoparticles (exosomes). Approximately one third of secretome proteins are exosomal; the remainder are from lysosomal and vacuolar compartments. We applied this workflow to three independently derived primary human cultures from trachea versus bronchioles. A total of 577 differentially expressed proteins from control supernatants and 966 differentially expressed proteins from RSV-infected cell supernatants were identified at a 1% false discovery rate. Fifteen proteins unique to RSV-infected primary human cultures from trachea were regulated by epithelial-specific ets homologous factor. A total of 106 proteins unique to RSV-infected human small airway epithelial cells was regulated by the transcription factor NF-&#x3ba;B. In this latter group, we validated the differential expression of CCL20/macrophage-inducible protein 3&#x3b1;, thymic stromal lymphopoietin, and CCL3-like 1 because of their roles in Th2 polarization. CCL20/macrophage-inducible protein 3&#x3b1; was the most active mucin-inducing factor in the RSV-infected human small airway epithelial cell secretome and was differentially expressed in smaller airways in a mouse model of RSV infection. These studies provide insights into the complexity of innate responses and regional differences in the epithelial secretome participating in RSV lower respiratory tract infection-induced airway remodeling.

### Keywords
Lower respiratory tract, Rsv, Secretome

### Affiliations
University of Texas Medical Branch

### Submitter
Yingxin Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Yingxin Zhao, Ph.D.
University of Texas Medical Branch


