### Accession
PXD024832

### Title
LC-MS confirmation of alternative YPD1 isoforms from Magnaporthe oryzae

### Description
This project aims to understand better the stress response mechanisms of components of the well known High Osmolarity Glycerol two-component regulatory system in the model organism Magnaporthe oryzae. Currently, two putative isoforms of the transfer protein YPD1 (MGG_07173) are described as theoretical proteins in the UniProt database (G4MTL0 and G4MTK9). For better understanding of signal transduction and response triggering we aimed to identify alternative isoforms that might explain the variety of triggered responses throughout the YPD1 signal transfer hub.

### Sample Protocol
Sixteen bands from the SDS-PAGE were cut in 1 mm x 1 mm pieces and washed twice with 200 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC) in 50 % acetonitrile (ACN) followed by a single wash with 200 µL pure ACN each by sonification for 5 min at room temperature, discarding the supernatant. The reduction of disulfide bonds was performed by addition of 100 µL of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 50 mM AMBIC / 50 % ACN and incubation for 60 min at 56 °C. After discarding the supernatant, 100 µL of 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added for alkylation of the reduced disulfide bonds by incubation for 45 min at room temperature, keeping the samples in the dark. The supernatant was discarded and the gel pieces were washed twice with 200 µL of 50 mM AMBIC / 50 % ACN followed by a single wash with 200 µL pure ACN each by sonification for 5 min at room temperature, discarding the supernatant. Remaining ACN from the gel pieces was evaporated by warming the samples at 56 °C for 30 s. Proteolytic digest was performed by addition of 2.5 µg Trypsin in 25 µL 50 mM AMBIC and incubation over night at 37 °C. The resulting peptides were recovered by washing the incubated gel pieces twice with 50 µL0.1 %formic acid (FA) in 50 % ACN and sonicating each for 15 min and combining the supernatants in a new sample tube. The peptides were frozen at -80 °C and lyophilized. For mass spectrometric analysis the lyophilized peptides were reconstituted in 20 µL 0.1 % FA.

### Data Protocol
For each measurement, 2.6 µL of the peptide mixture was injected in a ultra-high performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) nanoAcquity system (Waters Corporation) equipped with a HSS-T3 C18 1.8 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm reverse-phase column (Waters Corporation). The separation of peptides was performed at 55 °C using a 90 min gradient from 5 % to 40 % mobile phase B consisting of 0.1 %FA / 3 % DMSO in ACN while mobile phase A consisted of 0.1 % FA / 3 % DMSO in water. The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min and all separations were followed by washing the column with 90 % mobile phase B and sufficient re-equilibration. After elution from the chromatographic column, the peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization (ESI) and subjected to mass spectrometric analysis using a Synapt G2-S HDMS QTOF mass spectrometer (Waters Corporation) which was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with a typical resolving power of R = 20000. The top 10 most intense peptide precursor m/z from MS1 spectra were selected for further fragmentation in the quadrupole followed by measurement of the resulting fragment m/z as MS2 spectra. [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B was injected as lock mass into the flow path every 30 s via the reference sprayer of the NanoLockSpray source for post-acquisition mass correction. All samples were measured in triplicates.

### Publication Abstract
Different external stimuli are perceived by multiple sensor histidine kinases and transmitted by phosphorylation via the phosphotransfer protein Ypd1p in the multistep phosphorelay system of the high osmolarity glycerol signaling pathway of filamentous fungi. How the signal propagation takes place is still not known in detail since multiple sensor histidine kinase genes in most filamentous fungi are coded in the genome, whereas only one gene for Ypd1p exists. That raises the hypothesis that various Ypd1p isoforms are produced from a single gene sequence, perhaps by alternative splicing, facilitating a higher variability in signal transduction. We found that the mRNA of <i>MoYPD1</i> in the rice blast fungus <i>Magnaporthe oryzae</i> is subjected to an increased structural variation and amplified putative isoforms on a cDNA level. We then generated mutant strains overexpressing these isoforms, purified the products, and present here one previously unknown MoYpd1p isoform on a proteome level. Alternative splicing was found to be a valid molecular mechanism to increase the signal diversity in eukaryotic multistep phosphorelay systems.

### Keywords
Alternative splicing, Isoform identification, Lc-ms/ms, Magnaporthe oryzae, In-gel digest, Ypd1

### Affiliations
University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz / Institute for Immunology
University Medical Center of the Johannes-Gutenberg University Mainz

### Submitter
Thomas Michna

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Tenzer
University Medical Center of the Johannes-Gutenberg University Mainz


