### Accession
PXD025141

### Title
Dynamic tracking and identification of tissue-specific secretory proteins in the circulation of live mice

### Description
Accurate analysis of tissue-specific secretory proteins in blood plasma can provide valuable information regarding therapeutic target development but current approaches are mostly limited to ex vivo proteomic analysis. Here, we developed an in situ secretory protein labeling technology using endoplasmic reticulum-anchored TurboID (iSLET) and validated its utility in vivo by the successful identification of liver-specific secretory proteins in mouse plasma. iSLET is a promising new strategy that will facilitate the discovery of tissue-specific secretory proteins mediating interorgan communication in normal physiology and disease.

### Sample Protocol
In vivo biotin labeling and protein sample preparation. Approximately 108 adenoviral GFP or Sec61b-TurboID particles were injected to mice via the tail vein. 24mg/ml biotin stock was prepared in DMSO. Vehicle (10% DMSO in PBS) or Biotin solution (2.4mg/ml) was filtered by 0.22um PES syringe filter and injected 10ul/g (24mg/kg) by intraperitoneal injection for 3 consecutive days. Biotin was not administered on the last day to reduce residual biotin in blood. Blood samples were obtained by cardiac puncture and plasma was separated by PST (BD, 365985). Tissues were lysed and homogenized with RIPA with a 1X protease inhibitor by FastPrep-24 (MPbio). Lysates were clarified by a triple repeat of centrifugation at 16,000g for 20min at 4℃ and supernatant collection. The clear supernatant was used for western blots. The protein concentration of plasma and tissue lysate was estimated with BCA assay.  Peptide sample preparation and enrichment of biotinylated peptides. All prepared in vivo biotinylated plasma samples were first subjected to buffer exchange with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) buffer to completely remove residual free biotin via 10k MWCO filtration for three times. The biotin depleted plasma samples were transferred and denatured with 500 µL of 8 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) for 1 hour at 37°C, and followed by reduction of disulfide bonds with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 1 hour at 37°C. The reduced thiol groups in the protein samples were subsequently alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour at 37°C in the dark. The resulting alkylated samples were diluted eight times using 50 mM ABC and subjected to trypsinization at 2% (w/w) trypsin concentration under 1 mM CaCl2 concentration for overnight in Thermomixer (37°C and 500 rpm). Samples were centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 3 min to remove insoluble material. Then, 150 µL of streptavidin beads (Pierce) per replicate was washed with 2 M urea in 1× TBS for four times and combined with the individual digested sample. The combined samples were rotated for 1 hour at room temperature. The flow-through fraction was kept, and the beads were washed twice with 2 M urea in 50 mM ABC and finally with pure water in new tubes. The bound biotinylated peptides were eluted with 400 µL of 80% acetonitrile containing 0.2% TFA and 0.1% formic acid after mixing and heating the beads slurry at 60°C. Each eluate was collected into a new tube. Repeat the elution process four more times. Combined elution fractions were dried using Speed vac (Eppendorf) and reconstituted with 10 µL of 25 mM ABC for further LC-MS/MS experiment.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS datasets were first subject to peak picking and mass recalibration processed with RawConverter18 (http://fields.scripps.edu/rawconv) and MZRefinery19 (https://omics.pnl.gov/software/mzrefinery) software, respectively, and then were searched by MS-GF+20 algorithm (v.9979) at 10 ppm precursor ion mass tolerance against the UniProt reference proteome database (55,152 entries, Mouse). The following search parameters were applied: semi-tryptic digestion, fixed carbamidomethylation on cysteine, dynamic oxidation of methionine, and dynamic biotinylation of a lysine residue (delta monoisotopic mass: +226.07759 Da). The False discovery rate (FDR) was set at < 0.5 % for non-redundantly labeled peptide level and the resulting protein FDR was near or less than 1%. MS/MS spectrum annotation for biotinylated peptides was carried out using LcMsSpectator software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Turboid, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University
School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National Uuniversity

### Submitter
Jong-Seo Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Jong-Seo Kim
School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National Uuniversity


