### Accession
PXD011235

### Title
AOCM-CPC - Kinetochores are macromolecular protein complexes that ensure accurate chromosome segregation by linking chromosomes to spindle microtubules and integrating safeguard mechanisms

### Description
Kinetochores are macromolecular protein complexes that ensure accurate chromosome segregation by linking chromosomes to spindle microtubules and integrating safeguard mechanisms. In yeast, the inner kinetochore, also known as Constitutive Centromere Associated Network (CCAN), is specifically established at point centromeres and has been implicated in contributing to Aurora-BIpl1 function. In an attempt to gain a more detailed picture of the budding yeast kinetochore architecture, crosslink-guided in vitro reconstitution revealed novel direct interactions of the inner kinetochore assembled on Cse4CENP-A nucleosomes. The Ame1/Okp1CENP-U/Q heterodimer selectively bound Cse4CENP-A nucleosomes through the Cse4 N-terminus, providing an explanation for the essential role of the COMA complex in budding yeast. Moreover, the Sli15/Ipl1 core chromosomal passenger complex was found to directly interact with COMA in vitro, suggesting a hitherto unknown role of the COMA complex in establishing biorientation. In line with this finding, in vivo artificial tethering of Sli15 to inner kinetochore proteins rescued synthetically lethal subunit deletion phenotypes in a Sli15 centromere targeting deficient mutant. This study reveals characteristics of the inner kinetochore architecture assembled at point centromeres and its implications on chromosomal passenger complex function.

### Sample Protocol
The complex of Sli15-2xStrep-HA-6xHis/Ipl1 with Ame1/Okp1 and Ctf19/Mcm21 was assembled on Strep-Tactin Superflow agarose (Qiagen) by incubation at room temperature, 1000 rpm for 1 h in a thermomixer (Eppendorf). Unbound proteins were removed by washing three times with binding buffer (50 mM NaH2PO4  pH 8, 500 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol) and the complex was eluted in binding buffer containing 8 mM biotin. The eluted complex was re-isolated on Ni-NTA (Qiagen) beads, washed twice with binding buffer and then crosslinked by resuspending the protein bound beads in BS3 cross linker at a final concentration of 0.25 - 0.5 mM at 30 °C for 30 min. The crosslinking reaction was stopped by adding ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 100 mM for 20 min at 30 °C.  Crosslinked samples were denatured by adding 2 sample volumes of 8 M urea, reduced with 5 mM TCEP (Thermo Scientific) and alkylated by the addition of 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 40 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were digested with Lys-C (1:50 (w/w), Wako Pure Chemical Industries) at 35 °C for 2 h, diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and digested with trypsin (1:50 (w/w), Promega) overnight. Peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) at a final concentration of 1% and purified by reversed phase chromatography using C18 cartridges (Sep-Pak, Waters). Crosslinked peptides were enriched on a Superdex Peptide PC 3.2/30 column using water/acetonitrile/TFA (75/25/0.1, v/v/v) as mobile phase at a flow rate of 50 μl/min and were analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Fragment ion spectra were searched and crosslinks were identified by the dedicated software xQuest. The results were filtered according to the following parameters: Δ score ≤ 0.85, MS1 tolerance window of -4 to 4 ppm and score ≥ 22. The quality of all crosslink spectra passing the filter was manually validated and crosslinks were visualized as network plots using the webserver xVis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kinetochore; cpc; coma; cross-linking;

### Affiliations
EpiQMAx GmbH
Gene Center Munich and Department of Biochemistry, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25, 81377 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Victor Solis

### Lab Head
Dr Franz Herzog
Gene Center Munich and Department of Biochemistry, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25, 81377 Munich, Germany


