### Accession
PXD015567

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Lysine Acetylation and succinylation in pogostemon cablin

### Description
By the combination of affinity enrichment and high-resolution LC-MS/MS analysis, large-scale lysine acetylome analysis was performed. Altogether, 6,925 lysine acetylation sites in 2,526 protein groups were identified. Intensive bioinformatic analysis was then carried out to annotate those identified lysine acetylated targets in response to drug treatment, including GO annotation, domain annotation, subcellular localization, KEGG pathway annotation, functional cluster analysis, etc. Based on the results, further studies following the lysine acetylome analysis were suggested

### Sample Protocol
Sample was first grinded by liquid nitrogen, then the cell powder was transferred to 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 65 mM DTT and 0.1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NH4CO3, pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against UniProt pogostemon cablin database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 3 missing cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, Lysine Acetylation, Lysine succinylation and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The site localization probability was set as > 0.75

### Publication Abstract
Lysine succinylation is a novel, naturally occurring posttranslational modification (PTM) in living organisms. Global lysine succinylation identification has been performed at the proteomic level in various species; however, the study of lysine succinylation in plant species is relatively limited. Patchouli plant (<i>P. cablin</i> (Blanco) Benth., Lamiaceae) is a globally important industrial plant and medicinal herb. In the present study, lysine succinylome analysis was carried out in patchouli plants to determine the potential regulatory role of lysine succinylation in patchouli growth, development, and physiology. The global succinylation sites and proteins in patchouli plants were screened with an immunoprecipitation affinity enrichment technique and advanced mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Several bioinformatic analyses, such as function classification and enrichment, subcellular location predication, metabolic pathway enrichment and protein-protein interaction networking, were conducted to characterize the functions of the identified sites and proteins. In total, 1097 succinylation sites in 493 proteins were detected in patchouli plants, among which 466 succinylation sites in 241 proteins were repeatedly identified within three independent experiments. The functional characterization of these proteins indicated that the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, oxidative phosphorylation, photosynthesis processes, and amino acid biosynthesis may be regulated by lysine succinylation. In addition, these succinylated proteins showed a wide subcellular location distribution, although the chloroplast and cytoplasm were the top two preferred cellular components. Our study suggested the important role of lysine succinylation in patchouli plant physiology and biology and could serve as a useful reference for succinylation studies in other medicinal plants.

### Keywords
Proteomic acetylation succinylation pogostemon cablin

### Affiliations
company
Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
Jones Macke

### Lab Head
Dr Likai Chen
Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine


