### Accession
PXD003236

### Title
pyQms - partial labeled proteome gold standard

### Description
" The novel mass spectrometry quantitation tool pyQms can calculate isotope patterns for molecules that have any isotope enrichment or combinations of, e.g. 13C or 15N and allows partially labeled molecules to be quantified as well, as observed in pulse or pulse-chase experiments where enrichment levels change dynamically. In order to test how pyQms performs on such a task, we created a gold standard (GS) data set of partially labeled proteomes, which allows evaluation of algorithms detecting partial labeld isotopologues against the ground truth against 5 mixed samples. Cultures of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii were grown on medium containing 20, 40, 60, 80 and 100% 15N. Since partially labeled peptides will not produce interpretable fragmentation spectra, each of the partially labeled proteomes were mixed with an unlabeled (14N) or fully labeled (15N) proteome, yielding 5 mixed samples (0|100, 20|100, 40|100, 0|60 and 0|80). " (Modified from manuscript)

### Sample Protocol
" Sample preparation Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (strain CW15) cells were grown heterotrophically in tris-acetate-phosphate (TAP) medium (Harris 1989) at a light intensity of 50 µE m-2 s-1 and at 22 °C on a rotary shaker at 120 rpm or on TAP-agar plates containing 1.5% agar at a light intensity of 40–50 µE m-2 s-1. Metabolically labelling was performed by mixing unlabeled TAP medium with completely 15N labelled TAP medium at different proportions (0, 20, 40, 60, 80 and 100% (w/w)) using 99.4% 15N enriched 15NH4Cl (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Inc., Tewksbury, MA, USA). Cells were grown several generations on 15N containing agar plates to assure complete metabolic labelling. Cells were grown for three days with the described conditions and harvested at 5000 x g (Beckmann Coulter J 20 XP), suspended in H6 buffer (5 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 10 mM EDTA) and stored at -80 °C. Protein samples were tryptically digested using a modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol (Wisniewski et al. 2009) as described in Barth et al. (2014) with the following modifications. Samples were mixed on equal chlorophyll levels (6.25 µg). Washing steps were repeated 4 times. LC-MS/MS measurement Liquid chromatography coupled tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) measurements were done employing a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Instrument software versions which were used are: Exactive Series (Tune) 2.3 Build 1765 and Xcalibur 3.0.63. For reversed phase chromatography via HPLC a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC System (Thermo Scientific) was used. Peptide samples were loaded on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, 300 µm x 5 mm, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Dionex). Samples were desalted utilizing a flow rate of 5 µl/min for 5 min using 2 % (v/v) acetonitrile/0.05 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid in ultrapure water. Peptide separation was done using a mobile phase composed of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in ultrapure water (A) and 80% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) formic acid in ultrapure water (B). The trap column was switched for peptide elution in-line with a C18 capillary column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 µm x 150 mm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Dionex). The gradient used was: 2.5–35% B (90 min), 35–99 % B (5min), 99 % B (5 min). Ions were generated by electrospray ionization (ESI). For full scans a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 was used (maximum injection time: 50 ms, AGC target: 1e6, range: 400–1600 m/z). For each full scan the 12 most abundant precursor ions (charge 2+ to 7+) were selected for fragmentation (MS2) by higher energy c-trap dissociation (HCD). For MS2 scans a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200 was used (maximum injection time: 50 ms, AGC target: 5e4, underfill ratio: 1%). A dynamic exclusion of 60s for fragmented precursor ions was used. In total 35 LC-MS/MS runs were recorded consisting of 636,910 MS1 and 1,258,099 MS2 scans. " (Modified from manuscript)

### Data Protocol
"LC-MS/MS files in RAW format were converted to mzML (Martens et al. 2011, Deutsch 2008) using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.0.0). Subsequently, pymzML (Bald et al. 2012) was used to convert the mzML files to the mascot generic format (mgf), if required. It is noteworthy that although MS1 scans were recorded in profile mode, all spectra used for quantification in pyQms need to be transformed to a centroided format, which can be done automatically during conversion to mzML or alternatively if mzML parsing is performed using pymzML (Bald et al. 2012). All peptide identification algorithms were executed using Ursgal (Kremer et al. 2016), a Python framework for performing peptide identifications, statistical post-processing and data visualization using unified parameters. Briefly, peptides were identified using the algorithms OMSSA (version 2.19, , Geer et al. 2004), X!Tandem (version 2013.09.01, Craig and Beavis 2014), MS- GF+ (version 9979, Kim et al. 2010) and MyriMatch (version 2.1.138, Tabb et al. 2008). Default values were used for most of the search parameters. Precursor mass accuracy was set to 5 parts per million (ppm), fragmentation mass accuracy was set to 20 ppm. Trypsin was defined as protease. A shuffled-peptide based target-decoy database (conserving trypsin cleavage sites) was generated as described previously (Barth et al. 2014) using Ursgal. The Chlamydomonas reinhardtii database from the Joint Genome Institute (JGI) version 5.3.1/236 (Merchantb et al. 2007) with Augustus 11.6 (Stanke and Waack 2003), the chloroplastic (Maul et al. 2002) and mitochondrial proteome as well as a contaminant database (cRAP, Mellacheruvu et al. 2013) were used for the generation of the target decoy database containing in total 19,537 (target) protein sequences (see supplemental material). Further search parameters were variable modifications: oxidation of methionine (+15.9949 Da) and acetylation of the N-terminus (+42.0106 Da). No fixed modifications were defined. Two missed cleavage sites were permitted. Database searches were conducted for 14N and 15N labeling separately. The posterior error probability (PEP) was determined for each Peptide-spectrum match (PSM) using Percolator (version 2.08, Käll et al. 2007, Käll et al. 2008). All PSMs with PEPs ≤1% at the level of the database search engine were used for all subsequent analyses. A total of 19,976 unique peptides were identified, mapping to 18,285 unique chemical formulas. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange (Vizcaíno et al. 2014) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD003236. Venn diagrams of identified peptides and overlap of the different samples can be found in supplemental Fig. 2 and 3, respectively. Spectrum annotations of proteins with one PSM or one distinct peptide can be found in the supplemental material. All identified proteins and peptides including sequence coverage can be found in supplemental Table S2 and S3. Peptides were quantified using pyQms (v0.5.0). Retention-time (RT) alignment and enhancement defining RT windows for all peptides (supplemental Table S4) was carried out using piqDB as described earlier (Barth et al. 2014)." (Taken from manuscript)

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative mass spectrometry (MS) is a key technique in many research areas (1), including proteomics, metabolomics, glycomics, and lipidomics. Because all of the corresponding molecules can be described by chemical formulas, universal quantification tools are highly desirable. Here, we present pyQms, an open-source software for accurate quantification of all types of molecules measurable by MS. pyQms uses isotope pattern matching that offers an accurate quality assessment of all quantifications and the ability to directly incorporate mass spectrometer accuracy. pyQms is, due to its universal design, applicable to every research field, labeling strategy, and acquisition technique. This opens ultimate flexibility for researchers to design experiments employing innovative and hitherto unexplored labeling strategies. Importantly, pyQms performs very well to accurately quantify partially labeled proteomes in large scale and high throughput, the most challenging task for a quantification algorithm.

### Keywords
Gold standard dataset, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine
RNA biology laboratory
Von-Esmarch-Straße 54
48149 Münster
Germany
Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology, University of Muenster, Germany

### Submitter
Johannes Leufken

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Christian Fufezan
Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology, University of Muenster, Germany


