### Accession
PXD029364

### Title
HDX-MS data of trigger factor and GAPDH binding

### Description
We present HDX-MS data of the trigger factor:GAPDH complex to define the interaction sites for GAPDH on trigger factor and the structure of GAPDH in the bound state.

### Sample Protocol
For HDX-MS experiments, a robot for automated HDX (LEAP Technologies) was coupled to a Acquity M-Class LC and HDX manager (Waters). Samples comprised protein (TF, GAPDH or both, at a concentration of 8 µM) in 10 mM potassium phosphate, pH 7.6, 0.1M KCl, 1mM TCEP and 0.26M GdnHCl. To initiate the HDX experiment, 95 μL of deuterated buffer (10 mM potassium phosphate, pD 7.6, 0.1M KCl, 1mM TCEP and 0.26M GdnHCl) was added to 5 μL of protein-containing solution, and the mixture was incubated  at 4 °C for 0.5, 2, 5, 10 or 30 min. For each time point and condition three replicate measurements were performed. The HDX reaction was quenched by adding 100 μL of quench buffer (10 mM potassium phosphate, 0.05 % DDM, pH 2.2) to 50 μL of the labelling reaction.

### Data Protocol
The quenched sample (50 μL) was proteolyzed by flowing through immobilised pepsin and aspergillopepsin columns (Affipro) connected in series (20 °C). The produced peptides were trapped on a VanGuard Pre-column [Acquity UPLC BEH C18 (1.7 μm, 2.1 mm × 5 mm, Waters)] for 3 min. The peptides were separated using a C18 column (75 μm × 150 mm, Waters, UK) by gradient elution of 0–40% (v/v) acetonitrile (0.1% v/v formic acid) in H2O (0.3% v/v formic acid) over 7 min at 40 μL min−1.   Peptides were detected using a Synapt G2Si mass spectrometer (Waters) operating  in HDMSE mode, with dynamic range extension enabled. IM separataion was used to separate peptides prior to CID fragmentation in the transfer cell. CID data were used for peptide identification, and uptake quantification was performed at the peptide level. Data were analysed using PLGS (v3.0.2) and DynamX (v3.0.0) software (Waters). Search parameters in PLGS were as follows: peptide and fragment tolerances = automatic, min fragment ion matches = 1, digest reagent = non-specific, false disco rate = 4. Restrictions for peptides in DynamX were as follows: minimum intensity = 1000, minimum products per amino acid = 0.3, max sequence length = 25, max ppm error = 5, file threshold = 3.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chaperone; trigger factor; gapdh; folding

### Affiliations
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, U.K.
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Leeds

### Submitter
Antonio Calabrese

### Lab Head
Dr Antonio Nickolas Calabrese
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, U.K.


