### Accession
PXD017076

### Title
Stress enhances secretory autophagy increasing extracellular Bdnf maturation

### Description
Stress response is a fundamental mechanism to maintain a healthy homeostasis and its disruption is implicated in several psychiatric disorders. Autophagy is one of the mechanisms  regulating homeostasis, and it is known to be activated by cellular stressors such as starvation. In a previous study, we revealed that glucocorticoid (GC)-mediated stress also activates macroautophagy via the stress-responsive co-chaperone FK506-binding protein 51 (FKBP51).  In this study we reveal that GC-mediated stress enhances secretory autophagy, a recently described Atg-dependent secretory pathway, via FKBP51. Strikingly we detected the matrix metallopeptidase 9 (Mmp9) as one of the stress-induced secreted proteins. Furthermore we found that enhanced Mmp9 secretion increases both in vitro and in vivo the cleavage of pro-brain derived neurotrophic factor (proBdnf) to its mature form (mBdnf), a key protein in neuroplasticity. This unravelled mechanism can represent a link between stress and the development of psychiatric disorders.

### Sample Protocol
For the enrichment and digestion of AHA-labeled proteins, the Click-iT™ Protein Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used according to the instructions of the supplier. Resulting peptides were further desalted by using 0.1 % formic acid in 50 % acetonitrile in the micro-column format (three discs, Ø 1.5 mm, C18 material, 3M Empore per micro-column were used). After drying in a centrifugal evaporator, the samples were stored at -20 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS measurement of peptides in eluates was performed using a nanoLC UltiMate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a quadrupole-Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides separated on an Acclaim PepMap analytical column (0.1 mm x 15 cm, C18, 2 µM, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 60 min linear gradient from 3-28 % solvent B [0.1 % formic acid, 5 % DMSO in acetonitrile] in solvent A [0. 1% formic acid, 5 % DMSO in water] at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition and positive ionization mode. MS1 spectra were acquired over a range of 360-1300 m/z at a resolution of 60’000 in the Orbitrap by applying an automatic gain control (AGC) of 3e6 or maximum injection time of 50 ms. Up to 12 peptide precursors were selected for fragmentation by higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD; 1.3 m/z isolation window, AGC value of 1e5, maximum injection time of 22 ms) using 28% normalized collision energy (NCE) and analyzed at a resolution of 15’000 in the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification was performed  using MaxQuant  (version 1.6.0.16) by searching the tandem MS data against all murine canonical and isoform protein sequences as annotated in the Swissprot reference database (25175 entries, downloaded 13.07.2018) using the embedded search engine Andromeda. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modification. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. The minimum peptide length was set to seven and all data were adjusted to 1% PSM and 1 % protein FDR. Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) was enabled within MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
The stress response is an essential mechanism for maintaining homeostasis, and its disruption is implicated in several psychiatric disorders. On the cellular level, stress activates, among other mechanisms, autophagy that regulates homeostasis through protein degradation and recycling. Secretory autophagy is a recently described pathway in which autophagosomes fuse with the plasma membrane rather than with lysosomes. Here, we demonstrate that glucocorticoid-mediated stress enhances secretory autophagy via the stress-responsive co-chaperone FK506-binding protein 51. We identify the matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) as one of the proteins secreted in response to stress. Using cellular assays and in vivo microdialysis, we further find that stress-enhanced MMP9 secretion increases the cleavage of pro-brain-derived neurotrophic factor (proBDNF) to its mature form (mBDNF). BDNF is essential for adult synaptic plasticity and its pathway is associated with major depression and posttraumatic stress disorder. These findings unravel a cellular stress adaptation mechanism that bears the potential of opening avenues for the understanding of the pathophysiology of stress-related disorders.

### Keywords
Secretory autophagy, Secretome, Stress

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich, Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics
TU Munich, Proteomics and Bioanalytics

### Submitter
Svenja Wiechmann

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Technical University of Munich, Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics


