### Accession
PXD029403

### Title
Chromatin-associated RNA degradation contributes to silencing of Polycomb target genes

### Description
Polycomb Repressive Complexes 1 and 2 (PRC1 and PRC2) are histone-modifying and -binding complexes that mediate the formation of facultative heterochromatin and are required for silencing of developmental genes and maintenance of cell fate. Multiple pathways of RNA decay work together to establish and maintain heterochromatin in fission yeast, including a recently identified role for a conserved RNA degradation complex called the rixosome or RIX1 complex. Whether RNA degradation also plays a role in the stability of mammalian heterochromatin remains unknown. Here we show that the rixosome contributes to silencing of many Polycomb targets in human cells. The rixosome associates with human PRC complexes and is enriched at promoters of Polycomb target genes. Importantly, depletion of either the rixosome or Polycomb results in accumulation of paused and elongating RNA polymerase at Polycomb-target genes. We identify point mutations in the RING1B subunit of PRC1 that disrupt the interaction between PRC1 and the rixosome and result in diminished silencing, suggesting that direct recruitment of the rixosome to chromatin is required for silencing. Finally, we show that the RNA kinase activity of the rixosome and the XRN2 exoribonuclease, which degrades RNAs with 5’ mono-phosphate groups generated by the rixosome, are required for silencing. Our findings suggest that rixosome-mediated degradation of nascent RNA is conserved from fission yeast to human, although in human cells the rixosome degrades RNA in facultative rather than constitutive heterochromatin.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation and Mass spectrometry Analysis To prepare chromatin-enriched fractions, cells were washed with PBS and then resuspended in ice-cold hypotonic buffer (10 mM HEPES, pH7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 Mm KCl, 0.2 mM PMSF, 0.2 mM DTT) and incubated on ice for 10 min. Cell membranes were then disrupted by douncing for 10 times. Nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation at 2,000xg for 10 min, resuspended in cell lysis buffer (50 mM Hepes, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, and 0.5% Triton X-100) by pipetting for 3 min, and pelleted by centrifugation at 2,000xg for 10 min to obtain a chromatin fraction. The chromatin pellet was resuspended in IP buffer (50 mM Hepes, pH 7.4, 250 mM NaCl, 10% Glycerol, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, and 1% Triton X-100) containing protease inhibitor cocktail (5056489001, Sigma) and 1 mM DNase I. Chromatin was digested for 2 h at 4°C and centrifuged at 10,000xg for 10 min. The supernatant was then incubated with specific antibodies (Extended Data Table 3) and immune complexes were collected using Dynabeads Protein A/G (ThermoFisher). For silver staining, samples were run on a 5%-20% Bis-Tris SDS-PAGE gel (BioRad) and stained with SilverQuest Silver Staining kit (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For immunoblotting, beads were boiled for 5 min in SDS loading buffer. For mass spectrometry analysis, proteins were eluted with 0.5 M NH4OH and dried to completion in a speed vac.  Dried protein samples were digested in 200 mM EPPS buffer pH 8.5 with trypsin (Promega #V5111). Digests contained 2% acetonitrile (v/v) and were performed at 37˚C overnight. Digests were labeled directly with TMT10 plex reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific, #90406). Labeling efficiency was checked by mass spectrometry. After hydroxylamine-quenching (0.3% v/v) for 15 minutes, reactions were mixed and acidified and solvent evaporated to near completion by speed vac. Samples were then fractionated by alkaline reversed phase chromatography (ThermoFisher #84868) into 12 fractions eluted with 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 25%, 30%, 35%, 40%, 50%, 65% and 80% acetonitrile. Fractions were pooled into 6 fractions (1+7, 2+8, 3+9, 4+10, 5+11, 6+12), dried down, stage-tipped and analyzed by mass spectrometry on an Orbitrap Lumos instrument (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Relative quantification followed a multi-notch SPS-MS3 method. Prior to injection, peptides were separated by HPLC with an Easy-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system using 100 μm inner diameter capillaries and a C18 matrix (2.6 μM Accucore C18 matrix, ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated with 4-hour acidic acetonitrile gradients. MS1 scans were measured by orbitrap recording (resolution 120,000, mass range 400-1400 Th). After CID (collision induced dissociation, 35%), MS2 spectra were collected by iontrap mass analyzer. After SPS (synchronous precursor selection), TMT reporter ions were generated by HCD (high-energy collision-induced dissociation, 55%) and quantified by orbitrap MS3 scan (resolution 50,000 at 200 Th). Spectra were searched with an in-house written software based on Sequest (v.28, rev. 12) against a forward and reversed human proteome database (Uniprot 07/2014). Mass tolerance for searches was 50ppm for precursors and 0.9 Da for fragment ions. Two missed tryptic cleavages per peptide were allowed and oxidized methionine (+15.9949 Da) was searched dynamically. For a peptide FDR (false discovery rate) of 1%, a decoy database strategy and linear discriminant analysis (LDA) were applied. The FDR for collapsed proteins was 1%. Proteins were quantified by summed peptide TMT s/n (signal/noise) with a sum s/n >200 and an isolation specificity of >70%. In this dataset, NOL9-IP samples we labelled with TMT reagents 130n and 131, corresponding controls with 129c and 130c to generate figure 1D.

### Publication Abstract
Polycomb repressive complexes 1 and 2 (PRC1 and PRC2) are histone-modifying and -binding complexes that mediate the formation of facultative heterochromatin and are required for silencing of developmental genes and maintenance of cell fate<sup>1-3</sup>. Multiple pathways of RNA decay work together to establish and maintain heterochromatin in fission yeast, including a recently identified role for a conserved RNA-degradation complex known as the rixosome or RIX1 complex<sup>4-6</sup>. Whether RNA degradation also has a role in the stability of mammalian heterochromatin remains unknown. Here we show that the rixosome contributes to silencing of many Polycomb targets in human cells. The rixosome associates with human PRC complexes and is enriched at promoters of Polycomb target genes. Depletion of either the rixosome or Polycomb results in accumulation of paused and elongating RNA polymerase at Polycomb target genes. We identify point mutations in the RING1B subunit of PRC1 that disrupt the interaction between PRC1 and the rixosome and result in diminished silencing, suggesting that direct recruitment of the rixosome to chromatin is required for silencing. Finally, we show that the RNA endonuclease and kinase activities of the rixosome and the downstream XRN2 exoribonuclease, which degrades RNAs with 5' monophosphate groups generated by the rixosome, are required for silencing. Our findings suggest that rixosomal degradation of nascent RNA is conserved from fission yeast to human, with a primary role in RNA degradation at facultative heterochromatin in human cells.

### Keywords
Polycomb repressive complex rixosome rna degradation wdr18 nol9

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Marian Kalocsay

### Lab Head
Dr Danesh Moazed
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School


