### Accession
PXD014323

### Title
Host cholesterol modulates the generation and enrichment of persister population during Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection.

### Description
We previously reported that the utilization of host cholesterol is essential for mycobacterial persistence. In this study, we demonstrated that cholesterol-induced activation of a ribonuclease toxin (VapC12) inhibits translation by targeting proT tRNA in Mtb. The resulting cholesterol-specific growth modulation increases the frequency of the generation of persisters in a heterogeneous Mtb population. A vapC12-null mutant strain (ΔvapC12) failed to persist and demonstrated a hypervirulent phenotype in a guinea pig model of Mtb infection. This is the first study to identify a novel strategy through which cholesterol-specific activation of a toxin–antitoxin (TA) module in Mtb enhances persister formation during infection. In addition to identifying the mechanism, the study provides opportunity for targeting persisters, a new paradigm facilitating tuberculosis drug development.

### Sample Protocol
BCG strain (vapB K:A C12), overexpressing the toxin–antitoxin complex where antitoxin is His tagged with site-directed mutagenesis (SDM) converting lysine to alanine (K 19 to A 19 ). Log phase culture of BCG strain (vapB K:A C12) was washed with PBS and inoculated in minimal media with 0.1 percent glycerol and minimal media with 0.01 percent cholesterol. The cultures were allowed to grow for 48 hours and cell lysate was prepared. The Immunoprecipitation was performed using an anti-His antibody (cat no. BTL1010).

### Data Protocol
All raw mass spectrometry files were searched in Protein Pilot software v. 5.0.1 (SCIEX) with the Paragon algorithm for relative protein quantification and identification. For Paragon searches, the following settings were used: Sample type: iTRAQ 4 plex (peptide labeled); Cysteine Alkylation: methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS), Digestion: Trypsin; Instrument: TripleTOF5600

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mycobacterium, Proteomics, Mass-spectrometer, Tripletof5600

### Affiliations
Northwestern University
Translational Health Science and Technology Institute

### Submitter
Renu Goel

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Nisheeth Agrawal
Translational Health Science and Technology Institute


