### Accession
PXD046322

### Title
Lipid exchange at ER-trans Golgi contact sites governs polarized cargo sorting

### Description
Oxysterol Binding Protein (OSBP) extracts cholesterol from the ER to deliver it to the TGN via the counter exchange and subsequent hydrolysis of the phosphoinositide PI(4)P. Here, we show that this pathway is essential in polarized epithelial cells where it contributes not only to the proper subcellular distribution of cholesterol, but also to the trans-Golgi sorting and trafficking of numerous plasma membrane cargo proteins with apical or basolateral localization. Reducing the expression of OSBP, blocking its activity or inhibiting a PI4Kinase that fuels OSBP with PI(4)P abolishes the epithelial phenotype. Waves of cargo enrichment in the TGN in phase with OSBP and PI(4)P dynamics suggest that OSBP promotes the formation of lipid gradients along the TGN, which help cargo sorting. During their transient passage through the trans-Golgi, polarized plasma membrane proteins get close to OSBP, but fail to be sorted when OSBP is silenced. Thus, OSBP lipid exchange activity is decisive for polarized cargo sorting and distribution in epithelial cells.

### Sample Protocol
For detailed protocols and methodes see the corresponding publication

### Data Protocol
For detailed protocols and methodes see the corresponding publication

### Publication Abstract
Oxysterol binding protein (OSBP) extracts cholesterol from the ER to deliver it to the TGN via counter exchange and subsequent hydrolysis of the phosphoinositide PI(4)P. Here, we show that this pathway is essential in polarized epithelial cells where it contributes not only to the proper subcellular distribution of cholesterol but also to the trans-Golgi sorting and trafficking of numerous plasma membrane cargo proteins with apical or basolateral localization. Reducing the expression of OSBP, blocking its activity, or inhibiting a PI4Kinase that fuels OSBP with PI(4)P abolishes the epithelial phenotype. Waves of cargo enrichment in the TGN in phase with OSBP and PI(4)P dynamics suggest that OSBP promotes the formation of lipid gradients along the TGN, which helps cargo sorting. During their transient passage through the trans-Golgi, polarized plasma membrane proteins get close to OSBP but fail to be sorted when OSBP is silenced. Thus, OSBP lipid exchange activity is decisive for polarized cargo sorting and distribution in epithelial cells.

### Keywords
Surface proteomic, Osbp, Proximity proteomic

### Affiliations
IPMC/CNRS
IPMC CNRS

### Submitter
David Kovacs

### Lab Head
Dr Anne-Sophie Gay
IPMC/CNRS


