### Accession
PXD008665

### Title
The impact of circulating preeclampsia-associated extracellular vesicles on the migratory activity and phenotype of THP-1 monocytic cells

### Description
Intercellular communication via extracellular vesicles (EVs) is a highly dynamic and specific process. The interaction between EVs and their  target cells, especially immune cells, results in functional and phenotype changes that consequently may play a significant role in various  physiological states and the pathogenesis of immune-mediated disorders. Monocytes are the most prominent environment sensing immune cells in  circulation, skilled to shape their microenvironments via cytokine secretion and further differentiation. Both the circulating monocyte subset distribution and the blood plasma EV pattern are characteristic for preeclampsia, a pregnancy induced immune-mediated hypertensive disorder. We hypothesized that preeclampsia-associated EVs (PE-EVs) induced functional and phenotypic alterations of monocytes. First we proved EV binding  and uptake by THP-1 cells. Cellular origin and protein cargo of circulating PE-EVs were characterized by flow cytometry and mass spectrometry.  An altered phagocytosis-associated molecular pattern was found on PE-EVs: an elevated CD47 “don’t eat me” signal and decreased exofacial phosphatidylserine “eat-me” signal were found along with decreased uptake of PE-EVs. PE-EVs induced significantly lower chemotaxis and cell  motility, but accelerated cell adhesion of THP-1 cells. PE-EVs caused sustained TNF production of THP-1 cells. PE-EVs induced altered monocyte  functions suggest that circulating PE-EVs may have a role in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia.

### Sample Protocol
Blood samples from both healthy and preeclamptic third trimester pregnant women were obtained.Blood was centrifuged at 800 g for 5 minutes to  obtain plasma. Platelet-poor plasma was separated by centrifugation at 2 500 g for 15 minutes at room temperature. Next, it was recentrifuged once again at 2 500 g for 15 minutes to obtain platelet-free plasma (PFP). The PFP aliquots were stored at -80◦ C until use. Each experiment was performed in triplicates and with a minimum of 6 samples/group.  EVs were isolated by serial centrifugation and ultracentrifugation from 1 mL of PFP diluted with 1.5 mL phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) filtered on a 0.22 μm membrane. The 12.5K pellet (EV) was sedimented at 12 500 g for 20 minutes at 16◦ C and subsequently washed at 12 500 g for 15  minutes at 16◦ 333 C. The 100K pellet (small EV) was sedimented from the first 12.5K pellet supernatant at 100 000 g for 70 minutes at 4◦ C. The obtained pellet was washed by filtered (0.22 µm pore size,) PBS at 100 000 g for 70 minutes at 4◦ C. EV-depleted fraction was obtained from the supernatant of 100K pellet by centrifugation at 100 000 g for 4 hours at 4◦ C and filtered through a 0.22 μm filter.  EV pellets for MS analysis were resuspended in 25 μL HPLC water. Vesicle preparations were subjected to repeated freeze-thaw cycles and digested in solution as previously described (Turiák, L. et al. Proteomic characterization of thymocyte-derived microvesicles 582 and apoptotic bodies in BALB/c mice. J. Proteomics 74, 2025–2033 (2011).The resulting peptides were cleaned using PierceTM C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were analysed using a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC or a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Bruker Maxis II Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) with CaptiveSpray nanoBooster ionization source.  Following trapping, peptides were separated on a 25 cm Waters Peptide BEH C18 nanoACQUITY 1.7µm particle size UPLC column using gradient elution.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed with ProteinScape 3.0 software (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen,Germany). Proteins were identified using Mascot  (version Mascot 2.5; Matrix Science, London, UK) search engine against the Swissprot database (2015_08). The following parameters were used:  Homo sapiens taxonomy, trypsin enzyme, 7 ppm peptide mass tolerance, 0.05 Da fragment mass tolerance, 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, while deamidation (NQ) and oxidation (M) as variable modifications. To identify key networks, genome ontology (GO) term enrichment was performed on the identified proteins. For gene ontology (GO) and pathway analysis we used FunRich  software (Uniprot and Funrich databases)

### Publication Abstract
Intercellular communication via extracellular vesicles (EVs) and their target cells, especially immune cells, results in functional and phenotype changes that consequently may play a significant role in various physiological states and the pathogenesis of immune-mediated disorders. Monocytes are the most prominent environment-sensing immune cells in circulation, skilled to shape their microenvironments via cytokine secretion and further differentiation. Both the circulating monocyte subset distribution and the blood plasma EV pattern are characteristic for preeclampsia, a pregnancy induced immune-mediated hypertensive disorder. We hypothesized that preeclampsia-associated EVs (PE-EVs) induced functional and phenotypic alterations of monocytes. First, we proved EV binding and uptake by THP-1 cells. Cellular origin and protein cargo of circulating PE-EVs were characterized by flow cytometry and mass spectrometry. An altered phagocytosis-associated molecular pattern was found on 12.5&#x2009;K fraction of PE-EVs: an elevated CD47 "don't eat me" signal (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.01) and decreased exofacial phosphatidylserine "eat-me" signal (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001) were found along with decreased uptake of these PE-EVs (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). The 12.5&#x2009;K fraction of PE-EVs induced significantly lower chemotaxis (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.01) and cell motility but accelerated cell adhesion of THP-1 cells (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). The 12.5&#x2009;K fraction of PE-EVs induced altered monocyte functions suggest that circulating EVs may have a role in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia.

### Keywords
Human, Flow cytometry, Bruker q-tof, Monocyte, Preeclampsia, Extracellular vesicle, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
MS Proteomics Group Reserach Centre for Natural Sciences Hungarian Academy of Sciences
RCNS HAS, MS Proteomics Research Group

### Submitter
Lilla Turiák

### Lab Head
Dr László Drahos
MS Proteomics Group Reserach Centre for Natural Sciences Hungarian Academy of Sciences


