### Accession
PXD007901

### Title
Neuroblastoma intratumor heterogeneity

### Description
Proteome and phosphoproteome analysis of 10 patient derived xenografts from one neuroblastoma tumor

### Sample Protocol
Tissue samples were homogenized by pulses in a bead beater after addition of zirconia beads and lysis buffer. The supernatants were recovered after centrifugation and used for proteome and phosphoproteome analysis. For proteome analysis, FASP was used to prepare peptide samples. For phosphoproteome analysis, the samples were run on a SDS gel and extracted using-in gel digestion before phosphoenrichment using TiO2 Mag sepharose beads.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to mzML and MGF using ProteoWizard. MGF files were searched with MS-GF+ and X!tandem against a database consisting of of the human proteins and contaminants in THISP45, version 2017-01-01 and all UniProt mouse entries as of 2017-01-23, supplemented with reverse sequence decoy protein entries. A fragment tolerance of 0.4 Da were used in X!tandem and MS-GF+ was set to low-res. Precursor tolerance was 10 ppm. Carbamidometghylation was set as fixed modification of cysteins, and variable phosphorylation of S,T as well as oxidation of M were considered. The peptide-spectrum-matches were combined and filtered at 1% FDR i Proteios Software Environment.

### Publication Abstract
Patient-derived xenografts (PDX) and the Avatar, a single PDX mirroring an individual patient, are emerging tools in preclinical cancer research. However, the consequences of intratumor heterogeneity for PDX modeling of biomarkers, target identification, and treatment decisions remain underexplored. In this study, we undertook serial passaging and comprehensive molecular analysis of neuroblastoma orthotopic PDXs, which revealed strong intrinsic genetic, transcriptional, and phenotypic stability for more than 2 years. The PDXs showed preserved neuroblastoma-associated gene signatures that correlated with poor clinical outcome in a large cohort of patients with neuroblastoma. Furthermore, we captured spatial intratumor heterogeneity using ten PDXs from a single high-risk patient tumor. We observed diverse growth rates, transcriptional, proteomic, and phosphoproteomic profiles. PDX-derived transcriptional profiles were associated with diverse clinical characteristics in patients with high-risk neuroblastoma. These data suggest that high-risk neuroblastoma contains elements of both temporal stability and spatial intratumor heterogeneity, the latter of which complicates clinical translation of personalized PDX-Avatar studies into preclinical cancer research.<b>Significance:</b> These findings underpin the complexity of PDX modeling as a means to advance translational applications against neuroblastoma. <i>Cancer Res; 78(20); 5958-69. &#xa9;2018 AACR</i>.

### Keywords
Pdx, Neuroblastoma

### Affiliations
Lund University,
Department of Immunotechnology
Lund University

### Submitter
Fredrik Levander

### Lab Head
Dr Fredrik Levander
Lund University


