### Accession
PXD000674

### Title
PeptideShaker - PeptideShaker is a user friendly tool for shotgun proteomic data interpretation and reprocessing. 

### Description
PeptideShaker is a user friendly tool for shotgun proteomic data interpretation and reprocessing. The present dataset is the example dataset and consists of a single run HeLa measurement.

### Sample Protocol
The dataset consists of an LC-MS analysis of a HeLa lysate on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer.   Sample Preparation  HeLa S3 cells (DSMZ, Braunschweig, Germany) were grown under standard conditions to a confluence of 70-80%. Cells were detached by incubation with trypsin and pelleted cells washed using PBS buffer. A cell pellet corresponding to 2.5 x 106 cells was lysed with 1% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.8, on ice, followed by incubation Benzonase (purity > 99 %) and 2 mM MgCl2 for 30 min at 37°C. Protein concentration was determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Thermo Scientific) followed by reduction of disulfide bonds with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 56°C and carbamidomethylation of free sulfhydryl groups with 20 mM IAA for 30 min at room temperature, in the dark.  The sample was diluted 10-fold with cold ethanol (-40°C) and stored at -40°C for 1 h, followed by centrifugation at 25,000 x g and 4°C for 30 min. The supernatant was carefully removed and the protein pellet washed with 100 µL ice-cold acetone. After centrifugation at 25,000 x g and 4°C for 30 min, the supernatant was removed and the protein pellet was re-solubilized in 2 M GuHCl, 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 7.8. The protein solution was further diluted 10-fold with 50 mM NH4HCO3, 10% ACN and 1 mM CaCl2 to reach a final concentration of 0.2 M GuHCl. For proteolytic digestion, trypsin was added in a 1:30 (wt:wt) ratio and the sample incubated at 37°C overnight. Digest efficiency was controlled as previously described (Burkhart et al., Systematic and quantitative comparison of digest efficiency and specificity reveals the impact of trypsin quality on MS-based proteomics. Journal of Proteomics 2012, 75, 1454-1462.) and generated peptides were desalted using C18 solid phase Tips (SPEC C18 AR, 4 mg bed, Agilent Technologies, Böblingen, Germany) according to the manufacturer´s instructions. Eluted peptides were dried to completeness under vacuum followed by re-solubilization in 0.1% TFA to a final concentration of ~1 µg/µL.   nano-LC-MS/MS An aliquot corresponding to 100 ng in 15 µl 0.1% TFA was used for nano-LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) which was online coupled to a nano RSLC HPLC system (Thermo Scientific). The sample was loaded onto a trap column (C18, 100 μm x 2 cm PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific) with 0.1% TFA, at a flow rate of 10 µL/min, and subsequently separated on a 50 cm main column (C18, 75 μm x 50 cm PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific) using a binary gradient consisting of solvent A (0.1% FA) and solvent B (0.1% FA, 84% ACN); the column compartment was heated to 60°C. The gradient increased linearly from 3-50% B in 40 min and the flow rate was set to 250 µL/min. The Q Exactive was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode acquiring full MS scans at a resolution of 70,000, followed by MS/MS of the 15 most abundant ions (Top15) at a resolution of 17,500. Target values and fill times were set to 3 x 106 and 120 ms for MS and 5 x 104 and 250 ms for MS/MS, respectively. Only charge states between +2 and +5 were selected for fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 27, and the minimum m/z was set to 110.

### Data Protocol
The RAW data was transformed into mgf peak lists using the ProteoWizard software package version 2.2.2954. The obtained peak lists were searched with OMSSA version 2.1.9 and X!Tandem Jackhammer 2013.06.15 using SearchGUI version 1.15.1. All searches were conducted against a concatenated target/decoy version of the human complement of the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (version of December 2013, containing 20,279 target sequences). The decoy sequences are created by reversing the target sequences.  Search settings were as follows:  Trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; 10 ppm as MS, 0.02 Da as MS/MS tolerances, respectively; carbamidomethylation of Cys (+57.021464 Da) as fixed, and oxidation of Met (+15.994915 Da) and phosphorylation of Ser/Thr/Tyr (+79.966331 Da) as variable modifications. All other OMSSA or X!Tandem settings were kept at the default values of SearchGUI.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein identification, Peptideshaker, Reprocessing

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. Department of Medical Protein Research, VIB, Ghent, Belgium.
PROBE Dept of Biomedicine

### Submitter
Marc Vaudel

### Lab Head
Dr Lennart Martens
Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. Department of Medical Protein Research, VIB, Ghent, Belgium.


