### Accession
PXD010615

### Title
FtsH12 abundance modulates chloroplast development in Arabidopsis thalian

### Description
Proteomic investigation of Arabidopsis thaliana ftsH12 - ftsH12 is one of 17 genes of the FtsH metallo-protease family encoded within the A. thaliana genome.

### Sample Protocol
To find interacting partners we cloned FtsH12 promoter to FtsH12 CDS and a C-terminal c-myc tag. This construct was brought into a heterozygote T-DNA insertion line of FtsH12 (GABI_550G09) and segregated until we received a homozygote line expressing only P12::FtsH12CDS::4xc-myc (see Sup. Fig. Myc Western). This line did not show a visible phenotype indicating a normal function of our FtsH12 construct. We isolated two time independently chloroplasts from six week old leaves from wt and P12::FtsH12CDS::4xc-myc. The plastids were solubilized in PBS, 0.28 % beta-DM, and 1.86 % digitonin. FtsH12 containing solubilized plastid membranes were enriched via magnetic beads bound anti-c-myc antibodies. Negative controls were either wild type chloroplasts with c-myc antiboby bound beads or P12::FtsH12CDS::4xmyc chloroplasts with beads that had bound an antibody not raised against c-myc. Proteins eluted from those beads were identified and quantified via label free LC-mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified and quantified from the acquired MS spectra using the MaxQuant software package, v1.6.0.16 and the UniProt Arabidopsis thaliana reference proteome database (downloaded January 2018, 41350 entries). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+ 42.0106 Da) was considered as variable modifications. PSM false discovery rate was set to 0.01. Proteins with more than one unique peptide and only present in the anti-c-myc antibody reacting P12::FtsH12CDS::4xc-myc chloroplast samples were regarded as true hits.

### Publication Abstract
The ATP-dependent metalloprotease FtsH12 (filamentation temperature sensitive protein H 12) has been suggested to participate in a heteromeric motor complex, driving protein translocation into the chloroplast. FtsH12 was immuno-detected in proplastids, seedlings, leaves, and roots. Expression of Myc-tagged FtsH12 under its native promotor allowed identification of FtsHi1, 2, 4, and 5, and plastidic NAD-malate dehydrogenase, five of the six interaction partners in the suggested import motor complex. Arabidopsis thaliana mutant seedlings with reduced FTSH12 abundance exhibited pale cotyledons and small, deformed chloroplasts with altered thylakoid structure. Mature plants retained these chloroplast defects, resulting in slightly variegated leaves and lower chlorophyll content. Label-free proteomics revealed strong changes in the proteome composition of FTSH12 knock-down seedlings, reflecting impaired plastid development. The composition of the translocon on the inner chloroplast membrane (TIC) protein import complex was altered, with coordinated reduction of the FtsH12-FtsHi complex subunits and accumulation of the 1 MDa TIC complex subunits TIC56, TIC214 and TIC22-III. FTSH12 overexpressor lines showed no obvious phenotype, but still displayed distinct differences in their proteome. N-terminome analyses further demonstrated normal proteolytic maturation of plastid-imported proteins irrespective of FTSH12 abundance. Together, our data suggest that FtsH12 has highest impact during seedling development; its abundance alters the plastid import machinery and impairs chloroplast development.

### Keywords
Ath ftsh12 immunoprecipitation ip

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany
Forschungszentrum Juelich
ZEA-3 Analytics
Wilhelm-Johnen-Str
D-52425 Juelich

### Submitter
Fatih Demir

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Florian Huesgen
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany


