### Accession
PXD037361

### Title
Hippocampus Proteomics analysis of 5×FAD::Alb-CreERT2;Ephx2−/− mice and control littermates (5×FAD::Ephx2loxp/loxp); Note: Hepatic Ephx2 deletion in 5×FAD::Alb-CreERT2;Ephx2−/− mice

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the leading cause of late onset dementia. However, to date, no efficient therapy for AD is available. Here, we identified a neuroprotective role of the liver contributing to brain amyloid-β (Aβ) homeostasis. The hippocampus is a crucial region for learning and memory and is one of the brain areas most affected by AD. To investigate brain mechanisms underlying the neuroprotective role of the liver in AD pathology, we performed proteomics analysis of hippocampus extracted from 5×FAD::Alb-CreERT2;Ephx2−/− mice and control littermates. After quality control, we identified 67 protein expressions that were differently regulated between the two genotypes, including nine proteins in the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway of AD

### Sample Protocol
The hippocampal tissue(n=4 per group) of 5×FAD::Alb-CreERT2;Ephx2−/− mice and control littermates was processed. Briefly, homogenization of approximately 50 mg of hippocampal tissue was performed in 500 μL lysis buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NaHPO4, pH 8.5) containing HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The lysates were transferred to new Eppendorf tubes, was sonicated, and were then centrifuged for 5 min at 15,000g. The supernatant was collected to a new tube. The protein concentration was determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Thermo Scientific). Subsequently, the extracted proteins were digested using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure. A 30 min reduction with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) was followed by 30 min of alkylation with 5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark. Lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) at 1:100 (w/w) was added overnight to the samples after they had been diluted 8-fold with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). A further 12 h were spent digesting with trypsin (Promega) at 1:50 (w/w). Acidification of peptide solutions to 1% formic acid (FA) and 0.1% triflouroacetic acid (TFA) and desalination with a C18 Sep-Pak column (Waters) were carried out. With 1 mL of methanol, 80% acetonitrile, and 2 mL of 0.1% TFA, each Sep-Pak column was activated, washed, and equilibrated, respectively. Following loading, each column was washed twice with 1% TFA and eluted twice with 50% acetonitrile (ACN). The peptide solutions after digestion were vacuum-dried. Next, the derived peptides were resuspended in peptide loading buffer (0.1% FA, 0.03% TFA, 1% ACN) with 0.2 pmol of isotopically labeled peptide calibrants (Cat#88321, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Resuspended peptides were separated on a C18 column (25 × 75 µm internal diameter, New Objective) by a NanoAcquity UPLC (Waters) and monitored on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer with Electron Transfer Dissociation (Thermo Scientific). Separation was performed over a 120-min gradient (400 nl/min) of 3–80% buffer B (0.1% formic acid 0.5% DMSO in acetonitrile) into buffer A (0.1% formic acid 5% DMSO in water). The mass spectrometer cycle was programmed to collect one full MS scan followed by MS/MS scans. MS scans were collected at m/z 200 at a resolution of 70,000 in profile mode and MS/MS scans were collected at 200 m/z at a resolution of 17,500. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previously sequenced precursor ions for 30 s within a 10ppm window. Also excluded were precursor ions with +1 or ≥ +6 charge states.

### Data Protocol
Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was performed. Raw sample data were analyzed using MaxQuant v1.5.3.30 with Thermo Foundation 2.0 for RAW file reading capability. The search engine Andromeda, integrated into MaxQuant, was used to search a concatenated target-decoy Uniprot mouse reference protein database (retrieved August 2015; 54,489 target sequences). Quantitation of proteins was performed using the LFQ algorithm built into MaxQuant, which normalizes for technical variations across samples. LFQ minimum ratio count allowed was 1. The quantitation method only considered razor plus unique peptides for protein level quantitation. The full list of parameters used for MaxQuant are available upon request as a parameter.XML file. The average extracted ion currents (XIC) across three biological repeats was calculated for 5×FAD::Alb-CreERT2;Ephx2−/− mice and 5×FAD::Ephx2loxp/loxp littermates. To determine which proteins were altered, we calculated the log2 ratio of XIC values from 5×FAD::Alb-CreERT2;Ephx2−/− mice and 5×FAD::Ephx2loxp/loxp littermates. relative to control littermates. Gene ontology (GO) term and Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment was determined using the Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID).

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is caused by a complex interaction between genetic and environmental factors. However, how the role of peripheral organ changes in response to environmental stimuli during aging in AD pathogenesis remains unknown. Hepatic soluble epoxide hydrolase (sEH) activity increases with age. Hepatic sEH manipulation bidirectionally attenuates brain amyloid-&#x3b2; (A&#x3b2;) burden, tauopathy, and cognitive deficits in AD mouse models. Moreover, hepatic sEH manipulation bidirectionally regulates the plasma level of 14,15-epoxyeicosatrienoic acid (-EET), which rapidly crosses the blood-brain barrier and modulates brain A&#x3b2; metabolism through multiple pathways. A balance between the brain levels of 14,15-EET and A&#x3b2; is essential for preventing A&#x3b2; deposition. In AD models, 14,15-EET infusion mimicked the neuroprotective effects of hepatic&#xa0;sEH ablation at biological and behavioral levels. These results highlight the liver's key role in AD pathology,&#xa0;and targeting the liver-brain axis in response to environmental stimuli may constitute a promising therapeutic approach for AD prevention.

### Keywords
Liver; soluble epoxide hydrolases; alzheimer’s disease; 14, 15-epoxyeicosatrienoic acid; astrocytes; apolipoprotein e

### Affiliations
School of Psychology, Shenzhen University
School of Psychology, Shenzhen University; Shenzhen 518060, China. Research Center for Brain Health, Pazhou Lab; Guangzhou, 510330, China.

### Submitter
yu wu

### Lab Head
Dr Xinhong Zhu
School of Psychology, Shenzhen University; Shenzhen 518060, China. Research Center for Brain Health, Pazhou Lab; Guangzhou, 510330, China.


