### Accession
PXD016395

### Title
Leaf-cutting ant feces LC-MS/MS

### Description
Leaf-cutting ants of the genera Acromyrmex and Atta live in mutualistic symbiosis with a basidiomycete fungus (Leucocoprinus gongylophorus), which they cultivate as fungal gardens in underground nest chambers. The ants provide the fungus with a growth substrate consisting of freshly cut leaf fragments. After new leaf fragments are brought into the nest, the ants chew them into smaller pieces and apply droplets of fecal fluid to the leaf pulp before depositing this mixed substrate in the fungus garden and inoculating it with small tufts of mycelium from older parts of the garden. Previous work has shown that the fecal fluid contains a range of digestive enzymes including proteases, amylases, chitinases, cellulases, pectinases, hemicellulases and laccases, and that most of these enzymes are produced by the fungal symbiont in specialized structures called gongylidia that the ants eat. After ingestion, the enzymes apparently pass unharmed through the alimentary channel of the ants and end up in the fecal fluid. Most likely this complex system is an adaptation of the ant-fungus symbiosis to a herbivorous lifestyle, as the ancient ancestors of the ants and the fungus lived as hunter-gatherers and saprotrophs, respectively. The promise of fecal fluid for getting insight into the molecular adaptations that enables the ant-fungus holosymbiont to live as a herbivore, led us to investigate the fecal fluid proteome using LC-MS/MS in order to get a more comprehensive picture of the repertoire of proteins present.

### Sample Protocol
Fecal droplets were collected by squeezing large worker ants with forceps on the head and abdomen until they deposited a drop of fecal fluid. 0.5 µl of double destilled and autoclaved water was added to the droplet before it was collected with a micro pipette and transferred to an Eppendorf tube with Run Blue loading buffer (Expedeon Inc.). Ten fecal droplets from each of the four colonies were run on a 12 % Run Blue polyacrylamide gel (Expedeon Inc.) in a Mini-Protean II electrophoresis system (Biorad) for about 10 min at 90 mA. The gel was stained in Instant Blue Coommassie (Expedeon Inc.) over night at room temperature, and the stained part of each lane was cut out with a scalpel and transferred to Eppendorf tubes, after which the samples were sent to Alphalyse (Denmark) for analysis. The protein samples were reduced and alkylated with iodoacetamide (i.e. carbamidomethylated), and subsequently digested with trypsin. The resulting peptides were concentrated by Speed Vac lyophilization and redissolved for injection on a Dionex nano-LC system and MS/MS analysis on a Bruker Maxis Impact QTOF instrument.

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS/MS spectra were analysed using the MaxQuant software package version 1.5.4.1 integrated with the Andromeda search engine using standard parameters. The spectra were matched to a reference database of the predicted Acromyrmex echinatior proteome combined with published predicted Leucoagaricus gongylophorus proteomes originating from the Acromyrmex echinatior, Atta cephalotes and Atta colombica fungal symbionts, as well as single protein sequences predicted from manually PCR amplified and sequenced cDNA sequences. As these published fungal proteomes contained many redundant protein sequences, a non-redundant reference protein database was constructed using CD-Hit keeping only the longest sequences of the sets of 100% matching sequences. Annotation of the identified protein sequences was performed using Blast2GO (33) combined with manual BlastP searches against the NCBI nr database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Symbiosis, Enzymes, Acromyrmex

### Affiliations
DTU
Section for Ecology and Evolution, Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Morten Schioett

### Lab Head
Dr Jacobus Jan Boomsma
Section for Ecology and Evolution, Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Denmark


