### Accession
PXD015690

### Title
Integrated quantitative analysis of the human brain proteome and phosphoproteome in Alzheimer's disease

### Description
Proteome and phosphoproteome of Alzheimer's disease using tandem mass tag multiplexing.

### Sample Protocol
Brain tissue homogenization and protein digestion  Procedures for tissue homogenization were performed essentially as described[1]. In total there were 27 samples from 3 stages of pathological groups (10 cognition normal control, 8 Asym AD, 9 AD). Approximately 100 mg (wet tissue weight) of brain grey matter tissue was homogenized in 500 μL 8 M urea lysis buffer (8 M urea, 100mM NaHPO4, pH 8.5) with HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (ThermoFisher) using a Bullet Blender (NextAdvance). The samples were homogenized for 2 full 5 min cycles with ~100 μL of stainless steel beads (0.9 to 2.0mm blend, NextAdvance). The lysates were transferred to new Eppendorf Lobind tubes following with sonication of 3 cycles consisting of 5 s of active sonication at 30% amplitude followed by 15 s on ice. Samples were then centrifuged for 5 min at 15 000 g and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Prior to further processing, protein concentration and integrity was tested by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Pierce) and SDS-PAGE (Supplementary Figure 1). For protein digestion, 500 μg of each sample was aliquoted and volumes normalized with additional lysis buffer. Samples were reduced with 1mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min, followed by 5mM iodoacetamide (IAA) alkylation in the dark for another 30 min. Samples were 4-fold diluted with 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) before Lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) at 1:100 (w/w) was added and kept for 12 hours. Trypsin (Promega) was then added at 1:50 (w/w) and digestion was carried out for another 12 h after the urea concentration was diluted to 1 M. The peptide solutions were desalted with a 200mg C18 Sep-Pak column (Waters). Pak column was activated with 2X 1.5mL of methanol, then equilibrated with 6 × 1.5 mL 0.1% TFA. The samples were loaded after acidified to final concentration of 1% formic acid (FA) and 0.1% triflouroacetic acid (TFA). Each column was washed with 6× 1.5 mL 0.1% TFA. Elution was performed with 2 rounds of 1.5 mL of 50% acetonitrile.  IMAC phosphorylated peptide enrichment  For phosphorylated peptide enrichment, 95% of 24 subfractions were further combined into 12 fractions with alternating manner (1 and 13, 2 and 14, etc.). Peptide amount was assumed to equally distribute in all fractions. The enrichment method was according to CPTAC protocol (cite) with some modifications (cite). 1200 μL of slurry, in which the beads/solvent ratio is 1:1, was utilized for 1 batch of TMT fractions. Beads were stripped of nickel with 8 Ml of 100 mM EDTA and then treated with 8Ml of 50 mM FeCl3 both by 30 min end-to-end rotation. After removing excess Fe3+ ion, beads were wash with 8 Ml of water and resuspended in 2.4 mL of :1:1 (vol/vol/vol) ratio of acetonitrile/methanol/0.01% (vol/vol) acetic acid. The beads were re-rinse with 2.4 mL of 100% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and divided into 12 tubes. Supernatant was removed before peptide mixture was add into. All dried fractions were reconstituted in 50% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and then diluted 1:1 with 100% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid to obtain a final 75% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA peptide solution at a concentration of 0.5 μg/μl. The peptide mixture was incubated with treated beads for 30min with rotation. Enriched IMAC beads were resuspended in 100 μL of 80% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA before the stage tips got conditioned. Stage tips were equilibrated with 2 x 100 μL methonal wash, 2 x 100 μL100% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, 2 x 100 μL of 1% formic acid. IMAC beads slurry was loaded onto the stage tips and washed with 3 x 100 μL of 80% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA, then 3 x 100 μL of 1% formic acid. The phosphorylated peptides were released from IMAC beads by 3 x 100 μL 500 Mm dibasic sodium phosphate (Na2HPO4),pH 7.0, (Sigma, S9763) and washed by 3 x 100 μL 1% formic acid. The phosphorylated peptides were eluted from stage tips by 3 x 100 μL 50% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. The phosphorylated peptide solutions were dried with speed-vac.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS and TMT data acquisition on an orbitrap lumos mass spectrometer  Both proteome and phosphoproteome samples were on Fusion Lumos equipped with the NanoFlex nano-electrospray source (ThermoFisher). Assuming equal distribution of peptide concentration across all 24 subfractions, 19 μL of loading buffer (0.1% TFA) was added to each of the fractions and 2 μL (1 μg equivalent) was loaded for proteome analysis. Phosphorylated peptides were assumed to take 1% from all peptides. Same volume of loading buffer (7 μL, 0.1% TFA) was added to all IMAC elution samples, 2 μL (1 μg equivalent) was analysis mass spectrometry. All proteome and phosphoproteme samples were separated on 25 cm long 75 μm ID fused silica columns (New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed in-house with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ resin (Dr Maisch). All fractions were eluted over a 140 minute gradient (supplementary table 3) using an Easy nLC 1200 (Thermofisher). The gradient starts off 1% buffer B (A: water with 0.1% formic acid and B: 80% acetonitrile in water with 0.1% formic acid) and goes to 7% in 3 minutes, then goes from 7% to 30% in 137 minutes, then to 95% in 5 minutes and finally staying at 95% for 25 minutes. The mass spectrometer was operated in top speed mode with 3 second cycles. Both the MS and MS/MS scans were collected in the orbitrap. The full scan was performed with a range of 375-1500 m/z, a nominal resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z, automatic gain control (AGC) at 4x105, a 50 ms max injection time and a RF lens setting of 30%. Higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) MS/MS scans settings were: resolution of 50,000, AGC at 1x105 isolation width of 0.7 m/z, max injection time of 105 ms, and a collision energy of 38%. Only charge states from 2+ to 7+ were chosen for tandem MS/MS. All resulting raw files (n =211) are provided [Data Citation 2]  Protein identification and quantification  Raw data files from Orbitrap Fusion were processed using Proteome Discover (version 2.3). MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProtKB Human proteome database (xxxx total sequences) [Data Citation 3]. The respective FASTA database used in this study is deposited in the on the Synapse (www.synapse.org). The Sequest HT search engine was used and parameters were specified as: fully tryptic specificity, maximum of two missed cleavages, minimum peptide length of 6, fixed modifications for TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+ 229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+ 57.02146 Da), variable modifications for oxidation of methionine residues (+ 15.99492 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (+0.984 Da), precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 daltons. Percolator was used to filter peptide spectral matches (PSM) and peptides to a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% using target-decoy strategy. Following spectral assignment, peptides were assembled into proteins and were further filtered based on the combined probabilities of their constituent peptides to a final FDR of 1%. In cases of redundancy, shared peptides were assigned to the protein sequence in adherence with the principles of parsimony. Reporter ions were quantified from MS2 scans using an integration tolerance of 20 ppm with the most confident centroid setting. The search results and TMT quantification are included [Data Citation 4].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Phosphorylation, Ad, Phosphopeptide, Tandem mass tags, Tmt, Alzheimer's

### Affiliations
Emory University Department of Biochemistry Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases
Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases

### Submitter
Duc Duong

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas Seyfried
Emory University Department of Biochemistry Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases


