### Accession
PXD008900

### Title
Early mannitol-triggered changes  in the Arabidopsis leaf (phospho)proteome

### Description
Drought is one of the most detrimental environmental stresses to which plants are exposed. Especially mild drought is relevant to agriculture and significantly affects plant growth and development. In plant research, mannitol is often used to mimic drought stress and study the resulting responses. In growing leaf tissue of plants exposed to mannitol-induced stress, a highly-interconnected gene regulatory network is induced. However, early signaling and associated protein phosphorylation events that likely precede part of these transcriptional changes are largely unknown. Here, we performed a full proteome and phosphoproteome analysis on growing leaf tissue of Arabidopsis plants exposed to mild mannitol-induced stress and captured the fast (within the first half hour) events associated with this stress. Based on this in-depth data analysis, 167 and 172 differentially abundant and unique  proteins and phosphorylated sites were found back, respectively. Finally, we identified H(+)-ATPASE 2 (AHA2) and CYSTEINE-RICH REPEAT SECRETORY PROTEIN 38 (CRRSP38) as novel regulators of shoot growth under osmotic stress.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material was flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and ground into a fine powder. Proteins were extracted in homogenization buffer (pH 8.0) containing 30% sucrose, 250 mM Tris-HCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT and protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (cOmplete™ and PhosSTOP™). The samples were sonicated on ice and centrifuged at 4°C for 15 min at 2500 × g to remove debris. Supernatants were collected and a methanol/chloroform precipitation was carried out by adding methanol, chloroform and water in the following proportion 3:1:4. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 5000 × g, and the aqueous phase was removed. After addition of 4 volumes methanol, the proteins were pelleted via centrifugation for 10 min at 2500 × g. Pellets were washed with 80% acetone and re-suspended in 8 M urea in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (pH 8). Alkylation of cysteines was carried out by adding a combination of tris(carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Pierce) and iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) to final concentrations of 15 mM and 30 mM, respectively, and the reaction was allowed for 15 min at 30°C in the dark. Before digestion, the protein concentration was measured with a Nanodrop Spectrophotometer. Two milligrams of the proteins were pre-digested with endoproteinase-LysC (Wako Chemicals) for 2 h, followed by a digestion with trypsin overnight (Promega Trypsin Gold, mass spectrometry grade), both digestions occurring at 37°C at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 (w:w). Prior trypsin digestion samples were diluted 8 times in order to lowered urea concentration. The digest was acidified to pH ≤ 3 with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), desalted with SampliQ C18 SPE cartridges (Agilent) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines and vacuim-dried in a SpeedVac. Peptide pellets were dissolved in 500 μl of 80% acetonitrile (ACN) and 6% TFA. 30 μl of each peptide solution was used for proteome analysis and the rest for the phosphopeptide enrichment. For phosphopeptide enrichment dried eluates were resuspended in 100 µl of loading solvent (80% acetonitrile, 5% TFA) and incubated with 1 mg MagReSyn® Ti-IMAC microspheres for 20 min at room temperature. The microspheres were next washed once with wash solvent 1 (80% acetonitrile, 1% TFA, 200 mM NaCl) and two times with wash solvent 2 (80% acetonitrile, 1% TFA). The bound phosphopeptides were eluted with three volumes (80 µl) of a 1% NH4OH solution, followed immediately by acidification to pH ≤ 3 with formic acid. Prior to MS analysis, the samples were vacuum-dried and re-dissolved in 50 μL of 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA.  Each sample was analyzed twice (i.e. in two technical replicates) via LC−MS/MS on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in-line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The sample mixture was first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After flushing from the trapping column, the sample was loaded on an analytical column (made in-house, 75 μm I.D. × 150 mm, 3 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were loaded with loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water) and separated with a linear gradient from 98% solvent A’ (0.1% formic acid in water) to 55% solvent B′ (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile, 20/80 (v/v)) in 170 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. This was followed by a 5 min wash reaching 99% solvent B’. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 10 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was 3.4 kV, and the capillary temperature was 275°C. One MS1 scan (m/z 400−2000, AGC target 3 × 106 ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms) acquired at a resolution of 70000 (at 200 m/z) was followed by up to 10 tandem MS scans (resolution 17500 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 5 × 104 ions, maximum ion injection time 60 ms, isolation window 2 Da, fixed first mass 140 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, underfill ratio 2%, intensity threshold 1.7xE4, exclusion of unassigned, 1, 5-8, >8 charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 20 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 25% Normalized Collision Energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.120025 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the Arabidopsis proteome database (TAIR10, containing 35,386 entries; http://www.arabidopsis.org/) using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.4.1). A precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search (used for nonlinear mass recalibration) and to 4.5 ppm for the main search. Trypsin was selected as enzyme setting with maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was selected as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine residues was selected as a variable modification. For the samples enriched for phosphopeptides, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues were set as additional variable modifications. The false discovery rate for peptide and protein identifications was set to 1%, and the minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. The minimum score threshold for both modified and unmodified peptides was set to 30. The MaxLFQ algorithm allowing label-free quantification and the “Matching between runs” feature were enabled. For the quantitative maize proteome and phosphoproteome analyses, the ‘ProteinGroups’ and ‘Phospho(STY)sites’ output files, respectively, generated by the MaxQuant search was loaded into Perseus, the data analysis software available in the MaxQuant package.  Proteins or phosphopeptides that were present in one sample (in more than 75 % of the replicates) and absent or below the detection threshold in another sample (in more than 75 % of the replicates) were extracted from the main list as “unique” proteins or phosphosites.  Proteins or phosphopeptides that were quantified in ≥ 75 % of the biological replicates in both control and mannitol-treated samples were submitted for the following statistical analysis workflow. Log2 transformed protein LFQ intensities or phosphosites intensities were centred around zero by a subtraction of the medium within each replicate and subjected to a two-sample t-test (p < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Leaf growth is a complex, quantitative trait, controlled by a plethora of regulatory mechanisms. Diverse environmental stimuli inhibit leaf growth to cope with the perceived stress. In plant research, mannitol is often used to impose osmotic stress and study the underlying growth-repressing mechanisms. In growing leaf tissue of plants briefly exposed to mannitol-induced stress, a highly interconnected gene regulatory network is induced. However, early signalling and associated protein phosphorylation events that probably precede part of these transcriptional changes and that potentially act at the onset of mannitol-induced leaf size reduction are largely unknown. Here, we performed a proteome and phosphoproteome analysis on growing leaf tissue of Arabidopsis thaliana plants exposed to mild mannitol-induced stress and captured the fast (within the first half hour) events associated with this stress. Based on this in-depth data analysis, 167 and 172 differentially regulated proteins and phosphorylated sites were found. We provide these data sets as a community resource and we flag differentially phosphorylated proteins with described growth-regulatory functions, but we also illustrate potential novel regulators of shoot growth.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Phosphoproteome, Mild osmotic stress, Signalling

### Affiliations
Ghent University
Ghent University, Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, 9052 Ghent, Belgium VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, 9052 Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
Natalia Nikonorova

### Lab Head
Dr Ive De Smet
Ghent University, Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, 9052 Ghent, Belgium VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, 9052 Ghent, Belgium


