### Accession
PXD004599

### Title
Comprehensive analysis of the membrane phosphoproteome regulated by oligogalacturonides in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
Early changes in the Arabidopsis thaliana membrane phosphoproteome in response to oligogalacturonides (OGs), a class of plant damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), were analyzed  through phosphopeptide enrichment followed by LC-MS/MS using label-free quantification. This large-scale phosphoproteome analysis of early OG-signaling enabled us to determine 100 regulated phosphosites.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using a sequential elution from immobilized metal affinity chromatography (SIMAC).  Peptides were separated on a 15 cm PicoFrit Column (75 µm i.d.,New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed with Magic C18AQ (5 µm, 200 Å Michrom) and analyzed on a LTQ-Orbitrap Discovery (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled on-line with a nano-HPLC (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted using a 0–60% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid (180 min, 300 nl/min). MS was acquired at 30,000 FWHM resolution in the FTMS (target value of 5 × 105 ions) and MS/MS was carried out in the linear ion trap, with MS/MS on top 5 ions and multistage activation.

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 with a false-discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01 at the level of proteins, peptides and modifications, using default settings. Oxidized methionine, acetylation (protein N-term) and phospho(STY) were selected as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification. Proteins were identified using a target-decoy approach with a reversed database, using the Andromeda search engine against the Arabidopsis UniProt database (release-2014, 31565 entries) and LFQ quantification for phosphoproteomics and proteomics was performed by MaxQuant. Statistical analysis was performed with Perseus (version 1.5.0.31). Hits to the reverse database and contaminants were filtered out, intensities were normalized for unequal protein amounts and log2-transformed. For the phosphoproteomic study, identifications were filtered to retain only class I phosphosites (localization probability > 0.75 and score difference > 5).

### Publication Abstract
Early changes in the Arabidopsis thaliana membrane phosphoproteome in response to oligogalacturonides (OGs), a class of plant damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), were analyzed by two complementary proteomic approaches. Differentially phosphorylated sites were determined through phosphopeptide enrichment followed by LC-MS/MS using label-free quantification; differentially phosphorylated proteins were identified by 2D-DIGE combined with phospho-specific fluorescent staining (phospho-DIGE). This large-scale phosphoproteome analysis of early OG-signaling enabled us to determine 100 regulated phosphosites using LC-MS/MS and 46 differential spots corresponding to 34 pdhosphoproteins using phospho-DIGE. Functional classification showed that the OG-responsive phosphoproteins include kinases, phosphatases and receptor-like kinases, heat shock proteins (HSPs), reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging enzymes, proteins related to cellular trafficking, transport, defense and signaling as well as novel candidates for a role in immunity, for which elicitor-induced phosphorylation changes have not been shown before. A comparison with previously identified elicitor-regulated phosphosites shows only a very limited overlap, uncovering the immune-related regulation of 70 phosphorylation sites and revealing novel potential players in the regulation of elicitor-dependent immunity.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Phosphoproteomics, Oligogalacturonides, Damps, Elicitors, Lc-ms/ms, Innate immunity

### Affiliations
Biology and Biotechnology "C. Darwin"
Dipartimento di Biologia e Biotecnologie “C. Darwin,” Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy

### Submitter
Benedetta Mattei

### Lab Head
Dr Benedetta Mattei
Dipartimento di Biologia e Biotecnologie “C. Darwin,” Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy


