### Accession
PXD011517

### Title
RASSF1A IS REQUIRED FOR THE MAINTENANCE OF NUCLEAR ACTIN LEVELS

### Description
Nuclear actin participates in many essential cellular processes including gene transcription, chromatic remodelling and mRNA processing. Actin shuttles into and out the nucleus through the action of dedicated transport receptors importin-9 and exportin-6, but how this transport is regulated remains unclear. Here we show that RASSF1A is a novel regulator of actin nucleocytoplasmic trafficking and is required for the active maintenance of nuclear actin levels through supporting binding of exportin-6 (XPO6) to RAN GTPase. RASSF1A (Ras association domain family 1 isoform A) is a tumor suppressor gene frequently silenced by promoter hypermethylation in all major solid cancers. Specifically, we demonstrate that endogenous RASSF1A localizes to the nuclear envelope (NE) and is required for nucleo-cytoplasmic actin transport and the concomitant regulation of Myocardin-related transcription factor A (MRTF-A), a coactivator of the transcription factor serum response factor (SRF). The RASSF1A/RAN/XPO6/nuclear actin pathway is aberrant in cancer cells where RASSF1A expression is lost and correlates with reduced MTRF/SRF activity leading to cell adhesion defects. Taken together, we have identified a previously unknown mechanism by which the nuclear actin pool is regulated and uncovered a previously unknown link of RASSF1A and MTRF/SRF in tumor suppression.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were lysed in 1% NP‐40 lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES, 0.5 mM EDTA) containing complete protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche). 10 mg of total protein lysate were incubated for 3 h with protein A Dynabeads (Invitrogen) and 10 μg of MST2 antibody (ab52641) or rIgG at 4°C. MST2 immunoprecipitates were eluted off the beads in a low pH glycine buffer. The eluted fractions were sequentially incubated with DTT (5mM final concentration) and Iodacetamide (20mM final concentration) for 30min at room temperature in the dark, before proteins were precipitated with methanol/chloroform. Protein precipitates were reconstituted and denatured with 8M urea in 20mM HEPES (pH 8). Samples were then further diluted to a final urea concentration of 2M using 20Mm HEPES (pH8.0) before adding immobilised trypsin for 16h at 37˚C (Pierce 20230); (Montoya et al. 2011). Trypsin digestion was stopped by adding 1% TFA (final concentration) and trypsin removed by centrifugation. Tryptic peptides solution was desalted by solid phase extraction using C18 Spintips (Glygen LTD) and dry down.   Dried tryptic peptides were re-constituted in fifteen µl of LC-MS grade water containing 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA. Seven percent of the sample was analysed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC_MS/MS) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (PepMapC18; 300µm x 5mm, 5µm particle size, Thermo Fischer) for 1 min at a flow rate of 20 μl/min before being chromatographic separated on a 50cm-long EasySpray column (ES803, PepMAP C18, 75 µm × 500 mm, 2 µm particle, Thermo Fischer) with a gradient of 2 to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO with a 250 nL/min flow rate for 60 min (Chung et al. 2016). The Q-Exactive was operated in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode to automatically switch between full MS-scan and MS/MS acquisition. Survey-full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyser over an m/z window of 380 – 1800 and at a resolution of 70k (AGC target at 3e6 ions). Prior to MSMS acquisition, the top fifteen most intense precursor ions (charge state >=2) were sequentially isolated in the Quad (m/z 1.6 window) and fragmented on the HCD cell (normalised collision energy of 28%). MS/MS data was obtained in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17500 with a maximum acquisition time of 128ms, an AGC target of 1e5 and a dynamic exclusion of 27 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were searched against the Human UniProt-SwissProt database (November 2015; containing 20268 human sequences) using Mascot data search engine (v2.3). The search was carried out by  enabling the Decoy function, whilst selecting trypsin as enzyme (allowing 1 missed cleavage), peptide charge of +2, +3, +4 ions, peptide tolerance of 10 ppm and MS/MS of 0.05 Da; #13C at 1; Carboamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification; and Oxidation (M) and Deamidation (NQ) as a variable modification. MASCOT outputs were filtered using an ion score cut off of 20 and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mst2, Exportin-6, Nucleocytoplasmic shuttling, Srf, Rassf1a, Mrtf-a, Nuclear envelope, Nuclear actin, Nuclear export

### Affiliations
CRUK-MRC Oxford Institute for Radiation Oncology, Oxford University
Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, Oxford, Oxfordshire, OX3 7DQ, UK

### Submitter
iolanda Vendrell

### Lab Head
Dr Eric O'Neil
Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, Oxford, Oxfordshire, OX3 7DQ, UK


