### Accession
PXD031218

### Title
A nanobody-based toolset to monitor and modify the mitochondrial GTPase Miro1

### Description
The mitochondrial outer membrane (MOM)-anchored GTPase Miro1, is a central player in mitochondrial transport and homeostasis. The dysregulation of Miro1 in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and Parkinson's disease (PD) suggests that Miro1 may be a potential biomarker or drug target in neuronal disorders. However, the molecular functionality of Miro1 under (patho-) physiological conditions is poorly known. For a more comprehensive understanding of the molecular functions of Miro1, we have developed Miro1-specific nanobodies (Nbs) as novel research tools. We identified seven Nbs that bind either the N- or C-terminal GTPase domain of Miro1 and demonstrate their application as research tools for proteomic and imaging approaches. To visualize the dynamics of Miro1 in real time, we selected intracellularly functional Nbs, which we reformatted into chromobodies (Cbs) for time-lapse imaging of Miro1. By genetic fusion to an Fbox domain, these Nbs were further converted into Miro1-specific degrons and applied for targeted degradation of Miro1 in live cells. In summary, this study presents a collection of novel Nbs that serve as a toolkit for advanced biochemical and intracellular studies and modulations of Miro1, thereby contributing to the understanding of the functional role of Miro1 in disease-derived model systems.

### Sample Protocol
3 x 106 HEK 293 cells were seeded in 100 mm culture dishes (Corning) and cultivated for 24 h. For the pulldown of endogenous Miro1, the cells were harvested and lysed after 24 h. For the pulldown of GFP-Miro1 or GFP, the cells were subjected to plasmid DNA transfection with equal amounts of expression vectors and cultivated for 24 h. Subsequently, cells were washed in PBS (pH 7.4) and harvested, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, stored at -20 °C or thawed for immediate use. Cell pellets were homogenized in 200 µL lysis buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% Triton X-100, 1 mM PMSF, 1 µg/mL DNaseI, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 1 x protease inhibitor cocktail (Serva)) by passing through needles of decreasing gauge and intermittent vortexing for 60 min on ice. Lysates were clarified by subsequent centrifugation at 18,000 x g for 15 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was adjusted with dilution buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl ,150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF) to 500 µL. For immunoprecipitation, 40 – 80 μl of sepharose-coupled Miro1 Nbs (nanotraps) were added to the protein solution and incubated for 16 h on an end over end rotor at 4 °C. As a positive control, 2.5 µg of rabbit anti-Miro1 antibody (# PA5-42646, ThermoFisher) was added to the protein solution and incubated under the same conditions. and incubation continued for 4 h. As a negative control, a non-related Nb (PepNb) immobilized on sepharose beads was used. After centrifugation (2 min, 2700 x g, 4 °C) supernatant was removed and the bead pellet was washed three times in 0.5 mL dilution buffer. On the third wash, the beads were transferred to a pre-cooled 1.5 mL tube (Eppendorf), resuspended in 2 x SDS-containing sample buffer and boiled for 10 min at 95 °C. Miro1 pull-down samples, by application of the mono- and bivalent M41 and M114 nanotraps, were compared to control nanotraps in three technical replicates. Proteins were purified by SDS- PAGE (4-12% NuPAGE tris gel (Invitrogen) for 7 min at 200 V. Coomassie stained protein gel pieces were excised and applied to tryptic digestion as described previously (Shevchenko, A., et al 2006).

### Data Protocol
All samples were analyzed on an Exploris480 mass spectrometer, online-coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 UHPLC system. Peptides were separated on an in-house packed (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-μm silica beads), 20 cm analytical HPLC column (75 μm ID PicoTip fused silica emitter (New Objective, Berks, UK)). Peptides were eluted with a 36 min gradient, generated by solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (80% Acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min at 40°C. Nanospray ionization at 2.3 kV together with a capillary temperature of 275°C was applied for peptide ionization. Full MS spectra were acquired at resolution 60k within a scan range of 300-1750 m/z and tandem MS (MS/MS) spectra were acquired at 15k resolution. Maximum Injection Time Mode and automated control target were set to Auto and Standard respectively for full MS and MS/MS scans. The 20 most intense peptides with multiple charge were selected for MS/MS sequencing by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a dynamic exclusion of 30s. Raw data files were processed using the MaxQuant software suit (version 2.0.3.0). Spectra were searched against Uniprot Homo sapiens database (released 11.12.2019, 96,817 entries), Vicugna pacos specific Nanotraps and commonly observed contaminants. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for MS and to 20 ppm for MS/MS. Peptide and protein false discovery rate was set to 1%. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminus acetylation were selected as variable modification, while carbamidomethylation on Cysteine was defined as fixed modification. A maximum of two missed cleavages were accepted for specific trypsin digestion mode. For label-free quantification a minimum number of two ratio count was requested. Intensity based absolute quantification was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
The mitochondrial outer membrane (MOM)-anchored GTPase Miro1, is a central player in mitochondrial transport and homeostasis. The dysregulation of Miro1 in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and Parkinson's disease (PD) suggests that Miro1 may be a potential biomarker or drug target in neuronal disorders. However, the molecular functionality of Miro1 under (patho-) physiological conditions is poorly known. For a more comprehensive understanding of the molecular functions of Miro1, we have developed Miro1-specific nanobodies (Nbs) as novel research tools. We identified seven Nbs that bind either the N- or C-terminal GTPase domain of Miro1 and demonstrate their application as research tools for proteomic and imaging approaches. To visualize the dynamics of Miro1 in real time, we selected intracellularly functional Nbs, which we reformatted into chromobodies (Cbs) for time-lapse imaging of Miro1. By genetic fusion to an Fbox domain, these Nbs were further converted into Miro1-specific degrons and applied for targeted degradation of Miro1 in live cells. In summary, this study presents a collection of novel Nbs that serve as a toolkit for advanced biochemical and intracellular studies and modulations of Miro1, thereby contributing to the understanding of the functional role of Miro1 in disease-derived model systems.

### Keywords
Nanobody, Interactome, Miro1

### Affiliations
University of Tuebingen
Quantitative Proteomics, Department of Biology, Interfaculty Institute of Cell Biology,Eberhard Karls University Tübingen, Germany

### Submitter
Katharina Zittlau

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Macek
Quantitative Proteomics, Department of Biology, Interfaculty Institute of Cell Biology,Eberhard Karls University Tübingen, Germany


