### Accession
PXD044081

### Title
Analysis of CDPK1 targets identifies a trafficking adaptor complex that regulates microneme exocytosis in Toxoplasma - cWT and cMut IPs

### Description
Apicomplexan parasites use Ca2+-regulated exocytosis to secrete essential virulence factors from specialized organelles called micronemes. Ca2+-dependent protein kinases (CDPKs) are required for microneme exocytosis; however, the molecular events that regulate trafficking and fusion of micronemes with the plasma membrane remain unresolved. Here, we combine sub-minute resolution phosphoproteomics and bio-orthogonal labeling of kinase substrates in Toxoplasma gondii to identify 163 proteins phosphorylated in a CDPK1-dependent manner. In addition to known regulators of secretion, we identify uncharacterized targets with predicted functions across signaling, gene expression, trafficking, metabolism, and ion homeostasis. One of the CDPK1 targets is a putative HOOK activating adaptor. In other eukaryotes, HOOK homologs form the FHF complex with FTS and FHIP to activate dynein-mediated trafficking of endosomes along microtubules. We show the FHF complex is partially conserved in T. gondii, consisting of HOOK, an FTS homolog, and two parasite-specific proteins (TGGT1_306920 and TGGT1_316650). CDPK1 kinase activity and HOOK are required for the rapid apical trafficking of micronemes as parasites initiate motility. Moreover, parasites lacking HOOK or FTS display impaired microneme protein secretion, leading to a block in the invasion of host cells. Taken together, our work provides a comprehensive catalog of CDPK1 targets and reveals how vesicular trafficking has been tuned to support a parasitic lifestyle.

### Sample Protocol
cWT, cMutUT, and TIR1 (untagged) parasites were infected onto confluent HFFs in 15 cm dishes. At 1-day post-infection (dpi), 50 µM auxin or vehicle was added to deplete endogenous mAID-tagged CDPK1 and 1 µM compound 1 was added to block egress until parasites were ready to harvest. At 2 dpi, infected HFFs were washed twice with PBS to wash out drugs. Parasites were mechanically released in Endo buffer with a 27G needle, passed through a 5 µm filter, and spun at 1000 x g for 10 min. Parasite pellets were resuspended in a cold hypotonic buffer with 1X HALT protease inhibitors to parasite concentrations of 1.1 x 109 tg/mL, passed through a 27G needle five times, and incubated on ice for 1 hr to complete hypotonic lysis. The samples were spun at 1000 x g for 5 min to pellet unlysed parasites and the supernatant was saved. NaCl was added to a final concentration of 150 mM and this was used as the immunoprecipitation input. 25 µL of anti-HA magnetic beads (Thermo) were used per condition. Beads were washed twice with a wash buffer (10 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.5). To begin pulldown, parasite lysate was used to resuspend washed beads and incubated for 1 hr rotating at room temperature. Beads were washed four times with a wash buffer. Proteins were eluted by resuspending beads in 20 µL of 1X S-trap sample buffer (5% SDS, 50 mM TEAB, pH 7.5) and incubated at 70°C for 10 min. The eluate was collected for MS sample processing and analysis. Results are representative of two independent experiments. Proteins were prepared for mass spectrometry using a modified version of the S-trap protocol (Protifi). Proteins in lysates were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 10 min at 55°C and alkylated with 15 mM MMTS for 10 min at room temperature. The lysates were acidified to a final concentration of 1.2% v/v phosphoric acid. A 6X volume of S-trap binding buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.55) was mixed to each sample to precipitate proteins. The solution was loaded onto S-trap micro columns (Protifi) and spun at 4,000 x g for 1 min until all the solution had passed through the column. The columns were washed four times with 150 µL of S-trap binding buffer and centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 1 min between each wash. Proteins were digested on-column with 0.75 µg of trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM TEAB pH 8.5 overnight at 37°C in a humidified incubator. Digested peptides were eluted in three steps at 4,000 x g for 1 min: 40 µL of 50 mM TEAB, 40 µL of 0.2% formic acid, and 35 µL of 50% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid. The peptide concentrations of eluted peptides were quantified using the Pierce Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The remaining samples were frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized.

### Data Protocol
Lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 20 µL of 0.1% formic acid and were analyzed on an Exploris 480 Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMS Pro source (Bekker-Jensen et al. 2020) connected to an EASY-nLC chromatography system using 0.1% formic acid as Buffer A and 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid as Buffer B. Peptides were separated at 300 nL/min on a gradient of 1–6% B for 1 min, 6–21% B for 41 min and 30 sec, 21–36% B for 20 min and 45 sec, 36–50% B for 10 min and 15 sec, 100% B for 14 min and 30 sec, 100–2% B for 3 min, 2% B for 3 min, 2–98% B for 3 min, and 98% B for 3 min. The orbitrap and FAIMS were operated in positive ion mode with a positive ion voltage of 1800V; with an ion transfer tube temperature of 270°C; using a standard FAIMS resolution and an inner and outer electrode temperature of 100°C with 4.5 mL/min carrier gas. Samples were analyzed twice in DIA mode with a compensation mode of -50 and -65V. Full scan spectra were acquired in profile mode at a resolution of 120,000, with a scan range of 400–1000 m/z, 300% AGC target, and auto mode for maximum injection time. MS2 spectra for the DIA scan were generated with a isolation window of 20 m/z with a 0 m/z window overlap, 30 scan events, a HCD collision energy of 30 at a resolution of 30,000, first mass at 200 m/z, precursor mass range of 400–1000 m/z, and a standard AGC target and automatically determined maximum injection time. DIA-MS samples were analyzed using Scaffold DIA (2.0.0). DIA-MS data files were converted to mzML format using ProteoWizard (3.0.19254) (Chambers et al. 2012). Analytic samples were aligned based on retention times and individually searched against dku80_FAIMS_DIA_90min_autoIT.blib with a peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. The ToxoDB release 46 GT1 protein database was used for protein identification. The following modifications were included in the search: dynamic oxidation (+15.995 Da; M), dynamic phosphorylation (+79.966 Da; S,T,Y), and static methylthio (+45.988 Da; C). The digestion enzyme was trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites allowed. Only peptides with charges in the range of 2 to 3 and length in the range 6 to 30 were considered. Peptides identified in each sample were filtered by Percolator to achieve a maximum FDR of 0.01 (Käll et al. 2007, 2008; Käll, Storey, and Noble 2008). Individual search results were combined, and peptide identifications were assigned posterior error probabilities and filtered to an FDR threshold of 0.01 by Percolator. Peptide quantification was performed by Encyclopedia (0.9.2). For each peptide, the 5 highest quality fragment ions were selected for quantification. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Protein groups were thresholded to achieve a protein FDR less than 1%. Significance values were derived from t-tests across two replicates and adjusted with Benjamini-Hochberg correction with an FDR of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Whitehead Institute of Biomedical Research
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Insitute of Technology

### Submitter
Alex Chan

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Lourido
Associate Professor, Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Whitehead Institute of Biomedical Research


