### Accession
PXD010860

### Title
Interacting proteins of the NRAS RNA G-quadruplex

### Description
Biotinylated RNA oligos were used as baits for affinity enrichments from cytoplasmic cell extracts.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity enrichments were performed as described in Herdy, et al. 2015 using biotinylated RNA oligos and cytoplasmic cell extracs. Sample preparation for mass spectrometry analysis was according to Mohammed et al. 2016 Nat Protoc.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer v1.4. using the Sequest HT search engine.

### Publication Abstract
RNA G-quadruplexes (rG4s) are secondary structures in mRNAs known to influence RNA post-transcriptional mechanisms thereby impacting neurodegenerative disease and cancer. A detailed knowledge of rG4-protein interactions is vital to understand rG4 function. Herein, we describe a systematic affinity proteomics approach that identified 80 high-confidence interactors that assemble on the rG4 located in the 5'-untranslated region (UTR) of the NRAS oncogene. Novel rG4 interactors included DDX3X, DDX5, DDX17, GRSF1 and NSUN5. The majority of identified proteins contained a glycine-arginine (GAR) domain and notably GAR-domain mutation in DDX3X and DDX17 abrogated rG4 binding. Identification of DDX3X targets by transcriptome-wide individual-nucleotide resolution UV-crosslinking and affinity enrichment (iCLAE) revealed a striking association with 5'-UTR rG4-containing transcripts which was reduced upon GAR-domain mutation. Our work highlights hitherto unrecognized features of rG4 structure-protein interactions that highlight new roles of rG4 structures in mRNA post-transcriptional control.

### Keywords
Hela, Rna, Proteomics, Rna binding proteins, G4

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Lensfield Road, Cambridge, CB21EW, United Kingdom
Research Associate

### Submitter
Barbara  Herdy

### Lab Head
Dr Shankar Balasubramanian
Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Lensfield Road, Cambridge, CB21EW, United Kingdom


