### Accession
PXD028465

### Title
Streptococcus pneumoniae and IAV co infection induces altered polyubiquitination in A549 cells

### Description
Epithelial cells are the first line of defense within the lung. Disruption of the epithelial barrier by pathogens enables the systematic dissemination of bacteria or viruses within the host, leading to severe diseases with fatal outcomes. Thus, the lung epithelium can be damaged by seasonal and pandemic influenza A viruses. Influenza A virus infection induced dysregulation of the immune system is beneficial for the dissemination of bacteria to the lower respiratory tract, causing bacterial and viral co-infection. Host cells regulate protein homeostasis and the response to different stimuli, for instance pathogen infections, by post translational modification of proteins. Aside from protein phosphorylation, ubiquitination of proteins is an essential regulatory tool in virtually every cellular process, such as protein homeostasis, the host immune response, cell morphology, and in clearing of cytosolic pathogens. Here, we analyzed the proteome and ubiquitinome of A549 cells in response to Streptococcus pneumoniae D39 Δcps and influenza A virus H1N1 as well as bacterial and viral co-infection. Pneumococcal infection induced alterations in the ubiquitination of proteins involved in the organization of the actin cytoskeleton and Rho GTPases, but had minor effects on the abundance of host proteins. H1N1 infection is reflected by an anti-viral state of A549 cells. Finally, co infection resembled the imprints of both infecting pathogens with a minor increase in the observed alterations in protein and ubiquitination abundance.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was performed by lysis of harvested cells in 1 ml lysis buffer (50 mM Tris HCl [pH 7.5], 0.15 M NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP 40, 10% glycerol, 1x cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail [Roche], 1 mM PMSF, 10 mM N-ethylmaleimide, 20 µM MG132). Lysates were sonicated to shear DNA and cleared by centrifugation. Protein concentration of the samples was determined by the BCA assay. Lysates containing 500 µg of total protein were transferred into new tubes and filled to 300 µl with lysis buffer. To reduce unspecific binding of proteins to magnetic beads, 10 µl of magnetic control beads (LifeSensors) have been added to the samples and were incubated in an overhead shaker for 1 h at 10 rpm and 4 °C. Afterwards, supernatants were transferred into new tubes. For the enrichment of K48 ubiquitinated proteins, 40 µl of K48 magnetic TUBE HF (LifeSensors), washed with Tris-buffered saline with Tween20 (TBS-T), were added, followed by an incubation for 3 h at 10 rpm and 4 °C. To enrich K63 polyubiquitinated proteins, 700 µl water and K63 Flag TUBE (LifeSensors) with a final concentration of 50 nM were added to the precleared sample and incubated for 2 h at 10 rpm and 4 °C. Subsequently, 8 µl of magnetic anti Flag beads have been added and samples were incubated for additional 2 h. The unbound fraction of both enrichments was removed and the beads were washed three times with 500 µl TBS-T. To elute the enriched proteins, beads were resuspended in 25 µl SDS buffer (5% SDS; 50 mM TEAB; 5 mM TCEP) and incubated at 65 °C for 45 min with 300 rpm shaking. Finally, the supernatants were transferred into new tubes. Extracted and enriched ubiquitinated proteins were digested by suspension trapping on micro S Traps (Protifi). Briefly, lysates containing 30 µg protein were transferred into new tubes and disulfide bonds were reduced by adding TCEP. Thiol groups were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide for proteome samples or chloroacetamide for ubiquitinome samples. Phosphoric acid was added to the samples to a final concertation of 1.2%. Afterwards, 500 µl S Trap binding buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB) was added to the acidified samples. The protein colloid solution was subsequently loaded onto the S-Trap micro columns by centrifugation (4,000×g). Trapped proteins were washed three times with 165 µl S Trap binding buffer. Proteins were digested by adding 25 µl digestion buffer (50 mM TEAB) containing 1.2 µg trypsin for proteome samples and 600 ng trypsin (Promega) for ubiquitin enriched samples followed by an incubation for 3 h at 47 °C. Peptides were subsequently eluted with 40 µl 50 mM TEAB; 0.1% acetic acid; 60% ACN in 0.1% acetic acid. All eluted fractions of a sample were pooled and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Dried peptides were stored at -80 °C Peptides generated from crude protein extracts were fractionated using Pierce Micro-Spin Columns packed with 15 mg of Dr. Maisch Reprosil-Gold 300 C18, 5 µm (Dr. Maisch) particles. Columns were washed three times with 300 µl ACN and equilibrated two times with 300 µl 0.1% TFA by centrifugation (5,000×g; 2 min). Dried peptides were reconstituted in 300 µl 0.1% TFA and loaded onto the spin column by centrifugation (4 min; 3,000×g). Peptides were subsequently eluted with 5%; 7.5%; 10%; 12.5%; 15%; 17.5%; 20% and 60% ACN in 0.1% triethylamine, 300 µl each (4 min; 3,000×g). Fractions were concatenated using the scheme: 5% and 15%; 7.5% and 17.5%; 10% and 20%; 12.5% and 60%. Concatenated fractions were dried by vacuum centrifugation and resolved with 20 µl 0.1% acetic acid containing iRT peptides (Biognosys). The peptide composition of the generated samples was analyzed by LC MS/MS with an EASY nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto in-house packed fused silica columns of 20 cm length and an inner diameter of 75 µm, filled with ReproSil Pur 120 C18 AQ 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch). Peptides were subsequently eluted by a non linear binary gradient of 165 min from 2% to 99% solvent B (0.1% acetic acid in acetonitrile) in solvent A (0.1% acetic acid). MS/MS data were obtained in DDA mode. The survey scan was acquired from 300 1650 m/z with a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z for K63 enriched samples and 140,000 at 200 m/z for proteome and K48 enriched samples. The 10 (K63 enriched samples) or 15 (K48 enriched and proteome samples) most abundant ions were selected for fragmentation via HCD with a normalized collision energy of NCE 27. The AGC target was set to 1E5 with a maximum injection time of 180 ms (K63 enriched samples) or 60 ms (K48 enriched and proteome samples). MS/MS spectra were acquired in centroid mode with a resolution of 17,500 at 200 m/z. Ions with unassigned charge states as well as charge 1 and higher than 6 were excluded from fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and lock mass correction was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Datasets of enriched polyubiquitinated and total proteome samples were processed separately. Raw data were searched with MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) against the UniProt databases for human (July 2019, UP000005640, 20,416 entries), Influenza A virus (A/Germany-BY/74/2009(H1N1)) (December 2017, UP000153067, 10 entries) and for Streptococcus pneumoniae D39 (September 2020, UP000001452, 1,915 entries). The maximum number of allowed missed cleavages was 2 and precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N‐termini) were set as variable modifications for both datasets. GlyGly (K) was set as an additional variable modification for K48 and K63 polyubiquitin enriched samples. Proteins were identified with at least two unique peptides, and PSM and protein FDR were set to 0.01. Match between runs was applied and protein abundances were calculated by the MaxLFQ algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Streptococcus pneumoniae d39, A549, Co infection, Influenza a virus

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Felix Hausdorff Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany
University of Greifswald, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics

### Submitter
Thomas Sura

### Lab Head
Dr Doerte Becher
University of Greifswald, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Felix Hausdorff Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


