### Accession
PXD017289

### Title
Dpb11 Immuno-Precipitation Mass Spectrometry (IPMS) Data Related to Mec1/ATR Signaling Upon Hyper-Resection

### Description
The Mec1/ATR kinase is crucial for genome maintenance, although the mechanisms by which it controls DNA repair pathways remain elusive. Here we uncovered a role for Mec1/ATR in controlling homologous recombination (HR) factors in response to hyper-resection of DNA ends. Cells lacking RAD9, a checkpoint activator and an inhibitor of resection, exhibit Mec1-dependent hyper-phosphorylation of proteins associated with single strand DNA transactions, including the ssDNA binding protein Rfa2, the translocase/ubiquitin ligase Uls1 and the HR-regulatory Sgs1-Top3-Rmi1 (STR) complex. Extensive Mec1-dependent phosphorylation of the STR complex, mostly on the Sgs1 helicase subunit, promotes an interaction between STR and the DNA repair scaffolding protein Dpb11. Fusion of Sgs1 to phosphopeptide-binding domains of Dpb11 strongly impairs HR-mediated repair, supporting a model whereby Mec1 promotes recruitment of STR to the 9-1-1 clamp via Dpb11 to regulate recombinogenic processes.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cell lysates were prepared for immunoprecipitation by bead beating for 3 cycles of 10 minutes with 1-minute rest between cycles at 4˚C in lysis buffer (150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris pH 7.5, 5mM EDTA, 0.2% Tergitol type NP40).  Following normalization by Bradford assay, ~5mg of lysate per IP was incubated with antibody-conjugated agarose resin for 3 hours at 4˚C.  Resin was washed 4x in lysis buffer.  Elution was performed either with FLAG peptide or elution buffer (1% SDS, 100mM Tris pH 8.0). For IP-MS experiments, eluted proteins were alkylated with 25mM iodoacetamide followed by precipitation on ice for 1hr in PPT solution (50% acetone, 49.9% ethanol, 0.1% acetic acid).  Pellets were washed once with PPT then resuspended in urea/tris solution (8M urea, 50mM tris pH 8.0).  Urea-solubilized pellet was then diluted to 2M urea using NaCl/tris solution (150mM NaCl, 50mM tris pH 8.0) and digested overnight at 37˚C with 10ug of trypsin GOLD (Promega).  The following day, samples were prepared for MS analysis using a 50mg Waters Sep-Pak desalting column.  Eluted peptides were dried and resuspended in 0.1pmol/uL angiotensin in 0.1% TFA and submitted for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
IP-MS data analysis was performed using the Sorcerer2 workstation (SageN).  Briefly, PSMs were identified using a SEQUEST search over the budding yeast database downloaded from SGD.  PSMs with a PeptideProphet score greater than 0.9 were exported from sorcerer along with their Xpress ratio for SILAC quantitation.  PSMs from the same protein were grouped and the geometric mean of the Xpress values from every PSM corresponding to the same protein was calculated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Dpb11, Dna repair, Dna damage, Apms

### Affiliations
Graduate Student, Smolka Lab, Cornell University
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, USA

### Submitter
Ethan Sanford

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Smolka
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, USA


