### Accession
PXD005076

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of cold adaptation of the Antarctic archaeon Halohasta litchfieldiae and Halorubrum lacusprofundi

### Description
Halohasta litchfieldiae and Halorubrum lacusprofundi are important members of Deep Lake in Antarctica, representing ~44% (the most abundance) and ~10% (the 3rd most abundance) of the lake population. Deep Lake is in the Vestfold Hills, East Antarctica (68°33’36.8S, 78°11’48.7E) and is 36 m deep, monomictic, and perennially cold (down to -20C) (DeMaere et al., 2013; Williams et al., 2014; Tschitschko et al., 2015; Tschitschko et al., 2016). In this project, using quantitative proteomics (8-plex iTRAQ labeling), proteins, pathways and cellular processes important for cold adaptation were determined for both Hht. litchfieldiae and Hrr. lacusprofundi. The data provided a new level of understanding about molecular mechanisms and regulatory networks involved in adaptation of the Antarctic haloarchaea to cold environment.   DeMaere, M. Z., Williams, T. J., Allen, M. A., Brown, M. V., Gibson, J. A., Rich, J., et al. (2013) High level of intergenera gene exchange shapes the evolution of haloarchaea in an isolated Antarctic lake. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110: 16939-16944. Tschitschko, B., Williams, T. J., Allen, M. A., Páez-Espino, D., Kyrpides, N., Zhong, L., et al. (2015) Antarctic archaea–virus interactions: metaproteome-led analysis of invasion, evasion and adaptation. ISME J 9: 2094-2107. Tschitschko, B., Williams, T. J., Allen, M. A., Zhong, L., Raftery, M. J., and Cavicchioli, R. (2016) Ecophysiological distinctions of haloarchaea from a hypersaline Antarctic lake determined using metaproteomics. Appl Environ Microbiol 82: 3165 – 3173. Williams, T. J., Allen, M. A., DeMaere, M. Z., Kyrpides, N. C., Tringe, S. G., Woyke, T., and Cavicchioli, R. (2014) Microbial ecology of an Antarctic hypersaline lake: genomic assessment of ecophysiology among dominant haloarchaea. ISME J 8: 1645-1658.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in media with pyruvate as carbon source and ammonium as nitrogen source at 4, 10 and 30°C to mid-logarithmic and stationary phase. Proteins were prepared from whole cell extracts and supernatant fractions following PMID: 20039705 with minor modifications. Quantitative proteomics was performed using 8-plex iTRAQ labelling to enable the identification of differential abundant proteins from 4 vs 30°C, and 10 vs 30°C cultures. Samples were analyzed using TripleTOF 5600 + hybrid tandem mass spectrometer (ABSciex, Foster City, USA), and the acquisition of data was performed in information-dependent acquisition mode with Analyst TF 1.7 software (AB Sciex, Foster City, USA).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were matched against peptides with ProteinPilot software 4.5 (AB Sciex, Foster City, USA) using local Hht. litchfieldiae and Hrr. lacusprofundi protein FASTA database to identify proteins. All technical replicates for 8-plex labelling experiments were merged into a single sample file for each fraction during protein abundance analysis. Data were considered statistically significant when p was less than 0.05 and the error factor was less than 2. The weighted average mean and standard deviation of differential abundance between iTRAQ reporter ion ratios were calculated following PMID: 17676663. Protein annotation was performed following PMID: 19404327.

### Publication Abstract
Halohasta litchfieldiae represents &#x223c; 44% and Halorubrum lacusprofundi &#x223c; 10% of the hypersaline, perennially cold (&#x2265; -20&#xb0;C) Deep Lake community in Antarctica. We used proteomics and microscopy to define physiological responses of these haloarchaea to growth at high (30&#xb0;C) and low (10 and 4&#xb0;C) temperatures. The proteomic data indicate that both species responded to low temperature by modifying their cell envelope including protein N-glycosylation, maintaining osmotic balance and translation initiation, and modifying RNA turnover and tRNA modification. Distinctions between the two species included DNA protection and repair strategies (e.g. roles of UspA and Rad50), and metabolism of glycerol and pyruvate. For Hrr. lacusprofundi, low temperature led to the formation of polyhydroxyalkanoate-like granules, with granule formation occurring by an unknown mechanism. Hrr. lacusprofundi also formed biofilms and synthesized high levels of Hsp20 chaperones. Hht. litchfieldiae was characterized by an active CRISPR system, and elevated levels of the core gene expression machinery, which contrasted markedly to the decreased levels of Hrr. lacusprofundi. These findings greatly expand the understanding of cellular mechanisms of cold adaptation in psychrophilic archaea, and provide insight into how Hht. litchfieldiae gains dominance in Deep Lake.

### Keywords
Antarctic microorganism; psychrophile; archaea; itraq; cold adaptation

### Affiliations
University of New South Wales
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, The University of NSW, Sydney NSW 2052 Australia

### Submitter
Yan Liao

### Lab Head
Dr Rick Cavicchioli
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, The University of NSW, Sydney NSW 2052 Australia


