### Accession
PXD019850

### Title
Scorpion (Centruroides vittatus) venom gland

### Description
proteomic analysis of venom gland peptides from the scorpion Centruroides vittatus

### Sample Protocol
Telsons (venom glands) were harvested from flash frozen individual scorpions, washed with 95% ethanol, and ground in lysis buffer.  Extracted proteins were verified via gel electrophoresis on a 15% SDS-PAGE gel and sent for MS/MS spectrophotometry. Purified proteins were reduced, alkylated, and digested using filter-aided sample preparation with sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega). Tryptic peptides were then separated by reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 um resin (Waters) on an in-line 150 x 0.075 mm column using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo). Peptides were eluted using a 90 min gradient from 97:3 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio. Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.15 kV) followed by mass spectrometric analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo). MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 240,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z. Following HCD activation, MS/MS data were acquired using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range with precursor mass-dependent normalized collision energy between 28.0 and 31.0. Proteins were identified by database search using Mascot (Matrix Science) with a parent ion tolerance of 3 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da.

### Data Protocol
identification and quantification of proetins and peptides in the venom gland through scaffold analysis (version 4.9.0).

### Publication Abstract
Body tissue and venom glands from an eastern population of the scorpion <i>Centruroides vittatus</i> (Say, 1821) were homogenized and molecular constituents removed to characterize putative sodium &#x3b2; toxin gene diversity, RT-qPCR, transcriptomic, and proteomic variation. We cloned sodium &#x3b2; toxins from genomic DNA, conducted RT-qPCR experiments with seven sodium &#x3b2; toxin variants, performed venom gland tissue RNA-seq, and isolated venom proteins for mass spectrophotometry. We identified &gt;70 putative novel sodium &#x3b2; toxin genes, 111 toxin gene transcripts, 24 different toxin proteins, and quantified sodium &#x3b2; toxin gene expression variation among individuals and between sexes. Our analyses contribute to the growing evidence that venom toxicity among scorpion taxa and their populations may be associated with toxin gene diversity, specific toxin transcripts variation, and subsequent protein production. Here, slight transcript variation among toxin gene variants may contribute to the major toxin protein variation in individual scorpion venom composition.

### Keywords
Scorpion, Venom, Centruroides vittatus

### Affiliations
ATU
Arkansas Tech University

### Submitter
tsunemi yamashita

### Lab Head
Dr Tsunemi Yamashita
Arkansas Tech University


