### Accession
PXD017511

### Title
Identification of Novel Lipid Droplet Factors that Regulate Lipophagy and Cholesterol Efflux in Macrophage Foam Cells

### Description
Macrophage autophagy is a highly anti-atherogenic process that promotes the catabolism of cytosolic lipid droplets (LDs) to maintain cellular lipid homeostasis. Selective autophagy relies on tags such as ubiquitin and a set of selectivity factors including selective autophagy receptors (SARs) to label specific cargo for degradation. Originally described in yeast cells, ‘lipophagy’ refers to the degradation of LDs by autophagy. Yet, how LDs are targeted for autophagy is poorly defined. Here, we employed mass spectrometry to identify lipophagy factors within the macrophage foam cell LD proteome. In addition to structural proteins (e.g. PLIN2), metabolic enzymes (e.g. ACSL) and neutral lipases (e.g. PLPL2), we found the association of proteins related to the ubiquitination machinery (e.g. AUP1) and autophagy (e.g. HMGB, 1433).

### Sample Protocol
Lipid droplet fractions were de-lipidated as previously, and proteins were dried using SpeedVac and re-suspended in 8M urea. Sample protein concentrations were determined using the colorimetric Bio-Rad DC Protein Assay. Equal amounts of protein were reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol for 30 minutes at 56°C with agitation. Proteins were alkylated by incubation at room temperature for 30min with iodoacetamine with agitation. Urea within the samples was diluted to 2M using 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8). Protein samples were then digested using 0.125g of trypsin for 5µg of protein overnight at 37°C with agitation. Prior to desaltation, peptides were diluted in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and the pH was adjusted to 3.0 by addition of trifluoroacetic acid. Peptide desalting was completed using in-house made C18 desalting cartridges and samples were dried using a SpeedVac (SAVANT SpeedVac Concentrator).  Peptide mixtures were run using high-performance liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-ESI-MS/MS). An automated Ekspert NanoLC 400 system (Eksigent) coupled to a LTQ Velos Pro Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray interface operated in positive ion mode. Peptide samples were reconstituted in 0.5% (v/v) formic acid and loaded on a silica column packed with reverse phase Magic C18AQ resins (5 μm; 200 Å pore size; Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptide separation was done using an analytical column (75 μm × 10 cm) packed with reverse phase beads (3 μm; 120 Å pore size; Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were eluded with a solution of 5-25% acetonitrile (v/v) containing 0.1% formic acid (v/v) (JT Baker) for 120 minutes at a flow rate of 300nL/min.

### Data Protocol
MSConvert from the ProteoWizard package was used to convert Thermo RAW files to mzML files. The resulting mass spectrometry data files were processed using the Trans-Proteomics Pipeline (TPP version 5.0).  A database search was performed on mzML files to match MS/MS spectra to peptide sequences using the Comet algorithm against the UniProt Swiss-Prot database (downloaded in January 2017; number of protein entries = 20,130). The database search space considered tryptic peptides with a maximum of 2 miscleavages. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a static modification and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. Mass spectra were searched using a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for precursor ions and a fragment ion bin tolerance of 0.05. Files with the "C" suffix correspond to chloroquine treated samples.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophage autophagy is a highly anti-atherogenic process that promotes the catabolism of cytosolic lipid droplets (LDs) to maintain cellular lipid homeostasis. Selective autophagy relies on tags such as ubiquitin and a set of selectivity factors including selective autophagy receptors (SARs) to label specific cargo for degradation. Originally described in yeast cells, "lipophagy" refers to the degradation of LDs by autophagy. Yet, how LDs are targeted for autophagy is poorly defined. Here, we employed mass spectrometry to identify lipophagy factors within the macrophage foam cell LD proteome. In addition to structural proteins (e.g., PLIN2), metabolic enzymes (e.g., ACSL) and neutral lipases (e.g., PNPLA2), we found the association of proteins related to the ubiquitination machinery (e.g., AUP1) and autophagy (e.g., HMGB, YWHA/14-3-3 proteins). The functional role of candidate lipophagy factors (a total of 91) was tested using a custom siRNA array combined with high-content cholesterol efflux assays. We observed that knocking down several of these genes, including <i>Hmgb1, Hmgb2, Hspa5</i>, and <i>Scarb2</i>, significantly reduced cholesterol efflux, and SARs SQSTM1/p62, NBR1 and OPTN localized to LDs, suggesting a role for these in lipophagy. Using yeast lipophagy assays, we established a genetic requirement for several candidate lipophagy factors in lipophagy, including HSPA5, UBE2G2 and AUP1. Our study is the first to systematically identify several LD-associated proteins of the lipophagy machinery, a finding with important biological and therapeutic implications. Targeting these to selectively enhance lipophagy to promote cholesterol efflux in foam cells may represent a novel strategy to treat atherosclerosis.<b>Abbreviations:</b> ADGRL3: adhesion G protein-coupled receptor L3; agLDL: aggregated low density lipoprotein; AMPK: AMP-activated protein kinase; APOA1: apolipoprotein A1; ATG: autophagy related; AUP1: AUP1 lipid droplet regulating VLDL assembly factor; BMDM: bone-marrow derived macrophages; BNIP3L: BCL2/adenovirus E1B interacting protein 3-like; BSA: bovine serum albumin; CALCOCO2: calcium binding and coiled-coil domain 2; CIRBP: cold inducible RNA binding protein; COLGALT1: collagen beta(1-O)galactosyltransferase 1; CORO1A: coronin 1A; DMA: deletion mutant array; Faa4: long chain fatty acyl-CoA synthetase; FBS: fetal bovine serum; FUS: fused in sarcoma; HMGB1: high mobility group box 1; HMGB2: high mobility group box 2: HSP90AA1: heat shock protein 90: alpha (cytosolic): class A member 1; HSPA5: heat shock protein family A (Hsp70) member 5; HSPA8: heat shock protein 8; HSPB1: heat shock protein 1; HSPH1: heat shock 105kDa/110kDa protein 1; LDAH: lipid droplet associated hydrolase; LIPA: lysosomal acid lipase A; LIR: LC3-interacting region; MACROH2A1: macroH2A.1 histone; MAP1LC3: microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3; MCOLN1: mucolipin 1; NBR1: NBR1, autophagy cargo receptor; NPC2: NPC intracellular cholesterol transporter 2; OPTN: optineurin; P/S: penicillin-streptomycin; PLIN2: perilipin 2; PLIN3: perilipin 3; PNPLA2: patatin like phospholipase domain containing 2; RAB: RAB, member RAS oncogene family; RBBP7, retinoblastoma binding protein 7, chromatin remodeling factor; SAR: selective autophagy receptor; SCARB2: scavenger receptor class B, member 2; SGA: synthetic genetic array; SQSTM1: sequestosome 1; TAX1BP1: Tax1 (human T cell leukemia virus type I) binding protein 1; TFEB: transcription factor EB; TOLLIP: toll interacting protein; UBE2G2: ubiquitin conjugating enzyme E2 G2; UVRAG: UV radiation resistance associated gene; VDAC2: voltage dependent anion channel 2; VIM: vimentin.

### Keywords
Human, Lipid droplet, Macrophage foam cell, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Mathieu Lavallée-Adam

### Lab Head
Dr Mireille Ouimet
University of Ottawa


