### Accession
PXD017245

### Title
Molecular Profiling of Osteoclast Derived Apoptotic Bodies Reveals Extended Intercellular Regulations after Cell Death

### Description
Increasing evidences are revealing the important biological functions of apoptotic bodies (ABs). Here we identified the proteomic profiles of ABs from osteoclasts of distinct differentiation stages and investigated the potential functions. ABs were isolated from apoptotic bone marrow macrophages (BMMs), pre-osteoclasts (pOCs) or mature osteoclasts (mOCs). Proteomic signature analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) followed by bioinformatic analysis showed that proteomic signatures of ABs exhibited high similarities with the parental cells. Functionally, pOC-ABs induced endothelial progenitor cell (EPC) differentiation and increased CD31hiEmcnhi endothelial cell formation in a murine bone defect model via PDGF-BB. mOC-ABs induced mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) osteogenic differentiation and promoted bone formation via RANKL reverse signaling. Together, our results mapped the detailed proteomic landscapes of osteoclast derived ABs and demonstrated that the biological functions of ABs are largely inherited from corresponding parental cells, suggesting a novel extended intercellular regulation after cell apoptosis.

### Sample Protocol
After isolation and identification, ABs were sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit (Beyotime Biotechnology, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. According to the different stages of parental cell, ABs were divided into three sample groups: BMM-ABs, pOC-ABs and mOC-ABs. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratios for a second 4 h-digestion. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against human uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance or fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and Acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
Bone remodeling is precisely coordinated by bone resorption and formation. Apoptotic osteoclasts generate large amounts of apoptotic bodies (ABs) marking the end of the bone resorption phase, whereas the functions of osteoclast-derived ABs remain largely unknown. Here, we identified the molecular profile of ABs derived from osteoclasts at distinct differentiation stages and investigated their corresponding functions. ABs were isolated from apoptotic bone marrow macrophages, preosteoclasts, and mature osteoclasts induced by staurosporine. Proteomic signature analysis with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry suggested marked protein cargo differences among the different ABs. Further bioinformatic analysis showed that the proteomic signatures of the ABs were highly similar to those of their parental cells. Functionally, pOC-ABs induced endothelial progenitor cell differentiation and increased CD31<sup>hi</sup>Emcn<sup>hi</sup> endothelial cell formation in a murine bone defect model via their PDGF-BB cargo. mOC-ABs induced osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells and facilitated osteogenesis via RANKL reverse signaling. In summary, we mapped the detailed proteomic landscapes of ABs derived from osteoclasts and showed that their potential biological roles are important in coupling bone formation with resorption during bone remodeling.

### Keywords
Molecular profiling of osteoclast derived apoptotic bodies reveals extended intercellular regulations after cell death

### Affiliations
Department of Orthopedics, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China.
Third Military Medical University

### Submitter
Qinyu Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Ce Dou
Department of Orthopedics, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China.


