### Accession
PXD015171

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics implicates CD44 in proliferation of breast cancer cell

### Description
CD44 is a transmembrane glycoprotein playing a key role in cel adhesion to the extracellular matrix. CD44 expression is upregulated in various cancer cells and recognized as a molecular marker for tumor-initiating cancer cells. However, the intricate correlation between CD44 and underlying biological functions is yet to be fully disclosed at molecular levels. Here, we discovererd global proteome changes induced by CD44 knockdown in the four different breast cancer cell lines by TMT based quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets of four breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB231, Hs578T, MDA-MB468, and BT20) were lysed in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 2mM TECP, and 0.1M Tris-HCl pH7.5) by direct sonication. The proteins were digested via multi-digestion filter-aided sample preparation (MED-FASP) according to our previously dsecribed process. After measuring peptide concentration by tryptophan fluorescene (WF) assay, Tandem mass tag (TMT) labelling was performed according to a manufacturer's protocol with some modifications. The TMT-labelled peptide mixtures were subjected to High-pH reversed peptide fractionation using an Agilent 1290 bioinert HPLC. Total 96 fractions were concatenated to mix different parts of the gradient into 12 or 24 fractions. The fractionated peptide samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS system, Q-exactive plus euipped with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system. Peptides were separated on a 2-column system with a trap column and an analytic column using 0.1% formic acid in water as solvent A and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile as solvent B. The samples were separated using a 240-min gradient from 7% to 32% solvent B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The Q-exactive was operated in the data-dependent mode using a top 20 method with an isolation width of 1.2 m/z. HCD scans were acquired with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 32.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS files were processed with Proteome Discoverer ver 2.2 using the SEQUEST-HT algorithms against the HUMAN Uniprot protein sequence database (december_2014, 88,657 entries). The database search parameters were: full enzyme digest using trypsin (after KR/-) with up to 2 missed cleavages allowed; a precursor ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm; a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da; dynamic modification of 15.995 Da for methionine oxidation and 42.011 Da for protein N-term acetylation; static modification of 57.021 Da for carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues and 229.153 Da for TMT 6plex on any N-terminus and Lysine residues. Confidence criteria was set to a 1% FDR at PSM, peptide, and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
CD44 is a transmembrane glycoprotein that can regulate the oncogenic process. This is known to be a marker of the claudin-low subtype of breast cancer, as well as a cancer stem cell marker. However, its functional regulatory roles are poorly understood in claudin-low breast cancer. To gain comprehensive insight into the function of CD44, we performed an in-depth tandem mass tag-based proteomic analysis of two claudin-low breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231 and Hs 578T) transfected with CD44 siRNA. As a result, we observed that 2736 proteins were upregulated and 2172 proteins were downregulated in CD44-knockdown MDA-MB-231 cells. For Hs 578T CD44-knockdown cells, 412 proteins were upregulated and 443 were downregulated. Gene ontology and network analyses demonstrated that the suppression of this marker mediates significant functional alterations related to oncogenic cellular processes, including proliferation, metabolism, adhesion, and gene expression regulation. A functional study confirmed that CD44 knockdown inhibited proliferation by regulating the expression of genes related to cell cycle, translation, and transcription. Moreover, this promoted the expression of multiple cell adhesion-associated proteins and attenuated cancer cell migration. Finally, our proteomic study defines the landscape of the CD44-regulated proteome of claudin-low breast cancer cells, revealing changes that mediate cell proliferation and migration. Our proteomics data set has been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE repository with the data set identifier PXD015171.

### Keywords
Human, Breast cancer, Tmt, Cd44

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital


