### Accession
PXD026508

### Title
Withaferin A inhibits LFA-1-stimulated ZAP70 activity and T-cell motility

### Description
a steroidal lactone withaferin A (WFA) can inhibit T-cell motility, which is crucial for adaptive immune responses as well as autoimmune reactions. Tandem mass spectrometry identified WFA-interactome in human T-cells that were stimulated to migrate via cross-linking of the lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1 (LFA-1) integrin with the ligand intercellular adhesion receptor 1 (ICAM-1). Data revealed significant enrichment of the zeta-chain-associated protein kinase 70 (ZAP70) and cytoskeletal actin protein interaction networks. Phospho-peptide mapping and kinome analysis substantiated kinase signaling downstream of ZAP70 and cytoskeletal kinase pathways as key WFA targets, which was further confirmed by in silico analysis and molecular assays. The WFA-ZAP70 complex was disrupted by a redox agent dithiothreitol, suggesting a covalent binding interface. Moreover, WFA ablated the phosphorylation of the myosin light chain, further constraining T-cell motility. These studies identify a mechanism whereby WFA can impact T-cell motility. WFA can therefore be exploited to pharmacologically controlling host immune responses and preventing autoimmune-mediated pathologies.

### Sample Protocol
WFA-Biotin was synthesized as previously described (WFA-Biotin; University of Antwerp, Belgium) (41). For identification of endogenous WFA target proteins, both resting and migrating T-cells were incubated for 3 h with WFA-Biotin. Cells were lysed in 0.5 ml lysis buffer and incubated on streptavidin agarose beads (Thermo Fisher, Singapore) overnight and then resolved by SDS-PAGE. Lysates of DMSO-treated T-cells were used as technical controls for mass spectrometry studies.  Tandem mass spectrometry was performed on the in-gel digested proteins with trypsin (Promega, Singapore), as described earlier (42). Briefly, peptides were separated using PepMap C18 (3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) and analysed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q Exactive tandem mass spectrometry (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Separation was performed using solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 100% ACN) at flow rate of 300 nL/min with a 60 min gradient. A full MS scan (350–1,600 m/z range) was acquired at a resolution of 70,000 and a maximum ion accumulation time of 100 ms. The automatic gain control (AGC) settings of the full MS scan and the MS2 scan were 5E6 and 2E5, respectively. An isolation width of 2 m/z was used for MS2. Single and unassigned charged ions were excluded from MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were searched using ProteomeDiscoverer version 1.4.  Raw data were also processed and converted to Mascot generic files format and MS/MS spectra were and submitted for database searching against the Swiss-Prot Human database with Mascot (v2.4.1, Matrix Science). Mascot search results were submitted in HTML format (Online Resource 1). Data generated by Mascot were validated using Scaffold (version 4.10.0, Proteome Software, Portland, OR USA). Protein identifications were accepted if they assigned at least two unique peptides with at least 99% probability. A protein network was generated using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis® (IPA®), by uploading a .csv file containing the list of proteins generated by Scaffold. The network was then improved using the “Build” tool in IPA® to expand the network among the list of proteins identified in the T-cell migration specific WFA-interactome.

### Publication Abstract
The steroidal lactone withaferin A (WFA) is a dietary phytochemical, derived from Withania somnifera. It exhibits a wide range of biological properties, including immunomodulatory, anti-inflammatory, antistress, and anticancer activities. Here we investigated the effect of WFA on T-cell motility, which is crucial for adaptive immune responses as well as autoimmune reactions. We found that WFA dose-dependently (within the concentration range of 0.3-1.25&#xa0;&#x3bc;M) inhibited the ability of human T-cells to migrate via cross-linking of the lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1 (LFA-1) integrin with its ligand, intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1). Coimmunoprecipitation of WFA interacting proteins and subsequent tandem mass spectrometry identified a WFA-interactome consisting of 273 proteins in motile T-cells. In particular, our data revealed significant enrichment of the zeta-chain-associated protein kinase 70 (ZAP70) and cytoskeletal actin protein interaction networks upon stimulation. Phospho-peptide mapping and kinome analysis substantiated kinase signaling downstream of ZAP70 as a key WFA target, which was further confirmed by bait-pulldown and Western immunoblotting assays. The WFA-ZAP70 interaction was disrupted by a disulfide reducing agent dithiothreitol, suggesting an involvement of cysteine covalent binding interface. In silico docking predicted WFA binding to ZAP70 at cystine 560 and 564 residues. These findings provide a mechanistic insight whereby WFA binds to and inhibits the ZAP70 kinase and impedes T-cell motility. We therefore conclude that WFA may be exploited to pharmacologically control host immune responses and potentially prevent autoimmune-mediated pathologies.

### Keywords
Withaferin a, Kinome, T-lymphocytes, Migration, Inflammation

### Affiliations
Nanyang Technological University
Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University Singapore

### Submitter
SoFong Cam Ngan

### Lab Head
Dr Navin Kumar Verma
Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University Singapore


