### Accession
PXD004018

### Title
Surface Proteomics of Plasmodium yoelii Salivary Gland Sporozoites

### Description
To validate and refine bioinformatic tools aimed at identifying proteins found on the surface of the salivary gland sporozoites.

### Sample Protocol
Salivary gland sporozoites were dissected out of mosquitoes and purified twice by gentle centrifugation over a discontinuous gradient. Proteins on the surface of the sporozoite were then chemically-crosslinked with a non-permeable biotin marker.  Following sporozoite rupture, lysates were exposed to streptavidin-coated beads to capture the biotin-labeled proteins. Elutions were then processed for nano LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Fisher LTQ-Orbitrap Elite.

### Data Protocol
Following nano LC-MS/MS, Thermo .RAW files were converted to .mzml files using msconvert in ProteoWizard. Files were then uploaded and analyzed through the Transproteomic Pipeline (TPP. version 4.8.0).  Two database searches were perfomed using either the Comet or Tandem workflows. Search results were then individually analyzed for peptide identification confidence using PeptideProphet. Resulting files were then combined together for inferred protein identification, performed by iProphet.

### Publication Abstract
Accurate and comprehensive identification of surface-exposed proteins (SEPs) in parasites is a key step in developing novel subunit vaccines. However, the reliability of MS-based high-throughput methods for proteome-wide mapping of SEPs continues to be limited due to high rates of false positives (i.e., proteins mistakenly identified as surface exposed) as well as false negatives (i.e., SEPs not detected due to low expression or other technical limitations). We propose a framework called PlasmoSEP for the reliable identification of SEPs using a novel semisupervised learning algorithm that combines SEPs identified by high-throughput experiments and expert annotation of high-throughput data to augment labeled data for training a predictive model. Our experiments using high-throughput data from the Plasmodium falciparum surface-exposed proteome provide several novel high-confidence predictions of SEPs in P. falciparum and also confirm expert annotations for several others. Furthermore, PlasmoSEP predicts that 25 of 37 experimentally identified SEPs in Plasmodium yoelii salivary gland sporozoites are likely to be SEPs. Finally, PlasmoSEP predicts several novel SEPs in P. yoelii and Plasmodium vivax malaria parasites that can be validated for further vaccine studies. Our computational framework can be easily adapted to improve the interpretation of data from high-throughput studies.

### Keywords
Malaria, Cross-linking, Sporozoites

### Affiliations
Penn State University
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Department, Eberly College of Science, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA.

### Submitter
Scott Lindner

### Lab Head
Dr Scott Lindner
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Department, Eberly College of Science, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA.


