### Accession
PXD010691

### Title
PLASMA PROTEOMIC ANALYSIS OF RARE BMI-DISCORDANT MONOZYGOTIC TWIN PAIRS

### Description
The aim of the current study is to establish the effect of excess body wiehgt and liver fat on plasma proteomic profile without interference from genetic variation. Label-free proteomics (HDMSE) was performed on plasma samples of young healthy monozygotic twins who were discordant for BMI. the twins were further subdivided into groups of liver fat discordant and liver fat concordant to see the efefct fo liver fat on plasma proteomic signature.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples from twnety six twin pairs were collected and top 12 high-abundant plasma proteins were depleted by immunoaffinity spin columns. Equal amount of protein was dried and dissolved in 6M urea. The total proteins were reduced, alkylated and trypsin digested. Then peptides were cleaned with Pierce C18 (Thermofisher) according to manufacturer’s protocol, dried and dissolved to 0.1% formic acid in water. The tryptic peptide mixture, totalling 1.4 µg peptide, was analysed by Waters Synapt G2-Si, coupled to the nano-Acquity UPLC system.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (v2, Nonlinear Dynamics), and matched against the Uniprot FASTA sequences. Search parameters variations (from default settings) were: fixed at cysteine (carbamidomethyl) and variable in methionine (oxidation), trypsin cleavage with 2 missed cleavages. False discovery rate was set to 4%. Protein identification required 2 unique peptides, and the parsimony principle was used to group peptides into protein categories. All peptide Ids where the mass error was more than 10 ppm were deleted.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Complement activation, Acquired obesity, Hdmse, Monozygotic twins, Plasma proteomics, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Helsinki University
Transplantation laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 00290, Finland

### Submitter
Sakari Joenväärä

### Lab Head
Dr Risto Renkonen
Transplantation laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 00290, Finland


