### Accession
PXD023983

### Title
Discovery of RSV-induced BRD4 protein interactions using native immunoprecipitation and parallel accumulation – serial fragmentation (PASEF) mass spectrometry

### Description
Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) causes severe inflammation and airway pathology in children and the elderly by infecting the epithelial cells of the upper and lower respiratory tract. RSV replication is sensed by intracellular pattern recognition receptors upstream of the IRF and NF-$\upkappa$B transcription factors.  These proteins coordinate an innate inflammatory response via Bromodomain containing protein 4 (BRD4), a protein that functions as a scaffold for unknown transcriptional regulators.  To better understand the pleiotropic regulatory function of BRD4, we examine the BRD4 interactome and identify how RSV infection dynamically alters it. To accomplish these goals, we leverage native immunoprecipitation and Parallel Accumulation – Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) mass spectrometry to examine BRD4 complexes isolated from human alveolar epithelial cells in the absence or presence of RSV infection. In addition, we explore the role of BRD4's acetyl-lysine binding bromodomains in mediating these interactions by using a highly selective competitive bromodomain inhibitor. We identify 101 proteins that are significantly enriched in the BRD4 complex and are responsive to both RSV-infection and BRD4 inhibition. These proteins are highly enriched in transcription factors and transcriptional coactivators. Among them, we identify members of the AP1 transcription factor complex, a complex important in innate signaling and cell stress responses.  We independently confirm the BRD4/AP1 interaction in primary human small airway epithelial cells. We conclude that BRD4 recruits multiple transcription factors during RSV infection in a manner dependent on acetyl-lysine binding domain interactions. This data suggests that BRD4 recruits transcription factors to target its RNA processing complex to regulate gene expression in innate immunity and inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Culture and Treatment A549 cells (human adenocarcinomic alveolar basal epithelial cells) were obtained from ATCC and grown in 10\% FBS/F12K media (Corning, Corning, NY, USA). Primary human small airway epithelial cells (hSAECs) were immortalized using human Telomerase/CDK4 as previously described \cite{ramirez_immortalization_2004, ijaz_systems_2014}, and grown in SAGM small airway growth medium (Lonza, Walkersville, MD, USA). All cells were incubated at 37 °C, 5\% CO2 until confluence.  A549 cells were washed twice with Phosphate-buffered Saline (PBS) and exchanged into serum-free F12K media prior to infection with RSV viral particles at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 1. Infected A549 cells were harvested at 24 hours post-infection. hSAECs were stimulated with poly(I:C) (MilliporeSigma, Burlington, MA, USA, catalog no. P0913) by introducing the ligand to SAGM media at a final concentration of 50 $\upmu$g/ml \cite{tian_nf-b_2017}. hSAECs were harvested four hours post-stimulation. The ZL 0454 inhibitor was dissolved in DMSO and added to the relevant cell culture media at a final concentration of 10 $\upmu$M. The ZL 0454 inhibitor was added 18 hours before infection/stimulation, and to the media during infection/stimulation.  Protein Extraction and BRD4 Immunoprecipitation Cells were washed twice with cold PBS before lysis in 500 $\upmu$L low ionic strength immunoprecipitation buffer (50 mM NaCl, 10 mM HEPES, 1\% IGEPAL, 10\% Glycerol) with 1 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) and 1\% protease inhibitor cocktail (MilliporeSigma, Burlington, MA, USA, catalog no. P8340) \cite{zhang_quantitative_2017}. Lysates were sonicated three times for 10 seconds each time (BRANSON Sonifier 150, setting 4), and centrifuged for 5 minutes at 10,000g, 4 °C. Approximately 3 mg of the supernatant was incubated overnight at 4 °C with 3 ug anti-BRD4 antibody (Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA, USA, catalog no. 13440) for BRD4 immunoprecipitation. A nonspecific isotype control antibody (LSBio, Seattle, WA, USA, catalog no. LS-C149375) was used as a negative control. 30 $\upmu$L of Protein A magnetic beads (Dynabeads, Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) were added, and the samples were incubated on a rotating mixer for 1 hour at 4 °C. The beads were then separated from the supernatant with a magnetic stand. The beads were washed three times in low ionic strength immunoprecipitation buffer, transferred to a new tube, and washed once more; samples meant for mass spectrometry were washed three additional times in 50 mM NaCl/10 mM HEPES buffer before trypsin digestion.  Trypsin Digestion and Bottom-Up Sample Preparation The magnetic beads were resuspended in 50 $\upmu$L 0.2\% 4-hexylphenylazosulfonate (Azo)/50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate and reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37 °C for 1 hour. Freshly prepared iodoacetamide solution (200 mM) was added to a final concentration of 20 mM, and the samples were incubated in the dark for 30 minutes. The beads were digested with 1 $\upmu$g Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) overnight at 37 °C and agitation at 1000 rpm. The supernatants were collected, and the beads were further washed with 100 $\upmu$L 0.1\% Azo/50\% Acetonitrile. The supernatants and washes were collected and dried in a vacuum centrifuge to remove the acetonitrile, and resuspended in 1\% formic acid. The samples were then exposed to a mercury lamp (305 nm) for 5 minutes and centrifuged to degrade the Azo and remove byproduct salts. Finally, the samples were desalted using Pierce C18 tips (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and resuspended in 0.1\% Formic Acid.  Label-Free Quantitative Proteomics Analysis Desalted peptides (2 $\upmu$L) were loaded and separated on an IonOptiks Aurora UHPLC column with CSI fitting (Melbourne, Australia) at a flow rate of 0.4 $\upmu$L/minute and a linear gradient increasing from 0\% to 17\% mobile phase B (0.1\% formic acid in acetonitrile) (mobile phase A: 0.1\% formic acid in water) over 60 minutes; 17\% to 25\% from 60 to 90 minutes; 25\% to 37\% B from 90 to 100 minutes; 37\% to 85\% B from 100 minutes to 110 minutes; and a 10 minute hold at 85\% B before washing and returning to low organic conditions. The column directly integrated a nanoESI source for delivery of the samples to the mass spectrometer. MS spectra were captured with a Bruker timsTOF Pro quadrupole-time of flight (Q-TOF) mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA, USA) operating in PASEF mode, with 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans acquired per cycle. Precursors with charge states ranging from 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant v1.6.17.0 \cite{cox_maxquant_2008, cox_accurate_2014}, with LFQ normalization restricted within sample groups. Four biological replicates with two technical replicates each were used for global label-free quantitation. Differential protein abundance was established using the “ProStar” and “DAPAR” \cite{wieczorek_dapar_2017} R packages for R version 4.0.3 \cite{r_core_team_r_2020}. In brief: protein abundance represented by MS signal intensity was $\textrm{Log}_{\textrm{2}}$-transformed, and proteins were filtered to remove contaminants, reverse identifications, and proteins not quantified in at least 6 out of 8 technical replicates within at least one sample group. $\textrm{Log}_{\textrm{2}}$ intensities were normalized to median of the global data set, and missing values were imputed via ssla for partially observed values within a condition, or set to the 2.5\% quantile of observed intensities for observations that were missing entirely within a condition. A limma test was utilized to evaluate statistical significance based on an FDR-adjusted p-value of less than 0.05. For enrichment of protein in the BRD4 IP over the nonspecific IgG, a $\textrm{Log}_{\textrm{2}}$ fold change of 1 or greater in either direction was used. For comparison of the BRD4 IP between treatments and biological conditions, the protein abundance was normalized to the abundance of BRD4 in the sample prior to analysis with ProStar and DAPAR, and a $\textrm{Log}_{\textrm{2}}$ fold change threshold of 0.6 was chosen. P-values were FDR adjusted using the “p.adjust” function in base R (implementing the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Ap-ms, Rsv, Lung, Brd4

### Affiliations
Institute for Clinical and Translational Research (ICTR), University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 53705, USA
UW-Madison

### Submitter
Morgan Mann

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Brasier
Institute for Clinical and Translational Research (ICTR), University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 53705, USA


