### Accession
PXD002856

### Title
Soybean, Root, LC-MSMS -  Mechanisms of soybean roots' tolerances to salinity revealed by proteomic and phosphoproteomic comparisons between two cultivars

### Description
In the current study, we compared phosphoproteomic and proteomic changes in roots of different soybean seedlings of a salt-tolerant cultivar (Wenfeng07) and a salt-sensitive cultivar (Union85140) induced by salt stress. The root samples of Wenfeng07 and Union85140 at three-trifoliate stage were collected at 0 hr, 0.5 hr, 1 hr, 4 hrs, 12 hrs, 24 hrs and 48 hrs after been treated with 150 mM NaCl. LC-MS/MS based phosphoproteomic analysis of these samples identified a total of 2692 phosphoproteins and 5509 phosphorylation sites. Of these, 2344 phosphoproteins containing 3744 phosphorylation sites were quantitatively analyzed. Our results showed that 1163 phosphorylation sites were differentially phosphorylated in the two compared cultivars.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 1.5 mg aliquot of dissolved protein for each sample was processed by the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method to remove SDS in the samples (29). Briefly, dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to the protein solution to reach 100 mM, and then boiled for 5 min. 25 µL aliquot of each sample was mixed with 200 µL UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0), loaded into a Microcon filtration devices (Millipore, with a MWCO of 10 kd), and centrifuged at 14000 g for 15 min; 200 µL of fresh UA buffer was added to dilute the concentrate in the device and centrifuged again. The volume of concentrate was brought to 100 µL with UA buffer supplemented with 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and the sample was shaken at 600 rpm for 1 min. After 30 min incubation at room temperature, the samples were diluted with 40 µL of digestion buffer (contains 5 µg of trypsin). The mixture was shaken at 600 rpm for 1 min, and incubated at 37 oC for 16-18 hr. After digestion, the peptide solution was passed through a Microcon filtration device (MWCO 10 kd), and the concentration of the collected peptides was estimated based on their OD at 280 nm (30). For every eight-plex set, a pooled sample was obtained by combing two groups of samples representing seven time points (a control and six salt treatments) from two cultivars (Union 85140 and Wenfeng07). These pooled samples serve as normalizing reference for the peptide content in samples from all the tested eight-plex sets. A 200 μg digested peptides of each sample was subjected to AB Sciex iTRAQ labeling (Figure 1). The eight-plex iTRAQ labeling was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. A total of six eight-plex sets of iTRAQ samples were used for the three biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
The raw HCD files were analyzed by Mascot2.2 and Proteome Discoverer1.4 and searched against a peptide database derived from the Glycine max genome sequence (“uniprot_Glycine_74305_20140429.fasta” downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org/ on April 29, 2014, which includes 74, 305 nonredundant predicted peptide sequences) (32). The Mascot search parameters were list in Table 1. The Proteome Discoverer 1.4 was used for integrating the spectra intensity (> 200) of the eight-plex reporter ions. The quantitative value of phosphopeptides at different treatment time points was normalized using the pooled sample as a reference and converted to log2 value of fold-change. The phosphopeptides pass the cutoff and detected in at least two replicates were used for assessment of significant change in response to NaCl stress. In this research, two statistical approaches were used for significance analysis. The ‘significance A’ value previously described by Cox and Mann (33) was adapted to evaluate the changes between the treated (samples) and untreated (control, T0) root tissues in each biological replicate with each of which includes three technical replicates. A Student’s t-test was performed using the standard deviation of the pooled sample (standard) between different biological replicates for assessing the global variability of all tested samples (27). The phosphopeptides that passed both Significance A < 0.05 and p value < 0.05 were considered significantly changed (34).

### Publication Abstract
Understanding molecular mechanisms underlying plant salinity tolerance provides valuable knowledgebase for effective crop improvement through genetic engineering. Current proteomic technologies, which support reliable and high-throughput analyses, have been broadly used for exploring sophisticated molecular networks in plants. In the current study, we compared phosphoproteomic and proteomic changes in roots of different soybean seedlings of a salt-tolerant cultivar (Wenfeng07) and a salt-sensitive cultivar (Union85140) induced by salt stress. The root samples of Wenfeng07 and Union85140 at three-trifoliate stage were collected at 0 h, 0.5 h, 1 h, 4 h, 12 h, 24 h, and 48 h after been treated with 150 mm NaCl. LC-MS/MS based phosphoproteomic analysis of these samples identified a total of 2692 phosphoproteins and 5509 phosphorylation sites. Of these, 2344 phosphoproteins containing 3744 phosphorylation sites were quantitatively analyzed. Our results showed that 1163 phosphorylation sites were differentially phosphorylated in the two compared cultivars. Among them, 10 MYB/MYB transcription factor like proteins were identified with fluctuating phosphorylation modifications at different time points, indicating that their crucial roles in regulating flavonol accumulation might be mediated by phosphorylated modifications. In addition, the protein expression profiles of these two cultivars were compared using LC MS/MS based shotgun proteomic analysis, and expression pattern of all the 89 differentially expressed proteins were independently confirmed by qRT-PCR. Interestingly, the enzymes involved in chalcone metabolic pathway exhibited positive correlations with salt tolerance. We confirmed the functional relevance of chalcone synthase, chalcone isomerase, and cytochrome P450 monooxygenase genes using soybean composites and Arabidopsis thaliana mutants, and found that their salt tolerance were positively regulated by chalcone synthase, but was negatively regulated by chalcone isomerase and cytochrome P450 monooxygenase. A novel salt tolerance pathway involving chalcone metabolism, mostly mediated by phosphorylated MYB transcription factors, was proposed based on our findings. (The mass spectrometry raw data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002856).

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Root, Salinity stress, Soybean

### Affiliations
Hangzhou Normal University

### Submitter
Erxu Pi

### Lab Head
Dr Erxu Pi
Hangzhou Normal University


