### Accession
PXD011629

### Title
IP-MS target protein identification

### Description
To identify the target of the monoclonal antibody, Immuoprecipitation (IP) was performed to pull-down target protein from cell culture extraction, corn or zebrafish tissue lysate. The IP product was validated on silver-stained SDS-PAGE and Western blot. The target band was cut out and performed LC-MS/MS for target protein identification.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation (IP) assay was performed using CNBr-activated Sepharose 4B and following the company instruction. In brief, 200 µg purified antibody was cross-linked to 20 µL hydrolyzed CNBr beads, and used to pull-down target protein from 1 mg cell membrane or nuclear extraction. The IP product was validated on silver-stained SDS-PAGE to find out specific bands by comparing with IP products from negative antibody control. A WB test was also performed on input sample and IP product to help identify the target band. Once the band was defined as target band, another SDS-PAGE was run and stained with commassie blue R-250 for the IP product.

### Data Protocol
Mascot distiller (version 2.6, Matrix Science) or Protein Discovery software (version 2.2) was used to convert raw to mgf or mzML format for downstream analysis. The LC-MS/MS data was searched against uniprot human (557,992 proteins) for human cell culture sample, uniprot zebrafish (61,675) for zebrafish tissue sample or uniprot maize (137,106) for maize tissue sample. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys and allowing for two missed cleavages. ±10 ppm and 0.02Da (Thermo Q Exactive HF) or 1 Da (Thermo Orbitrap-Velos Pro) were used as tolerance for precursor (MS) and product ions (MS/MS) respectively. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as complete modifications. N-terminal protein acetylation and oxidation of methionine were set as potential modifications. Deamidation at asparagine and glutamine, oxidation at methionine and tryptophan were specified as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Antibodies are essential for elucidating gene function. However, affordable technology for proteome-scale antibody generation does not exist. To address this, we developed Proteome Epitope Tag Antibody Library (PETAL) and its array. PETAL consists of 62,208 monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against 15,199 peptides from diverse proteomes. PETAL harbors binders for a great multitude of proteins in nature due to antibody multispecificity, an intrinsic antibody feature. Distinctive combinations of 10,000 to 20,000 mAbs were found to target specific proteomes by array screening. Phenotype-specific mAb-protein pairs were found for maize and zebrafish samples. Immunofluorescence and flow cytometry mAbs for membrane proteins and chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing mAbs for transcription factors were identified from respective proteome-binding PETAL mAbs. Differential screening of cell surface proteomes of tumor and normal tissues identified internalizing tumor antigens for antibody-drug conjugates. By finding high-affinity mAbs at a fraction of current time and cost, PETAL enables proteome-scale antibody generation and target discovery.

### Keywords
Human, Protein identification, Zebrafish, Maize

### Affiliations
Shanghai Center for Systems Biomedicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

### Submitter
Yang Li

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng-Ce Tao
Shanghai Center for Systems Biomedicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.


