### Accession
PXD013382

### Title
Arabidopsis CEP5 overexprssion line  LC-MSMS

### Description
While CEP5 has been shown to play a role in shoot and root growth, possibly through interaction with the CEPR1/XIP1 and/or CEPR2 receptor kinase, very little is known about the downstream molecular effects. To gain insight in the changes downstream of CEP5, we quantified differences in proteomes  of wild type and CEP5OE shoots using label-free mass spectrometry-based proteomics

### Sample Protocol
10DAS Col-0 and CEP5OE shoots were harvested and frozen in liquid nitrogen.One gram of fresh weight material was manually ground into a fine powder with a pestle and mortar. Proteins were extracted in homogenization buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8), 0.1 M KCl, 30% sucrose, 5 mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT in Milli-Q water, and the appropriate amounts of the complete protease inhibitor mixture and the PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor mixture (both from Roche) were added. The samples were sonicated on ice and centrifuged at 4 °C for 15 min at 2500 × g to remove debris. Supernatants were collected, and a methanol/chloroform precipitation was carried out by adding 3, 1, and 4 volumes of methanol, chloroform, and water, respectively. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 5000 × g, and the aqueous phase was removed. After addition of 4 volumes methanol, the proteins were pelleted via centrifugation for 10 min at 2500 × g. Pellets were washed with 80% acetone and resuspended in 8M ureum in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (pH 8). Alkylation of cysteines was carried out by adding a combination of tris(carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Pierce) and iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) to final concentrations of 15 mM and 30 mM, respectively, and the reaction was allowed for 15 min at 30 °C in the dark. The protein concentration was measured using Nano drop. One milligram of the proteins was predigested with EndoLysC (Wako Chemicals) for 4 h, followed by a digestion with trypsin overnight (Promega Trypsin Gold, mass spectrometry grade) after diluting sample 8 times with 50 mM TEAB buffer (pH 8). Both digestions occurring at 37 °C at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 (w:w). The digest was acidified to pH ≤ 3 with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted with SampliQ C18 SPE cartridges (Agilent) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines.  For SCX fractionation,three discs of (1.5 mm diameter) of polystyrene divinylbenzene copolymer with sulfonic acid (Empore™, 3M) were stacked in a 200µl pipette tip to make SCX tips. The desalted peptides were fully dried in a vacuum centrifuge and then re-suspended in loading buffer [5% (v/v) acetonitrile, 1% (v/v) TFA]. 100μg peptide in 100μl loading buffer was loaded on SCX tips which were rinsed with 100μl acetonitrile (ACN) first.  Then peptides were subsequently eluted by using 20μl each following SCX fractionation buffers: 100 mM AmAc [20% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.5% (v/v) TFA] (fraction 1); 175 mM AmAc [20% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.5% (v/v) TFA] (fraction 1); 375 mM AmAc [20% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.5% (v/v) TFA] (fraction 2). 20μl Elution buffer [80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 5% (v/v) NH4OH] (fraction 3) were used twice to elute the remaining peptides. A couple of 10% formic acid was added to fraction 3 to avoid deamidation. The fractionated peptides were dried by vacuum drying and were dissolved in 30 μL of 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA right before LC–MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the A. thaliana proteome database (TAIR10, containing 35386 entries; http://www.arabidopsis.org/) using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.4.1).For the quantitative proteome analyses, the ‘ProteinGroups’ output files generated by the MaxQuant search were loaded into Perseus software (version 1.5.6.0). Centred log2-transformed intensity values of the statistically significant proteins were Z-scored and then clustered into groups by a hierarchical clustering analysis based on Pearson correlation, and visualized as heat maps. Venn diagrams were created with the Venny 2.1 online tool (http://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny). GO enrichment analysis was performed in the PLAZA 3.0 workbench using entire species as background model and 0.01 as a P-value cut-off.

### Publication Abstract
Peptides derived from non-functional precursors play important roles in various developmental processes, but also in (a)biotic stress signaling. Our (phospho)proteome-wide analyses of C-TERMINALLY ENCODED PEPTIDE 5 (CEP5)-mediated changes revealed an impact on abiotic stress-related processes. Drought has a dramatic impact on plant growth, development and reproduction, and the plant hormone auxin plays a role in drought responses. Our genetic, physiological, biochemical, and pharmacological results demonstrated that CEP5-mediated signaling is relevant for osmotic and drought stress tolerance in <i>Arabidopsis</i>, and that CEP5 specifically counteracts auxin effects. Specifically, we found that CEP5 signaling stabilizes AUX/IAA transcriptional repressors, suggesting the existence of a novel peptide-dependent control mechanism that tunes auxin signaling. These observations align with the recently described role of AUX/IAAs in stress tolerance and provide a novel role for CEP5 in osmotic and drought stress tolerance.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Lc-ms/ms, Shoot

### Affiliations
VIB Ceter for Plant System Biology and Medical Biotechnology; Ugent Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics;Ugent Department of Biomolecular Medicine. Ghent, Belgium
VIB-Ugent center for Plant systems biology

### Submitter
Shanshuo Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Shanshuo Zhu
VIB Ceter for Plant System Biology and Medical Biotechnology; Ugent Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics;Ugent Department of Biomolecular Medicine. Ghent, Belgium


