### Accession
PXD020511

### Title
Numerous post-translational modifications of RNA polymerase II subunit Rpb4 link transcription to post-transcriptional mechanisms

### Description
Rpb4/7 binds RNA Polymerase II (Pol II) transcripts co-transcriptionally and accompanies them throughout their lives. By virtue of its capacity to interact with key regulators (e.g., Pol II, eIF3, Pat1) both temporarily and spatially, Rpb4/7 regulates the major stages of the mRNA lifecycle. Here we show that Rpb4/7 can undergo over 100 combinations of post-translational modifications (PTMs). Remarkably, the Rpb4/7 PTMs repertoire changes as the mRNA/Rpb4/7 complex progresses from one stage to the next. A mutagenesis approach in residues that undergo PTMs suggests that temporal Rpb4 PTMs regulate its interactions with key regulators of gene expression that control transcriptional and post-transcriptional stages. Moreover, one mutant type specifically affects mRNA synthesis despite its normal association with Pol II, whereas the other affects both mRNA synthesis and decay; both types disrupt the balance between mRNA synthesis and decay (‘mRNA buffering’) and the cell’s capacity to respond to the environment. Taken together, we propose that temporal Rpb4/7 PTMs are involved in cross talks among the various stages of the mRNA lifecycle.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast extract were enruched for Rpb4 by TAP pull down. The elutions were reduced carbamidomethylated and trypsinized in gel. LC-MSMS was done using the Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MS data was analyzed on the Proteome Discoverer platform using the Sequest asearch engine

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Post-translational modifications, Rpb4, Mrna

### Affiliations
Technion
Faculty of Medicine Technion - Israel Institute of Technology Bat Galim, Haifa, Israel 31076

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Mordechai Choder
Faculty of Medicine Technion - Israel Institute of Technology Bat Galim, Haifa, Israel 31076


