### Accession
PXD016550

### Title
HHIP-AS1 lncRNA promotes tumorigenicity in human SHH-driven brain tumors

### Description
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) comprise a diverse class of gene expression regulators with emerging roles in many biological processes including cancer. Here we show that the expression of the lncRNA Hedgehog Interacting Protein Antisense 1 (HHIP-AS1) is a hallmark feature of human SHH-driven tumors. Importantly, loss of HHIP-AS1 leads to reduced tumor growth in SHH-driven tumors in vitro and in vivo. Our results demonstrate the power of cross-entity transcriptome-wide comparisons to identify novel epigenetic–regulatory lncRNA circuitries underlying human cancers.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from frozen cell pellets as previously described23. Briefly, cells were homogenized in urea buffer with a TissueLyser (Qiagen) and subsequent sonication. After centrifugation for 15 min at 14,000 g and 4°C, supernatants were collected. Protein concentration was determined via Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 10 µg protein per sample were desalted through electrophoretic migration at 50 V for 10 min on a 4 -12 % Bis-Tris Polyacrylamide Gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #NP0322BOX). After silver staining, protein bands were cut out, reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin before peptide extraction via sonication. Peptides were dissolved and diluted with 0.1 % TFA (v/v). LC-MS analysis For mass spectrometric analysis, 15 µl peptide solution per sample was analyzed on a nano-high-performance liquid chromatography electrospray ionization mass spectrometer. The analytical system was composed of an RSLCnano U3000 HPLC coupled to a Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer via a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Injected peptides were concentrated and desalted at a flow rate of 6 µl/min on a trapping column (Acclaim PepMao C18, 2 cm x 100 µm x 3 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 0.1 % TFA (v/v) for 10 min. Subsequently, peptides were separated at a constant flowrate of 300 nl/min over a 120 min gradient on an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 25 cm x 75 µm x 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 60°C. Separation was achieved through a gradient from 4 to 40 % solvent B (solvent A: 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in water, solvent B: 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid, 84 % (v/v) acetonitrile in water). Afterwards, peptides were ionized at a voltage of 1.400 V and introduced into the mass spectrometer operated in positive mode. Mass spectrometry scans were recorded in profile mode in a range from 350-1700 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 while tandem mass spectra were recorded in the ion trap at normal scan rate. Tandem mass spectra were recorded with a data dependent Top 20 method and 35 % normalized collision energy. Dynamic exclusion was activated with a repeat count of 1 for 45 s and only charge states 2+ and 3+ were analyzed.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was applied for peptide/protein identification with Mascot (version 2.4, Matrix Science) as search engine employing the UniProt database (human; including isoforms; date 2016-11-01). A false discovery rate of 1 % (p ≤ 0.01) on peptide level was set as identification threshold. Proteins were quantified with Progenesis QI for Proteomics (Version 2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters Corporation).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Shh, Lncrna, Proteogenomic, Epigenetic regulation, Pediatric brain tumors

### Affiliations
BMFZ/MPL
Institute for Molecular Medicine I, Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University Duesseldorf, Universitaetsstrasse 1, 40225 Duesseldorf, Germany

### Submitter
Nina Overbeck

### Lab Head
Dr Kai Stühler
Institute for Molecular Medicine I, Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University Duesseldorf, Universitaetsstrasse 1, 40225 Duesseldorf, Germany


