### Accession
PXD001817

### Title
Uncovering the abilities of Agaricus bisporus to degrade plant biomass throughout its life cycle

### Description
The common edible mushroom Agaricus bisporus is a basidiomycete that thrives on decaying plant material in the forests and grasslands of North America and Europe. It is adapted to forest litter and contributes to global carbon recycling, depolymerizing cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin in plant biomass. A. bisporus is also an edible mushroom that is widely cultivated and economically important. However, relatively little is known about how A. bisporus grows in this controlled environment in commercial production facilities and utilizes its substrate. Using transcriptomics and proteomics, we showed that changes in plant biomass degradation by A. bisporus occur throughout its life cycle. Ligninolytic genes were highly expressed during the spawning stage day 16 and had low expression during all the other growth stages which could indicate that lignin is not modified after the spawning stage. Our results also revealed differences in gene expression involved in cellulose and hemicellulose degradation between the first and second flushes. This could partially explain the reduction in the number of mushrooms during the second flush.

### Sample Protocol
For secretomic analysis, collected mycelium grown compost (10 g) samples were mixed with distilled water (100 ml) in 250 cm3 Erlenmeyer flasks. All the flasks were placed in an incubator shaker at 200 rpm for 1 h at 4°C. The samples were then centrifuged at 10000 rpm for 15 min and the supernatant was concentrated 4x using a vacuum concentrator Speedavac (Savant Instruments, Inc., Farmingdale, NY). 30 µl of each of the samples were run on a 12% Bis-Tris 1D SDS-PAGE gel (Biorad) for 2-3 cm and stained with colloidal coomassie dye G-250 (Gel Code Blue Stain Reagent, Thermo Scientific). The lane was cut into two bands, which were treated with 6.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at 60 °C for reduction and 54 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min for alkylation. The proteins were digested overnight with trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C. The peptides were extracted with 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and dried in a vacuum concentrator (Thermo Scientific, Bremen). Samples were resuspended in 10% formic acid (FA) / 5% DMSO and 30% of the sample was analyzed using a Proxeon Easy-nLC100 (Thermo Scientific) connected to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Samples were first trapped (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 um, 2 cm x 100 μm) before being separated on an analytical column (Agilent Poroshell EC-C18, 2.7 μm, 40 cm x 50 μm), using a gradient of 60 min at a column flow of 150 nl min-1. Trapping was performed at 8 μL/min for 10 min in solvent A (0.1 M acetic acid in water) and the gradient was as follows 7- 30% solvent B (0.1 M acetic acid in acetonitrile) in 31 min, 30-100% in 3 min, 100% solvent B for 5 min, and 7% solvent B for 13 min. Nanospray was performed at 1.7 kV using a fused silica capillary that was pulled in-house and coated with gold (o.d. 360 μm; i.d. 20 μm; tip i.d. 10 μm). The mass spectrometers were used in a data-dependent mode, which automatically switched between MS and MS/MS. Full scan MS spectra from m/z 350 – 1500 were acquired at a resolution of 35.000 at m/z 400 after the accumulation to a target value of 3E6. Up to ten most intense precursor ions were selected for fragmentation. HCD fragmentation was performed at normalised collision energy of 25% after the accumulation to a target value of 5e4. MS2 was acquired at a resolution of 17.500 and dynamic exclusion was enabled (exclusion size list 500, exclusion duration 10 s).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (version 1.3.0.339, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Database search was performed using the genome of A. bisporus var. bisporus (H97) v2.0 (Morin et al., 2012)  and Mascot (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science, UK) as the search engine. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was specified as enzyme and up to two miss cleavages were allowed. Data filtering was performed using percolator, resulting in 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Additional filters were; search engine rank 1 peptides and Mascot ion score >20. Raw files corresponding to one sample were merged into one result file

### Publication Abstract
The economically important edible basidiomycete mushroom Agaricus bisporus thrives on decaying plant material in forests and grasslands of North America and Europe. It degrades forest litter and contributes to global carbon recycling, depolymerizing (hemi-)cellulose and lignin in plant biomass. Relatively little is known about how A.&#x2009;bisporus grows in the controlled environment in commercial production facilities and utilizes its substrate. Using transcriptomics and proteomics, we showed that changes in plant biomass degradation by A.&#x2009;bisporus occur throughout its life cycle. Ligninolytic genes were only highly expressed during the spawning stage day 16. In contrast, (hemi-)cellulolytic genes were highly expressed at the first flush, whereas low expression was observed at the second flush. The essential role for many highly expressed plant biomass degrading genes was supported by exo-proteome analysis. Our data also support a model of sequential lignocellulose degradation by wood-decaying fungi proposed in previous studies, concluding that lignin is degraded at the initial stage of growth in compost and is not modified after the spawning stage. The observed differences in gene expression involved in (hemi-)cellulose degradation between the first and second flushes could partially explain the reduction in the number of mushrooms during the second flush.

### Keywords
Agaricus bisporus, Compost, Rna-seq, Plant biomass, Proteome

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Group
Fungal Physiology, CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre & Fungal Molecular Physiology, Utrecht University, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Harm Post

### Lab Head
Dr R. P. de Vries
Fungal Physiology, CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre & Fungal Molecular Physiology, Utrecht University, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands


