### Accession
PXD031579

### Title
Alterations of oral microbiota and impact on the gut microbiome in type 1 diabetes mellitus revealed by multi-omic analysis

### Description
Background Alterations of the gut microbiome have been linked to multiple chronic diseases. However, the drivers of such changes remain largely unknown. The oral cavity acts as a major route of exposure to exogenous factors including pathogens, and processes therein may affect the communities in the subsequent compartments of the gastrointestinal tract. Here, we perform strain-resolved, integrated multi-omic analyses of saliva and stool samples collected from eight families with multiple cases of type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM).  Results We identified distinct oral microbiota mostly reflecting competition between streptococcal species. More specifically, we found a decreased abundance of the commensal Streptococcus salivarius in the oral cavity of T1DM individuals, which is linked to its  apparent competition with the pathobiont Streptococcus mutans. The decrease in S. salivarius in the oral cavity was also associated with its decrease in the gut as well as higher abundances in facultative anaerobes including Enterobacteria. In addition, we found evidence of gut inflammation in T1DM as reflected in the expression profiles of the Enterobacteria as well as in the human gut proteome. Finally, we were able to follow transmitted strain-variants from the oral cavity to the gut at the metagenomic, metatranscriptomic and metaproteomic levels, highlighting not only the transfer, but also the activity of the transmitted taxa along the gastrointestinal tract. Conclusions  Alterations of the oral microbiome in the context of T1DM impact the microbial communities in the lower gut, in particular through the reduction of “oral-to-gut” transfer of Streptococcus salivarius. Our results indicate that the observed oral-cavity-driven gut microbiome changes may contribute towards the inflammatory processes involved in T1DM. Through the integration of multi-omic analyses, we resolve strain-variant “mouth-to-gut” transfer in a disease context.

### Sample Protocol
The study design was an observational study of eight selected families containing T1DM and healthy individuals. Recruited families were seen three times (V1, V2, V3) at intervals of between four and eight weeks for collection of saliva and stool samples..  For each individual and visit, faecal and saliva samples were subjected to comprehensive biomolecular isolations. Briefly, snap-frozen sample was homogenised in a liquid nitrogen bath followed by RNAlater treatment. After incubation, the sample was centrifuged and the cells pelleted. Cold stainless steel milling balls and 600 µl of RLT buffer (Qiagen) were added to the pellet and this was re-suspended via quick vortexing. Cells were disrupted by bead beating, the lysate was transferred onto a QIAshredder column and the eluate retrieved for multi-omics extraction. The subsequent biomacromolecular extractions were based on the Qiagen Allprep kit (Qiagen) using an automated robotic liquid handling system (Freedom Evo, Tecan)and in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.  Extracted proteins were processed and digested using the S-TrapTM system (ProtiFi) following manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, protein suspensions were solubilised with SDS then reduced, alkylated and acidified for complete denaturation.  Approximately 200 μl of samples were transferred onto the S-Trap column and centrifuged until all of the sample volume was transferred. The columns were then washed twice with S-Trap protein binding buffer. Protein digestion was performed by adding trypsin solution to each column, to achieve a trypsin to protein ratio of 1:50. Incubation was performed for three hours at 47°C in a Thermomixer. Tryptic peptides were eluted with 40 μl 50 mM TEAB, 40 μl 0.1% acetic acid, and 35 μl 60% acetonitrile with 0.1% acetic acid at 4,000 x g for 1 minute per elution. Samples were dried at 45°C in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -20°C. Peptides were fractionated into eight fractions using the high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (PierceTM Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and using self-made columns. Digested, dried peptides were resuspended in 300 μl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and suspensions transferred onto the columns. After centrifugation, the eluate was retained as “flow-through”-fraction. Columns were then washed with water (ASTM Type I). Separation of samples into eight fractions was performed using 300 μl of elution solutions with increasing concentrations of acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid at 3,000 x g for 4 minutes. Each elution fraction was collected in a separate microcentrifuge tube, dried at 45°C in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -20°C. Peptide concentrations were measured for fraction two of each sample using the Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay kit (PierceTM Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Of each of the samples, for each fraction, the volume for 170 ng of peptides were loaded onto in-house built columns (100 μm x 20 cm), filled with 3 μm ReproSil-Pur material and separated using a non-linear 100 min gradient from 1 to 99% buffer B (99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% acetic acid in water (ASTM Type I) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min operated on an EASY-nLC 1200. Measurements were performed on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer performing one full MS scan in a range from 300 to 1,700 m/z followed by a data-dependent MS/MS scan of the 20 most intense ions, a dynamic exclusion repeat count of 1, and repeat exclusion duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
As the mass spectrometry analysis of the protein fraction was performed at different facilities for families M01-04 and families M05, M06, M08, and M11, certain parts of the preprocessing workflow and analyses had to be tailored to the data, as mentioned below. Raw files were converted to mzML format using ThermoRawFileParser and to ms2 format using ProteoWizard’s msconvert. The files for families M01-04 were filtered for the top 300 most intense spectra, the files for the other families for the top 150 most intense spectra to optimise protein identifications. For each sample, microbial protein sequence databases were constructed from the Prokka predicted protein sequences of the IMP co-assemblies and supplemented with variant protein sequences (missense variants) identified in both the oral cavity and the gut, during the variant calling step. If no database was available for a single sample, all databases available from the individual were concatenated. If an individual had no database, all databases from the individual’s family were concatenated. In addition, the human RefSeq protein sequences (release 92), a collection of plant storage proteins that might be present due to food intake as well as  the cRAP contaminant database (release 04/03/2019) were added. The databases were then filtered according to size (60-40000 residues) to eliminate noise from very large or small proteins that can be erroneously produced during the ORF prediction step. Duplicate sequences were removed by sequence using SeqKit. Concatenated target-decoy databases were built using Sipros Ensembles sipros_prepare_protein_database.py. Using Sipros Ensemble, each sample was searched against the prepared database for that sample. Identifications were filtered to a protein FDR of 1%. After the search, human and microbial protein identifications were treated separately. Human proteins/protein groups that ended up having identical protein identifiers after processing the database identifiers in the output were collapsed and their spectral counts summed up. The same was done for the microbial proteins but gene identifiers were replaced by the corresponding annotation identifiers from the respective source.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microbiome ; metaproteomics ; type 1 diabetes

### Affiliations
LCSB
System Ecology Group Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine University of Luxembourg Luxembourg

### Submitter
Benoit Kunath

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Wilmes
System Ecology Group Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine University of Luxembourg Luxembourg


