### Accession
PXD031946

### Title
A non-hazardous deparaffinization protocol enables quantita-tive proteomics of core needle biopsy-sized formalin-fixed and paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue specimens.

### Description
Most human tumor tissues that are obtained for pathology and diagnostic purposes are forma-lin-fixed and paraffin embedded (FFPE).  To perform quantitative proteomics of FFPE samples, paraffin has to be removed and formalin-induced crosslinks have to be reversed prior to prote-olytic digestion.  A central component of almost all deparaffinization protocols is xylene, a toxic and highly flammable solvent that has been reported to negatively affect protein extraction and quantitative proteome analysis.  Here, we present a ‘green’ xylene-free protocol for accel-erated sample preparation of FFPE tissues based on paraffin-removal with hot water.  Com-bined with tissue homogenization using disposable micropestles and a modified protein aggre-gation capture (PAC) digestion protocol, our workflow enables streamlined and reproducible quantitative proteomic profiling of FFPE tissue.  Label free quantitation of FFPE cores from human ductal breast carcinoma in-situ (DCIS) xenografts with a volume of only 0.79 mm3 showed a high correlation between replicates (r2=0.992) with a median %CV of 16.9%.  Im-portantly, this small volume is amenable to tissue micro array (TMA) cores and core needle bi-opsies, while our results and the easy-of-use indicate that a further downsizing is feasible.  Fi-nally, our FFPE workflow does not require costly equipment and can be established in every standard clinical laboratory.

### Sample Protocol
Green xylene-free protocol for accelerated sample preparation of FFPE tissues based on paraffin-removal with hot water. Tissue homogenization using disposable micropestles and a modified protein aggregation capture (PAC) digestion protocol. All samples were analyzed by data dependent acquisition (DDA) using an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) online-coupled to a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. To minimize systematic errors, all samples from one experimental set (e.g. FASP/PAC/STRAP) were injected in randomized order. 1 µg of digested protein were preconcentrated on an AcclaimPepMap 100 C18 pre-column (3 µm particle size, 75 µm inner diameter x 2 cm length) and separated on an AcclaimPepMap 100 C18 main column (2 µm particle size, 75 µm inner diameter x 25 cm length) using a 50-min binary gradient (A: 0.1% FA; B: 84% ACN in 0.1% FA), at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. B was increased from 3-17% until min 30 and from 17-40% until min 20. Full MS scans were acquired from m/z 350-1,500 at a resolution of 70,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1x106 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The 15 most intense precursor ions (charge states +2, +3, +4) were isolated with a window of m/z 1.2 and fragmented using a normalized collision energy of 28; the dynamic exclusion was set to 40 s. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500, using an AGC target value of 2x104 and a maximum injection time of 64 ms.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (PD, Thermo Scientific). Database searches were performed using SequestHT and a human Swissprot database (January 2019; 20,414 target entries). Label free quantitation (LFQ) was performed using the Minora feature detector node, Percolator was used to calculate posterior error probabilities. Database searches were performed using trypsin as enzyme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da), and lysine methylation (+14.016 Da, +28.031 Da, and +42.047 Da) as variable modifications [6]. Mass tolerances were set to 5 ppm for precursor- and 0.02 Da for product-ions. The data was filtered to a false discovery rate (FDR) <1% on the peptide and protein levels. Only proteins that were (i) identified with at least two unique peptides and (ii) quantified in at least 3 out of 5 replicates of at least one of the methods to be compared, were considered for the quantitative comparison. Protein LFQ data obtained from Proteome Discoverer was normalized based on summed protein intensities to correct for differences in sample loading. For proteins passing the abovementioned criteria, missing values were imputed by multiplying for each sample the minimum observed intensity by 1.5. The obtained normalized abundances were used for unpaired t-tests (two tailed, 95% confidence) and Pearson correlation analyses. Differential expression analysis was performed on log2-transformed normalized abundance data with multiple hypothesis testing using a false discovery approach by Benjamini-Krieger false discovery rate (FDR 1%). Proteins having q-values of <0.01 and absolute log2 fold-changes >1 were considered as differential between tested workflows. Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism 9.

### Publication Abstract
Most human tumor tissues that are obtained for pathology and diagnostic purposes are formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE). To perform quantitative proteomics of FFPE samples, paraffin has to be removed and formalin-induced crosslinks have to be reversed prior to proteolytic digestion. A central component of almost all deparaffinization protocols is xylene, a toxic and highly flammable solvent that has been reported to negatively affect protein extraction and quantitative proteome analysis. Here, we present a 'green' xylene-free protocol for accelerated sample preparation of FFPE tissues based on paraffin-removal with hot water. Combined with tissue homogenization using disposable micropestles and a modified protein aggregation capture (PAC) digestion protocol, our workflow enables streamlined and reproducible quantitative proteomic profiling of FFPE tissue. Label-free quantitation of FFPE cores from human ductal breast carcinoma in situ (DCIS) xenografts with a volume of only 0.79 mm<sup>3</sup> showed a high correlation between replicates (r<sup>2</sup> = 0.992) with a median %CV of 16.9%. Importantly, this small volume is already compatible with tissue micro array (TMA) cores and core needle biopsies, while our results and its ease-of-use indicate that further downsizing is feasible. Finally, our FFPE workflow does not require costly equipment and can be established in every standard clinical laboratory.

### Keywords
Clinical proteomics; tumor tissues; ffpe; quantitative proteomics; core needle biopsy; cancer research; molecular pathology; breast ductal carcinoma; in-situ cancer

### Affiliations
1.Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada 2.Gerald Bronfman Department of Oncology, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec
McGill University, Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre

### Submitter
Georgia Mitsa

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph H Borchers
1.Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada 2.Gerald Bronfman Department of Oncology, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec


