### Accession
PXD037089

### Title
Ciona savignyi notochord LC-MS/MS based on 4D Mass Spectromete

### Description
Lumen formation and inflation are crucial for tubular organ morphogenesis, yet the underling mechanism remains largely unrevealed. Here, we applied 4D proteomics to screen the lumenogenesis-related proteins and reveal the potentially biological pathways that are involved in lumen inflation during notochord lumen formation in ascidian Ciona savignyi.

### Sample Protocol
After fertilization, the embryos were dechorionated and cultured at 16 ºC without illumination in an incubator. The Ciona tailbud embryos were transferred to a pre-cooled 90 mm petri dish coated 0.2 % Bovine albumin (BSA) (Sigma-Aldrich), the heads of the embryos were blown off by repeated blows with pipette tip. Decapitated Ciona embryos were transferred to a new 90 mm coated petri dish, then add 2.5% Trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) into petri dish (final concentration 0.8%). Trypsin was dissolved in artificial seawater without Ca2+ and Mg2+ (Ca2+-free ASW, 10 mM KCl, 40 mM MgCl2, 15 mM MgSO4, 435 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM NaHCO3, 7 mM Tris base, 13 mM Tris-HCl), formula reference previous works. The petri dish shook on a shaker at 60 rpm for 6-7 min to digest the embryos. The notochord tissue was collected into the pre-cooled 1.5ml tubes under a microscope and then centrifuged to the bottom, seawater was removed.

### Data Protocol
The notochord tissue was extracted and identified using timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) mass spectrometry in PTM biolabs (Hangzhou, China). The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (version 1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched and annotated against the C. savignyi genome annotation information concatenated with reverse decoy database. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%. The proteomic data was subjected to protein expression cluster analysis utilizing Mfuzz analysis, a newly fuzzy c-means algorithm. The number of clusters K was 6 and the degree of clustering ambiguity m was set to 2. Proteins were classified by GO annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment and molecular function. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The GO with a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant. All differentially expressed protein database accession or sequence were searched against the STRING database (https://cn.string-db.org, version 11.5) for protein-protein interactions. Only interactions between the proteins belonging to the searched data set were selected, thereby excluding external candidates. we fetched all interactions that had a confidence score ≥ 0.7 (high confidence). Interaction network was visualized by Sytoscape 3.9.0 software. The N-linked glycoproteins were predicted by NetNGlyc 1.0 (https://services.healthtech.dtu.dk/service.php?NetNGlyc-1.0), and the motif analysis was visualized by WebLogo3 (http://weblogo.threeplusone.com).

### Publication Abstract
The dual-specificity tyrosine phosphorylation-regulated kinase (DYRK1) phosphorylates diverse substrates involved in various cellular processes. Here, we found that blocking the kinase activity of DYRK1 inhibited notochord development and lumenogenesis in ascidian <i>Ciona savignyi</i>. By performing phosphoproteomics in conjunction with notochord-specific proteomics, we identified 1065 notochord-specific phosphoproteins that were present during lumen inflation, of which 428 differentially phosphorylated proteins (DPPs) were identified after inhibition of DYRK1 kinase activity. These DPPs were significantly enriched in metal ion transmembrane transporter activity, protein transport and localization, and tight junction. We next analyzed the downregulated phosphoproteins and focused on those belonging to the solute carrier (SLC), Ras-related protein (RAB), and tight junction protein (TJP) families. In vivo phospho-deficient study showed that alanine mutations on the phosphosites of these proteins resulted in defects of lumenogenesis during <i>Ciona</i> notochord development, demonstrating the crucial roles of phosphorylation of transmembrane transport-, vesicle trafficking-, and tight junction-related proteins in lumen formation. Overall, our study provides a valuable data resource for investigating notochord lumenogenesis and uncovers the molecular mechanisms of DYRK1-mediated notochord development and lumen inflation.

### Keywords
Ascidian, Lumenogenesis, Lc-ms/ms, Notochord

### Affiliations
Ocean University of China
Sars-Fang Centre, MoE Key Laboratory of Marine Genetics and Breeding, College of Marine Life Sciences, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266003, China.

### Submitter
zhuqing wang

### Lab Head
Dr Bo DONG
Sars-Fang Centre, MoE Key Laboratory of Marine Genetics and Breeding, College of Marine Life Sciences, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266003, China.


