### Accession
PXD005181

### Title
Specific mixing facilitates the comparative quantification of phosphorylation sites with significant dysregulations

### Description
It is still a big challenge to accurately quantify the proteins or proteins PTM sites with extreme relative abundances in comparative protein samples, such as the significantly dysregulated ones. Herein, a novel quantification strategy, Mixing at Specific Ratio (MaSR) before isotope labeling, had been developed to improve the quantification accuracy and coverage of extreme proteins and protein phosphorylation sites. Briefly, the comparative protein samples were firstly mixed together at specific ratios of 9:1 and 1:9 (w/w), followed with mass differentiate light and heavy isotope labeling, respectively. The extreme proteins and protein phosphorylation sites, even if the newly expressed or disappeared ones, could be accurately quantified due to all of the proteins’ relative abundances had been adjusted to 2 orders of magnitude (1/9-9) by this strategy. The number of quantified phosphorylation sites with more than 20 folds changes was improved about 10 times in comparative quantification of pervanadate stimulated phosphoproteome of HeLa cells.

### Sample Protocol
We mixed the two comparative protein samples at specific ratios of 9:1 and 1:9 (w/w) for light and heavy isotopic dimethyl labeling, respectively, followed with LC-MS/MS. The relative abundances of proteins were all adjusted to the range of 1/9 to 9 (2 orders of magnitude), which was suitable for current LC-MS/MS platform in quantitative analyses. The actual ratios of proteins or PTM sites could be calculated with the formula R2 = (9R1-1)/(9-R1) (R1, H/L ratio in comparative proteome quantification; R2, actual ratio, Supporting Information-Formula S1).

### Data Protocol
The obtained raw files were searched with MaxQuant (Version 1.3.0.5, by using database containing the sequences of six standard proteins for standard protein mixtures or integrated Uniprot protein fasta database of human (20197 sequences, downloaded at April 13, 2015), yeast BY 4741 (6740 sequences, downloaded at December 12, 2014) and E. coli (strain K12, 4305 sequences, downloaded at April 13, 2015) for complex protein mixtures. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation was set as a static modification, methionine oxidation, acetylation of protein N-term and phosphorylation (STY) were set as variable modifications with up to two missing cleavages of trypsin were allowed. Precursor ion mass tolerances were 10 ppm, and fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.8 Da. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide, protein and protein phosphorylation sites were all set as < 1% and a minimum length of six amino acids was used for peptides identification. Doublets were selected as the quantification mode with the dimethyl Lys 0 and N-term 0 as light labels and dimethyl Lys 4 and N-term 4 as heavy labels. All other parameters are the default setting in MaxQuant. After filtering by the FDR ≤ 1%, only phosphorylation sites with location probability ≥ 0.75 and score difference ≥ 5 were considered as highly reliable results and used for further investigation.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry (MS) based quantitative analyses of proteome and proteome post-translational modifications (PTMs) play more and more important roles in biological, pharmaceutical and clinical studies. However, it is still a big challenge to accurately quantify the proteins or proteins PTM sites with extreme relative abundances in comparative protein samples, such as the significantly dysregulated ones. Herein, a novel quantification strategy, Mixing at Specific Ratio (MaSR) before isotope labeling, had been developed to improve the quantification accuracy and coverage of extreme proteins and protein phosphorylation sites. Briefly, the comparative protein samples were firstly mixed together at specific ratios of 9:1 and 1:9 (w/w), followed with mass differentiate light and heavy isotope labeling, respectively. The extreme proteins and protein phosphorylation sites, even if the newly expressed or disappeared ones, could be accurately quantified due to all of the proteins' relative abundances had been adjusted to 2 orders of magnitude (1/9-9) by this strategy. The number of quantified phosphorylation sites with more than 20 folds changes was improved about 10 times in comparative quantification of pervanadate stimulated phosphoproteome of HeLa cells, and 134 newly generated and 21 disappeared phosphorylation sites were solely quantified by the MaSR strategy. The significantly up-regulated phosphorylation sites were mainly involved in the key phosphoproteins regulating the insulin-related pathways, such as PI3K-AKT and RAS-MAPK pathways. Therefore, the MaSR strategy exhibits as a promising way in elucidating the biological processes with significant dysregulations.

### Keywords
Extreme relative abundance, Lc-msms, Mixing at specific ratio, Stable isotope labeling, Comparative phosphoproteome quantification

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Separation Sciences for Analytical Chemistry, National Chromatographic R&A Center, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS)
Dalian Medical University

### Submitter
Jing Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Fangjun Wang
Key Laboratory of Separation Sciences for Analytical Chemistry, National Chromatographic R&A Center, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS)


