### Accession
PXD027428

### Title
A Data-Dependent Acquisition Ladder for Ultrasensitive (Neuro)Proteomics

### Description
We report here a data acquisition strategy that expands the detectable and quantifiable proteome from trace amounts of protein digests using microanalytical capillary electrophoresis (µCE) electrospray ionization (ESI) high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS). Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) was programmed to progressively exclude high-intensity peptide signals from repeated analysis of the sample, essentially forming a ladder of DDA measurements.

### Sample Protocol
Hippocampal neurons were cultured, lysed, and their proteins extracted. The extracts were reduced, alkylated, and digested following standard bottom-up proteomics workflows. The digest re-suspended in 50% acetonitrile containing 0.05% acetic acid. The resulting peptides were separated in 25% acetonitrile and 1 M formic acid (background electrolyte) in a custom-designed µCE platform. The peptides were ionized in a nanoflow ESI source operated in the cone-jet spraying regime for high-efficiency ion production. The ions were mass-analyzed using quadrupole orbitrap HRMS (Q Exactive plus, Thermo).

### Data Protocol
The MS-MS/MS data were processed in MaxQuant using the Andromeda search engine against the mouse proteome (UniProt). Peptide and protein hits were filtered to <1% false discovery rate, following our establish protocols (see corresponding publication).

### Publication Abstract
Measurement of broad types of proteins from a small number of cells to single cells would help to better understand the nervous system but requires significant leaps in sensitivity in high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS). Microanalytical capillary electrophoresis electrospray ionization (CE-ESI) offers a path to ultrasensitive proteomics by integrating scalability with sensitivity. Here, we systematically evaluate performance limitations in this technology to develop a data acquisition strategy with deeper coverage of the neuroproteome from trace amounts of starting materials than traditional dynamic exclusion. During standard data-dependent acquisition (DDA), compact migration challenged the duty cycle of second-stage transitions and redundant targeting of abundant peptide signals lowered their identification success rate. DDA was programmed to progressively exclude a static set of high-intensity peptide signals throughout replicate measurements, essentially forming rungs of a "DDA ladder." The method was tested for &#x223c;500 pg portions of a protein digest from cultured hippocampal (primary) neurons (mouse), which estimated the total amount of protein from a single neuron. The analysis of &#x223c;5 ng of protein digest over all replicates, approximating &#x223c;10 neurons, identified 428 nonredundant proteins (415 quantified), an &#x223c;35% increase over traditional DDA. The identified proteins were enriched in neuronal marker genes and molecular pathways of neurobiological importance. The DDA ladder enhances CE-HRMS sensitivity to single-neuron equivalent amounts of proteins, thus expanding the analytical toolbox of neuroscience.

### Keywords
Mouse., Neuroscience, Neuron, Capillary electrophoresis, Data dependent acquisition, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Maryland, College Park
Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of Maryland, College Park, MD

### Submitter
Peter Nemes

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Nemes
Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of Maryland, College Park, MD


