### Accession
PXD037381

### Title
Snf1/AMPK fine-tunes TORC1 signaling in response to glucose starvation

### Description
Three sets of DDA-based proteomics studies were performed to characterize Snf1-dependent phosphorylation kinetics in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. In vivo assays as well as in vitro kinase assays were performed. For each set, five biological replicates were analyzed.

### Sample Protocol
For in vivo phosphoproteome and OBIKA samples, lysates or proteins on beads were reduced by 1 mM DTT, alkylated by 5 mM iodoacetamide, and digested by Lys-C for 4 h. The concentration of urea was diluted to 1 M before overnight trypsin digestion. The peptides were purified and fractionated as described previously (Hu et al., 2019). Briefly, peptides were purified by SPE using HR-X columns in combination with C18 cartridges. The purified peptides were frozen, lyophilized and fractionated by HpH reversed phase chromatography (Batth et al., 2014). 96 fractions were mixed with an interval of 12 to yield 8 final fractions. The peptides were acidified, frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized prior to phosphopeptides enrichment. For manual phosphopeptides enrichment, samples were incubated with 2 mg TiO2 slurry, which were pre-incubated with 300 mg/mL lactic acid in 80% acetonitrile, 1% TFA prior to enrichment (Zarei et al., 2016) for 30 min at room temperature. For peptide elution, TiO2 beads were transferred to 200 μL pipette tips, which were blocked by C8 discs. Tips were sequentially washed with 200 μL of 10% acetonitrile/1% TFA, twice 200 μL of 80% acetonitrile/1% TFA, and 100 μL of LC-MS grade water. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 50 μL of 1.25% ammonia in 20% acetonitrile and 50 μL of 1.25% ammonia in 80% acetonitrile into single tubes. Eluates were acidified with 5 μL of formic acid. Samples were concentrated by vacuum concentration and resuspended in 20 μL of 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. The tip flow-through was desalted by STAGE tips for non-phosphopeptide analysis. Automated phosphopeptides enrichment was performed on an Automated Liquid Handling Platform (Bravo, Agilent) (Post et al., 2017). The Fe (III)-NTA cartridges (5 µL) were primed with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in acetonitrile and equilibrated with 0.1% TFA in 80% acetonitrile (equilibration/washing buffe). Peptides were resuspended in 200 µL of equilibration buffer and loaded on the cartridges with a flow rate of 5 µL/min. Cartridges were washed twice with 200 µL of washing buffer with a flow rate of 10 µL/min. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 100 μL of 1% ammonia in 80% acetonitrile with a flow rate of 5 µL/min. Eluates were acidified with 5 μL of formic acid. Samples were concentrated by lyophilizer and resuspended in 20 μL of 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The in vivo phosphoprotome data were analyzed as described (Hu et al., 2019). Briefly, measurements of the log2 fold changes on each site were combined into a random effect model, considering a priori the sites as a random effect, and including the variability among replicates by also considering the replicates as a random effect. The model assigns an average effect size and its corresponding 95% confidence interval to each site. If the confidence interval includes values of zeros, then there is no statistically significant log2 fold change, whereas if the confidence interval is above (below) zero, there is statistical evidence for upregulation (downregulation). Additionally, imputation processes were applied on both protein and phosphosite level. Proteins which were quantified in at least 2 biological replicates were kept and missing values were replaced by random values of a normal distribution to mimic low abundance measurements. Both width and down shift were applied according to Perseus default settings. Phosphosite was further normalized to the protein level. Only sites which were quantified in at least in 3 replicates in either DMSO 5 min or 15 min were kept. Missing values in 2NM-PP1 treated samples were then replaced by maximum likelihood estimators (MLE) imputation method (Messer and Natarajan, 2008). Finally, a t-test (FDR ≤ 0.05) was performed between DMSO and 2NM-PP1 treated samples to determine significantly changing phosphosites. OBIKA data were analyzed using Perseus. Phosphosites which were quantified in at least 3 replicates in WT samples were kept. Missing values in kinase dead samples were replaced by either random values of a normal distribution to mimic low abundance measurements, both width and down shift were applied according to default settings, when none of five replicates was quantified, or MLE, when at least 1 of five replicates was quantified. T-tests (FDR ≤ 0.05) were performed between WT and kinase dead samples to identify significantly changing sites.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Lc-msms, Phosphoproteomics, Torc1, Ampk, Silac

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631


