### Accession
PXD006640

### Title
Proteomics analysis of amyloid corneal aggregates from lattice corneal dystrophy patients

### Description
TGFBI associated Corneal Dystrophies (CD) are a group of inherited protein folding disorders linked to the mutation in the TGFBI gene.  The resultant mutant protein (TGFBIp) is deposited as insoluble protein aggregates in various layers of the cornea leading to corneal opacity and poor vision. Depending on the type of mutation the deposits may be classified as amyloid fibrillar type, amorphous globular aggregates or a mixed form of both fibrils and amorphous aggregates. However, the molecular mechanism of the mutant-induced amyloidosis is not fully understood. This study aimsto characterize truncated peptides enriched in the amyloid aggregates and to identify the protein composition of the corneal aggregates derived from dystrophic patients using LC-MS/MS and compare the data with normal control cornea. We have identified several amyloid associated proteins, non-fibrillar amyloid associated proteins and TGFBIp as the major component of the corneal deposits. The results suggest that Apolipoprotein A-IV, Apolipoprotein E and Serine protease HtrA1 to be significantly enriched in the corneal deposits compared to the normal cornea. Comparative analysis of peptides from corneal deposits of patient and control identified several peptides of TGFBIp which are enriched in patient tissue and may form the core of corneal amyloids. Most of the peptides represent the 4th FAS-1 domain of the protein. Biophysical studies of two such peptides (G515DNRFSMLVAAIQSAGLTETLNR533 and Y571HIGDEILVSGGIGALVR588) demonstrate that they readily form amyloid fibrils under physiological conditions, confirming their intrinsic propensity to form amyloid fibrils. The identification of proteins which are involved in other protein misfolding disorders as well as identification of peptides from TGFBIp which form -amyloid core highlight that the mechanism of amyloid formation may share common molecular pathways.

### Sample Protocol
The films were stripped from LCM caps and placed on to Eppendorf tubes containing 40µl 10mM Tris buffer, pH 7.8 containing 0.1% RapiGest SF Surfactant (#186001860, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). The tubes were centrifuged at 10,000×g for 1min and heated at 95°C for 90min in a water bath, with a brief spin every 20min. The tubes were centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 1min and cooled on ice.Then samples were reduced with 10mM DTT at 60oC for 30min, followed by an alkylation with 55mM IAA at room temperature for 45min in a dark place. The digestion was performed with 10µg of trypsin at 37oC overnight. Digested peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 Vac cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA). Desalted tryptic peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA for LC-MS/MS analysis.The normal human cornea samples were collected from healthy deceased donors and the epithelium was stripped. The rest of the corneal tissue were cut into small pieces using a sharp scalpel and they were processed to extract corneal stromal proteins. The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer coupled with online Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoLC system (Thermo Scientific; MA). Peptide samples were on a Dionex EASY-spray column (PepMap® C18, 3µm, 100Å) using 120min gradient of mobile phase A (0.1% FA in 5% ACN) and mobile phase B (0.1% FA in ACN) with a flow rate of 300nl/min. Separated peptides were sprayed through an EASY nanospray source with a source voltage of 1.5kV. A full MS scan range was set at 350–1600m/z and resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. The maximum ion accumulation time and dynamic exclusion time were set as 100ms and 30s respectively. The 10 most intense ions with a threshold of 1000 count were selected for HCD fragmentation and fragmented using 28% normalized collision energy with a maximum ion accumulation time of 120ms. Whereas parameters include the AGC setting of 1e+06 for the full MS scan and 2e+05 for the MS2 scan, isolation width of 2Da for MS2 scan, exclusion of single and unassigned charged ions from MS/MS scan and the underfill ratio set to 0.1 %. Data acquisition was performed using Xcaliber 2.2 software (Thermo Scientific; USA).

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were also analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software package. MS/MS spectra were searched against the same UniProt human database(downloaded on July 25, 2016, including 70,849 sequences and 23,964,784 residues using the Mascot search engine. Parameters included Carbamidomethyl at cysteine was set as a static modification and methionine oxidation, and asparagine and glutamine deamidation as dynamic modifications. Full trypsin digestion with maximum 2 missed and semi-trypsin with one non-specific cleavage were used as digestion parameter; # 13C of 2, 10ppm precursor mass and 0.02Da fragment mass tolerance were set as other search parameters. The peptides-to-spectrum matches were filtered for <1% FDR using Percolator. Proteins identified with multiple peptides was applied for the selection of proteins for final analysis and peptides identified with high confidence assigned by the software were selected for further analysis. Precursor ion area detection node was enabled in order to obtain the area under the curve (AUC, also called extracted ion chromatogram, XIC) of the LC elution profiles of the detected peptides. The AUCs of the same peptides from patient and control samples were used for quantitative analysis to determine the folder changes and extent of enrichment in the patient tissue. The peptide/protein list obtained was exported to Excel and further processed using in-house scripts for detail analysis. All statistical calculation were performed using three technical replicates of each sample.

### Publication Abstract
TGFBI-associated corneal dystrophies are inherited disorders caused by TGFBI gene variants that promote deposition of mutant protein (TGFBIp) as insoluble aggregates in the cornea. Depending on the type and position of amino acid substitution, the aggregates may be amyloid fibrillar, amorphous globular or both, but the molecular mechanisms that drive these different patterns of aggregation are not fully understood. In the current study, we report the protein composition of amyloid corneal aggregates from lattice corneal dystrophy patients of Asian origin with H626R and R124C mutation and compared it with healthy corneal tissues via LC-MS/MS. We identified several amyloidogenic, nonfibrillar amyloid associated proteins and TGFBIp as the major components of the deposits. Our data indicates that apolipoprotein A-IV, apolipoprotein E, and serine protease HTRA1 were significantly enriched in patient deposits compared to healthy controls. HTRA1 was also found to be 7-fold enriched in the amyloid deposits of patients compared to the controls. Peptides sequences (G<sup>511</sup>DNRFSMLVAAIQSAGLTETLNR<sup>533</sup> and Y<sup>571</sup>HIGDEILVSGGIGALVR<sup>588</sup>) derived from the fourth FAS-1 domain of TGFBIp were enriched in the corneal aggregates in a mutation-specific manner. Biophysical studies of these two enriched sequences revealed high propensity to form amyloid fibrils under physiological conditions. Our data suggests a possible proteolytic processing mechanism of mutant TGFBIp by HTRA1 and peptides generated by mutant protein may form the &#x3b2;-amyloid core of corneal aggregates in dystrophic patients.

### Keywords
Tgfbip, Corneal dystrophy, Laser capture microdissection, Amyloid fibrils, Tgfbi, Lattice corneal dystrophy, Htra1, Apolipoprotein

### Affiliations
Nanyang Technological University
School of Biological Sciences Division of Structural Biology and Biochemistry  Nanyang Technological University

### Submitter
Bamaprasad Dutta

### Lab Head
Dr Siu Kwan SZE
School of Biological Sciences Division of Structural Biology and Biochemistry  Nanyang Technological University


