### Accession
PXD041937

### Title
The proteome analysis of Human colorectal cancer

### Description
Every three samples of pelvic CRC (DLD-1 clone#1-Luc cell) in the control and Chemically-modified miR-143 (CM-miR143) groups, which were frozen in liquid nitrogen, were prepared. Every three samples were resected four times, three days after the administration of the control miRNA or CM-miR143 lipoplexes.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were extracted and refined to obtain the proteins. The proteins were digested with trypsin and labelled with TMTTM. Proteome analysis was conducted using quantitative LC-MS/MS of TMTTM-labelled peptides (Integrale Co. Ltd, Tokyo, Japan).

### Data Protocol
Each peptide fraction had a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled online with a capillary HPLC system (EASY-nLC 1200, Thermo Fischer Scientific) to acquire the MS/MS spectra. The Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4, Thermo Fischer Scientific) was used.

### Publication Abstract
Replenishing tumor-suppressor miRNAs (TS-miRNAs) is a potential next-generation nucleic acid-based therapeutic approach. Establishing an effective miRNA delivery system is essential to successful TS-miRNA therapy. To overcome vulnerability to RNA nucleases, we previously developed a chemically modified miRNA143-3p (CM-miR-143). In clinical practice, colorectal cancer (CRC) pelvic recurrence is an occasional challenge following curative resection, requiring a novel therapy because reoperative surgery poses a significant burden to the patient. Hence, we considered the use of CM-miR-143 as an alternative treatment. In this study, we used a mouse model bearing pelvic CRC adjacent to the rectum and investigated the anticancer effects of CM-miR-143 lipoplexes formulated from miRNA and a cationic liposome. Compared with commercial synthetic miR-143, CM-miR-143 lipoplexes accumulated heavily in regions of the pelvic CRC tumor where the blood flow was high. As a result, systemic administration of CM-miR-143 lipoplexes improved animal survival by significantly suppressing pelvic CRC tumors and relieving a lethal bowel obstruction caused by rectal compression. Detailed protein analysis revealed that the myristoylated alanine-rich C kinase is a novel target for CM-miR-143 lipoplexes. Our results suggest that CM-miR-143 is a potential next-generation drug candidate in the treatment of CRC pelvic recurrence.

### Keywords
Human, Mir-143, Protein

### Affiliations
Center for Medical Research & Development, Division of Translational Research, Osaka Medical and Pharmaceutical University, 2-7 Daigaku-machi,Takatsuki, Osaka 569-8686, Japan
Depertment of general and gastroenterological surgery, Osaka medical and pharmaceutical university

### Submitter
Jun Arima

### Lab Head
Dr Kohei Taniguchi
Center for Medical Research & Development, Division of Translational Research, Osaka Medical and Pharmaceutical University, 2-7 Daigaku-machi,Takatsuki, Osaka 569-8686, Japan


