### Accession
PXD003207

### Title
Sepiadarium austrinum Slime MSMS

### Description
Sepiadarium austrinum, the southern bottletail squid, is a small squid that inhabits soft sediments along Australia’s south-east coast. When provoked this squid rapidly secretes large volumes of slime as a defense mechanism. Behavioral observations suggest that this slime may be toxic to crabs but its composition remains unknown. A reference transcriptome for S. austrinum using give tissues including slime was assembled and a database of 40,444 predicted proteins was created using the Trinotate annotation software with an addition 53 short proteins identified exclusively by proteogenomics. This database was used to identify 1736 proteins within the slime using bottom-up (shotgun) proteomics. The mechanism of slime secretion is likely to involve ejection of cell content with the presence of proteins involved in fundamental intracellular functions such as DNA binding and protein folding being highly abundant, along with few slime proteins containing a signal peptide. Putative toxic proteins were identified within the slime based on characteristics of known toxins, namely cysteine richness, short length, the existence of a signal peptide and homology to known toxins. Our study also adds a crucial layer of evidence for toxicity of these proteins by using direct proteomic measurement within toxic secretions (slime) rather than their parent glands. To our knowledge this is the first such study in cephalopods. Quantitative proteomics has allowed us to highlight two putative toxins within the top ten most abundant slime proteins.  The slime secreted by S. austrinum may act as a carrier medium for these putative toxins and this may represent a novel toxin delivery mechanism for cephalopods.

### Sample Protocol
The S. austrinum slime sample was divided into three 30µl volumes (Sample 1,2 and 3) and each was dried using a SpeedVac Concentrator and Savant Refrigerated Vapor trap (ThermoScientific) for 15 minutes. Sample 1 was resuspended in 8M urea, 50 mM Tris pH=8.3 (buffer A) and incubated overnight to extract proteins. Sample 2 was treated with acetone (500 µl) in order precipitate proteins and remove sugars and lipids. The protein pellet was washed with 200 µl acetone and the proteins solubilised by the addition of 100 µl buffer A. 1 µl of TCEP (Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphone hydrochloride, 200 mM solution in water) was then added to samples 1 and 2. The mixture was left for 1 hour at room temperature and 4 µl of 1M IAA (iodoacetamide in water) was added and incubated in the dark. 900 µl of ABC (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in water) and 1 µg trypsin were then added to samples 1 and 2 and incubated overnight at 37°C.   Sample 3 was resuspended in SDS-loading buffer (70 µl) and heated to 75°C. 40 µl of Sample 3 was run on an SDS-PAGE gel and run at 150V for 35 minute and stained with Comassie Brilliant Blue G-250 (Bio-Rad).  The gel was cut into six fragments and tryptic peptides from each fragment were prepared according to Shevchenko et al.   The digested samples were purified for mass spectrometry analysis using the C18 stage tips procedure.   Peptides reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile were loaded onto a trap column (C18 PepMap 100 μm i.d. × 2 cm trapping column, Thermo-Fisher Scientific) at 5 μL/min for 6 min before switching the precolumn in line with the analytical column (Easy-Spray 75 μm i.d. × 50 cm, Thermo-Fisher Scientific). The separation of peptides was performed at 250 nl/min using a linear acetonitrile gradient of buffer A and buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile), starting from 5% buffer B to 60% over 300 min. Data was collected on an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) in Data Dependent Acquisition mode using m/z 300–1500 as MS scan range, CID MS/MS spectra were collected for the 20 most intense ions. Dynamic exclusion parameters were set as follows; repeat count 1, duration 90s, the exclusion list size was set at 500 with early expiration disabled.  Other instrument parameters for the Orbitrap were the following: MS scan at 120 000 resolution, maximum injection time 150 ms, AGC target 1 × 106, CID at 35% energy for a maximum injection time of 150ms with AGT target of 5000. The Orbitrap Elite was operated in dual analyzer mode with the Orbitrap analyzer being used for MS and the linear trap being used for MS/MS

### Data Protocol
A reference protein database for S. austrinum was constructed with a total of 40,444 amino acid sequences. This was a combined database of the full set of proteins predicted by Transdecoder combined with 53 additional proteins identified by searching all MS/MS spectra against all open reading frames generated by a six-frame translation of the reference transcriptome.   To do this a database was constructed by concatenating known (Transdecoder predicted) and novel (ORFs longer than 15AA from six-frame translations) sequences.  An equal number of decoys were added to this database to produce a total of 4.4 million entries.   All MS/MS spectra from S. austrinum samples were then searched against this database using Mascot, MS-GF+ and X!Tandem with the following parameters; parent mass tolerance: 10ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 0.5Da; allowed missed cleavages: 2; fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl C; variable modifications: oxidation of methionine, acetylation at the protein N-terminus; enzyme: trypsin with semi-tryptic peptides allowed.    All Peptide Sequence Matches (PSM) from this search were then classified as coming from the ‘known’ or ‘novel’ protein sets and split into separate files accordingly.  In cases of redundancy between known and novel sets the PSM was assumed to have come from the ‘known’ set. PeptideProphet and then iProphet were then used to calculate posterior error probabilities (PEP’s) for all PSMs in the ‘known’ and ‘novel’ sets separately as is recommended practice for proteogenomic analysis.  ProteinProphet was then used to combine results from ‘known’ and ‘novel’ sets when performing protein inference to produce a single protXML file.  This file was then processed using the protxml_to_gff tool to map all peptides with PEP < 0.05 and within proteins with PEP < 0.01 back to the reference transcriptome.  This process produced two gff3 files corresponding to peptides from ‘known’ and ‘novel’ sets respectively.  Peptides found only within the ‘novel’ set were used as evidence to support inclusion of the 53 additional proteins in the S. austrinum reference protein database.  Visualisation of peptide tracks along with transdecoder predictions was performed in Geneious (Biomatters Ltd, version 7.1.6).  The entire proteogenomic analysis was performed using tools available for the Galaxy bioinformatics platform and is available as a workflow from the Galaxy toolshed  The database consisting of 40,444 S. austrinum amino acid sequences was combined with known contaminants (cRAP) or all MaxQuant analyses Mass spectrometry data from acetone and urea extraction methods were analysed using MaxQuant (Version 1.5,0.30) with intensity-based absolute-protein-quantification method (iBAQ) turned on, and the protein database mentioned above for peptide and protein identification.  MaxQuant calculates an average iBAQ value across the two different extraction methods and this was used as an approximate measure of absolute protein abundance. MaxQuant uses the Andromeda search engine internally to match MS/MS Spectra to peptides. Settings used were; Parent mass tolerance: 10ppm; Fragment mass tolerance: 0.5Da; Allowed missed cleavages: 2; Enzyme: Trypsin; Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl C; Variable modifications: oxidation of methionine, acetylation at the protein N-terminus. Protein groups were retained at 1% false discovery rate (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Squid, Orbitrap, Cephalopod, Slime

### Affiliations
La Trobe University
Department of Ecology, Environment and Evolution, School of Life Sciences, La Trobe University

### Submitter
Nikeisha Caruana

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Marie Strugnell
Department of Ecology, Environment and Evolution, School of Life Sciences, La Trobe University


