### Accession
PXD004752

### Title
iTRAQ-based HepaRG Membrane Proteomics

### Description
HepaRG cell, a stabilized bipotent liver progenitor cell line, exhibits hepatocyte functions only after differentiation. However, the mechanism of transition from non-differentiated to differentiated states, accompanied by proliferation and migration, is poorly understood. Little information exists for proteins involved in this process, particularly those residing in the plasma membrane.   In this study, the plasma membrane protein expression change of HepaRG cell before and after differentiation were systematically analyzed using an iTRAQ labeled quantitative membrane proteomics approach. A total of 70 membrane proteins were identified to be differentially expressed. Function and disease clustering analysis showed that 11 of these proteins are involved in migration. Two key factors (MMP-14 and OCLN) were validated by qRT-PCR and Western Blot. Blockade of MMP-14, an extracellular matrix metalloprotease, by monoclonal antibody in a wound healing assay further demonstrated the importance of this protein in tumor cell migration. Even further, the MMP-14 expression correlation with HCC is confirmed by HCC cell lines and tissue samples.

### Sample Protocol
The MP fractions were mixed with solubilization buffer (50mM NH4HCO3, 0.1 % RG, and 5 mM DTT) to final concentration of 1 mg/mL. Solubilization was achieved by sonication in a water bath for 20 min and heated at 100 ℃ for another 10 min. IAA was added to 15 mM and incubated at RT in the dark for 30 min. A total of 5 μg of the solubilized protein was used for solublization efficiency evaluation by SDS-PAGE. Recombinant Lys C was added at 1:100 ratio (weight ratio of enzyme: protein) and incubated at 37 ℃ overnight. r-Ac-trypsin was then added at 1: 50 ratio (weight ratio of enzyme: protein) and incubated at 37 ℃ for another 4 h. Part of the digested sample (5 μg) was used for digestion efficiency evaluation by SDS-PAGE. After digestion, enzyme activity was blocked by acidification with TFA to final concentration of 0.5 %, incubated at 37 ℃ for 45 min, and centrifuged at 9,600 g for 10 min at RT to remove the pellet. The supernatant was vacuum dried and dissolved in 0.1 M tetraethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.5, labeled with iTRAQ reagents (4-plex system) separately. The 114 and 115 iTRAQ tags were used for the -DMSO samples, the 116 for DMSO30d and 117 for DMSO15d samples respectively. After incubation at RT for 2 h, the reactions were quenched by adding an equal volume of water. Differentially labeled peptides were mixed and dried with a vacuum dryer after digestion and label efficiency confirmation.  The mixed peptide samples with four labels were fractioned using a HPLC system [(Rigol L-3120, Beijing, China) with a C18 column (Kinetex 2.6 µm C18, 50×4.6 mm, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA,USA). The mobile phase consisted of (A) 2 % ACN and 98 % H2O (pH 10.0); (B) 98 % ACN and 2 % H2O (pH 10.0), the pH was adjusted with 300 μL NH3.H2O in 1 L ddH2O. The peptide samples were separated at a flow rate of 0.8 mL/min with the following gradients; 0 % B for 9 min, 0-12 %B in 16 min, 12-17% B in 5 min, 17-30 % B for 10 min, 30-100 % B in 5 min, 100% B for 1 min, and 100-0 % B for 4min. The samples were collected every 1 min from 4 min to 50 min and then pooled into 16 fractions for LC-MS/MS analysis after vacuum drying.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were submitted to the MaxQuant searching engine (1.5.3.28) for peptide and protein identification and quantification. The MS/MS spectra were searched against uniprot human database (human Swiss-Prot database released at 2015-05) along with 245 common contaminant protein sequences (http://www.maxquant.org/contaminants.zip). The search parameters were described as follows: precursor ion spectra were searched with a first search tolerance of 20 ppm and main search tolerance of 6 ppm in the MS mode, and the MS2 ions with 20 ppm in the HCD mode. Full-tryptic restriction and ≤2 missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide with minimal length of 7 amino acids were filtered. Carbamidomethylated cysteine (+57.02 Da), iTRAQ modified N-terminal residue, and iTRAQ modified lysine (+144.11 Da, 115.11 Da, 116.11 Da) were set as fixed modifications, while oxidation (+15.99 Da) of methionine was set as a variable modification. The cut off of max 25 % precursor interference for peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) was used in quantification. The peptides and proteins were filtered to a FDR of < 1 %, estimated using the target-decoy search strategy. Protein quantification was based on the reporter intensity generated from MaxQuant results, and only unique and razor peptides of the identified proteins were selected for reporter ion quantification. The significantly different proteins were derived by an in-house script using the “significance B” theory approach with FDR < 5 %. Biological variability was calculated by the intensity ratio of the -DMSO samples labeled with 115 tag based on their R2 value and SD. For protein expression comparison before and after differentiation, two comparisons were made. DMSO15d compared with –DMSO was termed Comparison I and DMSO30d compared with –DMSO was termed Comparison II.

### Publication Abstract
HepaRG cell, a stabilized bipotent liver progenitor cell line, exhibits hepatocyte functions only after differentiation. However, the mechanism of transition from nondifferentiated to differentiated states, accompanied by proliferation migration and differentiation, remains poorly understood, particularly those proteins residing in the plasma membrane. In this study, the membrane protein expression change of HepaRG cell during differentiation were systematically analyzed using an iTRAQ labeled quantitative membrane proteomics approach. A total of 70 membrane proteins were identified to be differentially expressed among 849 quantified membrane proteins. Function and disease clustering analysis proved that 11 of these proteins are involved in proliferation, migration, and differentiation. Two key factors (MMP-14 and OCLN) were validated by qRT-PCR and Western blot. Blockade of MMP-14 further demonstrated its important function during tumor cell migration. The data sets have been uploaded to ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD004752.

### Keywords
Membrane protein, Heparg, Itraq

### Affiliations
BPRC
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Center for Protein Sciences Beijing, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 102206, P. R. China

### Submitter
Wei Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Xu
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Center for Protein Sciences Beijing, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 102206, P. R. China


