### Accession
PXD040522

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the entorhinal cortex and CA1 subfields of the hippocampus of macaques injected with tau seeds from Alzheimer’s brain

### Description
The "prion-like" features of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) tauopathy and its relationship with amyloid β (Aβ) has never been experimentally studied in primates phylogenetically close to humans. We injected 17 macaques in the entorhinal cortex with nanograms of tau proteopathic seeds purified from AD brains or control extracts from aged-matched healthy brains, with or without intracerebroventricular co-injections of recombinant Aβ oligomers. After neuropathological examination of the macaque’s brain, we also performed mass spectrometry-based proteomics of macaques’ entorhinal cortex and CA1 to study the spatial response (local and distant) to tau seeds injections (and its modulation by oligomeric Aβ).

### Sample Protocol
Tissue patches from the entorhinal cortex and CA1 were collected on 300-µm thick cryostat-cut sections (n = 15 patches per structure and animal). Patches were pooled and mechanically lysed on ice with 100 µl of RIPA buffer (50 mM tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1.0% Triton X-100, 0.5% Na-deoxycholate, and 0.1% SDS) with a protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail as previously described. Lysates were incubated for 30 minutes and then centrifuged at 15, 000 g for 15 min at 4°C. Supernatants were collected, and the total amount of protein in the lysates was assessed by bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) before storage at −80°C. Protein samples were solubilized in Laemmli buffer and 5 µg per sample were deposited onto SDS-PAGE gel (10% acrylamide) for separation, concentration, and cleaning purposes. After colloidal blue staining, bands were cut out from the gel and subsequently cut in 1 mm × 1 mm gel pieces. Gel pieces were unstained in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate 50% Acetonitrile (ACN), rinsed twice in ultrapure water, and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were dried at room temperature, covered with the trypsin solution (10 ng/µl in 50 mM NH4HCO3), rehydrated at 4 °C for 10 min, and finally incubated overnight at 37 °C. Samples were then incubated for 15 min in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at room temperature with rotary shaking. The supernatant was collected, and an H2O/ACN/HCOOH (47.5:47.5:5) extraction solution was added to gel slices for 15 min. The extraction step was repeated twice. Supernatants were pooled and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Digests were finally solubilized in 0.1% HCOOH.

### Data Protocol
Peptide mixture was analyzed on an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to an Electrospray Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Ten microliters of peptide digests were loaded onto a 300 µm inner diameter × 5 mm C18 PepMapTM trap column (LC Packings) at a flow rate of 10 µL.min−1. The peptides were eluted from the trap column onto an analytical 75 mm id × 50 cm C18 Pep-Map column (LC Packings) with a 4−25% linear gradient of solvent B in 71 min (solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) followed by a 14 min gradient from 25% to 90% solvent B. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL.min−1. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.9 kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 4.1 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 375-1500) were recorded at a resolution of R = 120,000 (@ m/z 200) and an automated gain control target of 4 × 105 ions collected within 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and top speed fragmentation in Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) mode was performed over a 3 s cycle. MS/MS scans with a target value of 5 × 104 ions were collected in orbitrap with a maximum injection time of 54 ms and a resolution of 30,000 (@ m/z 200). Additionally, only +2 to +7 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Others settings were as follows: no sheath nor auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 275 °C; normalized HCD collision energy of 28% and an isolation width of 1.6 m/z. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was set to peptide and an intensity threshold was set to 2.5 × 104. Data were searched by SEQUEST through Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) against the Macaca mulatta protein database (v2021-03; 44,389 entries). Spectra from peptides higher than 5000 Da or lower than 350 Da were rejected. The search parameters were as follows: mass accuracy of the monoisotopic peptide precursor and peptide fragments was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. Only b- and y-ions were considered for mass calculation. Oxidation of methionines (+16 Da), methionine loss (-131 Da), methionine loss with acetylation (-89 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42 Da) were considered as variable modifications while carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57 Da) was considered as fixed modification. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Positive Rate at peptide level. Peaks were detected and integrated using the Minora algorithm embedded in Proteome Discoverer. Proteins were quantified based on unique peptides intensities. Normalization was performed based on total protein amount. Protein ratio were calculated as the median of all possible pairwise peptide ratios.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tau, Macaque, Proteome, Alzheimer

### Affiliations
Univ. Bordeaux, Bordeaux Proteome, Bordeaux, France
Plateforme Proteome

### Submitter
Stephane Claverol

### Lab Head
Dr Claverol Stephane
Univ. Bordeaux, Bordeaux Proteome, Bordeaux, France


