### Accession
PXD018029

### Title
Proteome mapping of human gingival tissue in health and disease

### Description
Gingival tissue proteome is at the forefront of the periodontal research, yet have been hampered by lack of sufficient tissue-extraction methods. Using an emerging technology for tissue homogenization, pressure cycling technology (PCT), we characterize the gingival tissue proteomic profiles of both healthy (n=5) and disease (n=5) sites from five systemically healthy individuals (51.6± 4.3 years) with generalized chronic periodontitis. In brief, the tissue was lysed and digested in PCT, the peptide was further subjected to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed by Progenesis QI using Mascot and Scaffold for identifying and sorting of protein conflict, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Gingival tissues were washed three times, each for 5 minutes in PBS to remove any residues prior to lysis. The tissues were then lysed and digested using a Barocycler NEP2320 (Pressure BioSciences) at 33 °C. In brief, 2.5 to 3 mg of samples (n=10) were placed in MicroTubes (Pressure BioSciences) and lysed with a 60–cycle barocyling process. The exacted proteins were then reduced and alkylated using tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (Sigma) and iodoacetamide (Sigma). Later, extracted proteins were digested using Lys-C (Wako) at an enzyme-to-protein (estimated to be 10% of the wet sample weight) ratio of a 1:45 with a 45–cycle barocyling process. These resultant solutions were further diluted and then digested again using trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:50 with a 90-cycle process. Each barocyling-cycle mentioned above consisted of a 50-seconds ultra-high pressure phage (45, 20, 20 thousand pounds per square inch (KPSI) for 60-, 45-, 90-cycle process, respectively) followed with a 10-seconds ambient pressure phase in each cycle. Resultant solutions were acidified by trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Sigma) to a final concentration of 0.8 % w/v, desalted using reverse-phase cartridges Finisterre SPE C18 (Wicom International AG), dried with vacuum centrifuged. All frozen peptides were reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile (CAN) in 0.1% formic acid and adjusted to 0.5 μg/μl using NanoDrop 1000 spectrophotometer (WITEC AG). 1 μl of the desalted peptide was analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a nano EasyLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
LFQ was performed by the Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (version 4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics, a Waters Company, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK). In brief, all the runs were aligned using a pooled sample (equal amounts of peptides from each sample) as reference for peak picking and creating Mascot files (.mgf) which was searched with Mascot (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) against a human database (40,510 sequences and 22,667,481 residues, Uniprot, isoforms included, retrieved December 9th 2016). Mascot parameters were set: following search parameters: precursor tolerance: ± 10 ppm; fragment ion tolerance: ± 0.6 Da; enzyme: trypsin; maximum missed cleavages: 2; fixed medication: carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modification: deamidated (NQ), oxidation (M) and acetylation on protein N-termini. The search result was loaded into Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.2.1, Proteome software) to solve protein conflicts, with a protein false discovery rate (proFDR) of 10%, minimal 1 peptide and a peptide false discovery rate (pepFDR) of 5%. The spectrum report was imported back into Progenesis QI for identifying the quantified proteins. The “within-subject” option was used for experiment design set up.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pressure cycling technology, Chronic periodontitis, Gingival tissue proteome

### Affiliations
postdoctoral researcher
Division of Oral Diseases, Department of Dental Medicine, Karolinska Insitutet, Sweden

### Submitter
Kai Bao

### Lab Head
Dr Nagihan Bostanci
Division of Oral Diseases, Department of Dental Medicine, Karolinska Insitutet, Sweden


