### Accession
PXD011170

### Title
Arzanol Biomolecular Targets -  Chemoproteomic fishing identifies arzanol as a positive modulator of brain glycogen phosphorylase

### Description
The interactome of arzanol was investigated by MS-based chemical proteomics, a pioneering technology for small molecules target discovery. Brain glycogen phosphorylase (bGP), a key regulator of glucose metabolism so far refractory to small molecule modulation, was identified as the main high-affinity target of arzanol. Competitive affinity-based proteomics, DARTS, molecular docking, and in vitro biological assays provided molecular mechanistic insights on the arzanol-enzyme interaction, qualifying this positive modulator of bGP for further studies in the realm of neurodegeneration and cancer.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells have been mechanically lysed in PBS pH 7.4 (137 mM NaCl, 2,7 mM KCl, 10mM Na2HPO4, 2mM KH2PO4) containing 0,1% Igepal and a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma Aldrich). Protein concentration has been determined by Bradford spectrophotometric assay.[1] After washing steps with PBS, Arzanol-bared beads and control matrix have been suspended in lysate solutions containing about 800 μg of proteins each and the incubation has been carried on overnight (4°C, constant rotation). Resins have been washed and the proteins have been eluted by treatment (95°C, 5 mins) with Laemmli buffer (100 mM Tris pH 6,8, 4% SDS, 0.2% Bromophenol Blue, 20% glycerol, 2% β-mercaptoethanol). The obtained protein mixtures have been separated by 1D-SDS-PAGE (12% polyacrilamide), stained by Coomassie Blue and then digested in situ by trypsin. Briefly, exceeded pieces of gel have been destained and disulfuric bonds between cysteines in the proteins have been reduced by DTT (6.5 mM in AmBic 50mM, 60°C, 1h) and then carboamidomethylated by IAM (10mM in AmBic 50mM, RT, dark, 30mins). A solution of trypsin (12 ng/ul) has been used to digest proteins in gel meshes (overnight, 37°C) and peptide mixtures have been extracted with 100% ACN and dried in SpeedVac.[2] Peptides have been resuspended in FA 10% and submitted to a nanoUPLC-nanoESI-MSMS analysis. The nanoAcquityLC System (Waters Corp. Manchester, U.K.) was equipped with a binary pump and a BEH C-18 column (1,7 μm, Waters Corp. Manchester, U.K.) interfaced with the nanoESI of the hybrid mass spectrometer LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific). 5 μL of each sample have been injected and separated in 55 mins by a linear gradient from 15% to 50% of buffer B (buffer A: 95% H2O, 5% ACN, 0.1% FA; buffer B: 95% ACN, 5%H2O, 0.1% FA; flux: 280nl/min).

### Data Protocol
Most intense doubly and triple charged peaks have been fragmented and the raw peak lists have been submitted to MASCOT Daemon software (SwissProt 2017_01; 553,474 sequences; 198,069,095 residues). All the experiments have been performed in 4 independent experiments.

### Publication Abstract
The interactome of arzanol was investigated by MS-based chemical proteomics, a pioneering technology for small molecule target discovery. Brain glycogen phosphorylase (bGP), a key regulator of glucose metabolism so far refractory to small molecule modulation, was identified as the main high-affinity target of arzanol. Competitive affinity-based proteomics, DARTS, molecular docking, surface plasmon resonance and in vitro biological assays provided molecular mechanistic insights into the arzanol-enzyme interaction, qualifying this positive modulator of bGP for further studies in the realm of neurodegeneration and cancer.

### Keywords
Arzanol, Brain glycogen phosphorylase, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Dept Pharmacy University of Salerno
Dept of Pharmacy, University of Salerno

### Submitter
Maria Chiara Monti

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Chiara Monti
Dept of Pharmacy, University of Salerno


