### Accession
PXD008589

### Title
Proteomic analysis of kiwifruit Proteomic analysis of kiwifruit in response to the postharvest pathogen, Botrytis cinereain response to the postharvest pathogen, Botrytis cinerea

### Description
In the present study, an iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis, combined with gene expression and virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS), were used to identify genes associated with the infection of kiwifruit (Actinidia deliciosa ‘Hayward’) by B. cinerea. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first proteomic study of the kiwifruit-B. cinerea interaction, and provides information that can be used to better understand the mechanism of gray mold infection in kiwifruit.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material and inoculation. Imaging of B. cinerea disease symptom development on kiwifruit. Protein preparation. iTRAQ labelling and SCX fractionation. LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis based on Triple TOF 5600. Proteomic data analysis. RT-qPCR analysis. VIGS of Myosin 10 in kiwifruit.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files acquired from Triple TOF 5600 were converted into MGF files using Proteome Discoverer 1.2 (Thermo, Germany), and the MGF files were queried. Protein identification was performed using the Mascot search engine v.2.3.02 (Matrix Science, UK) against a database derived from the Kiwifruit Genome, which includes 39,040 protein sequences (http://bioinfo.bti.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/kiwi/download.cgi). Proteins were identified using a mass tolerance of ±0.05 Da (ppm) that was allowed for intact peptide masses and ±0.1 Da for fragmented ions, with an allowance for one missed cleavage in the trypsin digests. Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Oxidation (M), and deamidated (NQ) were selected as potential variable modifications, while carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), and iTRAQ8plex (K) were selected as fixed modifications. The charge states of peptides were set to +2 and +3. Specifically, an automatic decoy database search was performed in Mascot, along with a search of the real database, by choosing the decoy checkbox in which a random sequence of the database was generated and tested for raw spectra. Only peptides with significance scores (≥20) at the 99% confidence interval by a Mascot probability analysis greater than “identity” were counted as identified in order to reduce the probability of false peptide identification. Each confident protein identification required at least one unique peptide.  The false discovery rate (FDR) of identified proteins was ≤0.01. For protein quantization, a protein was required to contain at least two unique peptides. The quantitative protein ratios were weighted and normalized by the median ratio in Mascot. Only ratios with P<0.05, according to a Student’s t test, were employed, and only fold-changes >1.33 were considered as significant. Functional annotation of the proteins was conducted using Blast2GO (https://www.blast2go.com/) against the NCBI non-redundant protein database. The KEGG (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) and COG databases (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG/) were used to classify the identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Gray mold, caused by the fungus <i>Botrytis cinerea</i>, is the most significant postharvest disease of kiwifruit. In the present study, iTRAQ with LC-ESI-MS/MS was used to identify the kiwifruit proteins associated with the response to <i>B. cinerea</i>. A total of 2,487 proteins in kiwifruit were identified. Among them, 292 represented differentially accumulated proteins (DAPs), with 196 DAPs having increased, and 96 DAPs having decreased in accumulation in <i>B. cinerea</i>-inoculated vs. water-inoculated, control kiwifruits. DAPs were associated with penetration site reorganization, cell wall degradation, MAPK cascades, ROS signaling, and PR proteins. In order to examine the corresponding transcriptional levels of the DAPs, RT-qPCR was conducted on a subset of 9 DAPs. In addition, virus-induced gene silencing was used to examine the role of <i>myosin 10</i> in kiwifruit, a gene modulating host penetration resistance to fungal infection, in response to <i>B. cinerea</i> infection. The present study provides new insight on the understanding of the interaction between kiwifruit and <i>B. cinerea</i>.

### Keywords
Kiwifruit-b.cinerea interaction, Postharvest decay, Proteomics, Gray mold, Defense response

### Affiliations
HeFei University of Technology
Hefei University of Technology

### Submitter
Junyang Yue

### Lab Head
Dr Yue Junyang
HeFei University of Technology


