### Accession
PXD023581

### Title
Characterization of I-Ab MHCII immunopeptidome eluted from control and obese (Ob/Ob) mice using a combination of data-dependent (DDA) and data-independent acquisition (DIA) nanoLC mass spectrometry

### Description
In Dendritic cells (DC), the MHC II eluted immunopeptidome reflects the antigenic composition of the microenvironment. Proteins are transported and processed into peptides in endosomal MHC II compartments through autophagy or phagocytosis; extracellular peptides can also directly bind MHC II proteins at the cell surface. Altogether, these mechanisms allow DC to sample both the intra and extracellular environment. With an increase in mass spectrometry sensitivity and accuracy, we can now finally tackle important questions on the nature and plasticity of the MHC-II immunopeptidome in health and disease. Presented epitopes, neoepitopes, and PTM-modified epitopes can be quantitatively and qualitatively analyzed to provide a comprehensive picture of DC role in immunosurveillance. To determine whether the redox metabolic conditions induce an altered spectrum of presented peptides, we eluted immunoaffinity-purified I-Ab from conventional dendritic cells isolated from control B6 or obese Ob/Ob mice, and analyzed MHC-II-associated peptides by LC/MS/MS using combined data-dependent (DDA) and data-independent acquisition (DIA) approaches. We analyzed the DIA data by employing a reference spectral library consisting of all peptides identified by database matching in the pool of spectra from combined DDA dataset, thus allowing a direct label-free quantitation of relative abundances between the two sample categories. The quantitative analysis of the I-Ab-eluted immunopeptidomes pinpoint important differences in peptide presentation and epitope selection in obese mice.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse Dendritic Cells: Ob/Ob mice and C57Bl6 controls were injected subcutaneously with 40x106 B16-FLt3-L-producing melanoma cells. Twelve to 14 days after injection spleens were harvested and DCs were purified by density-gradient centrifugation using 30% Bovine Albumin solution (Sigma-Aldrich). The preparation routinely contains 70 to 80% CD11c+ DC,with no significant differences observed in the numbers of cells isolated from control or Ob/Ob mice. MHC II complexes from DCs of control and Ob/Ob mice were isolated using immunoaffinity chromatography. Three independent samples of control and Ob/Ob were isolated in parallel. Cell pellets were resuspended in 50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 8.0, containing protease inhibitors and 5% β-octylglucoside, freeze-thawed for 5-6 times, homogenized, and the solubilized whole cell fraction was recovered by centrifugation at 100,000×g for 1 h at 4 °C. The supernatant was used for the isolation of the MHCII-peptide complexes using an immunoaffinity column of M5/114 monoclonal antibody immobilized onto CNBr activated sepharose. The column was equilibrated with buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl pH 8.0, containing protease inhibitors) for 2 h. The lysates were then allowed to mix with the isotype control antibody slowly for 1 h at 4 °C to prevent nonspecific binding of proteins to beads. This equilibrated lysate was incubated with M5/114 conjugated beads and allowed to mix slowly for 1 h at 4 °C. The column was washed with several buffers in succession as follows: (1) 50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 8.0, containing protease inhibitors and 5% β-octylglucoside (5 times the bead volume); (2) 50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 8.0, containing protease inhibitors and 1% β-octylglucoside (10 times the bead volume); (3) 50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 8.0, containing protease inhibitors (30 times the bead volume); (4) 50 mM Tris-HCl, 300 mM NaCl, pH 8.0, containing protease inhibitors (10 times the bead volume); (5) 1X PBS (30 times the bead volume); and (6) HPLC water (100 times the bead volume). MHC-peptide concentration was measured by ELISA. Peptides were further separated using a Vydac C4 macrospin column (The Nest Group, USA). I-Ab peptides were eluted using 30% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. Eluted peptides were lyophilized using a Speed-Vac. Eluted peptides displayed by MHC-II from control and Ob/Ob mice were analyzed in triplicate by LC-MS/MS using a combination of data dependent and independent analyses (DDA and DIA, respectively), on a Thermo Scientific™ Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer using equal aliquots for each sample (about 2.5 ug peptidome, each at 0.13 ug/ul as quantified by NanoDrop UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Desalted peptides were injected onto an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 50 cm x 75 μm column (Thermo Scientific), which was coupled to the mass spectrometer.  Peptides were eluted with a non-linear 180 min gradient of 5-30% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 100% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The column temperature was maintained at a constant 50 ˚C during all experiments.   The sample specific spectral library (SSL) was generated using half of the material and DDA method for peptide MS/MS analysis. Survey scans of peptide precursors were performed from 400 -1500 m/z at 120K FWHM resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 4 x 105 ion count target and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The instrument was set to run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles for the survey and the MS/MS scans. After a survey scan, tandem MS was performed on the most abundant precursors exhibiting a charge state from 2 to 6 of greater than 5 x 103 intensity by isolating them in the quadrupole at 1.6 Th. CID fragmentation was applied with 35% collision energy and resulting fragments were detected using the rapid scan rate in the ion trap. The AGC target for MS/MS was set to 1 x 104 and the maximum injection time limited to 35 ms. The dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm mass tolerance around the precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled.  The remaining half of each sample was run using DIA method. Survey scans of peptide precursors were performed from 350-1200 m/z at 120K FWHM resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 1 x 106 ion count target and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The instrument was set to run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles for the survey and the MS/MS scans. After a survey scan, 26 m/z DIA segments were acquired from 200-2000 m/z at 60K FWHM resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 1 x 106 ion count target and a maximum injection time of 118 ms. HCD fragmentation was applied with 27% collision energy and resulting fragments were detected using the rapid scan rate in the Orbitrap. The spectra were recorded in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
DIA Analysis of peptidomes eluted from C57BL/6J and Ob/Ob MHC-II. DIA data were analyzed using Scaffold DIA (1.2.1) (Proteome Software Inc., Portland) which had the raw data files converted to mzML format using ProteoWizard (3.0.11748). To generate the spectral libraries, the acquired DDA raw files were searched with PEAKS 8.5/X/X+ and then filtered with Scaffold software (version 4.6.2).  The enzyme restriction was set up as “no enzyme” option to fit the endogenously processed peptides. Then, the spectral library was exported as “DDA pDC ctr obob ptm.blib” file using the built-in available option from the Scaffold software. The analytic samples were aligned based on retention times and individually searched against “DDA pDC ctr obob ptm.blib spectral library” with a peptide mass tolerance of 10 to 15 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 15 to 50.0 ppm. Variable modifications were imported from the DDA based spectral library as follow:   methionine, lysine, proline, arginine, cysteine, and asparagine oxidations (+15.99 on CKMNPR), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (NQ-0.98) and pyro-Glu from glutamine (Q-18.01 N-term). The “no enzyme” option was used in Scaffold DIA with variable allowed 8-12 missed cleavage site(s). Only peptides with charges in the range [2-8] and length in the range [5-25] were exported for further quantitation. Peptides identified in each sample were filtered by Percolator (3.01. nightly-13-655e4c7-dirty) to achieve a maximum FDR between 0.01-0.05. Individual search results were combined, and peptide identifications were assigned posterior error probabilities and re-filtered to FDR thresholds of 0.01-0.05 by Percolator (3.01. nightly-13-655e4c7-dirty). Peptide quantification was performed by Encyclopedia (0.7.2). For each peptide, the 5 highest quality fragment ions were selected for quantitation. The intensities for the proteins were calculated and normalized by summation of the peptide intensities using the Scaffold DIA’s built-in normalization algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Hyperglycemia and hyperlipidemia are often observed in individuals with type II diabetes (T2D) and related mouse models. One dysmetabolic biochemical consequence is the non-enzymatic reaction between sugars, lipids, and proteins, favoring protein glycation, glycoxidation, and lipoxidation. Here, we identified oxidative alterations in key components of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II molecule antigen processing and presentation machinery in&#xa0;vivo under conditions of hyperglycemia-induced metabolic stress. These modifications were linked to epitope-specific changes in endosomal processing efficiency, MHC class II-peptide binding, and DM editing activity. Moreover, we observed some quantitative and qualitative changes in the MHC class II immunopeptidome of Ob/Ob mice on a high-fat diet compared with controls, including changes in the presentation of an apolipoprotein B100 peptide associated previously with T2D and metabolic syndrome-related clinical complications. These findings highlight a link between glycation reactions and altered MHC class II antigen presentation that may contribute to T2D complications.

### Keywords
Mouse dendritic cells; i-ab mhc-ii immunopeptidome; dda and dia nanolcms

### Affiliations
Weill Cornell Medicine
Department of Radiation Oncology, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA; Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA.

### Submitter
Cristina Clement

### Lab Head
Dr Laura Santambrogio and Lawrence J.Stern
Department of Radiation Oncology, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA; Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA.


