### Accession
PXD032360

### Title
MS-based proteomic characterization of Toxoplasma gondii GRA28-associated complexes

### Description
The obligate intracellular protozoan Toxoplasma gondii exploits the trafficking of mononuclear phagocytes for systemic dissemination. We report that, upon T. gondii infection, macrophages initiate expression of transcription factors normally attributed to DCs, upregulate the expression of Ccr7 with a chemotactic response, and perform systemic migration when adoptively transferred into mice. We identify the parasite effector GRA28, which is secreted into the host cell nuclei, as driving the chemotactic migratory activation of parasitized macrophages. To gain insight about the molecular role played by GRA28 in this phenomenon, we characterized its interactome.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from Raw cells infected with RH∆ku80 GRA28-HA–FLAG-tachyzoites were incubated with anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 hour at 4 °C. Beads were washed with ten column volumes of BC500 buffer (20 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, 500 mM KCl, 20% glycerol, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 0.5% NP-40 and protease inhibitors). The bound polypeptides were eluted stepwise with 250 μg ml−1 FLAG peptide (Sigma-Aldrich) diluted in BC100 buffer, before being submitted to size-exclusion chromatography. For this, protein eluates were loaded onto a Superose 6 HR 10/30 column equilibrated with BC500. The flow rate was fixed at 0.35 ml min−1 and 0.5-ml fractions were collected. Fractions 11 to 19 and 20 to 22 were combined. Proteins contained in these combined fractions were solubilized in Laemmli buffer and stacked in in the top of a 4-12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen). After staining with R-250 Coomassie Blue (Biorad), proteins were digested in-gel using trypsin (modified, sequencing purity, Promega). The resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 140 min gradient. For this purpose, the peptides were sampled on a precolumn (300 μm x 5 mm PepMap C18, Thermo Scientific) and separated in a 75 μm x 250 mm C18 column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch). The MS and MS/MS data were acquired by Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified by Mascot (version 2.6.0, Matrix Science) through concomitant searches against the T. gondii database (ME49 taxonomy, v.30, downloaded from ToxoDB), the Uniprot database (Mus musculus taxonomy, August 2019 version), and a homemade database containing the sequences of classical contaminant proteins found in proteomic analyses (bovine albumin, keratins, trypsin, etc.). Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at respectively at 10 ppm and 25 mmu. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), Acetyl (Protein N-term, variable) and Oxidation (M, variable). The Proline software was used for the compilation, grouping, and filtering of the results (conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide length ≥ 7, PSM score ≥ 25, false discovery rate of peptide-spectrum-match identifications < 1% as calculated on peptide-spectrum-match scores by employing the reverse database strategy, and a minimum of 1 specific peptide per identified protein group).

### Publication Abstract
Upon pathogen detection, macrophages normally stay sessile in tissues while dendritic cells (DCs) migrate to secondary lymphoid tissues. The obligate intracellular protozoan Toxoplasma gondii exploits the trafficking of mononuclear phagocytes for dissemination via unclear mechanisms. We report that, upon T.&#xa0;gondii infection, macrophages initiate the expression of transcription factors normally attributed to DCs, upregulate CCR7 expression with a chemotactic response, and perform systemic migration when adoptively transferred into mice. We show that parasite effector GRA28, released by the MYR1 secretory pathway, cooperates with host chromatin remodelers in the host cell nucleus to drive the chemotactic migration of parasitized macrophages. During in&#xa0;vivo challenge studies, bone marrow-derived macrophages infected with wild-type T.&#xa0;gondii outcompeted those challenged with MYR1- or GRA28-deficient strains in migrating and reaching secondary organs. This work reveals how an intracellular parasite hijacks chemotaxis in phagocytes and highlights a remarkable migratory plasticity in differentiated cells of the mononuclear phagocyte system.

### Keywords
Host-pathogen, Gra28, Intracellular parasitism, Apicomplexa, Nanolc-msms, Chemotaxis, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
EDyP


