### Accession
PXD027030

### Title
Time-series transcriptomics and proteomics reveal alternative modes to decode p53 oscillations

### Description
Transcription factors (TFs) can relay signals through temporal alterations in their levels. The cell stress responsive TF p53 exhibits different dynamics depending on the type of stress, which influence the magnitude and dynamics of expression of its target genes and subsequent cellular outcomes. The mechanisms decoding p53 dynamics into levels and dynamics of RNA and protein of its targets remain unclear. We systematically quantified p53 target mRNA and protein levels over time under two p53 dynamical regimes – oscillatory and sustained – using RNA-seq and quantitative mass spectrometry.  We categorized the mRNA dynamical patterns arising from oscillatory or sustained p53 expression, as well as the corresponding protein dynamics. We found that in both cases oscillatory dynamics allowed for the greatest variety of dynamical patterns of the downstream species. Target proteins from a wide range of functional categories were induced under both p53 dynamic conditions, with induction levels being overall higher under sustained dynamics. Mathematical modeling combined with analysis of empirical data revealed three mechanisms of decoding p53 dynamics: adjustment of mRNA and protein degradation rates, adjustment of activation thresholds for expression of mRNA and corresponding protein levels, and usage of coherent and incoherent feed-forward loop motifs in generating exclusive responses to p53 oscillatory or sustained dynamics, respectively. Our results highlight the diversity of mechanisms that decode complex TF dynamics into dynamical patterns of mRNA and proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction, Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) peptide labeling and SPS MS3 analysis Cells were lysed by addition of SDS lysis buffer (2% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.7) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (HaltTM Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Single-Use Cocktail, EDTA Free, ThermoFisher, Catalog Number 78441). Lysate was then homogenized using Qiashredder columns (Qiagen, ref. 79656) and disulfide reduction was performed by adding dithiothreitol to a final concentration of 5 mM and heating to 37oC for 1 hour, followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 15 mM folloed by quenching with 50mM DTT. Protein concentrations were determined using BCATM Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher, Catalog Number 23235). For each sample, an aliquot corresponding to 150 µg of total protein was withdrawn. Detergent was removed by methanol/chloroform protein precipitation as described previously (Wessel & Flügge, 1984). Precipitates were solubilized in 8M urea, 20 mM EPPS, pH 8.5 and 60 µg of solubilized total protein from each sample was then used for TMT labelling. 2% acetonitrile (v/v) was added and digestion was performed by overnight incubation in the presence of Lys-C protease (Wako, Catalog Number 129-02541) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:75.  Following further dilution of the sample with 20 mM EPPS to a final urea concentration of 0.8 M in the presence of 2% acetonitrile (v/v), digestion was performed by incubation at 37oC for 6 hours with trypsin (Promega, Catalog Number V5113) at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:75. Equal amounts of protein were removed from each sample and labelled using a TMT11plex Mass Tag Labelling Kit (ThermoFisher, Catalog Number A34808). TMT labelling efficiency and ratio checks were measured by LC-MS (Ting et al, 2011) analysis of a combined 11-plex sample after combining. Equal amounts of labelled peptide from each sample were then combined for subsequent analysis. Quenching of TMT labelling reactions was performed by adding hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) and incubating samples for 15 minutes at room temperature.  Formic acid (FA) was added to a final volume of 2% (v/v) to lower the pH below 3.0 and samples were combined and de-salted using a SepPak tC18 Vac RC Cartridges (50 mg, Waters, Catalog Number WAT054960). HPLC fractionation was performed using an Agilent 1200 Series instrument with a flow rate of 600 µl/minute over a period of 75 minutes. Peptides were collected in a 96-well plate over a 65 min-gradient of 13-44 %B with Buffer A comprising 5% acetonitrile, 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8 and Buffer B comprising 90% acetonitrile,10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8. Fractions were then pooled into 24 samples, followed by sample clean-up using C18 EmporeTM Extraction Disks (Fisher Scientific, Catalog Number 14-386-2). The matrix was primed with methanol and equilibrated with 70% acetonitrile. For LC-MS, peptides were injected onto a 30 cm, 100 µm (inner diameter) column and separated using an EASY-nLC 1200 HPLC system (ThermoFisher, Catalog Number LC120). The flow rate was 450 nl/min with a gradient of 6-28%B over 240 minutes with first 3% acetonitrile, 0.4% FA and then 100% acetonitrile, 0.4% FA. The column was packed with 1.8 µm C18 beads with a pore size of 12 nm (Sepax Technologies Inc.) heated to 60oC using a column heater. Samples from the HPLC were injected into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid MS (ThermoFisher, Catalog Number FSN02-10000) using a multi-notch MS3 method (Ting et al, 2011; McAlister et al, 2014). MS scans were performed in the Orbitrap over a scan range of 400-1400 m/z with dynamic exclusion. The top 10 ions with charge states from 2 to 6 were selected for MS/MS. Turbo rate scans were performed in the Ion Trap with a collision energy of 35% and a maximum injection time of 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
TMT quantification was performed using synchronous precursor selection (SPS-MS3) in the Orbitrap with a scan range of 100-1000 m/z and an HCD collision energy of 55% as described (Paulo et al, 2016). Assignment of MS/MS spectra was performed using the Sequest (Eng et al, 1994) and a Human UniProt database. Linear discriminant analysis was used to distinguish forward and reverse hits (Elias & Gygi, 2007). Peptides were identified using an MS2 spectrum and a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% and was achieved by applying a target-decoy database search strategy. For protein identification and quantification, shared peptides were collapsed into the minimally sufficient number of proteins using rules of parsimony. Peptides with a total TMT value of > 200 and an isolation specificity of > 0.7 were included for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
P53 targets dynamic oscillatory sustained proteomics tmt multiplex mrna rnaseq

### Affiliations
Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Marian Kalocsay

### Lab Head
Dr Galit Lahav
Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA


