### Accession
PXD002986

### Title
Proteomics of Mycobacterium tuberculosis Beijing genotype after acquisition of Isoniazid resistance

### Description
This project provides the first characterization of protein differences in clinical isolates of Mtb after acquisition of resistance to isoniazid (INH), one of the most important drug treatment options against TB. This study determines the global protein differences in a clinical isogenic pair of Mtb, comparing INH susceptibility versus INH resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates of two isogenic strains of M. tuberculosis (belonging to the Beijing genotype) were cultured in one liter Glycerine-Alanine-salts (GAS) media. The preparation of CFP and cell fractions required an initial filtration step (using a 0.2µm filter) and γ irradiation (dose of 2.4 Mrad) respectively.). CFP group all the proteins secreted by the microorganism and also those released onto the media during bacteria lysis. Cellular fractions include the mycobacterial membrane (MEM), cytosol (CYT) and cell wall (CW). All samples were concentrated using a Millipore™ Amicon™ Bioseparations Stirred Cell with a 3-KDa mass cutoff membrane and subjected to buffer exchange with 10mM ammonium bicarbonate, using Amicon Ultra-15 centrifugal filter units with a 3-kDa molecular mass cutoff.  Total protein was quantified by the bicinchoninic acid method. 30ug of MEM, CYT and CFP were subjected to acetone precipitation, solubilization, reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide, and trypsin digestion (using a mix of 1% ProteaseMaxTM Surfactant and trypsin). Following digestion, samples were desalted with Pierce® PepClean C18 columns following the manufacturer instructions. CW proteins had a delipidation process before to the protein digestion protocol described above. Then, 1ug of digested cellular fractions and CFP for all the three biological replicates were randomly analyzed in triplicate using the Thermo Scientific Linear Trap Quadrupole [LTQ] linear ion trap mass spectrometer at proteomics and metabolomics facilities at Colorado State University. Chromatographic separation was performed on a reverse-phase nanospray column (Agilent 1100 nanoHPLC; Zorbax C18; 5 μm; 75-μm inside diameter [ID] by 150-mm column) using a 60-min linear gradient from 25% to 55% buffer B (90% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides are eluted directly into the mass spectrometer and spectra are collected over an m/z range of 200 to 2,000 Da using a dynamic-exclusion limit of 2 MS-MS spectra of a given peptide mass for 30 s (exclusion duration, 90 s).

### Data Protocol
Resulting raw data were converted into mzXML files using ProteoWizard. LC-MS/MS spectra were then compared against Mtb genomic database (MtbReverse041712) using SORCERER (Sage-N Research, version 5.0.1). The parameters used for the analysis were: trypsin digestion, a maximum of 3 missed cleavages, fragment tolerance of 1.0 Da (monoisotopic), parent tolerance of 1.5 Da (monoisotopic), reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues (resulting in the addition of a carbamidomethyl group) and the oxidation of methionine.  For each cellular fraction, peptide identiﬁcations from the MS/MS spectra previously searched were combined in the proteomic software Scaffold (version Scaffold 4.3.2, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) summing all the technical replicates results for each biological sample. Normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) analysis was performed to measure the relative protein abundance. Additional parameters required for the Scaffold algorithm for protein identification included a maximum of 5% of false discovery rate for peptide threshold as well as for protein threshold and at least of 2 peptides.  Differences between protein abundances among the two different susceptibility profiles (susceptible versus resistant to INH) were tested by two tailed Student’s t test.

### Publication Abstract
We determined differences in the protein abundance among two isogenic strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) with different Isoniazid (INH) susceptibility profiles. The strains were isolated from a pulmonary tuberculosis patient before and after drug treatment. LC-MS/MS analysis identified 46 Mtb proteins with altered abundance after INH resistance acquisition. Protein abundance comparisons were done evaluating the different bacterial cellular fractions (membrane, cytosol, cell wall and secreted proteins). MS data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002986.

### Keywords
Resistance, Beijing, Mycobacterium, Tuberculosis, Proteomics, Ltq, Lc-ms/ms, Isoniazid

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Mycobacteria Research Laboratories Dept of Microbiology, Immunology,& Pathology (http://www.cvmbs.colostate.edu/DirectorySearch/Search/MemberProfile/CVMBS/3607) Associate Director, Research Integrity and Compliance Review Office (http://ricro.colostate.edu/)  Colorado State University
Colorado State University

### Submitter
Luisa Nieto

### Lab Head
Dr Karen M. Dobos
Associate Professor, Mycobacteria Research Laboratories Dept of Microbiology, Immunology,& Pathology (http://www.cvmbs.colostate.edu/DirectorySearch/Search/MemberProfile/CVMBS/3607) Associate Director, Research Integrity and Compliance Review Office (http://ricro.colostate.edu/)  Colorado State University


