### Accession
PXD011918

### Title
WNT5A is transported via lipoprotein particles in the cerebrospinal fluid to regulate hindbrain morphogenesis

### Description
WNTs are hydrophobic, lipid-modified proteins that control multiple functions in development and disease via short- and long-range signaling. However, it is unclear how these hydrophobic molecules reach over long distances in the mammalian brain. Here we show that WNT5A is produced by the choroid plexus (ChP) in the developing hindbrain, but not the telencephalon, in both mouse and human. Since the ChP produces and secretes the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), we examined the presence of WNT5A in the CSF and found it is associated to lipoprotein particles rather than exosomes. Moreover, since the CSF flows along the surface of apical progenitors that do not express Wnt5a, we examined whether WNT5A up- or  down-regulates their function. We found that Wnt5a down-regulates proliferation of such progenitor cells. Our study thus identifies the CSF as a route and lipoprotein particles as a vehicle for long-range transport of biologically active WNTs in the central nervous system.

### Sample Protocol
Protein mixtures were processed by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. The whole samples were mixed with 8M UA buffer (8M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5), loaded onto the Vivacon 500 device with MWCO 10 kDa (Sartorius Stedim Biotech) and centrifuged at 14,000× g for 30 min at 20°C. The retained proteins were washed with 400 μL UA buffer. The final protein concentrates kept in the Vivacon 500 device were mixed with 100 μL of UA buffer containing 50 mM dithiothreitol and incubated for 30 min. After additional centrifugation, the samples were mixed with 100 μL of UA buffer containing 50 mM iodoacetamide and incubated in the dark for 30 min. After the next centrifugation step, the samples were washed three times with 400 μL UA buffer and three times with 200 μL of 50 mM NaHCO3. Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) was added onto the filter and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 37°C. The tryptic peptides were finally eluted by centrifugation followed by two additional elutions with 50 μL of 50mM NaHCO3. Resulting peptides were extracted into LC-MS vials by 2.5% formic acid (FA) in 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and 100% ACN with addition of polyethylene glycol (20,000; final concentration 0.001%) and concentrated in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific). LC-MS/MS analyses of peptide mixture were done using RSLCnano system connected to Orbitrap Elite hybrid spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted using trapping column (100 μm × 30 mm) filled with 3.5-μm X-Bridge BEH 130 C18 sorbent (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). After washing of trapping column with 0.1% FA, the peptides were eluted (flow 300 nl/min) from the trapping column onto a Acclaim Pepmap100 C18 column (2 µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) by 40min gradient program (1-45% of mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in acetonitrile). Equilibration of the trapping column and the column was done prior to sample injection to sample loop. The analytical column outlet was directly connected to the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy selecting up to top 10 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (350-2000 m/z). The resolution of the survey scan was 60 000 (400 m/z) with a target value of 1×106 ions, one microscan and maximum injection time of 200 ms. HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 50 000 and resolution of 15 000 (400 m/z). The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 500 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition and early expiration was disabled. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 2 m/z. Two LC-MS/MS analyses were done for each sample with exclusion of identified precursors during the second run.

### Data Protocol
The analysis of the mass spectrometric RAW data files was carried out using the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 1.4) with in-house Mascot (Matrixscience, London, UK; version 2.3.1) and Sequest search engines utilisation. MS/MS ion searches were done against single protein database concatenated from UniProtKB protein databases (complete proteome sets) for Rattus novergatus and Box Taurus and selected proteins (UniProtKB accessions: P01837, P01863, P19909, P22725)). Individual databases/sequences were downloaded on 2015-02-04, total number of proteins 51,683. cRAP database (downloaded from http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) was searched in parallel. Mass tolerance for peptides and MS/MS fragments were 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Oxidation of methionine and deamidation (N, Q) as optional modification, carbamidomethylation of C as fixed modification and two enzyme miss cleavages were set for all searches. Percolator was used for post-processing of the search results. Peptides with PEP value <0.05, rank 1 and with at least 6 amino acids were considered only. Proteins matching the same set of peptides were reported as protein groups. Protein groups/proteins were reported only if they had at least one unique peptide. Label-free quantification using protein area calculation in Proteome Discoverer was used (“top 3 protein quantification”).

### Publication Abstract
WNTs are lipid-modified proteins that control multiple functions in development and disease via short- and long-range signaling. However, it is unclear how these hydrophobic molecules spread over long distances in the mammalian brain. Here we show that WNT5A is produced by the choroid plexus (ChP) of the developing hindbrain, but not the telencephalon, in both mouse and human. Since the ChP produces and secretes the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), we examine the presence of WNT5A in the CSF and find that it is associated with lipoprotein particles rather than exosomes. Moreover, since the CSF flows along the apical surface of hindbrain progenitors not expressing Wnt5a, we examined whether deletion of Wnt5a in the ChP controls their function and find that cerebellar morphogenesis is impaired. Our study thus identifies the CSF as a route and lipoprotein particles as a vehicle for long-range transport of biologically active WNT in the central nervous system.

### Keywords
Co-immunoprecipitation, Wnt5a, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 00, Brno, Czech Republic
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics
CEITEC-MU
Masaryk University
Brno, Czech Republic

### Submitter
David Potesil

### Lab Head
Dr Zbyněk Zdráhal
CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 00, Brno, Czech Republic


