### Accession
PXD013708

### Title
Changes in the oligodendrocyte cell progenitor cell proteome with ageing

### Description
Following CNS demyelination, adult oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) can differentiate into new myelin-forming oligodendrocytes in a regenerative process called remyelination. While remyelination is very efficient in young adults, its efficiency declines progressively with ageing. Here we performed proteomic analysis on OPCs isolated acutely from the brains of neonate, young and aged female rats. Approximately 60% of the proteins are expressed at different levels in OPCs from neonates compared to their adult counterparts. The amount of myelin-associated and cell adhesion proteins are increased with age, while cholesterol-biosynthesis, transcription factors and cell cycle proteins decreased. Our experiments provide the first ageing OPC rodent proteome, revealing the distinct features of neonatal and adult OPCs, and providing new insights into why remyelination efficiency declines with ageing and potential roles for aged OPCs in other neurodegenerative diseases.

### Sample Protocol
TMT10plex labeled peptides from oligodendrocyte progenitor cells were combined and fractionated using the basic reversed-phase chromatography1 on Dionex Ultimate RSLC system. Separation was carried out on an XBridge BEH C18 column (2.1 x 100 mm, 5 μm, 130Å) (Waters) using a gradient of 783 acetonitrile (2 to 98%) in 10 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate with a flow rate of 300μl/min. Ninety-six fractions were collected and concatenated into 18 fractions and concentrated to dryness using a speedvac with chilled vacuum trap and stored at -80°C. Eighteen fractionated peptide samples were analyzed in replicate on an Orbitrap Fusion TribridTM (www.thermoscientific.com) mass spectrometer interfaced with Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC system. Nanospray LC system comprised of a 20mm enrichment column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 7μm, www.Dr-Maisch.com) and a Picofrit (New Objective) analytical column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 2.4 μm). Peptides were separated using a gradient of acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid up to 80% over a period of 110 minutes. TMT labeled peptides were analyzed using the following data dependent acquisition parameters: Scan range for full MS, mz 400-1600, resolution 120000 (200 m/z), charge state(s) 2-7, higher collision dissociation fragmentation (normalized collision energy (%) of 35) method with MS/MS scan at 60000 resolution, precursor isolation window m/z 1.3 with m/z 0.3 offset. Fragmented peptides were excluded for 30 seconds, monoisotopic selection precursor (MIPS) was enabled with constant internal calibration using fluoranthene ion.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (PD) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) software with search engines Mascot, Amanda and Sequest HT nodes. Data was searched using latest Uniprot Rattus norvegicus protein database with common laboratory contaminants included. Search parameters included 2 missed arginine or lysine sites, oxidation (M) and deamidation (N, Q) as variable modifications. Tandem mass tag (229.163Da) at N-terminus and lysine residue and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residue were set as fixed modifications. The mass tolerances on precursor and fragment masses were set at 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. False discovery rate (FDR) cutoff value was set at 0.01. Unique peptide spectrum matches with protein information and non-normalized reporter ion intensity was exported and used for statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Following central nervous system (CNS) demyelination, adult oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) can differentiate into new myelin-forming oligodendrocytes in a regenerative process called remyelination. Although remyelination is very efficient in young adults, its efficiency declines progressively with ageing. Here we performed proteomic analysis of OPCs freshly isolated from the brains of neonate, young and aged female rats. Approximately 50% of the proteins are expressed at different levels in OPCs from neonates compared with their adult counterparts. The amount of myelin-associated proteins, and proteins associated with oxidative phosphorylation, inflammatory responses and actin cytoskeletal organization increased with age, whereas cholesterol-biosynthesis, transcription factors and cell cycle proteins decreased. Our experiments provide the first ageing OPC proteome, revealing the distinct features of OPCs at different ages. These studies provide new insights into why remyelination efficiency declines with ageing and potential roles for aged OPCs in other neurodegenerative diseases.

### Keywords
Primary cells, Opc ageing, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Wellcome-MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute Clifford Allbutt Building, Cambridge Biomedical Campus
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Rayner Queiroz

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Robin J Franklin
Wellcome-MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute Clifford Allbutt Building, Cambridge Biomedical Campus


