### Accession
PXD021370

### Title
Tick (Ixodes ricinus) salivary antigens by LC-MS/MS

### Description
Here, we challenged rabbits with repeated feeding of Ixodes ricinus adults and observed the formation of specific antibodies against several tick salivary proteins. To identify the salivary antigens, isolated immunoglobulins from repeatedly infested rabbits were utilised for a pull-down from the saliva of pilocarpine-treated ticks. Eluted antigens were separated on 1D SDS-PAGE and analysed by peptide mass fingerprinting. To increase the authenticity of immunogens identified, we also performed, for the first time, de novo assembly of the sialome from I. ricinus females fed for six days, a timepoint used for pilocarpine-salivation.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometric analysis of proteins Coomassie-stained bands were excised, chopped into small pieces and transferred to 0.5 ml Eppendorf tubes. For all following steps, buffers were exchanged in two consecutive 15 min incubation steps of gel pieces with 200 µl of acetonitrile (ACN), with the ACN being removed after each step. Proteins were reduced by the addition of 200 µl of a 10 mM DTT solution in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBiC, Sigma Aldrich, A6141) and incubated at 56°C for 30 min. Proteins were alkylated by the addition of 200 µl of 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 100 mM AmBiC and incubated for 20 min in the dark. A 0.1 µg/µl stock solution of trypsin (Promega, V511A) in trypsin resuspension buffer (Promega, V542A) was diluted with ice-cold 50 mM AmBiC buffer to achieve a final concentration of 1 ng/µl. 50 µl were then added to the gel pieces, which were incubated first for 30 min on ice and then overnight at 37°C. Gel pieces were sonicated for 15 min, spun down and the supernatant was transferred into a glass vial (VDS Optilab, 93908556). Remaining gel pieces were washed with 50 µl of an aqueous solution of 50% ACN and 1% formic acid and sonicated for 15 min. The combined supernatants were dried in a speedvac and reconstituted in 10 µl of an aqueous solution of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid.  LC-MS/MS Briefly, peptides were separated using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a trapping cartridge (Precolumn; C18 PepMap 100, 5 lm, 300 lm i.d. × 5 mm, 100 A°) and an analytical column (Waters nanoEase HSS C18 T3, 75 um × 25 cm, 1.8 um, 100 A°). Solvent A: aqueous 0.1% formic acid; Solvent B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (all solvents were of LC-MS grade). Peptides were loaded onto the trapping cartridge using solvent A for 3 min at a flowrate of 30 µl/min. Peptides were separated on the analytical column at a constant flowrate of 0.3 µl/min applying a 30 min gradient of 2 – 25% of solvent B in A, followed by an increase to 85% B. Peptides were directly analyzed in positive ion mode applied with a spray voltage of 2.2 kV and a capillary temperature of 275°C using a Nanospray-Flex ion source and a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 lm OD × 20 lm ID; 10 lm tip (New Objective). The MS spectra with a mass range of 350–1.500 m/z were acquired using a resolution of 120.000 [maximum injection time of 100 ms]. Fragmentation was triggered by HCD in fixed collision energy mode with fixed collision energy of 30% for peaks with a charge state of 2–6 on the MS scan and a 5-second exclusion window. MS2 spectra were acquired by the Ion Trap with a rapid ion trap scan rate and a max injection time of 35 ms.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were processed using MaxQuant 1.6.7.0 with cDNA databases based on transcriptomics data.  Apart from the default settings, the following modifications were taken into account: Carbamidomethyl (C) (fixed modification), Acetyl (N-term) and Oxidation (M) (variable modifications).

### Publication Abstract
During feeding on vertebrate hosts, ticks secrete saliva composed of a rich cocktail of bioactive molecules modulating host immune responses. Although most of the proteinaceous fraction of tick saliva is of little immunogenicity, repeated feeding of ticks on mammalian hosts may lead to impairment of tick feeding, preventing full engorgement. Here, we challenged rabbits with repeated feeding of both <i>Ixodes ricinus</i> nymphs and adults and observed the formation of specific antibodies against several tick salivary proteins. Repeated feeding of both <i>I. ricinus</i> stages led to a gradual decrease in engorged weights. To identify the salivary antigens, isolated immunoglobulins from repeatedly infested rabbits were utilized for a protein pull-down from the saliva of pilocarpine-treated ticks. Eluted antigens were first identified by peptide mass fingerprinting with the aid of available <i>I. ricinus</i> salivary gland transcriptomes originating from early phases of tick feeding. To increase the authenticity of immunogens identified, we also performed, for the first time, <i>de novo</i> assembly of the sialome from <i>I. ricinus</i> females fed for six days, a timepoint used for pilocarpine-salivation. The most dominant <i>I. ricinus</i> salivary immunogens identified in our study were zinc-dependent metalloproteases of three different families. To corroborate the role of metalloproteases at the tick/host interface, we fed ticks micro-injected with a zinc metalloprotease inhibitor, phosphoramidon, on a rabbit. These ticks clearly failed to initiate feeding and to engorge. However, neither feeding to ticks immune blood of repeatedly infested rabbits, nor phosphoramidon injection into ticks, prevented their engorgement when fed <i>in vitro</i> on an artificial membrane system. These data show that Zn metalloproteases play a decisive role in the success of tick feeding, mediated by complex molecular interactions between the host immune, inflammatory, and hemostatic processes, which are absent in <i>in vitro</i> feeding. This basic concept warrants further investigation and reconsideration of the current strategies towards the development of an effective "anti-tick" vaccine.

### Keywords
Antigen, Immunoprecipitation, Ticks, Saliva

### Affiliations
Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre, Ceske Budejovice
European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL)

### Submitter
Per Haberkant

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Perner
Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre, Ceske Budejovice


