### Accession
PXD026350

### Title
Phosphorylation-dependent Interactome of Ryanodine Recep-tor Type-2 in the Heart

### Description
Background: Hyperphosphorylation of the calcium release channel/ryanodine receptor type 2 (RyR2) at serine 2814 (S2814) is associated with multiple cardiac diseases including atrial fibrilla-tion and heart failure. Despite recent advances, the molecular mechanisms driving pathological changes associated with RyR2 -S2814 phosphorylation are still not well understood. Methods: Using affinity-purification coupled to mass spectrometry (AP-MS), we investigated the RyR2 in-teractome in ventricles from wild-type (WT) mice and two S2814 knock-in mutants: the un-phosphorylated alanine mutant (S2814A) and hyperphosphorylated mimic aspartic acid mutant (S2814D). Western blots were used for validation. Results: In WT mouse ventricular lysates, we identified 22 proteins which were enriched with RyR2 pull-down relative to both IgG control and no antibody (beads-only) pull-downs. Parallel AP-MS using WT, S2814A, and S2814D mouse ventricles identified 72 proteins with 20 being high confident RyR2 interactors. Of these, 14 had an increase in their binding to RyR2 S2814A but a decrease in their binding to RyR2 S2814D. We independently validated three protein hits, Idh3b, Aifm1, and Cpt1b, as RyR2 interactors by western blot and showed that Aifm1 and Idh3b had significantly decreased binding to RyR2 S2814D compared to WT and S2814A, consistent with MS findings. Conclusion: By applying state-of-the-art proteomic approaches, we discovered a number of novel RyR2 interactors in the mouse heart. In addition, we found and defined specific alterations in the RyR2 interactome that were dependent on the phosphorylation status of RyR2 at S2814. These findings yield mechanistic insights into RyR2 regulation which may guide future drug designs.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, ventricular lysates were pre-cleared with Protein G Plus Agarose beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) for 2 hours at 4°C and separated into 3 equal fractions for incubation overnight at 4°C with either anti-RyR2 mouse antibody (MA3-916; Thermo Fisher), IgG isotype control antibody (M5284; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), or no antibody (beads only control). The next morning the samples were incubated with Protein G Plus Agarose beads for 1 hour at 4°C on a rotator and the beads were subse-quently washed 3 times with RIPA buffer without CHAPS. The beads were then incu-bated in Laemmli sample buffer with β-mercaptoethanol either at 70°C for 10 minutes or room temperature for 30 minutes before the samples were run on a gradient SDS-PAGE gel. The gels were fixed and stained with bio-safe Coomassie dye (Bio-Rad) and each sample lane on the gels was cut into ten equally spaced pieces, which were subsequently reduced, alkylated and in-gel digested as previously described.

### Data Protocol
Nanoscale liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed as described. Protein identification and quantitation were also per-formed as described. Briefly, the RAW output files were loaded into MaxQuant and Proteome Discoverer and searched with mouse FASTA file from UniProt. Proteins that were only identified by site, reverse hits, or contaminants were filtered out. In addition, all immunoglobulin-related and keratin-related hits were removed. For MaxQuant analysis, only proteins with 3 or more unique peptides were kept. Label-free quantifi-cation (LFQ) intensities were used for comparison between samples that were ran in parallel.12 For proteins with an intensity value of 0, an arbitrary minimum (background) intensity of 50,000 was used for ratio calculations. For Proteome Discoverer analysis, PSM (peptide spectrum matches) were quantitated; hits are required to be found in at least one of the WT, S2814A and S2814D samples with PSM >= 5, and with at least 2 peptides identified. The PSM of each hit from all samples is normalized to the WT RyR2 PSM.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ryr2, Heart, Phosphorylation, Interactome

### Affiliations
Brigham and Women's Hospital
Cardiovascular Research Institute, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA

### Submitter
David Chiang

### Lab Head
Dr Xander Wehrens
Cardiovascular Research Institute, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA


