### Accession
PXD030995

### Title
Metabolic control of adult neural stem cell self-renewal by the mitochondrial protease YME1L

### Description
The transition between quiescence and activation in neural stem and progenitor cells (NSPCs) is coupled to reversible changes in energy metabolism with key implications for life-long NSPC self-renewal and neurogenesis. How this metabolic plasticity is ensured between NSPC activity states is unclear. We find that a state-specific rewiring of the mitochondrial proteome by the i-AAA peptidase YME1L is required to preserve NSPC self-renewal. YME1L controls the abundance of numerous mitochondrial substrates in quiescent NSPCs, and its deletion activates a differentiation program characterized by broad metabolic changes causing the irreversible shift away from a fatty acid oxidation-dependent state. Conditional Yme1l deletion in adult NSPCs in vivo results in defective self-renewal and premature differentiation, ultimately leading to NSPC pool depletion. Our results disclose an important role for YME1L in coordinating the switch between metabolic states of NSPCs and suggest that NSPC fate is regulated by compartmentalized changes in protein network dynamics.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to protein extraction cells were washed using ice cold 1X PBS. Cells were then lysed using 80 µL of 8 M Urea and stored at -80°C for further use. Protein samples were sonicated to degrade the chromatin followed by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 15 min at 4°C and the supernatant was collected. Protein concentration was measured using the Direct Detect spectrometer from Merck following the Manufacturer’s instructions and 50µg protein per sample was used for further processing. Samples were mixed with 100mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) to get the final concentration of DTT 5mM followed by incubation at 37°C for 1 h at 600rpm in a thermo mixer (Eppendorf). Samples were alkylated with 40mM Chloroacetamide (CAA) and incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were then mixed with endoproteinase Lys-C (1:75 (w/w) ratio of proteinase to protein) and incubated at 37°C for 4 h. Urea concentration was diluted from 8M to 2M by adding of 50mM TEAB. Samples were incubated with trypsin (1:75 (w/w) ratio of trypsin to protein) overnight at 37°C. Samples were collected and acidified to a final concentration of 1% TFA followed by StageTip extraction. SDB-RP Stage tips were pre-wetted with 30µL 100% MeOH and cleaned with 0.1% TFA, 80% ACN before equilibration with 0.1% TFA. The peptide containing samples were loaded onto SDB-RP StageTip columns and washed once with 30µL 0.1% TFA and twice with 0.1% TFA, 80% ACN followed by drying of StageTips completely with a syringe and stored at 4°C.  Prior to measurement StageTips were eluted with 30 µl 1% ammonium hydroxide in 60% ACN, dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 10 µl 5% FA in 2% ACN. Samples were analysed on a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC 1000 UPLC (Thermo Scientific). 3 µl resuspended peptides were loaded onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm × 75 μm I.D., filled with 2.7 μm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent) and equilibrated in solvent A (0.1% FA). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: 5-30% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) within 65 min, 30-50% solvent B within 13 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 2 Da window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 110 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters (Tyanova et al., 2016). Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the Uniprot MOUSE.fasta database, including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 0.01% (Protein FDR) and 0.01% (PSM FDR), respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethyolation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. The match-between runs option was enabled. LFQ quantification was enabled using default settings. The Maxquant output was processed as follows: Protein groups flagged as „reverse“, „potential contaminant“ or „only identified by site“ were removed from the proteinGroups.txt. LFQ values were log2 transformed. Proteins with less than 3 valid values in at least one group of 4 replicates were removed. Missing values were replaced by imputation from a normal distribution (width 0.3, down shift 1.8). Sample t-test was used to determine significantly changing protein levels (q-value <0.05, S0 = 0.2) and a permutation-based FDR was calculated to correct for multiple testing. Enrichment of Gene Ontology, KEGG and GSEA was assessed using 1D annotation enrichment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neural stem cells; mitochondria; metabolic rewiring; mitochondrial proteome; mitochondrial dynamics; adult neurogenesis; self-renewal; yme1l; oma1

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Matteo Bergami
Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases


