### Accession
PXD022985

### Title
PDGFR signaling in recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa

### Description
Seven sets of SILAC-based AP-MS experiments were performed analyzing phosphotyrosine signaling after 0, 5, and 10 min of PDGF-BB treatment of primary human skin fibroblasts. For this, proteins phosphorylated on tyrosine residues were enriched using the 4G10 antibody.

### Sample Protocol
After AP, SILAC samples were combined, proteins eluted in SDS loading buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE. Proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin, peptides purified and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Peak detection and relative quantification of SILAC-pairs was conducted by MaxQuant versión 1.4.1.2. Peaks were searched against a full-length human Uniprot database from December 2017. Enzyme specificity was assigned to trypsin/P and quantitation was based on three SILAC labels. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification; N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine, as well as phosphorylations of serine/threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. The MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Proteins were identified with a minimum of one unique peptide. For quantification, a ratio count of two was needed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Phosphotyrosine, Skin, Fibroblast, Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa

### Affiliations
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                  E     joern.dengjel@unifr.ch
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                  E     joern.dengjel@unifr.ch


