### Accession
PXD010628

### Title
Nitric oxide modulates metabolic remodelling and  immunometabolism in inflammatory murine macrophages

### Description
Classical stimulation of macrophages (MLPS/IFNγ) elicits the expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), generating large amounts of nitric oxide (NO) and inhibiting respiration. Consequent upregulation of glycolysis and a disrupted tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle underpin this switch to a pro-inflammatory phenotype. Here we show that the NOS cofactor tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) modulates key aspects of metabolic remodelling in activated bone-marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) via NO production. Using two complementary mouse models that each lack the capacity for inducible NO generation, through different mechanisms, we reveal that NO regulates macrophage respiratory function via changes in the abundance of critical N-module subunits in Complex I, by HIF1α-mediated glycolytic remodelling, and by modulating levels of the critical TCA cycle metabolites, and inflammatory mediators, citrate, succinate, and itaconate. Taken together, our findings reveal new critical roles for iNOS-derived NO that are required for metabolic remodelling and cytokine production in macrophage inflammatory responses.

### Sample Protocol
Bone marrow-derived macrophages were lysed in RIPA buffer by freeze thawing on dry ice. Extracted proteins were reduced and alkylated using dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide. Prior to digestion, proteins were precipitated by methanol/chloroform precipitation and resuspended in urea. Proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C after the addition of trypsin (trypsin:protein ratio of 1:50. Peptides were desalted using C18 Sep-Pak cartridges and vacuum dried. Desalted peptides were labelled with TMT 10-plex following the manufacturers protocol. Labelled peptides were desalted using C18 Sep-Pak cartridges. Prior to LC-MS/MS, TMT-labelled peptides were fractionated by high-pH reverse phase prefractionation.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.1.1) was used to identify peptides (MS2 spectra) and quantify TMT reporter ions (MS3 spectra). MS2 spectra were searched against the SwissProt mouse protein database using Sequest HT with the following parameters: Full trypsin specificity; precursor tolerance of 10 ppm; fragment tolerance of 0.6 Da; carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.021 Da) as fixed modification; oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da), TMT labelling of lysine and peptide N-terminal (+229.163 Da) were set as variable modifications. Identifications were post-processed with Percolator to a target FDR of 0.01. The Reporter Ions Quantifier node was used to quantify TMT reporter ions with an integration tolerance of 20 ppm using the most confident centroid method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mus musculus, Orbitrap fusion lumos

### Affiliations
Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7FZ, UK
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Simon Davis

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7FZ, UK


