### Accession
PXD009316

### Title
An alliance of gel-based and gel-free proteomic techniques displays substantial insight into the proteome of a virulent and an attenuated Histomonas meleagridis strain

### Description
The current work aimed to detect and identify significant differentially expressed proteins between a virulent and an attenuated Histomonas meleagridis strain which were in vitro co-cultivated with Escherichia coli DH5alpha. This was done by applying 2D-DIGE and sequential window acquisition of all theoretical spectra (SWATH) MS as tools on the two well-defined strains. In the gel-based experiments, 49 identified protein spots were found to be differentially expressed, of which 37 belonged to the in vitro cultivated virulent strain and 12 to the attenuated one. The most frequently identified proteins in the virulent strain take part in cytoskeleton formation, carbohydrate metabolism and adaptation to stress. However, post-translationally modified or truncated ubiquitous cellular proteins such as actin and GAPDH were identified as upregulated in multiple gel positions. This indicated their contribution to processes not related to cytoskeleton and carbohydrate metabolism, such as fibronectin or plasminogen binding. On the other hand, proteins involved in cytoskeleton, cell division and cytoskeleton organization were frequently observed in the attenuated strain. The findings of the gel-based studies were supplemented by the gel-free SWATH MS analysis, which identified and quantified 42 significantly differentially regulated proteins. In this case proteins with peptidase activity, metabolic proteins and actin-regulating proteins were the most frequent findings in the virulent strain, while proteins involved in hydrogenosomal carbohydrate metabolism dominated the results in the attenuated one.

### Sample Protocol
In total eight protein spots from the two 2D-DIGE experiments, could not be identified by MALDI-TOF/TOF Mass spectrometry and were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. For this, proteolytically generated peptides were separated by a high-performance chromatography system (nano-HPLC Ultimate 3000 RSLC system, Dionex) and analyzed with a high-resolution hybrid triple quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (TripleTOF 5600+, Sciex, USA) connected via nano-electrospray ionization (ESI) interface. Remainders of the de-salted peptides after in-gel digest were evaporated and reconstituted in 0.1% aqueous TFA for injection into LC-MS. Sample pre-concentration and de-salting was accomplished with a 5 mm Acclaim PepMap μ‑Precolumn (300 µm inner diameter, 5 µm particle size, and 100 Å pore size) (Dionex). As a mobile phase 2% ACN in ultra-pure H2O with 0.05% TFA was used for loading and de-salting of peptide samples with a flow rate of 5 µl/min. For peptide separation a 25 cm Acclaim PepMap C18 column (75 µm inner diameter, 3 µm particle size, and 100 Å pore size) was used operated at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient started with 4% B (80% ACN with 0.1% formic acid) and increased to 35% B in 60 min. It was followed by a washing step with 90% B. Mobile Phase A consisted of ultra-pure H2O with 0.1% formic acid. Mass spectra of HPLC-separated peptides were acquired using an information dependent data acquisition mode (IDA). MS1 spectra were collected in the range of 400 - 1500 m/z for 250 ms. The 25 most intense precursors with charge state 2–4, which exceeded 100 counts per second, were selected for fragmentation. MS2 spectra were acquired in the range of 100 - 1800 m/z for 110 ms. Precursor ions were dynamically excluded from reselection for 10 s. The nano-HPLC system was operated by Chromeleon 6.8 using DCMS-Link (Dionex) and the MS by Analyst Software 1.6 (Sciex).

### Data Protocol
Database searches of raw data were performed using ProteinPilot 5.0 (Sciex) in an amino acid database of E. coli proteins (UnitProt DB, taxonomy 562 EcolX; http://www.uniprot.org/) combined with a database containing conceptually translated contigs from the H. meleagridis reference transcriptome (size: 3356 unique contigs; study accession number PRJEB19109; http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/data/view/PRJEB19109) (Mazumdar et al., 2017, Protist 168, 663-685) and common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) database (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/crap.fasta). Mass tolerance in MS mode was set with 0.05 and 0.1 Da in MSMS mode for the rapid recalibration search, and 0.0011 Da in MS and 0.01 Da in MSMS mode for the final search. Parameters for database search: trypsin digestion, cysteine alkylation set to iodoacetamide, search effort set to rapid ID. FDR was performed using the integrated tools in ProteinPilot. Global FDR was set to <1% on protein as well as on peptide level. Following the generally applied so-called “two-peptide rule” only proteins with at least two peptides were further considered as identified (Taylor and Goodlett, 2005, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 19, 3420-3420.

### Publication Abstract
The unicellular protozoan <i>Histomonas meleagridis</i> is notorious for being the causative agent of histomonosis, which can cause high mortality in turkeys and substantial production losses in chickens. The complete absence of commercially available curative strategies against the disease renders the devising of novel approaches a necessity. A fundamental step toward this objective is to understand the flagellate's virulence and attenuation mechanisms. For this purpose we have previously conducted a comparative proteomic analysis of an <i>in vitro</i> cultivated virulent and attenuated histomonad parasite using two-dimensional electrophoresis and MALDI-TOF/TOF. The current work aimed to substantially extend the knowledge of the flagellate's proteome by applying 2D-DIGE and sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH) MS as tools on the two well-defined strains. In the gel-based experiments, 49 identified protein spots were found to be differentially expressed, of which 37 belonged to the <i>in vitro</i> cultivated virulent strain and 12 to the attenuated one. The most frequently identified proteins in the virulent strain take part in cytoskeleton formation, carbohydrate metabolism and adaptation to stress. However, post-translationally modified or truncated ubiquitous cellular proteins such as actin and GAPDH were identified as upregulated in multiple gel positions. This indicated their contribution to processes not related to cytoskeleton and carbohydrate metabolism, such as fibronectin or plasminogen binding. Proteins involved in cell division and cytoskeleton organization were frequently observed in the attenuated strain. The findings of the gel-based studies were supplemented by the gel-free SWATH MS analysis, which identified and quantified 42 significantly differentially regulated proteins. In this case proteins with peptidase activity, metabolic proteins and actin-regulating proteins were the most frequent findings in the virulent strain, while proteins involved in hydrogenosomal carbohydrate metabolism dominated the results in the attenuated one.

### Keywords
Comparative proteomic analysis, Protozoa, Attenuation., Virulence factors, Lc-ms/ms, Swath ms, 2d-dige, Maldi-tof/tof, Histomonas meleagridis

### Affiliations
Clinic for Poultry and Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna
University Clinic for Poultry and Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Ivana BILIC

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Ivana Bilic
University Clinic for Poultry and Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria


