### Accession
PXD027426

### Title
Nam Lot enamel proteome: part of a multi-proxy approach to exploring Homo sapiens arrival, environments and adaptations in Southeast Asia

### Description
Here we analyse two enamel protein extractions from a single Late Pleistocene dental fragment from Nam Lot (Laos). The proteome is analyzed for potential phylogenetic information, from which we concude the specimen represents an individual belonging to the genus Pongo, and characterized in terms of its molecular damage (deamidation, peptide lengths).

### Sample Protocol
Two enamel samples were demineralized in hydrochloric acid (1.5 M HCl), without subsequent solubilization or proteolysis using a protease. Peptides in the supernatant were desalted by solid-phase-extraction using C18 stagetips, vacuum dried, and reconstituted in 0.1 % TFA 5 % ACN. Peptides were loaded and separtaed on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Scientific) and two different gradients using 0.1 % TFA 99.9 % water as solvent A and 0.1 % TFA 80 % ACN 19.9 % water as solvent B at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The gradien 77 min gradient increased from 5 to 30 % B over 50 min, to 45 % B at  60 min, to 80 % B at 62 min until  67. % B was reduced to 5 % by minute 72. LC was interfaced with an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF-X (Thermo Scientific) acquiring full MS scans from 350 to 1400 m/z, at 120,000 resolution at 200 m/z, 3e6 AGC target, and 25 ms max. injection time (IT), followed by 10 data-dependent MS2 scans with 1.2 m/z isolation width and HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28 and measured at 60,000 resolution, 2e5 AGC target, 118 ms max. IT, and a first mass of 100 m/z. Laboratory blanks were prepared using the same procedure, and included alongside MS/MS analysis as a separate injection.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed with Maxquant (version 1.6.3.4) and searched against an in-house curated database containing protein sequences expected in the Hominidae enamel proteome. Enzyme mode was set to “unspecific” and allowed for up to 3 of the following variable modifications: deamidation (NQ), hydroxyproline (P), phosphorylation (STY), oxidation (MW), dioxidation (MW), ornithine formation, pyro-Glu formation (QE). The results were interpreted by a BLAST search to confirm sequence uniqueness. Deamidation calculations and phylogenetic information was performed and retrieved within R, as explained in the manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
The capability of Pleistocene hominins to successfully adapt to different types of tropical forested environments has long been debated. In order to investigate environmental changes in Southeast Asia during a critical period for the turnover of hominin species, we analysed palaeoenvironmental proxies from five late Middle to Late Pleistocene faunas. Human teeth discoveries have been reported at Duoi U'Oi, Vietnam (70-60&#xa0;ka) and Nam Lot, Laos (86-72&#xa0;ka). However, the use of palaeoproteomics allowed us to discard the latter, and, to date, no human remains older than&#x2009;~&#x2009;70&#xa0;ka are documented in the area. Our findings indicate that tropical rainforests were highly sensitive to climatic changes over that period, with significant fluctuations of the canopy forests. Locally, large-bodied faunas were resilient to these fluctuations until the cooling period of the Marine Isotope Stage 4 (MIS 4; 74-59&#xa0;ka) that transformed the overall biotope. Then, under strong selective pressures, populations with new phenotypic characteristics emerged while some other species disappeared. We argue that this climate-driven shift offered new foraging opportunities for hominins in a novel rainforest environment and was most likely a key factor in the settlement and dispersal of our species during MIS 4 in SE Asia.

### Keywords
Enamel, Palaeproteomics, Human evolution, Lc-ms/ms, Pleistocene

### Affiliations
Postdoc
Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen
Evolutionary Genomics Section, Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Frido Welker

### Lab Head
Dr Enrico Cappellini
Evolutionary Genomics Section, Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen


