### Accession
PXD030393

### Title
Proteome adaptations of the organohalide-respiring Desulfitobacterium hafniense to fermentative and various respiratory metabolisms

### Description
Desulfitobacterium hafniense was originally isolated for its ability to use organohalogens as terminal electron acceptors in the process of organohalide respiration (OHR). However, in contrast to obligate OHR bacteria, Desulfitobacterium spp. show a highly versatile energy metabolism with the capacity to use many possible electron donors and acceptors and to grow fermentatively also. The sequencing of several Desulfitobacterium genomes displaying numerous and apparently redundant members of redox enzyme families has confirmed their large metabolic potential. Nonetheless, the enzymes responsible for many metabolic traits are not yet identified. In the present work, we conducted an extended proteomic study by comparing the proteomes of D. hafniense strain DCB-2 cultivated in different combinations of electron donors and acceptors, triggering five alternative respiratory metabolisms that include OHR, as well as fermentation. The Tandem Mass Tag labelling proteomic approach allowed us to identify almost 60% of the predicted proteome of strain DCB-2 in all six growth conditions and to quantify the relative abundance of 2796 proteins. This dataset was analysed in order to highlight the proteins that were up-regulated in one or a subset of growth conditions to identify possible key players in the different energy metabolisms. The addition of sodium sulfide as reducing agent in the medium – a very widespread practice in the cultivation of strictly anaerobic bacteria – triggered the expression of the dissimilatory sulfite reduction pathway in relatively less favourable conditions such as fermentative growth on pyruvate, respiration with H2 as electron donor and OHR conditions. The presence of H2, CO2 and acetate in the medium induced several metabolic pathways involved in carbon metabolism including the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway and two pathways related to the fermentation of butyrate that rely on electron-bifurcating enzymes. While the predicted fumarate reductase appears to be constitutively expressed, a new lactate dehydrogenase and lactate transporters were identified. Finally, the OHR metabolism with 3-chloro-4-hydroxyphenylacetate as electron acceptor strongly induced proteins encoded in several reductive dehalogenase gene clusters including four new proteins, the function of which is discussed. Overall, we believe that this extended proteomic database represents a new landmark in understanding the metabolic versatility of Desulfitobacterium spp. and provides a solid basis for addressing present and future research questions.

### Sample Protocol
Biomass pellets were lysed in HEPES buffer by several rounds of sonication. Unbroken cells were removed by centrifugation and the cell-free extracts were solubilized in 2% SDS for 15 min and aliquoted to 30 μg samples. Samples were treated following the FASP protocol in 8 M urea and Tris-HCl buffer, then reduced with 10 mM TCEP and alkylation was performed with 40 mM chloroacetamide. Proteolytic digestion was done with Lys-C and Trypsin Gold to 1:50 ratio in presence of 10 mM CaCl2. Peptides were recovered in 4% trifluoroacetic acid, desalted and vacuum centrifuged. TMT-labelling was performed with the TMT10plex isobaric Mass Tagging Kit and quenched with 0.4% hydroxylamine. TMT-labelled samples were pooled at 1:1 ratio, desalted on C18 cartridges and vacuum centrifuged. Pooled samples were fractionated into 12 fractions with the Agilent OFF-Gel 3100 system. Fractions were vacuum centrifuged. For LC-MS/MS analysis, each fraction was resuspended in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid, then separated on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system connected to the Lumos Fusion OrbitrapMass spectrometer. Acquisitions were performed through Top Speed Data-Dependent acquisition mode using 3 s cycle time. First MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 120’000 (at 200 m/z) and the most intense parent ions were selected and fragmented by High energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) with a Normalised Collision Energy (NCE) of 37.5% using an isolation window of 0.7 m/z. Fragmented ions scans were acquired with a resolution of 50’000 (at 200 m/z) and selected ions were then excluded for the following 120 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using SEQUEST, Mascot, MS Amanda and MS Fragger in Proteome Discoverer v.2.4 against the Desulfitobacterium hafniense DCB-2 database (4851 sequences). Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin and a minimum of six amino acids was required for peptide identification. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed and a 1% FDR cut-off was applied both at peptide and protein identification levels. For the database search, carbamidomethylation (C), TMT tags (K and Peptide N termini) were set as fixed modifications whereas oxidation (M) was considered as a variable one.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Desulfitobacterium hafniense strain dcb-2; energy metabolism; organohalide respiration; fermentation; quantitative proteomics; tandem mass tag labelling

### Affiliations
PCF
Laboratory for Environmental Biotechnology, Ecole polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Romain Hamelin

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Holliger
Laboratory for Environmental Biotechnology, Ecole polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland


