### Accession
PXD024959

### Title
Mass spectometry Raw data DENV-Aedes aegypti SG experiment

### Description
We studied potential interactions between dengue viral particles and Aedes aegypti mosquito salivary proteins by mass  spectometry

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of DENV and Salivary Gland Mixture Cell-free supernatants were taken from a T-150 flask of DENV2-infected C6/36 cells at 10 dpi and overlaid on top of room-temperature 30% sucrose-PBS. Samples were ultra-centrifuged at 100k x g for 2 hours and supernatant was removed before viral pellet was resuspended in ~2 mL serum-free DMEM media. Resuspended virus was overlaid on a room-temperature 30%/60% sucrose-PBS gradient and ultra-centrifuged at 100k x g for 2 hours. Using a flashlight shone from underneath the virus/sucrose-gradient, a viral band was visualized and ~600 μL was carefully pipetted to a new Eppendorf tube. A small aliquot was removed to determine viral titer. Salivary glands from A. aegypti mosquitoes (Orlando strain) were dissected. Briefly, 10 - 14 day old uninfected and sucrose-fed female mosquitoes were anesthetized on ice, followed by the removal of the legs and head. After pushing down the thorax, salivary gland was isolated by using small forceps, and placed into sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) on ice. Sucrose-purified virus was split into two aliquots of ~300 μL (~3.9 x109 viral particles in each) and extract from 10 A. aegypti salivary glands (SGE) in 10 μL was added to one of the aliquots. Both the DENV (control) and the DENV+SGE were incubated for 1 hour at 30 °C, and then diluted to 4 mL before being overlaid on a room-temperature 30%/60% sucrose-PBS gradient and ultra-centrifuged at 100k x g for 2 hours. Both bands of the DENV (control) and the DENV+SGE were collected as described above and heat inactivated for 10 minutes at 65 °C before being frozen at -80 °C. This entire protocol was repeated for three biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry analysis (LC + MS/MS) DENV (control) and DENV combined with salivary gland extract samples were submitted to the Interdisciplinary Center for Proteomics at the Yale University, where they were precipitated and resuspended in PBS before liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC + MS/MS). Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot. Mascot was set up to search the Aedes aegypti_201505 database (selected for Aedes aegypti, unknown version, 37,800 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.050 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Gln- > pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, deamidated of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.4.8, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 50.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 50.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. This entire protocol was repeated for three biological replicates. The mass spectrometry proteomic raw data obtained from these experiments have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via PRIDE partner repository.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mass spectometry, Salivary glands, Denv

### Affiliations
Yale University
Waldemar Von Zedtwitz Professor of Medicine (Infectious Diseases) and Professor of Epidemiology (Microbial Diseases) and of Microbial Pathogenesis. Department of Internal Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, Yale University

### Submitter
Alejandro Marin Lopez

### Lab Head
Dr Erol Fikrig
Waldemar Von Zedtwitz Professor of Medicine (Infectious Diseases) and Professor of Epidemiology (Microbial Diseases) and of Microbial Pathogenesis. Department of Internal Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, Yale University


