### Accession
PXD027782

### Title
AOH1996, a small molecule ligand of PCNA, modulates PCNA interaction with RPB1

### Description
Targeting transcription replication conflicts, a major source of endogenous DNA double stranded breaks and genomic instability, could have important therapeutic implications. When transcription and DNA replication machineries encounter each other on chromosomes, one way to resolve the conflict is temporarily dislodging RNA polymerase II from the conflict sites to enable the replication fork to proceed. Proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), an essential component of replisomes, plays a critical role in this process. We discovered a small molecule ligand (AOH1996) of PCNA, which targets a binding pocket adjacent to the outer surface region of PCNA known to interact with PIP box and APIM motif proteins. Orally administrable, AOH1996 suppresses tumor growth but causes no discernable side effects. In addition, we found that AOH1996 treatment can stabilize interaction between PCNA and RPB1, the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II. To determine whether the effect of AOH1996 is mediated through affecting PCNA interaction with RPB1, we mutated Y418 within the APIM motif of RPB1 to an alanine in the SK-N-AS cell line by CRISPR and compared changes in protein expression profiles caused by AOH1996 in the parent and mutant SK-N-AS cells.

### Sample Protocol
SK-N-AS cells homozygous of the wildtype or mutant RPB1 allele were treated with or without 0.5 M AOH1996 in quadruplets overnight. To average out clonal variations unrelated to the RPB1 muation, the mutant cell quadruplets were derived from two independent clones (two from each clone). Cell pellets were dissolved in 100 µL lysis buffer (0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate, 0.05% sodium dodecyl sulfate) and subjected to tip sonication. Protein lysates were quantified for protein content using the BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and equal amounts of protein were used per condition, adjusted to the highest volume with lysis buffer. Proteins were then reduced [4µL of 100mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS), 600C for 1 hour], alkylated [2 µL of 100mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), room temperature for 10 min) and enzymatically digested overnight [1:25 trypsin/LysC, 370C in dark). Peptides were labelled using the 16-plex TMT reagents (TMT labels dissolved in 41 µL anhydrous acetonitrile and transferred to each sample, room temperature for 2 hr) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The labelling scheme was as follows: 126=untreated 1, 127N=treated 1, 127C=untreated 2, 128N=treated 2, 128C=untreated 3, 129N=treated 3, 129C=untreated 4, 130N=treated 4, 130C=26-0h-1, 131N=26-0h-2, 131C=26-24h-1, 132N=26-24h-2, 132C=31-0h-1, 133N=31-0h-2, 133C=31-24h-1, 134N=31-24h-2. The labelling reaction was stopped by adding 8 µL of 5% hydroxylamine in each sample and incubating at room temperature for 10 min. Peptides from all samples were then mixed and phospho-enrichment was performed using the Sequential enrichment of metal oxide affinity chromatography (SMOAC) protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Normalization was performed on total peptide amount and scaling was performed on all averages.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) using the Byonic search algorithm (Protein Metrics) and Uniprot human database. PD-Byonic search parameters were as follows: fully Tryptic peptides with no more than 2 missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm, and a maximum of 3 common modifications and 2 rare modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMTpro addition to lysine and peptide N-termini were static modifications. Methionine oxidation, lysine acetylation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues were common dynamic modifications (up to 2 each). Methionine loss on protein N-termini, methionine loss + acetylation on protein N-termini, and protein N-terminal acetylation were rare dynamic modifications (only 1 each). Percolator FDRs were set at 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed). Spectrum file retention time calibration was used with TMTpro addition to peptide N-termini and lysines as static modifications. Reporter ion quantification used a co-isolation threshold of 50% and average reporter S/N threshold of 10. Normalization was performed on total peptide amount and scaling was performed on all average. Peptide and protein FDRs were set at 0.001 (strict) and 0.01 (relaxed), with peptide confidence at least medium, lower confidence peptides excluded, minimum peptide length set at 6, and apply strict parsimony set to false.

### Publication Abstract
Targeting transcription replication conflicts, a major source of endogenous DNA double-stranded breaks and genomic instability could have important anticancer therapeutic implications. Proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) is critical to DNA replication and repair processes. Through a rational drug design approach, we identified a small molecule PCNA inhibitor, AOH1996, which selectively kills cancer cells. AOH1996 enhances the interaction between PCNA and the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II, RPB1, and dissociates PCNA from actively transcribed chromatin regions, while inducing DNA double-stranded breaks in a transcription-dependent manner. Attenuation of RPB1 interaction with PCNA, by a point mutation in RPB1's PCNA-binding region, confers resistance to AOH1996. Orally administrable and metabolically stable, AOH1996 suppresses tumor growth as a monotherapy or as a combination treatment but causes no discernable side effects. Inhibitors of transcription replication conflict resolution may provide a new and unique therapeutic&#xa0;avenue for exploiting this cancer-selective vulnerability.

### Keywords
Aoh1996, Pcna, And transcription-replication conflict, Apim motif, Rpb1

### Affiliations
Caltech Proteome Exploration Lab
Caltech Proteome Exploration Laboratory

### Submitter
Brett Lomenick

### Lab Head
Dr Spiros D Garbis
Caltech Proteome Exploration Laboratory


