### Accession
PXD029142

### Title
CLUH controls astrin-1 expression to couple mitochondrial metabolism to cell cycle progression

### Description
Proliferating cells undergo metabolic changes in synchrony with cell cycle progression and cell division. Mitochondria provide fuel, metabolites, and ATP during different phases of the cell cycle, however it is not completely understood how mitochondrial function and the cell cycle are coordinated. CLUH is a post-transcriptional regulator of mRNAs encoding mitochondrial proteins involved in oxidative phosphorylation and several metabolic pathways. Here, we show a role of CLUH in regulating the expression of astrin, which is involved in metaphase to anaphase progression, centrosome integrity, and mTORC1 inhibition. We find that CLUH binds both the SPAG5 mRNA and its product astrin, and controls the synthesis and the stability of the full-length astrin-1 isoform. We show that CLUH interacts with astrin-1 specifically during interphase. Astrin-depleted cells show mislocalized CLUH at focal adhesions, mTORC1 hyperactivation and enhanced anabolism. On the other hand, cells lacking CLUH show decreased astrin levels and increased mTORC1 signaling, but cannot sustain anaplerotic and anabolic pathways. In absence of CLUH, cells fail to grow during G1, and progress faster through the cell cycle, indicating dysregulated matching of growth, metabolism and cell cycling. Our data reveal a role of CLUH in coupling growth signaling pathways and mitochondrial metabolism with cell cycle progression.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC labelling, cells were cultured in DMEM medium without glutamine, arginine and lysine (Silantes, # 280001200), supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine, 2% penicillin/ streptomycin, dialyzed FCS (Thermofisher, # 26400044), 28 g/mL L-arginine-HCl (Arg0 or Arg10) (Silantes, # 201604102) and 73 g/mL L-lysine-2HCl (Lys0 or Lys8) (Silantes, # 211604102) for three passages before collecting for immunoprecipitation. Cells were collected and lysed IP buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.4; 50 mM KCl; 0.1% Triton X-100 supplemented freshly with protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich)] for 30 min on ice after passing 3x through syringe (30G x 1/2”, B. Braun Sterican). For SILAC samples, the lysate was incubated with 25 U benzonase HC nuclease (Sigma-Aldrich) at 37 °C for 30 min before IP. Afterwards, lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 20,000 x g for 30 min and protein amount was determined by standard Bradford assay (Biorad). For each reaction, 400 μg of protein were diluted in 250 μl IP buffer and incubated for 3h in head-to-toe agitation at 4°C with 0.5 μg of the rabbit polyclonal rabbit anti-CLUH (Novus Biologicals, NB100-93306), and as control rabbit polyclonal anti-FLAG (#F7425 from Sigma-Aldrich). 20 μl of prewashed magnetic Dynabeads Protein G (Invitrogen) were added per reaction and incubated for 1 h in head-to-toe agitation at 4°C. Afterwards, beads were washed five times with IP buffer. Beads were resuspended in 50 µl of elution buffer 1 (2M urea, 50 mM triethylammoniumbicarbonate, 1 mM DTT, 5 ng/l trypsin) and incubated at RT for 30 min while shaking. Beads were centrifuged and supernatant transferred to a new tube. Beads were washed twice with elution buffer 2 (2M urea, 50 mM triethylammoniumbicarbonate, 5 mM chloroacetamide) and centrifuged. The eluates were combined. Next, proteins were digested with lysyl endopeptidase (Wako Pure Chemical Industries) and trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) with an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:75 at 37 °C for 16 h. Samples were diluted with 50 mM triethylammoniumbicarbonate to reach a final urea concentration of 2 M. Next day, samples were acidified with formic acid to stop enzymatic digestion, desalted on C-18 Stage Tips and analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm x 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: 7-23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 35.0 min, 23-32% solvent B within 5.0 min, 32-85% solvent B within 5.0 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 108 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 35,000. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 20.0 s.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the Uniprot HUMANc_UP000005640.fasta (downloaded at: 26.08.2020) database, including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR) respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. SILAC/dimethyl labeling quantification was used, and the re-quantify option was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cluh; spag5; mitochondria

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
University of Cologne

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Elena I. Rugarli
University of Cologne


