### Accession
PXD021923

### Title
Identification of proximal SUMO-dependent interactors using SUMO-ID

### Description
To study the function of SUMOylation and SUMO-SIM interactions for particular substrates poses several challenges. SUMOylation occurs transiently and often in a small percentage of the total copy numbers of a given substrate. Modified proteins can be readily deSUMOylated and SUMO can be recycled and passed to other substrates. SUMO-SIM interactions are also difficult to analyze due to their weak affinity (Kd 1-100 µM). To overcome these technical issues, we developed SUMO-ID, a new strategy based on Split-TurboID to identify SUMO- interactors of specific substrates dependent on SUMO conjugation or interaction. Here we present SUMO-ID, a technology that merges proximity biotinylation by TurboID and protein-fragment complementation to find SUMO-dependent interactors. , the high sensitivity of SUMO-ID allowed to identify novel interactors of SUMOylated SALL1, a less characterized SUMO substrate.

### Sample Protocol
For SALL1 SUMO-ID, a HEK293FT stable cell line expressing low levels of TRIPZ–MYC-CTurboID195–SUMO2nc (selected with puromycin, 1µg/ml) was transiently transfected with EFS-FLAG-NTurboID194–SALL1WT or EFS-FLAG-NTurboID194–SALL1ΔSUMO (a mutant carrying Lys>Arg mutations at K571, K592, K982, K1086). Three independent pulldown experiments (8 x 107 cells per replicate, 8 ml of lysis) were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Samples eluted from the NeutrAvidin beads were separated in SDS-PAGE (50% loaded) and stained with Sypro Ruby (Invitrogen) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Gel lanes were sliced into 3 pieces as accurately as possible to guarantee reproducibility. The slices were subsequently washed in milli-Q water. Reduction and alkylation were performed using dithiothreitol (10 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) at 56°C for 20 min, followed by iodoacetamide (50 mM chloroacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for another 20 minutes in the dark. Gel pieces were dried and incubated with trypsin (12.5 µg/ml in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 20 minutes on ice. After rehydration, the trypsin supernatant was discarded. Gel pieces were hydrated with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and incubated overnight at 37ºC. After digestion, acidic peptides were cleaned with TFA 0.1% and dried out in a RVC2 25 speedvac concentrator (Christ). Peptides were resuspended in 10 µl 0.1% formic acid (FA) and sonicated for 5 min prior to analysis. SALL1 samples peptides were eluted from stage-tips in a solvent composed of deionized water/acetonitrile/FA at a ratio of 50/50/0.1 v/v/v. Peptides were lyophilized and dissolved in solvent A composed of deionized water/FA at a ratio of 100/0.1 v/v and subsequently analyzed by on‐line C18 nano-HPLC MS/MS with a system consisting of an Ultimate3000nano gradient HPLC system (ThermoFisher), and an Exploris480 mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher). Fractions were loaded onto a cartridge precolumn (5 mm x ID 300 μm, C18 PepMap 100 A, 5 μm particles (ThermoFisher)), using solvent A at a flow of 10 μl/minute for 3 minutes and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (50 cm × ID 75 μm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm, 120 A; Dr. Maisch GmbH). The gradient was run from 2% to 40% solvent B (water/acetonitrile/FA at a ratio of 20/80/0.1 v/v/v) in 40 minutes. The nano-HPLC column was drawn to a tip of ∼10 μm and acted as the electrospray needle of the MS source. The temperature of the nano-HPLC column was set to 50°C (Sonation GmbH). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent MS/MS mode for a cycle time of 3 seconds, with a HCD collision energy at 28 V and recording of the MS2 spectrum in the orbitrap, with a quadrupole isolation width of 1.6 Da. In the master scan (MS1) the resolution was set to 60,000, and the scan range was set to 300-1600, at an Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target of 3,000,000 with automated fill time. A lock mass correction on the background ion m/z=445.12 was used. Precursors were dynamically excluded after n=1 with an exclusion duration of 30 seconds, and with a precursor range of 10 ppm. Charge states 2-6 were included. For MS2 the first mass was set to 120 Da, and the MS2 scan resolution was 30,000 at an AGC target of 75,000 with automated fill time.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files (A,B and C files  are NTbID-SALL1WT. D, E and F are NTbID-Sall1ΔSUMO) were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.17) 89 matching to a human proteome (Uniprot filtered reviewed H. sapiens proteome, UP000005640) with a maximum of 4 missed cleavages and with precursor and fragment tolerances of 20 ppm and 0.05 Da. Label-Free Quantification was enabled with default values except for a ratio count set to 1. Slices corresponding to same lanes were considered as fractions. Biotinylation on lysine and on protein N-term was included as a variable modification for SALL1 SUMO-ID data, and biotinylated peptides were set to be included for quantification. Matching between runs and matching unidentified features were enabled.Only proteins identified with at least one peptide at FDR<1% were considered for further analysis. Data was loaded onto Perseus platform (version 1.6.14) 90 and further processed (Log2 transformation, imputation, median normalization when needed). A t-test was applied in order to determine the statistical significance of the differences detected. Proteins detected with at least 2 peptides (except when otherwise specified) and in at least 2 of the 3 replicates were considered for the results.

### Publication Abstract
The fast dynamics and reversibility of posttranslational modifications by the ubiquitin family pose significant challenges for research. Here we present SUMO-ID, a technology that merges proximity biotinylation by TurboID and protein-fragment complementation to find SUMO-dependent interactors of proteins of interest. We develop an optimized split-TurboID version and show SUMO interaction-dependent labelling of proteins proximal to PML and RANGAP1. SUMO-dependent interactors of PML are involved in transcription, DNA damage, stress response and SUMO modification and are highly enriched in SUMO Interacting Motifs, but may only represent a subset of the total PML proximal proteome. Likewise, SUMO-ID also allow us to identify interactors of SUMOylated SALL1, a less characterized SUMO substrate. Furthermore, using TP53 as a substrate, we identify SUMO1, SUMO2 and Ubiquitin preferential interactors. Thus, SUMO-ID is a powerful tool that allows to study the consequences of SUMO-dependent interactions, and may further unravel the complexity of the ubiquitin code.

### Keywords
Human, Sumo, Turbo-id, Sumo-id, Sall1, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Cell and Chemical Biology at the Leiden University Medical Center
LUMC

### Submitter
Fredrik Trulsson

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred Vertegaal
Cell and Chemical Biology at the Leiden University Medical Center


