### Accession
PXD001664

### Title
Pichia fermentans proteomics -  Proteome changes during yeast-like and pseudohyphal growth in the biofilm-forming yeast Pichia fermentans

### Description
The Pichia fermentans strain DISAABA 726 is a biofilm-forming yeast that has been proposed as biocontrol agent to control brown rot (Monilia spp.)  on apple fruit. However, when inoculated on peach fruit, strain 726 shows yeast-like to  pseudohyphal morphological transition coupled to a pathogenic behaviour. To identify the proteins potentially involved in   the transition process, P. fermentans 726 proteome was analysed using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE) coupled with mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed then broken using a mortar/pestle/silica powder/liquid nitrogen system.Following resuspension in an extraction buffer(50 mM Tris, pH 8.8, 10% glycerol, 7M urea, 2M thiourea,  1% Triton X-100, 1%SB 3-10, 20 mM EDTA, 2% IPG buffer 3-10, 1mM PMSF) , the mixture was centrifuged at 15000rpm.  Interfering components were removed with 2D-Clean KitTM (GE-Healthcare). The pellet was suspended in 2 mM Tris, 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 4% v/w CHAPS, 1% IPG buffer 3-10 and subjected to reduction with 5 mM TBP for 1h followed by alkylation with 30 mM IAA for 3h in the dark.Following 2D gel electrophoresis, excised gels pieces were submitted to standard trypsinolysis protocol, and peptides extracted. The samples were loaded on a C18 column and separated using a linear gradient from 5 to 95% B for 37 min at 300 nL/min. A single run took 45 min, including the regeneration step in 100% buffer B and the equilibration step in 100% buffer A. Eluted peptides were analyzed online with an LTQ XL ion trap (Thermo Electron).

### Data Protocol
X! Tandem (version 2010.12.01.1; http://www.thegpm.org/tandem/) was the database search engine. Enzymatic cleavage was declared as a trypsin digestion with one possible miscleavage event. Cys carboxyamidomethylation and Met oxidation were set to static and possible modifications, respectively. Precursor mass and fragment mass tolerance were 1.0 and 0.5 Da, respectively. A refinement search was added with similar parameters, except that semitryptic peptide and possible N-terminal amino acid acetylation, dehydratation, or deamidation were searched.  Searches were performed using a Pichia genius database (Uniprot, 2010/09/15). Identified proteins were filtered and grouped using the X! Tandem pipeline (http://pappso.inra.fr/bioinfo/xtandempipeline/, version 3.1.4) according to the following specifications: (1) at least two different peptides with an E value of <0.01 and a protein E value (calculated as the product of unique peptide E values) of <10–4. In the case of identification with only two or three MS/MS spectra, the similarity between the experimental and theoretical MS/MS spectra was checked visually. In the absence of positive identification by mass matching, due to the fact that Pichia fermentans genome has not been sequenced, peptide sequences were determined by de novo interpretation of MS/MS spectra using PepNovo software (version 2010.02.25). Trypsin digestion, Cys carboxyamidomethylation, and Met oxidation were set to enzymatic cleavage, static, and possible modifications, respectively. Only sequences containing a tag of at least six amino acids with an associated probability greater than 0.9 were selected. Sequence similarity were searched in the Pichia genius database and in a Fungi kingdom database (Uniprot 2011.05.30) by Fasts software (version 3.4t26) using the MD20-MS matrix. Sequences corresponding to keratins or trypsin were first removed by querying a homemade contaminant database. Protein identifications were validated with a minimum of two independent peptides and an E value of <0.001. In all cases, the automatic de novo interpretation of MS/MS spectra was confirmed visually.

### Publication Abstract
The Pichia fermentans strain DISAABA 726 is a biofilm-forming yeast that has been proposed as biocontrol agent to control brown rot on apple. How ever, when inoculated on peach, strain 726 shows yeast-like to pseudohyphal transition coupled to a pathogenic behaviour. To identify the proteins potentially involved in such transition process, a comparative proteome analysis of P. fermentans 726 developed on peach (filamentous growth) vs apple (yeast-like growth) was carried out using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis coupled with mass spectrometry analysis. The proteome comparison was also performed between the two different cell morphologies induced in a liquid medium amended with urea (yeast-like cells) or methionine (filamentous cells) to exclude fruit tissue impact on the transition. Seventy-three protein spots showed significant variations in abundance (&#xb1;twofold, p &lt; 0.01, confidence intervals 99 %) between pseudohyphal vs yeast-like morphology produced on fruits. Among them, 30 proteins changed their levels when the two morphologies were developed in liquid medium. The identified proteins belong to several pathways and functions, such as glycolysis, amino acid synthesis, chaperones, and signalling transduction. The possible role of a group of proteins belonging to the carbohydrate pathway in the metabolic re-organisation during P. fermentans dimorphic transition is discussed.

### Keywords
Pichia fermentans, Lcmsms, 2d electrophoresis

### Affiliations
INRA
PAPPSO, MICALIS, INRA, France

### Submitter
Didier Chevret

### Lab Head
Dr Véronique Monnet
PAPPSO, MICALIS, INRA, France


