### Accession
PXD003145

### Title
Elf5-centered transcription factor hub controls trophoblast stem cell self-renewal and differentiation through stoichiometry-sensitive shifts in target gene networks

### Description
Elf5 is a transcription factor with pivotal roles in the trophoblast compartment where it reinforces a trophoblast stem cell (TSC)-specific transcriptional circuit. However, Elf5 is also present in differentiating trophoblast cells that have ceased to express other TSC genes such as Cdx2 and Eomes. In the current study we aimed to elucidate the context-dependent role of Elf5 at the interface between TSC self-renewal and onset of differentiation. We demonstrate that precise levels of Elf5 are critical for normal expansion of the TSC compartment and embryonic survival, as Elf5 overexpression triggers precocious trophoblast differentiation. Through integration of protein interactome, transcriptome and genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation data we reveal that this abundance-dependent function is mediated through a shift in preferred Elf5 binding partners; in TSCs, Elf5 interaction with Eomes recruits Tfap2c to triply occupied sites at TSC-specific genes driving their expression. By contrast, the Elf5 and Tfap2c interaction becomes predominant as their protein levels increase. This triggers binding to double and single occupancy sites that harbour the cognate Tfap2c motif, causing activation of the associated differentiation-promoting genes. These data place Elf5 at the centre of a stoichiometry-sensitive transcriptional network where it acts as molecular switch governing the balance between TSC proliferation and differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
co-IP of FLAG-tagged Elf5 interactors, reduction/carbamidomethylation, trypsin digestion, nanoLC-MS/MS on LTQ Orbitrap Velos

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectral data were processed using Proteome Discoverer, submitted to Mascot for database searching, and further filtered using Scaffold.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Elf5, Trophoblast stem cells, Differentiation

### Affiliations
Babraham Institute Cambridge UK
Babraham Institute

### Submitter
David Oxley

### Lab Head
Dr david oxley
Babraham Institute Cambridge UK


