### Accession
PXD012832

### Title
Analysis of bacterial Type VI Secretion Systems Stoichiometry by Targeted Proteomics

### Description
The bacterial Type VI secretion system (T6SS) is important for bacterial competition as well as virulence in many Gram-negative bacteria, including human pathogens. T6SS is evolutionarily related to the contractile phage tails and assembles as a cell envelope attached organelle. The assembly progresses from formation of a membrane complex to assembly of a baseplate followed by copolymerization of a sheath-tube. Rapid sheath contraction propels the rigid inner tube with associated effectors into target cells. To understand the assembly and stoichiometry of this nanomachine, we applied targeted proteomics to determine the protein abundances of the key T6SS components in three model bacteria. The overall stoichiometry of the components is conserved across species and it agrees with the expected composition of the nanomachine. However, there are also species-specific variations of certain components, which may explain the observed differences in the respective dynamics of T6SS. Furthermore, changes in the protein abundance during different growth conditions point to possible mechanisms of regulation of T6SS dynamics. The combination of live-cell imaging and mass-spectrometry analysis suggests that a baseplate component TssE of V. cholerae might undergo an active proteolysis, which together with an effector protein VasX could be involved in regulation of baseplate dynamics and thus T6SS activity.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cultures grown at desired OD600 was prepared as described for live-cell imaging. Pellets of ~109 cells were washed with PBS for 3 times at 4 °C and 8,000 g for 10 min in a table top centrifuge. Cell pellets were then dissolved in lysis buffer (1% Sodium-deoxycholate (SOC) in 100 mM Ammoniumbicarbonate) followed by the addition of 10 mM TCEP (tris‐2‐carboxyethyl‐phosphine). Samples were sonicated using VialTweeter (Hielscher), followed by an incubation at 95 °C for 10 min. Samples were then subjected to the sonication with 30 second on and 30 second off for 10 cycles using Bioruptor (Diagenode) until samples became clear. After the complete lysis, the protein content was measurement by BCA assay for each sample (Pierce, Fisher Scientific). 15 mM of Chloroacetamide (Sigma) was added to the sample and incubated at 25 °C for 30 min with gentle agitation. Lysyl Endopeptidase (Wako Diagnostics) was added to lysates of 100 μg of proteins in a final enzyme/protein ratio of 1: 200 (w/w). The mixtures were then incubated at 37 °C for 4 hours. Peptides were then subjected to the digestion by trypsin in a final enzyme/protein ratio of 1: 50 (w/w) for 12h at 37 °C. 5% of trifluoroacetic acid was added to a final concentration of 1%. The precipitations were removed by centrifugation while the supernatants were subjected to C18 solid phase extraction using Macrospin columns (Harvard Apparatus). The eluted peptides were dried at 55 °C under vacuum and then resuspended in a buffer containing 0.15% Formic acid and 2% acetonitrile. The resuspensions were fully dissolved by using 10 second of ultrasonication and 5 minutes incubation at 25 °C. Two C-terminally stable isotope-labeled proteotypic peptide mixtures (SpikeMix L, JPT peptides) were added to each sample. In general, for each sample, 15 μl of peptides from biological samples containing 10 ug of peptides were mixed with 5 μl of ~0.2 pmol of SpikeMix (the exact concentration of each isotope-labeled peptide was determined as described below). The list of peptides included in both SpikeMix L mixtures employed can be found in Table S6. The peptides in these mixtures were isotopically labeled at the C-terminus  with either heavy lysine or arginine acid. Both SpikeMix mixtures were dissolved in a buffer containing 20% acetonitrile and 0.1% of trifluoroacetic acid. The samples were finally subjected to SRM analysis in a TSQ Vantage mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Each sample was prepared and analyzed in biological triplicate. To avoid peptide losses through hydrophobic interactions with plastic surfaces, only low binding tips, tubes or glass vials were used when handling peptide standard solutions.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were searched against a decoy database using the MaxQuant software (Version 1.0.13.13) containing normal and reverse sequences of the predicted UniProt entries of Vibrio cholerae serotype O1 (strain ATCC 39315 / El Tor Inaba N16961), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (strain ATCC 15692 / DSM 22644 / CIP 104116 / JCM 14847 / LMG 12228 / 1C / PRS 101 / PAO1) and Acinetobacter baylyi (strain ATCC 33305 / BD413 / ADP1) (www.ebi.ac.uk, release date 2016/07/19), retention time standard peptides and commonly observed contaminants (in total 25934 sequences) generated using the SequenceReverser tool from the MaxQuant software (Version 1.0.13.13). The precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues unless followed by proline), 3 missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification and arginine (+10 Da), lysine (+8 Da) and oxidation (M) were set as a variable modification. The resulting msms.txt file was converted to a spectral library panel with the 5 to 10 best transitions for each peptide using an in-house software tool. This was then imported into the SpectroDive program (Version 8.0, Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) and a scheduled transition list for quantitative SRM analysis was generated. Here, all samples were analyzed on a TSQ-Vantage triple-quadrupole mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy-nLC (Thermo Fisher, Scientific). In each injection an equivalent of 1.5 μg of peptides including heavy peptide references was loaded onto a custom-made main column (Reprosil C18 AQ, 3 μm diameter, 100Å pore, 0.75 × 300 mm) and separated using the same grandient mentioned above. The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ion mode using ESI with a capillary temperature of 275 °C, a spray voltage of +2200 V. All of the measurements were performed in an unscheduled mode and a cycle time of 2 s. A 0.7 FWHM resolution window for both Q1 and Q3 was set for parent- and product-ion isolation. Fragmentation of parent-ions was performed in Q2 at 1.2 mTorr, using collision energies calculated with the SpectroDive software (version 8.0). Each condition was analyzed in biological triplicates. All raw-files were imported into SpectroDive for absolute peptide and protein quantification. Here, only elution groups with q-values <0.01 were considered correct calls and used for quantification. Median heavy/light ratios of triplicates were employed to determine protein levels. Significance of different peptide abundances was calculated using p-values from a student t-test analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The Type VI secretion system (T6SS) is important for bacterial competition as well as virulence in many Gram-negative bacteria and its dynamics and regulation varies significantly between species. To gain insights into the mechanisms regulating T6SS assembly, we apply targeted proteomics to determine the abundance of the key T6SS components in Vibrio cholerae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Acinetobacter baylyi. We show that while there are species specific exceptions, the abundance of most components is similar in all three bacteria and ranges from less than hundred to tens of thousands of copies per cell. The comparison of T6SS dynamics and protein abundance in V. cholerae grown under various conditions suggests that the critical component TssE and the secreted protein VasX are unstable and this diminishes T6SS assembly when protein synthesis is limited. Our quantitative analysis opens possibilities to build realistic models of T6SS assembly and to identify principles of T6SS regulation in various species.

### Keywords
Complex stoichiometry, Type vi secretion systems, Srm

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland


