### Accession
PXD008493

### Title
Assessment of sample preparation bias in mass spectrometry-based proteomics

### Description
For mass spectrometry-based proteomics, the selected sample preparation strategy is a key determinant for information that will be obtained. However, the corresponding selection is often not based on a fit-for-purpose evaluation. Here we report a comparison of in-gel (IGD), in-solution (ISD), on-filter (OFD), and on-pellet digestion (OPD) workflows on the basis of targeted (QconCAT-multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) method for mitochondrial proteins) and discovery proteomics (data dependent acquisition, DDA) analyses using three different human head and neck tissues (i.e. nasal polyps, parotid gland, and palatine tonsils). Our study reveals differences between the sample preparation methods, for example with respect to protein and peptide losses, quantification variability, protocol-induced methionine oxidation and asparagine/glutamine deamidation as well as identification of cysteine containing peptides. Moreover, none of the methods performed best for all types of tissues, which seemingly argues against the existence of a universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue samples. Three different otolaryngeal tissues (i.e. nasal polyps, parotid gland and palatine tonsil) were obtained separately from three patients who underwent head and neck surgery at the University Medical Center Groningen. Immediately after resection, tissues were sliced into pieces of approximately 30 mm3, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80 °C until further processing. Tissue homogenization & protein extraction. Tissue was homogenized using a CryoMill cryogenic grinder (Retsch) with four 5 mL stainless steel cryogrinding jars each containing two 5 mm stainless steel grinding balls. After pre-cooling the jars for 8 minutes at 5 Hz, four pieces of frozen tissue were placed in each jar and were pulverized following 9 cryogrinding cycles of 3 minutes at 25 Hz with 3 minutes intermediate cooling at 5 Hz. Pulverized tissue was transferred to pre-weighed 2 mL low protein binding microcentrifuge tubes (Eppendorf, #022431102), and an aliquot of 0.1% (w/v) RapiGest (Waters, #186001861) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) or sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)/urea lysis buffer (2% (w/v) SDS, 8 M urea and 100 mM β-mercapto-ethanol in 50 mM Tris/HCl buffer, pH 7.6) was added to get a final tissue concentration of 30 mg/mL. Next, vials were vortex-mixed for 5 minutes and subjected to 3 freeze/thaw cycles (frozen at -80 °C for 10 min & thawed at 30 °C for 10 min). Upon another 5 minutes of vortex-mixing and pelleting debris via centrifugation (10 min; 14,000  g), the final lysates were collected. Protein concentration was determined using the micro bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #23235) according to manufacturer’s instructions, and lysates were stored at -80 °C until analysis. Protocols for in-solution digestion (ISD), on-pellet digestion (OPD), in-gel digestion (IGD), on-filter digestion (OFD) and LC-MS(/MS) analyzis can be found in the online methods of the main manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. Raw data for the targeted proteomics analyses were processed using the Skyline software (version 3.5), and were furthermore analyzed using Microsoft Excel 2013 (more details on processing of targeted proteomics data have been published previously21). Shotgun proteomics data were processed using PEAKS Studio software (version 8.0)32, and peak lists were searched against the UniProtKB homo sapiens ‘UP000005640’ reference proteome (canonical; 70956 entries; downloaded on December 15, 2016) with trypsin selected as proteinase (≤ 3 missed cleavages), cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, methionine oxidation as variable oxidation, and allowing ≤ 6 modifications per peptide, ≤ 10.0 ppm precursor mass deviation (using monoisotopic mass), ≤ 0.2 Da fragment ion deviation, and ≤ 1.0% false discovery rates (FDR) for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs), proteins and peptides for the principal analyses. For evaluation of cysteine carbamidomethylation efficiency, this modification was set to variable; for assessment of protocol-induced asparagine and glutamine deamidation, the corresponding modification was added as variable modification; and any further modification assessment was based on PEAKS PTM (including all 485 built-in modifications) and SPIDER searches on spectra with de novo ALC (Average Local Confidence) scores greater than 15%. Label-free quantification using ion counts was performed on the basis of the results of the principal PEAKS search, as described above, followed by further filtering and processing of the data using an in-house developed script in R (version 3.4.0) and R Studio (version 1.0.143). With respect to peptide quantification, peptide areas were summed for peptides with corresponding primary amino acid sequence thus including all PTMs and charge states. For protein quantification, areas of peptides belonging to the same protein group were summed, yet only if they were unique for the corresponding protein group. For both peptide and protein quantification, DDA data was scaled by median scale normalization. Bioinformatics analysis. Data analysis was performed using R, R studio, Microsoft Excel, and GraphPad Prism (version 5.00). For assessment of (relative) recovery and precision, peptides and proteins that were measured in all 20 samples originating from the same tissue (four sample preparation approaches, five replicates per approach) were included, and average levels as well as coefficients of variation (CV) were calculated for every approach, of which the latter values were used for evaluating the precision of the sample preparation method. For every peptide/protein, the highest average quantity was set to 100% and the other three average quantities were related to this maximum value thereby obtaining relative peptide/protein levels which were used for evaluation of the recovery of the sample preparation approaches. Assessment of the discovery potential for each of the sample preparation methods was based on comparing the amounts of proteins and peptides identified (in three out of five, four out of five, and five out of five replicates) per method as well as based on comparisons of the trypsin cleavage efficiencies, the fractions of cysteine-containing peptides (relative to the total number of peptides), methionine oxidized peptides (relative to the total number of methionine containing peptides), and asparagine and/or glutamine deamidated peptides (relative to the total number of asparagine and/or glutamine containing peptides) for each method. Furthermore, relevant modifications as pointed out by the PEAKS PTM and SPIDER searches were included as well. Comparisons of the selected physicochemical properties (e.g. molecular weight (MW), isoelectric point (pI), and hydrophobicity, expressed as grand average of hydropathy (GRAVY) scores calculated using the method of Kyte & Doolittle27) of the proteins and peptides identified in at least three out of five replicates per sample preparation method were enabled by using the R “Peptides” package (version 2.2, 2017-06-05). For visualization of the corresponding data, density plots were obtained using the R “ggplot2” package (version 2.2.1.9000, 2016-12-30).

### Publication Abstract
For mass spectrometry-based proteomics, the selected sample preparation strategy is a key determinant for information that will be obtained. However, the corresponding selection is often not based on a fit-for-purpose evaluation. Here we report a comparison of in-gel (IGD), in-solution (ISD), on-filter (OFD), and on-pellet digestion (OPD) workflows on the basis of targeted (QconCAT-multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) method for mitochondrial proteins) and discovery proteomics (data-dependent acquisition, DDA) analyses using three different human head and neck tissues (i.e., nasal polyps, parotid gland, and palatine tonsils). Our study reveals differences between the sample preparation methods, for example, with respect to protein and peptide losses, quantification variability, protocol-induced methionine oxidation, and asparagine/glutamine deamidation as well as identification of cysteine-containing peptides. However, none of the methods performed best for all types of tissues, which argues against the existence of a universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis.

### Keywords
Palatine tonsils, Sample preparation, Parotid gland, Proteomics, Nasal polyps

### Affiliations
Faculty of Science and Engineering, Groningen Research Institute of Pharmacy, Analytical Biochemistry, University of Groningen, 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands
University of Groningen Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences Department of Pharmacy Analytical Biochemistry  Building 3226, Room 6.9 Antonius Deusinglaan 1 9713 AV Groningen Internal Zip Code XB20 P.O. Box 196 9700 AD Groningen The Netherlands  Telephone: +31-(0)50-363 3341 Fax: +31 (0)50 363 7582 Mobile: +31 (0)6 2459 7203 Email: p.l.horvatovich@rug.nl Homepage: www.biomac.nl

### Submitter
Horvatovich Péter

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Horvatovich
University of Groningen Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences Department of Pharmacy Analytical Biochemistry  Building 3226, Room 6.9 Antonius Deusinglaan 1 9713 AV Groningen Internal Zip Code XB20 P.O. Box 196 9700 AD Groningen The Netherlands  Telephone: +31-(0)50-363 3341 Fax: +31 (0)50 363 7582 Mobile: +31 (0)6 2459 7203 Email: p.l.horvatovich@rug.nl Homepage: www.biomac.nl


