### Accession
PXD040170

### Title
Lung adenocarcinoma cell lines under HSP90 inhibitors and the proteomic technique iTRAQ

### Description
Protein profiling underlying the therapeutic efficacy of HSP90 inhibitors in human lung adenocarcinoma cell lines

### Sample Protocol
Eleven human lung adenocarcinoma cell lines (HCC827, H1650, H1975, A549, H2009, H358, H3122, H2228, CALU3, H1437, and H1781) were analyzed. For each cell line, the proteomic profiles of five conditions (4 HSP90 inhibitors: 17-AAG, IPI-540, STA9090 and AUY-922, and 2 small interfering RNAs (siRNAs): HSP90 alpha+beta siRNAs) versus untreated cells were identified by iTRAQ labelling and nano LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
8-plex iTRAQ labelling was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Each protein digestion was reconstituted and subsequently labeled with an isobaric amine-reactive tag as follows: untreated cells, 113; 17-AAG treatment, 114; treatment IPI-504, 115; STA-9090 treatment, 116; treatment with AUY-922, 117; genetic silencing of HSP90 alpha+beta, 121. a total of 13 increasing concentrations (50, 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, 600, 700, 800 and 900 mM and 1, 1.5 and 2 M) of ammonium formate and MCX Oasis columns (Waters), the peptides were prefractionated. Nanoliquid chromatography (nano LC1000, Thermo Scientific) was used to separate the peptides contained in each fraction, while the analysis was carried out by a nanoelectrospray ionization system (Proxeon Biosistems) connected to a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were identified from MS/MS spectra using the Sequest HT search engine and Percolator, embedded into Proteome Discovere 1.4 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and confronted with footprint patterns of the UniProt database for Homo Sapiens.

### Publication Abstract
The use of 90 kDa heat shock protein (HSP90) inhibition as a therapy in lung adenocarcinoma remains limited due to moderate drug efficacy, the emergence of drug resistance, and early tumor recurrence. The main objective of this research is to maximize treatment efficacy in lung adenocarcinoma by identifying key proteins underlying HSP90 inhibition according to molecular background, and to search for potential biomarkers of response to this therapeutic strategy. Inhibition of the HSP90 chaperone was evaluated in different lung adenocarcinoma cell lines representing the most relevant molecular alterations (EGFR mutations, KRAS mutations, or EML4-ALK translocation) and wild-type genes found in each tumor subtype. The proteomic technique iTRAQ was used to identify proteomic profiles and determine which biological pathways are involved in the response to HSP90 inhibition in lung adenocarcinoma. We corroborated the greater efficacy of HSP90 inhibition in EGFR mutated or EML4-ALK translocated cell lines. We identified proteins specifically and significantly deregulated after HSP90 inhibition for each molecular alteration. Two proteins, ADI1 and RRP1, showed independently deregulated molecular patterns. Functional annotation of the altered proteins suggested that apoptosis was the only pathway affected by HSP90 inhibition across all molecular subgroups. The expression of ADI1 and RRP1 could be used to monitor the correct inhibition of HSP90 in lung adenocarcinoma. In addition, proteins such as ASS1, ITCH, or UBE2L3 involved in pathways related to the inhibition of a particular molecular background could be used as potential response biomarkers, thereby improving the efficacy of this therapeutic approach to combat lung adenocarcinoma.

### Keywords
Hsp90 inhibitors, Nano lc-ms/ms analysis, Human lung adenocarcinoma cell line, Itraq labelling

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedicine of Seville (IBIS)

### Submitter
Sonia Molina-Pinelo

### Lab Head
Dr Sonia Molina-Pinelo
Institute of Biomedicine of Seville (IBIS)


