### Accession
PXD004340

### Title
Profiling of spreading- coupled protein tyrosine phosphorylation

### Description
Protein tyrosine phosphorylation is an important mechanism that regulates cytoskeleton reorganization and cell spreading of migratory cells. A number of cytoskeletal proteins are known to be tyrosine phosphorylated (pY) in different cellular processes. However, the profile of pY proteins during different stages of cell spreading has not been available.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoaffinity purification of pY proteins Precleared ECV 304 whole cell lysate (800 µg) in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM EDTA, 1%NP40, 1% Sodium deoxycholate, 0.2% SDS) were incubated with specific anti-pY antibody (1:100) overnight at 4°C followed by incubation for 2 h with Protein-A Sepharose beads at room temperature. The bound pY proteins were released from the protein A Sepharose beads by boiling with SDS-PAGE loading buffer. The pY proteins were then separated by SDS-PAGE. In-Gel Digestion The gel containing protein samples were cut into 2-3mm2 pieces and destained in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% acetonitrile buffer. The samples were incubated with 10 mM DTT at 56°C for 1 h and 55 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 45 min, and then digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, Madison, WI) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37°C overnight. The tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel with a buffer containing 5% trifluoroacetic acid and 50% acetonitirile. The liquid was freeze-dried with SpeedVac, and peptides were resolubilised in 0.1% formic acid and filtered with 0.45μm centrifugal filters.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis The database search was performed in the MaxQuant environment (version 1.5.3.30). MS/MS spectra were searched using Andromeda against the decoy UniProt human proteome database, which contains forward and reverse sequences and is concatenated with 262 frequently observed contaminants including human keratins, bovine serum proteins, and proteases. The mass tolerances for the database search were set at 4.5 ppm and 0.5 Da for precursor ions and fragment ions, respectively. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues were included as the variable modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was included as the fixed modification. The maximal number of miscleavage was set at 2 and the minimum peptide length was set at 7 amino acids. The false discovery rates for both peptide and protein identifications were set at 1%. Bioinformatic analysis All bioinformatic and statistical analyses were performed using Perseus (version 1.5.2.6) except the IPA analysis, which was performed using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software and Ingenuity Knowledge Database as previously described. For the label free quantitation, the pY level of the high abundance pY protein FAK was probed by western-blotting and used as the internal standard for the data normalization.

### Publication Abstract
Protein tyrosine phosphorylation is an important mechanism that regulates cytoskeleton reorganization and cell spreading of migratory cells. A number of cytoskeletal proteins are known to be tyrosine phosphorylated (pY) in different cellular processes. However, the profile of pY proteins during different stages of cell spreading has not been available. Using immunoafffinity enrichment of pY proteins coupled with label free quantitative proteomics, we quantitatively identified 447 pY proteins in the migratory ECV-304 cells at the early spreading (adhesion) and the active spreading stages. We found that pY levels of the majority of the quantified proteins were significantly increased in the active spreading stage compared with the early spreading stage, suggesting that active cell spreading is concomitant with extra tyrosine phosphorylation. The major categories of proteins impacted by tyrosine phosphorylation are involved in cytoskeleton and focal adhesion regulation, protein translation and degradation. Our findings, for the first time, dissect the cell spreading-specific pY signals from the adhesion induced pY signals, and provide a valuable resource for the future mechanistic research regarding the regulation of cell spreading.

### Keywords
Spreading, Ecv304, Fibronectin

### Affiliations
Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
IGDB

### Submitter
yajun xie

### Lab Head
Dr Yingchun Wang
Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences


