### Accession
PXD003423

### Title
EGF-dependent ubiquitinome, phosphorylation and interactome analysis in control and CYLD-deficient cells

### Description
The goal of the present project was to investigate the EGF-dependent ubiquitination changes occurring in HeLa cells upon a CYLD deficiency. We applied SILAC-based quantitative mass spectrometry proteomics together with genetic engineering and biochemical approaches, in order to enrich the ubiquitinated proteins of the control and silenced cells in response to the growth factor. In order to get a deeper insight of the obtained results, we subsequently combined the enrichment of CYLD protein through immunoprecipitation with SILAC-based proteomics. This allowed us to decipher a specific tyrosine phosphorylation of CYLD that responds to the treatment with EGF and, therefore, we next aimed to analyse the ability of this modification to recruit potential interaction partners. We thus performed a peptide pull-down assay that uncovered a set of proteins specifically associated to the phosphorylated tyrosine and helped to uncover an unexpected, previously unreported role for this deubiquitinase.

### Sample Protocol
For the analysis of the ubiquitinome, four triple SILAC experiments were carried out in parallel, in order to study the changes in response to EGF in control and CYLD-deficient HeLa cells. Cells were left starved or stimulated for 5 minutes with the growth factor, then lysed in a 50mM phosphate buffer pH8.0 containing 6M Guanidine-HCl and 500mM NaCl. Ubiquitinated proteins were firstly enriched using Ni-NTA beads and subsequently through immunoprecipitation using FLAG antibody –coupled beads. Ubiquitinated proteins were eluted with TFA, reduced, alkylated and subjected to in solution digestion using LysC and Trypsin. The resulting peptides were fractionated through a pH gradient and purified prior to LC-MS/MS analysis using a Qexactive instrument. For immunoprecipitation and peptide pull-down of CYLD, triple SILAC strategies were also applied. Cells were lysed in ice-cold modified RIPA buffer (50mM Tris/HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1% (v/v) NP-40, 0.25% Sodium Deoxycholate) containing proteases and phosphatases inhibitors. Lysates were cleared and protein extracts from the differently labeled conditions were quantified. CYLD antibody coupled to protein A sepharose beads was used for the protein immunoprecipitation on lysates. For the peptide pull-down experiments, streptavidin beads loaded with biotinylated peptides were incubated with the corresponding SILAC-labeled lysates. In both cases, bead-bound proteins were resolved on SDS-PAGE and in-gel digested with trypsin. The resulting peptides were extracted and purified, then analyzed through LC-MS/MS. The immunoprecipitation assay was run on a Qexactive instrument, while an LTQ Orbitrap Velos was used for the analysis of peptide pull-down experiments.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw MS data was processed using the MaxQuant 1.3.0.5 software and subsequent statistical analysis was performed using Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Cylindromatosis tumor suppressor protein (CYLD) is a deubiquitinase, best known as an essential negative regulator of the NFkB pathway. Previous studies have suggested an involvement of CYLD in epidermal growth factor (EGF)-dependent signal transduction as well, as it was found enriched within the tyrosine-phosphorylated complexes in cells stimulated with the growth factor. EGF receptor (EGFR) signaling participates in central cellular processes and its tight regulation, partly through ubiquitination cascades, is decisive for a balanced cellular homeostasis. Here, using a combination of mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic approaches with biochemical and immunofluorescence strategies, we demonstrate the involvement of CYLD in the regulation of the ubiquitination events triggered by EGF. Our data show that CYLD regulates the magnitude of ubiquitination of several major effectors of the EGFR pathway by assisting the recruitment of the ubiquitin ligase Cbl-b to the activated EGFR complex. Notably, CYLD facilitates the interaction of EGFR with Cbl-b through its Tyr15 phosphorylation in response to EGF, which leads to fine-tuning of the receptor's ubiquitination and subsequent degradation. This represents a previously uncharacterized strategy exerted by this deubiquitinase and tumors suppressor for the negative regulation of a tumorigenic signaling pathway.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Egf, Cyld

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHERN DENMARK

### Submitter
VIRGINIA Sanchez-Quiles

### Lab Head
Dr BLAGOY BLAGOEV
UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHERN DENMARK


