### Accession
PXD008466

### Title
Evolutionary insights into Trm112-methytransferase holoenzymes involved in translation between archaea and eukaryotes

### Description
To clarify the function of Trm112 in archaea, we have characterized structurally and functionally its interaction network using Haloferax volcanii as model system. This led us to unravel that methyltransferases are also privileged Trm112 partners in archaea and that this Trm112 network is much more complex than anticipated from eukaryotic studies.

### Sample Protocol
To identify HvoTrm112 protein partners, we expressed a Trm112-Flag protein from a plasmid and performed co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) under cross-linking conditions. After denaturation at 100°C for 10 min in loading buffer (2% SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 10% glycerol, 62.5 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8), 20 µg of proteins from each sample were concentrated in one band with a 4% stacking SDS-PAGE. The gels were fixed with 45% methanol/3% acetic acid and stained with colloidal Silver Blue. Each band was excised and cut in four pieces prior to in-gel digestion.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted into calibrated peak lists .mgf using ProteinPilot™ software (v. 5.0) be-fore being subjected to a search against a concatenated target-decoy database including both for-ward (target) and reversed (decoy) UniProtKB Haloferax volcanii sequences (4 February 2016, 9858 total entries) and common contaminants using Mascot search algorithm (v.2.5.1). Searches were performed with a mass measurement tolerance of 15 ppm for precursor ions and 0.05 Da for fragment ions. Oxidation of methionine residues, carbamidomethylation as well as propio-namidation of cysteine residues were searched as variable modifications. Full trypsic peptides only were searched with a maximum of one missed cleavage allowed. Proline software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr; (1)) was used to validate the identification results. For each sam-ple, Peptide Spectrum Matches were filtered out if they did not meet following criteria: pretty rank ≤ 1, Mascot ion score ≥ 25, minimum peptide length of 7 residues and a maximum false discovery rate of 1 % on the adjusted e-value. Then, proteins were filtered out in order to obtain a final list with a maximum false discovery rate of 1 % based on the modified MudPit score.

### Publication Abstract
Protein synthesis is a complex and highly coordinated process requiring many different protein factors as well as various types of nucleic acids. All translation machinery components require multiple maturation events to be functional. These include post-transcriptional and post-translational modification steps and methylations are the most frequent among these events. In eukaryotes, Trm112, a small protein (COG2835) conserved in all three domains of life, interacts and activates four methyltransferases (Bud23, Trm9, Trm11 and Mtq2) that target different components of the translation machinery (rRNA, tRNAs, release factors). To clarify the function of Trm112 in archaea, we have characterized functionally and structurally its interaction network using Haloferax volcanii as model system. This led us to unravel that methyltransferases are also privileged Trm112 partners in archaea and that this Trm112 network is much more complex than anticipated from eukaryotic studies. Interestingly, among the identified enzymes, some are functionally orthologous to eukaryotic Trm112 partners, emphasizing again the similarity between eukaryotic and archaeal translation machineries. Other partners display some similarities with bacterial methyltransferases, suggesting that Trm112 is a general partner for methyltransferases in all living organisms.

### Keywords
Methyltransferases, Interaction network, Trm112

### Affiliations
UMR7178 IPHC-DSA-LSMBO
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique (LSMBO), Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IPHC UMR 7178, F-67000 Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Leslie MULLER

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah CIANFERANI
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique (LSMBO), Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IPHC UMR 7178, F-67000 Strasbourg, France


