### Accession
PXD041582

### Title
Structural Premise of Selective Deubiquitinase USP30 Inhibition by Small-Molecule Benzosulfonamides

### Description
Dampening functional levels of the mitochondrial deubiquitylating enzyme USP30 has been suggested as an effective therapeutic strategy against neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson’s Disease. USP30 inhibition may counteract the deleterious effects of impaired turnover of damaged mitochondria which is inherent to both familial and sporadic forms of the disease. Small-molecule inhibitors targeting USP30 are currently in development, but little is known about their precise nature of binding to the protein. We have integrated biochemical and structural approaches to gain novel mechanistic insights into USP30 inhibition by a small-molecule benzosulfonamide containing compound, 39. Activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) mass spectrometry confirmed target engagement, the high selectivity, and potency of 39 for USP30 against 49 other deubiquitylating enzymes in a neuroblastoma cell line. In vitro characterization of 39 enzyme kinetics infers slow and tight binding behavior, which is comparable with features of covalent modification of USP30. Finally, we blended hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry and computational docking to elucidate the molecular architecture and geometry of USP30 complex formation with 39, identifying structural rearrangements at the cleft of the USP30 thumb and palm subdomains. These studies suggest that 39 binds to the thumb-palm cleft that guides the ubiquitin C-terminus into the active site, thereby preventing ubiquitin binding and isopeptide bond cleavage, and confirming its importance in the inhibitory process. Our data will pave the way for the design and development of next-generation inhibitors targeting USP30 and associated deubiquitinylases.

### Sample Protocol
HDX sample preparation  USP30 was incubated in either the presence (holo-USP30) or absence (apo-USP30) of a two-fold molar excess of 39, ensuring that all complexes were fully formed and maintained over the course of the labeling reaction. Before the HDX-MS experiments, labelling (L), equilibration (E) and quench (Q) buffers were freshly prepared with D2O or H2O, respectively (Buffers E and L: 50 mM HEPES, 400 mM NaCl, 2.0 mM TCEP, 10% glycerol (v/v) at pH 7.2; Buffer Q: 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer, 2.0 M guanidine hydrochloride at pH 2.30). The USP30 protein sample was supplied at 66 µM and was diluted in Buffer E to a final concentration of 11 µM, which equates to 16 pmol injected onto the pepsin column. Buffers E and L were equilibrated at 20°C, while the protein samples and Buffer Q were equilibrated at 0°C.  HDX cyclic ion mobility mass spectrometry  HDX-MS experiments were carried out on a fully automated HDX-2 system (supplied by Waters, Milford USA) previously described by Brown and Wilson.44 The exchange reaction was initiated by diluting 3.5 µL protein sample with a concentration of 11 µM into 56.5 µL Buffer E for reference, or Buffer L for D2O labeling, and incubated for several time points (0, 30, 60, 600 and 3600 sec). A D2O/H2O ratio in excess of 90% guaranteed that the kinetics favored unidirectional exchange. Subsequently, the exchange reaction was stopped by mixing 50 µL of sample with 50 µL pre-cooled Buffer Q. Next, 50 µL of quenched sample was subjected to a temperature-controlled chromatography system (HDX M-Class UPLC, Waters). The protein was digested online by a pepsin column (Enzymate BEH pepsin column; 2.1 x 30 mm; Waters). Eluting peptides were trapped and washed on a C18 pre–column (C18 1.7 µM VanGuard 2.1 x 5 mm pre-column; Waters) at 100 µL/min for 3 min and separated on a reversed phase column (C18 1.7 µM Acquity UPLC 1 x 100 mm reverse phased column; Waters) with a linear gradient ranging from 5% ACN to 40% ACN plus 0.2% FA at 40 µL/min in 8 min, followed by a rapid rise to 99% ACN holding for 0.3 min. ACN concentration was rapidly reduced to 5% and held there for 0.2 min, followed by a linear gradient back to 99% over 0.7 min, and holding that concentration for 0.1 min. Next, C18 columns were equilibrated with 95% H2O plus 0.2% FA for 4 min. The reversed-phase chromatographic system was kept at approximately 0°C to reduce back-exchange. Peptides eluting from reversed phase column were measured with a SELECT SERIES Cyclic IMS mass spectrometer (Waters, Wilmslow UK) in HDMSE mode (m/z 50-2000). This mode utilises ion mobility (IM) separation for orthogonal separation of the peptides (LC, IM, m/z). The mass spectrometer was fitted with an electrospray source equipped with additional independent LockSpray probe (Leu-enkephalin LockMass solution was used, m/z 556.2771).

### Data Protocol
All MS-analyses were performed in triplicate for each time point and condition. Protein Lynx Global Server (PLGS) 3.0 (Waters Corporation) was used for peptide identifications. A peptic peptide sequence coverage map was generated in DynamX 3.0 HDX software (Waters Corporation). Peptide-level deuterium uptake data was also visualized in DynamX (Figure S7) and reported as relative deuterium exchange levels expressed in either mass unit or fractional exchange. The latter was calculated by dividing the experimentally measured uptake by the theoretically maximum number of exchangeable backbone amide hydrogens that could be replaced within each peptide. This number corresponds to the number of amino acid residues present in the peptide minus the number of proline residues and minus one for the N-terminus that back exchanges too rapidly to be measured by MS.31 A single charge state was considered per peptide. Data were also verified and visualized in MEMHDX.45

### Publication Abstract
Dampening functional levels of the mitochondrial deubiquitylating enzyme Ubiquitin-specific protease 30 (USP30) has been suggested as an effective therapeutic strategy against neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson's Disease. USP30 inhibition may counteract the deleterious effects of impaired turnover of damaged mitochondria, which is inherent to both familial and sporadic forms of the disease. Small-molecule inhibitors targeting USP30 are currently in development, but little is known about their precise nature of binding to the protein. We have integrated biochemical and structural approaches to gain novel mechanistic insights into USP30 inhibition by a small-molecule benzosulfonamide-containing compound, USP30<sub>inh</sub>. Activity-based protein profiling mass spectrometry confirmed target engagement, high selectivity, and potency of USP30<sub>inh</sub> for USP30 against 49 other deubiquitylating enzymes in a neuroblastoma cell line. In&#xa0;vitro characterization of USP30<sub>inh</sub> enzyme kinetics inferred slow and tight binding behavior, which is comparable with features of covalent modification of USP30. Finally, we blended hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry and computational docking to elucidate the molecular architecture and geometry of USP30 complex formation with USP30<sub>inh</sub>, identifying structural rearrangements at the cleft of the USP30 thumb and palm subdomains. These studies suggest that USP30<sub>inh</sub> binds to this thumb-palm cleft, which guides the ubiquitin C terminus into the active site, thereby preventing ubiquitin binding and isopeptide bond cleavage, and confirming its importance in the inhibitory process. Our data will pave the way for the design and development of next-generation inhibitors targeting USP30 and associated deubiquitinylases.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Usp30, Abpp-ms

### Affiliations
Target Discovery Institute, University of Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Darragh O'Brien

### Lab Head
Dr Darragh O'Brien
University of Oxford


