### Accession
PXD008831

### Title
DNA replication regulates SPRTN- and Proteasome-dependent DPC proteolysis

### Description
DNA-protein crosslinks (DPCs) are bulky DNA lesions that interfere with DNA   metabolism and therefore threaten genomic integrity. Recent studies   implicate the metalloprotease SPRTN in S-phase removal of DPCs, but how   SPRTN activity is coupled to DNA replication is unknown. Using Xenopus egg   extracts that recapitulate replication-coupled DPC proteolysis, we show   that DPC degradation not only depends on SPRTN but also the proteasome,   which act as independent DPC proteases. Proteasome recruitment requires DPC   polyubiquitylation, which is triggered by single-stranded DNA, a byproduct   of DNA replication. In contrast, SPRTN-mediated DPC degradation is   independent of DPC polyubiquitylation but requires polymerase extension of   a nascent strand to the lesion. Thus, SPRTN and proteasome activities are   coupled to DNA replication by distinct mechanisms that together promote   replication across immovable protein barriers.

### Sample Protocol
Plasmid DNA was replicated in egg extracts at 5 ng/uL (final   concentration). At the indicated time points, 8 µL of the reaction were   withdrawn and plasmids and associated proteins were recovered by plasmid   pull down using LacI coated beads (Budzowska et al. 2015). After 30 min   incubation at 4°C, samples were washed twice in 10 mM Hepes pH 7.7, 50 mM   KCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 0.03% Tween 20, and once in 10 mM Hepes pH 7.7, 50 mM   KCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2. Samples were washed one additional time in 50 µL of 10   mM Hepes pH 7.7, 50 mM KCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2 and transferred to a new tube to   remove residual detergent. Beads were dried out and resuspended in 50 µL   denaturation buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM Tris pH 8.0). Cysteines were reduced   (1 mM DTT, 15 minutes at RT) and alkylated (5 mM iodoacetamide, 45 min at   RT). Proteins were digested and eluted from beads with 1.5 µg LysC (Sigma)   for 2.5 hr at RT. Eluted samples were transferred to a new tube and diluted   1:4 with ABC (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate). 2.5 µg trypsin was added an   incubated 16 hours at 30°C. NaCl was added to 400 mM final concentration   and peptides were acidified and purified by stage tipping on C18 material.   Samples were analyzed by label free MS as previously described (Räschle et   al. 2015). Four parallel reactions were performed for each conditions.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.5.2) using a   label-free algorithm. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins and   peptides and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids were required. MS/MS   spectra were searched against a non-redundant Xenopus database (database   available on request). For the Andromeda search trypsin allowing for   cleavage N-terminal to proline was chosen as enzyme specificity. Cysteine   carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification, while protein   N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were selected as variable   modifications. Maximally two missed cleavages were allowed. Initial mass   deviation of precursor ion was up to 7 ppm, mass deviation for fragment   ions was 0.5 Dalton. Protein identification required one unique peptide to   the protein group. Quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the built   in label free quantification algorithm. “Match between run” was used to   transfer identities.

### Publication Abstract
DNA-protein crosslinks (DPCs) are bulky lesions that&#xa0;interfere with DNA metabolism and therefore threaten genomic integrity. Recent studies implicate the metalloprotease SPRTN in S phase removal of DPCs, but how SPRTN is targeted to DPCs during DNA replication is unknown. Using Xenopus egg extracts that recapitulate replication-coupled DPC proteolysis, we show that DPCs can be degraded by SPRTN or the proteasome, which act as independent DPC proteases. Proteasome recruitment requires DPC polyubiquitylation, which is partially dependent on the ubiquitin ligase activity of TRAIP. In contrast, SPRTN-mediated DPC degradation does not require DPC polyubiquitylation but instead depends on nascent strand extension to within a few nucleotides of the lesion, implying that polymerase stalling at the DPC activates SPRTN on both leading and lagging strand templates. Our results demonstrate that SPRTN and proteasome activities are coupled to DNA replication by distinct mechanisms that promote replication across immovable protein barriers.

### Keywords
Xenopus egg extract, Dna replication, Pp-ms, Dna repair, Dpc repair, Plasmid   pull-down

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


