### Accession
PXD013831

### Title
the landscape of phosphorylated HLA-I ligands

### Description
The identification and prediction of HLA-I–peptide interactions play an important role in our understanding of antigen recognition in infected or malignant cells. In cancer, non-self HLA-I ligands can arise from many different alterations, including non-synonymous mutations, gene fusion, cancer-specific alternative mRNA splicing or aberrant post-translational modifications. In this study, we collected in-depth phosphorylated HLA-I peptidomics data (1,920 unique phosphorylated peptides) from several studies covering 67 HLA-I alleles and expanded our motif deconvolution tool to identify precise binding motifs of phosphorylated HLA-I ligands for several alleles. In addition to the previously observed preferences for phosphorylation at P4, for proline next to the phosphosite and for arginine at P1, we could detect a clear enrichment of phosphorylated peptides among HLA-C ligands and among longer peptides. Binding assays were used to validate and interpret these observations. We then used these data to develop the first predictor of HLA-I– phosphorylated peptide interactions and demonstrated that combining phosphorylated and unmodified HLA-I ligands in the training of the predictor led to highest accuracy.

### Sample Protocol
Several novel HLA-I peptidomics samples, 3993, 4052-BA, 3989-HT, OE37-1N, 0V2W-1P and OXVD-09, were measured using our previously described protocol and multiple MS datasets from published HLA peptidomics studies were collected  (see Supplementary Data 1, 2 and 3). In addition, we performed reanalysis of 85 MS raw files of 17 monoallelic peptidomics samples available at PRIDE Project PXD009531.

### Data Protocol
We employed the MaxQuant platform version 1.5.5.1 to search the MS peak lists against a fasta file containing the human UniProt database containing 42,170 entries including isoforms (March 2017) and a list of 247 frequently observed contaminants. Peptides with a length between 8 and 15 amino acids were allowed. The second peptide identification option in Andromeda was enabled. The enzyme specificity was set as unspecific and FDR of 5% was required for peptides and no protein FDR was set. The initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion was set to 6 ppm and the maximum fragment mass deviation was set to 20 ppm. Methionine oxidation (15.994915 Da), N-terminal acetylation (42.010565 Da) and phosphorylation (79.9663304 Da) on serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. We filtered the list of identified phosphorylated HLA-I peptides listed in the MaxQuant MSMS output table by restricting the identification score >70, delta score >10, and the localization probabilities to >0.75. Only unique modified and unmodified sequences were further analyzed (see Supplementary Data 2 for all identified phosphorylated HLA-I ligands).

### Publication Abstract
The presentation of peptides on class I human leukocyte antigen (HLA-I) molecules plays a central role in immune recognition of infected or malignant cells. In cancer, non-self HLA-I ligands can arise from many different alterations, including non-synonymous mutations, gene fusion, cancer-specific alternative mRNA splicing or aberrant post-translational modifications. Identifying HLA-I ligands remains a challenging task that requires either heavy experimental work for <i>in vivo</i> identification or optimized bioinformatics tools for accurate predictions. To date, no HLA-I ligand predictor includes post-translational modifications. To fill this gap, we curated phosphorylated HLA-I ligands from several immunopeptidomics studies (including six newly measured samples) covering 72 HLA-I alleles and retrieved a total of 2,066 unique phosphorylated peptides. We then expanded our motif deconvolution tool to identify precise binding motifs of phosphorylated HLA-I ligands. Our results reveal a clear enrichment of phosphorylated peptides among HLA-C ligands and demonstrate a prevalent role of both HLA-I motifs and kinase motifs on the presentation of phosphorylated peptides. These data further enabled us to develop and validate the first predictor of interactions between HLA-I molecules and phosphorylated peptides.

### Keywords
Hla binding peptides, Immunopeptidomics, Phosphorylations

### Affiliations
Department of oncology UNIL CHUV Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Lausanne
UNIL/CHUV

### Submitter
Michal Bassani-Sternberg

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Bassani-Sternberg
Department of oncology UNIL CHUV Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Lausanne


