### Accession
PXD014943

### Title
113 DLBCL SWATH maps by PCT-SWATH

### Description
Rapid proteotyping of 41 FFPE DLBCL tumor tissues with 2-3 biological replicates using pressure-cycling technology (PCT) and SWATH mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 41 FFPE DLBCL tissue samples were procured. To identify prognostic proteins for DLBCL, two to three FFPE punches were analyzed for each of the 41 DLBCL tumors. Altogether, we acquired 113 SWATH maps using a 60 min LC gradient, and a TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
OpenSWATH and pan-human library was used to interpret the SWATH data in the iPortal platform.

### Publication Abstract
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE), biobanked tissue samples offer an invaluable resource for clinical and biomarker research. Here, we developed a pressure cycling technology (PCT)-SWATH mass spectrometry workflow to analyze FFPE tissue proteomes and applied it to the stratification of prostate cancer (PCa) and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) samples. We show that the proteome patterns of FFPE PCa tissue samples and their analogous fresh-frozen (FF) counterparts have a high degree of similarity and we confirmed multiple proteins consistently regulated in PCa tissues in an independent sample cohort. We further demonstrate temporal stability of proteome patterns from FFPE samples that were stored between 1 and 15&#xa0;years in a biobank and show a high degree of the proteome pattern similarity between two types of histological regions in small FFPE samples, that is, punched tissue biopsies and thin tissue sections of micrometer thickness, despite the existence of a certain degree of biological variations. Applying the method to two independent DLBCL cohorts, we identified myeloperoxidase, a peroxidase enzyme, as a novel prognostic marker. In summary, this study presents a robust proteomic method to analyze bulk and biopsy FFPE tissues and reports the first systematic comparison of proteome maps generated from FFPE and FF samples. Our data demonstrate the practicality and superiority of FFPE over FF samples for proteome in biomarker discovery. Promising biomarker candidates for PCa and DLBCL have been discovered.

### Keywords
Dlbcl, Ffpe, Swath, Pct-dia

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Switzerland
Idorsia Pharmaceuticals Ltd

### Submitter
Peter Blattmann

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Switzerland


