### Accession
PXD026952

### Title
Differential patterns of protein expression in monolayer or spheroid melanoma cell models of acquired resistance to BRAF and MEK1/2 inhibitors

### Description
Mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) inhibitors are important therapies for treating many cancers. However, the development of acquired resistance to most protein kinase inhibitors limit their ability to provide durable responses. Approximately 50% of malignant melanomas contain activating mutations in the BRAF kinase, which promote cancer cell survival by activating the extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1/2 (ERK1/2) pathway through direct phosphorylation of the MAPK/ERK kinase-1/2 (MEK1/2). Although combination treatment with BRAF and MEK1/2 inhibitors is a recommended approach to treat melanoma, the development of drug resistance remains a barrier to achieving long term patient benefits. Using high-resolution label-free mass spectrometry, the current studies compared relative protein changes in BRAF and MEK1/2 inhibitor resistant A375 melanoma cells grown as monolayers or 3D spheroids. While approximately 66% of proteins identified were common in both monolayer and spheroid cultures, only 6.2% or 3.6% of proteins that significantly increased or decreased, respectively, compared to drug sensitive cells were common between the drug-resistant monolayer and spheroid cells. Major changes in drug-resistant monolayers suggested upregulation of alternative kinase signaling pathways that promote growth and metastasis. In contrast, the major changes in drug-resistant spheroids indicated increased catabolic metabolism to support oxidative phosphorylation and energy requirements.

### Sample Protocol
Parent and drug-resistant A375 cells were grown in three 10 cm plates as monolayers to approximately 80% confluence for proteomic analysis. Spheroids were generated by seeding 1000 – 2000 cells per well in Corning® ultra-low attachment 96 well plates (catalog number SIG-CLS7007) purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO), briefly centrifuged at 500 x g to aggregate cells, and incubated for 8 – 10 days in the presence or absence of 1 µM PLX4032 and AZD6244. Cells from the monolayers were washed with 5 ml of cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) twice followed by centrifugation at 1000 × g to remove the supernatant. Individual spheroids were grown to approximately 1 mm or 0.5 mm in size for the parent or resistant A375 cells, respectively. Triplicate proteomic samples for parent and drug-resistant cells were generated by harvesting all 96 spheroids from a plate with wide orifice tips (the combined 96 spheroids equals one biological replicate), washed with 1 ml of cold PBS thrice in a microcentrifuge tube, followed by centrifugation at 1000 x g to remove the supernatant. Three biological replicates were prepared for the proteomics analysis, as described above. Approximately equal amounts of cells (~ 10 mg wet cell pellet each) were solubilized by 5% sodium deoxycholate in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with constant mixing. Cell lysates were reduced, alkylated and trypsinolyzed on filter using a modified FASP protocol. Briefly, cell lysate proteins were reduced by 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and were then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide followed by incubation in dark for half an hour. The alkylated lysate supernatants were loaded on 10K MWCO filter (Millipore Amicon Ultra 0.5ml) and centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 15 minutes to remove small molecules such as metabolites and salts. The retained proteins on filter were washed three times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 0.3% sodium deoxycholate and finally 1 µg trypsin per 50 ug protein was added and the samples were incubated at 37 ºC for 18 hours. The tryptic digests were then acidified with trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1% and precipitated deoxycholic acid was removed by centrifugation. The peptide concentrations were measured by Pierce quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo Scientific Corp., San Jose, CA).The samples were analyzed on a high-resolution Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Corp., San Jose, CA) coupled to a nanoAquity ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). Peptides were trapped and desalted on a 180 µm × 20 mm nanoACQUITY UPLC trap column with 180 Å (5 µm) symmetry C18 particles (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). Subsequent peptide separation was on a 75 µm × 200 mm nanoACQUITY UPLC analytical column packed with 130 Å (1.7 µm) BEH130 C18 particles (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). For each liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, an equal amount of 1 µg of peptides was loaded on the trap column at 10 µL/min in 1% acetonitrile (v/v) with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Peptides were eluted using a 3 – 40% acetonitrile gradient flowing at 400 nL/min over 165 minutes. The eluted peptides were interrogated with a data-dependent acquisition method using a top speed selection mode. Fourier transform precursor spectra were collected using the following parameters: scan range 375 – 1500 m/z (mass/charge ratio), resolving power 240 000, automatic gain control (AGC) target 106, and maximum injection time of 50 milliseconds. Linear ion trap product spectra were collected using the following parameters: rapid scan rate, normalized collision energy of collision-induced dissociation 35%, 0.7 m/z isolation window, AGC target 3 × 103, and a maximum injection time of 300 milliseconds with using all parallelizable fill time enabled. Peptide precursors were selected for a 3-second cycle. Precursors with an assigned monoisotopic mass and a charge state of 2 – 6 were interrogated. Interrogated precursors were filtered using a 60 seconds dynamic exclusion window.

### Data Protocol
Acquired tandem mass spectra were searched against a UniProt Homo sapiens reference proteome using Sequest HT algorithm and MS Amanda algorithm with a maximum mass error tolerance of 10 ppm for the precursor ions and 0.5 Da for the fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were treated as static and dynamic modifications, respectively. Maximum two missed cleavages were allowed. Resulting hits were validated at a maximum false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 using a semi-supervised machine learning algorithm Percolator. Label-free quantifications were performed using Minora, an aligned AMRT (Accurate Mass and Retention Time) cluster quantification algorithm. Protein abundance ratios between samples were measured by comparing the MS1 peak volumes of peptide ions, whose identities were confirmed by MS2 sequencing as described above, after normalization by total peptide. Differentially expressed proteins in the resistant cells were examined by carrying out an ANOVA test and p-values were filtered via multiple hypothesis testing using an FDR of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1/2 (ERK1/2) pathway inhibitors are important therapies for treating many cancers. However, acquired resistance to most protein kinase inhibitors limits their ability to provide durable responses. Approximately 50% of malignant melanomas contain activating mutations in BRAF, which promotes cancer cell survival through the direct phosphorylation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase MAPK/ERK 1/2 (MEK1/2) and the activation of ERK1/2. Although the combination treatment with BRAF and MEK1/2 inhibitors is a recommended approach to treat melanoma, the development of drug resistance remains a barrier to achieving long-term patient benefits. Few studies have compared the global proteomic changes in BRAF/MEK1/2 inhibitor-resistant melanoma cells under different growth conditions. The current study uses high-resolution label-free mass spectrometry to compare relative protein changes in BRAF/MEK1/2 inhibitor-resistant A375 melanoma cells grown as monolayers or spheroids. While approximately 66% of proteins identified were common in the monolayer and spheroid cultures, only 6.2 or 3.6% of proteins that significantly increased or decreased, respectively, were common between the drug-resistant monolayer and spheroid cells. Drug-resistant monolayers showed upregulation of ERK-independent signaling pathways, whereas drug-resistant spheroids showed primarily elevated catabolic metabolism to support oxidative phosphorylation. These studies highlight the similarities and differences between monolayer and spheroid cell models in identifying actionable targets to overcome drug resistance.

### Keywords
Monolayer, Vemurafenib, Selumetinib, Melanoma, Braf, Drug resistance, Extracellular-signal regulated kinases, Protein kinases, Spheroids, Kinase targeted therapy

### Affiliations
School of Pharmacy, University of Maryland, Baltimore
University of Maryland, Baltimore

### Submitter
Weiliang Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Maureen Kane
School of Pharmacy, University of Maryland, Baltimore


