### Accession
PXD027822

### Title
Label-free LC-MS/MS of Ubiquitinated proteins derived from UPs-4T1/WT and UPs-4T1/EPB nanovaccine

### Description
In this project, 4T1 parental cells (4T1/WT) were exposed to increasing concentrations of epirubicin (EPB) to establish a novel multi-drug resistant CSC-like breast cancer cell line (4T1/EPB). The ubiquitinated proteins were enriched from 4T1/WT or 4T1/EPB derived cell lysate using a-Al2O3-Vx3 nanoparticles to produce the covalently linked product UPs nanovaccine.  Label-free LC-MS/MS mass spectrometry was used to detect the type and amount of enriched proteins of UPs from the 4T1/WT cells and the 4T1/EPB cells.

### Sample Protocol
UPs Protein identification by label-free LC-MS/MS analysis UPs-4T1/WT nanovaccine and UPs-4T1/EPB nanovaccine obtained from 4T1/WT cells and 4T1/EPB cells using a-Al2O3-Vx3 nanoparticles underwent trypsinolysis after extraction and digestion. Mass spectrometry and protein identification services were provided by the HuaDa Gene Company (China).UPs-4T1/WT nanovaccine and UPs-4T1/EPB nanovaccine obtained from 4T1/WT cells and 4T1/EPB cells underwent trypsinolysis after extraction and digestion. Sample peptides were separated by an LC-20AD liquid chromatograph (Shimadzu, Japan). The sample was loaded onto a self-packed C18 column and then separated by gradient steps. The peptides were ionized by a nanoESI source and then passed to a Triple Time-of-flight (TOF) 5600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX, USA). The mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) and its built-in search engine Andromeda was used to perform database searches against Mouse entries in UniprotKB/SwissProt protein database for peptide identification and protein inference. Mass spectrometry and protein identification services were provided by the HuaDa Gene Company (China).

### Data Protocol
For proteomic data analysis, raw files were searched using Maxquant/Andromeda. GO annotation was performed using Blast2GO with NR annotations.Peptides and proteins were filtered at a 1% FDR at the PSM-level using percolator node and at the protein level using protein FDR validator node, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Label-free lc-ms/ms, Ups-4t1/epb nanovaccine, Mouse, Ubiquitinated proteins, Ups-4t1/wt nanovaccine

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical School of Southeast University, 87 Dingjiaqiao Rd, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province 210009, P. R. China. 
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical School of Southeast University, 87 Dingjiaqiao Rd, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province 210009, P. R. China.

### Submitter
Fang Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Fang Huang
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical School of Southeast University, 87 Dingjiaqiao Rd, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province 210009, P. R. China.


