### Accession
PXD017313

### Title
Mechanisms of innate events during skin reaction following intradermal injection of seasonal influenza vaccine

### Description
The skin plays a crucial role in host defences against microbial attack and the innate cells must provide the immune system with sufficient information to organize these defences. This unique feature makes the skin a promising site for vaccine administration. Although cellular innate immune events during vaccination have been widely studied, initial events remain poorly understood. Our aim is to determine molecular biomarkers of skin innate reaction after intradermal (i.d.) immunization. Using an ex vivo human explant model from healthy donors, we investigated by NanoLC-MS/MS analysis and MALDI-MSI imaging, to detect innate molecular events (lipids, metabolites, proteins) few hours after i.d. administration of seasonal trivalent influenza vaccine (TIV). This multimodel approach allowed to identify early molecules differentially expressed in dermal and epidermal layers at 4 and 18 h after TIV immunization compared with control PBS. In the dermis, the most relevant network of proteins upregulated were related to cell-to-cell signaling and cell trafficking. The molecular signatures detected were associated with chemokines such as CXCL8, a chemoattractant of neutrophils. In the epidermis, the most relevant networks were associated with activation of antigen-presenting cells and related to CXCL10. Our study proposes a novel step-forward approach to identify biomarkers of skin innate reaction.

### Sample Protocol
Dermal and epidermal cells of human skin explants (the equivalent of 2 million cells for each condition) were lysed and proteins extracted with a Radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer. Extracted proteins were digested with filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), and the peptides retrieved were analysed with a nanoUPLC system coupled with a high-resolution mass spectrometer for MS and MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All MS data were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.6.5) by using the Andromeda search engine. The proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data against the reviewed proteome for Homo sapiens in the UniProt database (Release February 2017, 20 172 entries) and 262 commonly detected contaminants. Trypsin specificity was used for digestion mode. N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. An initial mass accuracy of 6 ppm was selected for MS spectra. The MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the HCD data (higher-energy-collisional dissociation). False discovery rates for peptide spectrum matches and for protein identifications were estimated by using a decoy version of the previously defined databases (reverse construction) and set at 1%. Relative label-free quantification (LFQ) of the proteins was conducted with MaxQuant, by applying the MaxLFQ algorithm with default parameters. Analysis of the identified proteins was performed with Perseus software (http://www.perseus-framework.org) (version 1.5.6.0). The file containing the information from the identification was used. Hits from the reverse database and proteins with only modified peptides were removed. Hits from potential contaminants were marked, and proteins originating from culture medium (e.g., serum albumin from Bos taurus) or sample preparation (e.g., trypsin from Sus scrofa) were manually removed to ensure 216 that only proteins that are part of the human skin structure were retained. LFQ intensities were transformed by base 2 logarithm before statistical analysis. Statistical analysis Protein expression data were analysed using R software. Analysis of the difference between TIV and PBS conditions at each time point was based on a paired nonparametric t-test (Wilcoxon signed-rank test), with a two-tailed test (p-value <0.05) considered a statistically significant. Unsupervised multivariate analysis was performed using Principal Component Analysis (PCA) using R software. Heatmaps and hierarchical clusters were generated with R software based on the Pearson coefficient of correlation with the complete linkage method.

### Publication Abstract
The skin plays a crucial role in host defences against microbial attack and the innate cells must provide the immune system with sufficient information to organize these defences. This unique feature makes the skin a promising site for vaccine administration. Although cellular innate immune events during vaccination have been widely studied, initial events remain poorly understood. Our aim is to determine molecular biomarkers of skin innate reaction after intradermal (i.d.) immunization. Using an ex vivo human explant model from healthy donors, we investigated by NanoLC-MS/MS analysis and MALDI-MSI imaging, to detect innate molecular events (lipids, metabolites, proteins) few hours after i.d. administration of seasonal trivalent influenza vaccine (TIV). This multimodel approach allowed to identify early molecules differentially expressed in dermal and epidermal layers at 4 and 18&#x202f;h after TIV immunization compared with control PBS. In the dermis, the most relevant network of proteins upregulated were related to cell-to-cell signalling and cell trafficking. The molecular signatures detected were associated with chemokines such as CXCL8, a chemoattractant of neutrophils. In the epidermis, the most relevant networks were associated with activation of antigen-presenting cells and related to CXCL10. Our study proposes a novel step-forward approach to identify biomarkers of skin innate reaction. SIGNIFICANCE: To our knowledge, there is no study analyzing innate molecular reaction to vaccines at the site of skin immunization. What is known on skin reaction is based on macroscopic (erythema, redness&#x2026;), microscopic (epidermal and dermal tissues) and cellular events (inflammatory cell infiltrate). Therefore, we propose a multimodal approach to analyze molecular events at the site of vaccine injection on skin tissue. We identified early molecular networks involved biological functions such cell migration, cell-to-cell interaction and antigen presentation, validated by chemokine expression, in the epidermis and dermis, then could be used as early indicator of success in immunization.

### Keywords
Skin; biomarkers; mass spectrometry; intradermal vaccination; innate immunity

### Affiliations
Université de Lille - INSERM U1192 - Laboratoire PRISM
University of Lille

### Submitter
Maxence Wisztorski

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
Université de Lille - INSERM U1192 - Laboratoire PRISM


