### Accession
PXD018041

### Title
Secretome analysis of human A549 Lung cancer cells harboring LKB1 mutations.

### Description
STK11 (LKB1) missense somatic mutant isoforms promote tumor growth, motility and inflammation. Elucidating the contribution of somatic mutations to cancer is essential for personalized medicine. STK11 (LKB1) tumor suppressor appears to be inactivated in human cancer, however, somatic missense mutations also occur. Despite of our increased knowledge about LKB1 function, the role/s of these alterations in cancer are mostly unknown. Here, we investigated the contribution of four missense LKB1 somatic mutations in tumor biology. Three, out of the four mutants, lost their tumor suppressor capabilities and showed a deficient kinase activity. The remaining mutant conserved the enzymatic activity, but conferred an increased cell motility. Mechanistically, LKB1 mutants promoted the differential gene expression regulation of vesicle trafficking regulating molecules, adhesion molecules and cytokines, that correlated with the identified protein networks associated to the comparative secretome analysis. Notably, three mutant isoforms promoted tumor growth, and one of them induced inflammation and hemorrhagic tumors that correlated with the deregulated levels of cytokines. Altogether, our findings uncover oncogenic roles of LKB1 somatic mutations helping to understand their contribution to cancer.

### Sample Protocol
The secretomes were prepared as previously described (1). In brief, 4 × 106 cells were seeded in 150 cc tissue culture plates and allowed to grow for 48 in the presence or absence of doxycycline 1µg/ml. After that, media was aspirated and cells were washed twice with PBS and then three times with serum-free media. Then, cells at 60-70 % confluency were maintained in serum-free media for 24 h before the collection of the conditioned media (secretome). Secretomes were spun down, and filtered through a 0.22 μm pore filter. Then, secretomes were concentrated using a 10,000 MWCO Millipore Amicon Ultra filter (Millipore) until a final volume of 50 μL was reached. The protein concentration was determined using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay kit (Thermo Scientific). All samples were digested with trypsin in-solution prior to analysis by liquid chromatography−mass spectrometry (LC−MS) as previously described (1). Tryptic digests were analyzed by shotgun proteomics using an LTQ Velos-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). (1) Villarreal L, Mendez O, Salvans C, Gregori J, Baselga J, Villanueva J. Unconventional secretion is a major contributor of cancer cell line secretomes. Mol Cell Proteomics 12, 1046-1060 (2013)

### Data Protocol
The RAW files of each MS run were processed using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and MS/MS spectra were searched against the human database of Swiss-Prot using the MASCOT (Matrix Science, London, U.K) algorithm. The results files generated from MASCOT (.DAT files) were then loaded into Scaffold (Proteome Software, Portland, OR), resulting in a nonredundant list of identified proteins per sample achieving a protein false discovery rate (FDR) under 1.0%, as estimated by a search against a decoy database. The RAW files of each MS run were processed using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and MS/MS spectra were searched against the human database of Swiss-Prot using the MASCOT (Matrix Science, London, U.K) algorithm. The results files generated from MASCOT (.DAT files) were then loaded into Scaffold (Proteome Software, Portland, OR), resulting in a nonredundant list of identified proteins per sample achieving a protein false discovery rate (FDR) under 1.0%, as estimated by a search against a decoy database.  Relative spectral counting-based protein quantification analysis was performed on the different samples analyzed using Scaffold. Files containing all spectral counts for each sample and its replicates were generated and then exported to R software for normalization and statistical analysis 33Relative spectral counting-based protein quantification analysis was performed on the different samples analyzed using Scaffold. Files containing all spectral counts for each sample and its replicates were generated and then exported to R software for normalization and statistical analysis (2) (2) Gregori J, Villarreal L, Mendez O, Sanchez A, Baselga J, Villanueva J. Batch effects correction improves the sensitivity of significance tests in spectral counting-based comparative discovery proteomics. J Proteomics 75, 3938-3951 (2012)

### Publication Abstract
Elucidating the contribution of somatic mutations to cancer is essential for personalized medicine. STK11 (LKB1) appears to be inactivated in human cancer. However, somatic missense mutations also occur, and the role/s of these alterations to this disease remain unknown. Here, we investigated the contribution of four missense LKB1 somatic mutations in tumor biology. Three out of the four mutants lost their tumor suppressor capabilities and showed deficient kinase activity. The remaining mutant retained the enzymatic activity of wild type LKB1, but induced increased cell motility. Mechanistically, LKB1 mutants resulted in differential gene expression of genes encoding vesicle trafficking regulating molecules, adhesion molecules and cytokines. The differentially regulated genes correlated with protein networks identified through comparative secretome analysis. Notably, three mutant isoforms promoted tumor growth, and one induced inflammation-like features together with dysregulated levels of cytokines. These findings uncover oncogenic roles of LKB1 somatic mutations, and will aid in further understanding their contributions to cancer development and progression.

### Keywords
Human; lung cancer; lkb1; lc-msms; secretome

### Affiliations
Vall Hebron Institute of Oncology
Biomedical Research in Melanoma-Animal Models and Cancer Laboratory- Vall d´Hebron Research Institute VHIR-Vall d’Hebron Hospital Barcelona-UAB 08035, Spain.

### Submitter
Francesc Canals

### Lab Head
Dr Juan A. Recio
Biomedical Research in Melanoma-Animal Models and Cancer Laboratory- Vall d´Hebron Research Institute VHIR-Vall d’Hebron Hospital Barcelona-UAB 08035, Spain.


