### Accession
PXD025126

### Title
Secretome and Proteome of WT and CFTR-KO pancreatic duct epithelial cells

### Description
Loss of CFTR function in the pancreatic duct leads to dysregulated luminal pH causing premature activation of digestive enzymes and tissue necrosis. Drastic alterations in pancreatic tissue architecture and cellular composition changes the microenvironment of the islets. Given that CFTR is expressed in the pancreatic ducts, we hypothesized that loss of functional CFTR impacts islet function by modifying the ductal secretome. To this end, we developed a long-term in vitro pancreatic duct epithelial cell culture system and polarized both WT and CFTR-KO (CF) ferret duct epithelial cells. We profiled the apical and basolateral secretome, and the cellular proteome of both WT and CF duct epithelium using quantitative mass spectrometry. Bioinformatic analysis of differentially secreted proteins mapped to their cognate receptors provided a list of putative paracrine interactions that affect islet function. Signaling pathways and upstream regulators that alter the secretome and cellular proteome profile were computationally mined to characterize disease causing mechanisms. In this study, we provide a proteomic roadmap of perturbed autocrine and paracrine signals from the CF pancreatic duct.

### Sample Protocol
Apical and basolateral secretions from WT and CFTR-KO polarized pancreatic duct epithelium were collected after 1h stimulation with IBMX/Frsk. Whole cell proteomw samples were prepared by lysing polarized WT and CFTR-KO pancreatic duct epithelium in RIPA buffer. After protein quantification, 10ug of protein from each sample was digested using trypsin and were labelled with light (WT) and heavy (CFTR-KO) stable dimethyl isotope labeling. Samples were paired across genotyes and analyzed on Thermo QEx HF High Resolution MS Instrument (ThermoFisher Scientific). Relative concentrations of heavy/light were determined using Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc)

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6.1) search of the mus_put_fur_02162017_v4.0 database. Scaffold was used to validate peptide (95% FDR) and protein (99% FDR) identification. A minimum of 2 peptides per protein in at least one sample was used as a threshold for positive protein identification. Scaffold Q+ was used to determine significantly different secretions and intracellular proteins in CFTR-KO duct cell epithelium. Values for significance were determined using a Student's T-Test on Scaffold Q+.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ductal cells, Cystic fibrosis, Proteome, Secretome, Pancreas, Cystic fibrosis related diabetes

### Affiliations
University of Iowa
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Iowa

### Submitter
Pavana Rotti

### Lab Head
Dr John F Engelhardt
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Iowa


