### Accession
PXD013167

### Title
The hematopoietic master transcription factor PU.1 requires its interaction with the SWI/SNF remodeler to access chromatin de novo

### Description
PU.1 is a prototype master transcription factor (TF) of hematopoietic cell differentiation with diverse roles in different lineages. Analysis of its genome-wide binding pattern across PU.1 expressing cell types revealed manifold cell type-specific binding patterns. They are not consistent with the epigenetic and chromatin constraints to PU.1 binding observed in vitro, suggesting that PU.1 requires auxiliary factors to access DNA in vivo. Using a model of transient mRNA expression we show that PU.1 induction leads to the extensive remodeling of chromatin, redistribution of partner transcription factors and rapid initiation of a myeloid gene expression program in heterologous cell types. By probing PU.1 mutants for defects in chromatin access and screening for PU.1 proximal proteins in vivo, we found that its N-terminal acidic domain was required for the recruitment of SWI/SNF remodeling complexes, de novo chromatin access and stable binding as well as the redistribution of partner TFs.

### Sample Protocol
BioID experiments to analyze proximity-dependent interactions of PU.1 and vincinal proteins were essentially carried out as described by Roux et al. (2013) with slight modifications. Each experiment was performed in three independent biological replicates. Briefly, fusion proteins containing either wild-type PU.1, or it’s ΔA and ΔQ deletion mutants, were fused over a flexible linker region to promiscuous E.coli biotin ligase (BirA*, harboring a R118G point mutation) and ordered as gBlock gene fragments at IDT. The biotin ligase fused to a nuclear localization sequence (NLS) was used as control for all experiments. 3 h after transfection the cell culture medium was supplemented with 50 µM biotin (Sigma). 5 h after biotin supplementation cells were harvested. For lysis, cell pellets were first swelled in ice-cold lysis buffer 1A (10 mM Hepes (pH 7.5), 85 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA (pH 8.0), 1mM PMSF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 x protease inhibitor cocktail), before an equal amount of ice-cold lysis buffer 1B (10 mM Hepes (pH 7.5), 1% NP-40, 85 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA (pH 8.0), 1mM PMSF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 x protease inhibitor cocktail) was added. Suspensions were incubated on ice for 10 min before nuclei were spun down at 700×g for 5 min at 4°C. In a next step, nuclei were resuspended in lysis buffer 2 (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 0.4% SDS, 5 mM EDTA (pH 8.0), 500 mM NaCl, 1mM PMSF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 x protease inhibitor cocktail) and sonicated to shear genomic DNA. All sonication steps were carried out with a constant duty cycle, output control 2,  for 10 s using a Branson Sonifier 250. Triton X-100 was added to a final concentration of 2% before lysates were sonified again. Finally, an equal amount of ice-cold dilution buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 1mM PMSF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 x protease inhibitor cocktail) was added and suspensions were sonified one last time. Insoluble materials were removed by centrifugation, before a dialysis step using Slide-A-Lyzer MINI Dialysis Devices (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was performed. Next, prewashed Pierce Streptavidin Magnetic Beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were added and lysates were incubated for 2 h on a rotating wheel at room temperature. Beads were washed three times each with 100 mM NH4HCO3 and 4 M Urea in Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), respectively. Beads were resuspended in 40 µl of 100 mM Tris, pH 7.6 containing 4 M urea and 0.5 µg LysC. the mixture was incubated at 28°C for 1.5 h to release bound proteins into the solution. The supernatant was subsequently transferred into a fresh vial and the beads were washed twice with 100 µl of 100 mM Tris, pH 7.6. Both wash fractions were combined with the supernatant and DTT was added to a final concentration of 10 mM for reduction of disulfide bonds. Next, 1 µg trypsin was added to proteolytically cleave the oligopeptide mixture at 28°C for 12 h. Subsequently, 1 M iodoacetamide in 100 mM Tris, pH 7.6 was added to a final concentration of 30 mM to alkylate free cysteine side chains. After 30 min incubation at RT, the samples were acidified by adding 3 µl of 90% formic acid (FA) and 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Residual beads were removed with a magnet and the oligopeptide mixture was a desalted using the C18 stage tip protocol described in Rappsilber et al. 2003. For sample loading, a low centrifugation speed of 800 rpm was applied until the complete sample was flown through the column. For salt removal, 3x 50 µl 0.1% FA were applied with fast centrifugation at 1500 rpm. Peptides were eluted with 2x 60 µl of 70 % acetonitrile (ACN), containing 0.1% FA, subsequently vacuum dried and reconstituted in 10 µl of 0.1% FA in water as loading buffer. Samples were analyzed via nano reversed phase-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nanoRP-LC-MS/MS) on a Ultimate 3000 nCS HPLC system coupled to an QExactive HF mass spectrometer. Samples were loaded onto the chromatographic column (150x0.075mm, packed in house with 2.4 µm C18 chromatographic material Reprosil-AQ, Dr. Maisch GmBH) by direct injection. For peptide separation, a linear gradient over 60 min from 4-40% ACN in 0.1% FA was applied. The column outlet was connected to the nano-electrospray ionization (nESI) source to transfer the eluting ions directly into the QExactive HF MS for peptide analysis. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode acquiring 1 survey scan covering the range of 350-1600 m/z at 60000 resolution, followed by up to 10 tandem MS scans of selected peptide precursors per cycle. Suitable precursors had a defined charge state between 2 to 5+, a minimal intensity of 4.0 e4, and were isolated with in a 1.5 Da window. Peptide precursors were fragmented in the HCD cell applying a normalized collision energy of 27 and spectra were acquired in the orbitrap at 15000 res. To prevent repeated analysis of precursors, dynamic exclusion was programmed for 15 sec with a 12 ppm window around the signal of previously fragmented precursors.

### Data Protocol
MS Data Analysis MS data were searched in the MaxQuant software suite (1.6.0.16) against the human database (Uniprot, 02/2015) using the andromeda search algorithm and finally filtered for a false discovery rate (FDR) of 5% on protein level and 2% on PSM level. The iBAQ quantitation option was enabled and peptide modifications of methionine (oxidation, variable), cysteine (carbamidomethylation, fixed) and protein N-terminus (acetylation) were selected. Protein abundances were calculated from the peptide peak areas, divided by the number of detectable peptides to obtain iBAQ intensities, which were Log2 transformed, followed by median normalization for all replicates. Statistical analysis and data plotting was performed in the Perseus software suit, therefore samples were grouped according to protein that carried the BirA tag (NLS-BirA, Pu.1-BirA, etc). For statistical analysis, missing values of protein abundances were filled in with the nearest neighbor method, if at least two of three replicates per biological sample reported a value from the raw data. If a protein was represented by two or more missing values in a biological sample, missing values were replaced by values from a random distribution which was downshifted by a factor 1.8 from the sample distribution that had a width of 0.3 times the sample distribution. To detect interacting proteins, protein abundances were subjected to a Student’s t-test and results were filtered by applying a FDR rate of 5%. Statistically enriched proteins were further subjected to GO-term analysis using the gene annotation and analysis resource Metascape (http://metascape.org). Protein networks were visualized using the STRING network app in Cytoscape 3.6.1 (https://cytoscape.org). Volcano plots were drawn in R using ggplot2 and ggrepel packages.

### Publication Abstract
Establishing gene regulatory networks during differentiation or reprogramming requires master or pioneer transcription factors (TFs) such as PU.1, a prototype master TF of hematopoietic lineage differentiation. To systematically determine molecular features that control its activity, here we analyze DNA-binding in vitro and genome-wide in vivo across different cell types with native or ectopic PU.1 expression. Although PU.1, in contrast to classical pioneer factors, is unable to access nucleosomal target sites in vitro, ectopic induction of PU.1 leads to the extensive remodeling of chromatin and redistribution of partner TFs. De novo chromatin access, stable binding, and redistribution of partner TFs both require PU.1's N-terminal acidic activation domain and its ability to recruit SWI/SNF remodeling complexes, suggesting that the latter may collect and distribute co-associated TFs in conjunction with the non-classical pioneer TF PU.1.

### Keywords
Chromatin remodelling, Cell differenciation, Transcription factor

### Affiliations
CECAD, University of Cologne, AG Krüger
Biomedical Center, LMU Munich Molecular Biology Großhaderner Strasse 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried Phone: (089) 2180 75420

### Submitter
Andreas Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Imhof
Biomedical Center, LMU Munich Molecular Biology Großhaderner Strasse 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried Phone: (089) 2180 75420


