### Accession
PXD038157

### Title
Shuffled ATG8 interacting motifs form an ancestral bridge between UFMylation and C53-mediated autophagy

### Description
UFMylation mediates the covalent modification of substrate proteins with UFM1 (Ubiquitin- fold modifier 1) and regulates the selective degradation of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) via autophagy (ER-phagy) to maintain ER homeostasis. Specifically, collisions of the ER-bound ribosomes trigger ribosome UFMylation, which in turn activates C53-mediated autophagy that clears the toxic incomplete polypeptides. C53 has evolved non-canonical shuffled ATG8 interacting motifs (sAIMs) that are essential for ATG8 interaction and autophagy initiation. Why these non-canonical motifs were selected during evolution, instead of canonical ATG8 interacting motifs remains unknown. Here, using a phylogenomics approach, we show that UFMylation is conserved across the eukaryotes and secondarily lost in fungi and some other species. Further biochemical assays have confirmed those results and showed that the unicellular algae, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii has a functional UFMylation machinery, overturning the assumption that this process is linked to multicellularity. Our conservation analysis also revealed that UFM1 co-evolves with the sAIMs in C53, reflecting a functional link between UFM1 and the sAIMs. Using biochemical and structural approaches, we confirmed the interaction of UFM1 with the C53 sAIMs and found that UFM1 and ATG8 bound to the sAIMs in a different mode. Conversion of sAIMs into canonical AIMs prevented binding of UFM1 to C53, while strengthening ATG8 interaction. This led to the autoactivation of the C53 pathway and sensitized Arabidopsis thaliana to ER stress. Altogether, our findings reveal an ancestral toggle switch embodied in the sAIMs that regulates C53- mediated autophagy to maintain ER homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Cell cultures were grown in liquid TAP medium in 250 ml Erlenmeyer flasks for two days to an OD600 of 1.5-2. Cultures were then grown with or without 0.2 mg/l Tunicamycin to a final OD600 of 0.1. After 24 hours, 50 ml of cell culture was spun down and resuspended in lysis buffer (200 mM Tris pH 9.0, 200 mM KCl, 35 mM MgCl2, 1% Triton X-100, 2% Polyoxyethanl(10)tridecyl ether, 0.5% Na-deoxycholate, 1 mM DTT, 100 µg/mL Cycloheximide) freshly supplied with Roche Protease Inhibitors. Cell suspension was frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -70°C. Frozen cells were then cryo-milled for 1 min, 4 times at 20 s-1 using a Retsch Mixer Mill MM400. Cell powder was thawed, transferred and centrifuged 30 min, 4°C, 13,000 x g.  Chlamydomonas r. ribosome purification To purify the ribosomes from the lysate, a 30 % sucrose cushion centrifugation was performed. 1 mL supernatant was loaded on top of 1 mL cushion (20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 30 % Sucrose) in open-top thick wall polycarbonate tube (Beckman Coulter®, 349622). Samples were centrifuged 16 h, 4°C, 70,000 rpm (TLA 100.3 rotor, Beckman Coulter Optima™ MAX-XP Ultracentrifuge). Supernatant was discarded and pellet resuspended in 20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT.  Tryptic digest was performed using the iST 96x kit (PO 00027, PreOmics). 1,5 ug of each sample was analysed on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spec.  Chlamydomonas r. in vivo co-immunoprec. Protein amount of the cell lysate was measured by Bradford assay and 4 mg total protein were incubated with homemade UFM1 antibody (2.5 h, 4°C, rotating) in Co-IP buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.1% Nonidet P-40, Protease Inhibitor Cocktail tablet). Protein-A Agarose beads were added and incubated for 2 more hours. Beads were washed six times with the Co-IP buffer by pelleting gently the agarose beads (1 min, 4°C, 850 rpm). Sample was eluted by adding 5x SDS Loading buffer and incubating at 95 °C for 10 min.  Coomassie-stained gel bands were in-gel digested with Arg-C (Arg-C sequencing grade, Promega) as described (Shevchenko, 2007) with the following modifications: Bands were reduced with 6mM DTT in 100 mM ABC at 56°C for 30 min, alkylated with 100 l of 27 mM IAC in 100 mM ABC at room temperature for 30 min in the dark, washed and ACN dehydrated, rehydrated in 30µl Arg-C buffer (100mM Tris-HCl pH8, 2mM CaCl2, 2mM DTT) containing 50ng/µl Arg-C. After 5min incubation at 5°C they were overlaid by another 30µl Arg-C buffer and incubated at 37°C over night . Gel pieces were extracted twice by addition of 20 µl 5% formic acid and sonication for 10 min in a cooled ultrasonic bath. Each band extract was analyzed on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spec.  The nano HPLC system (UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system, Thermo Fisher Sc.) was coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 / Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spec. equipped with a FAIMS pro interface and a Nanospray Flex ion source (all parts Th. F.S.). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (PepMap Acclaim C18, 5 mm × 300 μm ID, 5 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, Th. F.S.) at a flow rate of 25 μl/min using 0.1% TFA as mobile phase. After 10 minutes, the trap column was switched in line with the analytical column (PepMap Acclaim C18, 500 mm × 75 μm ID, 2 μm, 100 Å, Th. F.S.) operated at 30°C. Peptides were eluted using a flow rate of 230 nl/min, starting with the mobile phases 98% A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 2% B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and linearly increasing to 35% B over the next 60 minutes (Exploris) or 180 minutes (Eclipse) respectively.  The Exploris 480 mass spec was operated in DDA mode, performing a full scan (m/z range 350-1200, resolution 60,000, target value 1E6) at 3 different compensation voltages (CV -45, -60, -75), followed each by MS/MS scans of the most abundant ions for a cycle time of 1 second per CV. MS/MS spectra were acquired using an HCD collision energy of 30%, isolation width of 1.0 m/z, resolution of 30.000, target value at 2E5, minimum intensity of 5E4 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation (include charge state 2-6) were excluded for 10 s. The monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) mode was set to Peptide and the exclude isotopes feature was enabled.  The Eclipse was operated in DDA mode, performing a full scan (m/z range 350-1500, resolution 120,000, target value 1E6) at 4 different compensation voltages (CV-45, -55, -65, -75), followed each by MS/MS scans of the most abundant ions for a cycle time of 0.75 sec per CV. MS/MS spectra were acquired using an isolation width of 1.2 m/z, target value of 3E4 and intensity threshold of 5E4, maximum injection time 20 ms, HCD with a collision energy of 30%, using the Iontrap for detection in the rapid scan mode. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation (include charge state 2-6) were excluded for 60 s. The MIPS was set to Peptide and the exclude isotopes feature was enabled.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, the RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5.0.400, Thermo Scientific). All hereby created MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda v2.0.0.19924 (Dorfer V. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2014 Aug 1;13(8):3679-84). Peptide and protein identification was performed in two steps. For the initial search, the RAW-files were searched against an Uniprot database that was filtered for the organism Chlamydomonas_reinhardtii and combined with common contaminants and sequences of tagged proteins of interest (18,942 sequences; 14,090,486 residues), using the following search parameters:  Iodoacetamide derivative on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine as variable modification. The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±10 ppm, the fragment mass tolerance was set to ±10 ppm for the Orbitrap MS2 scans, to ±400 mmu for Iontrap scans, the maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2, using tryptic enzymatic specificity without proline restriction. The result was filtered to 1 % FDR on protein level using the Percolator algorithm (Käll L. et al., Nat. Methods. 2007 Nov; 4(11):923-5) integrated in Proteome Discoverer.  A sub-database of proteins identified in this search was generated for further processing. For the second search, the RAW-files were searched against the created sub-database using the same settings as above plus considering additional variable modifications: Phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, UFM_VG (monoisotopic mass of 156.089878 Da) on lysine, UFM_DRVG (427.217932 Da) on lysine and glutamine to pyro-glutamate conversion at peptide N-terminal glutamine, acetylation on protein N-terminus.  The localization of the post-translational modification sites within the peptides was performed with the tool ptmRS, based on the tool phosphoRS (Taus T. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2011, 10, 5354-62). Identifications were filtered again to 1 % FDR on protein and PSM level. Additionally, an MSAmanda score cut-off of at least 150 and 70 was applied for high and low resolution spectra respectively and proteins were filtered to be identified by a minimum of 2 PSMs in at least 1 sample. Peptides were subjected to label-free quantification using IMP-apQuant (Doblmann J. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2019, 18(1):535-541). Proteins were quantified by summing unique and razor peptides and applying intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ, Schwanhäusser B.et al., Nature 2011, 473(7347):337−42). Protein-abundances-normalization was done using sum normalization, based on the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox J. et al., Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014, 13(9):2513-26).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Er-phagy, Ufmylation, Rpl26

### Affiliations
IMBA Vienna
Gregor Mendel Institute of Molecular Plant Biology GmbH Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria Phone: +43 1 79044 9850 http://www.gmi.oeaw.ac.at

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Yasin Dagdas
Gregor Mendel Institute of Molecular Plant Biology GmbH Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria Phone: +43 1 79044 9850 http://www.gmi.oeaw.ac.at


