### Accession
PXD027310

### Title
Fast Fluoroalkylation of Proteins Uncovers Structure and Dynamics of Biological Macromolecules

### Description
Stable covalent labeling of proteins in combination with mass spectrometry has been established as a complementary technique to classical structural methods, such as X Ray, NMR, or Cryo-EM used for protein structure determination. Although the current stable covalent labeling techniques enable to monitor protein solvent accessible areas with sufficient spatial resolution, there is still high demand for alternative, less complicated and inexpensive approaches. Here, we introduce a new covalent labeling method based on Fast Fluoroalkylation of Proteins (FFAP). The FFAP uses fluoroalkyl radicals formed by reductive decomposition of Togni reagents with ascorbic acid for labeling of proteins on a time scale of seconds. The feasibility of FFAP for effective labeling of proteins was demonstrated by monitoring differential amino acids modi-fication of native horse heart apomyoglobin/holomyoglobin and human haptoglobin-hemoglobin complex. The obtained data confirmed the Togni reagent-mediated FFAP as an advantageous alternative method for covalent labeling in applications, such as protein fingerprinting, epitope mapping and surface mapping of proteins (and their complexes) in general.

### Sample Protocol
Lyophilized proteins  were dissolved in the labeling buffer and purified using gel chromatography column . The final concentration of proteins was deter-mined by UV VIS spectrophotometer . For prepa-ration of apomyoglobin, 12 mg of holomyoglobin were dissolved in 5 ml of the labeling buffer. To the precooled solution of holomyoglo-bin, ice cold concentrated hydrochloric acid (35% w/w) was drop-wise added with external ice cooling to reach the final pH of 1.5. Then, 20 ml of butan-2-one (4 times the volume of labeling buffer) was added to the sample, transferred to the separatory funnel and shaken for 10 seconds to extract off the liberated heme. The aqueous, heme-free phase was collected and concentrated using centrifuge tubes with 10 kDa cut-off. Finally, the protein was purified by gel chromatography column (ENrichTM SEC 70, Biorad, USA). The concentration of both apo- and holomyoglobin was adjusted to 0.66 mg/ml. The haptoglobin-hemoglobin complex was prepared by mixing 22 µl of α,β-hemoglobin at concentration of 0.46 mg/ml with 15 µl of 1,1 haptoglobin at concentration of 0.66 mg/ml. Hemoglobin solution was prepared by mixing 22 µl of α,β-hemoglobin at a concentration of 0.46 mg/ml with 15 µl of the labeling buffer. 1,1 haptoglobin solution was prepared by mixing 15 µl of 1,1 haptoglobin at concentration of 0.66 mg/ml with 22 µl of the labeling buffer. The amount of protein was 10 µg per reaction. All four Togni reagents (1,2,3,4) were dissolved in dimethylsulfox-ide to final concentration of 50 mg/ml. Thereafter, a Togni reagent  was added to the protein samples to final concentration of 7.5 mM . L-Ascorbic acid was dissolved in the labeling buffer to a final concentration of 0.4 mg/ml. Hamilton syringes were used to deliver the mixture of protein with Togni reagent and ascorbic acid  as a radical inducer to the mixing chamber according to the setup. L-Tryptophan solution  used as a quencher was delivered by the third Hamilton syringe to the quenching chamber. The flow rate, length and diameter of the capil-laries were set to give a labeling time of three seconds. The samples were collected for 3 minutes and the final amount of labeled protein was 10 ng.Samples were 2 times diluted with 100mM 4-ethylmorpholine buff-er, ACN (90:10 v/v)), pH 8.5. α,β-hemoglobin and 1,1 haptoglobin were reduced with 10 mM Tris(2 carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 56 °C for 10 minutes. Free cysteines were subsequently alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetam-ide (IAA) at room temperature for 20 minutes in the dark. 1,1 haptoglobin was deglycosylated overnight with PNgase F (pro-tein:enzyme ratio 1:20). All samples were digested by trypsin/Lys-C (protein:enzyme ration 1:20) for two hours with addition tryp-sin/Lys-C digestion for another two hours. The digestion was stopped by the addition of TFA to a final concentration of 0.1 %. Samples were dried by SpeedVac concentrator.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed by software Data Analysis 5.0 and exported to the mascot generic files (mgf). The mfg files were uploaded into Mascot (Matrix Science, Great Britain)33 search engine with the following search setup: Pro-tease – Trypsin/Lys-C with three missed cleavage, variable modifica-tion – oxidation of methionine, fluoroalkylation of tryptophan, tyrosine, phenylalanine, histidine and cysteine, fixed modification – carbamidation of cysteines. Error for precursor ion was set at 5 ppm and for fragments ions at 0.05 Da. A mass shift for the modification by trifluoromethyl radicals was 66.9784 Da and for imidazole-tetrafluoroethyl radicals 166.0154 Da. All modifications were checked manually.Ion intensities of the first isotope of the most intensive charge state were used for quantification. For quantification the same equation was used as for the FPOP experiment which was performed by the group of Michael Gross.

### Publication Abstract
Covalent labeling of proteins in combination with mass spectrometry has been established as a complementary technique to classical structural methods, such as X-ray, NMR, or cryogenic electron microscopy (Cryo-EM), used for protein structure determination. Although the current covalent labeling techniques enable the protein solvent accessible areas with sufficient spatial resolution to be monitored, there is still high demand for alternative, less complicated, and inexpensive approaches. Here, we introduce a new covalent labeling method based on fast fluoroalkylation of proteins (FFAP). FFAP uses fluoroalkyl radicals formed by reductive decomposition of Togni reagents with ascorbic acid to label proteins on a time scale of seconds. The feasibility of FFAP to effectively label proteins was demonstrated by monitoring the differential amino acids modification of native horse heart apomyoglobin/holomyoglobin and the human haptoglobin-hemoglobin complex. The obtained data confirmed the Togni reagent-mediated FFAP is an advantageous alternative method for covalent labeling in applications such as protein footprinting and epitope mapping of proteins (and their complexes) in general. Data are accessible via the ProteomeXchange server with the data set identifier PXD027310.

### Keywords
Togni reagents, Interactomics, Protein footprinting, Radical labeling, Conformational changes, Hyperva-lent iodine reagents, Radicals, Protein surface mapping, Trifluoromethylation, Proteomics, Epitope mapping, Protein fingerprinting, Mass spectrometry, Protein structure, Fluoroalkylation

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology, The Czech Academy of Sciences, BIOCEV, Prumyslova 595, 252 50 Vestec, Czech Republic,
Institute of Microbiology, The Czech Academy of Sciences 

### Submitter
Zdenek Kukacka

### Lab Head
Dr Petr Novak
Institute of Microbiology, The Czech Academy of Sciences, BIOCEV, Prumyslova 595, 252 50 Vestec, Czech Republic,


