### Accession
PXD023379

### Title
N-Glycome and N-Glycoproteome of a Hematophagous Parasitic Nematode Haemonchus

### Description
N-glycosylation is a physiologically vital post-translational modification of proteins in eukaryotic organisms. Initial work on Haemonchus contortus – an economically-important blood-sucking nematode of ruminants with a broad geographical distribution – has shown that the parasite harbors N-glycans with exclusive core chitobiose modifications, and severel immunogenic proteins (e.g., amino- and metallo-peptidases) in the adult worms are N-glycosylated. However, an informative atlas of N-glycosylation in H. contortus is not yet available. Herein, we report a total of 291 N-glycosylated proteins with 425 sites in this parasite. Functional analyses of glycoproteome revealed significant enrichment of the peptidase families (e.g., peptidase C1 and M1), many of which are potential vaccine targets. Besides, the glycan-rich conjugates are distributed primarily in the intestine and gonads of the adult worms. These data, taken together, provide a comprehensive insight into the N-glycosylation of a prevalent parasitic nematode, while underlining its significance for the infection and prophylaxis.

### Sample Protocol
The worms were immersed in 500 µL of ice-cold lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease inhibitor cocktail), and then homogenized in a glass homogenizer for 20 min. The homogenate, kept on ice, was ultrasonicated at 30 s bursts for 5 min. The total parasite extract was centrifuged at 10.000g for 25 min, and the supernatant was were collected and the protein concentrations were detected using a BCA assay. Individual protein sample (400 ug) was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol at 56°C for 35 min, and then alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 20 min in a darkroom. The urea concentration of the sample was diluted to less than 1 M with a 100 mM NH4HCO3 solution. Finally, trypsin was added at a mass ratio of 1:50 (trypsin/protein) for the first digestion (overnight), and a ratio of 1:100 (trypsin/protein) for an additional 5 h to ensure complete digestion. Glycopeptides were collected using a HILIC enrichment method. Briefly, peptides were reconstituted in 40 μL of loading buffer (80% ACN with 1% TFA), and then pipetted into a HILIC tip. After centrifugation (4000g, 20 min), retaining glycopeptides were washed three times with 40 μL loading buffer, and centrifuged to remove the residual non-glycopeptides. Afterward, glycopeptides were eluted three times with 20 μL of 10% ACN. Finally, enriched glycopeptides were divided into two equal parts and respectively dried by the centrifugal evaporator. The workflow of N-glycan preparation was based on a previous report with some modifications. Briefly, an aliquot of glycopeptides was incubated with 2 μL of PNGase F in 50 μl of PBS (pH 8.0) buffer at 37ºC for 24 h. PNGase F-cleaved glycans were then desalted and purified by PGC cartridges, essentially as described elsewhere. The remaining glycopeptides after PNGase F digestion were dried and then redissolved in 50 μL of sodium acetate solution (pH 4.5). After addition of 2 μL PNGase A enzyme, the sample was incubated at 37°C for 24 h. PNGase A-released glycans were isolated by PGC cartridges, as described above. Permethylation of glycans was performed following an established protocol. In brief, native glycan pools released by PNGase F and PNGase A were dissolved in 50 μL DMSO and 100 μL of DMSO-NaOH slurry, respectively. Afterwards, 50 μL of methyl iodide was added to each reaction mixture, followed by shaking (room temperature, 15 min). The reaction was terminated by addition of 500 µL of ultrapure water and 250 μL chloroform. After separation of the liquid phases, the upper layer was removed carefully, and the lower organic layer containing the permethylated glycans was washed three times with ultrapure water. Finally, the two organic phases were transferred to separate vials and dried by the centrifugal evaporator.   For N-glycoproteome analysis (three replicates), an aliquot of enriched glycopeptides was dissolved in 50 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 buffer (prepared using H218O) and deglycosylated by treatment with 2 μL PNGase F (37°C, 24 h). The fraction was subjected to HILIC enrichment, as outlined above. Peptides deglycosylated by PNGase F were collected from the HILIC tip effluent. The HILIC tip-bound glycopeptides were eluted and dried by the centrifugal evaporator, and finally reconstituted in 50 μL of 50 mM sodium acetate solution (in H218O). 2 μL of PNGase A enzyme was supplemented, followed by incubation at 37 ºC for 24 h. The PNGase F- and PNGase A-deglycosylated peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTips (manufacturer’s protocol), dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and loaded onto a reversed-phase analytical column equipped with an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. A gradient at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min was programed to increase the solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) from 6-23% in the first 26 min, followed by another 8 min from 23-35%, and then 3 min to reach 80%, and thereafter staying constant at 80% for the last 3 min. After UPLC, peptides were ionized by a nanospray ionization source (2.0 kV) and analyzed by MS/MS in Orbitrap FusionTM TribridTM (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
Spectra were obtained using the AB 5800 MALDI-MS instrument operated in the positive ionization mode (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada). The dried glycan residues were reconstituted in 15 μL methanol solution. The matrix was prepared with 10 mg/mL DHB in 50% acetonitrile and 10 mM sodium acetate. 1 μL of permethylated glycan was mixed with 1 μL of freshly-prepared DHB prior to spotting on a MALDI-target plate and allowed to crystalize at room temperature. In total, 1000 laser shots were applied on each sample spot. MS/MS analyses were performed with air as CID gas using 2 kV collision energy. The final data were processed by DataExplorer 4.0 (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada), and the selected spectra were annotated using GlycoWorkbench (2.1 build 146).  The MS/MS data were evaluated by MaxQuant software package (v1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against H. contortus entries in the UniProt database (24273 proteins) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin was specified as the cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set at 20 ppm in the first search and 5 ppm in the main search. The mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Dalton. Carbamidomethyl on the cysteine residue was specified as a fixed modification and oxidation on methionine was specified as a variable modification. The false discovery rate was adjusted to ≤1%, and the minimum score for modified peptides was set ≥40.

### Publication Abstract
N-glycosylation is a physiologically vital post-translational modification of proteins in eukaryotic organisms. Initial work on <i>Haemonchus contortus</i> - a blood-sucking nematode of ruminants with a broad geographical distribution - has shown that this parasite harbors N-glycans with exclusive chitobiose modifications. Besides, several immunogenic proteins (<i>e.g.</i>, amino- and metallo-peptidases) are known to be N-glycosylated in adult worms. However, an informative atlas of N-glycosylation in <i>H. contortus</i> is not yet available. Herein, we report 291&#xa0;N-glycosylated proteins with a total of 425 modification sites in the parasite. Among them, many peptidase families (<i>e.g.</i>, peptidase C1 and M1) including potential vaccine targets were enriched. Notably, the glycan-rich conjugates are distributed primarily in the intestine and gonads of adult worms, and consequently hidden from the host's immune system. Collectively, these data provide a comprehensive atlas of N-glycosylation in a prevalent parasitic nematode while underlining its significance for infection, immunity and prevention.

### Keywords
Haemonchus contortus, Glycopeptide, N-glycan, Mass spectrometry, N-glycosylation

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
Chunqun Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Min Hu
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University


