### Accession
PXD024077

### Title
Influenza A H1N1 induced disturbance of the respiratory and gastrointestinal microbiome - a multi-omics characterization

### Description
Seasonal influenza outbreaks represent a large burden for the healthcare system as well as the economy.  While the role of the microbiome in the context of various diseases has been elucidated, the effects on the respiratory and gastrointestinal microbiome during influenza illness is largely unknown. Therefore, this study aimed to characterize the temporal development of the respiratory and gastrointestinal microbiome of swine using a multi-omics approach prior and during influenza infection. Swine is a suitable animal model for influenza research, as it is closely related to humans and a natural host for influenza viruses. Our results showed that IAV infection resulted in significant changes in the abundance of Moraxellaceae and Pasteurellaceae families in the upper respiratory tract. To our surprise, temporal development of the respiratory microbiome was not affected. Furthermore, we observed significantly altered microbial richness and diversity in the gastrointestinal microbiome after IAV infection. In particular, we found increased abundances of Prevotellaceae, while Clostridiaceae and Lachnospiraceae decreased. Furthermore, metaproteomics showed that the functional composition of the microbiome, known to be robust and stable under healthy conditions, was heavily affected by the influenza infection. Metabolome analysis proved increased amounts of short-chain fatty acids in the gastrointestinal tract, which might be involved in faster recovery. Furthermore, metaproteome data suggest a possible immune response towards flagellated Clostridia induced during the infection. Therefore, it can be assumed that the respiratory infection with IAV caused a systemic effect in the porcine host and microbiome.

### Sample Protocol
Metaproteomic approach was performed as previously described by Gierse et al. (2020). Briefly, a TRIzol based extraction protocol was applied to 100 mg fecal powder for protein extraction. Protein amount of the obtained protein extracts was measured by Pierce BCA Protein Assay. Subsequently, 30 µg of the protein extract were loaded on a 4 - 22 % Criterion TGX precast Gel (BioRAD, Hercules, CA, USA), stained with Colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250, and each lane was cut in 10 pieces. Before tryptic digestion, each piece was processed to smaller blocks and destained. Afterwards, ZipTip purification (C18, Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), according to the manufacturer’s protocol, was performed to desalt the peptide containing solution. The purified peptide mixture was eluted in glass vials and vacuum centrifugation was performed until dryness. The peptides were finally resuspended in 10 µl of 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid for mass spectrometric analysis. Mass spectrometry was performed as described in Gierse et al. (2020).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed by Mascot Daemon version 2.6.2 (Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK) against a specific swine database, followed by validation with Scaffold 4.8.7 and X!Tandem (version X! Tandem Alanine (2017.2.1.4)) (Gierse et al. 2020). For taxonomic and functional protein analysis, the metaproteome annotation pipeline Prophane (www.prophane.de,) was employed. Prophane used diamond blast combined with the NCBI nr protein database (version 08.08.2018) for taxonomic classification (parameters: e-value 0.01, query-coverage 0.9, max-target-seqs 1). Subsequently, the protein classification data were manually transcribed from NCBI to SILVA taxonomy, to compare the data with the corresponding 16S rRNA gene sequencing analysis. Hmmscan algorithm combined with eggNOG database (version 4.5.1) was applied for functional annotation (e-value 0.01). For statistical analysis, 2-way ANOVA and Welsh T-test were performed (p = 0.05), using MeV. NMDS plot analysis was done in R!Studio, using the packages “vegan” and “ggplot” .

### Publication Abstract
Seasonal influenza outbreaks represent a large burden for the health care system as well as the economy. While the role of the microbiome has been elucidated in the context of various diseases, the impact of respiratory viral infections on the human microbiome is largely unknown. In this study, swine was used as an animal model to characterize the temporal dynamics of the respiratory and gastrointestinal microbiome in response to an influenza A virus (IAV) infection. A multi-omics approach was applied on fecal samples to identify alterations in microbiome composition and function during IAV infection. We observed significantly altered microbial richness and diversity in the gastrointestinal microbiome after IAV infection. In particular, increased abundances of <i>Prevotellaceae</i> were detected, while <i>Clostridiaceae</i> and <i>Lachnospiraceae</i> decreased. Moreover, our metaproteomics data indicated that the functional composition of the microbiome was heavily affected by the influenza infection. For instance, we identified decreased amounts of flagellin, correlating with reduced abundances of <i>Lachnospiraceae</i> and <i>Clostridiaceae</i>, possibly indicating involvement of a direct immune response toward flagellated <i>Clostridia</i> during IAV infection. Furthermore, enzymes involved in short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) synthesis were identified in higher abundances, while metabolome analyses revealed rather stable concentrations of SCFAs. In addition, 16S rRNA gene sequencing was used to characterize effects on the composition and natural development of the upper respiratory tract microbiome. Our results showed that IAV infection resulted in significant changes in the abundance of <i>Moraxellaceae</i> and <i>Pasteurellaceae</i> in the upper respiratory tract. Surprisingly, temporal development of the respiratory microbiome structure was not affected. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Here, we used swine as a biomedical model to elucidate the impact of influenza A H1N1 infection on structure and function of the respiratory and gastrointestinal tract microbiome by employing a multi-omics analytical approach. To our knowledge, this is the first study to investigate the temporal development of the porcine microbiome and to provide insights into the functional capacity of the gastrointestinal microbiome during influenza A virus infection.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Metaproteomics, Influenza, 16s rrna, Gastrointestinal, Microbiome

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Katharina Riedel
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology


