### Accession
PXD011206

### Title
Streptococcus agalactiae LC-MSMS

### Description
The human-derived serotype Ⅴ ST1 GBS strains NNA038 and NNA048 was isolated from a amniotic fluid of full-term pregnant woman who suffered from premature rupture of membrane in China.Serotype Ia ST7 GBS strain YM001 is an attenuated strain ,its parent strain HN016 was isolated from an outbreak epidemical disease in tilapia from China.HN016_KO_D2 is a knockout strain from Serotype Ia ST7 GBS strain HN016.

### Sample Protocol
Strong cation-exchange (SCX) chromatography was performed with a LC-20AB HPLC pump system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). The iTRAQ-labelled peptide mixtures were reconstituted with 4 mL of buffer A (25 mM NaH2PO4in 25% ACN, pH 2.7) and loaded onto a 4.6 × 250-mm Ultremex SCX column containing 5-μm particles (Phenomenex, Torrance, USA). Buffer B consisted of 25 mM NaH2PO4and 1 M KCl in 25% ACN (pH 2.7). Peptide elution procedures were conducted following the procedure of Petritis K et al [33].Each fraction was resuspended in buffer C (2% (v/v) ACN and 0.1% (v/v) FA in MilliQ water) and centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 10 min. Next, 10 μL of peptide (0.5 μg/μ L) were loaded onto a C18 trap column (2 cm × 100 μm, 5 μm) in a LC-20AD nano-HPLC system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) by auto-sampler. The samples were loaded at 8 μ L/min for 4 min, then run on a 44 min gradient increasing from 2% to 35% buffer D (98% ACN (v/v) and 0.1% FA (v/v)) at 300 nL/min, followed by a 2 min linear gradient to 80% buffer D, maintained at 80% buffer D for 4 min, and finally returned to 5% buffer D for 1 min. Peptide analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) in positive ion mode with a selected mass range of 350–2000 mass/charge (m/z) for a full MS scan and 100–1800 m/z for MS2scans. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy setting of 27.0; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Resolving power for the Q-Exactive was set as 70,000 for the MS scan and 17,500 for the MS/MS scan at m/z 200. The electrospray voltage was set to 1.6 KV and MS/MS data were acquired using the 15 most abundant precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 20,000 in the MS survey scan with a dynamic exclusion duration of 15 s. The automatic gain control target values for full MS were 3e6 and 1e5 for MS2. The underfill ratio was defined as 0.1% on the Q-Exactive.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were merged and transformed to a MGF file by Proteome Discoverer (ver. 1.2; Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) and then probed using the Mascot search engine (ver. 2.3.02; Matrix Science, London, UK). For protein identification, the parameters were as follows: monoisotopic mass, trypsin digestion allowing up to two missed cleavages, MS/MS ion search, fragment mass tolerance at 0.02 Da, and peptide mass tolerance at ± 10 ppm. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethylation of cysteine, iTRAQ 6-plex (N-term), and iTRAQ 6-plex (K). Potential variable modifications were Gln- > pyro-Glu (N-term Q), oxidation (M), or deamidation (NQ). The decoy database pattern was the reverse of the target database. The probability of false peptide identification was reduced by only counting peptides at the 99% confidence level. Protein identification required at least one unique peptide identification and at least two unique spectra. Relative quantification of identified proteins was estimated according to the weighted and normalized ratios of uniquely identified peptides using the median ratio in Mascot. Differential expression of proteins was determined using Fisher’s test. Proteins with a 1.2-fold change and a P-value < 0.05 were defined as differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
Streptococcus agalactiae(GBS) is a seriously threat to the farmed tilapia, and oral vaccination was considered to be the most desirable means which requires deep understanding of virulence mechanism of the fish-derived GBS. Our previous genome study of the fish-derived attenuated strain YM001 showed that there were two large deletions in YM001 compared to its parental virulent strain HN016. In this study, a combined transcriptomic and proteomic analysis was performed on YM001 and HN016 strains, and the important genes were verified by RT-qPCR in bacteria strains and infected-tilapia tissues. Overall, we have shown that a total of 958 genes and 331 proteins were significantly differential expressed between YM001 and HN016. By functional annotation of these DEGs and DEPs, genes that were enriched in pentose phosphate pathway(pgm, ptsG, pgi pfkA, fbaA and FBP3) and pyruvate metabolism pathway(pdhA, pdhB, pdhC and pdhD) were identifed as important candidate genes for leads low growth ability in attenuated strain, which may be an important reasons leading virulence attenuation in the end. The expression levels the candidate genes in pentose phosphate pathway and pyruvate metabolism pathway were significant differential expressed in tilapia' brain and spleen when infected with YM001 and HN016. Our study indicated that the pentose phosphate pathway and pyruvate metabolism pathway that affecting the growth of the strain may be one of the important reasons for the virulence attenuation in HN016.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Tilapia, Streptococcus agalactiae

### Affiliations
Guangxi Academy of Fishery Sciences

### Submitter
ming chen

### Lab Head
Dr Ming Chen
Guangxi Academy of Fishery Sciences


