### Accession
PXD021593

### Title
A proteomic-informed view of the changes induced by loss of cellular adherence: the example of mouse macrophages

### Description
In vertebrates, all cells except circulating blood cells must adhere to support their normal growth and functions. The adherence to extracellular matrix and/or other cells is critical and adherent cells placed in non-adherent conditions either die or form multicellular spheroids. Placing cells in non-adherent conditions has been used to induce differentiation in teratocarcinoma cells and more recently to form organoids . Because of such important consequences induced by cell adhesion on cell growth and function, the transition between adherent and non-adherent states is rather rare. There are however physiological situations, such as blood cells diapedesis, during which cells that circulate into the blood stream must adhere to the endothelial cells and cross the endothelial barrier to reach target tissues. Another example of transition, from an adherent to a non-adherent state, is observed in the metastasic process, where cells detach from the tumor mass and circulate in the blood and lymphatic vasculature prior to reattaching and extravasating to colonize distant organs.  The comparative analysis of the only effects of adherence on cellular functions is complicated by the fact that in many study models the acquisition or loss of adherence induces major alterations in cell physiology that would obscure the effects of the adherence itself. For example, P19 teratocarcinoma cells differentiate in suspension spheroids while they do not in adhering conditions. In this context, the comparison between spheroids and adherent cells would not be a comparison between adherent and non-adherent cells, but between differentiated cells adhering between them and undifferentiated cells adhering on plastic.  Mouse macrophage cell lines represent one of the rare experimental models that may be suitable to compare the adherent and non-adherent states. Indeed, they grow equally well under adherent and non-adherent conditions and keep their differentiated functions under both conditions. We therefore decided to use this model to analyze the changes between the adherent and the non-adherent state using a broad approach, based on proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
The mouse monocyte/macrophage cell line RAW264.7 was purchased from the European Cell Culture Collection (Salisbury, UK). The cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum. Cells were seeded every two days at 200,000 cells/mL and harvested at 1,000,000 cells per ml. For the adherent vs. suspension cultures, cells were seeded at 500,000 cells/ml on either adherent T75 flasks or 6-well plates (Corning) or on non-adherent T75 flasks or 6-well plates (suspension culture flasks from Greiner) and let to grow for 24 hours. For harvesting the adherent cells in the adherent flasks, the culture medium (containing a few non-adherent cells) was removed, and the adherent cell layer was rinsed 3 times with serum-free RPMI 1640 medium. The cells were then scraped in Hepes buffered saline (Hepes-NaOH pH 7.5 10mM, NaCl 150mM, MgCl2 2mM) and collected by centrifugation (400g, 5 minutes). For harvesting the non-adherent cells in the non-adherent flasks, the flasks were shaken and the cell medium containing the non-adherent cells was collected, allowing the few adherent cells to stay within the culture flask. The suspension was centrifuged (400g, 5 minutes) and the cell pellet was rinsed 3 times with serum-free RPMI 1640 medium and once with Hepes buffered saline. The cell pellets were then processed for further use. For harvesting cells from adherent plates, the culture medium was removed, and the adherent cell layer was rinsed once with serum-free RPMI 1640 medium. The cells were then detached by incubation in PBS containing 1mM EDTA for 5 minutes, following by flushing repeatedly the cell layer. The cell suspension was then diluted with an equal volume of serum-free RPMI 1640 medium, and the cells were collected by centrifugation. For harvesting the non-adherent cells in the non-adherent plates, repeated flushing was used. The suspension was centrifuged (400g, 5 minutes) and the cell pellet was rinsed 3 times with serum-free RPMI 1640 medium. The 2D gel based proteomic experiments were essentially carried out as previously described [B. Dalzon, A. Torres, H. Diemer, S. Ravanel, V. Collin-Faure, K. Pernet-Gallay, P.-H. Jouneau, J. Bourguignon, S. Cianférani, M. Carrière, C. Aude-Garcia, T. Rabilloud, How reversible are the effects of silver nanoparticles on macrophages? A proteomic-instructed view, Environ. Sci. Nano. 6 (2019) 3133–3157.], on independent biological quadruplicates.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, the MS/MS data were interpreted using a local Mascot server with MASCOT 2.6.2. algorithm (Matrix Science, London, UK) against UniProtKB/SwissProt (version 2020-04, 563,082 sequences) The protein identification search was carried out in all species. Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 15 ppm for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS data, allowing a maximum of one trypsin missed cleavage. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues,  oxidation of methionine residues, acetylation of protein N-terminus, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues were specified as variable modifications. Protein identifications were validated with at least two peptides with Mascot ion score above 30.

### Publication Abstract
Except cells circulating in the bloodstream, most cells in vertebrates are adherent. Studying the repercussions of adherence per se in cell physiology is thus very difficult to carry out, although it plays an important role in cancer biology, e.g. in the metastasis process. In order to study how adherence impacts major cell functions, we used a murine macrophage cell line. Opposite to the monocyte/macrophage system, where adherence is associated with the acquisition of differentiated functions, these cells can be grown in both adherent or suspension conditions without altering their differentiated functions (phagocytosis and inflammation signaling). We used a proteomic approach to cover a large panel of proteins potentially modified by the adherence status. Targeted experiments were carried out to validate the proteomic results, e.g. on metabolic enzymes, mitochondrial and cytoskeletal proteins. The mitochondrial activity was increased in non-adherent cells compared with adherent cells, without differences in glucose consumption. Concerning the cytoskeleton, a rearrangement of the actin organization (filopodia vs sub-cortical network) and of the microtubule network were observed between adherent and non-adherent cells. Taken together, these data show the mechanisms at play for the modification of the cytoskeleton and also modifications of the metabolic activity between adherent and non-adherent cells.

### Keywords
Mouse, Cellular adherence, Lc-ms/ms, Macrophage

### Affiliations
LSMBO
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique (LSMBO), Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IPHC UMR 7178, 67087 Strasbourg Cedex 2, France

### Submitter
Hélène Diemer

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah CIANFERANI
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique (LSMBO), Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IPHC UMR 7178, 67087 Strasbourg Cedex 2, France


