### Accession
PXD021502

### Title
Training set - Novel insights into quantitative proteomics from an innovative bottom-up Simple Light Isotope Metabolic (bSLIM) labeling data processing strategy

### Description
The Simple Light Isotope Metabolic labeling (SLIM-labeling) is an inovative method to quantify proteome variations based on an original in vivo labeling strategy. Heterotrophic cells grown on a U-[12C] sole source of carbon synthesize U-[12C]-amino acids which are incorporated into proteins giving rise ultimately to U-[12C]-proteins. This results in a large increase of the intensity of the monoisotope ion of peptides and proteins, and therefore allows higher identification scores and protein sequence coverage in mass spectrometry experiments. The method initially developed for signal processing and quantification of the rate of incorporation of 12C into peptides was based on a multistep process that was found difficult to implement by many laboratories. To overcome these limitations, we developed a new theoretical background to analyze the bottom-up proteomics data using SLIM-labeling (bSLIM) and set simple procedures based on open source software, using dedicated OpenMS modules, and embedded R scripts to process the bSLIM experimental data. These new tools allow both the computation of the 12C abundance in peptides to follow kinetics of protein labeling, and of the molar fraction of unlabeled and 12C-labeled peptides in multiplexing experiments to determine the relative abun-dance of proteins extracted from different biological conditions. The tools also allow us to take into account incomplete 12C labeling as observed in cells with nutritional requirements for non-labeled amino acids. These tools were validated on experimental dataset produced using various yeast strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and growth conditions. The workflows are built on the implemen-tation of appropriate calculus modules in a KNIME working environment. These new integrated tools provide a convenient frame-work for a wider use of the SLIM-labeling strategy.

### Sample Protocol
S. cerevisiae strains S288c (MATα SUC2 gal2 mal2 mel flo1 flo8-1 hap1 ho bio1 bio6) 17 and its isogenic derivative BY4742 (MATα his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 lys2Δ0 ura3Δ0)18,19 were used through-out this work. S288c cells were grown on a defined synthetic medium (Yeast Nitrogen Base, with ammonium sulfate, with-out amino acid, Difco BD Life) with glucose (0.5 % w/v) as the sole source of carbon. BY4742 cells were grown under the same conditions, with filter sterilized L-Histidine, L-Leucine, L-Ly-sine and Uracil, 20 mg.L-1, 100 mg.L-1, 50 mg.L-1 and 20 mg.L-1 final concentration respectively. We ran two types of culture, using either regular glucose (N-Glc), or glucose containing only 12C carbon atoms (U-[12C]-glucose, Euriso-Top, Saint-Aubin, France; filter sterilized; 12C-Glc). The carbon isotopic composi-tion of N-Glc is 98.93 % 12C, 1.07 % 13C. Cell cultures (100 ml) were inoculated at an initial OD600 of 0.03 with liquid pre-cul-tures (10 ml of same medium inoculated at an OD600 of 0.03 with freshly grown colonies on YPD agar plates) and incubated in an orbital shaker at 30°C. The cells were collected by centrif-ugation for 5 min at 1200xg. The cell pellet was resuspended in 10 vol/g cells of lysis buffer pH 7.5 made of 20 mM Tris HCl; 140 mM NaCl; 5 mM MgCl2; 1 mM DTE and one tablet of pro-tease inhibitor cocktail 2X Sigma fast/10 ml lysis buffer. The cell extracts were prepared by vortexing the cell suspension for 6 cycles of 2 min in the presence of 2 vol/vol cell suspension of acid-washed glass beads (0.45-0.5 mm Ø). The cell lysate was diluted twice in the same buffer, and large cell debris was re-moved by centrifugation for 10 min at 1200xg. The supernatant, referred to hereafter as the cell homogenate, was rapidly frozen in 5 mg proteins/ml aliquot fractions and kept at -80°C. After a BCA protein assay, controlled amounts of protein extracts from 12C-Glc and N-Glc cultures were mixed for LC-MS/MS pro-cessing. Protein extracts (40 μg) were precipitated with acetone at -20°C. The pellet of proteins was collected by centrifugation. The acetone supernatant was carefully removed and the protein pellet was resuspended in 20 μl of 25 mM NH4HCO3 containing sequencing-grade trypsin (0.2 μg/μl aliquot fractions, Promega) and incubated overnight at 37 °C. The resulting peptides were desalted using ZipTip μ-C18 Pipette Tips (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus coupled to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1000 equipped with an Easy Spray ion source (all from Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by chromatography with the following parameters: Acclaim Pep-Map100 C18 pre-column (2 cm, 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 100Å), LC EASY-Spray™ C18 column (50 cm, 75 μm i.d., 2 μm bead size, 100 Å pore size) operated at 55°C, 300 nl/min flow rate, gradi-ent from 95% solvent A (water, 0.1% formic acid) to 35% sol-vent B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over a period of 97 min, followed by a column regeneration for 23 min, giving a total run time of 2 hrs. Peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell, in full ion scan mode, at a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200), with a mass range of m/z 375-1500 and an Automatic Gain Con-trol (AGC) target of 3x106. Fragments were obtained by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) activation with a collisional energy of 30%, and a quadrupole isolation window of 1.4 Da. MS/MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap cell in Top20 mode, at a resolution of 17,500 with an AGC target of 2x105, with a dynamic exclusion of 30 sec. MS/MS of most intense precursor were acquired first. Peptides with unassigned charge state or singly charged were excluded from the MS/MS acquisition. The maximum ion accumulation times were set to 50 ms for MS ac-quisition and 45 ms for MS/MS acquisition.

### Data Protocol
The two datasets consisted of a series of samples from S288c and BY4742 strains. In both cases peptides were analyzed as 1:0, 0.5:0.5, and 0:1 vol/vol mixtures of identical amounts of total protein extracts prepared from the NC and the 12C conditions, respectively. These data are used as training for our workflow.

### Publication Abstract
Simple light isotope metabolic labeling (SLIM labeling) is an innovative method to quantify variations in the proteome based on an original <i>in vivo</i> labeling strategy. Heterotrophic cells grown in U-[<sup>12</sup>C] as the sole source of carbon synthesize U-[<sup>12</sup>C]-amino acids, which are incorporated into proteins, giving rise to U-[<sup>12</sup>C]-proteins. This results in a large increase in the intensity of the monoisotope ion of peptides and proteins, thus allowing higher identification scores and protein sequence coverage in mass spectrometry experiments. This method, initially developed for signal processing and quantification of the incorporation rate of <sup>12</sup>C into peptides, was based on a multistep process that was difficult to implement for many laboratories. To overcome these limitations, we developed a new theoretical background to analyze bottom-up proteomics data using SLIM-labeling (bSLIM) and established simple procedures based on open-source software, using dedicated OpenMS modules, and embedded R scripts to process the bSLIM experimental data. These new tools allow computation of both the <sup>12</sup>C abundance in peptides to follow the kinetics of protein labeling and the molar fraction of unlabeled and <sup>12</sup>C-labeled peptides in multiplexing experiments to determine the relative abundance of proteins extracted under different biological conditions. They also make it possible to consider incomplete <sup>12</sup>C labeling, such as that observed in cells with nutritional requirements for nonlabeled amino acids. These tools were validated on an experimental dataset produced using various yeast strains of <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> and growth conditions. The workflows are built on the implementation of appropriate calculation modules in a KNIME working environment. These new integrated tools provide a convenient framework for the wider use of the SLIM-labeling strategy.

### Keywords
Light carbon isotope, 12c, Data processing workflow, Yeast, Quantitative proteomics, Openms, In vivo metabolic labeling, Knime

### Affiliations
Jean-Michel CAMADRO, PhD DR1 CNRS "Mitochondria, Metals and Oxidative Stress" group leader Head "Mass Spectrometry Lab and Proteomics core Facility" Jacques Monod Institute UMR7592 CNRS - Paris University 15 rue Hélène Brion 75205 Paris Cedex 13, FRANCE tel : 33(1)57278029
Institut Jacques-Monod UMR7592

### Submitter
Nicolas SENECAUT

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Michel Camadro
Jean-Michel CAMADRO, PhD DR1 CNRS "Mitochondria, Metals and Oxidative Stress" group leader Head "Mass Spectrometry Lab and Proteomics core Facility" Jacques Monod Institute UMR7592 CNRS - Paris University 15 rue Hélène Brion 75205 Paris Cedex 13, FRANCE tel : 33(1)57278029


