### Accession
PXD035975

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana metacaspase 3 interactome

### Description
This project aimed to identify proteins interacting with metacaspase 3 from Arabidopsis thaliana under regular growth conditions and

### Sample Protocol
WT and AtMC3 overexpressor plants were grown for 3 weeks. Tissue was collected from well-watered plants (control condition) and plants subjected to water withdrawal for 5 days and frozen immediately with liquid nitrogen. Protein extraction buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, Glycerol, 1% Triton X-100, o,1% SDS and 5mM DTT) supplemented with a 1:100 dilution of plant protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)- was added to the ground samples and centrifuged 20 minutes at 6,000 x g at 4°C. The supernatant was collected, transferred to a new tube and centrifuged at 11,000 x g 4°C. The supernatant was transferred in a new tube and protein concentrations were measured using Bradford (BIORAD) and equalized at 1.5μg. Fifty microliters of anti-GFP magnetic beads (Miltenyi Biotec) were added to the protein extracts and incubated for 1 h at 4°C in a rotary mixer. Magnetic beads were immobilized on a magnetic separator (Miltenyi Biotec) and washed and eluted according to the manufacturer’s instructions, followed by in-solution digestion with trypsin and desalting using home-made C18 StageTips. Samples was collected in four independent biological replicates for AtMC3 overexpressor and WT plants. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an UltiMate 3000 RSCL nano-HPLC system (Thermo) online coupled to an Impact II Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker) via a CaptiveSpray ion source boosted with an ACN-saturated nitrogen gas stream. Peptides were loaded on a uPAC 2cm reverse phase trap column (PharmaFluidics) and separated on anuPAC 50 cm reverse phase column PharmaFludidics).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified by matching spectra against the UniProt Arabidopsis thaliana protein database (release 2021_2) with appended MaxQuant contaminant entries using the Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant software package (version 2.0.1.0). Protein N-terminal acetylation and Met oxidation were considered as variable modifications, and enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P”. The “requantify” option was enabled, and false discovery rates (FDRs) for peptide sequence matches and protein identifications were set to <0.01. Data quality was assessed using the PTXQC-script v1.0.5 with standard settings (Bielow et al 2016). Further analysis was performed using the Perseus software package (v 1.6.15.0). Proteins flagged as contaminant or reverse protein entries were excluded from analysis, as were proteins not quantified in at least three of the four biological replicates in at least one of the four experimental groups (wt and MC3-overexpressor plants grown in wild type and draught conditions, respectively). Missing values were imputed using Perseus standard settings, and significant differences between the individual experimental groupsfollowed by analysis for significant changes using the ANOVA test (p-value 0.05) followed by Tukey´s Post-Hoc-test (FDR<0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Data obtained from subjects in the city of S&#xe3;o Paulo show that hypertension will be an increasing major public health problem as the adult population grows older. Information from over 5000 subjects indicated that males had a prevalence of hypertension almost 3 times that of females, with this difference being significant up to 44 years of age. Although mild and moderate forms of hypertension increased with age among both males and females, black males were noted to have diastolic blood pressures greater than or equal to 90 mm Hg in almost twice the frequency of their white counterparts. In addition, the demographic tendencies in S&#xe3;o Paulo of increasing older age groups over the last 2 decades compare similarly with data from other developed Western countries. Thus, the importance of hypertension in underdeveloped countries must not be underestimated.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Seedling, Control condition, Metacaspase, Draught

### Affiliations
University of Freiburg
ZEA-3 Analytics  Forschungszentrum Juelich

### Submitter
Pitter Huesgen

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Huesgen
ZEA-3 Analytics  Forschungszentrum Juelich


