### Accession
PXD037853

### Title
17 -estradiol impedes aortic root dilation and rupture in male Marfan mice

### Description
Thoracic aortic aneurysms have a higher prevalence in male patients compared to female patients.  Marfan syndrome causes a hereditary form of TAA with dilation of the aortic root.  Male patients with Marfan syndrome are more likely than women to have aortic dilation and dissection and mouse models of Marfan syndrome demonstrate larger aortic roots in males compared to females even after adjustment for body size.  Similar sex disparities are present in patients and models of abdominal aortic aneurysms where estrogen has been demonstrated to attenuate aneurysm formation perhaps through anti-inflammatory mechanisms.  In this study we demonstrate the effects of estrogen on aortic dilation and rupture in a Marfan mouse model and we investigate if these effects operate through suppression of complement components of the immune system.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse aortic root was homogenized in 8MUrea/5% SDS lysis buffer and processed on Protifi S-Trap high recovery tips to generate tryptic peptides for LC MS on a Thermo Fusion Lumos Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer in DIA-MS mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed in DIANN using a library free search.

### Publication Abstract
Marfan syndrome causes a hereditary form of thoracic aortic aneurysms with worse outcomes in male compared to female patients. In this study, we examine the effects of 17 &#x3b2;-estradiol on aortic dilation and rupture in a Marfan mouse model. Marfan male mice were administered 17 &#x3b2;-estradiol, and the growth in the aortic root, along with the risk of aortic rupture, was measured. Transcriptomic profiling was used to identify enriched pathways from 17 &#x3b2;-estradiol treatments. Aortic smooth muscle cells were then treated with cytokines to validate functional mechanisms. We show that 17 &#x3b2;-estradiol decreased the size and rate of aortic root dilation and improved survival from rupture. The Marfan transcriptome was enriched in inflammatory genes, and the addition of 17 &#x3b2;-estradiol modulated a set of genes that function through TNF&#x3b1; mediated NF-&#x3ba;B signaling. In addition, 17 &#x3b2;-estradiol suppressed the induction of these TNF&#x3b1; induced genes in aortic smooth muscle cells in vitro in an NF-&#x3ba;B dependent manner, and 17 &#x3b2;-estradiol decreased the formation of adventitial inflammatory foci in aortic roots in vivo. In conclusion, 17 &#x3b2;-estradiol protects against the dilation and rupture of aortic roots in Marfan male mice through the inhibition of TNF&#x3b1;-NF-&#x3ba;B signaling.

### Keywords
Estrogen, Aneurysm, Sex differences, Marfan syndrome

### Affiliations
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
Assistant Professor, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Cardiology

### Submitter
Sarah Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Parker
Assistant Professor, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Cardiology


