### Accession
PXD025582

### Title
Quantitative proteomic screen identifies Annexin A2 as a host target for Salmonella pathogenicity island-2 effectors SopD2 and PipB2

### Description
In this work we use stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and a S. Typhimurium mutant that secretes increased amounts of effectors to identify cognate effector binding partners during infection. Using this method, we identified the host protein annexin A2 as a binding partner for both SopD2 and PipB2 and were able to confirm its binding to SopD2 by reciprocal pull down. This indicates that SopD2 and PipB2 likely both interact with annexin A2 through protein-protein interactions to establish the S. Typhimurium intracellular replicativeniche. This demonstrates the value of studying effector interactions using proteomic techniques and natural effector delivery during infection rather than transfection.

### Sample Protocol
Infection of SILAC-labelled HeLa and analysis Light and heavy labelled HeLa cells were seeded at a density of approximately 4.5 x 10 6 cells per 15 cm culture plate 16-24 hours prior to infection. For all HeLa cell infections: overnight bacterial cultures were subcultured 1:33 in LB without antibiotics and incubated for 3 hours at 37˚C with shaking. 1 mL of bacterial cultures was pelleted and resuspended in Dulbecco’s Phosphate-Buffered Saline (DPBS) (Hyclone), diluted in the appropriate isotope-supplemented DMEM, and added to the HeLa cells at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of ≈100:1. Infections proceeded for 15 minutes at 37˚C in 5% CO 2 , after which non-internalized bacteria were removed by three washes in DPBS and cells incubated in growth media containing 100 µg/mL gentamicin until 2 hours post-infection, followed by growth media containing 10 µg/mL gentamicin for the remainder of the experiment. HeLa cells were infected for a total of 8 hours. For two of the three replicate experiments, seven 15 cm cell culture plates of light labelled HeLa cells were infected with one of T3SS2 + ∆sifA-pSifA-2HA, T3SS2 + ∆sopD2-pSopD2-2HA, T3SS2 + ∆pipB2-pPipB2-2HA, T3SS2 + ∆steA-pSteA-2HA, T3SS2 + ∆sseJ-pSseJ-2HA, T3SS2 + ∆sseF-pSseF-2HA, or T3SS2 + pACYC-2HA (vector control) (Table 1), while seven 15 cm cell culture plates of heavy labelled HeLa cells were infected with T3SS2 + pACYC-2HA. For the third experimental replicate, a label swap was performed wherein seven 15 cm cell culture plates of light labelled HeLa cells were infected with T3SS2 + pACYC-2HA and seven 15 cm cell culture plates of heavy labelled HeLa cells were infected with one of T3SS2 + ∆sifA-pSifA-2HA, T3SS2 + ∆sopD2-pSopD2-2HA, T3SS2 + ∆pipB2-pPipB2-2HA, T3SS2 + ∆steA-pSteA-2HA, T3SS2 + ∆sseJ-pSseJ-2HA, T3SS2 + ∆sseF-pSseF-2HA, or T3SS2 + pACYC-2HA. This label swap allowed us to control for interference by the heavy or light isotopes used for SILAC labelling. Infected light and heavy labelled cells were washed three times in ice cold DPBS and manually detached from the culture dish containing 5 mL ice-cold DPBS and transferred into 15 mL tubes. Cells were spun at 300 x g for 10 minutes in a centrifuge set to 4˚C. The supernatant was removed, and cell pellets were resuspended in RIPA buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, supplemented with mini cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) and incubated on ice for 10 minutes. Cell lysates were centrifuged for 20 minutes in a 4˚C microcentrifuge at max speed to pellet cell debris. Protein concentrations were determined using a Bicinchoninic Acid Assay (BCA) (Sigma). Lysates from cells infected with each of the seven different T3SS2 + strains were then mixed at a 1:1 ratio with lysate from the opposite SILAC labelled HeLa cells infected with the vector control T3SS2 + pACYC-2HA. E.g., lysate from light labelled HeLa cells infected with T3SS2 + ∆sifA-pSifA-2HA was combined at a 1:1 ratio with lysate from heavy labelled HeLa cells infected with T3SS2 + pACYC-2HA. 25µL of anti-HA magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added to the mixed lysates and incubated with end-over-end rotation overnight at 4˚C. Immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted from the magnetic beads using a basic elution protocol according to manufacturer’s specifications. Eluted proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, bands excised, and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion as previously described. The resulting peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a Bruker Impact II Qtof as described elsewhere.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were searched on MaxQuant version 1.6.7.0 against UniProt sequence database for human and S. Typhimurium. Mass spectrometry data were analyzed in Perseus version 1.6.7.0. STRING analysis was performed using the STRING database online tool version 11.0 (https://string-db.org/). Graphs were made using Prism9 (GraphPad).

### Publication Abstract
Intracellular pathogens need to establish an intracellular replicative niche to promote survival and replication within the hostile environment inside the host cell. Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) initiates formation of the unique Salmonella-containing vacuole and an extensive network of Salmonella-induced tubules in order to survive and thrive within host cells. At least six effectors secreted by the type III secretion system encoded within Salmonella pathogenicity island-2 (SPI-2), namely SifA, SopD2, PipB2, SteA, SseJ, and SseF, purportedly manipulate host cell intracellular trafficking and establish the intracellular replicative niche for S. Typhimurium. The phenotypes of these effectors are both subtle and complex, complicating elucidation of the mechanism underpinning host cell manipulation by S. Typhimurium. In this work we used stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and a S. Typhimurium mutant that secretes increased amounts of effectors to identify cognate effector binding partners during infection. Using this method, we identified the host protein annexin A2 (AnxA2) as a binding partner for both SopD2 and PipB2 and were able to confirm its binding to SopD2 and PipB2 by reciprocal pull down, although there was a low level of non-specific binding of SopD2-2HA and PipB2-2HA to the Ni-Sepharose beads present. We further showed that knockdown of AnxA2 altered the intracellular positioning of the Salmonella containing vacuole (SCV). This suggests that AnxA2 plays a role in the subcellular positioning of the SCV which could potentially be mediated through protein-protein interactions with either SopD2 or PipB2. This demonstrates the value of studying effector interactions using proteomic techniques and natural effector delivery during infection rather than transfection.

### Keywords
Salmonella, Proteomics, Silac

### Affiliations
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, Canada
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Jenny Moon

### Lab Head
Dr Leonard J. Foster
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, Canada


