### Accession
PXD029377

### Title
Intracellular and extracellular proteome characterization of virulent and avirulent Bursaphelenchus xylophilus isolates

### Description
The pinewood nematode (PWN), Bursaphelenchus xylophilu (Bx) s, one of the most serious forest pests, worldwide, is considered the causal agent of the pine wilt disease (PWD). The main host species belong to the genus Pinus and a variation in the susceptibility of several pine species to PWN infection is well-known. Additionally, it is also recognized that there is variation in the virulence among different B. xylophilus isolates. In the present study, we applied a quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics approach to perform a deep characterization of proteomic changes across two B. xylophilus isolates from different hosts and geographical origins and with different virulence. A total of 1456 proteins were quantified and compared between the two isolates secretomes and a total of 2741 proteins were quantified and compared between the nematode proteomes in two different conditions, pine tree extract and fungus stimuli.

### Sample Protocol
Nematodes from the Portuguese virulent isolate BxPt17AS (BxV) originally isolated from P. pinaster and the avirulent Japanese isolate C14-5 (BxAv) originally isolated from the insect vector Monochamus alternatus emerged from P. densiflora (Kiyohara, 1989) were maintained in cultures plates of the fungus Botrytis cinerea. The BxPt17AS isolate was used as virulent isolate (Cardoso et al., 2016, 2019,2020, 2021; Silva et al., 2021) and the C14-5 isolate was used as avirulent isolate (Mota et al., 2006; Aikawa and Kikuchi, 2007; Filipiak et al., 2015). Pine wood extracts were prepared from two years old P. pinaster seedlings as previously described (Cardoso et al. 2016) and the obtained solution was used as pine stimulus. Mixed developmental nematode stages of each isolate (BxV and BxAv) were collected from fungal cultures as described above and washed with SW. About 106 nematodes for each replica were resuspended with 5 mL of pine extract previously prepared and incubated over night at 25°C in 10 cm Petri dishes. Six replicates for each stimulus were performed. Nematodes (proteome) were then sedimented by centrifugation and separate from the supernatant (secretoma) containing the secreted proteins (±5 mL). Nematodes from each isolated collected from fungus cultures and not exposed to pine extract were also collected for analysis of the whole nematode proteins (proteome) under fungus conditions. For the preparation of secreted proteins, an internal standard [(IS - the recombinant protein maltose-binding protein fused with green fluorescent protein (MBP-GFP)] was added in equal amounts (1 µg of recombinant protein) to each sample (Anjo et al. 2019), and the supernatants with the secreted proteins were completely dried under. The resulting pellets were resuspended in SDS-Sample buffer. In addition to the individual replicates (6 in the case of the BxAv isolates and 4 replicates of the BxV), two pooled samples were created for protein identification and library creation by combining one-sixth of each replicate. For preparation of whole nematode proteome, nematode pellets were lysed in 1 mM Tris- HCl pH 7.4 as described in Anjo et al. 2017 followed by protein precipitation using TCA-Acetone (Anjo et al. 2016). Protein pellets were resuspended as described above and 50 µg of total protein per sample (6 replicates per condition) was used for SWATH-MS. Four pooled samples were also created for protein identification/library creation by combining 15 µg of each replicate. All samples were spiked with equal amounts of internal standard (MBP-GFP) prior protein digestion. Samples were digested as previously described (Cardoso et al, Anjo et al. 2015). All samples were analyzed on a NanoLC™ 425 System coupled to a Triple TOF™ 6600 mass spectrometer (Sciex®) using two acquisition modes: i) the pooled samples were analysed by information-dependent acquisition (IDA) and, ii) the individual samples by SWATH-MS mode. The ionization source was the OptiFlow® Turbo V Ion Source equipped with the SteadySpray™ Micro Electrode (1–50 μL). The chromatographic separation was performed on a YMC-Triart C18 Capillary Column 1/32′′ (12 nm, S-3 μm, 150 mm × 0.3 mm) and using a YMC-Triart C18 Capillary Guard Column (0.5 μm × 5 mm, 3 μm, 12 nm) at 50°C. The flow rate was set to 5 μLmin-1 and mobile phases A and B were 5% DMSO plus 0.1% formic acid in water or acetonitrile, respectively. The LC program was performed as followed: 5–35% of B (0–40 min), 35–90% of B (40–41 min), 90% of B (41–45 min), 90–5% of B (45–46 min), and 5% of B (46–50 min). The ionization source was operated in the positive mode set to an ion spray voltage of 4,500 V and source temperature (TEM) at 100°C. For IDA experiments, the mass spectrometer was set to scanning full spectra (m/z 350-1250) for 250 ms, followed by up to 100 MS/MS scans (m/z 100–1500) per cycle, in order to maintain a cycle time of 3.298s. The accumulation time of each MS/MS scan was adjusted to the precursor intensity (minimum of 30 ms for precursor above the intensity threshold of 1000). Candidate ions with a charge state between +1 and +5 and counts above a minimum threshold of 10 counts per second were isolated for fragmentation and one MS/MS spectrum was collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list for 15 s (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.7, Sciex). The rolling collision was used with a collision energy spread (CES) of 5. For SWATH experiments, the mass spectrometer was operated in a looped product ion mode (Gillet et al. 2012) and specifically tuned to a set of 90 overlapping windows, covering the precursor mass range of 350–1,250 m/z. A 50 ms survey scan was acquired at the beginning of each cycle, and SWATH-MS/MS spectra were collected from 100 to 1,800 m/z for 35 ms resulting in a cycle time of 3.251 s. The collision energy for each window was determined according to the calculation for a charge +2 ion centered upon the window with variable CES, according to the window.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and library generation were performed by searching all the IDA samples using the ProteinPilot™ software (v5.1, ABSciex®) with the following parameters: i) search against the annotated B. xylophilus protein database obtained from Wormbase Parasite derived from BioProject PRJEA64437 (Kikuchi et al. 2011) and MBP-GFP (IS); ii) acrylamide alkylated cysteines as fixed modification; and iii) trypsin as digestion type. An independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis using the target-decoy approach provided with Protein Pilot software was used to assess the quality of the identifications and positive identifications were considered when identified proteins and peptides reached a 5% local FDR (Tang et al. 2008. Sennels et al 2009). Quantitative data processing was conducted using SWATH™ processing plug-in for PeakView™ (v2.0.01, ABSciex®) (Lambert et al. 2013). After retention time adjustment using the MBP-GFP peptides, up to 15 peptides, with up to five fragments each, were chosen per protein, and quantitation was attempted for all proteins in library file that were identified from ProteinPilot™ search. Only proteins with at least one confidence peptide (FDR<0.01) in no less than three of the four/six replicates condition and with at least three transitions were considered. Peak areas of the target fragment ions (transitions) of the retained peptides were extracted across the experiments using an extracted-ion chromatogram (XIC) window of 3 minutes with 100 ppm XIC width. The proteins' levels were estimated by summing all the transitions from all the peptides for a given protein that met the criteria described above (an adaptation of Collins et al. 2013) and normalized to the levels of the internal standard or total intensity of each replicate, in the case of secretome or proteome samples, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
The pinewood nematode (PWN), <i>Bursaphelenchus xylophilus</i>, one of the most serious forest pests worldwide, is considered the causal agent of the pine wilt disease (PWD). The main host species belong to the genus <i>Pinus</i>, and a variation in the susceptibility of several pine species to PWN infection is well-known. It is also recognized that there is variation in the virulence among <i>B. xylophilus</i> isolates. In the present study, we applied a quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics approach to perform a deep characterization of proteomic changes across two <i>B. xylophilus</i> isolates with different virulence from different hosts and geographical origins. A total of 1,456 proteins were quantified and compared in the two isolates secretomes, and a total of 2,741 proteins were quantified and compared in the nematode proteomes in pine tree extract and fungus stimuli conditions. From the proteomic analyses, a group of proteins was selected and identified as potential virulence biomarkers and shed light on putative most pathogenic proteins of this plant-parasitic nematode. Proteomic data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD029377.

### Keywords
Virulent isolate, Pinewood nematode, Proteomics, Intracellular proteome; extracellular proteome; bursaphelenchus xylophilus, Avirulent isolate

### Affiliations
Centre for Functional Ecology, University of Coimbra
​Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra

### Submitter
Sandra Anjo

### Lab Head
Dr Joana Sá
Centre for Functional Ecology, University of Coimbra


