### Accession
PXD037734

### Title
A seven-transmembrane methyltransferase catalysing N-terminal histidine methylation of lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases

### Description
Lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases (LPMOs) are oxidative enzymes that help break down lignocellulose, making them highly attractive for improving biomass utilization in biotechnological purposes. The catalytically essential N-terminal histidine (His1) of LPMOs is post-translationally modified by methylation in filamentous fungi to protect them from auto-oxidative inactivation, however, the responsible methyltransferase enzyme is unknown. Using mass-spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics in combination with systematic CRISPR/Cas9 knockout screening in Aspergillus nidulans, we identified the N-terminal histidine methyltransferase (NHMT) encoded by the gene AN4663. Targeted proteomics confirmed that NHMT was solely responsible for His1 methylation of LPMOs. NHMT is predicted to encode a unique seven-transmembrane segment anchoring a soluble methyltransferase domain. Co-localization studies showed endoplasmic reticulum residence of NHMT and co-expression in the industrial production yeast Komagataella phaffii with LPMOs resulted in His1 methylation of the LPMOs. This demonstrates the biotechnological potential of recombinant production of proteins and peptides harbouring this unique post-translational modification.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from A. nidulans cell biomass with lysis buffer (2% Triton X-100, 1% SDS, 100 mM NaCl and 10 mM EDTA) combined with bead beating and sonication. Resulting protein lysate was prepared for protein digestion with LysC/Trypsin using protein aggregation capture using magnetic hydroxyl beads. Resulting peptides were prepared for LC/MS/MS analysis. For TMT analysis, peptides were tagged with TMT-11 reagents prior to LC/MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data dependent acquisition data were analyzed using MaxQuant software (including TMT and LFQ samples) and searched against the UniProt Emericella nidulans (taxonomy ID 227321, strain FGSC A4 / ATCC 38163 / CBS 112.46 / NRRL 194 / M139) reference proteome. PRM targeted data analysis was performed using Skyline software.

### Publication Abstract
Lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases (LPMOs) are oxidative enzymes that help break down lignocellulose, making them highly attractive for improving biomass utilization in industrial biotechnology. The catalytically essential N-terminal histidine (His1) of LPMOs is post-translationally modified by methylation in filamentous fungi to protect them from auto-oxidative inactivation, however, the responsible methyltransferase enzyme is unknown. Using mass-spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics in combination with systematic CRISPR/Cas9 knockout screening in Aspergillus nidulans, we identify the N-terminal histidine methyltransferase (NHMT) encoded by the gene AN4663. Targeted proteomics confirm that NHMT was solely responsible for His1 methylation of LPMOs. NHMT is predicted to encode a unique seven-transmembrane segment anchoring a soluble methyltransferase domain. Co-localization studies show endoplasmic reticulum residence of NHMT and co-expression in the industrial production yeast Komagataella phaffii with LPMOs results in His1 methylation of the LPMOs. This demonstrates the biotechnological potential of recombinant production of proteins and peptides harbouring this specific post-translational modification.

### Keywords
Fungi, Lpmo, Methyltransferase, Ptm, Lcms

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen
Vice Director, Professor  Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Proteomics Program  University of Copenhagen  Denmark

### Submitter
Tanveer Batth

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
Vice Director, Professor  Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Proteomics Program  University of Copenhagen  Denmark


