### Accession
PXD026597

### Title
iTRAQ analyses of Fe-sufficient and Fe-deficient non-transformant and HRZ-knockdown rice roots

### Description
We conducted iTRAQ analyses using soluble proteins extracted from roots of non-transformant rice (NT) and previously generated HRZ-knockdown (HRZi) lines (Kobayashi et al., 2013 Nat Commun 4: 2792) cultivated under Fe-sufficient and Fe-deficient conditions. We identified and quantified 3,033 and 3,525 proteins in replicate 1 and 2, respectively, which totaled 4,884 proteins including 1,698 overlapping proteins between the two replicate experiments.

### Sample Protocol
NT rice (Oryza sativa L.) cultivar Tsukinohikari and HRZ knockdown lines 2i-2 and 2i-3 (Kobayashi et al., 2013) were cultivated under Fe-deficient and -sufficient conditions for 7 days. Whole roots were harvested from 3 plants for each replicate and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen.  The frozen roots were ground into a powder using a mortar and pestle, and total soluble proteins were extracted using the P-PER Plant Protein Extraction Kit (PIERCE). The proteins (120 g) were used for the commercial iTRAQ® analysis (Filgen) as described in Santucci et al. (2012 PLoS One 7: e40112). The proteomic analysis was performed using two individual iTRAQ experiments using individual biological replicates. Replicate 1 comprised NT and 2i-3 plants, and replicate 2 comprised NT and 2i-2 plants.

### Data Protocol
The expression ratio for the Fe deficiency response in NT was calculated as (expression level under Fe deficiency)/(expression level under Fe sufficiency). The expression ratio for the HRZ knockdown response was calculated as (expression level in 2i-2 or 2i-3)/(expression level in NT). Proteins with a log2 expression ratio > 0.5 and < -0.5 were classified as induced and repressed proteins, respectively. Correspondence of each gi code of the identified protein to the RAP locus (Rice Annotation Project Database; http://rapdb.dna.affrc.go.jp/) was investigated using a blastp search on the NCBI website (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). The locus showing the highest identity to the query sequence with at least 10% coverage was chosen. The sequence without any locus showing > 50% identity and > 10% coverage were considered as having no corresponding locus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hrz ubiquitin ligases, Iron deficiency, Rice roots

### Affiliations
Ishikawa Prefectural University
Research Institute for Bioresources and Biotechnology, Ishikawa Prefectural University, 1-308 Suematsu, Nonoichi, Ishikawa 921-8836, JAPAN

### Submitter
Takanori Kobayashi

### Lab Head
Dr Takanori Kobayashi
Research Institute for Bioresources and Biotechnology, Ishikawa Prefectural University, 1-308 Suematsu, Nonoichi, Ishikawa 921-8836, JAPAN


