### Accession
PXD013539

### Title
Multi-omics analysis demonstrates unique mode of action of a potent new antimalarial compound, JPC-3210, against Plasmodium falciparum

### Description
The increasing incidence of antimalarial drug resistance to the first-line artemisinins, and their combination partner drugs, underpins an urgent need for new antimalarial drugs, ideally with a novel mechanism of action. The recently developed 2-aminomethylphenol, JPC-3210, (MMV 892646) is an erythrocytic schizonticide with potent in vitro antimalarial activity against multidrug-resistant Plasmodium falciparum, low cytotoxicity, potent in vivo efficacy against murine malaria, and favourable preclinical pharmacokinetics, including a lengthy plasma elimination half-life. This study demonstrates the application of a “multi-omics” workflow based on high resolution orbitrap mass spectrometry to investigate the impact of JPC-3210 on biochemical pathways within P. falciparum infected red blood cells.  Metabolomics and peptidomics analysis revealed a perturbation in hemoglobin metabolism following JPC-3210 exposure. The metabolomics data demonstrated a depletion in short hemoglobin-derived peptides, while peptidomics analysis showed a depletion in longer hemoglobin-derived peptides. In order to further elucidate the mechanism responsible for inhibition of hemoglobin metabolism, we used in vitro β-hematin polymerisation assays and showed JPC-3210 to be an intermediate inhibitor of β-hematin polymerisation, about 10-fold less potent then the quinoline antimalarials. Furthermore, quantitative proteomics analysis showed that JPC-3210 treatment results in a distinct proteomic signature in comparison to other known antimalarials. Whilst JPC-3210 clustered closely with mefloquine in the metabolomics and proteomics analyses, a key differentiating signature for JPC-3210 was the significant enrichment of parasite proteins involved in regulation of translation. In conclusion, multi-omics studies using high resolution mass spectrometry revealed JPC-3210 to possess a unique mechanism of action involving inhibition of hemoglobin digestion, depletion of DNA replication and synthesis proteins, and elevation of regulators of protein translation. Importantly, this mechanism is distinct from currently-used antimalarials, suggesting that JPC-3210 warrants further investigation as a potentially useful new antimalarial agent.

### Sample Protocol
Parasites were were solubilised with lysis buffer (100 mM N-2-hydroxyethylpiperazine-N-2-ethane sulfonic acid, 4% sodium deoxycholate, pH 8.1) supplemented with phosphatase and protease inhibitors for 10 min at 95°C. Proteins were reduced and alkylated using tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (Sigma) (TCEP) (10 mM final concentration) and iodoacetamide (Sigma) (40 mM final concentration) respectively. Proteins were then precipitated using 1:4 volume of trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and the supernatants were kept for peptidomics sample preparation. The pellets were resuspended in 1 mL of lysis buffer, and 500 µg of total protein, accurately determined using Pierce bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit (Thermofisher Scientific) were incubated overnight with trypsin (1:50; Promega) at 37°C. Trypsin activity was quenched using 5% formic acid (FA), and detergent was removed using ethyl acetate. Samples were then subjected to desalting using in-house-generated StageTips. Samples were then dried and resuspended in 20 μL of 2% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% (v/v) FA spiked in with indexed retention time (iRT) peptides (Biognosys) for LC-MS/MS analysis.   Liquid chromatography–MS/MS was performed using an Ultimate U3000 Nano LC system (Dionex) and Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher). Samples were loaded at a flow rate of 15 μL/min onto a reverse-phase trap column (100 μm x 2 cm), Acclaim PepMap media (Dionex), which was maintained at a temperature of 40°C. Peptides were then eluted from the trap column at a flow rate of 0.25 μL/min through a reverse-phase capillary column (75 μm x 50 cm) (LC Packings, Dionex).  For data independent analysis (DIA) acquisition, the HPLC gradient was set to 158 min using a gradient that reached 30% of ACN after 123 min, then 34% of ACN after 126 min, 79.2% of ACN after 131 min and 2% after 138 min for a further 20 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-independent mode with a 25-fixed-window setup of 24 m/z effective precursor isolation over the m/z range of 375-975 Da. TCA soluble supernatants from the proteomics experiments described above, were subjected to centrifugal filtration (10 kDa cutoff, Amicon Ultra) and used for peptidomics analyses. The flow-through containing endogenous peptides was collected, and an equal amount of ethyl acetate was added to remove residual detergent. Equal quantities of total peptides (30 µg measured using Pierce BCA protein assay kit) were then used for peptidomics analyses. Peptide samples were subjected to desalting and were then dried and resuspended in 20 μL of 2% (v/v) ACN and 0.1% (v/v) FA for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS was performed using the same method as the proteomics LC-MS/MS analysis (described above), with minor modifications. The HPLC gradient was set to 120 min using a gradient that reached 37.5% of ACN after 88 min, then 42.5% of ACN after 88 min, 99% of ACN after 93 min and 2% after 100 min for a further 20 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode with 2 microscan FTMS scan events at 70,000 resolution over the m/z range of 375-1575 Da in positive ion mode. The 20 most intense precursors with charge states 1-8 were selected for fragmentation with normalised collision energy 27.0, activation time of 15 ms and enabled dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Raw files for proteomics were processed using Spectronaut against an in-house generated P. falciparum (3D7 line) iRBCs library. The consensus library contained 42 245 peptides corresponding to 4421 protein groups. For spectronaut processing, raw files were loaded into Spectronaut version 11 with default settings. In brief, RT prediction type was set to dynamic indexed RT and correction factor for window was set to one. Mass calibration was set to local mass calibration. Interference correction was on MS2 level. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at peptide precursor level. For quantification, the interference correction was activated and a cross run normalisation was performed using the total peak area as normalisation base. A significance filter of 0.01 was used. Fold-changes for the drug treated samples compared to the DMSO control sample were calculated in Microsoft Excel.  Peptide identification was conducted with de novo sequencing–assisted database search using PEAKS DB software. Maximum mass deviation and false discovery rates were set at 15.0 ppm and 0.01 respectively. The identified peptide sequences from Homo sapiens (UP000005640) and Plasmodium falciparum (UP000001450) proteome databases detected in multiple samples were shortlisted. The mass-to-charge ratio and retention time of 130 shortlisted peptides were imported into TraceFinder (ThermoFisher). The peak intensity was obtained by manually adjusting the integration and accounting for retention time drift, when required. Log-transformed fold-difference and Welch’s t test were calculated in Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
The increasing incidence of antimalarial drug resistance to the first-line artemisinin combination therapies underpins an urgent need for new antimalarial drugs, ideally with a novel mode of action. The recently developed 2-aminomethylphenol, JPC-3210, (MMV 892646) is an erythrocytic schizonticide with potent <i>in vitro</i> antimalarial activity against multidrug-resistant <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> lines, low cytotoxicity, potent <i>in vivo</i> efficacy against murine malaria, and favorable preclinical pharmacokinetics including a lengthy plasma elimination half-life. To investigate the impact of JPC-3210 on biochemical pathways within <i>P. falciparum-</i>infected red blood cells, we have applied a "multi-omics" workflow based on high resolution orbitrap mass spectrometry combined with biochemical approaches. Metabolomics, peptidomics and hemoglobin fractionation analyses revealed a perturbation in hemoglobin metabolism following JPC-3210 exposure. The metabolomics data demonstrated a specific depletion of short hemoglobin-derived peptides, peptidomics analysis revealed a depletion of longer hemoglobin-derived peptides, and the hemoglobin fractionation assay demonstrated decreases in hemoglobin, heme and hemozoin levels. To further elucidate the mechanism responsible for inhibition of hemoglobin metabolism, we used <i>in vitro</i> &#x3b2;-hematin polymerization assays and showed JPC-3210 to be an intermediate inhibitor of &#x3b2;-hematin polymerization, about 10-fold less potent then the quinoline antimalarials, such as chloroquine and mefloquine. Further, quantitative proteomics analysis showed that JPC-3210 treatment results in a distinct proteomic signature compared with other known antimalarials. While JPC-3210 clustered closely with mefloquine in the metabolomics and proteomics analyses, a key differentiating signature for JPC-3210 was the significant enrichment of parasite proteins involved in regulation of translation. These studies revealed that the mode of action for JPC-3210 involves inhibition of the hemoglobin digestion pathway and elevation of regulators of protein translation. Importantly, JPC-3210 demonstrated rapid parasite killing kinetics compared with other quinolones, suggesting that JPC-3210 warrants further investigation as a potentially long acting partner drug for malaria treatment.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Proteomics, 2-aminomethylphenol, Antimalarial drug discovery, Mechanism of action

### Affiliations
Monash University
Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia

### Submitter
Ghizal Siddiqui

### Lab Head
Dr Darren Creek
Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia


