### Accession
PXD029965

### Title
Investigating the proteome of red blood cells and reticulocytes in Polycythemia Vera and Essential Thrombocythemia

### Description
The project aims at comparing the effect of the JAK2V617F mutation on protein expression in human erythroid cells in the context of Polycythemia Vera and Essential Thrombocythemia

### Sample Protocol
Fresh peripheral blood samples from aspirin treated or non-treated JAK2V617F PV (N=4) and ET (N=4) patients, and healthy donors (N=4). The erythroid cells were selected by cellulose separation following density gradient separation enriching the samples in reticulocytes as previously described (Gautier EF et al., Blood Adv, 2018). At least 1×106 reticulocytes and mature RBCs were sorted using BD FACSAriaII cell sorter (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) and Sony LE-SH800 cell sorter (Sony Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). Samples were washed with PBS and immediately stored at -80°C. Stored RBCs were then lysed for 5 min at 95°C in 200 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.5, 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate. Protein concentrations were determined using a bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA kit, Pierce). Proteins were reduced and alkylated in 10 mM TCEP [(tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine] and Chloroacetamide. Thirty-microgram of proteins were digested overnight with trypsin using the suspension trapping (S-Trap) method (ProtiFi). Eluted peptides were then fractionated using strong cation exchange (SCX) StageTips in 5 fractions as previously described (Kulak NA et al., Nat Methods, 2014) and vacuum-dried while centrifuge in a Speed Vac (Eppendorf). Mass spectrometry (MS) analyses were performed on a Dionex U3000 RSLC nano-LC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides from each SCX fraction were solubilized in 0.1% trifluoracetic acid containing 10% acetonitrile and separated on a C18 column (2-mm particle size, 75-mm inner diameter, 25-cm length; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 3-hour gradient starting from 99% solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and ending with 55% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.085% formic acid). The mass spectrometer operated in a data-dependent manner with full MS scans acquired with the Orbitrap, followed by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentations of the most abundant ions with detection in the ion trap for 3 seconds and with a precursor selection widow set at 1.6 m/z and a dynamic exclusion time of 30 seconds. The MS1 scans spanned from 350-1500 m/z with a resolution set to 60,000 and a 1.106 Automated Gain Control (AGC) target within 60 ms maximum ion injection time (MIIT). HCD Normalized Collision Energy was set at 30%. Ion trap scan rate was set to “rapid” mode with AGC target set at 1.105 and wit a MIIT of 60ms.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.6.0 (Cox J et al., Nat Protoc, 2009) using the Uniprot-Swissprot reviewed database (Uniprot-Swissprot, release 2019-10) and a protein false discovery rate of 0.01. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a constant modification and acetylation of protein N termini and oxidation of methionines as variable modifications. Labelfree protein quantification (LFQ) was done using both unique and razor peptides with at least 2 ratio counts. Data from all experiments were analysed simultaneously using the match between runs (MBR) option.

### Publication Abstract
Over 95% of Polycythemia Vera (PV) patients carry the V617F mutation in the tyrosine kinase Janus kinase 2 (JAK2), resulting in uncontrolled erythroid proliferation and a high risk of thrombosis. Using mass spectrometry, we analyzed the RBC membrane proteome and showed elevated levels of multiple Ca<sup>2+</sup> binding proteins as well as endoplasmic-reticulum-residing proteins in PV RBC membranes compared with RBC membranes from healthy individuals. In this study, we investigated the impact of JAK2<sup>V617F</sup> on (1) calcium homeostasis and RBC ion channel activity and (2) protein expression and sorting during terminal erythroid differentiation. Our data from automated patch-clamp show modified calcium homeostasis in PV RBCs and cell lines expressing JAK2<sup>V617F</sup>, with a functional impact on the activity of the G&#xe1;rdos channel that could contribute to cellular dehydration. We show that JAK2<sup>V617F</sup> could play a role in organelle retention during the enucleation step of erythroid differentiation, resulting in modified whole cell proteome in reticulocytes and RBCs in PV patients. Given the central role that calcium plays in the regulation of signaling pathways, our study opens new perspectives to exploring the relationship between JAK2<sup>V617F</sup>, calcium homeostasis, and cellular abnormalities in myeloproliferative neoplasms, including cellular interactions in the bloodstream in relation to thrombotic events.

### Keywords
Essential thrombocythemia, Erythrocytes, Nlc-ms/ms, Polycythemia vera, Reticulocytes, Human red blood cells, Jak2v617f, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Institut National de la Transfusion Sanguine, Laboratoire d’Excellence GR-Ex, F-75015 Paris, France
3p5-proteom'ic plateform

### Submitter
Virginie Salnot

### Lab Head
Dr Wassim El Nemer
Institut National de la Transfusion Sanguine, Laboratoire d’Excellence GR-Ex, F-75015 Paris, France


