### Accession
PXD001417

### Title
Comprehensive Assessment of Proteins Regulated by Dexamethasone Reveals Novel Effects in Primary Human Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells - secreted proteins of untreated cells

### Description
Inflammation is a physiological process involved in many diseases. Monitoring proteins involved in regulatory effects may help to improve our understanding of inflammation. We have analyzed proteome alterations induced in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) upon inflammatory activation in great detail using high resolution mass spectrometry. Moreover, the activated cells were treated with dexamethasone to investigate their response to this antiphlogistic drug. From a total of 6886 identified proteins, 469 proteins were significantly regulated upon inflammatory activation. Most of these proteins were counter-regulated by dexamethasone, with some exceptions concerning members of the interferon-induced protein family. To confirm some of these results, we performed targeted MRM analyses of selected peptides. The inflammation-induced up-regulation of proteins such as IL-1beta, IL-6, CXCL2 and GROα was confirmed, however with strong quantitative inter-individual differences. Furthermore, the inability of dexamethasone to down-regulate inflammation-induced proteins such as PTX3 and TSG6 was clearly demonstrated. In conclusion, the relation of cell function as well as drug-induced modulation thereof was successfully mapped to proteomes, suggesting targeted analysis as a novel and powerful drug evaluation method. While most consequences of dexamethasone were found compatible with the expected way of action, some unexpected but significant observations may relate with adverse effects.

### Sample Protocol
PBMCs were isolated from three different healthy volunteers with written consent of each donor and approval of the Ethics Committee of the Medical University of Vienna. 50ml of non-coagulated whole blood were collected in 6ml CPDA tubes (Greiner Bio-One GmbH, Austria) and immediately processed by diluting it 1:2 with RPMI1640 medium (Gibco, Life Technologies, Austria) supplemented with 100U/ml penicillin and 100µg/ml streptomycin (ATCC, LGC Standards GmbH, Germany). The diluted blood suspension was carefully overlaid on Ficoll Paque (GE Healthcare, Bio-Sciences AB, Uppsala, Sweden) and centrifuged at 500g for 20min at 24°C. The interphase was then collected and washed with PBS. The washed cell pellet was resuspendend in diluted autologous plasma and 4h incubated at 37°C and 5% CO2. Following 4h cultivation, cells were further grown for 3h in serum-free medium for secretome analysis and afterwards harvested. Supernatants were sterile-filtered through a 0.2µm filter and precipitated overnight with ice-cold ethanol at -20°C for isolation of secreted proteins. After precipitation, samples were dissolved in sample buffer (7.5 M urea, 1.5 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 0.05% SDS, 100 mM DDT) and the protein concentrations were determined by means of Bradford assay (Bio-Rad-Laboratories, Germany). For digestion of secreted proteins a variation of the FASP protocol was used. 3kD MWCO filters (Pall Austria Filter GmbH) were rinsed with LC-MS grade water (Millipore GesmbH). 20µg of each protein sample was concentrated onto the pre-washed filter by centrifugation at 15000g for 15min to get a final sample volume of 10-20µl. For reduction, 200µl of DTT solution (5mg/ml dissolved in 8M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (ABC buffer), pH 8) were added and incubation was performed at 56°C for 30min. After centrifugation at 14000g for 10min, a washing step with ABC buffer was performed. For alkylation, 200µl of IAA solution (10mg/ml in 8M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50mM ABC buffer) were added and incubation was performed in the dark for 45min. After centrifugation at 14000g for 10min, proteins on top of the filter were washed with ABC buffer. Afterwards, filters (with a maximum of 50µl sample volume) were placed in a new Eppendorf tube and 100µl ABC buffer as well as 10µl trypsin solution (0.1µg/µl) were added and incubation was performed at 37°C for 18h. After trypsin digestion, peptide samples were cleaned up with C-18 spin columns (Pierce, Thermo Scientific). Therefore, columns were pre-washed two times with 500µl ACN and equilibrated with 200µl 5% ACN, 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) by centrifugation at 1500g for 1min. The peptide samples were acidified to a final concentration of 1% TFA and transferred from the MWCO filters to spin columns. After centrifugation at 1500g for 1min, the flow-through was re-loaded on the column to maximize peptide binding and again centrifuged. After a washing step with 5% ACN, 0.5% TFA, the peptides were eluted two times with 40µl 50% ACN, 0.1% TFA and once with 40µl 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA into a new Eppendorf tube. Finally the digested peptide samples in the flow-through were dried and stored at -20°C until further MS analyses. For LC-MS/MS analyses dried samples were reconstituted in 5µl 30% formic acid (FA) and diluted with 40µl mobile phase A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA). 10µl of this solution were then injected into the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC-system coupled to a QExactive orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria). All samples were analyzed in duplicates. As a pre-concentration step, peptides were loaded on a 2cm x75µm C18 Pepmap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) at a flow rate of 10µl/min using mobile phase A. Elution from the pre-column to a 50cm x75µm Pepmap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) and subsequent separation was achieved at a flow rate of 300nl/min using a gradient of 8% to 40% mobile phase B (80% ACN, 2% H2O, 0.1% FA) over 95min. For mass spectrometric detection, MS scans were performed in the range from m/z 400-1400 at a resolution of 70000 (at m/z =200). MS/MS scans of the 8 most abundant ions were achieved through HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy and analyzed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17500 (at m/z =200).

### Data Protocol
ProteomeDiscoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification and qualitative data analysis. Protein identification was achieved searching against the SwissProt Database (version August 2014 with 20 194 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 10ppm for MS spectra and 50mmu for MS/MS spectra as well as a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Inflammation is a physiological process involved in many diseases. Monitoring proteins involved in regulatory effects may help to improve our understanding of inflammation. We have analyzed proteome alterations induced in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) upon inflammatory activation in great detail using high-resolution mass spectrometry. Moreover, the activated cells were treated with dexamethasone to investigate their response to this antiphlogistic drug. From a total of 6886 identified proteins, 469 proteins were significantly regulated upon inflammatory activation. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD001415-23. Most of these proteins were counter-regulated by dexamethasone, with some exceptions concerning members of the interferon-induced protein family. To confirm some of these results, we performed targeted MRM analyses of selected peptides. The inflammation-induced upregulation of proteins such as IL-1&#x3b2;, IL-6, CXCL2, and GRO&#x3b1; was confirmed, however, with strong quantitative interindividual differences. Furthermore, the inability of dexamethasone to downregulate inflammation-induced proteins such as PTX3 and TSG6 was clearly demonstrated. In conclusion, the relation of cell function as well as drug-induced modulation thereof was successfully mapped to proteomes, suggesting targeted analysis as a novel and powerful drug evaluation method. Although most consequences of dexamethasone were found to be compatible with the expected mode of action, some unexpected but significant observations may be related to adverse effects.

### Keywords
Drug effects, Proteomics, Cell biology, Inflammatory response, Adverse drug effects, Secretome, Mass spectrometry, Pbmcs

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


