### Accession
PXD033645

### Title
O-Glycoproteomic Analysis of Engineered Heavily-Glycosylated Fusion Proteins using NanoHILIC-MS

### Description
In this study, we identified and quantified the relative glycan distribution on UTI-Fc using nanoHILIC-MS for comprehensive mapping O-glycopeptides in UTI-Fc fusion protein. We quantified O-glycosylated peptides in the Fab domain and describe in detail for the first-time unexpected O-glycosylation at the linker and Fc region in UTI-Fc. These results highlight the improved performance of nanoHILIC-MS for characterization of biotherapeutic protein glycosylation in comparison to RP nanoLC-MS methods.

### Sample Protocol
For protein digestion, 10 µg of UTI-Fc was reduced with 10 mM DTT (Sigma) for 30 min at 55°C. Samples were then alkylated using 50 mM iodoacetamide  (Thermo-Fischer Scientific) for 30 min at room temperature in a dark room. After alkylation, additional DTT was added to quench the IAA. Sample was buffered using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) was added at an enzyme/substrate weight ratio of 1:50 incubated at 37°C overnight. Digested samples were desalted using Pierce C18 Spin Columns (Thermo-Fischer Scientific). Finally, samples were enriched in glycopeptides using HILIC SPE columns (Hilicon)

### Data Protocol
Glycopeptide analysis was performed using GlycReSoft 0.4.721. Glycan search space is included in Supplementary information. Prior to automatic identifications, raw files were converted to mzML format using MSConvert (ProteoWizard version 3.0.11252) with no additional filters. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was set as fixed modification and oxidation on methionine were specified as variable modification. The precursor ion (MS1) mass error tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion (MS/MS) error tolerance to 20 ppm. We required a minimum of two unique peptides for protein identification. Default parameters were used for setting the threshold score for accepting individual spectra. Glycan structures are represented according to Symbol Nomenclature for Glycans (SNFG)23 and linkage analysis were not determined, consistent with MIRAGE guidelines. Glycopeptide identifications and scoring function using GlycReSoft is described elsewhere

### Publication Abstract
Recombinant protein engineering design affects therapeutic properties including protein efficacy, safety, and immunogenicity. Importantly, glycosylation modulates glycoprotein therapeutic pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and effector functions. Furthermore, the development of fusion proteins requires in-depth characterization of the protein integrity and its glycosylation to evaluate their critical quality attributes. Fc-fusion proteins can be modified by complex glycosylation on the active peptide, the fragment crystallizable (Fc) domain, and the linker peptides. Moreover, the type of glycosylation and the glycan distribution at a given glycosite depend on the host cell line and the expression system conditions that significantly impact safety and efficacy. Because of the inherent heterogeneity of glycosylation, it is necessary to assign glycan structural detail for glycoprotein quality control. Using conventional reversed-phase LC-MS methods, the different glycoforms at a given glycosite elute over a narrow retention time window, and glycopeptide ionization is suppressed by co-eluting non-modified peptides. To overcome this drawback, we used nanoHILIC-MS to characterize the complex glycosylation of UTI-Fc, a fusion protein that greatly increases the half-life of ulinastatin. By this methodology, we identified and characterized ulinastatin glycopeptides at the Fc domain and linker peptide. The results described herein demonstrate the advantages of nanoHILIC-MS to elucidate glycan features on glycotherapeutics that fail to be detected using traditional reversed-phase glycoproteomics.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Fusion proteins

### Affiliations
Boston University
Zaia Lab, Department of Biochemistry, Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, United States

### Submitter
Gustavo Cavallero

### Lab Head
Dr Gustavo Cavallero
Zaia Lab, Department of Biochemistry, Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, United States


