### Accession
PXD010775

### Title
Comparison of bone demineralization protocols for paleoproteomics applications

### Description
Protocols for bone protein extraction adapted for radiocarbon dating were compared for their capability of being used also for paleoproteomics applications. Eight extraction protocols were tested on modern and archaeological bones. Molecular characterization of the extracts was performed by shot-gun proteomics. The effect of each extraction protocol on species identification through database searchnig was evaluated.

### Sample Protocol
Eight different collagen extraction protocols used in radiocarbon laboratories were tested. They were classified according to their “harshness”: A corresponds to the softest and H the harshest. All protocols included a demineralization step, either with EDTA (protocol A) or HCl (protocol B-H). The optional decontamination step was performed with NaOH 1 M (protocols B, D-G) or avoided (protocols A, C and H). Finally, “collagen” was solubilized in hot HCl. The obtained extract was, in some cases, further purified through filtration (protocols A-C, E-H) and/or ultrafiltration (protocols C-E) or dialysis (protocol F).  A complete description of each protocol can be found in Cersoy et al., Sci Rep. 7(1):7141 (2017). doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-07645-3.

### Data Protocol
Data were converted to mgf using Bruker Daltonics software DataAnalysis and generated compounds searched again public protein databases (using Mascot online software, SwissProt and NCBI databases).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Archaeozoology, Demineralization, Collagen, Paleoproteomics, Bone

### Affiliations
Museum national d'Histoire naturelle

### Submitter
Severine Zirah

### Lab Head
Dr Severine Zirah
Museum national d'Histoire naturelle


