### Accession
PXD029363

### Title
Genome-wide base editor screen identifies regulators of protein abundance in yeast

### Description
Proteins are key molecular players in a cell, and their abundance is extensively regulated not just at the level of gene expression but also post-transcriptionally. Here, we describe a genetic screen in yeast that enables systematic characterization of how protein abundance regulation is encoded in the genome. The screen combines a CRISPR/Cas9 base editor to introduce point mutations with fluorescent tagging of endogenous proteins to facilitate a flow-cytometric readout. We first benchmarked base editor performance in yeast with individual gRNAs as well as in positive and negative selection screens. We then examined the effects of 16,452 genetic perturbations on the abundance of eleven proteins representing a variety of cellular functions. We uncovered hundreds of regulatory relationships, including a novel link between the GAPDH isoenzymes Tdh1/2/3 and the Ras/PKA pathway. Many of the identified regulators are specific to one of the eleven proteins, but we also found genes that, upon perturbation, affected the abundance of most of the tested proteins. While the more specific regulators usually act transcriptionally, broad regulators often have roles in protein translation. Overall, our novel screening approach provides unprecedented insights into the components, scale and connectedness of the protein regulatory network.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics analyses, individual mutant strains were streaked out on YPD plates and incubated at 30ºC for several days. Overnight cultures were then inoculated from a single colony of each mutant strain in SC media. The next day, 3-ml cultures were set up at 2.5x106 cells/ml (OD600 = 0.05) and grown for several hours until they reached a density of 2.5x107 cells/ml (OD600 = 0.5). Of each culture, 2 ml were harvested by centrifugation for 1 min at 5000 g at 4ºC. Supernatant was removed and cell pellets stored at -80ºC. For cell lysis, 200 µl freshly prepared lysis buffer (8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl at pH 8) was added to each cell pellet. The resulting solution was transferred to 2-ml screw-cap tubes containing a 100-µl volume of glass beads (500 µm, Sigma G8772). Cells were lysed by 3x 5 min bead beating at 2400 rpm (40 Hz) on a BioSpec Mini-BeadBeater-96, with 1-2 min cooling on ice between cycles. Samples were then centrifuged for 5 min at full speed (at room temperature to avoid precipitation of urea) and cleared lysates transferred to new tubes. Protein concentrations were determined with a colorimetric bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Pierce / Thermo Scientific #23225). Absorbance at 562 nm was measured on a BioTek Synergy2 plate reader which indicated protein concentrations of 1-2 mg/ml.  For each sample, 25-50 µg of protein was further processed as follows. Protein disulfide bonds were reduced by the addition of 5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and incubation at room temperature for 30 min. Next, the free cysteine residues were alkylated by the addition of 10 mM iodoacetamide and incubation at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Subsequently, samples were diluted with 100 mM Tris-HCl at pH 8 to reach a urea concentration of less than 2 M. For the protein digest, 0.2 µg LysC (Wako #125-05061) and 0.8 µg trypsin (Pierce / Thermo Scientific, #90057) were added and samples were incubated at 37°C overnight. The digest was quenched by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 5% (v/v). Finally, samples were desalted using C18 tips (Pierce / Thermo Scientific #87784), dried under vacuum and reconstituted in 5% formic acid (v/v).  For liquid chromatography-coupled tandem mass spectrometric (LC-MS/MS) analysis, desalted peptides were fractionated online by nano-flow reversed phase liquid chromatography using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column consisted of a 25-cm fused silica capillary with 75 μm inner diameter that was packed in-house (Jami-Alahmadi et al., JoVE e62830) with ReproSil-Pur C18 particles  (particle size 1.9 μm; pore size 120 Å; Dr. Maisch). The linear 140-min water–acetonitrile gradient from 5% to 35% acetonitrile was delivered at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Mass spectrometric analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) run in Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode and with an inclusion list containing a total of six peptides from Tdh1 and Tdh2 to ensure their consistent quantification (IDVAVDSTGVFK(2+), LISWYDNEYGYSAR(2+), VVDLIEYVAK(2+), HIIVDGHK(2+), DPANLPWASLNIDIAIDSTGVFK(2+), GVLGYTEDAVVSSDFLGDSNSSIFDAAAGIQLSPK(3+)). MS1 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 (FWHM at 400 m/z) over a range of 400 to 1600 m/z with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. MS1 acquisition was followed by the acquisition of MS2 spectra from precursors falling into the inclusion list windows (monoisotopic m/z +/- 25 ppm). Precursors were isolated with a window of 1.6 m/z and fragmentation was obtained by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) at a fixed collision energy of 35%. MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000, a maximum injection time of 54 ms and dynamic exclusion for 5 s. The remainder of the 3-s cycle time was used to acquire MS2 spectra for other precursors at a resolution of 15,000 and an exclusion window of 25 s but otherwise identical parameters as for the inclusion list precursors.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification was performed with MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008). The search was performed against a S. cerevisiae S288C protein database containing 5917 protein sequences (version R64-2-1, Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD)). Only fully LysC- and trypsin-digested peptides with up to one missed cleavage were allowed. LysC was specified to cleave after lysine even if followed by proline and trypsin was specified to cleave after lysine and arginine if not followed by proline. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines  was  defined  as  a  fixed  modification  and  methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum-match (PSM) and protein-level false discovery rates (FDRs) were set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Proteins are key molecular players in a cell, and their abundance is extensively regulated not just at the level of gene expression but also post-transcriptionally. Here, we describe a genetic screen in yeast that enables systematic characterization of how protein abundance regulation is encoded in the genome. The screen combines a CRISPR/Cas9 base editor to introduce point mutations with fluorescent tagging of endogenous proteins to facilitate a flow-cytometric readout. We first benchmarked base editor performance in yeast with individual gRNAs as well as in positive and negative selection screens. We then examined the effects of 16,452 genetic perturbations on the abundance of eleven proteins representing a variety of cellular functions. We uncovered hundreds of regulatory relationships, including a novel link between the GAPDH isoenzymes Tdh1/2/3 and the Ras/PKA pathway. Many of the identified regulators are specific to one of the eleven proteins, but we also found genes that, upon perturbation, affected the abundance of most of the tested proteins. While the more specific regulators usually act transcriptionally, broad regulators often have roles in protein translation. Overall, our novel screening approach provides unprecedented insights into the components, scale and connectedness of the protein regulatory network.

### Keywords
Yeast, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
University of California, Los Angeles, United States
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Olga T. Schubert

### Lab Head
Dr Leonid Kruglyak
University of California, Los Angeles, United States


