### Accession
PXD026496

### Title
Silica associated proteomes of three diatoms reveal conservation of sequence motifs, proteins highly conserved among diatoms, and proteins targeted to specific silica structures

### Description
Proteins associated with diatom silica are likely involved in the biogenesis of the complex, species-specific morphologies of the biomineral, but only very few such proteins have been identified. In this project we extracted and identified proteins from three related, but morphologically distinct, species of centric diatoms: Thalassiosira pseudonana, Thalassiosira oceanica and Cyclotella cryptica.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution digestion for proteomic analysis by LC-MS/MS and in-gel digestion GeLC-MS/MS for were performed according to Kotzsch et al. 2016 [1] and Vasilij et al. 2012 [2] with slight modifications. In brief, for in-solution digests dried extracts were recovered in 10mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.4). Aliquots were digested either with trypsin, chymotrypsin or Asp-N with a final enzyme concentration of 50ng/µl overnight at 37°C and subsequently dried and stored until analysis at -20°C. The digest were again recovered in 50µl of 5% formic acid in water and 5µl were injected for LC-MS/MS analysis. For in-gel digest, areas of the gels, either stained with Coomassie G-250 (Sigma) or Stains-All stain (Sigma), were excised and proteins were treated for reduction and alkylation with DTT and iodacetamide. Afterwards proteins were digested separately with trypsin, chymotrypsin or Asp-N overnight at 37°C. Incubation was followed by extraction of the peptides and evaporation of the solution to dryness and samples were stored at -20°C. Peptides were recovered in 5% formic acid / water and injected for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed with a Velos-Orbitrap mass spectrometer or a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (both ThermoScientific, USA/Germany) hyphenated to nanoflow LC system (Dionex3000 RSLC, ThermoDionex, Germany or Eksigent 2D-LC, Sciex, USA) and operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification was performed with Mascot V2.6 (Matrixscience, UK) and peptide hits were evaluated and aggregated in Scaffold 4.11 (ProteomeSoftware, USA).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Morphogenesis, Silaffin, Intrinsically disordered proteins, Proteomics, Biomineralization, Valve, Fultoportula, Cell wall, Girdle band

### Affiliations
B Cube, TU Dresden, Germany
Molecular Analysis - Mass Spectrometry,
Center for Molecular and Cellular Bioengineering (CMCB), TU Dresden

### Submitter
Marc Gentzel

### Lab Head
Dr Nils Kröger
B Cube, TU Dresden, Germany


