### Accession
PXD010762

### Title
comparative proteome analysis of serum exosomes from newborn piglets inresponse to porcine epidemic diarrhea virus infection

### Description
The immune system is thought to be fragile in the neonate, which is susceptible to pathogens. Exosomes are a type of vehicles existing in the body fluid and participate in many biological processes, especially the immune response. Inorder to investigate the roles that exosomes may play during virus infection in the neonate, porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV), a devastating enteric virus to newborn piglets, was selected for infection. Serum exosomes were then isolated from the newborn-piglets infected or mock-infected with PEDV and followed by a label-free LC-MS/MS based comparative quantitative proteomic analysis. Among 441 proteins detected in the serum exosomes, there were lots of complement proteins. The expression level of the complement C3, C6 and CFB suffered drastic changes due to PEDV infection. After the confirmation by western-blot assay, we then investigated the function of these exosomes on PEDV infection and discovered that the exosomes from mock-infected newborn piglets restricted PEDV infection but this inhibition disappeared after exosomes were heat-inactivated, suggesting that the complement is one of the key antiviral molecules. These findings will facilitate the understanding of the antiviral response of the neonate mediated by exosomes

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes were isolated with a qEV size exclusion column kit (iZON) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Briefly, serum was pipetted onto the top of the filter column and entered into the column by gravity. PBS was also pipetted on the top of the column when the last of the serum just entered into the column. The exosomes were immediately collected after 3 ml of void volume outflowing the column.Exosome samples were added to the SDT buffer ( 4% (w/v) SDS, 100mM Tris/HCl，1 mM DTT, pH 7.6). The lysate was sonicated (10 sec on, then 15 sec off for 10 cycles) and then boiled for 15 min. After centrifuged at 14000 g for 40 min, the supernatant was quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad). A total of 20 µg proteins for each sample were then separated on 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel. Protein bands were visualized by Coomassie Blue R-250 staining. The gel band pieces were excised, reduced with 100 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in ABC. The detergent, DTT and other low-molecular-weight components were removed using UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) by repeated ultrafiltration (Microcon units, 10 kD). Then 100 μl iodoacetamide (100 mM IAA in UA buffer) was added to block reduced cysteine residues and the samples were incubated for 30 min in darkness. The filters were washed with 100 μl UA buffer three times and then 100 μl 25mM NH4HCO3 buffer twice. Finally, the protein suspensions were digested with 4 μg trypsin (Promega) in 40 μl 25mM NH4HCO3 buffer overnight at 37 °C, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. The peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma), concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm using an extinctions coefficient of 1.1 of 0.1% (g/l) solution that was calculated on the basis of the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins.  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 60 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z.. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, tandem mass spectra were extracted and analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.17. Search engines were set up to search against the Uniprot database (Version: Uniprot_Sus_scrofa(Pig)_35620_20170726.fasta). Two mixed cleavages were allowed. Main search was set to 6 ppm, MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Oxidation in M and Acetyl in A were selected as variable modifications. The false discovery rate at the peptide level and protein level were set to 0.01. iBAQ was performed in MaxQuan. Quantifiable proteins were defined as those identified at least twice in the three biological replicates. Strict cutoff values for differential proteins abundances between samples was recognized as p < 0.05 and > two-fold differences. Razor and unique peptides were used for protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Exosomes are vehicles in the body fluid that participate in many biological processes, especially immune responses. In this study, we employed comparative proteome analysis to investigate the roles of serum exosomes during viral infection in neonates using porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV), a devastating enteric virus in newborn piglets, as a model virus. Serum exosomes were first isolated from newborn piglets infected with PEDV or mock-infected newborn piglets, followed by label-free LC-MS/MS-based comparative quantitative proteomic analysis. Among the 441 detected proteins, 10 complement proteins were found in the serum exosomes, and significantly decreased expression levels of the C3, C6, and CFB complements were measured in PEDV-infected serum exosomes compared to those in mock-infected serum exosomes. After confirmation by Western blot, we then investigated the function of these exosomes in PEDV infection and discovered that exosomes from mock-infected newborn piglets restricted PEDV infection. However, this inhibition disappeared after the exosomes were heat-inactivated, suggesting that complements are key antiviral molecules. Our findings improve the understanding of antiviral responses mediated by exosomes in neonatal piglets and facilitate the discovery of novel antiviral drugs.

### Keywords
Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus, Neonate, Antiviral effect, Serum exosome, Complement

### Affiliations
lanzhou veterinary research institute
animal immunology group, lanzhou veterinary research institute

### Submitter
jianing chen

### Lab Head
Dr liu guangliang
animal immunology group, lanzhou veterinary research institute


