### Accession
PXD020303

### Title
Proteomic signatures of radioresistance:  Alteration of inflammation, angiogenesis and metabolism-related factors in radioresistant oesophageal adenocarcinomav

### Description
The clinical management of locally advanced oesophageal adenocarcinoma (OAC) commonly involves neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy (CRT), but complete pathological response to CRT only occurs in 20-30% of patients, as radioresistance remains a major clinical challenge. In this study we used an established isogenic cell line model of radioresistant OAC to detect proteomic signatures of radioresistance in order to identify novel potential molecular and cellular targets of radioresistance in OAC. Intracellular proteins obtained from radiosensitive (OE33P) and radioresistant (OE33R) cells were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. We identified 5785 proteins of which 251 were significantly modulated in OE33R cells, when compared to OE33P. Gene ontology and pathway analysis of the significantly modulated proteins demonstrated altered metabolism in radioresistant cells accompanied by an inhibition of apoptosis in OE33R cells. In addition, radioresistant cells were predicted to have an activation of inflammatory and angiogenic pathways when compared to the radiosensitive cells. For the first time, we  performed a comprehensive proteomic profiling of our established isogenic cell line model of radioresistant OAC, providing insights into the molecular and cellular pathways which regulates radioresistance in OAC, and we provided pathway specific signatures of radioresistance that will aid further studies on the development of targeted therapies and personalised approaches to radiotherapy, with the ultimate goal of improving response to radiotherapy in cancer patients.

### Sample Protocol
Total lysate preparation for Mass spectrometry The human OE33 oesophageal adenocarcinoma cell line was obtained from the European Collection of Authenticated Cell Cultures. The isogenic model of radioresistant OAC; OE33P (radiosensitive) and OE33R (radioresistant) cells was generated, characterised and cultured in our department as previously described [PMID 21128793]. Cells were plated in 100 mm dishes. Once confluent, media was discarded and cells were washed once in PBS. Subsequently, 300 μl of PBS was added to the plates, cells were disrupted using a cell scraper and collected in labelled eppendorfs. Cells were centrifuged (14,000 rcf, 10 min), and supernatant discarded. Cell pellets were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and transported on ice to Systems Biology Ireland for MS preparation. Cell pellets were resuspended in a lysis buffer containing 2% SDS (Fisher Scientific), 0.1M Tris-HCl pH 8, supplemented with protease inhibitor tablets (Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (phosSTOP Roche). Lysates were subjected to sonication (Syclon ultrasonic cell disrupter), boiling (95°C, 5 min) and placed on ice prior to centrifugation (14000 rcf, 10 min). Supernatants were transferred to eppendorfs and protein concentration was measured using the Pierce BCA protein assay kit as per manufacturers instruction (Thermo Scientific), using a SpectraMax M3 (Molecular Devices). Once quantified, DL-dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to the lysates at a final concentration of 0.1 M DTT. Subsequently, lysates were boiled (95°C, 5 min). Detergent was removed from the lysates prior to MS analysis using the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) procedure incorporating Vivacon spin ultracentrifugation units with a molecular weight cutoff of 30 kDa (Sartorius. Briefly, 200 μl of urea buffer (Fisher Scientific) UA buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.9) was added to 100 μg of cell lysate. Samples were added to the filter unit and centrifuged at 14000 rcf for 15 min. An additional 200 μl of UA buffer was added to the filter unit and re-centrifuged. Iodoacetamide (100 μl, 0.05 M prepared in UA buffer) was added to the filter units, incubated for 1 min on a thermomixer at 600 rpm and subsequently incubated in darkness for 20 min. Following the incubation period, filter units were centrifuged and washed twice with 100 μl of UA buffer followed by 2 washes with 100 μl of ABC solution (0.05 M NH4HC03). After the final wash step, filter units were transferred to a new collection tube and a multi-step digestion method was employed as described by Wisniewski and Mann (2. Wisniewski & Mann, Med-FASP). In the first instance, proteins were digested in a wet chamber overnight at 37°C using a solution containing Lys-C (Lysl Endopeptidase, Wako) and ABC buffer (1:50, enzyme to protein ratio). The following day, liberated peptides were collected by centrifugation and subsequent wash cycles with ABC buffer. Meanwhile, remaining proteins on the filter unit were digested using a solution containing Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega) and ABC buffer in a wet chamber at 37°C for a minimum of 4 hr. Once again liberated peptides were collected by centrifugation and subsequent wash cycles with ABC buffer. The concentration of the Lys-C digests and Trypsin digests were measured using a NanoDrop 2000. In total, 10 μg of each digest was loaded onto activated handmade C18 StageTips as described previously (3 RAPPSILBER reference). StageTips were desalted with two 1% TFA wash cycles and bound peptides were eluted with 2 X 25 μl of 50% ACN/0.1% TFA. Final eluates were concentrated in the speed-vacuum centrifuge (Centri-Vap concentrator, Labconco to a final volume of ~5 μl. Samples were then resuspended by adding 0.1% acetic acid, to a final volume of 15 μl and analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) connected to a Dionex x Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) incorporating an autosampler. A total of 5μl of Lys-c/tryptic peptides from each sample was loaded onto a homemade column (100mm length, 75 μm inside diameter [i.d]), packed with 1.9 μm ReprosilAQ C18 (Dr. Maisch, Germany) and separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient using a 40 min reverse-phase gradient (from 3%-32% Acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 220°C and a potential of 2000 V applied to the capillary. Scan parameters for MS1 were as follows: Resolution 70,000, AGC 3e6, MIT 60ms while scan parameters for MS2 were: Resolution 17,500, AGC 5e4, MIT 250ms, NCE 27.0, Isolation window 1.6m/z. The exclusion list parameters contained no entries and charge exclusion was set to un-assigned and singly charged. Both MS1 and MS2 were recorded as profile data.  All data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data-dependent switching mode. A high-resolution MS scan (350-2,000 Da) was performed using the Orbitrap to select the 12 most intense ions before MS/MS analysis using the Ion trap. Raw files were analyzed and relative protein concentration and identification were determined by label-free quantification using the MaxQuant software suite [3]. The MaxQuant parameters used were as previously described [1]. The resulting mass spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.0.25) containing the in-built Andromeda search engine to identify the proteins from a human database (Uniprot HUMAN, release 2012_01) containing 20,242 entries. Default parameters were selected in MaxQuant with the exception of the selection of the relevant enzyme, (LysC and Trypsin digests were separated between parameter groups). For database searches, the precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for first searches and 4.5 ppm for main Andromeda search. The search included a fixed modification of Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications of Oxidation (M);Acetyl (Protein N-term). Label free quantification with a minimum ratio count of 2 was selected, the maximum number of missed cleavages was set at 2 and minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. An FDR of 0.01 was set for peptide and protein identifications. Match between runs was selected with a matching time window of 0.7 min and alignment time window of 20min. The presence of reverse and contaminant identifications were removed from the dataset prior to statistical analysis.  Data Processing: Log2 transformed LFQ (label free quantification) were used for all analyses. Proteins were removed from the analyses if they were observed in fewer than 4 samples. Missing values for individual samples were replaced with the lowest observed value for that sample. Between-group comparisons were performed using a two-sided heteroscedastic t-test. The Benjamini and Hochberg (https://rss.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.2517-6161.1995.tb02031.x) approach was used to calculate a false discovery rate (FDR). Proteins were considered differentially expressed if they had an FDR < 10% and an absolute difference in their median log2(LFQ) value greater than 1.

### Publication Abstract
The clinical management of locally advanced oesophageal adenocarcinoma (OAC) involves neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy (CRT), but as radioresistance remains a major clinical challenge, complete pathological response to CRT only occurs in 20-30% of patients. In this study we used an established isogenic cell line model of radioresistant OAC to detect proteomic signatures of radioresistance to identify novel molecular and cellular targets of radioresistance in OAC. A total of 5785 proteins were identified of which 251 were significantly modulated in OE33R cells, when compared to OE33P. Gene ontology and pathway analysis of these significantly modulated proteins demonstrated altered metabolism in radioresistant cells accompanied by an inhibition of apoptosis. In addition, inflammatory and angiogenic pathways were positively regulated in radioresistant cells compared to the radiosensitive cells. In this study, we demonstrate, for the first time, a comprehensive proteomic profile of the established isogenic cell line model of radioresistant OAC. This analysis provides insights into the molecular and cellular pathways which regulate radioresistance in OAC. Furthermore, it identifies pathway specific signatures of radioresistance that will direct studies on the development of targeted therapies and personalised approaches to radiotherapy.

### Keywords
Oac, Oesophageal adenocarcinoma

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin

### Submitter
David Matallanas

### Lab Head
Dr David Matallanas
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin


