### Accession
PXD004440

### Title
Dynarrestin, a novel inhibitor of cytoplasmic dyneins 1 and 2

### Description
Aberrant hedgehog (Hh) signaling contributes to the pathogenesis of multiple cancers. Currently available inhibitors target Smoothened, which can acquire mutations causing drug resistance. Thus, compounds that inhibit Hh signaling downstream of Smoothened are urgently needed. We identified dynarrestin, a novel inhibitor of cytoplasmic dyneins 1 and 2 by using achemical proteomics approach. Dynarrestin acts reversibly to inhibit cytoplasmic dynein 1-dependent microtubule binding and motility in vitro without affecting ATP hydrolysis. It rapidly and reversibly inhibits endosome movement in living cells and perturbs mitosis by inducing spindle misorientation and a pseudoprometaphase delay. Dynarrestin reversibly inhibits intraflagellar transport (IFT) of the cargo IFT88 and flux of Smoothened within cilia without interfering with ciliogenesis as well as suppresses Hh-dependent proliferation of neuronal precursors and tumor cells. As such, dynarrestin is a valuable new tool for probing cytoplasmic dynein-dependent cellular processes and a promising lead compound for medicinal chemistry programs aimed at development of anti-cancer drugs.

### Sample Protocol
C3H10T1/2 cells were lysed in a lysis buffer containing 50 mM PIPES (pH 7.4), 50 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM EGTA, 0.1% NP40, 0.1% Triton X-100, 0.1% Tween 20, protease and phosphatase inhibitors and 1mM DTT. Streptavidin magnetic beads (New England BioLabs) were washed with PBS and then incubated with 10 µM of the biotinylated compounds in PBS for 30 min at room temperature. Immobilized probes were washed with PBS prior to incubation with the cell lysate (total protein amount 1.25 mg) for 1 h at 4°C. The beads were washed twice with lysis buffer that was supplemented with 75 mM MgCl2 followed by washing two times with PBS. Enriched proteins were leased from the matrix by boiling the samples in SDS sample buffer. Supernatants were loaded on a 4-20% SDS-polyacrylamide gel for protein separation. Gels were stained with Colloidal Coomassie, cut into 10-15 subsequent slices per lane, and subjected to in-gel digestion (Shevchenko, Tomas et al. 2006). Extracted peptides were then desalted using Empore-C18 StageTips (Rappsilber, Ishihama et al. 2003).  For LC-MSMS analysis peptides were eluted twice with 20µl of 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid each, dried in an Eppendorf concentrator to a volume of about 2µl and resuspended in 10 µl Buffer A (0.5% acetic acid). Peptides present in 6 µl of this solution were subsequently separated by reversed-phase chromatography using an EASY nLC HPLC system and in-house packed fused silica emitter columns (columns 15 cm x 75 µm ID by New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA; 3µm C18 particles by Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) that were online coupled via a NanoFlex ESI source (Thermo Scientific) to a Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 250 nl/min using a 2-segment gradient from 0-40% B (0.5% acetic acid in 80% acetonitril) in 70min and from 40 – 98% B in 5 min). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, acquiring full scan spectra at a resolution of 60.000 and an AGC target value of 3e6 (scan range 300 - 1650 m/z). The 15 most intense ions were chosen for collisional induced dissociation (CID). Dynamic exclusion was allowed and set to 30 sec (list size 500; duration 90 sec), uncharged as well as singly charged compounds were excluded from the analysis. Data were recorded with Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed using the MaxQuant computional platform (version 1.5.2.8)(Cox and Mann 2008). Identification of peptides and proteins was enabled by the built-in Andromeda search engine by querying the concatenated forward and reverse HUMAN Uniprot database (version from November 2012), including common contaminants. The allowed initial mass deviation was set to 7ppm and 20ppm in the search for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Trypsin with full enzyme specificity and only peptides with a minimum length of 7 amino acids were selected. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, while Oxidation (Met) and N - acetylation were defined as variable modifications. For protein and peptide identification a minimum false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was required.   Relative label free quantification was based on the measurements of 4 independent pulldown experiments with each compound (2 replicates for L357) and was performed using theLFQ algorithm of MaxQuant with the ‘match between runs’ option turned on. Data processing was performed using the Perseus module of MaxQuant version 1.5.1.6.  The output file (proteinGroups.txt) was filtered for reverse and contaminant hits as well as proteins that were identified by a modified site only. Proteins included in the analysis had to be identified with at least 2 different peptide sequences, one of these being unique for the protein group. Proteins that could not be discrimiminated by the presence of unique peptides were grouped together. Intensity values were logarithmized and missing values (NaN) were replaced by imputation, simulating signals of very low abundant proteins within the distribution of measured values. A width of 0.3 SD and a downshift of 1.8 SD was used for this purpose(Hubner, Bird et al. 2010). To identify proteins that significantly stand out in a groupwise comparison the ANOVA function of Perseus was applied (p = 0.05). Principal component analysis was performed on the list of significantly changed proteins to project the proteome measurements of the different compounds onto a two-dimensional data space. Hierarchical clustering (rows: proteins; columns: compounds) was performed using default values of Perseus (Euclidian distance; average linkage; pre-processing with K-means) subsequent to normalization of the matrix of significantly changed proteins by Z-transformation.

### Publication Abstract
Aberrant hedgehog (Hh) signaling contributes to the pathogenesis of multiple cancers. Available inhibitors target Smoothened (Smo), which can acquire mutations causing drug resistance. Thus, compounds that inhibit Hh signaling downstream of Smo are urgently needed. We identified dynarrestin, a novel inhibitor of cytoplasmic dyneins 1 and 2. Dynarrestin acts reversibly to inhibit cytoplasmic dynein 1-dependent microtubule binding and motility in&#xa0;vitro without affecting ATP hydrolysis. It rapidly and reversibly inhibits endosome movement in living cells and perturbs mitosis by&#xa0;inducing spindle misorientation and pseudoprometaphase delay. Dynarrestin reversibly inhibits&#xa0;cytoplasmic dynein 2-dependent intraflagellar transport (IFT) of the cargo IFT88 and flux of&#xa0;Smo within cilia without interfering with ciliogenesis and suppresses Hh-dependent proliferation of neuronal precursors and tumor cells. As&#xa0;such, dynarrestin is a valuable tool for probing cytoplasmic dynein-dependent cellular processes and a promising compound for medicinal chemistry&#xa0;programs aimed at development of anti-cancer&#xa0;drugs.

### Keywords
Dynarrestin, Dynein, Hedgehog signalling, Small molecule inhibitor

### Affiliations
Dr. Hannes C.A. Drexler Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster P:+49-251-70365550 P:+49-251-70365521 F:+49-251-70365299
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Dr. Hannes C.A. Drexler Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster P:+49-251-70365550 P:+49-251-70365521 F:+49-251-70365299


