### Accession
PXD024011

### Title
Bursaphelenchus xylophilus secretome under Pinus pinaster and P. pinea stimuli

### Description
The pinewood nematode, Bursaphelenchus xylophilus, the pine wilt disease's causal agent, is a migratory endoparasitic nematode skilled to feed on pine tissues and on fungi that colonize the trees. In order to study B. xylophilus secretomes under the stimulus of pine species with different susceptibility to disease, nematodes were exposed to aqueous pine extracts from Pinus pinaster (high susceptible host) and P. pinea (low susceptible host). Sequential windowed acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH-MS) was used to determine relative changes in protein amounts between B. xylophilus secretions, and a total of 776 secreted proteins were quantified in both secretomes.

### Sample Protocol
Pine extracts and nematodes: Pine wood extracts were prepared from two years old P. pinaster and P. pinea seedlings as previously described and the obtained solution was used to simulate pine stimulus of a high susceptible and low susceptible trees, respectively. Nematodes from a Portuguese isolate (BxPt17AS) maintained in cultures of Botrytis cinerea grown on Malt Extract Agar medium at 25°C for approximately two weeks were used. Mixed developmental nematode stages were collected with water from fungal cultures using a 20 μm sieve and washed at least three times with sterile water. Pine extracts stimuli assay: About 1×106 nematodes were resuspended with 5 mL of pine extract previously prepared and incubated overnight at 25°C in 10 cm Petri dishes. Six replicas for each stimulus were performed. Nematodes were then sedimented by centrifugation and separate from the supernatant containing the secreted proteins (+/-5 mL). Samples containing the secreted proteins were stored at -80°C until the proteomic analysis. Sample preparation for proteomic analysis: For the preparation of secreted proteins, an internal standard [(IS - the recombinant protein maltose-binding protein fused with green fluorescent protein (MBP-GFP)] was added in equal amounts (1 µg of recombinant protein) to each sample, and the supernatants with the secreted proteins were completely dried under vacuum using a Speedvac Concentrator Plus (Eppendorf). The resulting pellets were resuspended in SDS-Sample buffer, aided by steps of ultrasonication (using a 750W Ultrasonic processor) and denaturation at 95°C. In addition to the individual replicates (in a total of 6 replicates per condition), two pooled samples were created for protein identification and library creation by combining one-sixth of each replicate. To improve the protein identification and create a more comprehensive library of proteins from nematodes, pooled samples of the stimulated nematodes were also digested and analyzed. Afterward, samples were alkylated with acrylamide addiction, and gel digestion was accomplished by the Short GeLC approach.  Protein quantification by SWATH-MS: All samples were analyzed using the Triple TOFTM 6600 System (ABSciex®) using two acquisition modes: i) the pooled samples were analysed by information-dependent acquisition (IDA) and, ii) the individual samples by SWATH-MS mode. Peptides were resolved by liquid chromatography (nanoLC Ultra 2D, Eksigent®) on a MicroLC column ChromXP™ C18CL (300 μm ID x 15 cm length, 3 μm particles, 120 Å pore size, Eksigent®) at 5 μL/min with a multistep gradient: 0-3 min 2 % mobile phase B and 3-46 min linear gradient from 2% to 30% B. Mobile phase A corresponding to 0.1% FA with 5% DMSO, and mobile phase B to 0.1% FA and 5% DMSO in ACN. Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer using an electrospray ionization source (DuoSpray™ Source, ABSciex®) with a 25 μm internal diameter (ID) hybrid PEEKsil/stainless steel emitter (ABSciex®). For the protein identification by IDA experiments, the mass spectrometer was set to scan full spectra (350-1250 m/z) for 250 ms, followed by up to 80 MS/MS scans (100–1500 m/z from a dynamic accumulation time – minimum 40 ms for precursor above the intensity threshold of 1000 – in order to maintain a cycle time of 3.499 s). Candidate ions with a charge state between +2 and +5 and counts above a minimum threshold of 10 counts per second were isolated for fragmentation, and one MS/MS spectra was collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list for 25 seconds (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.7, ABSciex®). The rolling collision was used with a collision energy spread of 5. For SWATH-MS based experiments, the mass spectrometer was operated in a looped product ion mode and the same chromatographic conditions used as in the IDA run described above. A set of 168 windows of variable width (containing 1 m/z for the window overlap) was constructed, covering the precursor mass range of 350-1250 m/z. A 50 ms survey scan (350-1500 m/z) was acquired at the beginning of each cycle for instrument calibration, and SWATH-MS/MS spectra were collected from 100–1500 m/z for 19 ms resulting in a cycle time of 3.291 s from the precursors ranging from 350 to 1250 m/z. The collision energy for each window was determined according to the calculation for a charge +2 ion centered upon the window with variable collision energy spread (CES), according to the window.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and library generation were performed with Protein Pilot software (v5.1, ABSciex®) with the following parameters: i) search against the annotated B. xylophilus protein database obtained from Wormbase Parasite derived from BioProject PRJEA64437 (Kikuchi et al. 2011) and MBP-GFP (IS); ii) acrylamide alkylated cysteines as fixed modification; and iii) trypsin as digestion type. An independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis using the target-decoy approach provided with Protein Pilot software was used to assess the quality of the identifications and positive identifications were considered when identified proteins and peptides reached a 5% local FDR. Quantitative data processing was conducted using SWATH™ processing plug-in for PeakView™ (v2.0.01, ABSciex®) (Lambert et al. 2013). After retention time adjustment using the MBP-GFP peptides, up to 15 peptides, with up to five fragments each, were chosen per protein, and quantitation was attempted for all proteins in library file that were identified from ProteinPilot™ search. Only proteins with at least one confidence peptide (FDR<0.01%) in no less than three of the six replicates per condition and with at least three transitions were considered. Peak areas of the target fragment ions (transitions) of the retained peptides were extracted across the experiments using an extracted-ion chromatogram (XIC) window of 3 minutes with 100 ppm XIC width. The proteins' levels were estimated by summing all the transitions from all the peptides for a given protein that met the criteria described above (an adaptation of Collins et al. 2013) and normalized to the levels of the internal standard of each sample.

### Publication Abstract
The pinewood nematode (PWN), <i>Bursaphelenchus xylophilus</i>, the pine wilt disease's (PWD) causal agent, is a migratory endoparasitic nematode skilled to feed on pine tissues and on fungi that colonize the trees. In order to study <i>B. xylophilus</i> secretomes under the stimulus of pine species with different susceptibilities to disease, nematodes were exposed to aqueous pine extracts from <i>Pinus pinaster</i> (high-susceptible host) and <i>P. pinea</i> (low-susceptible host). Sequential windowed acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH-MS) was used to determine relative changes in protein amounts between <i>B. xylophilus</i> secretions, and a total of 776 secreted proteins were quantified in both secretomes. From these, 22 proteins were found increased in the <i>B. xylophilus</i> secretome under the <i>P. pinaster</i> stimulus and 501 proteins increased under the <i>P. pinea</i> stimulus. Functional analyses of the 22 proteins found increased in the <i>P. pinaster</i> stimulus showed that proteins with peptidase, hydrolase, and antioxidant activities were the most represented. On the other hand, gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of the 501 proteins increased under the <i>P. pinea</i> stimulus revealed an enrichment of proteins with binding activity. The differences detected in the secretomes highlighted the diverse responses from the nematode to overcome host defenses with different susceptibilities and provide new clues on the mechanism behind the pathogenicity of this plant-parasitic nematode. Proteomic data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD024011.

### Keywords
Pinus pinaster, Secretome, P. pinea, Swath-ms, Bursaphelenchus xylophilus

### Affiliations
Centre for Functional Ecology, University of Coimbra
​Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra

### Submitter
Sandra Anjo

### Lab Head
Dr Joana Sá
Centre for Functional Ecology, University of Coimbra


