### Accession
PXD034375

### Title
Raw data for mass spectrometry analysis of the effects of hypoxia on mitochondrial protein composition

### Description
This project wanted to demonstrate that mitoselfphagy degrades various mitochondrial proteins to a different extent. Therefore，we measured the levels of mitochondrial proteins under hypoxia by mass spectrometry analysis. After 24 hours of hypoxia, most mitochondrial proteins, locating at different mitochondrial compartments, were decreased to different extents relative to normoxic controls. After hypoxia, The certain mitochondrial proteins were increased, and some mitochondrial proteins remained almost unchanged. These data demonstrated that mitoselfphagy is different from traditional mitophagy that degrades the entire mitochondria, which degrades various mitochondrial proteins to a different extent.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were treated with normoxia (3 samples, N1/N2/N3) or hypoxia (3 samples, H1/H2/H3) for 24 h, then the cells were collected. Mitochondria were isolated by differential centrifugation and cracked into a mitochondrial protein solution. The volume of each mitochondrial protein solution is 100μL. The protein concentration of mitochondrial fractions was measured by the Bradfordassay. The protein concentration of mitochondrial fractions were 0.224μg/μL (N1), 0.314μg/μL (N2)，0.470μg/μL (N3), 0.380μg/μL (H1), 0.470μg/μL (H2), and 0.515μg/μL (H3), respectively. All samples were then digested and treated, and 1/5 of each protein samples (final products) were used for mass spectrometry. Therefore, the protein mass ratio of the 6 samples used for mass spectrometry is 1 : 1.4 : 2.1 : 1.7 : 2.1 :2.3. The mitochondrial protein samples were analyzed by mass spectrometry. Nanoflow LC-MS/MS analysis of tryptic peptides was conducted on a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap coupled to an EASYnLC 1000 ultra-high-pressure system via anano-electrospray ionsource (all fromThermo FisherScientific).

### Data Protocol
The comparison of mass spectrometry data should be a comparison of the equal amount of protein samples. However, the amount of protein for each sample used for mass spectrometry analysis is different, therefore, the values of each protein sample should be divided by the indicated ratio of protein amount ( N1 : N2 : N3 : H1 : H2 : H3=1 : 1.4 : 2.1 : 1.7 : 2.1 :2.3). The mass spectrometry data of mitochondrial proteins were selected for analysis, and mitochondrial proteins were divided into four parts: outer mitochondrial membrane proteins, Intermembrane mitochondrial space and inter mitochondrial membrane proteins, mitochondrial matrix proteins, and oxidative phosphorylation complexes proteins. The data were classified, analyzed and processed for heatmap production. The data were analyzed by Z-Score, and processed for heatmap production using MeV software. A Z-score is a numerical measurement that describes a value's relationship to the mean of a group of values. Z-score is measured in terms of standard deviations from the mean. If a Z-score is 0, it indicates that the data point's score is identical to the mean score. A Z-score of 1.0 would indicate a value that is one standard deviation from the mean. Z-scores may be positive or negative, with a positive value indicating the score is above the mean and a negative score indicating it is below the mean.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria are the key organelles for sensing oxygen, which is consumed by oxidative phosphorylation to generate ATP. Lysosomes contain hydrolytic enzymes that degrade misfolded proteins and damaged organelles to maintain cellular homeostasis. Mitochondria physically and functionally interact with lysosomes to regulate cellular metabolism. However, the mode and biological functions of mitochondria-lysosome communication remain largely unknown. Here, we show that hypoxia remodels normal tubular mitochondria into megamitochondria by inducing broad inter-mitochondria contacts and subsequent fusion. Importantly, under hypoxia, mitochondria-lysosome contacts are promoted, and certain lysosomes are engulfed by megamitochondria, in a process we term megamitochondria engulfing lysosome (MMEL). Both megamitochondria and mature lysosomes are required for MMEL. Moreover, the STX17-SNAP29-VAMP7 complex contributes to mitochondria-lysosome contacts and MMEL under hypoxia. Intriguingly, MMEL mediates a mode of mitochondrial degradation, which we termed mitochondrial self-digestion (MSD). Moreover, MSD increases mitochondrial ROS production. Our results reveal a mode of crosstalk between mitochondria and lysosomes and uncover an additional pathway for mitochondrial degradation.

### Keywords
Mitochondria fraction, Human, Lc-msms, Hela cell

### Affiliations
College of Life Sciences, Wuhan Univeristyege of Life Sciences, Wuhan Univeristylege of Life Sciences, Wuhan Univeristy
Wuhan University

### Submitter
Tianshu Hao

### Lab Head
Dr Zhiyin Song
College of Life Sciences, Wuhan Univeristyege of Life Sciences, Wuhan Univeristylege of Life Sciences, Wuhan Univeristy


