### Accession
PXD002022

### Title
Vav1 regulates T cell activation through a feedback mechanism and crosstalk between the T cell receptor and CD28 in CD3-stimulated T cells

### Description
Vav1, a Rac/Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor and a critical component of the T cell receptor (TCR) signaling cascade, is rapidly tyrosine phosphorylated in response to T cell activation. Previous studies using Vav1 knockout models have demonstrated its importance in TCR signaling. Although Vav1 has established roles in proliferation, cytokine secretion, Ca2+ responses, and cytoskeletal regulation, its function in the regulation of phosphorylation of TCR components, including the ζ chain, the CD3 δ, ε, γ chains, and the associated kinases Lck, and ZAP-70 is not well established. To obtain a more comprehensive picture of the role of Vav1 in receptor proximal signaling, we performed a wide-scale characterization of Vav1-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation events using quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of Vav1-deficient T cells across a time course of TCR stimulation. Among the 642 tyrosine phosphorylation sites identified and quantified in cells with or without Vav1, we observed statistically significant alterations in phosphorylation on proteins implicated in canonical actin cytoskeletal rearrangement and cell cycle progression, supporting the previously established role of Vav1 in these functions of TCR signaling. Critically, this study revealed a new role for Vav1 in negative feedback regulation of the phosphorylation of immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs within the ζ chains, CD3 δ, ε, γ chains, as well as activation sites on the critical T cell tyrosine kinases Itk, Lck, and ZAP-70. Our study also uncovered a previously unappreciated role for Vav1 in crosstalk between the CD28 and TCR signaling pathways.

### Sample Protocol
The J.Vav1 and J.Vav1.WT (15-11) cell lines were maintained in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated undialyzed FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin G, and 100 μg/ml streptomycin in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2 at 37°C. The J.Vav1.WT cell line medium additionally contained 0.5mg/ml Geneticin. OKT3/OKT4 stimulation of the TCR was performed for 0, 3, 5, or 10 minutes and cells were subsequently lysed in urea buffer. Reduction, alkylation, and trypsin digestion were performed. After desalt,  phosphotyrosine peptide enrichment was performed using p-Tyr-100 phosphotyrosine antibody beads (Cell Signaling Technology). Prior to immunoprecipitation, a 5 pmol fraction of synthetic phosphopeptide LIEDAEpYTAK was added to each replicate and time point sample as an exogenous quantitation standard. Samples were then desalted using ZipTip pipette tips according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Tyrosine phosphopeptides were analyzed by a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted through a PicoFrit analytical column (360 μm outer diameter 75 μm inner diameter-fused silica with 12 cm of 3-μm Monitor C18 particles; New Objective) with a reversed-phase gradient (0–70% 0.1M acetic acid in acetonitrile in 90 minutes). An electrospray voltage of 1.8 kV was applied using a split flow configuration. Spectra were collected in positive ion mode and in cycles of one full MS scan in the Orbitrap (m/z: 300-1700), followed by data-dependent MS/MS scans in the LTQ (~ 0.3 seconds each), sequentially of the ten most abundant ions in each MS scan with charge state screening for +1, +2, +3 ions and dynamic exclusion time of 30 seconds. The automatic gain control was 1,000,000 for the Orbitrap scan and 10,000 for the LTQ scans. The maximum ion time was 100 milliseconds for the LTQ scan and 500 milliseconds for the Orbitrap full scan. Orbitrap resolution was set at 60,000.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the non-redundant human UNIPROT "complete proteome set" database (UNIPROT database released 2011.10.21) containing 88,832 forward and an equivalent number of reversed decoy entries using the Mascot algorithm version 2.2.07 from Matrix Science. Peak lists were generated using extract_msn.exe (1/10/11) using a mass range of 600–4500. The Mascot database search was performed with the following parameters: trypsin enzyme specificity, 2 possible missed cleavages, 7 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions, and 0.5 Da mass tolerance for fragment ions. Search parameters specified a differential modification of phosphorylation (+79.9663 Da) on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues and methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) as well as a static modification of carbamidomethylation (+57.0215 Da) on cysteine. Mascot results were filtered by Mowse score (>20) and precursor mass error (<2ppm). Peptide assignments from the database search was filtered down to 1% FDR by a logistic spectral score, as previously described (26). The Ascore algorithm (27) was implemented to validate phosphorylation site position and the top-ranked Ascore predicted phosphorylation site position is reported.

### Publication Abstract
Vav1, a Rac/Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor and a critical component of the T-cell receptor (TCR) signaling cascade is tyrosine phosphorylated rapidly in response to T-cell activation. Vav1 has established roles in proliferation, cytokine secretion, Ca(2+) responses, and actin cytoskeleton regulation; however, its function in the regulation of phosphorylation of TCR components, including the &#x3b6; chain, the CD3 &#x3b4;, &#x3b5;, &#x3b3; chains, and the associated kinases Lck and ZAP-70, is not well established. To obtain a more comprehensive picture of the role of Vav1 in receptor proximal signaling, we performed a wide-scale characterization of Vav1-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation events using quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of Vav1-deficient T cells across a time course of TCR stimulation. Importantly, this study revealed a new function for Vav1 in the negative feedback regulation of the phosphorylation of immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs within the &#x3b6; chains, CD3 &#x3b4;, &#x3b5;, &#x3b3; chains, as well as activation sites on the critical T cell tyrosine kinases Itk, Lck, and ZAP-70. Our study also uncovered a previously unappreciated role for Vav1 in crosstalk between the CD28 and TCR signaling pathways.

### Keywords
T cell receptor, Tyrosine phosphorylaiton, Vav1

### Affiliations
Brown University

### Submitter
Arthur Salomon

### Lab Head
Dr Arthur Salomon
Brown University


