### Accession
PXD017500

### Title
APP infected and healthy Pig serum LC-MSMS

### Description
Porcine pleuropneumonia caused by Actinobacilluspleuropneumoniae (APP) is a swine respiratory disease with an important impact around the world either as a single infection or part of the porcine respiratory disease complex. The data of interaction between hosts and pathogens has becoming more crucial for exploration of the mechanism. However, up to now, comparatively little information is available on the systemic and dynamic changes that occur in pig serum in response to APP infection.  This study used iTRAQ to identify differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in pig serum in response to APP infection.

### Sample Protocol
Nine piglets were randomly assigned into two groups. Group 1 (control) comprised three pigs which received PBS, and group 2 nine pigs intranasally infected with L20.  Blood samples were collected in serum separation vacutainer tubes from control piglets at 0 h prior to infection, from three piglets of group 2 at 24 h post infection (mild symptoms), and from the remaining three piglets (group 2) at 120 h post infection (severe symptoms). Serum was separated from whole blood by clotting at room temperature for 30 min, aliquots transferred into sterile cryovials and stored at -80 ℃.Depletion of albumin and IgG in thawed serum was performed using the albumin and IgG depletion kit (GE Healthcare, Watertown, MA). Immunodepleted serum was further desalted using the 2D-cleanup kit (GE Healthcare, Watertown, MA), protein dissolved in rehydration buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% CHAPS, 1 m MTris, and 1 M NaCl), and the protein concentration determined using the 2D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare, Watertown, MA). iTRAQ analysis was performed by Beijing Qinglian Biotech co.Ltd (Beijing, China). Post-digestion iTRAQ labeling was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA). To control for biological and technical variations, three independent iTRAQ experiments were performed.LC-MS/MS analysis was performed by Beijing Qinglian Biotech co.Ltd (Beijing, China).The peptide mixture from each fraction was injected for nano LC-MS/ MS analysis. To achieve reliable statistics, three technical replicates were analyzed.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data from three biological replicates were transformed into Mascot generic format (.mgf) files. The MS/MS spectra were searched using Mascot (version 2.3.02; Matrix Science, London, UK) against the nonredundant International Protein Index database from the European Bioinformatics Institute. To filter the results, we employed a false discovery rate (FDR) of ≤ 1% for identification. The unique protein with at least one particular peptide was identified. The FDR was set to ≤ 1% for identification of both proteins and peptides. All peptides with a minimum confidence level of 95% (unused confidence score > 1.3) were used as qualification criteria. Relative quantification was calculated based on the ratio of peak areas from MS/MS spectra. For DEPs, a log2 fold change ≥ 1 was considered upregulated, and a log2 fold change ≤ -1 was classified as downregulated.

### Publication Abstract
Porcine pleuropneumonia caused by Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae (APP) is a swine respiratory disease with an important impact around the world either as a single infection or part of the porcine respiratory disease complex. The data of interaction between hosts and pathogens has becoming more crucial for exploration of the mechanism. However, up to now, comparatively little information is available on the systemic and dynamic changes that occur in pig serum in response to APP infection. This study used iTRAQ to identify differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in pig serum in response to APP infection. Compared with the APP un-infected group (S0),there were 137 up-regulated and 68 down-regulated proteins at 24&#xa0;h (S24), and 81 up-regulated and 107 down-regulated proteins at 120&#xa0;h (S120). At 24&#xa0;h, the immune response was not significantly enriched, but cell adhesion, cytosol, Golgi apparatus, GTP and ATP binding and regulation of cell cycle were extremely active, implying host preparation of immune response starting. Subsequently, innate immune response, negative regulation of apoptotic process, immunological synapse, adaptive immune response, the regulation of inflammatory response, positive regulation of T cell proliferation were more enhanced at 120&#xa0;h then that of 24&#xa0;h, representing innate immunity transferring to the adaptive, while endocytosis, cell adhesion and platelet aggregation showed obvious decline. The pathways of T cell receptor signaling pathway, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, complement and coagulation cascades, leukocyte transendothelial migration were active remarkably during all infection period, and more pathways could connect to form innate immune defense networks. Surprisingly, the pathways like amoebiasis, rheumatoid arthritis and malaria had been found up-regulated. As a conclusion, APP could delay host inflammatory response to the infection at early stage, and induced innate immunity to convert from adhesion, interaction into complement activation, proteasome digestion, bacterial invasion at later stage. This would increase our understanding of the porcine distinct response to APP infection.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Serum, Pig

### Affiliations
Jilin University
Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Ministry of Education, College of Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, P. R. China

### Submitter
Zhu Rining

### Lab Head
Dr Lei Liancheng
Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Ministry of Education, College of Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, P. R. China


