### Accession
PXD008284

### Title
Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture based proteomics reveals differences in protein abundances between spiral and coccoid forms of the gastric pathogen Helicobacter pylori

### Description
Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) is a ε-proteobacterium that colonizes the stomach of about half of the world's population. Persistent infections have been associated with several gastric diseases. Mainly rod- or spiral shaped but also coccoid H. pylori forms have been isolated from mucus layer biopsies of patients. It is still being debated whether the coccoid form can be transformed back into the spiral form or whether this morphology is a result of bacterial cell death or persistence. We established stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) for quantitative proteomics of H. pylori and applied it to investigate differences between the spiral and the coccoid morphology. We detected 72% and were able to relatively quantify 47% of the H. pylori proteome. Proteins involved in cell division and transcriptional and translational processes showed a lower abundance in coccoid cells. Additionally, proteins related to host colonization, including CagA, the arginase RocF, and the TNF-α inducing protein were down-regulated. The fact that outer membrane proteins were observed at higher abundances might represent a mechanism for immune evasion but also preserves adherence to host cells. The established protocol for relative protein quantification of H. pylori samples offers new possibilities for research on H. pylori.

### Sample Protocol
H. pylori strain 26695 was cultured in Ham's F12 medium (without arginine, Biosera, UK) supplemented with either “light” (12C6, 14N4), “heavy” (13C6, 15N4) or “medium” (13C6, 14N4) isotopically labeled arginine (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, USA) and 5% (v/v) dialyzed fetal calf serum (FCS) (Thermo Scientific, USA). Four biological replicates were investigated in this study. Lysinewas not used for isotopic labeling due to insufficient incorporation into proteins. Samples were fractionated by SDS-PAGE and Off-gel fractionation by gel-eluted liquid fraction entrapment electrophoresis (GELFREE) on a GELFREE 8100 Fractionation System(Expedeon, USA) with a 12% tris acetate cartridge kit (Expedeon, USA). Each fraction was digested separately with trypsin and AspN. Peptides were separated on a nano-HPLC system with a C18 column (nanoAcquity, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled online with an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). The mass spectrometer automatically switched between full scan MS mode (m/z 300–1600, R = 60,000) and tandem MS acquisition. Peptide ions exceeding an intensity of 2000 counts were fragmented within the linear ion trap by CID(isolationwidth 3 amu, normalized collision energy 35%, activation time 10 ms, activation Q 0.25). A dynamic precursor exclusion of 2 min for MS/MS measurements was applied.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant (version 1.2.2.5, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany) was used for peptide identification and relative protein quantification. Peptide and protein identification was performed by Andromeda using a concatenated database containing forward and reverse entries of all proteins of H. pylori strain 26695 from NCBI refined by results of our recent proteogenomic analysis (1661 entries). Precursor masses were recalibrated by the option “first search” using a peptidemass tolerance of 20 ppm. Themain search was performed with a peptide mass tolerance of 6 ppmand a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. A maximum of two proteolytic missed cleavageswere accepted. For samples digestedwith trypsin, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. For endoprotease AspN digestions, pyro-glutamine formation of glutamic acid and glutamine at the peptideN-terminuswas additionally specified as variable modifications. AspN specificity was defined to cleave at the N-terminal side of aspartic acid and glutamic acid. A FDR of 1% was applied for peptide and protein identifications and two unique peptides were required for protein identifications. For relative protein quantification, the required minimum ratio counts were set to two.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Helicobacter pylori, Silac

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan Alexander Mueller
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany


