### Accession
PXD022346

### Title
MKRN3 interacting proteins identified by LC-MS/MS

### Description
MKRN3, whose deletion or loss-of-function mutations were genetically associated with human centeral precocious puberty (CPP). To identify the potential substrates for MKRN3, MKRN3 was transfected into HEK293T cells as bait, and its interacting proteins were identified by mass spectrum and functions were extensively studied.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with empty vectors or MKRN3-3xFlag, lysed in COIP buffer and incubated with anti-Flag affinity gels with or without RNase A. The immunoprecipitates were washed three times with COIP buffer, and eluted with 8M urea dissolved in 100mM Tris-Cl (pH 8.0), followed by TCEP reduction, CAA alkylation and trypsin digestion. Peptides were separated by the EASY-nLC 1000 system (ThermoFisher Scientific, CA). Peptides were separated by the EASY-nLC 1000 system (ThermoFisher Scientific, CA). The column (15 cm in length, 75 µm inner diameter) was packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). The high resolution data acquisitions were acquired on the Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, CA). Peptides was loaded onto the column and separated with a linear gradient of 5-30% buffer B (ACN with 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 36 min. The total time for reversed phase analysis was 45 min. Data was acquired in the data-dependent “top15” mode, in which fifteen most abundant precursor ions were selected with high resolution (120 000 @ m/z 200) from the full scan (300-1500 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Precursor ions with singly charged and charge information unassigned were excluded. Resolution for MS/MS spectra was set to 15 000 @ m/z 200, target value was 1E5 (AGC control enabled) and isolation window was set to 0.7 m/z. Normalized collision energy was 30.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant software, version 1.5.2.8, and peptide lists were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database (protein items: 92607, 201608). The database search was configured with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine as expected using trypsin as proteases. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide identification was performed with an initial precursor mass deviation up to 7 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for protein and peptide levels with a minimum length of 7 amino acids for peptides identification. Label-free protein quantitation (LFQ) was performed with a minimum ratio count of 2. To detect the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), proteins detected (intensity > 0) in at least 3 samples were considered. Missing values were imputed with the minimum value across our proteome data. Then, data was normalized based on quantile. The one-sided t test (as implemented in R software) was used to assess the DEPs. P-value was adjusted by Benjamini & Hochberg method. Proteins with adjust p-value ≤0.05 and fold change ≥ 8 were considered to be up expressed genes. To further explore the functions of DEPs, GO and KEGG enrichment analysis were performed with “clusterProfiler” package in R. Adjusted P ≤ 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Network was displayed using Cytoscape.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Hek293t, Mkrn3, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology/Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science

### Submitter
Menghuan Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Ronggui Hu
Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology/Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science


