### Accession
PXD031417

### Title
Ubiquitination of protein Tau in Alzheimer's disease

### Description
Identification of posttranlational modifications of Tau in Alzheimer's disease

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from AD brain, and then protein Tau was enriched with IP and digested with trypsin. The resulting peptides were analyzed with LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant software.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitin-modified tau aggregates are abundantly found in human brains diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease (AD) and other tauopathies. Soluble tau oligomers (TauO) are the most neurotoxic tau species that propagate pathology and elicit cognitive deficits, but whether ubiquitination contributes to tau formation and spreading is not fully understood. Here, we observed that K63-linked, but not K48-linked, ubiquitinated TauO accumulated at higher levels in AD brains compared with age-matched controls. Using mass spectrometry analyses, we identified 11 ubiquitinated sites on AD brain-derived TauO (AD TauO). We found that K63-linked TauO are associated with enhanced seeding activity and propagation in human tau-expressing primary neuronal and tau biosensor cells. Additionally, exposure of tau-inducible HEK cells to AD TauO with different ubiquitin linkages (wild type, K48, and K63) resulted in enhanced formation and secretion of K63-linked TauO, which was associated with impaired proteasome and lysosome functions. Multipathway analysis also revealed the involvement of K63-linked TauO in cell survival pathways, which are impaired in AD. Collectively, our study highlights the significance of selective TauO ubiquitination, which could influence tau aggregation, accumulation, and subsequent pathological propagation. The insights gained from this study hold great promise for targeted therapeutic intervention in AD and related tauopathies.

### Keywords
Posttranslational modifications, Tau, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
University of Texas Medical Branch

### Submitter
Yingxin Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Yingxin Zhao, Ph.D.
University of Texas Medical Branch


