### Accession
PXD020960

### Title
Propionate production from carbon monoxide by synthetic co-cultures of Acetobacterium wieringae spp. and propionigenic bacteria

### Description
This study was conducted in order to evaluate the physiological ability for syngas conversion into propionate by a synthetic co-culture. A proteogenomics approach was used to get insight into the metabolic pathways of the conversion of CO to propionate.

### Sample Protocol
The co-culture of Acetobacterium wieringae strain JM + Anaerotignum neopropionicum was grown in basal medium supplemented with 1 mM formate, 0.1 g/L yeast extract, 20 mM acetate, and under the headspace a composition of CO, N2 and CO2 (50:30:20 %, v/v) at 170 kPa. CO was refilled once it was depleted. Cultures were sampled at the 4th, 11th, and 15th day of incubation, by three bottles at each selected time-point. Cell pellets were resuspended in 0.5 ml SDS-lysis buffer (100 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5; 4 % SDS (w/v)) plus 50 µL 1 mmol L-1 PMSF (phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride), and sonicated. Approximately 60 µg proteins were loaded on a protein gel, run shortly and in-gel digested with trypsin. The resulting peptides were measured by nLC – LTQ-OrbitrapXL MSMS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.3.4) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Gas fermentation is a promising way to convert CO-rich gases to chemicals. We studied the use of synthetic cocultures composed of carboxydotrophic and propionigenic bacteria to convert CO to propionate. So far, isolated carboxydotrophs cannot directly ferment CO to propionate, and therefore, this cocultivation approach was investigated. Four distinct synthetic cocultures were constructed, consisting of Acetobacterium wieringae (DSM 1911<sup>T</sup>) and Pelobacter propionicus (DSM 2379<sup>T</sup>), <i>Ac. wieringae</i> (DSM 1911<sup>T</sup>) and Anaerotignum neopropionicum (DSM 3847<sup>T</sup>), <i>Ac. wieringae</i> strain JM and <i>P. propionicus</i> (DSM 2379<sup>T</sup>), and <i>Ac. wieringae</i> strain JM and <i>An. neopropionicum</i> (DSM 3847<sup>T</sup>). Propionate was produced by all the cocultures, with the highest titer (&#x223c;24&#x2009;mM) being measured in the coculture composed of <i>Ac. wieringae</i> strain JM and <i>An. neopropionicum</i>, which also produced isovalerate (&#x223c;4&#x2009;mM), butyrate (&#x223c;1&#x2009;mM), and isobutyrate (0.3&#x2009;mM). This coculture was further studied using proteogenomics. As expected, enzymes involved in the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway in <i>Ac. wieringae</i> strain JM, which are responsible for the conversion of CO to ethanol and acetate, were detected; the proteome of <i>An. neopropionicum</i> confirmed the conversion of ethanol to propionate via the acrylate pathway. In addition, proteins related to amino acid metabolism and stress response were highly abundant during cocultivation, which raises the hypothesis that amino acids are exchanged by the two microorganisms, accompanied by isovalerate and isobutyrate production. This highlights the importance of explicitly looking at fortuitous microbial interactions during cocultivation to fully understand coculture behavior. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Syngas fermentation has great potential for the sustainable production of chemicals from wastes (via prior gasification) and flue gases containing CO/CO<sub>2</sub>. Research efforts need to be directed toward expanding the product portfolio of gas fermentation, which is currently limited to mainly acetate and ethanol. This study provides the basis for a microbial process to produce propionate from CO using synthetic cocultures composed of acetogenic and propionigenic bacteria and elucidates the metabolic pathways involved. Furthermore, based on proteomics results, we hypothesize that the two bacterial species engage in an interaction that results in amino acid exchange, which subsequently promotes isovalerate and isobutyrate production. These findings provide a new understanding of gas fermentation and a coculturing strategy for expanding the product spectrum of microbial conversion of CO/CO<sub>2</sub>.

### Keywords
Acetogen, Propionate, Acetobacterium, Carbon monoxide, Co-culture, Syngas

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


