### Accession
PXD002880

### Title
mRNA binding -  Insights into RNA biology from an atlas of mammalian mRNA-binding proteins

### Description
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) determine RNA fate from synthesis to decay. Employing two complementary protocols for covalent UV crosslinking of RBPs to RNA, we describe a systematic, unbiased, and comprehensive approach, termed "interactome capture," to define the mRNA interactome of proliferating human HeLa cells. We identify 860 proteins that qualify as RBPs by biochemical and statistical criteria, adding more than 300 RBPs to those previously known and shedding light on RBPs in disease, RNA-binding enzymes of intermediary metabolism, RNA-binding kinases, and RNA-binding architectures. Unexpectedly, we find that many proteins of the HeLa mRNA interactome are highly intrinsically disordered and enriched in short repetitive amino acid motifs. Interactome capture is broadly applicable to study mRNA interactome composition and dynamics in varied biological settings.

### Sample Protocol
In Vivo Isolation of HeLa RBPs  HeLa cells were grown overnight in the presence (PAR-CL) or absence (cCL) of 4-thiouridine. Cells were irradiated with UV light at 254 nm (for cCL) or 365 nm (for PAR-CL), harvested, and lysed. Poly(A)+ mRNAs and crosslinked proteins were captured with oligo(dT)25 magnetic beads (NE Biolabs) as described in the Supplemental Information. Mass Spectrometry, Protein Identification, and Quantification  Proteins were processed following standard protocols, and the resulting peptides were fractionated and analyzed on a nano-HPLC system (Proxeon) or nano-Acquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled directly to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A detailed description of the sample preparation, protein identification, and quantification can be found in the Supplemental Information. GFP-Based Method for Detection of mRNA-Protein Interactions  HeLa cells expressing N- or C-terminally EGFP/YFP-tagged proteins (Table S7) were induced with tetracycline, irradiated with UV light, and lysed. GFP-binding protein (GBP; GFP agarose trap, Chromotek)-immunoprecipitated mRNAs were detected using an oligo(dT)25 probe fused to TRed dye (Sigma). RNAs coimmunoprecipitated with GFP/YFP-tagged proteins were identified by RNASeq. Detailed protocols can be found in the Supplemental Information.

### Data Protocol
Mascot search of the raw files, due to label free quantification

### Publication Abstract
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) determine RNA fate from synthesis to decay. Employing two complementary protocols for covalent UV crosslinking of RBPs to RNA, we describe a systematic, unbiased, and comprehensive approach, termed "interactome capture," to define the mRNA interactome of proliferating human HeLa cells. We identify 860 proteins that qualify as RBPs by biochemical and statistical criteria, adding more than 300 RBPs to those previously known and shedding light on RBPs in disease, RNA-binding enzymes of intermediary metabolism, RNA-binding kinases, and RNA-binding architectures. Unexpectedly, we find that many proteins of the HeLa mRNA interactome are highly intrinsically disordered and enriched in short repetitive amino acid motifs. Interactome capture is broadly applicable to study mRNA interactome composition and dynamics in varied biological settings.

### Keywords
Mrna binding

### Affiliations
EMBL
DKFZ

### Submitter
Sophia Foehr

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
EMBL


