### Accession
PXD006738

### Title
Ultrafiltration combined with Size Exclusion Chromatography efficiently isolates Extracellular Vesicles from Cell Culture Media for compositional and functional Studies

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) exert important functions in the extracellular space and in cell-to-cell communication. Ultracentrifugation, the most frequently used EV isolation technique, requires specialized equipment and provides relatively low purity and yield. A more recently applied and easily accessible EV isolation technique is size exclusion chromatography (SEC). Here, we hypothesized that EVs isolated from dilute cell culture media by concentration on a 10 kDa filter followed by SEC are suitable for proteomic and functional studies. We also hypothesized that the protein-rich SEC fractions are suitable controls to assess biological effects of the non-EV associated secretome. Cell-depleted medium from BEAS-2B bronchial epithelial cells (60 ml) was 0.22 µm filtered, concentrated to 0.5 ml by 10 kDa UF and run over a sepharose CL-4B column. Fractions were assessed for protein and EV content. EV-rich and protein-rich fractions were concentrated by 10 kDa UF. EV concentrates were characterized by tuneable resistive pulse sensing, cryo transmission electron microscopy and nanoLC-MS/MS. Finally, we assessed the effect of EVs or free secreted protein from unexposed cells or cells exposed to 1% (v/v) cigarette smoke extract (CSE) on IL-8 release by naïve BEAS-2B cells or on adhesion of THP-1 monocytes to endothelial cells. UF concentrated the EVs with approximately 100% recovery. Most of EVs eluted in SEC fractions 6-11, while protein became detectable at fraction 12. The final EV recovery was 40 ± 4%, as compared to 27 ± 8% by ultracentrifugation. Mass Spectrometry of the EV fractions identified 388 different proteins, including various EV markers. Only the protein, but not the EV fractions from media of CSE-exposed cells induced IL-8 release by naïve bronchial epithelial cells, whereas only EVs, but not the protein fractions induced THP-1 adhesion to endothelial cells. Thus, UF followed by SEC provides EV isolates with sufficient yield and purity for proteomic studies and allows directly comparing the functional effects of EVs and the non-EV associated secretome.

### Sample Protocol
EVs isolated by UF-SEC (500 µl) were precipitated by overnight incubation at -20C with 1.5 ml acetone containing 10 % (v/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA; Sigma-Aldrich) and 20 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol (DTT; Sigma-Aldrich) followed by centrifugation for 10 min at 16,000 x g and 4C. After washing with ice cold acetone and repeated centrifugation, the protein pellets were resuspended in 30 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC; Sigma-Aldrich) containing 5 M urea, and the protein concentration was determined using Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). To 5 µg of protein, DTT (20 mM) was added and incubated at RT for 45 minutes. Iodoacetamide (40 mM) was then added to alkylate for 45 minutes at RT until quenching by a second addition of DTT. A mixture of trypsin/lysC (2 µg) was added and digestion was performed at 37ºC for 2 hours. The mixture was diluted with ABC without urea and incubation was continued at 37ºC for 18 hours. The digestion mix was briefly centrifuged and the digest/peptide mixture diluted fourfold for nano-LC MS/MS analysis. A nanoflow HPLC instrument (Dionex ultimate 3000) was coupled in-line with a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) with a nano-electrospray Flex ion source (Proxeon). Five microliter of the digest/peptide mixture was loaded onto a C18-reversed phase column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap C18 column, 75-μm inner diameter x 15 cm, 2-μm particle size). The peptides were separated with a 90 min linear gradient of 4-45% buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method, dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (250–1250 m/z) in positive mode. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000. Dynamic exclusion duration was 30 s. Isolation of precursors was performed with a 4.0 m/z window. Resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 and the Normalized collision energy was 30 eV. The under fill ratio was defined as 1.0%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled, but exclusion of singly charged and charge states of more than five.

### Data Protocol
The data was analysed using Sequest HT Proteome Discoverer 2.1 search engine (Thermo Scientiﬁc), against the Uniprot database. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for proteins and peptides, which had to have a minimum length of 6 amino acids. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm and the fragment tolerance at 0.2 Da. One miss-cleavage was tolerated, oxidation of methionine was set as a dynamic modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was a fixed modification. Proteins with a score > 10 were considered as being identified with high confidence.

### Publication Abstract
Appropriate isolation methods are essential for unravelling the relative contribution of extracellular vesicles (EVs) and the EV-free secretome to homeostasis and disease. We hypothesized that ultrafiltration followed by size exclusion chromatography (UF-SEC) provides well-matched concentrates of EVs and free secreted molecules for proteomic and functional studies. Conditioned media of BEAS-2B bronchial epithelial cells were concentrated on 10&#x2009;kDa centrifuge filters, followed by separation of EVs and free protein using sepharose CL-4B SEC. Alternatively, EVs were isolated by ultracentrifugation. EV recovery was estimated by bead-coupled flow cytometry and tuneable resistive pulse sensing. The proteomic composition of EV isolates and SEC protein fractions was characterized by nano LC-MS/MS. UF-SEC EVs tended to have a higher yield and EV-to-protein rate of purity than ultracentrifugation EVs. UF-SEC EVs and ultracentrifugation EVs showed similar fold-enrichments for biological pathways that were distinct from those of UF-SEC protein. Treatment of BEAS-2B cells with UF-SEC protein, but not with either type of EV isolate increased the IL-8 concentration in the media whereas EVs, but not protein induced monocyte adhesion to endothelial cells. Thus, UF-SEC is a useful alternative for ultracentrifugation and allows comparing the proteomic composition and functional effects of EVs and free secreted molecules.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Human Biology
Maastricht University Medical Center Department of Medical Microbiology PO box 5800 6202 AZ Maastricht The Netherlands T +31 43 38 74663 f.stassen@maastrichtuniversity.nl ( lab head )

### Submitter
freek bouwman

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Stassen
Maastricht University Medical Center Department of Medical Microbiology PO box 5800 6202 AZ Maastricht The Netherlands T +31 43 38 74663 f.stassen@maastrichtuniversity.nl ( lab head )


