### Accession
PXD014077

### Title
Proteomic dissection of CFAP44 deficient axonemes

### Description
Leishmania are protists (class: Kinetoplastida) with a single multifunctional flagellum, which forms a canonical motile 9+2 microtubule axoneme in the promastigote forms. Deletion of gene CFAP44 (LmxM.14.1430) caused a reduction in promastigote motility (Beneke et al., PLoS Pathogens, 2019; accepted). To study the changes in protein composition in CFAP44 deficient axonemes, flagellar skeletons were isolated from CFAP44 knockout mutants and the parental cell line L. mex Cas9 T7 (Beneke et al., R Soc Open Sci. 2017; 4(5):170095) using a modified version of the method by Robinson et al., (Methods Enzymol. 1991; 196:285-99). Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry and a label-free quantitation method (SINQ; Trudgian et al., 2011, Proteomics 10.1002) were used to identify proteins enriched in each fraction. This PRIDE upload contains .RAW and .XML files, as well as the SINQ quantification output file “SINQ_raw_data”. XML files are named SUB9810; MSS11680. .RAW files are structured as follows: “CFAP44 mutants: Qex01_SVH_180422_TomBeneke_B29_F_001”; “Cas9 T7 parentals: Qex01_SVH_180422_TomBeneke_Cas9_F_005”.

### Sample Protocol
L. mexicana promastigotes were washed and separated into detergent (1% octylglucoside) soluble and insoluble fractions. The insoluble fraction, containing cytoskeletons of Leishmania promastigotes, was then salt extracted using 1M NaCl to depolymerize subpellicular microtubules. Flagellar skeletons were collected by centrifugation and further purified using differential centrifugation on a sucrose gradient. Protein samples were processed using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) Wiśniewski et al., 2009 (Nat Methods. 2009;6(5):359-62.), digested with trypsin and analysed using Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Raw output files were analysed as described in Beneke et al., 2019 (PLoS Pathogens, accepted) Briefly, .RAW files from QExactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer were converted to .MGF file using ProteoWizard (Filter settings: threshold “count 200 most-intense”, peak picking “true 1-“). Converted files were uploaded to the Central Proteomics Facilities Pipeline (CPFP, Trudgian et al., Bioinformatics 2010; 10.1093). Filter settings for CPFP were set to PSM & peptide-level FDR “1.00%”, PSM & peptide-level q-value “0.01”, protein group FDR “1.00%” and protein group q-value “0.01”. CPFP was used to operate meta-searches with Mascot, X!Tandem kscore and OMSSA against the MFiebig_20140619 sequence database (provided in project files; Fiebig et al., 2015, PLoS Pathogens 11(10):e1005186). Filter settings for the meta-search was set to missed cleavages “2”, precursor tolerance “0.1 Da”, charge state(s) “1+, 2+ and 3+”, modifications “carbamidomethylation (C), oxidation (M), and deamidation (N/Q)”, quantitation “none” and quantitation tolerance “0.02”. Search results were quantified by using normalized spectral index quantification SINQ (Trudgian et al., 2011, Proteomics 10.1002). Filter settings were set to PROT_MAX_QVAL “0.01”, PSM_MAX_QVAL “0.01”, FRAGMENT_TOL “0.1”, maximum q-value (local FDR) “0.01”  and peptides per protein “at least 2”.

### Publication Abstract
Motile eukaryotic flagella beat through coordinated activity of dynein motor proteins; however, the mechanisms of dynein coordination and regulation are incompletely understood. The inner dynein arm (IDA) f complex (also known as the I1 complex), and the tether and tether head (T/TH) complex are thought to be key regulators of dynein action but, unlike the IDA f complex, T/TH proteins remain poorly characterised. Here, we characterised T/TH-associated proteins in the protist <i>Leishmania mexicana</i> Proteome analysis of axonemes from null mutants for the CFAP44 T/TH protein showed that they lacked the IDA f protein IC140 and a novel 28-kDa axonemal protein, LAX28. Sequence analysis identified similarities between LAX28 and the uncharacterised human sperm tail protein TEX47, both sharing features with sensory BLUF-domain-containing proteins. <i>Leishmania</i> lacking LAX28, CFAP44 or IC140 retained some motility, albeit with reduced swimming speed and directionality and a propensity for flagellar curling. Expression of tagged proteins in different null mutant backgrounds showed that the axonemal localisation of LAX28 requires CFAP44 and IC140, and the axonemal localisations of CFAP44 and IC140 both depend on LAX28. These data demonstrate a role for LAX28 in motility and show mutual dependencies of IDA f and T/TH-associated proteins for axonemal assembly in <i>Leishmania</i>.

### Keywords
Leishmania, Flagellum, Axoneme, Cfap44

### Affiliations
University of Oxford, Sir William Dunn School of Pathology
Royal Society University Research Fellow and Group Leader Research Lecturer, Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Fellow by special election, St. Edmund Hall, University of Oxford

### Submitter
Tom Beneke

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Eva Gluenz
Royal Society University Research Fellow and Group Leader Research Lecturer, Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Fellow by special election, St. Edmund Hall, University of Oxford


