### Accession
PXD000905

### Title
Proteomic signatures of the Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas cellular response to Ostreid herpes virus -1 (OsHV-1) infection: a metabolic response.

### Description
To better understand the pathogenesis of OsHV-1 and to determine which cell pathways might be affected during OsHV-1 infection, we used an experimental infection in the Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas by intra-muscular injection with a low or high load of OsHV-1. Animals were sampled 2 days post-injection (dpi) which corresponds to the incubation period required for OsHV1 to initiate an intense replication phase. Twenty-five abundant proteins linked to infection process were identified using a two-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE) proteomic approach.

### Sample Protocol
Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas were infected by  intra-muscular injection with a low or high load of OsHV-1. Two days post-infection total proteins were extracted and separated by 2 dimensional gel electrophoresis. Differential proteins between the low and the high load of OsHV-1 were excised, trypsin digested, analysed by nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS (HCT Ultra PTM Discovery ion trap) and identified using the ProteinScape 2.1 software and the Mascot search engine.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data files were processed using the DataAnalysis software v3.4. The proteinScape 2.1 software was used to submit MS/MS data to the UniProt Database restricted to the Crassostrea gigas proteins. Search parameters were as follow: one missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation of cysteins set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation set as variable modification, 0.25 Da precursor tolerance and 0.5 Da fragment tolerance. Peptide identifications were accepted if the individual ion Mascot scores were above the identity threshold (an ion score f -10  log(p) where p is the probability that the observed match is a random event). In case of ambiguous assignments (one compound fitted to more than one peptide), peptides were accepted based on the peptide score, meaning that the peptide sequence with the highest score was accepted and it did not matter if the protein was contained in the list. The matching of identified peptides to proteins was performed with the ProteinExtractor algorithm

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Herpes virus, Proteomics, Marine bivalves, Crassostrea gigas

### Affiliations
Biogenouest Proteomics Core Facility -IREST INSERM U1085 - Rennes, France
Protim, Irset, Inserm U1085

### Submitter
E Com

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Pineau
Biogenouest Proteomics Core Facility -IREST INSERM U1085 - Rennes, France


