### Accession
PXD020697

### Title
IFITM3 BioID Interactomes in B-ALL and MCL

### Description
To determine the roles of membrane associated IFITM3 in BCR-signalling in B-cell malignancies we expressed N-terminal BirA-IFITM3-Y20E fusion or BirA-EV control in patient derived B-ALL cells (PDX2) and Jeko1 Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) cells. Additionally to examine the role of PIP3 binding residues in the conserved intracellular loop region a K83A/K104A mutated form of IFITM3-Y20E-BirA fusion and compared with basic patch unmutated.

### Sample Protocol
Patient-derived PDX2 B-ALL cells and Jeko1 MCL cells were transduced with Flag-tagged IFITM3Y20E or K83A/K104 mutant constructs with N-terminal Turbo-ID BirA (engineered biotin ligase) and selected by puromycin for 3 days. Turbo-ID BirA expressing construct tagged with Flag was used as negative control. To induce biotinylation of proteins proximal to IFITM3, cells were treated with 50 µmol l-1 biotin with anti-HA antibody for simultaneous induction of IFITM3 crosslinking for 10 min. Cells were washed three times with chilled PBS and lysed in IP/WASH buffer (#87788, Pierce) with 1 × HALT protease inhibitor (Thermo Fisher). The lysates were incubated by Streptavidin C1 MyOne Dynabeads (Invitrogen) for 16 hours at 4 ºC. Unbound proteins were washed three times by 2% SDS-PBS, three times by PBS and three time with pure water. The eluted proteins were gel purified, followed by in-gel digestion and subjected to Mass Spectrometry. For LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were analyzed using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC) systems and a Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). 6 µl peptide samples were loaded onto the trap column, which was 150 µm × 3 cm in-house packed with 3 µm C18 beads. The analytical column was a 75 µm × 10.5 cm PicoChip column packed with 3 µm C18 beads (New Objectives). The flow rate was kept at 300 nL/min. Solvent A was 0.1% FA in water and Solvent B was 0.1% FA in ACN. The peptide was separated on a 120-min analytical gradient from 5% ACN/0.1% FA to 40% ACN/0.1% FA. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode. The source voltage was 2.40 kV and the capillary temperature was 275 ⁰C.  MS1 scans were acquired from 400-2000m/z at 60,000 resolving power and automatic gain control (AGC) set to 1x106.  The fifteen most abundant precursor ions in each MS1 scan were selected for fragmentation. Precursors were selected with an isolation width of 1 Da and fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID) at 35% normalized collision energy in the ion trap, previously selected ions were dynamically excluded from re-selection for 60 seconds. The MS2 AGC was set to 3 x105.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis, proteins were identified from the MS raw files using Mascot search engine (Matrix science). MS/MS spectra were searched against the SwissProt human database. All searches included carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification and oxidized Met, deamidated Asn and Gln, acetylated N-term as variable modifications. Three missed tryptic cleavages were allowed. The MS1 precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the MS2 tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. A 1% false discovery rate cutoff was applied at the peptide level. Only proteins with a minimum of two peptides above the cutoff were considered for further study.

### Publication Abstract
Interferon-induced transmembrane protein&#xa0;3 (IFITM3) has previously been identified as an endosomal protein that blocks viral infection<sup>1-3</sup>. Here we studied clinical cohorts of patients with B&#xa0;cell leukaemia and lymphoma, and identified IFITM3 as a strong predictor of poor outcome. In normal resting B&#xa0;cells, IFITM3 was minimally expressed and mainly localized in endosomes. However, engagement of the B&#xa0;cell receptor (BCR) induced both expression of IFITM3 and phosphorylation of this protein at Tyr20, which resulted in the accumulation of IFITM3 at the cell surface. In B&#xa0;cell leukaemia, oncogenic kinases phosphorylate IFITM3 at Tyr20, which causes constitutive localization of this protein at the plasma membrane. In a mouse model, Ifitm3<sup>-/-</sup> naive B&#xa0;cells developed in normal numbers; however, the formation of germinal centres and the production of antigen-specific antibodies were compromised. Oncogenes that induce the development of leukaemia and lymphoma did not transform Ifitm3<sup>-/-</sup> B&#xa0;cells. Conversely, the phosphomimetic IFITM3(Y20E) mutant induced oncogenic PI3K signalling and initiated the transformation of premalignant B&#xa0;cells. Mechanistic experiments revealed that IFITM3 functions as a PIP3&#xa0;scaffold and central amplifier of PI3K signalling. The amplification of PI3K signals depends on IFITM3 using two lysine residues (Lys83 and Lys104) in its conserved intracellular loop as a scaffold for the accumulation of PIP3. In Ifitm3<sup>-/-</sup> B&#xa0;cells, lipid rafts were depleted of PIP3, which resulted in the defective expression of over 60&#xa0;lipid-raft-associated surface receptors, and impaired BCR signalling and cellular adhesion. We conclude that the phosphorylation of IFITM3 that occurs after B&#xa0;cells encounter antigen induces a dynamic switch from antiviral effector functions in endosomes to a PI3K amplification loop at the cell surface. IFITM3-dependent amplification of PI3K signalling, which in part acts downstream of the BCR, is critical for the rapid expansion of B&#xa0;cells with high affinity to antigen. In addition, multiple oncogenes depend on IFITM3 to assemble PIP3-dependent signalling complexes and amplify PI3K signalling for malignant transformation.

### Keywords
Human b-all mcl b-cells

### Affiliations
City of Hope
Department of Systems Biology, City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center, Monrovia, CA, USA

### Submitter
Mark Robinson

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Muschen
Department of Systems Biology, City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center, Monrovia, CA, USA


