### Accession
PXD031586

### Title
Differential trafficking and expression of PIR proteins in acute and chronic Plasmodium infections

### Description
Plasmodium multigene families are thought to play important roles in the pathogenesis of malaria. Plasmodium interspersed repeat (pir) genes comprise the largest multigene family in many Plasmodium species. However, their expression pattern and localisation remain to be elucidated. Protein subcellular localisation is fundamental to be able to elucidate the functional importance and cell-cell interactions of the PIR proteins. Here, we use the rodent malaria parasite, Plasmodium chabaudi chabaudi, as a model to investigate the localisation pattern of this gene family. We found that most PIR proteins are co-expressed in clusters during acute and chronic infection; members of the S7 clade are predominantly expressed during the acute-phase, whereas members of the L1 clade dominate the chronic-phase of infection. Using peptide antisera specific for S7 or L1 PIRS, we show that S7 and L1 PIRs have different localisations within the infected red blood cells. S7 PIRs are exported into the infected red blood cells cytoplasm where they are co-localised with parasite-induced host cell modifications termed Maurer's clefts, whereas L1 PIRs are localised on or close to the parasitophorous vacuolar membrane. This localisation pattern changes following mosquito transmission and during progression from acute- to chronic-phase of infection. However, neither S7 nor L1 PIR proteins detected by the peptide antisera are localised on the surface of infected red blood cells, suggesting that they are unlikely to be targets of surface variant-specific antibodies or be involved directly in adhesion of infected red blood cells to host cells, as described for Plasmodium falciparum VAR proteins. Their presence on Maurer’s clefts, as seen for Plasmodium falciparum RIFIN and STEVOR proteins, might further suggest trafficking of the PIRs on the surface of the infected erythrocytes. The differences in subcellular localisation of the two major clades of Plasmodium chabaudi PIRs across the blood cycle, and the apparent lack of expression on the red cell surface strongly suggest that the function(s) of this gene family may differ from those of other multigene families of Plasmodium, such as the var genes of Plasmodium falciparum.

### Sample Protocol
MS SDS-PAGE - Approximately 50 μg of the SLO fraction, and 15-20 μg of the SAP, Tris and RIPA fractions were added to 8 ul of Laemmli buffer containing 3% (v/v) 1,4-dithiothreitol (DTT; Roche). The mixture was heated for 10 min at 95oC and ran on a 16.5% Tris-Tricine gel electrophoresis (Mini-Protean Tris-Tricine Precast Protein Gels, BioRad) in Tris-Tricine buffer (BioRad). Gel was allowed to run at constant voltage (120 V) until track lengths (top to tracking dye) averaged 5 cm. Proteins below 17 kDa were excised and discarded to ensure mouse haemoglobin (Hb) depletion (Mouse Hb size: 14.4 kDa).   In-gel digestion and fractionation - Gel lanes corresponding to each sample were cut into pieces and spread out into 8 wells of a 96-well plate (Costar). Gel pieces were de-stained overnight in 50% (v/v) Acetonotrile/100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate, de-hydrated in 100% (v/v) Acetonitrile (5 min) and aired-dried (10 min). Following reduction with 10 mM Dithiothreitol (60 min, room temperature) and alkylation with 55 mM Iodoacetamide (30 min, room temperature, in the dark), gel pieces were washed once with 50% (v/v) Acetonitrile/100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate with shaking (10 min), de-hydrated with 100% (v/v) Acetonitrile (5 min) and air-dried (10 min). MS-grade Trypsin (Pierce) in 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate was added to each well (200 ng) in sufficient volume to allow for complete gel saturation. Samples were then digested overnight at 37oC with shaking. Peptides were extracted by incubation with 50% (v/v) Acetonitrile/100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (20 min) followed by 100% (v/v) Acetonitrile (10 min). Peptide solutions corresponding to each sample were then pooled and partially dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Pierce) was used to assess peptide content in each sample. 5 μgaliquots were then removed, acidified with neat Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and fractionated on a stage tip using high pH reverse phase (bRP). Briefly, each stage tip was packed with two C18 Empore discs (3M), conditioned with 100 uL of 100% (v/v) Acetonitrile, followed by 200 µL of 0.1% (v/v) TFA. The samples were loaded in 1% (v/v) TFA, washed once with 200 uL water and fractionated by elution with increasing amounts of Acetonitrile (10% v/v, 17.5% v/v, 25% v/v and 50% v/v) in 0.1% (v/v) Triethylamine. Resulting fractions (25 uL each) were pooled non-consecutively, i.e. fraction 1 with 3 and fraction 2 with 4. The two final bRP fractions were vacuum dried. LC-MS/MS - Samples were resuspended in 2% (v/v) Acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) TFA supplemented with iRT standards (Biognosys) and loaded on a 50 cm Easy Spray PepMap column (75 um inner diameter, 2 um particle size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an integrated electrospray emitter. Reverse phase chromatography was performed using the RSLC nano U3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a binary buffer system (solvent A: 0.1% v/v Formic acid, 5% v/v DMSO; solvent B: 80% v/v Acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v Formic acid, 5% v/v DMSO) at a flow rate of 275 nl/min. The samples were run on a linear gradient of 2-8% (v/v) B in 5.5 min, 8-25% (v/v) B in 54.5 min, 25-40% (v/v) B in 31 min, and 40-50% (v/v) B in 7 min with a total run time of 120 min including column conditioning. The nanoLC was coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer using an EasySpray nano source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Orbitrap Eclipse was operated in data-independent mode (DIA) with following settings: MS1 data acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120000, max injection time of 20 ms, AGC target of 1e6, in positive ion mode and profile mode, over the mass range 375-1500 m/z.  DIA segments over this mass range (variable size windows, 34 in total) were acquired in the Orbitrap following fragmentation in the HCD cell (30%), with 30000 resolutions over the mass range 200-2000 m/z and with a max injection time of 70 ms and AGC target of 1e6.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were analysed with Spectronaut v15.4.210913 (Biognosys AG) using directDIA analysis option. Data were searched against P. c. chabaudi (PlasmoDB), Mus musculus (UniProt) and contaminants (Spectronaut) FASTA files using Pulsar search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), acetylation (Protein N-term) and deamidation (NQ) were selected as variable modifications. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. The datasets were filtered on posterior error probability (PEP) to achieve a 1% false discovery rate on protein, peptide and PSM level.  MS1 and MS2 tolerances were set to dynamic and retention time calibration was based on iRT regression generated in Spectronaut. Interference correction was activated, keeping a minimum of 2 precursor ions and 3 fragment ions. Quant 2.0 was selected as protein LFQ method and Quantity MS-level was set to MS2 with Q value ≤ 0.01 used for data filtering. No intensity normalisation was performed. Data were further processed with Microsoft Office Excel 2016 (Supplementary Table S2). Protein group data were filtered to remove common contaminant entries as well as for the presence of 1 valid value. Quantity values were then log2 transformed and no further data transformations were performed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Mouse, Malaria, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Francis Crick Institute
Malaria Immunology Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK

### Submitter
Mark Skehel

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Langhorne
Malaria Immunology Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK


