### Accession
PXD037546

### Title
Inhibiting ACK1-mediated phosphorylation of C-terminal Src kinase counteracts prostate cancer immune checkpoint blockade resistance

### Description
Solid tumours are highly refractory to immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) therapies due to the functional impairment of effector T cells and their inefficient trafficking to tumours. T-cell activation is negatively regulated by C-terminal Src kinase (CSK); however, the exact mechanism remains unknown. Here we show that the conserved oncogenic tyrosine kinase Activated CDC42 kinase 1 (ACK1) is able to phosphorylate CSK at Tyrosine 18 (pY18), which enhances CSK function, constraining T-cell activation. Mice deficient in the Tnk2 gene encoding Ack1, are characterized by diminished CSK pY18 phosphorylation and spontaneous activation of CD8+ and CD4+ T cells, resulting in inhibited growth of transplanted ICB-resistant tumours. Furthermore, ICB treatment of castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) patients results in re-activation of ACK1/pY18-CSK signalling, confirming the involvement of this pathway in ICB insensitivity. An ACK1 small-molecule inhibitor, (R)-9b, recapitulates inhibition of ICB-resistant tumours, which provides evidence for ACK1 enzymatic activity playing a pivotal role in generating ICB resistance. Overall, our study identifies an important mechanism of ICB resistance and holds potential for expanding the scope of ICB therapy to tumours that are currently unresponsive.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in denaturing buffer containing 8 M urea, 20 mM HEPES (pH 8), 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate and 1 mM β-glycerophosphate. Bradford assays determined the protein concentration for each sample. Protein disulfides were reduced with 4.5 mM DTT at 60 °C for 30 minutes and then cysteines were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 20 minutes in the dark at room temperature. Trypsin digestion was carried out at room temperature overnight with enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:20, and tryptic peptides were acidified with aqueous 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted with C18 Sep-Pak cartridges according to the manufacturer’s procedure. Following lyophilization, peptide pellets were re-dissolved in immunoaffinity purification (IAP) buffer containing 50 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate and 50 mM NaCl. Phosphotyrosine-containing peptides (pY) were immunoprecipitated with p-Tyr-1000 beads (Cell Signaling Technology #8803S), according to the manufacturer’s instructions.    A nanoflow ultra high performance liquid chromatograph and nanoelectrospray orbitrap mass spectrometer (RSLCnano and Q Exactive plus, Thermo) were used for LC-MS/MS.  The sample was loaded onto a pre-column (C18 PepMap100, 2 cm length x 100 µm ID packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) and washed for 8 minutes with aqueous 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid.  Trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column, (C18 PepMap100, 25 cm length x 75 µm ID, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo).  A 120-minute gradient was programmed as: 95% solvent A (aqueous 2% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for 8 minutes, solvent B (aqueous 90% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 38.5% in 90 minutes, then solvent B from 50% to 90% B in 7 minutes and held at 90% for 5 minutes, followed by solvent B from 90% to 5% in 1 minute and re-equilibration for 10 minutes using a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Spray voltage was 1900 V. Capillary temperature was 275 °C. S lens RF level was set at 40. Top 16 tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner. The resolution for MS and MS/MS were set at 70,000 and 17,500 respectively. Dynamic exclusion was 15 seconds for previously sampled peaks.  Proteomics experiments were performed by Victoria Izumi, MS and Bin Fang, PhD (Moffitt).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant  (version 1.2.2.5) was used to identify peptides using the UniProt human database (April 2017) and quantify the MS1 precursor intensities. Up to 2 missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance was 20 ppm first search and 4.5 ppm main search. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as fixed modification. Phosphorylation on Serine/Threonine/Tyrosine and Methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Both peptide spectral match (PSM) and protein false discovery rate (FDR) were set at 0.05. Match between runs feature was activated to carry identifications across samples.   For data upload to PRIDE/ProteomeXchange, similar database searches were performed with Mascot (www.matrixscience.com) in Proteome Discoverer (Thermo).

### Publication Abstract
Solid tumours are highly refractory to immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) therapies due to the functional impairment of effector T cells and their inefficient trafficking to tumours. T-cell activation is negatively regulated by C-terminal Src kinase (CSK); however, the exact mechanism remains unknown. Here we show that the conserved oncogenic tyrosine kinase Activated CDC42 kinase 1 (ACK1) is able to phosphorylate CSK at Tyrosine 18 (pY18), which enhances CSK function, constraining T-cell activation. Mice deficient in the Tnk2 gene encoding Ack1, are characterized by diminished CSK Y18-phosphorylation and spontaneous activation of CD8<sup>+</sup> and CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells, resulting in inhibited growth of transplanted ICB-resistant tumours. Furthermore, ICB treatment of castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) patients results in re-activation of ACK1/pY18-CSK signalling, confirming the involvement of this pathway in ICB insensitivity. An ACK1 small-molecule inhibitor, (R)-9b, recapitulates inhibition of ICB-resistant tumours, which provides evidence for ACK1 enzymatic activity playing a pivotal role in generating ICB resistance. Overall, our study identifies an important mechanism of ICB resistance and holds potential for expanding the scope of ICB therapy to tumours that are currently unresponsive.

### Keywords
Immune checkpoint blockade, Src, Phosphotyrosine, Ack1, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Siteman Cancer Center Washington University in St. Louis
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Nupam Mahajan, PhD
Siteman Cancer Center Washington University in St. Louis


