### Accession
PXD026888

### Title
Proteomic characterization of calcium macrophages

### Description
In this study, macrophages, which differentiated from monocytes due to exposure to calcium and no further growth factors, were characterized. For this purpose, their proteomic profile was compared to monocytes, M1 macrophages, M2 macrophages, DCs, and foam cells obtained from healthy donors or patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).

### Sample Protocol
Monocytes were extracted from the blood of healthy or RA donors and differentiated into calcium macrophages, M1 macrophages, M2 macrophages, DCs, or foam cells. The obtained cells were lysed and investigated using untargeted proteomics applying TMT labeling (TMT 16 plex, Thermo Scientific, USA). For each sample, 15 µg protein were prepared on paramagnetic beads that allow for single-pot sample processing. Thus, two fractions were obtained, which were analyzed on a nano-UPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, USA) coupled online to the mass spectrometer (QExactive HF, Thermo Scientific, USA) via a chip-based electrospray ionization source (Nanomate, Advion, USA).

### Data Protocol
Obtained raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 and the UniprotKB reference proteome of either only Homo sapiens (3 May 2020) - Proteome Discoverer files named StrangeCells - and or a combination of Homo sapiens (3 May 2020) AND Bos taurus (8 December 2020) - Proteome Discoverer files named StrangeCells_BosTaurus_HomoSapiens_TMTpro_HighConfidence - to identify unique human and bovine peptides for Fetuin A. Furthermore, Proteome Discoverer’s total peptide normalization was applied. Obtained fold changes for selected comparisons were normalized to a pooled sample (containing a mixture of all available samples), which was part of every TMT mix. Next, data were Log2-transformed before calculation of p-values, which were adjusted according to Benjamini-Hochberg. These steps were conducted with R.

### Publication Abstract
The danger signal extracellular calcium is pathophysiologically increased in the synovial fluid of patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Calcium activates the NLRP3-inflammasome via the calcium-sensing receptor in monocytes/macrophages primed by lipopolysaccharide, and this effect is mediated by the uptake of calciprotein particles (CPPs) formed out of calcium, phosphate, and fetuin-A. Aim of the study was to unravel the influence of calcium on monocytes when the priming signal is not present. Monocytes were isolated from the blood of healthy controls and RA patients. Macrophages were characterized using scRNA-seq, DNA microarray, and proteomics. Imaging flow cytometry was utilized to study intracellular events. Here we show that extracellular calcium and CPPs lead to the differentiation of monocytes into calcium-macrophages when the priming signal is absent. Additional growth factors are not needed, and differentiation is triggered by calcium-dependent CPP-uptake, lysosomal alkalization due to CPP overload, and TFEB- and STAT3-dependent increased transcription of the lysosomal gene network. Calcium-macrophages have a needle-like shape, are characterized by excessive, constitutive SPP1/osteopontin production and a strong pro-inflammatory cytokine response. Calcium-macrophages differentiated out of RA monocytes show a stronger manifestation of this phenotype, suggesting the differentiation process might lead to the pro-inflammatory macrophage response seen in the RA synovial membrane.

### Keywords
Human, Calcium, Rheumatoid arthritis, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Isabel Karkossa

### Lab Head
Dr Kristin Schubert
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ


