### Accession
PXD011783

### Title
Multipotent fetal-derived Cdx2 cells from placenta regenerate the heart

### Description
Placental Cdx2 cells can be isolated and utilized for cardiac regeneration in a mouse model of myocardial infarction with evidence of multipotentiality both in vitro and in vivo

### Sample Protocol
Pellets were lysed in 100uL of freshly made 8M urea, dissolved in 100mM Tris-­‐HCl (pH 8.5), containing phosphatase and protease inhibitor. Lysates were ultrasonicated to complete lysis and to shear DNA (5 successive 10sec pulses). After determining protein concentrations using a BCA assay, samples were reduced and alkylated (TCEP and fresh IAA), and diluted to 500uL. Samples were digested at 37degrees overnight with constant agitation using Trypsin/LysC mix at a 40:1 ratio. Digests were acidified with TFA and desalted on a 96-­‐well HLB microelution plate and dried to completion prior to MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Samples were resuspended in 0.1% FA at 1ug/uL. 6 uL were injected onto a C18 μPLC column and analyzed under Data Dependent Acquisition mode using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, USA). Average fold­changes values were inferred from the quantified protein­level values as the quotient of the experimental and control groups. These expression differences were subject to ingenuity pathway analysis(IPA).

### Publication Abstract
The extremely limited regenerative potential of adult mammalian hearts has prompted the need for novel cell-based therapies that can restore contractile function in heart disease. We have previously shown the regenerative potential of mixed fetal cells that were naturally found migrating to the injured maternal heart. Exploiting this intrinsic mechanism led to the current hypothesis that Caudal-type homeobox-2 (Cdx2) cells in placenta may represent a novel cell type for cardiac regeneration. Using a lineage-tracing strategy, we specifically labeled fetal-derived Cdx2 cells with enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP). Cdx2-eGFP cells from end-gestation placenta were assayed for cardiac differentiation in vitro and in vivo using a mouse model of myocardial infarction. We observed that these cells differentiated into spontaneously beating cardiomyocytes (CMs) and vascular cells in vitro, indicating multipotentiality. When administered via tail vein to infarcted wild-type male mice, they selectively and robustly homed to the heart and differentiated to CMs and blood vessels, resulting in significant improvement in contractility as noted by MRI. Proteomics and immune transcriptomics studies of Cdx2-eGFP cells compared with embryonic stem (ES) cells reveal that they appear to retain "stem"-related functions of ES cells but exhibit unique signatures supporting roles in homing and survival, with an ability to evade immune surveillance, which is critical for cell-based therapy. Cdx2-eGFP cells may potentially represent a therapeutic advance in allogeneic cell therapy for cardiac repair.

### Keywords
Placenta, Cdx2, Cardiac regeneration, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Cedars Sinai Medical Center
Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA

### Submitter
Niveda Sundararaman

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Jennifer Van Eyk
Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA


