### Accession
PXD019620

### Title
Wobble tRNA modification dependent proteome

### Description
We want to assess the features of proteins whose translation depends on the mcm5s2 modification of urifdine in position 34 of some tRNAs.

### Sample Protocol
BT549 cells depleted or not of ELP3 by shRNA were lysed in SDS 2 % buffer containing 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 150mM sodium chloride, 10mM sodium fluoride and 1mM trisodium phosphate, Complete™ proteinase inhibitor cocktail (Roche). At least 1mg of each sample were sent for mass spectrometry analysis using LC/MS/MS (MsBioworks, LLC). Samples were TCA precipitated overnight at -20°C in 90/10 acetonitrile/water incorporating 20% TCA. Precipitates were washed, pelleted, and resuspended in 5M urea, 50mM Tris HCl, pH 8.0, Complete™ proteinase inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and quantitated by Qubit fluorometry (Life Technologies). A 50µg aliquot per sample was reduced using dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide and then subjected to digestion with trypsin (Promega) for 18h at 37 °C at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50. The digestion was quenched with formic acid and peptides cleaned using solid phase extraction (SPE) using the Empore C18 plate (3M). A 2µg aliquot of each sample was analyzed by nano LC/MS/MS with a Waters M-Class HPLC system interfaced to a Fusion Lumos tandem mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher). Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75µm analytical column at 350nL/min; both columns were packed with Luna C18 resin (Phenomenex). A 4h gradient was employed. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with MS and MS/MS performed in the Orbitrap at 60,000 FWHM resolution and 15,000 FWHM resolution, respectively. APD was turned on. The instrument was run with a 3s cycle for MS and MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were processed using MaxQuant v1.6.2.3 (Max Planck Institute), Product ion data were searched against the combined forward and reverse Swissprot H. sapiens protein database using Andromeda. Data were filtered 1% protein and peptide-spectrum match (PSM) level false discovery rate (FDR) and requiring at least one unique peptide per protein. Label-free protein quantitation was based on the extracted ion chromatograms of detected peptides; data was normalized using the embedded LFQ algorithm. Identified proteins underwent pathway enrichment analysis, differential expression analysis and codon enrichment analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of mRNA translation elongation impacts nascent protein synthesis and integrity and plays a critical role in disease establishment. Here, we investigate features linking regulation of codon-dependent translation elongation to protein expression and homeostasis. Using knockdown models of enzymes that catalyze the mcm<sup>5</sup>s<sup>2</sup> wobble uridine tRNA modification (U<sub>34</sub>-enzymes), we show that gene codon content is necessary but not sufficient to predict protein fate. While translation defects upon perturbation of U<sub>34</sub>-enzymes are strictly dependent on codon content, the consequences on protein output are determined by other features. Specific hydrophilic motifs cause protein aggregation and degradation upon codon-dependent translation elongation defects. Accordingly, the combination of codon content and the presence of hydrophilic motifs define the proteome whose maintenance relies on U<sub>34</sub>-tRNA modification. Together, these results uncover the mechanism linking wobble tRNA modification to mRNA translation and aggregation to maintain proteome homeostasis.

### Keywords
Elongator, Trna modification, Cancer

### Affiliations
Lab of cancer signaling; GIGA-stem cell; University of Liege-Belgium
ULG- GIGA liege Belgium

### Submitter
Francesca Rapino

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre CLOSE
Lab of cancer signaling; GIGA-stem cell; University of Liege-Belgium


