### Accession
PXD048933

### Title
Proteome of cerebral thrombi retrieved in acute phase of stroke (Retro-MATISSE I)

### Description
The proteome of cerebral thrombi from patients recanalized by mechanical thrombectomy in an acute phase of stroke was carried out to determine biomarkers of stroke radio-clinical outcomes for stroke physicians (clinical outcome and mortality at 3 months, intracranial hemorrhagic transformation, etc.). Proteome of cerebral thrombi was also used to elucidate stroke physiopathology (paradoxical effect of glucose in acute phase of stroke) and evaluate recanalization treatments (intravenous thrombolysis by rt-PA and/or thrombectomy efficiency). Retro-MATISSE (Molecular Analysis of Thrombus in Ischemic Stroke prognosiS and Etiology) database was incremented by proteomic analyses of cerebral thrombi successfully retrieved from all consecutive stroke patients (n=47) with large vessel occlusion treated by mechanical thrombectomy in acute phase between December 2020 and May 2021 in the intensive care stroke unit of the University Hospital of Marseille (France).

### Sample Protocol
Each thrombus, in single or multiple fragments, was rinsed with cold saline solution in situ and stored at -80°C. All steps were carried out by the same person. The frozen thrombotic material was briefly rinsed in ice-cold saline solution supplemented with protease/phosphatase inhibitors (cOmplete, EDTA-free and PhosSTOP; Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Germany) and then crushed with a handheld battery-operated tissue homogenizer (13 000 rpm; BT LabSystems; St Louis, MO, USA) for 90 seconds in lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% DDM, 50 mM DTT) at 4°C to break up the clots. After incubation for 20 minutes at 4°C the material was again homogenized for 90 seconds to obtain homogenates of similar consistency for all samples. After centrifugation of the homogenates (13,000 g for 15 minutes at 4°C), the supernatants were collected and the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad Protein Assay; Bio-Rad, USA) was used to determine the protein concentrations. A volume of supernatant corresponding to 100 µg of protein was loaded onto a 10% urea polyacrylamide gel (PAGE). After penetration of the proteins (2 cm) into the gel, electrophoresis was stopped, and protein-containing gel portions were recovered. To optimize proteomic analysis, gel was cut into two parts separated at 40 KDa (Gel 130 à 40 KDa et gel 40 à 15 KDa).  Then, proteolytic in-gel digestion with trypsin was performed. PAGE allows efficient removal of detergents and salts and prevents column clogging during LC-MS/MS. After centrifugation, the peptide-containing supernatant was dried and resuspended in 50 µL of a 20:80 acetonitrile-H2O mixture and stored at -20°C until LC-MS analyzes. The obtained peptides (5 μL) were analyzed using an ESI-Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer incorporating a high-field Orbitrap analyzer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSL C Nano LC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For nano-liquid chromatography, the system was set up in a pre-concentration mode using a 300 μm x 5 mm trap column in back-flush configuration at 40°C (P/N 6720.0315). An EASY-Spray 25 cm x 75 μm and 2 μm diameter column (P/N ES 802A) was connected and coupled to the system with an EASY-Spray source (P/N ES081) operating at 40°C.  The flow rate was 0.3 μL/min with a 5-45% gradient of solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 20% water, 0.1% formic acid) against solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 100% water) for 120 minutes. Full-scan mass spectra were measured from 350 to 1500 m/z with an Automatic Gain Control Target.

### Data Protocol
All MS raw data files were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer software 1.4 (Thermo Fisher, France) using the Sequest HT search engine against a database of protein sequences (Uniprot version2015_2).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Stroke, Lc-msms, Thrombus, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Stroke Unit - University Hospital of Marseille (France)
C2VN - Aix-Marseille University (France)
C2VN, faculty of Medicine, Marseille (France) TIRO-MATOs, Faculty of Medicine, Nice (France)

### Submitter
Laurent SUISSA

### Lab Head
Professor SUISSA Laurent
C2VN, faculty of Medicine, Marseille (France) TIRO-MATOs, Faculty of Medicine, Nice (France)


