### Accession
PXD009635

### Title
proteomics identification of total cellular proteins after five types of nanocarbon incubations with macrophages

### Description
Single-walled-carbon-nanohorns (SNH) exhibit huge application prospects. Notably, spherical SNH possess different morphology from conventional carbon nanotubes (CNT). However, there is a tremendous lack of studies on the nanotoxicity and mechanism of SNH, and their comparison with nanotubes. Here, the dissimilarity between SNH and CNT is found in nano-protein interaction. To validate the potential protein-mediated membrane disturbance caused by different nanocarbons, LC-MS/MS based on LFQ proteomics technology is utilized to compare the differences of total cellular proteins after different nanocarbon incubations and evaluate the impact of nanocarbons on protein expressions.

### Sample Protocol
Before the proteomics analysis, cells were first incubated with nanocarbons (100 μg ml-1) at 37 ℃ for 24 h. After incubations, cells were then performed to capture single cell suspensions. By centrifugation in 600 g and washing with PBS for three times, cell pellets were lysed by RIPA lysis buffer (containing 1 % PMSF (phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride)) at 4 ℃. The lysate total proteins in supernatant were obtained by centrifuging in 12000 g for 10 min. Protein samples (200 μg) from each group were then performed as the manufacturer’s protocol for FASP (Filter Assisted Sample Preparation, Mann). First, samples were added into Vivacon@500 filtrate tube (Cat No. VNO1HO2, Sartorius Stedim Biotech) and mixed with 200 μl of 8 M urea dissolved in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5,). After centrifugation at 14,000 g for 15 min at room temperature, 10 μl of 0.05 M TCEP in water was added to the filter and incubated at 67°C for 10 min. The obtained sample was then incubated with 10 μl of 20 mM IAA for 30 min in darkness. After washing twice with 50 mM NH4HCO3, 4 μg of trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added. The protein/enzyme ratio was 50:1. The total protein sample was incubated over night at 37°C and the released peptides were collected by centrifugation and lyophilized.  To improve the resolution and sensitivity for MS/MS determination, the digested peptides were separated via high pH reverse phase chromatography before LC-MS/MS detection using the Dionex Ultimate 3000 Micro Binary HPLC Pump system. The peptide sample was dissolved in with buffer A (60 μl, 0.1% NH3.H2O in water) and loaded onto a 2.1 × 150 mm Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 column containing 3.5 μm particles (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The flow rate was set as 230 μl per min and the gradient was modulated as 5% buffer B (0.1% NH3.H2O in 80% ACN, pH = 10) for 5 min, 1-15% buffer B for 15 min, 15-25% buffer B for 10 min, 25-55% buffer B for 10 min, and finally 55-95% buffer B for 5 min. The system was then maintained in 95% buffer B for 5 min before equilibrating with 1% buffer B for 8 min prior to the next injection. Elution was monitored by measuring the absorbance at 214 nm, and fractions were collected every 2.2 min. 27 fractions containing eluted peptides were pooled into 10 fractions based on peptide density and vacuum-dried for nano-LC-MS/MS analysis (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA). The peptide solution was injected (5 μl) at a flow rate of 5 μl per min onto a pre-column (Easy-column C18-A1, 100 μm I.D. × 20 mm, 5 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) and then performed on a C18 column (Easy-column C18-A2, 75 μm I.D. × 100 mm, 3 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nl per min with a 60 min gradient of 2% to 40% ACN in 0.1% formic acid.Mass spectrometric analysis was performed by using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). MS/MS spectra were obtained in a data-dependent collision induced dissociation (CID) model and the full MS was acquired from m/z 350 to 2000 with resolution 60, 000. The top 15 most intense ions were selected to for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer v1.4.1.14 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) or MaxQuant software (version 1.5.6.0). MS/MS spectra were searched against UniProt Mouse database (released march 2015, 53289 sequences) using the Andromeda search engine with the following settings: trypsin cleavage; fixed modification of carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modifications of oxidation of methionine; a maximum of two missed cleavage. The false discovery rate was calculated by decoy data base searching. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed in MaxQuant or Proteome Discoverer. The Minimum ratio count for LFQ was set to 2, and the match-between-runs option was enabled. Other parameters were set as default. Up- and down-regulated proteins were defined based on a significantly altered protein ratio (p-values< 0.01). Significance p-values were calculated using Perseus software (version 1.6.0, http://www.perseus-framework.org). A 2-fold change in expression and a p-value of 0.01 were used as a combined threshold to define biologically regulated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Single-walled carbon-nanohorns (SNH) exhibit huge application prospects. Notably, spherical SNH possess different morphology from conventional carbon nanotubes (CNT). However, there is a tremendous lack of studies on the nanotoxicity and mechanism of SNH, and their comparison with nanotubes. Here, the dissimilarity between SNH and CNT is found in many aspects including necrosis, pyroptosis, apoptosis, protein expression, hydrolases leakage, lysosome stress, membrane disturbance and the interaction with membrane proteins. The improved biocompatibility of SNH over four types of established CNT is clearly demonstrated in macrophages. Importantly, a key transmembrane protein, glycoprotein nonmetastatic melanoma protein B (GPNMB) is discovered to initiate the nanotoxicity. Compared to CNT, the weaker nano-GPNMB interaction in SNH group induces lower degree of cascade actions from nano/membrane interplay to final cell hypotoxicity. In conclusion, the geometry of single-construct unit, but not that of dispersive forms or intracellular levels of nanocarbons make the most difference.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Nanotubes, Lc-ms/ms, Nano-protein interaction, Single-walled-carbon-nanohorns

### Affiliations
1.Department of Pharmaceutics, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100191, China 2.State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Beijing 100191, China Beijing Key Laboratory of Molecular Pharmaceutics and New Drug Delivery Systems, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100191, China
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences; State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs;
Peking University; China

### Submitter
Bing He

### Lab Head
Dr Bing He
1.Department of Pharmaceutics, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100191, China 2.State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Beijing 100191, China Beijing Key Laboratory of Molecular Pharmaceutics and New Drug Delivery Systems, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100191, China


