### Accession
PXD014276

### Title
Mouse Testis Immunoprecipitation- SLX/SLXL1

### Description
Immunoprecipitation of SLX/SLXL1 from mouse testis and mass spec.

### Sample Protocol
SLX/SLXL1 co-immunoprecipitation was performed on whole testis lysate using our SLX/SLXL1 antibody conjugated to protein A Dynabeads (Life Technologies). Briefly, testes from wildtype, Slx-/Y, Slxl1-/Y and Slx-/Y, Slxl1-/Y males were lysed (150 mM KCl, 0.05% NP-40, 0.5 mM DTT, and protease inhibitors (EDTA-free Complete PI) and centrifuged at full speed in a tabletop centrifuge at 4C. The top lipid layer was discarded and the remaining supernatant was transferred to a new tube and incubated with SLX/SLXL1 antibody. Protein A dynabeads were rinsed 3 times with lysis buffer before adding the lysate/antibody solution and incubated at 4ºC for at least 1hr. Beads were subsequently washed 2X with lysis buffer and 1X with lysis buffer containing no detergent and 1X with PBS containing protease inhibitors. A small aliquot of beads was removed for western blot analysis. The remaining beads were stored at -20ºC after removing all liquid. Prior to trypsin digestion, beads were resuspended in 50ul of 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH~8).  Cysteines were reduced by adding 50ul of 10 mM DTT and incubated at 45C for 30 min.  To alkylate cysteines, the samples incubated at room temperature, protected from light, with 65 mM 2-Chloroacetamide.  Proteins were digested overnight with 1ug sequencing grade modified trypsin at 37C with constant shaking in a Thermomixer.  Digestion was stopped by acidification and peptides were desalted using SepPak C18 cartridges using manufacturer’s protocol (Waters).  Samples were dried using a vacufuge.  Samples were dissolved in 8ul of 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile solution and then 2ul of the peptide solution was resolved on a nano-capillary reverse phase column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 micron, 50 cm, ThermoScientific) using a 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile (Buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid, 95% acetonitrile (Buffer B) gradient at 300 nl/min over a period of 180 min (2-22% buffer B in 110 min, 22-40% in 25 min, 40-90% in 5 min followed by holding at 90% buffer B for 5 min and requilibration with Buffer A for 25 min).  Eluent was directly introduced into Orbitrap Fusion tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose CA) using an EasySpray source.  MS1 scans were acquired at 120K resolution (AGC target=1x106; max IT=50 ms).  Data-dependent collision induced dissociation MS/MS spectra were acquired using Top speed method (3 seconds) following each MS1 scan (NCE ~32%; AGC target 1x105; max IT 45 ms).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching the MS/MS data against Mus Musculus (UniProt; 60627 entries) using Proteome Discoverer (v2.1, Thermo Scientific).  Search parameters included MS1 mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment tolerance of 0.2 Da; two missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidimethylation of cysteine was considered fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, deamidation of aspergine and glutamine were considered as potential modifications.  False discovery rate (FDR) was determined using Percolator and proteins/peptides with a FDR of ≤1% were retained for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Testis, Slxl1, Reproduction, Ip-ms, Mouse, Slx

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan

### Submitter
Jacob Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Jacob Mueller
Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan


