### Accession
PXD010161

### Title
Proteome and ubiquitinome changes in Huntington’s disease

### Description
Huntington’s disease is caused by a polyglutamine repeat expansion at the N-terminus of the huntingtin protein which affects the function and folding of the protein, and results in intracellular protein aggregates. Here, we examined whether this mutation leads to altered ubiquitination of huntingtin and other proteins in both soluble and insoluble fractions of brain lysates of the Q175 knock-in Huntington disease mouse model and the Q20 wild-type mouse model. Ubiquitination sites are detected by identification of Gly-Gly (diGly) remnant motifs that remain on modified lysine residues after digestion. We identified K6, K9, K132, K804 and K837 as endogenous ubiquitination sites of soluble huntingtin, with wild-type huntingtin being mainly ubiquitinated at K132, K804 and K837. Mutant huntingtin protein levels were strongly reduced in the soluble fraction while K6 and K9 were mainly ubiquitinated. In the insoluble fraction increased levels of huntingtin K6 and K9 diGly sites were observed for mutant huntingtin as compared to wild type. Besides huntingtin, proteins with various roles, including membrane organization, transport, mRNA processing, gene transcription, translation, catabolic processes and oxidative phosphorylation, were differently expressed or ubiquitinated in wild-type and mutant huntingtin brain tissues. Correlating protein and diGly site fold-changes in the soluble fraction revealed that diGly site abundances of the majority of the proteins were not related to protein fold-changes, indicating that these proteins were differentially ubiquitinated in the Q175 mice. In contrast, both the fold-change of the protein level and diGly site level were increased for several proteins in the insoluble fraction, including ubiquitin, ubiquilin-2, sequestosome-1/p62 and myo5a. Our data sheds light on putative novel proteins involved in different cellular processes as well as their ubiquitination status in Huntington’s disease, which forms the basis for further mechanistic studies to understand the role of differential ubiquitination of huntingtin as well as ubiquitin-regulated processes in Huntington’s disease.

### Sample Protocol
Snap frozen whole brains excluding cerebellum derived  from 40weeks old mice of strain HttQ20 (wild type) and strain Q175F neo delete/Q175FDN (mutant, homozygous) (Southwell et al. 2016), were provided by the Jackson Lab (www.jax.org). Frozen brains were grinded and dissolved in a mild lysis buffer (50mM Tris/HCl pH7; 150mM NaCl; 1% Triton X-100; Roche protease inhibitor tablet; 200µM PR-619; 1mM EDTA; 100mM Chloroacetamide (CAA)) using a glass douncer on ice. Lysates were centrifuged through a 70micron filter (EASYstrainer Greiner bio-one) and DNA was sheared by sonication (Bioruptor Pico, Diagenode). Lysates were centrifuged for 20min with 14,000rpm by 4°C to separate soluble (monomeric and oligomeric Htt) and insoluble (fibrils, aggregates and inclusion bodies) huntingtin fractions (Ochaba et al. 2018). Proteins of the soluble fraction were denatured by addition of 10 volumes of 8M urea lysis buffer (8M urea; 50mM Tris/HCl pH8; 50mM NaCl). The pellet or insoluble fraction was washed several times in the mild lysis buffer. Next, the Htt aggregates in the pellets were solubilized as described before (Juenemann et al. 2015) with some small adjustments. Briefly, aggregates were solubilized by resuspension in one pellet volume of formic acid and incubated at 37°C for 40min with 1000rpm shaking and dried by speedvac O/N. Pellets were dissolved in 8M urea-based lysis buffer. Four biological replicates of 20mg total protein for soluble fractions and 3mg protein for insoluble fractions were made for both wild-type and mutant samples.  10mg total protein of each sample was used for Arg-C/chymotrypsin digestion 2.75mg of each sample was used for Lys-C/trypsin digestion. Digestion was performed as described above. Arg-C/chymotrypsin and Lys-C/trypsin digests of soluble fractions were combined. Peptide fractionation, diGly peptide enrichment and NanoLC-MS/MS analysis were performed as initially described (Van Der Wal et al. 2018), with only minor adjustments. Briefly, for peptide fractionation high pH reverse-phase (RP) chromatography was performed using polymeric PLRP-S (300Å, 50µm, Agilent Technologies, part #PL1412-2K01). Samples were loaded onto the column and washed with 6 column volumes (CVs) of 0.1% TFA followed by 6CVs of milliQ H2O. Peptides were then eluted in three fractions with 6CVs of 10mM ammonium formate solution (pH10) and 9%, 15% and 40% acetonitrile (AcN), respectively. 1/30 part of the fractions were dried to completeness by vacuum centrifugation and used for global proteome analysis. Remaining of the fractions were dried to completeness by lyophilization and used for diGly peptide enrichment. Peptide clean-up was performed with Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters) according to PTMscan protocol (PTMscan, Cell Signaling Technologies).  Ubiquitin remnant motif (K-ε-GG) antibodies coupled to beads (PTMscan, Cell Signaling Technologies) were used according to manufacturer’s advice. For the soluble fraction, each standard batch of beads was divided over the three fractions of each sample. For the insoluble fraction, 20μl beads was used per diGly IP.   Mass spectra were acquired on an Orbitrap Tribrid Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo). Peptides were separated on an in-house packed 75μm inner diameter column containing 50cm Waters CSH130 resin (2.5μm, 130Å, Waters) with a gradient consisting of 2−30% (AcN, 0.1%FA) over 120 min at 300nL/min. The column was kept at 50°C in a NanoLC oven - MPI design (MS Wil GmbH). For all experiments, the instrument was operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using the top speed method with a cycle time of 3sec. MS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120,000 with an automated gain control (AGC) target of 4E5 and a max injection time of 50ms. Precursors were filtered according to charge state (2-6z), and monoisotopic peak assignment. Previously interrogated precursors were dynamically excluded for 60s. Peptide precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.6Th. Ion trap MS2 spectra were collected at an AGC of 7E3, a max injection time of 50 ms and HCD collision energy of 30%. Duration of all individual mass spec runs was 120min.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing and Statistical Analysis - RAW files were analyzed using MaxQuant software suite (v1.6.5.0) (Tyanova, Temu & Cox 2016). The data were searched against reviewed (Swiss-Prot) Mus musculus proteome from Uniprot (September 2018, contains 16989 entries) (The UniProt Consortium 2017), along with revert decoys and standard contaminants database from MaxQuant. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. In addition to these, diGly modification of Lysine was set as a variable modification for searching diGly data. Maximum number of modifications per peptide were set to 5. Default search settings for Orbitrap were used, such as a precursor tolerance of 20ppm and 4.5ppm for the first and main search respectively and a tolerance of 20ppm for the fragment ions. Trypsin was selected as the search enzyme for the insoluble data; whereas Arg-C/chymotrypsin/trypsin was set as the cleavage enzyme for the soluble. Maximum number of miscleavages were set to 3. The minimal peptide length was set to 7, ‘second peptides’ and ‘match between runs’ were checked. The label-free quantification algorithm (LFQ) in MaxQuant was used for quantification with LFQ minimum ratio count set to 1; unique and razor peptides were selected to be used for quantification.  The false discovery rate for peptide, protein and site identifications were set to 1%. The minimum score for diGly peptides was kept at 40 (default). Statistical analyses were performed on MaxQuant outputs using the Perseus package (v1.6.2.3) (Tyanova, Temu, Sinitcyn, et al. 2016). For global proteome data the proteinGroups files were used for statistical analyses. Proteins that were identified by less than 2 unique peptides were excluded. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed. Proteins that were identified in at least 3 (out of 4) replicates in both wtHtt and mHtt samples were selected for comparison of protein abundance. Missing values of selected proteins were then imputed from a normal distribution with width 0.3, down shift 1.8 from the general distribution.  For ubiquitinome data the GlyGly (K) Sites tables were used for statistical analyses. diGly site modifications localized on C-term with a probability more than 0.75 and on any other position with a probability less than 0.75 were discarded. diGly sites that were identified in at least 3 (out of 4) experiments in both wtHtt and mHtt samples were selected for diGly site quantification. Normalization of diGly log2 transformed intensities was done manually based on average median intensities in the global evidence file. Calculated scaling factors were then applied to intensities in the GlyGly(K) sites table. In addition to these comparisons, proteins and diGly sites that were identified in all of the mHtt replicates but in none or only one of the wtHtt, and vice versa, were extracted from the tables before imputation and filtering for further exploration.

### Publication Abstract
Huntington's disease is caused by a polyglutamine repeat expansion in the huntingtin protein which affects the function and folding of the protein, and results in intracellular protein aggregates. Here, we examined whether this mutation leads to altered ubiquitination of huntingtin and other proteins in both soluble and insoluble fractions of brain lysates of the Q175 knock-in Huntington's disease mouse model and the Q20 wild-type mouse model. Ubiquitination sites are detected by identification of Gly-Gly (diGly) remnant motifs that remain on modified lysine residues after digestion. We identified K6, K9, K132, K804, and K837 as endogenous ubiquitination sites of soluble huntingtin, with wild-type huntingtin being mainly ubiquitinated at K132, K804, and K837. Mutant huntingtin protein levels were strongly reduced in the soluble fraction whereas K6 and K9 were mainly ubiquitinated. In the insoluble fraction increased levels of huntingtin K6 and K9 diGly sites were observed for mutant huntingtin as compared with wild type. Besides huntingtin, proteins with various roles, including membrane organization, transport, mRNA processing, gene transcription, translation, catabolic processes and oxidative phosphorylation, were differently expressed or ubiquitinated in wild-type and mutant huntingtin brain tissues. Correlating protein and diGly site fold changes in the soluble fraction revealed that diGly site abundances of most of the proteins were not related to protein fold changes, indicating that these proteins were differentially ubiquitinated in the Q175 mice. In contrast, both the fold change of the protein level and diGly site level were increased for several proteins in the insoluble fraction, including ubiquitin, ubiquilin-2, sequestosome-1/p62 and myo5a. Our data sheds light on putative novel proteins involved in different cellular processes as well as their ubiquitination status in Huntington's disease, which forms the basis for further mechanistic studies to understand the role of differential ubiquitination of huntingtin and ubiquitin-regulated processes in Huntington's disease.

### Keywords
Digly, Brain, Ubiquitination, Mouse, Lfq, Huntington, Ptms

### Affiliations
Academisch Medisch Centrum
Professor Cellular Imaging, Huntington degradation research groupleader   Department of Medical Biology, Amsterdam UMC (AMC), Meibergdreef 15, 1105AZ Amsterdam, the Netherlands

### Submitter
Arzu Tugce Guler

### Lab Head
Dr Eric A. Reits
Professor Cellular Imaging, Huntington degradation research groupleader   Department of Medical Biology, Amsterdam UMC (AMC), Meibergdreef 15, 1105AZ Amsterdam, the Netherlands


