### Accession
PXD017150

### Title
Differentially expressed proteins wereassociated withtwo color morphs of Asian citrus psyllid, Diaphorina citri

### Description
Diaphorina citriis a vector of ‘CandidatusLiberibacter asiaticus,’(CLas), associated with citrus greening or Huanglongbing (HLB) disease in citrus. D. citriexhibits two group three different color morph variants, blueand non-blue (includes gray and yellow). Blue morphs have  a  greater  capacity  for  long-distance  flight while  has  lower  efficiency  in  CLas transmission as compared to non-blue morphswhich influences disease epidemiology. In this study, wecompare the protein profilesof two-color morphsand evaluate the effect of CLas infection on abundance of pre-identified proteins in each color morphs. Our results showed  that  blue  morphs  have  higher  abundance  of  the immunity-associated proteins, while their abundance were upregulated dramatically in the non-blue morphcompared to blue morphin result of CLas infection. This observation proposes blue morph has higher immunity  and CLas trigger the immunity  in both morph while in non-blue’s response is late and non-effective.Further, challenging both color morphs byentomopathogenic fungi Beauveria bassiana, were showed significantly lower mortality in blue morph vs non-blue. Also, to test the effect of delayed response in CLas acquisition, we did CLas acquisition assay after priming immunity by feeding heat-killed Liberibacter crescens to both color-morphs. The obtained results were showed that priming immunity in non-blue morph can significantly decrease CLas  acquisition as  close as  the level of  CLas  acquisition in blue morph. Taking all these in account propose that higher immunity in blue morph suppress CLas acquisition in a way that CLas acts as a pathogenand costly forACP. While in non-blue ACP, CLas triggers the immunity but the delayed immunity is not effective to block CLas from acquisition.

### Sample Protocol
D. citri proteins were precipitated and prepared for mass spectrometry analysis following methods modified from (24). The sorted D. citri samples were flash frozen and cryoground (Retsch Mixer Mill 400, Haan, Germany) in 2 ml microcentrifuge tubes containing three small 3.2 mm stainless steel beads (Next Advance, Averill Park, NY, USA) for 2 rounds, 3 min each at 25 Hz. Protein precipitation solvent (10% trichloroacetic acid in acetone with 2% beta-mercaptoethanol) was made fresh and kept on ice until use. Precipitation solvent (500 μL) was added to ground psyllid powder, the metal beads were removed using forceps, the samples were sonicated () on ice for two cycles of 15 s each at 15% amplitude for 30sec at 15% amplitude and stored in the -20°C freezer overnight to precipitate.  Sample were span 14,000 ×g for 5 min at 4°C. Precipitated protein pellets were washed three times with one mL ice-cold acetone, and after decanting the supernatant from the final wash the pellet was dried to completion. Pellets were resuspended in 200 μL protein reconstitution solvent [8 M urea, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) in water]. Pellets were reconstituted overnight with shaking. Samples were centrifuged for 15 min at full speed to pellet insoluble material, and the supernatant was collected, and the protein concentration was determined using the Bradford method. For each sample, 50 μg of protein was diluted in 100 mM TEAB to a final volume of 90 μL. For reduction, a 100 μL solution of each protein in 10 mM dithiotreitol, 50 mM TEAB was prepared, and samples were vortexed, centrifuged briefly, and incubated for one hour at 37°C. After cooling samples to room temperature, methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham MA) in 50 mM TEAB was added to reach a final concentration of 30 mM MMTS, samples were vortexed, centrifuged, and incubated for one hour at room temperature in the dark. Samples were diluted with TEAB if necessary, to reduce concentration of urea below 1 M. Proteins were digested using 1 μg of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) per sample and incubated at 37 °C overnight. Oasis mixed mode cation exchange (MCX) solid phase extraction cartridges (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) was used to remove lipids and other contaminants from the digested peptides. Peptide samples were dried using a centrifugal evaporator.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were searched against a combined database described previously (23) containing proteins from D. citri and its inhabiting microbes including Carsonella, Profftella, Wolbachia CLas using Mascot Daemon 2.3.2 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA). This database had a total of 33,112 combined insect and microbial sequences as well as 112 common contaminant sequences. MS/MS search parameters allowed for fixed methylthio modification modifications and variable modifications (asparagine, glutamine: deamidated; methionine: oxidation) with a peptide mass tolerance of ±20ppm and fragment mass tolerance of ±0.6Da and a maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed. Thermo _.raw files were converted into Mascot Generic files using MSConvert in Protewizard. Subsequentially the _.dat were used as input files were loaded into Scaffold Q+ 4.4.1.1 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR) and used to calculate normalized spectral count for each protein from each sample. Proteins were identified with a 99% threshold and 0.6% decoy FDR with a minimum of 2 matching peptides.  A Fisher's Exact Test was employed to identify proteins significantly differentially expressed between different groups in effect of color morphology, gender and CLas infection using spectral counting. A P-value cutoff of 0.05 and 2-FC were applied.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Diaphorina citri</i> is a vector of "<i>Candidatus</i> Liberibacter asiaticus<i>"</i> (<i>C</i>Las), associated with citrus greening disease. <i>D</i>. <i>citri</i> exhibit at least two color morphotypes, blue and non-blue, the latter including gray and yellow morphs. Blue morphs have a greater capacity for long-distance flight and transmit <i>C</i>Las less efficiently as compared to non-blue morphs. Differences in physiology and immunity between color morphs of the insect vector may influence disease epidemiology and biological control strategies. We evaluated the effect of <i>C</i>Las infection on color morph and sex-specific proteomic profiles of <i>D. citri</i>. Immunity-associated proteins were more abundant in blue morphs as compared to non-blue morphs but were upregulated at a higher magnitude in response to <i>C</i>Las infection in non-blue insects. To test for differences in color morph immunity, we measured two phenotypes: (1) survival of <i>D. citri</i> when challenged with the entomopathogenic fungus <i>Beauveria bassiana</i> and (2) microbial load of the surface and internal microbial communities. Non-blue color morphs showed higher mortality at four doses of <i>B. bassinana</i>, but no differences in microbial load were observed. Thus, color morph polyphenism is associated with two distinct proteomic immunity phenotypes in <i>D. citri</i> that may impact transmission of <i>C</i>Las and resistance to <i>B. bassiana</i> under some conditions.

### Keywords
Color polymorphism, Proteomics survey, Immunity

### Affiliations
USDA-ARS/Boyce Thompson Institute/Cornell University
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
Kevin Howe

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle Heck
USDA-ARS/Boyce Thompson Institute/Cornell University


