### Accession
PXD037309

### Title
The deubiquitinase OTUD1 regulates immunoglobulin production and proteasome inhibitor sensitivity in multiple myeloma

### Description
Serum monoclonal immunoglobulin (Ig) is the main diagnostic factor for patients with multiple myeloma (MM), however its prognostic potential remains unclear. On a large MM patient cohort (n=4146), we observe no correlation between serum Ig levels and patient survival, while amount of intracellular Ig has a strong predictive effect. Focused CRISPR screen, transcriptional and proteomic analysis identify deubiquitinase OTUD1 as a critical mediator of Ig synthesis, proteasome inhibitor sensitivity and tumour burden in MM. Mechanistically, OTUD1 deubiquitinates peroxiredoxin 4 (PRDX4), protecting it from endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated degradation. In turn, PRDX4 facilitates the synthesis of Ig which coincides with the accumulation of unfolded proteins and higher ER stress. The elevated load on proteasome ultimately potentiates myeloma response to proteasome inhibitors providing a window for a rational therapy. Collectively, our findings support the significance of the Ig production machinery as a yet unappreciated biomarker and target in the combinatory treatment of MM patients.

### Sample Protocol
2.5*10 7 HEK 293 cells with doxycycline-inducible expressing of TurboID N-terminally fused to OTUD1 and TurboID only were treated with biotin (50 μM) for 1 h before lysis with Urea buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM TRIS, pH 7.6, 1 mM DTT) supplemented with 1% Triton X-100 and protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After 30 min incubation on ice, the concentration of Triton X-100 was decreased to 0.5 % by dilution with Urea buffer. The cells were further sonicated and lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 17,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. Protein concentration was determined by BCA protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The lysates were mixed with 25 μL of Streptavidin sepharose high performance resin (Cytiva) and incubated on a rotator at 4°C overnight. Beads were washed extensively with Urea buffer and transferred to new tubes before washing with ammonium bicarbonate buffer (1 mM biotin, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate). The enriched biotinylated proteins were subjected to on-bead trypsin digestion (1 µg of trypsin at 37 °C overnight). The digested peptides were collected and desalted using in-house made StageTips packed with C18 disks (Empore) before mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were separated and analysed on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were firstly loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap300 trap column (300 µm x 5 mm) packed with C18 (5 µm, 300 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in loading buffer (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 2% acetonitrile) for 4 min at 15 μL/min and then separated in an EASY-Spray column (75 µm x 50 cm) packed with C18 (2 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) and mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) were used to establish a 60-min gradient from 4% to 35% B. Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray. A full MS spectrum (350-1400 m/z range) was acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 and a maximum ion accumulation time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS/MS spectra were acquired in iontrap in rapid mode and normalized collision energy was set to  21  30% with maximum ion accumulation time of 35 ms. The automatic gain control for MS and MS2 was set at 1E6 and 5E4, respectively. Top speed mode with 2 s cycle time and lower intensity threshold 5E3 were selected. An isolation width of 1.6 m/z units was used for MS. All raw data were processed and searched using MaxQuant 1.6.3.4 52 with the UniProtKB reviewed human protein database (release 2020_07; 20,381 sequences). Trypsin specificity was set C-terminally to arginine and lysine residues, also allowing the cleavage of proline bonds. Two missed cleavage sites of trypsin were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification and N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The false discovery rate of both peptide identification and protein identification was set as 1%. The options of “Second peptides” and “Match between runs” were enabled. Label-free quantification was used to quantify the difference in protein abundance between different samples 53 . Data analysis was performed using Perseus 1.6.1.3 software 54 . The obtained dataset was further correlated with the published OTUD1 interaction data 55 .

### Publication Abstract
Serum monoclonal immunoglobulin (Ig) is the main diagnostic factor for patients with multiple myeloma (MM), however its prognostic potential remains unclear. On a large MM patient cohort (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;4146), we observe no correlation between serum Ig levels and patient survival, while amount of intracellular Ig has a strong predictive effect. Focused CRISPR screen, transcriptional and proteomic analysis identify deubiquitinase OTUD1 as a critical mediator of Ig synthesis, proteasome inhibitor sensitivity and tumor burden in MM. Mechanistically, OTUD1 deubiquitinates peroxiredoxin 4 (PRDX4), protecting it from endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated degradation. In turn, PRDX4 facilitates Ig production which coincides with the accumulation of unfolded proteins and higher ER stress. The elevated load on proteasome ultimately potentiates myeloma response to proteasome inhibitors providing a window for a rational therapy. Collectively, our findings support the significance of the Ig production machinery as a biomarker and target in the combinatory treatment of MM patients.

### Keywords
Deubiquitinase otud1, Multiple myeloma

### Affiliations
Charles University
1 Department of Hematooncology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ostrava, Ostrava, Syllabova 19, 703 00, Czech Republic 2 Department of Hematooncology, University Hospital Ostrava, Ostrava, 17. listopadu    1790/5, 708 00, Czech Republic 3 Faculty of Science, University of Ostrava, Ostrava, 30. dubna 22, 701 03, Czech Republic * Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.S. (email: michal.simicek@fno.cz).

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Simicek 1,2,3,*
1 Department of Hematooncology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ostrava, Ostrava, Syllabova 19, 703 00, Czech Republic 2 Department of Hematooncology, University Hospital Ostrava, Ostrava, 17. listopadu    1790/5, 708 00, Czech Republic 3 Faculty of Science, University of Ostrava, Ostrava, 30. dubna 22, 701 03, Czech Republic * Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.S. (email: michal.simicek@fno.cz).


