### Accession
PXD017238

### Title
Structural Basis for CAL1-Mediated Centromere Maintenance

### Description
Intermolecular interactions stabilising the CAL1–CENP-A/H4 complex were analysed using chemical Cross-Linking Mass Spectrometry (CLMS). Purified recombinant CAL11-160–CENP-A101-225–H4 complex was crosslinked using EDC and BS3. The crosslinked peptides were analysed by mass spectrometry to identify intra- and intermolecular contacts.  Notably, the data revealed several intramolecular crosslinks between the N- and C-terminal regions of CAL11-160, suggesting a direct interaction between these regions.

### Sample Protocol
Crosslinking was performed on gel filtered complexes dialysied into PBS. 30 ug EDC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 66 ug sulfo-NHS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were used to crosslink 10 ug of protein for 1.5 h at RT. 30 ug of BS3 was used to crosslink 10 ug of protein for 2 h at RT. The reactions were quenched with Tris-HCl or ammonium bicarbonate respectively before separation on 4-12% Bis-Tris plus gels (Invitrogen). Following previously established protocol (Maiolica, Cittaro et al., 2007), the bands were excised and proteins were digested with trypsin (Pierce) overnight at 37˚C after being reduced and alkylated.  The digested peptides were loaded onto C18-Stage-tips (Rappsilber, Mann et al., 2007) for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a “high/high” acquisition strategy. The peptide separation was carried out on an EASY-Spray column (50 cm × 75 μm i.d., PepMap C18, 2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A consisted of water and 0.1% v/v formic acid. Mobile phase B consisted of 80% v/v acetonitrile and 0.1% v/v formic acid. Peptides were loaded at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min and eluted at 0.2 μl/min using a linear gradient going from 2% mobile phase B to 40% mobile phase B over 109 followed by a linear increase from 40% to 95% mobile phase B in 11 min. The eluted peptides were directly introduced into the mass spectrometer. MS data were acquired in the data-dependent mode with a 3 s acquisition cycle. Precursor spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000. The ions with a precursor charge state between 3+ and 8+ were isolated with a window size of 1.6 m/z and fragmented using high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with a collision energy of 30. The fragmentation spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 15,000. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with single repeat count and 60 s exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric raw files were processed into peak lists using ProteoWizard (version 3.0.19288) (Kessner, Chambers et al., 2008), and crosslinked peptides were matched to spectra using Xi software (version 1.7.754.RC1) (Mendes, Fischer et al., 2018) with in-search assignment of monoisotopic peaks (Lenz, Giese et al., 2018). Search parameters were MS accuracy, 3 ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 10 ppm; enzyme, trypsin; cross-linker, EDC or BS3; max missed cleavages, 4; missing mono-isotopic peaks, 2; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications, oxidation on methionine; fragments, b and y ions with loss of H2O, NH3 and CH3SOH.

### Publication Abstract
Centromeres are microtubule attachment sites on chromosomes defined by the enrichment of histone variant CENP-A-containing nucleosomes. To preserve centromere identity, CENP-A must be escorted to centromeres by a CENP-A-specific chaperone for deposition. Despite this essential requirement, many eukaryotes differ in the composition of players involved in centromere maintenance, highlighting the plasticity of this process. In humans, CENP-A recognition and centromere targeting are achieved by HJURP and the Mis18 complex, respectively. Using X-ray crystallography, we here show how Drosophila CAL1, an evolutionarily distinct CENP-A histone chaperone, binds both CENP-A and the centromere receptor CENP-C without the requirement for the Mis18 complex. While an N-terminal CAL1 fragment wraps around CENP-A/H4 through multiple physical contacts, a C-terminal CAL1 fragment directly binds a CENP-C cupin domain dimer. Although divergent at the primary structure level, CAL1 thus binds CENP-A/H4 using evolutionarily conserved and adaptive structural principles. The CAL1 binding site on CENP-C is strategically positioned near the cupin dimerisation interface, restricting binding to just one CAL1 molecule per CENP-C dimer. Overall, by demonstrating how CAL1 binds CENP-A/H4 and CENP-C, we provide key insights into the minimalistic principles underlying centromere maintenance.

### Keywords
Cal1/cenp-a/cenp-c/centromeres/chromosome segregation

### Affiliations
The University of Edinburgh
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin

### Submitter
Juan Zou

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin


