### Accession
PXD031015

### Title
Gut bacterial nutrient preferences quantified in vivo

### Description
We quantitatively examine inputs and outputs of the mouse gut microbiome, using isotope tracing. To determine nutrient preferences across bacteria, we traced into genus-specific bacterial protein sequences. By in vivo isotope tracer feeding, mapped the contribution of different dietary nutrients vs circulating nutrients contribution to different gut bacterial genera.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics analysis, approximately mouse cecal samples (10 mg each) were dissolved in 400 ul lysis buffer (6M guanidium chloride, 2% cetrimonium bromide, 5 mM dithiothreitol, 50 mM (4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid) (HEPES), pH 7.2). Then the sample mixture was put on ice and sonicated for 10 cycles (30 s on and 30 s off cycle, amplitude 50%) by a sonicator (Qsonica), followed by centrifugation at 20,000 × g for 20 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was taken and alkylated with 20 mM N-ethylmaleimide for 20 min at room temperature, 5 mM dithiothreitol was added to quench the excessive alkylating reagents. Proteins were purified by methanol-chloroform precipitation. The dried protein pellet was resuspended in 10 mM EPPS (N-(2-Hydroxyethyl) piperazine-N’-(3-propanesulfonic acid)) at pH 8.5 with 6 M guanidine hydrochloride. Samples were heated at 60°C for 15 min and protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Scientific). The protein mixture (30~50 µg) was diluted with 10 mM EPPS pH 8.5 to 2 M GuaCl and digested with 10 ng/µL LysC (Wako) at room temperature overnight. Samples were further diluted to 0.5 M GuaCl with 10 M EPPS pH 8.5 and digested with an additional 10 ng/µL LysC and 20 ng/µL sequencing grade Trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 16 h. Samples were desalted using a SepPak cartridges (Waters) and then vacuum-dried and resuspended in 1% formic acid before mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
The data was analyzed using software licensed from Harvard. Thermo Fisher Scientific. raw files were converted to mzXML using ReAdW.exe. MS2 spectra assignment was performed using the SEQUEST algorithm v.28 (rev. 12) by searching the data against the combined reference proteomes for Mus Musculus, Bos Taurus, and all the abundant bacterial families detected in 16S rRNA sequencing (Bacteroidaceae, Porphyromonadaceae, Prevotellaceae, Rikenellaceae, Muribaculaceae, Lachnospiraceae, Ruminococcaceae, Erysipelotrichaceae, Oscillospiraceae, Clostridiaceae, Eubacteriaceae, Lactobacillaceae and Verrucomicrobiaceae) acquired from Uniprot on Jan 2021 (SwissProt + Trembl) along with common contaminants such as human keratins and trypsin. The target-decoy strategy was used to construct a second database of reverse sequences that were used to estimate the peptide false discovery rate.52 A 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance with the requirement that both N- and C- terminal peptide ends are consistent with the protease specificities of LysC and Trypsin was used for SEQUEST searches, two missed cleavage was allowed. NEM was set as a static modification of cysteine residues (+125.047679 Da). An MS2 spectral assignment false discovery rate of 0.5% was achieved by applying the target decoy database search strategy. Linear Discriminant analysis was used for filtering with the following features: SEQUEST parameters XCorr and unique ΔXCorr, absolute peptide ion mass accuracy, peptide length and charge state. Forward peptides within three standard deviations of the theoretical m/z of the precursor were used as positive training set.

### Publication Abstract
High affinity interactions between cells and laminin are mediated, at least in part, by the 67 kDa laminin receptor (67 LR). A 37 kDa nascent polypeptide (37 LRP), predicted by a full length cDNA clone and obtained by in vitro translation of hybrid-selected laminin receptor mRNA, has been immunologically identified in cancer cell extracts as the putative precursor of the 67 LR. In this study, we used affinity purified antibodies developed against cDNA-deduced 37 LRP synthetic peptides in pulse chase experiments and demonstrated a precursor-product relationship between the 37 LRP and the 67 LR. Immunoblot, pulse chase and immunofluorescence experiments showed that transient transfection of the full length 37 LRP cDNA clone induced a dramatic increase in the synthesis of the 37 LRP but not of the mature 67 LR. We propose that the 67 LR results from the association of two gene products: the 37 LRP and a polypeptide yet to be identified.

### Keywords
Isotope, Mouse, Cecal content, Microbiome

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Department of Chemistry, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Princeton Branch, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA (lab head)

### Submitter
Xianfeng Zeng

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua D. Rabinowitz
Department of Chemistry, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Princeton Branch, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA (lab head)


