### Accession
PXD003385

### Title
Characterisation and use of orthotopically grownHapT1tumours in its homologous host as a preclinical model to evaluate novel drugs against desmoplastic pancreatic cancer

### Description
The major objective of this study was to characterise theHapT1 orthotopic hamster pancreatic tumor as a preclinical model of desmoplastic pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma; and use this model to validate the efficacy of drugs that kills activated pancreatic stellate cells (PSCs)in vitro. Experimentaldesign: Commercially procured HapT1 pancreatic cancer (PCA) cell line was implanted in the pancreas of its syngeneic host, Syrian golden hamster (Mesocricetusauratus). After certain time period the primary and secondary tumors were harvested for histological andimmunophynotypical analysis. PSCs of hamsters were harvested, cultured and characterised. The in-cultured activated rodent PSCs and commercially procured human PSCs were used to check the cytotoxic effect of Disulfiram (DSF) in presence and absence of copper (Cu )in vitro. Finally, theHapT1 orthotopic tumor model was used to check the efficacy of DSF in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Protein isolation and massspectrometry analysis: For isolation of protein samples from hamster PSCs, cells were harvested in protein lysis buffer supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (MP Biomedicals) and stored at -800C. Cells were homogenised by passing through insulin syringe (30-guage needle) to facilitate the disruption of the cell membranes and incubated on ice. The homogenate was then sedimented by centrifuging at 14,000 rpm for 30 min at 40C and the supernatant was collected. Protein concentrations were determined by using the Bradford assay (Sigma). 500µg of protein sample was precipitated with 30% TCA at 40C for 16 hr, final volume 500µl. The samples were then centrifuged at 14,000g at 40C for 30min, supernatant was discarded and visible pellet air dried. The air dried protein pellet was then resuspended with 50µl of resuspension buffer (6M urea) and re-quantified using the Bradford assay (Sigma). Protein (30µg) denaturation was done by incubating the samples at 600C for 1 hr with 2µl TFE and 0.2 µl DTT followed by alkylating the samples by adding 0.8µl IAM (15mM) in dark for 1 hr at RT. Excess amount of IAM was neutralised by incubating the protein samples in 0.2µl of DTT for 1 hr at RT under dark condition, followed by addition of ammonium bicarbonate (0.15mM) to raise the pH (pH 7.5-8.0). Protein samples were then digested by adding trypsin (1:25) and incubated for overnight at 370C. To stop the trypsin digestion reaction 0.2µl of 100% formic acid was added, mixed and aliquoted in to 3 tubes. The samples were then concentrated using speedvac at 370C.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2009) software version 1.5.0.8 and searched an in-house modified UniProt Human, Mouse and Hamster database along with NCBI Hamster database by adding common contamination sequences. Database search was performed in Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) integrated in MaxQuant environment. A list of 280 common laboratory contaminants included in MaxQuant was also added to the database as well as reversed target decoy search was used for all sequences. For searching, the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with the maximum number of missed cleavages set to 2. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 0.07 Da for the first search and then to 0.006 Da for the main search. Mass tolerance for fragment ions in CID spectra was set to 0.5 Da. The search included variable modifications of protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and carbamidomethylation of cysteines was searched as a fixed modification. The maximal number of modifications per peptide was set to 5. The false discovery rate (FDR) for PSM, protein, and site decoy fraction was set to 1%. Additionally TOF MS/MS mass tolerance was set to be 40 ppm. The minimum peptide length of 6 was set, and the ‘peptide requantification’ function was enabled. To validate and transfer identifications across different runs, the ‘match between runs’ option in MaxQuant was enabled with a retention time window of 0.7 minute and an alignment time window of 20 min.

### Publication Abstract
Desmoplasia in human pancreatic cancer (PC) promotes cancer progression and hinders effective drug delivery. The objectives of this study were to characterize a homologous orthotopic model of PC in Syrian golden hamster and investigate the effect of anti-fibrotic (pirfenidone), antioxidant (N-acetyl cysteine, NAC) and anti-addiction (disulfiram, DSF) drugs on desmoplasia and tumor growth in this model. The HapT1 PC cells when implanted orthotopically into hamsters formed tumors with morphological, cellular and molecular similarities to human PC. Protein profiling of activated hamster pancreatic stellate cells (ha-PSCs) revealed expression of proteins involved in fibrosis, cancer cells growth and metastasis. Pirfenidone, suppressed growth of HapT1 cells and the desmoplastic response in vivo; these effects were enhanced by co-administration of NAC. Disulfiram alone or in combination with copper (Cu) was toxic to HapT1 cells and PSCs in vitro; but co-administration of DSF and Cu accelerated growth of HapT1 cells in vivo. Moreover, DSF had no effect on tumor-associated desmoplasia. Overall, this study identifies HapT1-derived orthotopic tumors as a useful model to study desmoplasia and tumor-directed therapeutics in PC. Pirfenidone in combination with NAC could be a novel combination therapy for PC and warrants investigation in human subjects.

### Keywords
Pancreatic cell line, Lc-ms/ms, Hamster

### Affiliations
Institute of Life Sciences
Institute of life sciences (ILS) Bhubaneswar National dairy Research Institute (NDRI) Haryana, INDIA

### Submitter
Shantibhusan  Senapati

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Shantibhusan Senapati
Institute of life sciences (ILS) Bhubaneswar National dairy Research Institute (NDRI) Haryana, INDIA


