### Accession
PXD029321

### Title
Anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies elicited by COVID-19mRNA vaccine exhibits a unique glycosylation pattern

### Description
Messenger RNA-based vaccines against COVID-19 induce a robust anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibody response with potent viral neutralization activity. Antibody effector functions is determined by its constant region subclasses as well as by its glycosylation patterns, but their role in vaccine efficacy is not well understood. Moreover, whether vaccination induce antibodies with similar Fc structures and protection potential as in COVID-19 patients remains unclear. Here, we analyzed BNT162b2 vaccine-induced IgG subclass distribution and Fc glycosylation patterns, as well as their potential to drive effector function via Fc-gamma receptors and complement pathways. We identified a unique Fc composition of these antiviral protein antibodies that is distinct from COVID-19 patients and convalescences. Vaccine-induced anti-spike SARS-CoV-2 IgG displayed a pro-inflammatory Fc profile and superior Fab- and Fc-mediated function, as compared to antibodies generated during natural viral infection. Moreover, differences in the kinetics of IgG Fc structure formation and their engagement with immune receptors were observed between different age groups. These data highlight the heterogeneity of the IgG Fc response to SARS-CoV-2 infection and vaccination and suggest that they differently support long-lasting protection.

### Sample Protocol
IgG's were purified from patient plasma using protein A/G. a part of each sample was further purified using IP against bead-immobilised spike proteins. samples were then digested with trypsin and enriched for glycopeptides using boronic acid spin tips. Samples were loaded on HSS T3 C18 columns mounted on nanoAcquity nanoUPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos running PRM using EThcD.

### Data Protocol
data was searched against the IgG glycan carrying Fc sequences and an in house compiled glycan library, using Byonic search engine. mzID were imported into skyline for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Fc-glycosylation, Mrna vaccine, Covid-19, Fcγ receptors, Igg, Antibodies, Antibody effector function

### Affiliations
Weizmann institute
Department of Immunology, Weizmann institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel 7610001

### Submitter
David Morgenstern

### Lab Head
Dr Rony Dahan
Department of Immunology, Weizmann institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel 7610001


