### Accession
PXD007054

### Title
SUMOylome Profiling in Arabidopsis of Targets Modified by the Sumo Ligase Siz1 During Heat Stress

### Description
Ligation is accomplished by a small set of SUMO E3 ligases, with the SAP-MIZ domain-containing (SIZ)-1 and METHYL METHANESULFONATE-SENSITIVE (MMS)-21 ligases having critical roles in stress protection and DNA endoreduplication, respectively.  To help identify their corresponding Arabidopsis targets, we combined siz1 and mms21 mutants with proteomic analyses of SUMOylated proteins enriched using an engineered 6His-SUMO1. Through multiple datasets from seedlings grown at normal temperatures or exposed to heat stress, we identified over 1,000 SUMO targets, most of which are nuclear localized.  Whereas no targets could be assigned to MMS21, suggesting that it modifies only one or a few low abundance proteins, numerous targets could be assigned to SIZ1, including major transcription factors, co-activators/repressors, and chromatin modifiers connected to abiotic and biotic stress defense, some of which associate into multi-subunit regulatory complexes.

### Sample Protocol
A stringent three-step purification protocol based on the 6His-tag and anti-SUMO1 antibodieswas used to isolate SUMO conjugates 8-day old Arabidopsis seedlings untreated or heat-stressed at 37C for 30 minutes. Conjugates were extracted from wild-type (Col-0) and from wild-type and SUMO E3 ligase mutants siz1-2 and mms21-1 expressing a 6His-SUMO1(H89-R) transgene.

### Data Protocol
The raw data searched using MORPHEUS version 160 against the Arabidopsis protein database (TAIR10; http://www.arabidopsis.org) along with common contaminants (e.g., trypsin and human keratin).

### Publication Abstract
The posttranslational addition of small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) is an essential protein modification in plants that provides protection against numerous environmental challenges. Ligation is accomplished by a small set of SUMO ligases, with the SAP-MIZ domain-containing SIZ1 and METHYL METHANESULFONATE-SENSITIVE21 (MMS21) ligases having critical roles in stress protection and DNA endoreduplication/repair, respectively. To help identify their corresponding targets in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>, we used <i>siz1</i> and <i>mms21</i> mutants for proteomic analyses of SUMOylated proteins enriched via an engineered SUMO1 isoform suitable for mass spectrometric studies. Through multiple data sets from seedlings grown at normal temperatures or exposed to heat stress, we identified over 1000 SUMO targets, most of which are nuclear localized. Whereas no targets could be assigned to MMS21, suggesting that it modifies only a few low abundance proteins, numerous targets could be assigned to SIZ1, including major transcription factors, coactivators/repressors, and chromatin modifiers connected to abiotic and biotic stress defense, some of which associate into multisubunit regulatory complexes. SIZ1 itself is also a target, but studies with mutants protected from SUMOylation failed to uncover a regulatory role. The catalog of SIZ1 substrates indicates that SUMOylation by this ligase provides stress protection by modifying a large array of key nuclear regulators.

### Keywords
Sumo, Arabidopsis, Siz1, Sumo e3 ligases, Heat stress

### Affiliations
Washington University in St. Louis; University of Wisconsin-Madison
Washington University in St. Louis

### Submitter
Therese Rytz

### Lab Head
Dr Richard D Vierstra
Washington University in St. Louis; University of Wisconsin-Madison


