### Accession
PXD037543

### Title
Matrix Gla Protein acts as a driver of stemness and tumor initiation in ovarian cancer

### Description
Ovarian cancer (OC) displays the highest mortality among gynecological tumors, mainly due to early peritoneal dissemination, the high frequency of tumor relapse following primary debulking and the development of chemoresistance. All these events are thought to be initiated and sustained by a subpopulation of neoplastic cells, termed ovarian cancer stem cells (OCSC), that are endowed with self-renewing and tumor-initiating properties. This implies that interfering with OCSC function should offer novel therapeutic perspectives to defeat OC progression. To this aim, a better understanding of the molecular and functional makeup of OCSC in clinically relevant model systems is essential. We have profiled the transcriptome of OCSC vs. their bulk cell counterpart from a panel of patient-derived OC cell cultures. This revealed that Matrix Gla Protein (MGP), classically known as a calcification-preventing factor in cartilage and blood vessels, is markedly enriched in OCSC. Functional assays showed that MGP confers several stemness-associated traits to OC cells, including a transcriptional reprogramming. Patient-derived organotypic cultures pointed to the peritoneal microenvironment as a major inducer of MGP expression in OC cells. Furthermore, MGP was found to be necessary and sufficient for tumor initiation in OC mouse models, by shortening tumor latency and increasing dramatically the frequency of tumor-initiating cells. Mechanistically, MGP-driven OC stemness was mediated by the stimulation of Hedgehog signaling, in particular through the induction of the Hedgehog effector GLI1, thus highlighting a novel MGP/Hedgehog pathway axis in OCSC. Finally, MGP expression was found to correlate with poor prognosis in OC patients, and was increased in tumor tissue after chemotherapy, supporting the clinical relevance of our findings. Thus, MGP is a novel driver in OCSC pathophysiology, with a major role in stemness and in tumor initiation.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed with boiling guanidine-hydrochloride lysis buffer (6 M Gnd-HCl, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 5 TCEP, 10 mM CAA). Lysates were heated at 95 °C for 10 minutes, while shaking, and sonicated (Vibra-Cell VCX130, Sonics, Newtown, CT) for 2 minutes, with pulses 1 seconds on, 1 second off. Protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). Proteins were pre-digested with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako) for 2 hours at room temperature in an enzyme/protein ratio of 1:100. Thereafter, samples were diluted to 1M guanidine-hydrochloride with 25 mM Tris buffer before overnight digestion with trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) at 37°C in an enzyme/protein ratio of 1:50. After overnight digestion, enzymatic activity was quenched by acidifying the lysates using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) at a final concentration of 1% and ensuring the pH of the samples being around 2. 750 ng of digested peptides for single-shot proteome analysis were loaded on C18 Evotips (Evosep) for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
DIA raw files were analyzed on Spectronaut (PMID: 25724911) v 15.5.211111.50606 in directDIA mode with standard settings. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (NQ) was added as variable modification. Data filtering was set on “q value sparse” (default in version 15). The Human Uniprot fasta file (downloaded in October 2020; 20,600 entries) was supplemented with the MaxQuant contaminant fasta file containing 246 entries.

### Publication Abstract
Ovarian cancer (OC) displays the highest mortality among gynecological tumors, mainly due to early peritoneal dissemination, the high frequency of tumor relapse following primary debulking, and the development of chemoresistance. All these events are thought to be initiated and sustained by a subpopulation of neoplastic cells, termed ovarian cancer stem cells (OCSC), that are endowed with self-renewing and tumor-initiating properties. This implies that interfering with OCSC function should offer novel therapeutic perspectives to defeat OC progression. To this aim, a better understanding of the molecular and functional makeup of OCSC in clinically relevant model systems is essential. We have profiled the transcriptome of OCSC vs. their bulk cell counterpart from a panel of patient-derived OC cell cultures. This revealed that Matrix Gla Protein (MGP), classically known as a calcification-preventing factor in cartilage and blood vessels, is markedly enriched in OCSC. Functional assays showed that MGP confers several stemness-associated traits to OC cells, including a transcriptional reprogramming. Patient-derived organotypic cultures pointed to the peritoneal microenvironment as a major inducer of MGP expression in OC cells. Furthermore, MGP was found to be necessary and sufficient for tumor initiation in OC mouse models, by shortening tumor latency and increasing dramatically the frequency of tumor-initiating cells. Mechanistically, MGP-driven OC stemness was mediated by the stimulation of Hedgehog signaling, in particular through the induction of the Hedgehog effector GLI1, thus highlighting a novel MGP/Hedgehog pathway axis in OCSC. Finally, MGP expression was found to correlate with poor prognosis in OC patients, and was increased in tumor tissue after chemotherapy, supporting the clinical relevance of our findings. Thus, MGP is a novel driver in OCSC pathophysiology, with a major role in stemness and in tumor initiation.

### Keywords
Exploris 480; matrix gla protein; ovarian cancer; cancer stem cells; tumor initiation; hedgehog pathway

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center For Protein Research, Copenhagen University, Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Proteomics Program Blegdamsvej 3B,  DK-2200 Copenhagen N Denmark

### Submitter
Giulia Franciosa

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Proteomics Program Blegdamsvej 3B,  DK-2200 Copenhagen N Denmark


