### Accession
PXD019884

### Title
Glycan-induced structural dynamics in human norovirus P dimers depend on the virus strain and deamidation status

### Description
Noroviruses are non-enveloped (+) single stranded RNA viruses of the Caliciviridae family that cause an estimated 20 % of gastroenteritis cases worldwide . The virus possesses an icosahedral capsid, build by the two structural proteins VP1 and VP2. Noroviruses of genogroup II, especially GII.4, dominated in the majorities of outbreaks in the last two decades. In the last years, a novel GII.17 strain has also emerged in Asia. The major capsid protein VP1 builds dimers that are divided into the inner shell (S) domain and the outward-facing protruding (P) domain. The P domain is further divided into P1 and P2 subdomains, of which P2 is essential for host immune response and binds to histo blood-group antigens (HBGAs) for cell attachment in a strain-dependent manner, but the exact mechanism of cell attachment and entry remains unclear. Recently, a spontaneous deamidation of N373 with subsequent formation of an iso-aspartate (iD) was identified in GII.4 Saga P dimers that strongly attenuates glycan binding. This deamidation appears to be site specific and occurs in GII.4 MI001 P dimers as well, whereas it is absent in GII.10 Vietnam 026 and GII.17 Kawasaki 308 P dimers, which carry an Asp at the equivalent position. Given their high structural similarity with at the same time strain-dependent glycan binding behavior, we wanted to study if glycan binding induces different dynamic changes in P dimers of different strains using Hydrogen-Deuterium Exchange Mass Spectrometry (HDX-MS). Furthermore, we wanted to examine the structural effects of fucose binding to a mixture of wildtype and deamidated GII.4 MI001 and GII.4 Saga P dimers, to get more insights about the dynamic changes induced by N373 deamidation. Our results suggest identical glycan binding behavior of the almost identical GII.4 Saga and GII.4 MI001 strains, but reveal different glycan induced dynamics in GII.17 Kawasaki 308 and GII.10 Vietnam 026. Furthermore, all strains apart from GII.4 Saga form a second P domain species that is highly protected from HDX . In mixtures of wildtype and N373 deamidated GII.4 P dimers, fucose binding leads to different structural dynamics than in pure wildtype, indicating that the deamidated species could have a biological function in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
GII.4 Saga 2006 (residues 225–530), GII.4 MI001 (residues 225–530), GII.10 Vietnam 026 (residues 224–538), and GII.17 Kawasaki 308 (residues 225–530) P domains  with GenBank accession numbers AB447457, KC631814, AF504671, and LC037415, respectively, were synthesized and purified as described elsewhere. P dimers (30-50 pmol) were mixed with glycans at tenfold of the final concentration (100 mM HBGA B trisaccharide, 1 M fucose) and directly diluted 1:9 in 99% deuterated 20 mM Tris buffer (pH 7, 150 mM NaCl, 25°C) to start the exchange reaction. After various time points the exchange reaction was quenched by 1:1 addition of ice-cold quench buffer (300 mM phosphate buffer, pH 2.3, 6 M urea), which decreased the pH to 2.3, and frozen in liquid nitrogen. As a fully deuterated (FD) control, P dimers were diluted 1:9 in 99% deuterated 20 mM Tris buffer with 150 mM NaCl and 6 M urea at pH 7, labelled for 24-72 h at room temperature and quenched as described above. Samples were thawed and injected onto a cooled (2 °C) HPLC System (Agilent Infinity 1260, Agilent Technologies) equipped with a home packed pepsin column (IDEX guard column with an internal volume of 60 µL, Porozyme Immobilized Pepsin beads, Thermo Scientific) in a column oven (25 °C), a peptide trap column (OPTI-TRAP for peptides, Optimize Technologies) and a reversed-phase analytical column (PLRP-S for Biomolecules, Agilent Technologies). Pepsin digestion was performed online at a flow rate of 75 µL/min (0.4 % formic acid (FA) in water) and peptides were trapped in the trap column. Peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column using a 7 min gradient of 8-40 % solvent B (solvent A: 0.4 % FA in water, solvent B: 0.4 % FA in acetonitrile (ACN)) at 150 µL/min. MS was performed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid in positive ESI MS only mode (Orbitrap resolution 120000, 4 microscans). Peptide and PTM identification was performed on non-deuterated samples using a 27 min elution gradient of 8-40 % solvent B in data-dependent MS/MS acquisition mode (Orbitrap resolution 120000, 1 microscan, HCD 30 with dynamic exclusion).

### Data Protocol
DeutEx software (obtained from peterslab.org) was used to determine the deuterium uptake via centroid analysis. Excel (Microsoft), GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software, Inc.), OriginPro 2016 (Origin Lab Corporation) and PyMOL software were used for data visualization and statistical analysis. For comparison of triplicate data, a two-sided Student’s T-test using deuteration differences from centroid analysis was used with the α-value set to 0.05. A peptide was only considered to have a significant HDX difference if the peptide passed the T-test and ΔD exceeded 2x the pooled average standard deviation of the dataset either for several time points or for the same time point in overlapping peptides. Deuterated spectra of peptides in certain protein regions showed bimodal peak distributions that led to lower deuteration values in centroid analysis. To validate the deuteration differences observed in centroid data analysis and to calculate relative intensities of both peak distributions, bimodal spectra of peptides representative for certain regions were analyzed by binomial fitting in HXExpress.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Norovirus, Interaction, Deamidation, Protein dynamics, Glycan

### Affiliations
Heinrich Pette Institute
Heinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology, Hamburg, Germany European XFEL, Schenefeld, Germany

### Submitter
Jasmin Dülfer

### Lab Head
Dr Charlotte Uetrecht
Heinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology, Hamburg, Germany European XFEL, Schenefeld, Germany


