### Accession
PXD001212

### Title
A mammalian transcription factor-specific peptide repository for targeted proteomics

### Description
Site-specific transcription factors (TFs) play an essential role in mammalian development and function as they are vital for the majority of cellular processes. Despite their biological importance, TF proteomic data is scarce in the literature, likely due to difficulties in detecting peptides as the abundance of TFs in cells tends to be low. In recent years, significant improvements in mass spectrometry (MS)-based technologies in terms of sensitivity and specificity have increased the interest in developing quantitative methodologies specifically targeting relatively lowly abundant proteins such as TFs in mammalian models. Such efforts would be greatly aided by the availability of TF peptide-specific information as such data would not only enable improvements in speed and accuracy of protein identifications, but also ameliorate cross-comparisons of quantitative proteomics data and allow for a more efficient development of targeted proteomics assays. However, to date, no comprehensive TF proteotypic peptide database has been developed. To address this evident lack of TF peptide data in public repositories, we are generating a comprehensive, experimentally derived TF proteotypic peptide spectral library dataset based on in vitro protein expression. Our library currently contains peptide information for 89 TFs, and this number is set to increase in the near future.

### Sample Protocol
122 selected TFs containing a GST tag at their C-terminus were expressed in vitro utilizing a TnT SP6 High Yield Wheat Germ Protein Expression System (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The TF fusion proteins were subsequently enriched using glutathione sepharose 4B beads (GE Healthcare) and incubated at 4°C overnight on a rotator. The sepharose beads were then washed three times with a saline buffer (50 mM tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 0.1% NP-40, 10% glycerol) and boiled at 95°C for 5 min in a protein loading buffer to elute the fusion proteins prior to a centrifugation step at 6’000 rpm for 30 s. Subsequently, the supernatant fraction was separated by SDS-PAGE in a 10% resolving gel (Tris-Glycine) and stained with silver nitrate for visualization of the TF fusion protein-belonging bands. In vitro–expressed proteins were in-gel digested using trypsin as follows: the samples were reduced in 10 mM dithioerythritol (DTE) and alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) before being dried. The samples were then incubated with 12.5 μg/ml of trypsin (in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.5) overnight at 37 °C. The resulting tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel slices, dried and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (ACN):0.1% formic acid (FA) for LC-MS/MS analysis. A mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap XL; Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an ultraperformance LC (UPLC) system (nanoACQUITY; Waters) was used. Peptides were trapped in a custom-made precolumn (Magic C18 AQ stationary phase, 5-μm diameter, 200-Å pore, 0.1 mm × 20 mm, Michrom Bioresources) and separated in a custom-made main column (Magic C18 AQ, 3 μm-diameter, 100-Å pore, 0.75 mm × 150 mm), using a run of 53 min and a gradient of H2O:ACN:FA 98%:2%:0.1% (solvent A) and ACN:H2O:FA 98%:1.9%:0.1% (solvent B). The gradient of the run was set at a flow rate of 250 nl/min as follows: 100% A for 3 min, 30% B within 36 min, 47% B within 14 min, 90% B within 5 min, held for 5 min and 100% A for 17 min. The MS/MS was operated in an information-dependent mode, in which each full MS analysis was followed by ten MS/MS acquisitions during which the most abundant peptides were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) to generate tandem mass spectra. The normalized collision energies were set to 35% for CID.

### Data Protocol
Database search and protein identification was performed using a combination of search engines against a small database constructed with the Uniprot sequences of the expressed TF constructs without the GST part complemented with a set of common contaminant proteins sequences. Briefly, raw data were first searched using the Mascot software (v. 2.3; Matrix Science). The Mascot output was imported into Proteome Discoverer (v. 1.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the data searched again with MS Amanda and Sequest. Finally, the results of this protein identification pipeline were imported into Scaffold (v. 4.2.1; Proteome Software) for final search with X! Tandem, validation of protein identification, normalization and determination of spectral counts. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at a probability of >95% as determined by the PeptideProphet algorithm. With a few exceptions, protein identifications were accepted if they were assigned at least two unique validated peptides, and could be established with at least 99% probability as determined by the ProteinProphet algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Site-specific transcription factors (TFs) play an essential role in mammalian development and function as they are vital for the majority of cellular processes. Despite their biological importance, TF proteomic data is scarce in the literature, likely due to difficulties in detecting peptides as the abundance of TFs in cells tends to be low. In recent years, significant improvements in MS-based technologies in terms of sensitivity and specificity have increased the interest in developing quantitative methodologies specifically targeting relatively lowly abundant proteins such as TFs in mammalian models. Such efforts would be greatly aided by the availability of TF peptide-specific information as such data would not only enable improvements in speed and accuracy of protein identifications, but also ameliorate cross-comparisons of quantitative proteomics data and allow for a more efficient development of targeted proteomics assays. However, to date, no comprehensive TF proteotypic peptide database has been developed. To address this evident lack of TF peptide data in public repositories, we are generating a comprehensive, experimentally derived TF proteotypic peptide spectral library dataset based on in vitro protein expression. Our library currently contains peptide information for 89 TFs and this number is set to increase in the near future. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001212 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001212).

### Keywords
Proteotypic peptide selection, Repository for targeted proteomics, Quantitative proteomics, Transcription factor

### Affiliations
EPFL Proteomics Core Facility
PCF

### Submitter
Romain Hamelin

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Moniatte
EPFL Proteomics Core Facility


