### Accession
PXD036370

### Title
Phosphorylation detection of protein DGCR8 between  between control and coilin knockdown samples

### Description
The project is for identification and quantification of phosphorylated peptides of protein DGCR8 between control and coilin knockdown samples.

### Sample Protocol
The protein band from an SDS-PAGE gel was sliced into ~1 mm cubes and subjected to in-gel digestion followed by extraction of the tryptic peptide as reported previously (ref#1). The excised gel pieces were washed consecutively with 200μL distilled/deionized water followed by 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, 50% acetonitrile and finally 100% acetonitrile. The dehydrated gel pieces were reduced with 50μL of 10mM DTT in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate for 1 hour at 56 °C, alkylated with 50μL of 55mM iodoacetamide in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature in the dark for 45 minutes.  Repeated wash steps as described above. The gel was then dried and rehydrated with trypsin (Promega), at an estimated 1:10 w/w ratio in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10% ACN (100ul used to overlay gel @ 10ng/ul trypsin, total enzyme used 1 ug).  Incubated at 37 °C for 18 hrs. The digested peptides were extracted twice with 200μl of 50% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid and once with 200μl of 75% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid. Extractions from each sample were pooled together and filtered with 0.22 um spin filter (Costar Spin-X from Corning) and dried to dryness in the speed vacuum. Each sample was reconstituted in 0.5% formic acid prior to LC MS/MS analysis. The in-gel tryptic digests were reconstituted in 20 μL - 0.5% FA for nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis, which was carried out using an Orbitrap FusionTM TribridTM (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray Flex Ion Source, and coupled with a Dionex UltiMate3000RSLCnano system (Thermo, Sunnyvale, CA) (refs#2, #3).  The gel extracted peptide samples (2.5 μL) were injected onto a PepMap C-18 RP nano trapping column (5 µm, 100 µm i.d x 20 mm) at 20 µL/min flow rate for rapid sample loading and then separated on a PepMap C-18 RP nano column (2 µm, 75 µm x 25 cm) at 35 °C. The tryptic peptides were eluted in a 90 min gradient of 5% to 35% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% formic acid at 300 nL/min., followed by a 8 min ramping to 90% ACN-0.1% FA and an 8 min hold at 90% ACN-0.1% FA. The column was re-equilibrated with 0.1% FA for 25 min prior to the next run.  The Orbitrap Fusion is operated in positive ion mode with spray voltage set at 1.9 kV and source temperature at 275°C with advanced peak determination. External calibration for FT, IT and quadrupole mass analyzers was performed. In data-dependent acquisition (DDA) analysis, the instrument was operated using FT mass analyzer in MS scan to select precursor ions followed by 3 second “Top Speed” data-dependent CID ion trap MS/MS scans at 1.6 m/z quadrupole isolation for precursor peptides with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 10,000 and normalized collision energy of 30%.  MS survey scans at a resolving power of 120,000 (fwhm at m/z 200), for the mass range of m/z 375-1600.  Dynamic exclusion parameters were set at 35 s of exclusion duration with ±10 ppm exclusion mass width. All data were acquired under Xcalibur 4.3 operation software (Thermo-Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The DDA raw files for CID MS/MS were subjected to database searches using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with the Sequest HT algorithm.  Processing workflow for precursor-based quantification. The PD 2.4 processing workflow containing an additional node of Minora Feature Detector for precursor ion-based quantification was used for protein identification. The database search was conducted against Homo sapiens Uniprot database that has 20,315 sequences.  Two-missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed.  The peptide precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. Variable modification of methionine oxidation, deamidation of asparagine/glutamine, phosphorylation of serine/threonine/tyrosine and fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation, were set for the database search.  To confidently localize phosphorylation sites, the phosphoRS 3.0 node integrated in PD 2.4 workflow was also used. The algorithm of phosphoRS 3.0 software enables automated and confident localization of phosphosites by determining individual probability values for each putatively phosphorylated site within the validated peptide sequences (ref #5). Only high confidence peptides defined by Sequest HT with a 1% FDR by Percolator were considered for the peptide identification.  All phosphorylated peptides were validated by manual inspection of the relevant MS/MS spectra.  The occupancy rate of all phosphorylated peptide was calculated based on the peak area of XICs versus their counterpart native peptides in different charges states using Xcalibur software under assumption that ionization efficiency is the same or similar between the native peptide and its phosphorylated form.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gel digestion, Phosphorylation, Dgcr8, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Cornell University

### Submitter
Sheng Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng Zhang
Cornell University


