### Accession
PXD031244

### Title
CROP: A Retromer- PROPPIN complex mediating  membrane fission in the endo-lysosomal system

### Description
Endo-lysosomal compartments exchange proteins by fusing, fissioning, and through endosomal transport carriers. Thereby, they sort many plasma membrane receptors and transporters and control cellular signaling and metabolism. How the membrane fission events are catalyzed is poorly understood. Here, we identify the novel CROP complex as a factor acting at this step. CROP integrates PROPPIN Atg18 with a part of the endosome- and vacuole-associated retromer complex to generate a membrane fission device of much higher potency. We studied its activity in yeast, in human cells and on liposomes.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast strains sTC14 and sTC22 were grown to saturation in SC (synthetic complete, Formedium) and transferred into 5 mL of SC-arginine/- lysine  supplemented with 0.43 mM light (R0, K0, control sTC22), medium (R6, K4, WT sTC14) or heavy (R10, K8, salt shock sTC14) labelled arginine and lysine. Vacuole fragmentation was triggered in the R10/K8 sample through a salt shock by addition of 200 mL of SC supplemented with 0.43 mM of R10/K8 and 5 M NaCl. For Atg18 purification in SILAC experiments, pellets were thawed on ice in one pellet volume of TGN lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 10 % Glycerol, 100 mM NaCl) supplemented with 0.5% Triton, complete protease inhibitor tablets, phosphatase inhibitor tablets, 1 mM DTT, and 1 mM PMSF. Cells were passed through a French press, and Atg18 was isolated by affinity purification using the Gly6-FLAG3 tag and Dynabeads crosslinked with the FLAG M2 antibody. The light-, medium- (Arg6/Lys4) and heavy-labeled (Arg10/Lys8) samples were later mixed and concentrated by a microspin column with a 10kDa cutoff membrane. 2/3 (for shotgun analysis) and 1/3 (for ubiquitination analysis of atg18 protein) of the mixed sample were loaded and migrated in separate lanes of a 12% SDS-PAGE gel. For the shotgun analysis, the whole lane was cut in 7 bands and digested, as described with sequencing-grade trypsin. For the ubiquination analysis, only two bands between 50 and 150 kDa were cut and digested, using methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) for cysteine alkylation. For retromer purification from yeast, cells were opened using a French press, and cleared lysates were incubated with 1 mL IgG Sepharose beads suspension. Beads were spun down and washed before being resuspended in RP buffer without inhibitors, supplemented with 250 μg of TEV protease. AfterTEV cleavage, the supernatant was incubated with Ni-NTA beads to remove TEV protease and concentrated on an Amicon Ultra-50 100K filter column at 3000 × g. The samples were then resuspended in 15 ul of buffer (8M urea, 50 mM TEAB, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM chloroacetamide) and kept 45 min in the dark at ambient temperature for cysteine alkylation. After dilution 4x with 50 mM TEAB, samples were digested with 0.2 ug Trypsin/LysC mix  for 3h at 37°C, and then desalted on a C18 Sep-Pak plate. After digestion, the extracted peptides were analyzed either on a hybrid LTQ Orbitrap Velos (for the shotgun analysis), an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (for the phosphorylation/ubiquitination analysis) or a QExactive Plus (for the complex analyses) mass spectrometer interfaced to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano HPLC system. Peptides were loaded onto a trapping microcolumn Acclaim PepMap100 C18 (20 mm x 100 μm ID, 5 μm) before separation on a reversed-phase custom packed nanocolumn (Velos and Fusion, 75 μm ID × 40 cm, 1.8 μm particles, Reprosil Pur, Dr. Maisch) or an Easy Spray C18 PepMap nanocolumn (QExactive, 50cm x 75µm ID, 2µm). A flowrate of 0.3 μl/min was used with a gradient from 4 to 76% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, with a total method time of 95 (Velos), 65 min (Fusion) or 140 min (QExactive). In Velos instrument, full survey scans were performed at a 60’000 resolution.  In data-dependent acquisition controlled by Xcalibur software, the 10 most intense precursor ions detected in the full MS survey performed in the Orbitrap (range 350-1500 m/z) were selected and fragmented. MS/MS was triggered by a minimum signal threshold of 3’000 counts, carried out at relative collision energy of 35 % and with isolation width of 4.0 amu. Only precursors with a charge higher than one were selected for CID fragmentation and fragment ions were analyzed in the ion trap. The m/z of fragmented precursors was then dynamically excluded from any selection during 30 s.  In Fusion mass spectrometer, full survey scans (range 350-1550 m/z) were performed at a 120’000 resolution, and a top speed precursor selection strategy was applied by Xcalibur software to maximize acquisition of peptide tandem MS spectra with a maximum cycle time of 3.0s. MS/MS was triggered by a minimum signal threshold of 5’000 counts. HCD fragmentation mode was used at a normalized collision energy of 32%, with a precursor isolation window of 1.6 m/z. Only precursors with a charge between 2 and 6 were selected for fragmentation and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the ion trap. Peptides selected for MS/MS were excluded from further fragmentation during 60s. In QExactive instrument, full MS survey scans were performed at 70,000 resolution. In data-dependent acquisition controlled by Xcalibur software, the 10 most intense multiply charged (2-5) precursor ions detected in the full MS survey scan (range 395-2000 m/z) were selected for higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy NCE=27 %) and analysis in the orbitrap at 17’500 resolution. The window for precursor isolation was of 1.5 m/z units around the precursor and selected fragments were excluded for 60s from further analysis.

### Data Protocol
The SILAC triplex data were processed by the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.1.2) incorporating the Andromeda search engine. A UniProt yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae, strain ATCC 204508 / S288c) proteome database was used (downloaded in October 2014, 6’674 sequences), supplemented with sequences of common contaminants. Trypsin (cleavage at K,R) was used as the enzyme definition, allowing 2 missed cleavages. For Velos data, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation of protein, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified as variable modifications. For Fusion data, methylthiolation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation of protein, oxidation of methionine and ubiquitination of lysine were specified as variable modifications. In a parallel MaxQuant analysis, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified as variable modification instead of lysine ubiquitination. All identifications were filtered at 1% FDR at both the peptide and protein levels with default MaxQuant parameters. MaxQuant data were further processed with Perseus software. The QExactive data were searched with Mascot 2.6 (Matrix Science, London, UK) software using a Saccharomyces cerevisiae (strain ATCC 204508 / S288c) reference proteome from UniProt (www.uniprot.org, February 2017 version: 6’049 sequences) as database. Trypsin (cleavage at K,R) was used as the enzyme definition, allowing 2 missed cleavages. Mascot was searched with a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. Scaffold software (version 4.8.7, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications, and to perform dataset alignment. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90.0% probability by the the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability, assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm, and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Endo-lysosomal compartments exchange proteins by fusing, fissioning, and through endosomal transport carriers. Thereby, they sort many plasma membrane receptors and transporters and control cellular signaling and metabolism. How the membrane fission events are catalyzed is poorly understood. Here, we identify the novel CROP complex as a factor acting at this step. CROP joins members of two protein families: the peripheral subunits of retromer, a coat forming endosomal transport carriers, and membrane inserting PROPPINs. Integration into CROP potentiates the membrane fission activity of the PROPPIN Atg18 on synthetic liposomes and confers strong preference for binding PI(3,5)P<sub>2</sub> , a phosphoinositide required for membrane fission activity. Disrupting CROP blocks fragmentation of lysosome-like yeast vacuoles in&#xa0;vivo. CROP-deficient mammalian endosomes accumulate micrometer-long tubules and fail to export cargo, suggesting that carriers attempt to form but cannot separate from these organelles. PROPPINs compete for retromer binding with the SNX-BAR proteins, which recruit retromer to the membrane during the formation of endosomal carriers. Transition from retromer-SNX-BAR complexes to retromer-PROPPIN complexes might hence switch retromer activities from cargo capture to membrane fission.

### Keywords
Yeast, Endo-lysosomal system

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Department of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne, Ch. des Boveresses 155, CH-1066 Epalinges

### Submitter
Patrice Waridel

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Mayer
Department of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne, Ch. des Boveresses 155, CH-1066 Epalinges


