### Accession
PXD007082

### Title
The footprint of embryonic genome activation on the proteome of mouse preimplantation development

### Description
The transformation of a fertilized oocyte into a multicellular embryo comprised of differentiated cells depends on the processing of genetic orders, first in the form of transcripts and then of proteins. Our current understanding of mouse development has greatly benefited from the analysis of transcripts as proxy for the proteins. However, the hexagonal-shaped free ribosomes that translate mRNAs into proteins are scarce during cleavage and do not become abundant until the morula-blastocyst stage. How accurate, then, is an understanding of mouse and more in general mammalian development that uses the analysis of transcripts as proxy for the proteins? This led us in this study to measure the proteome of seven preimplantation mouse stages (B6C3F1 x CD1), from oocyte to blastocyst, using 'spike-in' SILAC technology combined with high accuracy mass spectrometry (LTQ Orbitrap and Q-Exactive). The relative abundances of embryonic proteins were compared and contrasted with those of transcripts measured by RNA sequencing. A total of 6976 proteins were detected in at least the spike (precondition for determining the heavy/light peptide ratios in oocytes or embryos). Among these 6976 proteins, 4991 proteins were present in all developmental stages, and 1893 proteins were present in all replicates. Our tandem approach uncovered: 1) the different abundance profiles of proteome and transcriptome during the time of preimplantation development; 2) the different reciprocal associations of developmental stages (dendrograms) on the protein level as compared to the mRNA level; and 3) the different gene ontology terms overrepresented among the proteins that increase or decrease across adjacent stages, compared to mRNAs. In essence, the elaborate phasing of embryonic gene expression that has been known for mRNAs leaves an unsuspected footprint on the protein products of those mRNAs. This information facilitates the analysis of mammalian development in two important ways. First, it provides new insight into the regulation of the transition from the differentiated oocyte into the embryo, by identifying the subsets of proteins that accompany the passage from one embryonic stage to the next, which are likely composed of important regulators of the morphogenetic transitions. Second, our analysis provides a reference to determine the degree of ‘embryoness’ of entities produced via assisted reproductive technologies, cloning by somatic cell nuclear transfer, and even artificial gametes.

### Sample Protocol
Fertilized and unfertilized oocytes were collected after gonadotropin stimulation (5 IU each PMSG and hCG, injected i.p. 48 hours apart) and cervical dislocation of B6C3F1 mice aged 6-8 weeks. Fertilized oocytes were recovered from oviducts and cultured in KSOM(aa) medium at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere of 5 % CO2 in air. Developmental stages were sampled at respective time points. Before lysing in SDS buffer, the zona pellucida was removed using acidic Tyrode’s solution so as to increase the sensitivity of proteome analysis for the other oocyte proteins. The LC-MSMS pipeline was based on the stable isotope labeling of a F9 embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells as spike-in reference for the oocyte samples. In brief, proteins from zona-free oocytes or embryos were mixed in a 1:1 ratio (protein amount) with the heavy F9 carcinoma spike-in cell lysate (Lys8 and Arg10), acetone-precipitated, reduced (DTT) and alkylated JAA), and then digested with Endoproteinase Lys-C (3hr) and Trypsin (overnight). Following desalting on Empore 3M C18 discs, peptide mixtures were offline fractionated by RP-HPLC at pH 10.2 (Buffer A: 10mM ammonium formate pH 10.2; Buffer B: 10mM ammonium formate, 90% acetonitril, pH 10.2; linear gradient from 0-35% B in 70min; 35 - 70% B in 15min; 70% B for 10min; Waters XBridge BEH C18 2.1 x 150mm). Twenty pools were generated from each sample by concatenated fractionation, lyophilized and subsequently analyzed individually by LC-MS/MS either on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos (experiments 0672 and 0746) or on a Q Exactive (experiment 0616) mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA 02454, USA) both equipped with an Easy nano-LC system and a nano-electrospray source (both from Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) holding 15 cm fused silica capillary emitter columns (New Objective, ID 75µm) filled with a C18 reversed phase matrix (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3µm; Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch). Both mass spectrometers were operated in data-dependent mode (positive ion mode, source voltage 2.1kV) automatically switching between a survey scan (Orbitrap Velos: mass range m/z = 350-1650, target value = 1 x 106; resolution R = 60 K; lock mass set to background ion 445.120025; Q Exactive: mass range 300 – 1750; target value = 3 x 106; resolution 70K) and MS/MS acquisition of the 15 (Velos) and 10 (Q Exactive) most intense peaks by collisional induced dissociation (CID) in the ion trap in case of the Velos (isolation width m/z = 2.0; normalized collision energy 35%; dynamic exclusion enabled with repeat count 1, repeat duration 30.0, exclusion list size 500 and exclusion duration set to 90 s) or by higher energy induced collisional dissociation (HCD) in case of the Q Exactive (isolation width m/z = 1.6; normalized collision energy 25%; dynamic exclusion enabled and set to 25.0 s); double charge and higher charges were allowed. Gradient conditions for the reversed-phase online separation of peptide mixtures were 2-28% buffer B (80% acetonitril, 0.1% formic acid; 120min), 28-98% B (20min), 98% B (6min) for the Orbitrap Velos; and 2-30% B (120min), 30-50% B (30min), 50-95% B (5min), 95% B (5min) for the Q Exactive. Afterwards, columns were re-equilibrated in Buffer A (0.1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
Heavy over light (H/L) SILAC ratios for each protein group were calculated by MaxQuant as the median of all SILAC peptide ratios that could be assigned to the protein group. SILAC ratios were normalized by MaxQuant in order to correct for mixing errors of total protein amounts as described by Cox and Mann 24. For all further calculations the normalized H/L SILAC ratios were inverted, resulting in L/H ratios, which facilitate the interpretation of result since the oocyte or embryo quantity (L) is at the numerator. The MaxQuant output data were exported to Excel for analysis of abundance profiles.

### Publication Abstract
Early mouse embryos have an atypical translational machinery that consists of cytoplasmic lattices and is poorly competent for translation. Hence, the impact of transcriptomic changes on the operational level of proteins is predicted to be relatively modest. To investigate this, we performed liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry and mRNA sequencing at seven developmental stages, from the mature oocyte to the blastocyst, and independently validated our data by immunofluorescence and qPCR. We detected and quantified 6,550 proteins and 20,535 protein-coding transcripts. In contrast to the transcriptome - where changes occur early, mostly at the 2-cell stage - our data indicate that the most substantial changes in the proteome take place towards later stages, between the morula and blastocyst. We also found little to no concordance between the changes in protein and transcript levels, especially for early stages, but observed that the concordance increased towards the morula and blastocyst, as did the number of free ribosomes. These results are consistent with the cytoplasmic lattice-to-free ribosome transition being a key mediator of developmental regulation. Finally, we show how these data can be used to appraise the strengths and limitations of mRNA-based studies of pre-implantation development and expand on the list of known developmental markers.

### Keywords
Preimplantation, Lc-msms, Silac, Oocyte, Mouse development

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Bioemedicine,  Bioanalytical Mass Spectroemtry
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Bioemedicine,  Bioanalytical Mass Spectroemtry


