### Accession
PXD036201

### Title
Identification of phosphorylation sites of purified ORP8 from in vitro AMPK kinase assay

### Description
We investigated the potential role of AMPK in the phosphorylation of ORP8.In vitro kinase assay using purified ORP8 and kinase-active AMPK complex confirmed that ORP8 is the direct substrate of AMPK. Phosphorylated ORP8 from in vitro kinase assay was analyzed by HPLC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Purified ORP8 protein (0.5 μg) in kinase assay buffer (60 mM Tris, 10 mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM Na3VO4, 5 mM β-Glycerophosphate, 5 mM DTT and 100 μM AMP) was incubated with kinase-active AMPK complex (0.2 μg) (SignalChem) at 30oC in the presence or absence of 100 μM ATP or 50 μM compound C for 1 h. SDS sample buffer was then added to terminate the reaction. ORP8 from the in vitro kinase assay was separated using SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and stained with Coomassie blue. The band of ORP8 was cut down and performed in-gel digestion with trypsin at 37oC overnight. After desalting, digested peptides were analyzed by HPLC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS data were analyzed against a UniProtKB human or E.coli containing target proteins using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 or PEAKS studio X. Precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to ±0.2 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da), oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da) and phosphorylation of Serine\threonine\tyrosine was set as variable modifications. All identified proteins had a FDR of ≤1%, which was calculated at the peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
Lipophagy, the selective engulfment of lipid droplets (LDs) by autophagosomes for lysosomal degradation, is critical to lipid and energy homeostasis. Here we show that the lipid transfer protein ORP8 is located on LDs and mediates the encapsulation of LDs by autophagosomal membranes. This function of ORP8 is independent of its lipid transporter activity and is achieved through direct interaction with phagophore-anchored LC3/GABARAPs. Upon lipophagy induction, ORP8 has increased localization on LDs and is phosphorylated by AMPK, thereby enhancing its affinity for LC3/GABARAPs. Deletion of ORP8 or interruption of ORP8-LC3/GABARAP interaction results in accumulation of LDs and increased intracellular triglyceride. Overexpression of ORP8 alleviates LD and triglyceride deposition in the liver of ob/ob mice, and Osbpl8-/- mice exhibit liver lipid clearance defects. Our results suggest that ORP8 is a lipophagy receptor that plays a key role in cellular lipid metabolism.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Ampk, Orp8

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Department of Metabolic Medicine of the Fourth Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310058, China
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
maomao pu

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Liu
Department of Biochemistry and Department of Metabolic Medicine of the Fourth Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310058, China


