### Accession
PXD049046

### Title
A deterministic, c-di-GMP-dependent genetic program ensures the generation of phenotypically similar, symmetric daughter cells during cytokinesis

### Description
Phenotypic heterogeneity in bacteria results from stochastic processes or deterministic genetic programs. These deterministic programs often incorporate the versatile second messenger c-di-GMP, and by deploying c-di-GMP metabolizing enzyme(s) asymmetrically during cell division give rise to daughter cells with different c-di-GMP levels. Here, we identify a deterministic c-di-GMP-dependent genetic program that is hardwired into the cell cycle of Myxococcus xanthus to minimize cellular heterogeneity and guarantee the formation of phenotypically similar daughter cells during division. Cells lacking the diguanylate cyclase DmxA have an aberrant motility behaviour. DmxA is recruited to the cell division site and its activity switched on during cytokinesis, resulting in a dramatic but transient increase in the c-di-GMP concentration. During cytokinesis, this c-di-GMP burst ensures the symmetric incorporation and allocation of structural motility proteins and motility regulators at the new cell poles of the two daughters, thereby generating mirror-symmetric, phenotypically similar daughters with correct motility behaviours. These findings suggest a general c-di-GMP-dependent mechanism for minimizing cellular heterogeneity, and demonstrate that bacteria by deploying c-di-GMP metabolizing enzymes to distinct subcellular locations ensure the formation of dissimilar or similar daughter cells.

### Sample Protocol
Proximity labelling was done as described 77. Briefly, 50 ml of exponentially growing cell suspension were incubated with 100 µM biotin, and 35 µg ml-1 cephalexin. After 4 h, cells were harvested by centrifugation (8,000 g, 10 min, 4°C), resuspended in 600 µl RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 0.2% (w/v) SDS, 1% (v/v) Triton-X100) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and lysed by 30 pulses of sonication using a Hielscher UP200st set to pulse 50%, amplitude 50%. The lysate was cleared by centrifugation (10 min, 8,000 g, at 4°C), and the pellet was discarded. To remove excess biotin in the supernatant, SpinTrap G-25 columns (Cytiva), pre-equilibrated with RIPA buffer, were used following manufacturer’s instructions. To enrich biotinylated proteins, 500 µl of each sample was incubated for 1 h at 4°C with 50 µl streptavidin magnetic beads (Pierce), previously equilibrated twice with 1 ml RIPA buffer. To remove unspecific proteins, the beads were washed three times with 1 ml RIPA buffer, twice with 1 ml 1 M KCl, and three times with 1 ml 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6. Finally, proteins were eluted using on-bead digest as described 68. Briefly, 100 µl elution buffer 1 (100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1 µg trypsin (Promega)) was added to each sample. After 30 min incubation at 30°C, the supernatant containing the digested proteins was collected. Beads were washed twice with elution buffer 2 (10  mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP)) and added to the first elution fraction. Digestion continued overnight at 30°C. Next, the peptides were incubated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 25°C in the dark. Prior to LC-MS analysis, peptide samples were desalted using C18 solid phase extraction spin columns (Macherey-Nagel). Peptide mixtures were then analysed using LC-MS on an Exploris 480 instrument connected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and a nanospray flex ion source (all Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed on a reverse phase HPLC column (75 μm×42 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (2.4 μm; Dr. Maisch). The following separating gradient was used: 98% solvent A (0.15% formic acid) and 2% solvent B (99.85% acetonitrile, 0.15% formic acid) to 30% solvent B over 40 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides were ionized at a spray voltage of 2.3 kV, and ion transfer tube temperature set at 275°C, 445.12003 m/z was used as internal calibrant. The data acquisition mode was set to obtain one high-resolution MS scan at a resolution of 60,000 full width at half maximum (at m/z 200) followed by MS/MS scans of the most intense ions within 1 s (cycle 1s). To increase the efficiency of MS/MS attempts, the charged state screening modus was enabled to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 14 sec. The ion accumulation time was set to 50 ms (MS) and 50 ms at 17,500 resolution (MS/MS). The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 3×106 for MS survey scan and 2×105 for MS/MS scans. The quadrupole isolation was 1.5 m/z, collision was induced with an HCD collision energy of 27%. The total proteome of M. xanthus cells grown in suspension culture was determined following a slightly modified protocol of 68. Briefly, 2 ml of exponentially growing suspension cultures were harvested (8,000 g, 3 min, RT). Cells were resuspended in 1 ml PBS and harvested again. Subsequently, the supernatant was discarded and the pellet snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. The pellet was suspended in 150 µl 2% Sodium Lauryl Sulfate (SLS) and proteins precipitated using acetone. For digestion, samples were resuspended in 0.5% SLS with 1 μg trypsin (Promega) and incubated for 30 min at 30˚C, subsequently 5 mM TCEP were added to the suspension and further incubated overnight. Following, acetylation using 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 25˚C in the dark, the peptides were desalted using C18 solid phase extraction. For label-free protein quantification, peptide mixtures were analysed using LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
Proximity labeling MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant. MaxQuant was executed in standard settings without “match between runs” option. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues); two missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and deamidation (N,Q) as variable modifications. The MaxQuant proteinGroups.txt file was further processed by the SafeQuant R package for statistical analysis 80. For total cell label-free protein quantification, the MS data was acquired in data-independent acquisition mode and the MS raw data analysed by DIA-NN as described (https://journals.asm.org/doi/10.1128/mbio.02032-22). Data were further analysed and plotted using Python (3.7).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Diguanylate cyclase, C-di-gmp

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology Karl-von-Frisch Str. 10  35043 Marburg Germany
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology
Marburg

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Glatter
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology Karl-von-Frisch Str. 10  35043 Marburg Germany


