### Accession
PXD037760

### Title
Identification of flagellin proteins from the citrus canker pathogens Xanthomonas citri (strain 306) and Xanthomonas aurantifolii pathotype C (strain ICMP 8435)

### Description
In this project, we have extracted the flagellum of the citrus canker pathogens Xanthomonas citri and Xanthomonas aurantifolii pathotype C and the proteins associated with these preparations were resolved by SDS-PAGE and identified by mass spectrometry. The major 50 kDa band, observed in both samples, correspond to the flagellin C (FliC) proteins. All the peptides identified by mass spectrometry shown here showed perfect matches to the X. citri and X. aurantifolii FliC proteins deposited in the GenBank (NCBI reference sequences WP_003482972 and WP_007962409, respectively).

### Sample Protocol
FliC identification and peptide mapping  Bacterial cells were grown in liquid LBON medium supplemented with ampicillin (100 mg/L) for 18 h at 28oC under mild agitation (100 rpm). Cells were collected by centrifugation (5.000 x g) at 4oC for 5 min and suspended in 25mM Tris HCl, 150mM NaCl pH7.0. The suspensions were homogenized in a cell mixer (Politron PT-MR 1600E) for 5 min on ice. Bacterial cells were recovered by centrifugation and the suspensions containing bacterium flagellum was precipitated with acetone (1:1 ratio) at – 20oC overnight. The suspensions were centrifuged (5.000 x g) at 4oC for 10 min and the protein pellets suspended in SDS-PAGE sample buffer and resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE gels. Protein bands were extracted from the gels and digested with trypsin, and the cleaved peptides were identified by mass spectrometry, as previously described (Soprano et al., 2017).

### Data Protocol
The electrophoresed 50 kDa bands were excised from the SDS-PAGE gels and in-gel trypsin digested, as described by Shevchenko et al. (1996). The peptide mixture was separated on a C18 RP-UPLC column (nanoAcquity UPLC, Waters) coupled with nanoelectrospray tandem mass spectrometry on a Q-Tof Premier mass spectrometer (Waters) at a flow rate of 600 nL/min. A gradient of 2-30% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 30min, with nanoelectrospray voltage of 3.0 kV, cone voltage of 50 V and source temperature of 80°C were applied. The instrument operated in the “top three” mode, in which one MS spectrum is acquired followed by MS/MS of the top three most-intense peaks detected. The resulting spectra were processed using Mascot Distiller 2.3.2.0, 2009 Matrix Science (MassLynx 4.1) and searched against the NCBI database.

### Publication Abstract
Citrus cancer, caused by strains of Xanthomonas citri (Xc) and Xanthomonas aurantifolii (Xa), is one of the most economically important citrus diseases. Although our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying citrus canker development has advanced remarkably in recent years, exactly how citrus plants fight against these pathogens remains largely unclear. Using a Xa pathotype C strain that infects Mexican lime only and sweet oranges as a pathosystem to study the immune response triggered by this bacterium in these hosts, we herein report that the Xa flagellin C protein (XaFliC) acts as a potent defence elicitor in sweet oranges. Just as Xa blocked canker formation when coinfiltrated with Xc in sweet orange leaves, two polymorphic XaFliC peptides designated flgIII-20 and flgIII-27, not related to flg22 or flgII-28 but found in many Xanthomonas species, were sufficient to protect sweet orange plants from Xc infection. Accordingly, ectopic expression of XaFliC in a Xc FliC-defective mutant completely abolished the ability of this mutant to grow and cause canker in sweet orange but not Mexican lime plants. Because XaFliC and flgIII-27 also specifically induced the expression of several defence-related genes, our data suggest that XaFliC acts as a main immune response determinant in sweet orange plants.

### Keywords
Flic, Flagellin c, Xanthomonas citri (strain 306) and xanthomonas aurantifolii pathotype c (strain icmp 8435)

### Affiliations
CNPEM
Coordenadora no laboratório de Espectrometria de Massas, LNBio, CNPEM, Brasil.

### Submitter
Adriana Franco Paes Leme

### Lab Head
Dr Adriana Franco Paes Leme
Coordenadora no laboratório de Espectrometria de Massas, LNBio, CNPEM, Brasil.


