### Accession
PXD013990

### Title
Geobacter sulfurreducens and Pseudomonas aeruginosa adapted cocultures SWATH-MS

### Description
In this study we further investigate the previously observed syntrophic interaction between Geobacter sulfurreducens and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. In early coculture establishment, two genetic variants of G. sulfurreducens emerged that were strongly selected for throughout coculture evolution. Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) variants occurred in fabI and tetR genes of G. sulfurreducens. The tetR variants displayed upregulation of adenylate cyclase transporter, CyaE and of RND efflux pump proteins as determined through SWATH-MS proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed in B-Per II, 50 mM DTT and Complete mini EDTA-free Protease inhibitor cocktail. Performed three freeze thaw cycles in liquid nitrogen then incubated at room temperature for 30 mins. Centrifuged and mixed supernatants with 0.04% sodium deoxycholate. Precipitated protein with 10% TCA at 4C overnight. Centrifuged and discarded supernatant. Resuspended pellets in 80% acetone and sonicated at 4C until complete resuspension. Incubated for 20 minutes at -20C. Centrifuged to collect protein pellet then allowed to dry for 5 minutes. Resuspended pellets in buffer: 2 M thiourea, 7 M urea and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. 2-D Quant Kit was used to measure protein concentrations and all samples were normalized to 10 µg/µl. Reduction of proteins with 5 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 56C, followed by a 30 minute alkylation with 25 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark. An additional 5 mM DTT was added to quench excess iodoacetamide. Digestion with 1:600 enzyme:protein ratio of rLys-C was performed at 37C for 7 hours. Diluted samples with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer to reduce the urea concentration to 2 M. A second digestion with 1:100 enzyme:protein ratio of trypsin was performed at 37C for 14 hours. Proteins were desalted and purified using ZipTip clean-up with washes in 5% acetonitrile(ACN)/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and eluted with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA into autosampler vials for mass spectrometry. Eluted peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation to remove ACN and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. SWATH-MS was done by analyzing peptides via LC-ESI-MS/MS with a Prominence nanoLC system (Shimadzu) and Triple ToF 5600 mass spectrometer with a Nanospray III interface (ABSciex).

### Data Protocol
The obtained mass-spectrometry (MS) data was input into ProteinPilot software and IDA searches were performed against the downloaded G. sulfurreducens (PCA) and P. aeruginosa (PAO1 and PA14) proteomes obtained from Uniprot Swiss-Prot database (August 2016 release), at a global FDR of 1%. The PeakView program was used to generate SWATH files containing quantified proteomes with settings set to 5 peptides per protein and 3 transitions per peptide. The “exclude shared peptides” option was selected to avoid the issue of shared peptides in conserved proteins of the two bacteria present in each coculture. The MSstats statistics package for R was used for all statistical analyses. To increase the stringency of analysis, only proteins with intensity values existing for ≥ 50% of the peptides detected were included in the analysis. Furthermore, normalization setting was set to false to avoid shifting median intensity values by a constant. Due to the nature of the cocultures being a mix of two bacterial species, MSStats analyses were performed twice for each coculture sample, once for only G. sulfurreducens proteins and the second analysis was done specifically on P. aeruginosa proteins. Protein abundance changes between G. sulfurreducens DL-1 in coculture with P. aeruginosa relative to pure culture of DL-1 were measured as the log2 Fold Change (log2FC) difference. Similarly, the protein abundance changes between each P. aeruginosa strain PAO1, PA14 and PA14 ∆phz relative to its pure culture equivalent were reported as log2FC differences (Table S4). Pathways, molecular function, biological processes and cellular components for each protein were obtained from KEGG and GO resources.

### Publication Abstract
Interactions between microorganisms in mixed communities are highly complex, being either syntrophic, neutral, predatory, or competitive. Evolutionary changes can occur in the interaction dynamics between community members as they adapt to coexistence. Here, we report that the syntrophic interaction between <i>Geobacter sulfurreducens</i> and <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> coculture change in their dynamics over evolutionary time. Specifically, <i>Geobacter</i> sp. dominance increases with adaptation within the cocultures, as determined through quantitative PCR and fluorescence <i>in situ</i> hybridization. This suggests a transition from syntrophy to competition and demonstrates the rapid adaptive capacity of <i>Geobacter</i> spp. to dominate in cocultures with <i>P. aeruginosa</i> Early in coculture establishment, two single-nucleotide variants in the <i>G. sulfurreducens</i><i>fabI</i> and <i>tetR</i> genes emerged that were strongly selected for throughout coculture evolution with <i>P. aeruginosa</i> phenazine wild-type and phenazine-deficient mutants. Sequential window acquisition of all theoretical spectra-mass spectrometry (SWATH-MS) proteomics revealed that the <i>tetR</i> variant cooccurred with the upregulation of an adenylate cyclase transporter, CyaE, and a resistance-nodulation-division (RND) efflux pump notably known for antibiotic efflux. To determine whether antibiotic production was driving the increased expression of the multidrug efflux pump, we tested <i>Pseudomonas</i>-derived phenazine-1-carboxylic acid (PHZ-1-CA) for its potential to inhibit <i>Geobacter</i> growth and drive selection of the <i>tetR</i> and <i>fabI</i> genetic variants. Despite its inhibitory properties, PHZ-1-CA did not drive variant selection, indicating that other antibiotics may drive overexpression of the efflux pump and CyaE or that a novel role exists for these proteins in the context of this interaction.<b>IMPORTANCE</b><i>Geobacter</i> and <i>Pseudomonas</i> spp. cohabit many of the same environments, where <i>Geobacter</i> spp. often dominate. Both bacteria are capable of extracellular electron transfer (EET) and play important roles in biogeochemical cycling. Although they recently in 2017 were demonstrated to undergo direct interspecies electron transfer (DIET) with one another, the genetic evolution of this syntrophic interaction has not been examined. Here, we use whole-genome sequencing of the cocultures before and after adaptive evolution to determine whether genetic selection is occurring. We also probe their interaction on a temporal level and determine whether their interaction dynamics change over the course of adaptive evolution. This study brings to light the multifaceted nature of interactions between just two microorganisms within a controlled environment and will aid in improving metabolic models of microbial communities comprising these two bacteria.

### Keywords
Coculture evolution, Geobacter, Pseudomonas, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
La Trobe University
Physiology, Anatomy and Microbiology - La Trobe University

### Submitter
Lucie Semenec

### Lab Head
Dr Ashley E Franks
Physiology, Anatomy and Microbiology - La Trobe University


