### Accession
PXD021743

### Title
Dynamics of an LPS translocon induced by substrate and an antimicrobial peptide

### Description
We investigated the conformational dynamics of the LPS translocon LptDE was using hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry. We evaluated the conformational changes of LptDE upon binding of LPS, Re-LPS (an LPS substructure), thanatin, and the membrane lipid POPG. Our data reveal that LPS induces opening of the LptD β-taco domain, coupled with conformational changes on β-strands adjacent to the putative lateral exit gate. Conversely, an antimicrobial peptide, thanatin, stabilises the β-taco, thus blocking these conformational fluctuations and preventing LPS transport. Our results illustrate that LPS insertion into the OM relies on concerted opening movements of both β-barrel and β-taco domains.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to HDX labelling, purified LptDE was purified at a concentration of 20 μM and all ligands were diluted in equilibration buffer (200 mM NaCl, 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 10% glycerol and 0.03% DDM). In the case of LPS binding experiments it was incubated with LPS in 15-fold excess (considering an average MW of 4.5 kDa). The same molar ratio was used for the experiments in the presence of Re-LPS and POPG. In the case of thanatin, the peptide was added in a 1:1 molar ratio. All ligands were incubated for 1h at 4°C to allow equilibration before HDX labelling. In order to study thanatin effect on substrate binding to LptDE, LPS or Re-LPS were added in 15-fold excess, the protein-substrate mixture was equilibrated for 1h followed by the addition of thanatin (1:1 LptDE:thanatin ratio) and further 1h incubation at 4 °C.  The HDX reaction was initiated by a 12× dilution into deuterated buffer (0.03% DDM, 200 mM NaCl, 25 mM Tris adjusted to pD 8 using DCl at 20 °C) resulting in a labelling solution ~92 % D2O. The labelling reaction was incubated for a time course of 10 s (0.1667 min), 60 s (1 min), 1000 s (16.67 min), 5000 s (83.33 min) and 7 hrs (420 min) at 20 °C and quenched with equal volume of ice cold quench buffer (200 mM NaCl, 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 1.9), 0.03% DDM, 15 mM TCEP).  The quenched sample was injected into a nanoACQUITY UPLC System (Waters) and online digested by Enzymate™ BEH Pepsin Column (2.1 x 30 mm, Waters) at 20 °C using an isocratic 0.1 % v/v formic acid-H2O solution (200 μL/min). Peptide products were collected on a BEH C18 trap column (1.7 μm, 2.1 x 5 mm, Waters) at 0 °C for 3 minutes for de-salting. Peptides were then eluted from the trap column on to a BEH C18 analytical column (1.7 μm, 1 x 100 mm, Waters) for separation using a reverse-phase gradient. The mobile phase consisted of a H2O/MeCN (+0.1% formic acid v/v) linear gradient from 3% to 35% MeCN at a flow rate of 40 μL/min. Wash buffer (1.5 M guanidinium chloride pH 2.8, 4 % acetonitrile, 0.8% formic acid) was used to clean the pepsin column. To prevent peptide carry-over a wash and a blank injection runs were performed between each labelling experiment.  Following chromatographic separation, the peptides were injected in a hybrid ESI-Q-ToF mass spectrometer (Synapt G2-Si, Waters) for mass spectrometric analysis. Mass analysis was performed in in positive ion mode. MS/MS spectra were obtained using data-independent MSE mode. MS conditions were optimised to avoid H/D exchange in the step-wave source region leading to false EX1 kinetics. MS conditions were as follows: capillary 2.8 kV, sample cone 30 V, source offset 30 V, trap activation 4 V, transfer activation 2 V. The source temperature was set to 80 °C and cone gas flow 80 L/hr, the desolvation temperature was 150 °C and the desolvation gas flow of 250 L/hr. Leucine Enkephalin was used as internal calibrant for mass accuracy correction and NaI was used for MS calibration.

### Data Protocol
Peptides from un-deuterated samples were analysed and identified by Protein Lynx Global Server 3.0 (Waters). Peptide identifications were filtered using DynamX (Waters), according to the following parameters: minimum and maximum peptide sequence length of 5 and 30, respectively, minimum fragmentation products per amino acid of 0.15, minimum MS/MS products of 3, maximum [MH]+ error of 5 ppm. Additionally, the peptides had to be identified in 50% of the acquired MS/MS files. Moreover, all the spectra were visually examined and only those with high signal to noise ratios were used for HDX-MS analysis. The amount of relative deuterium uptake for each peptide was determined using DynamX 3.0 (Waters) and were not corrected for back exchange since analyses compared different states of the protein and there was no benefit from normalising the data.  Confidence intervals (CI) and Woods plots were generated using Deuteros software. In-house Python scripts were used to generate the uptake plots and to apply further statistical filters as described below.  In the comparative HDX analyses on different ligand-binding states, a peptide was considered to have a significant difference in HDX at a certain time point if this difference was greater than the calculated CI for two consecutive time points and statistically significant based on a Student’s t-test (two-sided, unpaired, p < 0.01). As an exemption to this rule, a difference was also considered significant if the last time point (420 min) displayed a difference in HDX at least two times larger than the CI, since this may indicate an increasing difference not completely sampled by the HDX time course.

### Publication Abstract
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) transport to the outer membrane (OM) is a crucial step in the biogenesis of microbial surface defenses. Although many features of the translocation mechanism have been elucidated, molecular details of LPS insertion via the LPS transport (Lpt) OM protein LptDE remain elusive. Here, we integrate native MS with hydrogen-deuterium exchange MS and molecular dynamics simulations to investigate the influence of substrate and peptide binding on the conformational dynamics of LptDE. Our data reveal that LPS induces opening of the LptD &#x3b2;-taco domain, coupled with conformational changes on &#x3b2;-strands adjacent to the putative lateral exit gate. Conversely, an antimicrobial peptide, thanatin, stabilizes the &#x3b2;-taco, thereby preventing LPS transport. Our results illustrate that LPS insertion into the OM relies on concerted opening movements of both the &#x3b2;-barrel and &#x3b2;-taco domains of LptD, and suggest a means for developing antimicrobial therapeutics targeting this essential process in Gram-negative ESKAPE pathogens.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Lptde, Thanatin, Hydrogen-deuterium exchange, Lps

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QZ, UK
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Francesco Fiorentino

### Lab Head
Dr Carol V. Robinson
Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QZ, UK


