### Accession
PXD016160

### Title
14-3-3 protects AMPK phosphorylated TET2 from dephosphorylation by PP2A

### Description
Ten-eleven translocation-2 (TET2) is a member of the methylcytosine dioxygenase family of enzymes implicated in cancer and in aging due to its role as a global epigenetic modifier. TET2 has a large N-terminal domain followed by a catalytic C-terminal. Previous reports have demonstrated that the catalytic domain remains active independent of the N-terminal domain. As such, the function of the N-terminus of this large protein remains poorly characterized. Here, we identify that several isoforms of the 14-3-3 family of proteins bind TET2. 14-3-3s bind TET2 when phosphorylated at serine 99 (S99). AMPK-mediated phosphorylation at S99 promotes TET2 stability and increases global DNA 5-hydroxymethylcytosine. 14-3-3s’ interaction with TET2 serves to protect S99 phosphorylation. Disruption of this interaction leads to both reduced TET2 phosphorylation and decreased protein stability. Furthermore, we identify that the protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) can interact with TET2 and dephosphorylates S99. Collectively, our study provides novel insights into the role of the N-terminal domain in TET2 regulation. Moreover, they demonstrate the dynamic nature of TET2 protein regulation that could have therapeutic implications for disease states resulting from reduced TET2 levels and/or activity.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics analysis was carried out as previously referenced with minor changes (Ludwig et. al, under section 2.5 nLC-ESI-MS2 under Protein IDs for GeLC). The proteins extracts from purified exosomes were quantified using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat.# PI23225), 10µg of protein per exosome extract were obtained and diluted to 35µL using NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (1x final conc., Invitrogen, Cat.#NP0007). Proteins were then reduced with DTT and denatured at 70°C for 10min prior to loading everything onto Novex NuPAGE 10% Bis-Tris Protein gels (Invitrogen, Cat.# NP0315BOX) and separated as a short stack (10 min at 200 constant V). The gels were stained overnight with Novex Colloidal Blue Staining kit (Invitrogen, Cat.# LC6025). Following de-staining, each lane were cut into a single MW fractions and equilibrated in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBc), each gel plug was then digested overnight with Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade (Promega, Cat.# V5280) following manufacturer’s instruction. Peptide extracts were reconstituted in 0.1% Formic Acid/ ddH2O at 0.1µg/µL.Peptide digests (8µL each) were injected onto a 1260 Infinity nHPLC stack (Agilent Technologies), and separated using a 75 micron I.D. x 15 cm pulled tip C-18 column (Jupiter C-18 300 Å, 5 micron, Phenomenex). This system runs in-line with a Thermo Orbitrap Velos Pro hybrid mass spectrometer, equipped with a nano-electrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and all data were collected in CID mode. The nHPLC was configured with binary mobile phases that included solvent A (0.1%FA in ddH2O), and solvent B (0.1%FA in 15% ddH2O / 85% ACN), programmed as follows; 10min @ 5%B (2µL/ min, load), 90min @ 5%-40%B (linear: 0.5nL/ min, analyze), 5min @ 70%B (2µL/ min, wash), 10min @ 0%B (2µL/ min, equilibrate). Following each parent ion scan (300-1200m/z @ 60k resolution), fragmentation data (MS2) was collected on the top most intense 15 ions. For data dependent scans, charge state screening and dynamic exclusion were enabled with a repeat count of 2, repeat duration of 30s, and exclusion duration of 90s.

### Data Protocol
The list of peptide IDs generated based on SEQUEST (Thermo Fisher Scientific) search results were filtered using Scaffold (Protein Sciences, Portland Oregon). Scaffold filters and groups all peptides to generate and retain only high confidence IDs while also generating normalized spectral counts (N-SC’s) across all samples for the purpose of relative quantification. The filter cut-off values were set with minimum peptide length of >5 AA’s, with no MH+1 charge states, with peptide probabilities of >80% C.I., and with the number of peptides per protein ≥2. The protein probabilities were then set to a >99.0% C.I., and an FDR<1.0. Scaffold incorporates the two most common methods for statistical validation of large proteome datasets, the false discovery rate (FDR) and protein probability (Keller, Nesvizhskii, Weatherly). Relative quantification across experiments were then performed via spectral counting (Old, Liu), and when relevant, spectral count abundances were then normalized between samples (Hyde).

### Publication Abstract
Ten-eleven translocation-2 (TET2) is a member of the methylcytosine dioxygenase family of enzymes and has been implicated in cancer and aging because of its role as a global epigenetic modifier. TET2 has a large N-terminal domain and a catalytic C-terminal region. Previous reports have demonstrated that the TET2 catalytic domain remains active independently of the N-terminal domain. As such, the function of the N terminus of this large protein remains poorly characterized. Here, using yeast two-hybrid screening, co-immunoprecipitation, and several biochemical assays, we found that several isoforms of the 14-3-3 family of proteins bind TET2. 14-3-3 proteins bound TET2 when it was phosphorylated at Ser-99. In particular, we observed that AMP-activated protein kinase-mediated phosphorylation at Ser-99 promotes TET2 stability and increases global DNA 5-hydroxymethylcytosine levels. The interaction of 14-3-3 proteins with TET2 protected the Ser-99 phosphorylation, and disruption of this interaction both reduced TET2 phosphorylation and decreased TET2 stability. Furthermore, we noted that protein phosphatase 2A can interact with TET2 and dephosphorylate Ser-99. Collectively, these results provide detailed insights into the role of the TET2 N-terminal domain in TET2 regulation. Moreover, they reveal the dynamic nature of TET2 protein regulation that could have therapeutic implications for disease states resulting from reduced TET2 levels or activity.

### Keywords
5hmc, Post-translational modification, 14-3-3, Ampk, Tet2, Pp2a

### Affiliations
University of Alabama at Birmingham

### Submitter
james mobley

### Lab Head
Dr James A. Mobley
University of Alabama at Birmingham


