### Accession
PXD033501

### Title
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF)

### Description
Although the prevalence of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) is increasing, evidence-based therapies for HFpEF are rare, likely due to an incomplete understanding of this disease. This study sought to identify the cardiac-specific features of protein and phosphoprotein in a murine model of HFpEF using mass spectrometry. HFpEF mice developed moderate hypertension, left ventricle (LV) hypertrophy, lung congestion and diastolic dysfunction. Proteomics analysis of the LV tissue showed that 897 proteins were differentially expressed between HFpEF and Sham mice. We observed abundant changes in sarcomeric proteins, mitochondrial-related proteins, and NAD-dependent protein deacetylase sirtuin-3 (SIRT3). Upregulated pathways by GSEA analysis were related to immune modulation and muscle contraction, while downregulated pathways were predominantly related mitochondrial metabolism. Western blot analysis validated SIRT3 downregulated cardiac expression in HFpEF. Phosphoproteomics analysis showed that 72 phosphopeptides were differentially regulated between HFpEF and sham LV. Aberrant phosphorylation patterns mostly occurred in sarcomere proteins and nuclear-localized proteins associated with contractile dysfunction and cardiac hypertrophy. Seven aberrant phospho-sites were observed at the z disk binding region of titin. While total titin cardiac expression remained unaltered, its stiffer N2B isoform was significantly increased in HFpEF. Thus, these results show profound changes in proteins related to mitochondrial metabolism and function and the cardiac contractile apparatus in HFpEF. We propose that SIRT3 plays a key role and may be a target for drug development in HFpEF.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly thawed samples were homogenized on ice with a mixer mill MM 400 in 10 volumes of 8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 2 mM dithiolthreitol, and protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails. Tissue homogenate was then sonicated with a probe sonicator and centrifuged. After centrifugation, supernatant was decanted and total protein in each sample was determined using a modified ‘microtitre plate’ version of the Bradford assay (Sigma-Aldrich). For phosphoproteomics experiments, aliquots containing 300 μg of protein were alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide for additional 45 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were then diluted 8-fold with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested overnight with sequencing-grade trypsin. Digestion was stopped by acidification to a final concentration of 1% (v/v) formic acid and the peptide solutions were desalted using disposable C18 SepPak syringes and lyophilized to dryness following manufacturer´s instructions. Peptide concentrations were determined by a colorimetric peptide assay kit and an aliquot of 100 μg was placed in 100 μL of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate. Peptides were labelled with 0.4 mg of TMT label. Labelled samples were pooled, and 95% was set aside for phosphopeptide enrichment. The remaining 5% of labelled peptides and the phosphopeptide enriched samples were analyzed separately by mass spectrometry. Phosphopeptides were selectively enriched by binding to titanium dioxide beads. Briefly, peptides were resuspended in 200 μL 80% acetontirile, 6% trifluoroacetic acid and incubated for 10 min with 10 μL of slurry containing TiO2 magnetic beads. Unbound peptides and supernatant were decanted, and the beads were washed three times with binding buffer. After final decanting, the beads were incubated for 10 min with ammonium hydroxide elution buffer and the eluate was carefully removed and dried prior to mass spectrometry analysis. The samples were then loaded onto a nano-trap column with mobile phase A, and were separated over an EASY-Spray column by an increasing mobile phase B. Tryptic peptide mixtures were analyzed by nano-scale high-performance liquid chromatography and online nano electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry. Briefly, samples were loaded in aqueous 0.1% (v/v) formic acid via a trap column and peptides were resolved over an Easy-Spray analytical column by an increasing mobile phase B. Mobile phase A consisted of 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid, and organic phase B contained 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Reverse phase separation was performed over 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Eluted peptides were ionized directly into the mass spectrometer using a nanospray ion source. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 300 °C, and with a potential of 2100 V applied to the frit. Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) was performed using high-energy collision-induced disassociation and 10 MS/MS data-dependent scans were acquired in profile mode alongside each profile mode full-scan mass spectra (45,000 resolution) as reported previously. The automatic gain control (AGC) for MS scans was 1×106 ions with a maximum fill time of 60 ms. The AGC for MS/MS scans was 3×104, with 80 ms maximum injection time, 0.1 ms activation time, and 33% normalized collision energy. To avoid repeated selection of peptides for MS/MS a dynamic exclusion list was enabled to exclude all fragmented ions for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data files were searched using the standard workflow of MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5; http://maxquant.org/) under standard settings using the UniProt mouse database (www.uniprot.org/taxonomy/10090) allowing for two missed trypsin cleavage sites, carbamidomethylation of cysteine (fixed) and variable oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation of STY residues. Precursor ion tolerances were 20ppm for first search and 4.5 ppm for a second search. The MS/MS peaks were de-isotoped and searched using a 20-ppm mass tolerance. A stringent false discovery rate threshold of 1% was used to filter candidate peptide, protein, and phosphosite identifications. The searched intensity data were filtered, normalized, and clustered using Omics Notebook DOI (https://doi.org/10.1093/bioadv/vbab024). Feature filtering was performed to remove any feature in less than 70 percent of samples with 1627 proteins and 1066 phospho-sites passing the filter in the proteomics and phosphoproteomic data sets, respectively. The LIMMA R package was used for LOESS normalization and differential expression analysis. A combined ranked list for both sets was generated where duplicate gene entries were removed to keep the entry with the highest absolute rank value. Gene Set Enrichment analysis (GSEA) was used to compute gene set enrichment after ranking proteins by differential expression in HFpEF versus Sham. Briefly, GSEA was used in rank mode along with gene sets downloaded from the Bader Lab (Mouse_GOBP_AllPathways_no_GO_iea_October_01_2018_symbol.gmt from https://baderlab.org/GeneSets). GSEA results were visualized using the Enrichment Map app (Version 3.1) in Cytoscape (Version 3.6.1) and highly related pathways were grouped into a theme and labeled by AutoAnnotate (version 1.2). For the merged gene set analyses, we applied an enrichment P < 0.01 and FDR ≤ 0.1 cutoffs and calculated overlap between gene set annotations using a combination of Jaccard and overlap coefficients with a cutoff of 0.375.

### Publication Abstract
Although the prevalence of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) is increasing, evidence-based therapies for HFpEF remain limited, likely due to an incomplete understanding of this disease. This study sought to identify the cardiac-specific features of protein and phosphoprotein changes in a murine model of HFpEF using mass spectrometry. HFpEF mice demonstrated moderate hypertension, left ventricle (LV) hypertrophy, lung congestion and diastolic dysfunction. Proteomics analysis of the LV tissue showed that 897 proteins were differentially expressed between HFpEF and Sham mice. We observed abundant changes in sarcomeric proteins, mitochondrial-related proteins, and NAD-dependent protein deacetylase sirtuin-3 (SIRT3). Upregulated pathways by GSEA analysis were related to immune modulation and muscle contraction, while downregulated pathways were predominantly related to mitochondrial metabolism. Western blot analysis validated SIRT3 downregulated cardiac expression in HFpEF vs. Sham (0.8 &#xb1; 0.0 vs. 1.0 &#xb1; 0.0; <i>P</i> &lt; 0.001). Phosphoproteomics analysis showed that 72 phosphosites were differentially regulated between HFpEF and Sham LV. Aberrant phosphorylation patterns mostly occurred in sarcomere proteins and nuclear-localized proteins associated with contractile dysfunction and cardiac hypertrophy. Seven aberrant phosphosites were observed at the z-disk binding region of titin. Additional agarose gel analysis showed that while total titin cardiac expression remained unaltered, its stiffer N2B isoform was significantly increased in HFpEF vs. Sham (0.144 &#xb1; 0.01 vs. 0.127 &#xb1; 0.01; <i>P</i> &lt; 0.05). In summary, this study demonstrates marked changes in proteins related to mitochondrial metabolism and the cardiac contractile apparatus in HFpEF. We propose that SIRT3 may play a role in perpetuating these changes and may be a target for drug development in HFpEF.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Phosphoproteomics, Hfpef, Titin, Proteomics, Sirt3, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Boston University

### Submitter
Ryan Hekman

### Lab Head
Dr Flora Sam
Boston University


