### Accession
PXD023904

### Title
Deep Visual Proteomics defines single-cell identity and heterogeneity

### Description
Despite the availabilty of imaging-based and mass-spectrometry-based methods for spatial proteomics, a key challenge remains connecting images with single-cell-resolution protein abundance measurements. Here we introduce Deep Visual Proteomics (DVP), which combines artificial-intelligence-driven image analysis of cellular phenotypes with automated single-cell or single-nucleus laser microdissection and ultra-high-sensitivity mass spectrometry. DVP links protein abundance to complex cellular or subcellular phenotypes while preserving spatial context. By individually excising nuclei from cell culture, we classified distinct cell states with proteomic profiles defined by known and uncharacterized proteins. In an archived primary melanoma tissue, DVP identified spatially resolved proteome changes as normal melanocytes transition to fully invasive melanoma, revealing pathways that change in a spatial manner as cancer progresses, such as mRNA splicing dysregulation in metastatic vertical growth that coincides with reduced interferon signaling and antigen presentation. The ability of DVP to retain precise spatial proteomic information in the tissue context has implications for the molecular profiling of clinical samples.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry Cell culture (nuclei or whole cells) and tissue samples were collected by automated laser microdissection into 384-well plates (Eppendorf 0030129547). For the collection of different U2OS nuclei classes (Fig. 3), we normalized nuclear size differences (resulting in different total protein amounts) by the number of collected objects per class. On average, we collected 267 nuclei per sample. For FFPE tissue samples of salivary gland and melanoma, (2.5 µm thick section cut in microtome) an area of 80,000 – 160,000 µm2 per sample was collected, an estimated number of 100-200 cells based on the average HeLa cell volume of 2,000 μm3 (BNID 100434).  20µl of ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) were added to each sample well and the plate closed with sealing tape (Corning, CLS6569-100EA). Following vortexing for 10 s, plates were centrifuged for 10 min at 2000g and heated at 95C for 30 min (cell culture) or 60 min (tissue) in a thermal cycler (Biorad S1000 with 384-well reaction module) at a constant lid temperature of 110 C. 5 µl 5x digestion buffer (60% acetonitrile in 100 mM ABC) was added and samples heated at 75 C for another 30 min. Samples were shortly cooled down and 1 µl LysC added (pre-diluted in ultra-pure water to 4 ng/µl) and digested for 4 h at 37 C in the thermal cycler. Subsequently, 1.5 µl trypsin was added (pre-diluted in ultra-pure water to 4ng/µl) and incubated overnight at 37 C in the thermal cycler. Next day, digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, final concentration 1% v/v) and samples vacuum-dried (approx. 1.5 h at 60 C). 4 µl MS loading buffer (3% acetonitrile in 0.2% TFA) was added, the plate vortexed for 10s and centrifuged for 5 min at 2000g. Samples were stored at -20 C until LC-MS analysis. LC-MS analysis  Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis was performed with an EASY-nLC-1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a modified trapped ion mobility spectrometry quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer with about five-fold higher ion current7 (timsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Germany) with a nano-electrospray ion source (Captive spray, Bruker Daltonik GmbH). The autosampler was configured for sample pick-up from 384-well plates. Peptides were loaded on a 50 cm in-house packed HPLC-column (75µm inner diameter packed with 1.9µm ReproSilPur C18-AQ silica beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany).  Peptides were separated using a linear gradient from 5-30% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% ACN in LC-MS grade H2O) in 55 min followed by an increase to 60% for 5 min and 10 min wash at 95% buffer B at 300nl/min. Buffer A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade H2O. The total gradient length was 70 min. We used an in-house made column oven to keep the column temperature constant at 60 °C.   Mass spectrometric analysis was performed essentially as described in Brunner et al.7, either in data-dependent (ddaPASEF) (Fig. 5 and 6) or data-independent (diaPASEF) mode (Fig. 3 and 4). For ddaPASEF, 1 MS1 survey TIMS-MS and 10 PASEF MS/MS scans were acquired per acquisition cycle. Ion accumulation and ramp time in the dual TIMS analyzer was set to 100 ms each and we analyzed the ion mobility range from 1/K0 = 1.6 Vs cm-2 to 0.6 Vs cm-2. Precursor ions for MS/MS analysis were isolated with a 2 Th window for m/z < 700 and 3 Th for m/z >700 in a total m/z range of 100-1.700 by synchronizing quadrupole switching events with the precursor elution profile from the TIMS device. The collision energy was lowered linearly as a function of increasing mobility starting from 59 eV at 1/K0 = 1.6 VS cm-2 to 20 eV at 1/K0 = 0.6 Vs cm-2. Singly charged precursor ions were excluded with a polygon filter (otof control, Bruker Daltonik GmbH). Precursors for MS/MS were picked at an intensity threshold of 1.000 arbitrary units (a.u.) and resequenced until reaching a ‘target value’ of 20.000 a.u taking into account a dynamic exclusion of 40 s elution. For DIA analysis, we made use of the correlation of Ion Mobility (IM) with m/z and synchronized the elution of precursors from each IM scan with the quadrupole isolation window. The collision energy was ramped linearly as a function of the IM from 59 eV at 1/K0 = 1.6 Vs cm−2 to 20 eV at 1/K0 = 0.6 Vs cm−2. We used the ddaPASEF method for library generation17.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis of proteomic raw files Mass spectrometric raw files acquired in ddaPASEF mode  (Fig. 4) were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.7.0)43,44. The Uniprot database (2019 release, UP000005640_9606) was searched with a peptide spectral match (PSM) and protein level FDR of 1%. A minimum of seven amino acids was required including N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Due to omitted reduction and alkylation, cysteine carbamidomethylation was removed from fixed modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of two allowed missed cleavages. First and main search mass tolerance was set to 70 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. Peptide identifications by MS/MS were transferred by matching four-dimensional isotope patterns between the runs (MBR) with a 0.7-min retention-time match window and a 0.05 1/K0 ion mobility window. Label-free quantification was performed with the MaxLFQ algorithm45 and a minimum ratio count of one.  For diaPASEF measurements (Fig. 2, 3 and 5), raw files were analyzed with DIA-NN (version 1.8, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0638-x). To generate a project specific spectral library,  a 24-fraction high-pH reversed-phase fractionated precursor library was created from the same tissue specimen and acquired in ddaPASEF mode, as described above. Raw files were analyzed with MSFragger (https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4256) under default settings (with the exception that cysteine carbamidomethylation was removed from fixed modifications) to generate the library file used in DIA-NN. The library consisted of  90,056 precursors, 79,802 elution groups and 7,765 protein groups.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the availabilty of imaging-based and mass-spectrometry-based methods for spatial proteomics, a key challenge remains connecting images with single-cell-resolution protein abundance measurements. Here, we introduce Deep Visual Proteomics (DVP), which combines artificial-intelligence-driven image analysis of cellular phenotypes with automated single-cell or single-nucleus laser microdissection and ultra-high-sensitivity mass spectrometry. DVP links protein abundance to complex cellular or subcellular phenotypes while preserving spatial context. By individually excising nuclei from cell culture, we classified distinct cell states with proteomic profiles defined by known and uncharacterized proteins. In an archived primary melanoma tissue, DVP identified spatially resolved proteome changes as normal melanocytes transition to fully invasive melanoma, revealing pathways that change in a spatial manner as cancer progresses, such as mRNA splicing dysregulation in metastatic vertical growth that coincides with reduced interferon signaling and antigen presentation. The ability of DVP to retain precise spatial proteomic information in the tissue context has implications for the molecular profiling of clinical samples.

### Keywords
Digital pathology, Microscopy, Laser microdissection, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine
Prof. Dr. Matthias Mann Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried +49 89 8578-2557

### Submitter
Fabian Coscia

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Prof. Dr. Matthias Mann Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried +49 89 8578-2557


