### Accession
PXD023533

### Title
Rab5a-VPS34 unnatural amino acid mediated crosslinking

### Description
The small GTPase Rab5 has an essential role in sorting vesicles arriving to and leaving the early endosome. One key function of Rab5 in this process is the activation of the primordial phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase VPS34, a lipid kinase that phosphorylates phosphatidylinositol (PI) to generate PI3P. Human VPS34 forms two heterotetrameric core complexes known as complexes I and II. Rab5a preferentially activates endocytic complex II in a membrane dependent manner. To map Rab5a-GTP interaction sites in complex II, unnatural amino acid mediated crosslinking was employed by genetic code expansion. A Rab5a mutant, in which the S84 in was replaced by BrCO6K was used for crosslinking mass spectrometry analysis. BrCO6K is a lysine derivative that can crosslink to several amino acids such as cysteines, histidines, lysines and glutamates over distances up to 15 Å (Cigler et al., 2017; Nguyen et al., 2018). Both complex II and VPS34 alone incubated with Rab5a-GTP-BrCO6K gave rise to a cross-linked product that ran slightly above the 120 kDa molecular weight marker, consistent with 102 kDa VPS34 crosslinked to the 24 kDa Rab5a (126 kDa). The gel bands of this crosslinking product in both samples were cut and analysed by LC-MS/MS for identification of crosslinks.

### Sample Protocol
There are two types of core complexes, I and II, that are formed by human VPS34. Complex II can be activated by Rab5a in a membrane-dependent manner. To map out the interaction sites between Rab5a and GTP in complex II, a human Rab5a mutant was used for crosslinking mass spectrometry analysis. This mutant replaced S84 with BrCO6K, a lysine derivative that can crosslink with various amino acids over distances up to 15. Incubating both complex II and VPS34 alone with Rab5a-GTP-BrCO6K resulted in a cross-linked product that ran slightly above the 120 kDa molecular weight marker. The product was consistent with 102 kDa VPS34 crosslinked to the 24 kDa Rab5a, with a total weight of 126 kDa. The gel bands of this crosslinking product in both samples were cut out and analyzed by LC-MS/MS to identify crosslinks. The LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer connected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system. Peptides were separated using a linear gradient and ionized by an EASY-Spray source before being introduced into the mass spectrometer. The MS data was acquired in data-dependent mode with a three-second acquisition cycle, and the fragmentation spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50000. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a single repeat count and 60-second exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
The MS2 peak lists were generated from the raw mass spectrometric data files using the MSConvert module in ProteoWizard (version 3.0.11729). The default parameters were applied, except that Top MS/MS Peaks per 100 Da was set to 20. Precursor and fragment m/z values were recalibrated. Identification of crosslinked peptides was carried out using xiSEARCH software (https://www.rappsilberlab.org/software/xisearch) (PMID:31556486). For crosslinked Rab5a S84BrCO6K-VPS34 sample, the peak list was searched against the sequences and the reversed sequences of Rab5a and VPS34, and for crosslinked Rab5a S84BrCO6K-complex II sample, the peak list was searched against the sequences and the reversed sequences of Rab5a and all subunits of complex II. For both cases, BrCO6K (residue 84) was defined as a modified lysine residue in Rab5a sequence. The crosslinking specificity was defined between BrCO6K and any cysteine, lysine, histidine, aspartate and glutamate residues. The following parameters were applied for the search: MS accuracy = 4 ppm; MS2 accuracy = 10 ppm; enzyme = trypsin (with full tryptic specificity); allowed number of missed cleavages = 4; missing monoisotopic peak=2; fixed modifications = carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications = oxidation on methionine. All crosslink-spectrum matches (CSMs) that were autovalidated by xiSEARCH were further manually inspected and validated. No CSM against the reversed protein sequences (decoy matches) were autovalidated.

### Publication Abstract
The lipid phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate (PI3P) is a regulator of two fundamental but distinct cellular processes, endocytosis and autophagy, so its generation needs to be under precise temporal and spatial control. PI3P is generated by two complexes that both contain the lipid kinase VPS34: complex II on endosomes (VPS34/VPS15/Beclin 1/UVRAG), and complex I on autophagosomes (VPS34/VPS15/Beclin 1/ATG14L). The endosomal GTPase Rab5 binds complex II, but the mechanism of VPS34 activation by Rab5 has remained elusive, and no GTPase is known to bind complex I. Here we show that Rab5a-GTP recruits endocytic complex II to membranes and activates it by binding between the VPS34 C2 and VPS15 WD40 domains. Electron cryotomography of complex II on Rab5a-decorated vesicles shows that the VPS34 kinase domain is released from inhibition by VPS15 and hovers over the lipid bilayer, poised for catalysis. We also show that the GTPase Rab1a, which is known to be involved in autophagy, recruits and activates the autophagy-specific complex I, but not complex II. Both Rabs bind to the same VPS34 interface but in a manner unique for each. These findings reveal how VPS34 complexes are activated on membranes by specific Rab GTPases and how they are recruited to unique cellular locations.

### Keywords
Crosslinking/mass spectrometry, Unnatural amino acid mediated crosslinking, Vps34, Rab5a

### Affiliations
Technische Universität Berlin

### Submitter
Zhuo Chen 

### Lab Head
 Juri Rappsilber 
Technische Universität Berlin


