### Accession
PXD013487

### Title
Human cerebrospinal fluid analysis by HPLC-MS/MS

### Description
Cerebrospinal fluid samples of patients with Parkinson’s disease and healthy controls were used for this study. Part of the samples consisted of fractions that were separated by gel electrophoresis. After tryptic digestion, all samples were spiked with indexed retention time (iRT) peptides and were measured using a DDA mass spectrometry approach. This data is intended to be used to create a spectral library for DIA analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The CSF was collected by lumbar puncture. The protein concentration determined by amino acid analysis and proteins separated by gel electrophoresis. The resulting lanes were cut into single bands followed by an in-gel digestion with trypsin. Additionally, five pooled samples were digested using an in-solution approach. Indexed retention time peptides were spiked into each sample. All samples were measured with a data-dependent based mass spectrometric approach by a Q exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The .raw-Files created by Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were converted into .XML-Format by MSConvert by Proteowizard. A spectral library was generated by Spectronaut (Biognosys)

### Publication Abstract
Spectral libraries generated by data dependent acquisition (DDA) are a useful tool for the analysis of data created by data independent acquisition (DIA) in mass spectrometry. The quality of DIA analysis is dependent on the quality of the spectral library. We used cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of patients with Parkinson's disease and healthy controls to create a spectral library of human CSF proteome. To this date, there is no validated CSF biomarker for Parkinson's disease. This data set may therefore be valuable for the future analysis of CSF proteins. Part of the samples consisted of fractions that were separated by gel electrophoresis. After tryptic digestion, all samples were spiked with indexed retention time (iRT) peptides and were measured using a DDA mass spectrometry approach. The here provided data set can be used as a CSF-specific spectral library. Data files generated from the described workflow are hosted in the public repository ProteomeXchange under the identifier PXD013487.

### Keywords
Human, Spectral library, Parkinsons disease, Cerebrospinal fluid

### Affiliations
Medizinisches Proteom-Center

### Submitter
Lukas Schilde

### Lab Head
Dr Caroline May
Medizinisches Proteom-Center


