### Accession
PXD021693

### Title
Proximity labeling of Siglec-1 counter-receptors on activated regulatory T cells using soluble Siglec-1-HRP multimers

### Description
Siglec-1 is a macrophage lectin-like receptor that mediates sialic acid-dependent cellular interactions. It was shown previously to promote inflammation in autoimmune disease through suppressing the expansion of regulatory T cells (Tregs). We have investigated the molecular basis for Siglec-1 binding to these cells using in vitro-induced Tregs.  A proximity labelling and proteomics strategy were used to identify glycoproteins expressed by activated Tregs that may function as Siglec-1 counter-receptors.

### Sample Protocol
Activated regulatory T cells were induced from freshly prepared mouse CD4 T cells from spleen and lymph nodes. Mouse Siglec-1 human IgG Fc chimera was mixed with HRP conjugated anti-human IgG Fc polyclonal antibody. The resulting Siglec-1-HRP immuno-complex bound to the Tregs and Siglec-1 counter-receptors were biotinylated by proximity labeling. The biotinylated proteins were enriched on streptavidin beads where the glycans were removed by glycosidases. The proteins were then eluted from the streptavidin beads and processed using paramagnetic bead (SP3 bead) technology for label free proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
The proteomic raw data were imported to MaxQuant Version 1.6.2.3 to search protein FASTA files of mouse, human IgG Fc and HRP in Uniprot database

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Counter-receptor, Siglec-1, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, DD1 5EH, Scotland, United Kingdom
Imperial College London

### Submitter
Gang Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Paul R. Crocker
Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, DD1 5EH, Scotland, United Kingdom


### SDRF

