### Accession
PXD031637

### Title
Proteomic profiling identifies co-regulated expression of splicing factors as a characteristic feature of intravenous leiomyomatosis

### Description
In this work, we undertake a comparative mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis of intravenous leiomyoma (IVLM) and other smooth muscle tumours (uterine leiomyoma (uLM), soft tissue leiomyoma (stLM) and benign metastatic keiomyoma (BML).  By utilising sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra mass spectrometry (SWATH-MS), we quantified >2,400 proteins from FFPE samples and demonstrate that at the protein level, IVLM is characterised by the unique co-regulated expression of splicing factors that comprise the spliceosome.

### Sample Protocol
20µm tissue sections from each sample were deparaffinised by three washing steps in xylene, rehydrated by washes with decreasing ethanol gradient (100%, 96%, 70%) and then dried in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Scientific). The lysis buffer (0.1M Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 0.50% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 0.35% (w/v) sodium lauryl sulphate) was added at a ratio of 200ul/mg of dry tissue. The sample was homogenised using a LabGen700 blender (ColeParmer) with 3x 30s pulses and sonicated on ice for 10 min, then heated at 95⁰C for 1 h to reverse formalin crosslinks. Lysis was carried out by shaking at 750rpm at 80⁰C for 2 h. The sample was then centrifuged for 15min at 4°C at 14,000rpm and the supernatant collected. Protein concentration in the homogenate was measured by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Pierce) The extracted protein sample was digested using the Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol. Each sample was placed into an Amicon-Ultra 4 (Merck) centrifugal filter unit and detergents were removed by several washes with 8M urea. The concentrated sample was then transferred to Amicon-Ultra 0.5 (Merck) filters to be reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with 55mM iodoacetamide (IAA). The sample was washed with 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and digested with trypsin overnight (Promega, trypsin to starting protein ratio 1:100 µg). Peptides were collected by two successive centrifugations with 100mM ABC and desalted on C18 SepPak columns (Waters). The desalted peptide samples were then dried in a SpeedVac concentrator and stored at -80°C. Samples were resuspended in a buffer of 2% ACN/ 0.1% formic acid, spiked with iRT calibration mix (Biognosys AG) and analysed on an Agilent 1260 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies) coupled to a TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer with NanoSource III (AB SCIEX). 1 μg of peptides for each sample was loaded onto a 150μm×3 cm  self-made trap column packed with ReproSil C18AQ beads (10 μm, 120 Å particles, Dr. Maisch) and separated on a 75 μm×15 cm long analytical column with an integrated manually pulled tip packed with Reprosil Pur C18AQ beads (3 μm, 120 Å particles, Dr. Maisch). A linear gradient of 2–40% of Buffer B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA) in 120 min and a flow rate of 250 nl/min was used. Each sample was analyzed in 2 technical replicates. Full profile MS scans were acquired in the mass range of m/z 340-1400 in positive ion mode. 8 data points per elution peak were set up for calculation of 60 precursor isolation windows with a fixed size of 13 Da across the mass range of m/z 380–1100 with 1 Da overlap. MS/MS scans were acquired in the mass range of m/z 100-1500. Maximum filling time for MS scans was 250 ms and for MS/MS scans 100 ms, resulting in a cycle time of 3.1 s.

### Data Protocol
SWATH spectra were analysed using Spectronaut 15 (Biognosys AG) against a published pan-human library. FDR was restricted to 1% on PSM and protein level and only the top 6 peptides were used for quantification of a protein. Peak area of 2 to 6 fragment ions was used for peptide quantification, and the mean value of the peptides was used to quantify proteins. 2 peptides were set as minimum requirement for inclusion of a protein in the analysis. Protein quantities were log2 transformed and quantile normalised at sample level using proBatch package in R followed by protein median centering across the samples.

### Publication Abstract
Intravenous leiomyomatosis (IVLM) is a rare benign smooth muscle tumour that is characterised by intravenous growth in the uterine and pelvic veins. Previous DNA copy number and transcriptomic studies have shown that IVLM harbors unique genomic and transcriptomic alterations when compared to uterine leiomyoma (uLM), which may account for their distinct clinical behaviour. Here we undertake the first comparative proteomic analysis of IVLM and other smooth muscle tumours (comprising uLM, soft tissue leiomyoma and benign metastasizing leiomyoma) utilising data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry. We show that, at the protein level, IVLM is defined by the unique co-regulated expression of splicing factors. In particular, IVLM is enriched in two clusters composed of co-regulated proteins from the hnRNP, LSm, SR and Sm classes of the spliceosome complex. One of these clusters (Cluster 3) is associated with key biological processes including nascent protein translocation and cell signalling by small GTPases. Taken together, our study provides evidence of co-regulated expression of splicing factors in IVLM compared to other smooth muscle tumours, which suggests a possible role for alternative splicing in the pathogenesis of IVLM.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Tripletof 5600+, Ffpe tissue, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research
Molecular and Systems Oncology Team Institute of Cancer Research London, UK

### Submitter
Lukas Krasny

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Huang
Molecular and Systems Oncology Team Institute of Cancer Research London, UK


