### Accession
PXD033593

### Title
Dichlorvos-induced formation of isopeptide crosslinks between proteins in SH-SY5Y cells

### Description
Chlorpyrifos oxon catalyzes the crosslinking of proteins via an isopeptide bond between lysine and glutamic acid or aspartic acid in studies with purified proteins.  Our goal was to determine the crosslinking activity of the organophosphorus pesticide, dichlorvos. We developed a protocol for examining crosslinks in a complex protein mixture consisting of human SH-SY5Y cells exposed to 10 µM dichlorvos.  The steps in our protocol included immunopurification of crosslinked peptides by binding to anti-isopeptide antibody 81D1C2, stringent washing of the immobilized complex, release of bound peptides from Protein G agarose with 50% acetonitrile 1% formic acid, liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer, Protein Prospector searches of mass spectrometry data, and manual evaluation of candidate crosslinked dipeptides.  We report a low quantity of dichlorvos-induced KD and KE crosslinked proteins in human SH-SY5Y cells exposed to dichlorvos.  Cells not treated with dichlorvos had no detectable KD and KE crosslinked proteins.  Proteins in the crosslink were low abundance proteins.  In conclusion, we provide a protocol for testing complex protein mixtures for the presence of crosslinked proteins.  Our protocol could be useful for testing the association between neurodegenerative disease and exposure to organophosphorus pesticides.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture SH-SY5Y cells (ATCC CRL #2266) in T75 flasks were grown in DMEM/F12 GlutaMAX supplemented with 15% fetal bovine serum, penicillin, and streptomycin, in a humidified atmosphere of 5% carbon dioxide, at 37°C.  After 5 days, when cells were 70-80% confluent, cells were washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS).  Cells received 15 mL per flask of DMEM/F12 GlutaMAX (no serum) supplemented with 10 µM trans retinoic acid plus-or-minus 10 µM dichlorvos.  After 2 days at 37°C, cells were harvested.  Cell lysis and protein concentration Cells were harvested, washed with PBS, and lysed with 100 µL IP lysis buffer (25 mM TrisCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, 5% glycerol) containing Halt protease inhibitor cocktail.  Halt protease inhibitor cocktail contains AEBSF (4-(2-aminoethyl)-benzene sulfonyl fluoride), aprotinin, bestatin, E-64 (epoxysuccinyl-L-leucylamido (4-guandidino)butane), leupeptin and pepstatin A, that inhibit serine-proteases, cysteine proteases, aspartic acid proteases, and aminopeptidases.  Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 14,000xg for 20 min at 4˚C.  The protein concentration in 130 µL of supernatant was 13.2 mg/mL as determined by the bicinchoninic acid protein assay (Thermo Scientific #23228). Three cell lysates were prepared for the plus dichlorvos cells and two for the minus dichlorvos cells.  Each lysate was digested with trypsin, immunopurified with anti-isopeptide antibody 81D1C2, and subjected to liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry.  Trypsin digestion Cell lysate supernatant containing 200 µg protein (15 µL) was diluted with 185 µL of 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.  Proteins were denatured in a boiling water bath for 3 min.  The denatured proteins were digested with 4 µg trypsin (8 µL) at 37˚C for 16 h.  Trypsin was inactivated by heating the digest in a boiling water bath for 3 min.  Immunopurification of tryptic peptides linked through an isopeptide bond The heat-treated digest was incubated with 8 µg (8 µL) of anti-isopeptide monoclonal 81D1C2 at room temperature for 8 h to capture isopeptide crosslinked peptides.  Antibody-peptide complexes were immobilized by adding 0.1 mL of a 1:1 suspension of Protein G agarose beads, in PBS.  The sample was rotated overnight at room temperature. The beads and liquid were transferred to a 0.45 µm Durapore spin filter (Millipore UFC30HV00).  Use of the spin filter maximized recovery because beads were not lost in the wash steps.  Beads were washed with 0.4 mL of RIPA buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 140 mM NaCl) 5 times followed by 5 washes with water.  Salts and detergents were washed off with water.  The flow through in each wash step was discarded. The basket of washed beads was transferred to a new microfuge tube.  Bound peptides were released from the washed beads by incubating the basket of beads with 0.1 mL of 50% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid for 0.5 to 1 h at room temperature.  The released peptides were collected in the flow through by brief centrifugation.  The extraction step was repeated twice.  The combined flow through was dried by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
Batch Tag Web search for crosslinked peptide candidates The *.mgf files were subjected to a database search using the Batch Tag Web algorithm in Protein Prospector version 6.2.1.  Searches were performed on the Protein Prospector website https://prospector.ucsf.edu [prospector.ucsf.edu].  Database search parameters included: database—SwissProt 2021.0618; Species—Homo sapiens; enzyme—trypsin, missed cleavages—3; expect calc method—none; protein N term—unchecked; protein C-term—unchecked; uncleaved—checked; parent mass tolerance—20 ppm; fragment mass tolerance—30 ppm; precursor charge state—2, 3, 4, 5; parent ion conversion—monoisotopic; modification defect—0.0048 Da; instrument—ESI Q high res; link search type—user defined link; link aa—E, D, protein C-term K, protein N-term; mod comp ion—K, D, and E; mod range-- -18 to 3883 Da; bridge comp—H-2O-1; mod uncleaved—checked; msms mass peaks—80; msms max modifications—2; variable modification—oxidation methionine; fixed modification—none.  This database search created a list of peptides that Protein Prospector considered to be crosslinked.  The list of potentially crosslinked peptides, along with parameters indicating the level of confidence in the assignment, were displayed in Protein Prospector/Search Compare.  Search Compare screening of crosslinked peptide candidates To reduce the number of crosslink peptide candidates and aid in the identification of crosslinked peptides, the Search Compare list was screened using the Protein Prospector output parameters.  Parameters indicating a crosslinked peptide were taken to be: charge state 3, 4, 5; Score > 25; score difference > 1; % matched intensity > 45%; and at least 5 amino acids in each peptide.  Choice of these parameters is empirical and was based on experience.   Manual evaluation criteria that support the presence of crosslinked peptides For a crosslink candidate to be accepted as a crosslinked peptide there must be amino acid sequence support for both peptides and there must be at least one crosslink specific amino acid, defined by two crosslink specific ions.  Sequence support consists of the following features. 1) A series of non-crosslink specific masses in the MS/MS spectrum must correspond to an amino acid sequence from one or the other peptide in a crosslink candidate.  Suitable sequences include an N-terminal sequence, a C-terminal sequence, or an internal fragment.  Sequences must be at least 3 amino acids long (for example green AVNKV and blue KGV in Figure 2 panel A and green REDLLIN in Figure 3 upper panel). 2) At least one crosslink specific amino acid is essential.  A series of crosslink specific amino acids is frequently encountered. 3) Neutral loss of amino acids from the parent ion.  Neutral losses can be N terminal amino acids (ladder sequence) from one peptide, C terminal amino acids (peeling sequence) from one peptide, a combination of N-terminal and C-terminal amino acids from one peptide, or a mixture of N-terminal and C terminal amino acids from both peptides.  By definition, the amino acids that are neutral losses from the parent ion contain residues from both peptides and are therefore crosslink specific amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
Chlorpyrifos oxon catalyzes the crosslinking of proteins via an isopeptide bond between lysine and glutamic acid or aspartic acid in studies with purified proteins. Our goal was to determine the crosslinking activity of the organophosphorus pesticide, dichlorvos. We developed a protocol for examining crosslinks in a complex protein mixture consisting of human SH-SY5Y cells exposed to 10&#xa0;&#x3bc;M dichlorvos. The steps in our protocol included immunopurification of crosslinked peptides by binding to anti-isopeptide antibody 81D1C2, stringent washing of the immobilized complex, release of bound peptides from Protein G agarose with 50% acetonitrile 1% formic acid, liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer, Protein Prospector searches of mass spectrometry data, and manual evaluation of candidate crosslinked dipeptides. We report a low quantity of dichlorvos-induced KD and KE crosslinked proteins in human SH-SY5Y cells exposed to dichlorvos. Cells not treated with dichlorvos had no detectable KD and KE crosslinked proteins. Proteins in the crosslink were low abundance proteins. In conclusion, we provide a protocol for testing complex protein mixtures for the presence of crosslinked proteins. Our protocol could be useful for testing the association between neurodegenerative disease and exposure to organophosphorus pesticides.

### Keywords
Shsy5y human neuroblastoma cells, Dichlorvos, Crosslinks, Isopeptide, Protein prospector, Mass spectrometry, Manual evaluation, Crosslink

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center
Eppley Institute University of Nebraska Medical Center

### Submitter
Lawrence Schopfer

### Lab Head
Dr Oksana Lockridge
Eppley Institute University of Nebraska Medical Center


