### Accession
PXD024601

### Title
Systematic analysis of the impact of R-methylation on RBPs-RNA interactions

### Description
RNA binding proteins (RBPs) bind RNAs through specific RNA-binding domains, generating multi-molecular complexes known as ribonucleoproteins (RNPs). Various post-translational modifications (PTMs) have been described to regulate RBP structure, subcellular localization and interactions with other proteins or RNAs. Recent proteome-wide experiments showed that RBPs are the most representative group within the class of arginine (R)-methylated proteins; moreover, emerging evidence suggests that this modification plays a major role in the regulation of RBP-RNA interaction. Nevertheless, a systematic analysis of how changes in protein-R-methylation can affect globally RBPs-RNA interactions  has not yet been carried out. We describe here a quantitative proteomics approach to profile global changes of RBP-RNA interactions upon the modulation of protein arginine methyltransferases PRMT1 and PRMT5. By coupling the recently described Orthogonal Organic Phase Separation (OOPS) with SILAC labelling and pharmacological modulation of PRMT1 and PRMT5 enzyme, we describe the RNA-binding protein dynamics in dependence of protein-R-methylation.

### Sample Protocol
Two independent SILAC based-proteomics experiments were carried out with swapped SILAC channels,(Forward and Reverse experimenst),  bothfor the whole cell extracts and the interface fraction enrichment, corresponding to the RBPome. For each SILAC experiment  them, equal numbers of light-, medium- and heavy-labeled HeLa cells differentially treated with either DMSO or PRMT inhibitors  were mixed in a 1:1:1 ratio, pelleted, and washed twice with PBS. For the whole cell extract, cell pellets were lysed in urea lysis buffer [9 M urea, 20 mM Hepes (pH 8.0)] supplemented with 1x Roche cocktail of proteases and phosphatase inhibitors, sonicated, and cleared by ultracentrifugation (20,000g for 15 min at 15 °C). For the RBPome, the protein extract was already resuspended in Urea lysis buffer following OOPS strategy. For in-solution digestion, 200 µg of proteins was reduced by adding 4.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at 55 °C, alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide [10% (v/v) for 15 min at room temperature in the dark; Sigma-Aldrich], and digested overnight with sequencing-grade trypsin [1:100 (w/w); Promega] after a fourfold dilution in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution. Protease digestion was terminated by the addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to adjust pH < 3. Precipitated material w as removed by centrifugation for 15 min at 1780g at room temperature. Peptides were dried with a vacuum concentrator, re-suspended into 300 µL of 0.1% TFA and off line HpH fractionated by Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher scientific 84868). Eluted fractions were dried with vacuum concentrator and resuspended in an aqueous 0.1% TFA solution prior to analysis by LC-MS/MS. The mRNA pull-down was performed as described in (Castello et al., 2013). Briefly, SILAC-labelled HeLa cells were treated with DMSO or MS023 10µM or GSK591 5µM for 48h and then were harvested and UV-crosslinked at 254 nm at a dose of 40 J/m2 using a Stratalinker 2400 UV cross-linker (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA). A small aliquot (corresponding to about 10%) of sample from each treatment was saved for WB analysis while the remaining was mixed in 1:1:1 proportion with samples from the other conditions. Cell were then lysed and poly(A)-mRNAs were pulled-down for 3 times (each time using the flow-through from the previous pull-down) using dynabeads Oligo (dT) 25 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Polyadenylated mRNA-associated proteins were eluted from the beads following the manufacturer's instruction and subsequently processed by in-solution digestion prior to LC-MS/MS.  Peptide mixtures were analyzed by online nano-flow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) connected to a Q-Exactive instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nano-electrospray ion source. The nano-LC system was operated in one column set-up with a 50-cm analytical column (75-mm inner diameter, 350-mm outer diameter) packed with C18 resin (EasySpray PEPMAP RSLC C18 2M 50 cm x 75 M, Thermo Fisher Scientific) configuration. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA) and solvent B was 0.1% FA in 80% ACN. Samples were injected in an aqueous 0.1% TFA solution at a flow rate of 500 nL/min. Peptides were separated with a gradient of 5%-40% solvent B over 90 min followed by a gradient of 40%-60% for 10 min and 60%-80% over 5 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min in the EASY-nLC 1000 system. The Q-Exactive was operated in the data-dependent mode (DDA) to automatically switch between full scan MS and MSMS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300-1150) were analyzed in the Orbitrap detector with resolution R = 35,000 at m/z 400. The 15 most intense peptide ions with charge states 2+ were sequentially isolated to a target value of 3e6 and fragmented by Higher Energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy setting of 25%. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 20ms for full scans and 50ms for MSMS and the target value for MSMS was set to 1e6. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were analyzed with the integrated MaxQuant software v1.6.2.10 using the Andromeda search engine. In MaxQuant, the estimated FDR of all peptide identifications was set to a maximum of 1%. The main search was performed with a mass tolerance of 4.5 parts per million (ppm). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P. A maximum of three missed cleavages was permitted, and the minimum peptide length was fixed at seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The 2020_06 version of the UniProt Human sequence database (UP000005640) was used for peptide identification. To assign and quantify SILAC methyl peptides, all raw data were processed, indicating N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, mono-methyl-K/R, and di-methyl-K/R as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rbps, Prmts, Oops, R-methylation

### Affiliations
European Institute of Oncology IRCSS, Department of Experimental Oncology, Milan, Italy

### Submitter
Enrico Massignani

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Bonaldi
European Institute of Oncology IRCSS, Department of Experimental Oncology, Milan, Italy


