### Accession
PXD037265

### Title
Total Proteomics of SARS-CoV-2  variants

### Description
The ancestral SARS-CoV-2 strain that initiated the Covid-19 pandemic at the end of 2019 has rapidly mutated into multiple variants of concern with variable pathogenicity and increasing immune escape strategies. However, differences in host cellular antiviral responses upon infection with SARS-CoV-2 variants remains elusive. Leveraging whole cell proteomics, we determined host signalling pathways that are differentially modulated upon infection with the clinical isolates of the ancestral SARS-CoV-2 B.1 and the variants of concern Delta and Omicron BA.1. Our findings illustrate alterations in the global host proteome landscape upon infection with SARS-CoV-2 variants and the resulting host immune responses. Additionally, viral proteome kinetics reveal declining levels of viral protein expression during Omicron BA.1 infection when compared to ancestral B.1 and Delta variants, consistent with its reduced replication rates. Moreover, molecular assays reveal deferral activation of specific host antiviral signalling upon Omicron BA.1 and BA.2 infection. Our study provides an overview of host proteome profile of multiple SARS-CoV-2 variants and brings forth a better understanding of the instigation of key immune signalling pathways causative for the differential pathogenicity of SARS-CoV-2 variants.

### Sample Protocol
For whole cell proteomics, Calu-3 cells were mock-infected (time point 0) or infected with SARS-CoV-2 variants (MOI 1) B.1, Delta, Omicron BA.1 and collected at 6, 12, 24 hpi (Supplementary Table 1 and 2). Samples were collected in lysis buffer (100 mM TRIS, 2 % SDS, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM 2-CAA) and sample lysates for total assays were performed as described in. Briefly, sample lysates were methanol/chloroform precipitated and resuspended in buffer containing 8 M Urea and 100 mM Tris (PH.8). Protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay and 300 µg of protein per sample was used for digestion after dilution to 1M Urea and 100mM Tris. Samples were digested with 1:50 wt/wt LysC and 1:100 wt/wt Trypsin overnight at 37 °C. Digested samples were acidified with TFA and peptides were purified using SepPak (Waters Oasis Prime HLB 30mg columns). Dried peptide samples were resuspended in TMT labelling buffer containing 200 mM EPSS and 10 % acetonitrile and incubated at 37 °C for 10 min. Peptide concentration was determined by µBCA and 100 µg of protein per sample was used for TMT labelling (TMT- PRO16) by one-hour incubation at room temperature (RT). The reaction was quenched by addition of 1:10 (vol) 5 % hydroxylamine solution at RT for 15 min. TMT labelling quality was verified by mixing equimolar ratios of each TMT channel followed by single injection measurement by LC-MS/MS. Samples were pooled acidified using 20 % TFA and purified using SepPak (Waters Oasis Prime HLB 30mg columns). For whole cell proteome pooled peptides were used for High pH Reverse phase fractionation by Dionex Ultimate 3000 analytical HPLC. The eluted peptides were collected for 96 fractions and cross concatenated into 24 fractions and dried for processing.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 software (ThermoFisher Scientific). Default settings were used for selection of spectra. SequestHT node was opted for database searches against trypsin digested Homo sapiens reference proteome (Taxonomy ID 9606) downloaded from UniProt (12-March-2020; “One Sequence Per Gene”, 20531 entries) and SARS-CoV-2 (UniProt pre-release, 10-February-2020, Taxonomy ID 2697049; 14 entries). Precursor mass tolerance of 7 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da was set in the database search. Static modifications were set as TMTpro at the N terminus and carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues. The following dynamic modifications were taken into account: Oxidation (M), and Acetyl (Protein N terminus). False discovery rates were controlled using Percolator < 0.01 FDR at peptide and < 0.05 FDR at protein level. For whole cell proteomics quantification all PSMs were summed intensity normalized, followed by IRS normalization. Further data analysis was performed using PERSEUS 1.6.15.0 software. Significance was tested using unpaired two-sided students T. test and values were further FDR corrected. Values q < 0.05 were considered significant. Gene Ontology category enrichment analysis for proteomic dataset was performed using DAVID functional annotational tool (DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.8) and further analysis was performed using Enrichment map v3.2.1, OmicsVisualize v1.3.0 and STRING v1.5.1 application on Cytoscape v 3.7.1.

### Publication Abstract
The ancestral SARS-CoV-2 strain that initiated the Covid-19 pandemic at the end of 2019 has rapidly mutated into multiple variants of concern with variable pathogenicity and increasing immune escape strategies. However, differences in host cellular antiviral responses upon infection with SARS-CoV-2 variants remain elusive. Leveraging whole-cell proteomics, we determined host signaling pathways that are differentially modulated upon infection with the clinical isolates of the ancestral SARS-CoV-2 B.1 and the variants of concern Delta and Omicron BA.1. Our findings illustrate alterations in the global host proteome landscape upon infection with SARS-CoV-2 variants and the resulting host immune responses. Additionally, viral proteome kinetics reveal declining levels of viral protein expression during Omicron BA.1 infection when compared to ancestral B.1 and Delta variants, consistent with its reduced replication rates. Moreover, molecular assays reveal deferral activation of specific host antiviral signaling upon Omicron BA.1 and BA.2 infections. Our study provides an overview of host proteome profile of multiple SARS-CoV-2 variants and brings forth a better understanding of the instigation of key immune signaling pathways causative for the differential pathogenicity of SARS-CoV-2 variants.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Delta, Omicron

### Affiliations
Goethe University Frankfurt
Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany. Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Goethe University, 60596 Frankfurt am Main, Germany. Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Goethe University, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Münch

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany. Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Goethe University, 60596 Frankfurt am Main, Germany. Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Goethe University, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany


