### Accession
PXD029776

### Title
Proteomic analysis of macrophages derived from induced pluripotent stem cells

### Description
Macrophages (Mɸ) are highly heterogenous and versatile innate immune cells involved in homeostatic and immune responses. Activated Mɸ can exist in two extreme phenotypes: pro-inflammatory (M1) and anti-inflammatory (M2) Mɸ and these phenotypes can be recapitulated in vitro by using lipopolysaccharide (LPS) plus IFNγ and IL-4, respectively. In the recent years, human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) derived-Mɸ have gained major attention since they are functionally similar to human monocyte derived-Mɸ and are receptive to genome editing. In this study, we used quantitative proteomics to address whether the plasticity of iPSC-derived Mɸ (iPSDM) are similar to human monocyte derived Mɸ.  Our analyses suggest that iPSC Mɸ are promising tools to understand Mɸ biology since they exhibit similar polarisation profiles and functions as monocyte-derived Mɸ. We believe this comprehensive proteome data set will be a useful resource in the Mɸ field.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates each of differentially polarised iPSDM were processed for proteomic analyses. Cell pellets were solubilized in buffer containing 4% SDS, 10 mM TCEP and 50 mM TEAB. Cell lysates were boiled for 5 min and sonicated (15 cycles, 30 sec on/30 sec off). Protein concentrations were determined using MicroBCA assay kit and equal amounts of lysates were taken for further processing. The samples were alkylated using iodoacetamide (20 mM) and incubated at room temperature in dark for 1 h. To the alkylated lysates, SP3 beads were added to a final concentration of 0.5 µg/ µl of processing volume followed by an equal volume of ethanol (1:1 ethanol: cell lysate). The mixture was incubated at 24°C for 5 min at 1000 rpm and the tubes were placed on the magnetic rack until the beads have settled onto the tube wall. The unbound supernatant was discarded and the beads were rinsed thrice in 80% ethanol while on the magnetic rack. After removing all the residual ethanol, the beads were air-dried and resuspended in digestion solution (100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) containing LysC and trypsin (at 1:25 wt/wt of protein: proteases) and sonicated in a water bath. The bead mixture was incubated at 37°C at 1000 rpm overnight. After the protease digestion is complete, the bead mixture was centrifuged at 20,000g for 1 min. The tubes were placed on the magnetic rack and the supernatants were transferred to fresh tubes. The supernatants were then dried and suspended in 50 µl of 1% formic acid prior to analysis with LC-MS.   Analysis of peptide readout was performed on a Q Exactive™ plus, Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS (Thermo Scientific). LC buffers used are the following: buffer A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v). An equivalent 0f 0.75 µg of each sample were loaded at 10 μL/min onto a trapping column (100 μm × 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in 0.1% TFA. The trap column was washed for 3 min at the same flow rate with 0.1% TFA and then switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific, resolving C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å). The peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 2% buffer B to 5% buffer B in 5 min, then from 5% buffer B to 35% buffer B in 125 min, and then to 98% buffer B within 2 min. The column was then washed with 98% buffer B for 20 min and equilibrated for 17 min with 2% Buffer B The column was kept at a constant temperature of 50°C. Q-exactive plus was operated in data dependent positive ionization mode. The source voltage was set to 2.7 Kv and the capillary temperature was 250°C. A scan cycle comprised MS1 scan (m/z range from 350-1600, ion injection time of 20 ms, resolution 70 000 and automatic gain control (AGC) 1x106) acquired in profile mode, followed by 15 sequential dependent MS2 scans (resolution 17500) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC 2 x 105, maximum ion injection time 100 ms, isolation window of 1.4 m/z, fixed first mass of 100 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, intensity threshold 2 x 104, exclusion of unassigned, singly and >7 charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 45 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 27% of the normalized collision energy. Mass accuracy is checked before the start of samples analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometric data were processed, searched and quantified using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.5.1) (Cox and Mann, 2008) and the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both peptides and proteins. MaxQuant scored peptide identifications based on mass tolerance of 7 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. The enzyme specificity was set to LysC/Trypsin. Other parameters used were: fixed modifications-cysteine carbamidomethylation; variable modifications-deamidation, protein N-acetylation and methionine oxidation; missed cleavage-2; minimum peptide length was set to 7. The Andromeda search engine was used to match MS/MS data against the human Uniprot database. The “match between runs” feature was activated to transfer identification information to other LC-MS/MS runs based on ion masses and retention times. Minimum peptide ratio count was set to 2 and the relative quantitation between the peptides identified across different conditions was based on LFQ and iBAQ intensities. For data analysis, Perseus software version 1.6.7.0 was used. All the potential contaminants, reverse peptides and peptides “only identified by site” were removed from the data and the absolute copy number per cell and concentration were estimated by using Proteomic ruler (Wisniewski et al., 2014). Proteins (reproducible in all biological replicates) with log intensities of copy number per cell and concentrations greater than 2–fold and p-value greater than 0.05 were considered differentially regulated across polarised Mɸ. Gene Ontology (GO) over representation enrichment analysis was done by using WEB-based GEne SeT AnaLysis Toolket (Huang da et al., 2009).

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages (M<sub>&#x3a6;</sub>) are highly heterogenous and versatile innate immune cells involved in homeostatic and immune responses. Activated M<sub>&#x3a6;</sub> can exist in two extreme phenotypes: pro-inflammatory (M1) M<sub>&#x3a6;</sub> and anti-inflammatory (M2) M<sub>&#x3a6;</sub>. These phenotypes can be recapitulated in vitro by using ligands of toll-like receptors (TLRs) and cytokines such as IFN&#x3b3; and IL-4. In recent years, human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC)-derived M<sub>&#x3a6;</sub> have gained major attention, as they are functionally similar to human monocyte-derived M<sub>&#x3a6;</sub> and are receptive to genome editing. In this study, we polarised iPSC-derived M<sub>&#x3a6;</sub> to M1 or M2 and analysed their proteome and secretome profiles using quantitative proteomics. These comprehensive proteomic data sets provide new insights into functions of polarised M<sub>&#x3a6;</sub>.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Ipsc, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, DundeeDD1 5EH, UK.
School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee

### Submitter
Gavuthami Murugesan

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Paul Crocker
Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, DundeeDD1 5EH, UK.


