### Accession
PXD028585

### Title
Proteomic analysis of bovine mammary  epithelial cells after in vitro incubation with S.  agalactiae: potential biomarkers

### Description
Streptococcus agalactiae is one of the causative agents of subclinical mastitis, a common disease of dairy cows that  causes great economic losses in the industry worldwide. It is thought that pathology is mainly due to infammatory  damage of bovine mammary epithelial cells (bMECs); however, the mechanism by which S. agalactiae damages the  bMECs is not clear. The aim of this study was to evaluate the infammatory efects of S. agalactiae on bMECs and the  resulting changes in protein profles. The bMECs were incubated with S. agalactiae for diferent times and assayed  for cell viability by MTT assay, apoptosis by annexin V and propidium iodide dual staining, and morphological and  ultrastructural changes by scanning and transmission electron microscopy. Quantitative real-time PCR was used to  determine the efect of S. agalactiae on expression of mRNA of infammatory factors in bMECs and protein levels were  quantitated by liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry. Exposure to S. agalactiae signifcantly decreased the cell  viability and triggered apoptosis, as well as up-regulating TNF-α, IL-1β and IL-6 mRNA, and inhibiting IL-8 expression. S.  agalactiae also induced morphological and ultrastructural changes. Furthermore, we identifed 325 up-regulated and  704 down-regulated proteins in the treated vs control group. All signifcant diferentially expressed proteins (DSEPs)  were classifed into three major areas by function: biological processes, cellular components and molecular functions.  These diferentially expressed proteins included enzymes and proteins associated with various metabolic processes and cellular immunity. Pathway enrichment analysis showed that eight down-regulated signaling pathways were signifcantly enriched. Exposure to even subclinical levels of S. agalactiae can lead to infammation and bMEC damage. Our data suggest some possible molecular mechanisms for the harmful efects of subclinical mastitis in dairy cows.

### Sample Protocol
Te tryptic peptides were separated into fractions by high-pH reverse-phase HPLC on an Agilent 300ExtendC18 column (5  μm particle size, 4.6  mm ID, 250  mm length) using a chromatograph (Termo EASY-nLC 1000 Nano HPLC, USA) and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A). Samples were directly loaded onto a homemade reversed-phase analytical liquid chromatography column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.) connected to an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. Te gradient consisted of an increase from 6 to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and increasing to 80% in 3 min, then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant fow rate of 400 nL/min. Ten the peptides were subjected to a nanospray ionization source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) on a Q ExactiveTM Plus (Termo) coupled online to the UPLC.Te applied electrospray voltage was 2.0  kV. Te m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected by the OrbitraP at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using an NCE setting of 28 and the fragments were detected in the OrbitraP at a resolution of 17,500. Te data-dependen procedure alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with a 15.0  s dynamic exclusion. Te automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4 and the fxed frst mass was set at 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Te resulting MS/MS data were processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Te tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt Bos taurusdatabase concatenated with a reverse decoy database.  Gene Ontology (GO) software was used to analyze enrichment for signaling pathway proteins and for the putative protein functionality present in and between each sample (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Te Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) Pathway Annotation was used to determine the number of pathways detected in each sample and the number of proteins of each pathway represented in each sample (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomic analysis, Potential biomarkers, Bovine mammary epithelial cells, Streptococcus agalactiae

### Affiliations
18947009802
Beijing Key Laboratory for Dairy Cow Nutrition, Beijing University of Agriculture

### Submitter
Xin Li

### Lab Head
Dr Jinjin Tong
Beijing Key Laboratory for Dairy Cow Nutrition, Beijing University of Agriculture


