### Accession
PXD023314

### Title
TMT-based quantitative proteomic analysis reveals defense mechanism of wheat against the crown rot pathogen Fusarium pseudograminearum

### Description
Abstract Background: Fusarium crown rot is major disease in wheat. However, the wheat defense mechanisms against this disease remain poorly understood. Results: Using tandem mass tag (TMT) quantitative proteomics, we evaluated a disease-susceptible (UC1110) and a disease-tolerant (PI610750) wheat cultivar inoculated with Fusarium pseudograminearum WZ-8A. The morphological and physiological results showed that the average root diameter and malondialdehyde content in the roots of PI610750 decreased 3 days post-inoculation (dpi), while the average number of root tips increased. Root vigor was significantly increased in both cultivars, indicating that the morphological, physiological, and biochemical responses of the roots to disease differed between the two cultivars. TMT analysis showed that 366 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified by Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes enrichment in the two comparison groups, UC1110_3dpi/UC1110_0dpi (163) and PI610750_3dpi/PI610750_0dpi (203). It may be concluded that phenylpropanoid biosynthesis (8), secondary metabolite biosynthesis (12), linolenic acid metabolites (5), glutathione metabolism (8), plant hormone signal transduction (3), MAPK signaling pathway-plant (4), and photosynthesis (12) contributed to the defense mechanisms in wheat. Protein-protein interaction network analysis showed that the DEPs interacted in both sugar metabolism and photosynthesis pathways. Sixteen genes were validated by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction and were found to be consistent with the proteomics data. Conclusion: The results provided insight into the molecular mechanisms of the interaction between wheat and F. pseudograminearum.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction The sample was ground in liquid nitrogen into a cell powder and then transferred to a 5 mL centrifuge tube. After that, we added four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Zhejiang, China). We removed the remaining debris by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4°C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 20% trichloroacetic acid for 2 h at -20°C. After centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4°C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. We washed the remaining precipitate with cold acetone three times. The protein was re-dissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin digestion For digestion, we reduced the protein solution with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB until the urea concentration was less than 2 M. Finally, we added trypsin at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h digestion. LC-MS (MS/MS) analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and directly loaded onto a homemade reversed-phase analytical column (15 cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient increased from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, increased from 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbed to 80% in 3 min, and was then held at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system. The peptides were subjected to an NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in QExactiveTM Plus (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for a full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. We then selected peptides for MS/MS using NCE set at 28. The fragments were then detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. We conducted a data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. We set the automatic gain control at 5E4. The fixed first mass was set at 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database search We processed the resulting MS/MS data using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt Triticum aestivum database concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme allowing up to two missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set at 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set at 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as a variable modification. We adjusted the false discovery rate (FDR) to <1% and set the minimum score for peptides at >40. We selected TMT 6-plex for the protein quantification method. A global FDR was set at 0.01, and protein groups required at least two peptides to be considered for quantification. For protein quantification, we calculated the protein ratios as the median of only the unique peptides of the protein. All peptide ratios were normalized by the median protein ratio. We used cutoff values of more than 1.50-fold and less than 0.667-fold to identify up-regulated and down-regulated proteins using a t-test at P < 0.05. Bioinformatics analysis We derived the GO annotation proteome from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). We used the KEGG database to annotate protein pathways. We analyzed the protein–protein interactions for the identified proteins using the STRING v10.5 database (http://string-db.org) to determine their functions and pathways. We visualized the interaction network from STRING in Cytoscape (https://cytoscape.org/). We used a graph theoretical clustering algorithm, molecular complex detection (MCODE), to analyze densely connected regions. MCODE is part of the plug-in toolkit of the network analysis and visualization software Cytoscape.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Wheat (triticum aestivum l.); crown rot; fusarium pseudograminearum; tmt; differentially expressed proteins (deps); defense mechanism

### Affiliations
College of Agronomy, Henan Agricultural University/ National Engineering Research Center for Wheat/ Co-construction State Key Laboratory of Wheat and Maize Crop Science/ Collaborative Innovation Center of Henan Grain Crops

### Submitter
Dexian He

### Lab Head
Dr Dexian He
College of Agronomy, Henan Agricultural University/ National Engineering Research Center for Wheat/ Co-construction State Key Laboratory of Wheat and Maize Crop Science/ Collaborative Innovation Center of Henan Grain Crops


