### Accession
PXD018731

### Title
Quantitative proteome in tomato

### Description
In this study, we applied a quantitative proteomic approach to identify the proteins that differentially accumulate in the mutant of an E3 ubiquitin ligase gene. Proteins were isolated from fruits of wild-type and mutant tomato plants. A total of 288 proteins were finally screened as significantly altered in the mutant.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from tomato fruits using phenol extraction method as previously described. The isolated proteins were solubilized in protein buffer consisting of 20 mM HEPES, pH8.0, and 8 M urea, and the protein concentrations were determined by the method of Bradford. One hundred micrograms of proteins from each sample were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide, and digested with 10 ng μL-1 trypsin overnight. The tryptic peptides were desalted, and then labeled with the iTRAQ Reagents 4-plex Kit (Applied Biosystems) according to the manufacturer`s protocol. Two independent biological experiments were performed. The iTRAQ-labeled samples were combined and subjected to high-pH reversed-phase chromatography. Forty-eight fractions were collected and pooled into a total of six fractions. After reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid, 8 μL of the combined iTRAQ-labeled peptides were submitted for NanoLC–MS/MS analysis using a NanoLC system (NanoLC–2D Ultra Plus, Eksigent) equipped with a Triple TOF 5600 Plus mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification for iTRAQ experiments was performed using ProteinPilot™ 4.5 software (AB SCIEX). Database search was carried out against the Solanum lycopersicum protein database ITAG2.4_proteins_full_desc.fasta using the following parameters: (i) Sample Type: iTRAQ 4-plex (Peptide Labeled); (ii) Cysteine Alkylation: MMTS; (iii) Digestion: Trypsin; (iv) Instrument: TripleTOF 5600; (v) Species: None; (vi) Quantitate: Yes; (vii) Bias Correction: Yes; (viii) Background Correction: Yes; (ix) Search Effort: Thorough; (x) FDR Analysis: Yes. For iTRAQ quantitation, the peptide for quantification was automatically selected using the Pro GroupTM algorithm (AB SCIEX) to calculate the reporter peak area. A reverse database search strategy was used to estimate the global FDR for peptide identification. Only proteins identified below the 1% global FDR were ultimately exported for determining the meaningful cut-off value for the regulated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fruit, Tomato, Itraq

### Affiliations
Institute of Botany, the Chinese Academy of Sciences
Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Weihao Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Guozheng Qin
Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences


