### Accession
PXD019922

### Title
Mesoplasma florum proteome analysis by 2D LC-MS/MS

### Description
The near-minimal bacterium Mesoplasma florum constitutes an interesting model for synthetic genomics and systems biology studies due to its small genome, fast growth rate, and lack of pathogenic potential. However, some fundamental aspects of its biology remain largely unexplored. Here, we report a broad yet remarkably detailed characterization of M. florum by combining a wide variety of experimental approaches. More specifically, we investigated several physical and physiological aspects of this bacterium, and performed the first genome-wide analysis of its transcriptome and proteome using RNA sequencing techniques and two-dimensional liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. These analyses notably revealed the M. florum consensus promoter, a first experimental cartography of transcription units, as well as the transcription and expression levels of all annotated genes. We also converted gene transcription and expression levels into absolute molecular abundances using biomass quantification results, generating an unprecedented view of the M. florum cellular composition and functions. These characterization efforts will provide an experimental foundation for the development of a genome-scale metabolic model for M. florum and will guide future genome engineering endeavours in this simple organism.

### Sample Protocol
M. florum cells were washed twice, resuspended in 0.4% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, and lysed using a Bioruptor UCD-200 sonication system (Diagenode) set at high intensity and 4°C for 35 cycles (30 sec on, 30 sec off). Insoluble material was removed by centrifuging the cell lysate at 16,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C and the supernatant was recovered. Protein concentration was measured using the Bio-Rad Protein Assay (Bio-Rad) according to the manufacturer’s specifications. The cell lysate was then reduced at 65°C for 15 min with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in a final pH of 8.0, and then alkylated at RT in the dark for 30 min with 15 mM iodoacetamide. 10 mM of DTT was then added to quench residual iodoacetamide and proteins (~200 µg) were digested at 37°C overnight with shaking using 1 µg of trypsin per 30 µg of proteins. The resulting peptides were first separated using a polymeric reversed phase column (Phenomenex, 8E-S100-AGB) and eluted into eight fractions with increasing concentration of acetonitrile. ~ 5 µg of each fraction was then injected into a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX) equipped with a HALO ES-C18 column (0.5 x 150 mm). Peptides were separated with a 60 min gradient of the following two mobile phases: A) 0.2 % (v/v) formic acid and 3% (v/v) DMSO in water; B) 0.2 % (v/v) formic acid and 3% (v/v) DMSO in ethanol. Peptides were analyzed in information dependant acquisition (IDA) mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed using PeptideShaker software version 1.13.4 (Vaudel et al, 2015) configured to run three different search engines (MS-GF+, Comet, and OMSSA) via SearchGUI (version 3.1.0) (Barsnes & Vaudel, 2018). SearchGUI parameters were set as follows: maximum precursor charge, 5; maximum number of post-translational modification per peptide, 4; precursor ion m/z tolerance, 0.006 Da; fragment ion m/z tolerance, 0.1 Da; maximum missed cleavages, 2; minimal peptide length, 8; maximal peptide length, 30. Carbamidomethylation of C was set as a fixed modification. Acetylation of K, Acetylation of protein N-term, FormylMet of protein N-term, Oxidation of M, Phosphorylation of S, Phosphorylation of T, and Phosphorylation of Y were set as variable modifications. Protein search database was defined according to the published M. florum L1 RAST genome annotation (Baby et al, 2018). Peptide spectrum matches, peptides and proteins were validated using a 1% FDR cut-off.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mollicutes, Mesoplasma florum, 2d lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Université de Sherbrooke
Université de Sherbrooke, Département de biologie 2500 boul. de l'Université, Sherbrooke (Québec), Canada J1K 2R1

### Submitter
Sébastien Rodrigue

### Lab Head
Dr Sébastien Rodrigue
Université de Sherbrooke, Département de biologie 2500 boul. de l'Université, Sherbrooke (Québec), Canada J1K 2R1


