### Accession
PXD044286

### Title
Multi-level profiling unravels mitochondrial dysfunction in Myotonic Dystrophy type 2

### Description
Myotonic Dystrophy type 2 (DM2) is an autosomal-dominant, multisystemic disease with a core manifestation of proximal muscle weakness, muscle atrophy, myotonia, and myalgia. The disease-causing CCTG tetranucleotide expansion within the CNBP gene on chromosome 3 leads to an RNA-dominated spliceopathy which is currently untreatable. Research exploring the pathophysiological mechanisms in Myotonic Dystrophy Type 1 resulted in new insights into disease mechanisms and identified mitochondrial dysfunction as promising therapeutic target. It remains unclear whether similar mechanisms underlie DM2 and, if so, whether these might also serve as potential therapeutic targets.  In this cross-sectional study, we studied DM2 skeletal muscle biopsy specimens on proteomic, molecular, and morphological including ultrastructural levels in two separate patient cohorts consisting of 8 (explorative cohort) and 40 (confirmatory cohort) patients. Seven muscle biopsy specimens obtained from four female and three male DM2 patients underwent proteomic analysis. We performed immunoblotting of respiratory chain complexes, mitochondrial DNA copy number determination and long-range PCR (LR-PCR) to study mitochondrial deletions on six biopsies. Forty-eight biopsy samples were studied by light and electron microscopy.  Proteomic analysis revealed a downregulation of essential mitochondrial proteins, namely of subunits of respiratory chain complexes I, III, and IV (e.g. mt-CO1, mt-ND1, mt-CYB, NDUFB6) and associated translation factors (TACO1). Light microscopy showed an age-inappropriate amount of COX-deficient fibers in most biopsy specimens. Electron microscopy revealed widespread ultrastructural mitochondrial abnormalities including dysmorphic mitochondria with paracrystalline inclusions. Immunoblotting and LR-PCR did not reveal significant differences between patients and controls, while mtDNA-copy number measurement revealed a reduction of mtDNA-copy numbers in the patient group compared to controls.  This first multi-level study of DM2 unravels thus far undescribed functional and structural mitochondrial abnormalities. While the molecular link between the tetranucleotide expansion, and mitochondrial dysfunction needs to be further elucidated, these findings may provide an additional route for treatment strategies for DM2.

### Sample Protocol
Surgically removed muscle tissue was snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C. The total muscle was lysed in 200 µl of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8) buffer, 5 % SDS, and cOmplete ULTRA protease inhibitor (Roche) using the Bioruptor® (Diagenode) for 10 minutes (30 seconds on, 30 seconds off, 10 cycles) at 4 °C. To ensure complete lysis we conducted an additional sonication step using an ultra-sonic probe (30s, 1s/1s, amplitude 40%) followed by centrifugation at 4 °C and 20,000 g for 15 min. Protein concentration of the supernatant was determined by BCA assay according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Disulfide bonds were reduced by addition of 10 mM TCEP at 37 °C for 30 min, and free sulfhydryl bonds were alkylated with 15 mM IAA at room temperature (RT) in the dark for 30 min. 100 µg protein of each sample was used for proteolysis using the S-Trap protocol (Protifi) and using a protein to trypsin ratio of 20:1. The incubation time for trypsin was changed to 2 h at 37 °C. Proteolysis was stopped using FA to acidify the sample (pH < 3.0).  All proteolytic digests were checked for complete digestion after desalting by using monolithic column separation (PepSwift monolithic PS-DVB PL-CAP200-PM, Dionex) on an inert Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex, Germering, Germany) by direct injection of 1 μg sample. A binary gradient (solvent A: 0.1% TFA, solvent B: 0.08% TFA, 84% ACN) ranging from 5-12% B in 5 min and then from 12-50% B in 15 min at a flow rate of 2.2 μL/min and at 60 °C, was applied. UV traces were acquired at 214 nm .

### Data Protocol
For the analysis of the samples acquired with nano-LC-MS/MS in DIA mode, the data was introduced to the Spectronaut software (Biognosys) and analyzed with a library-based search. As library an in house created spectral library was used. Search and extraction settings were kept as standard (BGS Factory settings). As proteome background the human proteome data was selected from UniProt (www.uniprot.org) containing 20,374 entries. For reliable label-free quantification, only proteins identified with ≥ 2 unique peptides were considered for further analysis. Next, the average normalized abundances (obtained by Spectronaut) were calculated for each protein and were used to determine the ratios between patient muscle samples with their respective controls. Lastly, for each protein log2 transformation of the generated ratios and Student's t-test p-values were calculated using MS Excel.

### Publication Abstract
Myotonic dystrophy type 2 (DM2) is an autosomal-dominant multisystemic disease with a core manifestation of proximal muscle weakness, muscle atrophy, myotonia, and myalgia. The disease-causing CCTG tetranucleotide expansion within the CNBP gene on chromosome 3 leads to an RNA-dominated spliceopathy, which is currently untreatable. Research exploring the pathophysiological mechanisms in myotonic dystrophy type 1 has resulted in new insights into disease mechanisms and identified mitochondrial dysfunction as a promising therapeutic target. It remains unclear whether similar mechanisms underlie DM2 and, if so, whether these might also serve as potential therapeutic targets. In this cross-sectional study, we studied DM2 skeletal muscle biopsy specimens on proteomic, molecular, and morphological, including ultrastructural levels in two separate patient cohorts consisting of 8 (explorative cohort) and 40 (confirmatory cohort) patients. Seven muscle biopsy specimens from four female and three male DM2 patients underwent proteomic analysis and respiratory chain enzymology. We performed bulk RNA sequencing, immunoblotting of respiratory chain complexes, mitochondrial DNA copy number determination, and long-range PCR (LR-PCR) to study mitochondrial DNA deletions on six biopsies. Proteomic and transcriptomic analyses revealed a downregulation of essential mitochondrial proteins and their respective RNA transcripts, namely of subunits of respiratory chain complexes I, III, and IV (e.g., mt-CO1, mt-ND1, mt-CYB, NDUFB6) and associated translation factors (TACO1). Light microscopy showed mitochondrial abnormalities (e.g., an age-inappropriate amount of COX-deficient fibers, subsarcolemmal accumulation) in most biopsy specimens. Electron microscopy revealed widespread ultrastructural mitochondrial abnormalities, including dysmorphic mitochondria with paracrystalline inclusions. Immunofluorescence studies with co-localization of autophagy (p62, LC-3) and mitochondrial marker proteins (TOM20, COX-IV), as well as immunohistochemistry for mitophagy marker BNIP3 indicated impaired mitophagic flux. Immunoblotting and LR-PCR did not reveal significant differences between patients and controls. In contrast, mtDNA copy number measurement showed a reduction of mtDNA copy numbers in the patient group compared to controls. This first multi-level study of DM2 unravels thus far undescribed functional and structural mitochondrial abnormalities. However, the molecular link between the tetranucleotide expansion and mitochondrial dysfunction needs to be further elucidated.

### Keywords
Repeat expansion disease, Mitochondrial dysfunction, Proximal myotonic myopathy, Myotonic dystrophy type 2

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften
Proteomics, Biomarker, Leibniz-Institut für analytische Wissenschaften -ISAS - e.V., Germany

### Submitter
Andreas Hentschel

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Hentschel
Proteomics, Biomarker, Leibniz-Institut für analytische Wissenschaften -ISAS - e.V., Germany


