### Accession
PXD010993

### Title
SWATH proteomic profiling of prostate cancer cells identifies NUSAP1 as a biomarker of response to Galiellalactone

### Description
Galiellalactone (GL) is a fungal metabolite that presents antitumor and anti-inflammatory activities in vitro and in vivo. Previous studies have shown that GL targets NF-KB and STAT3 pathways and induces G2/M cell cycle arrest in androgen-insensitive prostate cancer cells. In this study, we show that GL-induced cell cycle arrest is independent of the NF-KB and STAT3 pathways in DU145 and PC-3 cells, and also that GL did not affect cell cycling in androgen-sensitive prostate cancer cell such as LNCaP and 22Rv1 cells. In addition, we showed confluence resistance to GL in DU145 cells. Using a SWATH proteomic approach we identified the down-regulation of Nucleolar and spindle associated protein 1 (NUSAP1) under DU145 confluence and in LNCaP cells. Also, the inhibition of NUSAP1 by siRNAs induced resistance to GL in DU145 cells, suggesting that NUSAP1 may be a target for GL and could be useful as biomarker for responsiveness of the antitumor activity of GL.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from cell cultures, with or without Galiellalactone treatment, were subjected to trypsin digestion. Biognosys iRT peptides were added to the peptide samples in order to calibrate retention times in the SWATH runs. Samples (1 ug) were analyzed by LC-MS/MS usign a data-independent SWATH acquisition using a Triple TOF 5600+ mass spectrometer (Sciex) coupled to a nLC system with a 2 h gradient (5% to 35% ACN 0.1% formic acid, 300 nL/min, column:Thermo Acclaim RSLC 25cm x 75 um). For building the spectral library, shotgun data-dependent acquisition runs (top 65 method) were performed on the same LC-MS equipment and gradient.

### Data Protocol
Proteins and peptides were identified from the DDA shotgun runs using ProteinPilot v5.0 and a concatenated target-reverse decoy SwissProt human protein database. A spectral library was built using the MS/MS ALL with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (v2.0) using the peptides that showed up in the database search with a confidence score above 99%. The library-assisted targeted data extraction of the fragment ion chromatogram traces from the SWATH runs, and the retention time calibration, was performed by PeakView (version 2.1) using the MS/MSALL with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (version 2.0), using a 1% FDR threshold and 50 ppm of tolerance. MarkerView (version 1.2.1, Sciex) was used for signal normalisation.

### Publication Abstract
Galiellalactone (GL) is a fungal metabolite that presents antitumor and antiinflammatory activities in vitro and in vivo. Previous studies have shown that GL targets NF-&#x3ba;B and STAT3 pathways and induces G<sub>2</sub>/M cell cycle arrest in androgen-insensitive prostate cancer cells. In this study, we show that GL-induced cell cycle arrest is independent of the NF-&#x3ba;B and STAT3 pathways in DU145 and PC-3 cells, and also that GL did not affect cell cycling in androgen-sensitive prostate cancer cells such as LNCaP and 22Rv1 cells. In addition, we showed confluence resistance to GL in DU145 cells. Using a SWATH proteomic approach we identified a down-regulation of Nucleolar and spindle associated protein 1 (NUSAP1) under DU145 confluence. Moreover the expression of NUSAP1 in LNCaP cells is low compared to DU145 cells. The inhibition of NUSAP1 by siRNAs induced resistance to GL in DU145 cells, suggesting that NUSAP1 may be a target for GL and could be useful as a biomarker for the responsiveness of the antitumor activity of GL. Altogether, our finding shed light to the potential of GL to be developed as a novel treatment of castration resistance prostate cancer.

### Keywords
Galiellalactone; cell cycle; prostate cancer; swath; nusap1

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit, IMIBIC, Cordoba, Spain
IMIBIC

### Submitter
Ignacio Ortea

### Lab Head
Dr Ignacio Ortea
Proteomics Unit, IMIBIC, Cordoba, Spain


