### Accession
PXD004060

### Title
Human omentum from patients with High-grade serous ovarian cancer

### Description
High-resolution multi-layered profiling of human ovarian cancer metastases.

### Sample Protocol
Enrichment for ECM-component: ECM component was enriched from frozen whole tissue sections (20 x 30 micron sections, approx. 40-50 mg of tissue) from frozen tissue as previously described {Naba, 2012 #12686}. Peptide preparation: ECM enriched pellets (from method above) were solubilised in 250 uL of an 8M Urea in 20mM HEPES (pH8) solution containing with Na3VO4 (100mM), NaF (0.5M), β-Glycerol Phosphate (1M), Na2H2P2O7 (0.25M). Samples were Vortex for 30s and leave on ice prior to sonication @ 50% intensity, 3 times for 15 seconds on ice. Centrifuge tissue lysate suspension at 20000g for 10 minutes at 5oC, and recover supernatant to a protein lo-bind tube. BCA assay for total protein was then performed and 80 ug of protein continued to the next step.  Volume of supernatant was adjusted to 200uL. Prior to trypsin digestion disulphide bridges were reduced by adding 500mM Dithiothreitol (DTT, in 10uL) to sample(s), votexing then incubation at room temp for 1 hr with with agitation in the dark. Free cysteines were then alkylated by adding 20uL of a 415mM iodacetamide solution to sample(s), then vortex and incubate at room temp for 1hr with agitation in the dark. The sample was then diluted 1 in 4 with 20mM HEPES. Removal of N-glycosylation was then achieved by addition of 1500U PNGaseF, vortex, and incubate at 37oC for 2 hours. 2uL of a 0.8 ug/uL LysC sample was then added, gently mixed then incubated at 37oC for 2 hours. Protein digestion was then  achieved with the use of immobilized Trypsin beads (40uL of beads per 250ug of protein). Incubate at 37oC for 16 hours with shaking. Peptides were then de-salted using Glygentop tips C-18. Briefly, samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (1% v/v). Samples were then centrifuged at 2000g, 5 min at 5oC and transfer supernatant to a 1.5ml eppendorf. Keep sample on ice. Wash Glygentops tip with 200μl of 100% ACN (LC-MS grade). Centrifuge at 1500g for 3mins  and discard the flow-through. Wash tip with 200μl of 99% @H2O (+ 1% ACN, 0.1% TFA). Centrifuge at 1500g for 3mins and discard the flow-through. Top up with a further 100μl and discard the flow-through. Load protein digest sample to the tip and centrifuge at 1500g for 3 mins. Discard the flow-through.Wash cartridge with 200μl of 99% @H2O (+ 1% ACN, 0.1% TFA). Centrifuge at 1500g for 3mins and discard the flow-through. Transfer the tip into a new 1.5 or 2 ml lo-bind eppendorf. Add 100μl of 70/30 ACN/H2O +0.1% FA. Centrifuge at 1500g for 3mins and keep the flow-through. Repeat this one more. Dry the samples and store at -20 oC. Re-constitute samples in re-con buffer prior to MS analysis.   Mass Spectrometry analysis and bioinformatics: Dried samples were dissolved in 0.1% TFA (0.5μg/μl) and run in a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a nanoflow ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography (UPLC, NanoAcquity, Waters). Peptides were separated using a 75 μm × 150 mm column (BEH130 C18, 1.7 μm Waters) using solvent A (0.1% FA in LC–MS grade water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in LC–MS grade ACN) as mobile phases. The UPLC settings consisted of a sample loading flow rate of 2 μL/min for 8 min followed by a gradient elution with starting with 5% of solvent B and ramping up to 35% over 220 min followed by a 10 min wash at 85% B and a 15 min equilibration step at 1% B. The flow rate for the sample run was 300 nL/min with an operating back pressure of about 3800 psi. Full scan survey spectra (m/z 375–1800) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30000 at m/z 400. A data dependent analysis (DDA) was employed in which the five most abundant multiply charged ions present in the survey spectrum were automatically mass-selected, fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy 35%) and analysed in the LTQ. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with the exclusion list restricted to 500 entries, exclusion duration of 30 s and mass window of 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
MASCOT search was used to generate a list of proteins. Peptide identification was by searchers against the SwissProt database (version 2013-2014) restricted to human entries using the Mascot search engine (v 2.5.0, Matrix Science, London, UK). The parameters included trypsin as digestion enzyme with up to two missed cleavages permitted, carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification and Pyro-glu (N-term), Oxidation (M) and Phospho (STY) as variable modifications. Datasets were searched with a mass tolerance of ±5 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of ±0.8 Da.  A MASCOT score cut-off of 50 was used to filter false-positive detection to a false discovery rate below 1%. PESCAL was used to obtain peak areas in extracted ion chromatograms of each identified peptide {Cutillas, 2007 #12753} and protein abundance determined by the ratio of the sum of peptides areas of a given protein to the sum of all peptide areas. This approach for global protein quantification absolute quantification, described in {Cutillas, 2007 #12753}, is similar to intensity based protein quantification (iBAQ) and {Schwanhausser, B., Busse, D., Li, N., Dittmar, G., Schuchhardt, J., Wolf, J., Chen, W. & Selbach, M. Global quantification of mammalian gene expression control. Nature 473, 337-342 (2011).), and total protein abundance (TPA) (Wisniewski, J.R., Ostasiewicz, P., Dus, K., Zielinska, D.F., Gnad, F. & Mann, M. Extensive quantitative remodeling of the proteome between normal colon tissue and adenocarcinoma. Molecular systems biology 8, 611 (2012).)

### Publication Abstract
We have profiled, for the first time, an evolving human metastatic microenvironment by measuring gene expression, matrisome proteomics, cytokine and chemokine levels, cellularity, extracellular matrix organization, and biomechanical properties, all on the same sample. Using biopsies of high-grade serous ovarian cancer metastases that ranged from minimal to extensive disease, we show how nonmalignant cell densities and cytokine networks evolve with disease progression. Multivariate integration of the different components allowed us to define, for the first time, gene and protein profiles that predict extent of disease and tissue stiffness, while also revealing the complexity and dynamic nature of matrisome remodeling during development of metastases. Although we studied a single metastatic site from one human malignancy, a pattern of expression of 22 matrisome genes distinguished patients with a shorter overall survival in ovarian and 12 other primary solid cancers, suggesting that there may be a common matrix response to human cancer.<b>Significance:</b> Conducting multilevel analysis with data integration on biopsies with a range of disease involvement identifies important features of the evolving tumor microenvironment. The data suggest that despite the large spectrum of genomic alterations, some human malignancies may have a common and potentially targetable matrix response that influences the course of disease. <i>Cancer Discov; 8(3); 304-19. &#xa9;2017 AACR.</i><i>This article is highlighted in the In This Issue feature, p. 253</i>.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Extracellular matrix, Matrisome, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Centre for Haemato Oncology
Reader In Cell Signalling & Proteomics, Barts Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Vinothini Rajeeve

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro R Cutillas
Reader In Cell Signalling & Proteomics, Barts Cancer Institute


