### Accession
PXD001265

### Title
Mining potential serum biomarkers for gastric adenocarcinoma using quantitative proteomics

### Description
Serum is a valuable body fluid to diagnose cancer as it can be accessed with minimal invasive techniques. Studying the cancer serum proteome provides valuable insights into the pathophysiology of tumor progression. Gastric adenocarcinoma is an aggressive cancer resulting in poor prognosis, mainly due to the lack of specific early diagnostic biomarkers. To this end, we used an iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic approach to identify differentially expressed proteins in the sera of patients diagnosed with gastric cancer. Our study resulted in the identification of 643 proteins in the serum, of which 48 proteins were found to be overexpressed and 11 proteins underexpressed in gastric cancer when compared with healthy controls. We used multiple reaction monitoring assays to validate the overexpression of potential biomarkers. This catalog of serum-based biomarkers will aid in diagnosis and prognosis of gastric cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Blood samples from 10 patients with gastric adenocarcinoma and 10 healthy volunteers were collected. Serum was obtained by centrifugation at 3000rpm. The protein concentrations of the samples were estimated using BCA assay. Protein amounts were normalized and equivalent amounts of protein from each of the patient and control serum samples were pooled separately. 10 mg protein each from both patients and control samples were depleted of the top fourteen abundant serum proteins using a Human 14 Multiple Affinity Removal Column (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA. Cat# 5188-6557; 4.6 x 50 mm). 160g protein each from tumor and normal serum was reduced, alkylated and digested using sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI. Cat#V5111) at 37 ºC overnight. Both the test and control samples were split into two equal halves. Control samples were labeled with iTRAQ reagents containing 114 and 115 reporter ions, while tumor samples were labeled with those containing 116 and 117 reporter ions. The labeling was quenched and samples were pooled into a single tube. The samples were fractionated by strong cation exchange chromatography using polysulfoethylA column (PolyLC, Columbia, MD. Cat#: 204SE0502; 200Ǻ, 5 μm, 200 x 4.6 mm) connected to Agilent 1200 infinity series HPLC system. 20 fractions were collected, vacuum dried and stored at-20ºC until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data (.raw) was searched against human RefSeq Build 50 protein sequence database (containing 33,833 entries along with common contaminants) using SequestHT and Mascot (version 2.2) search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany, version 1.3.0.339). The search criteria included methylthio modification of cysteine, iTRAQ 4-plex modification at peptide N-terminus and Lysine (K) as static modifications and oxidation of methionine as dynamic modification. For both the searches, precursor mass tolerance of 20ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.1 Da and two missed cleavage were considered. The data were searched against a decoy database to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide level. For protein identification, a cutoff of 1% FDR at the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) level was employed. Relative protein level between non-neoplastic and tumor was quantitated using Reporter Ions Quantifier node of Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Adenocarcinoma, Quantitative proteomics, Serum biomarkers, Gastric cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA.

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA.


