### Accession
PXD020196

### Title
Mouse lung N-glycoproteome, phosphoproteome, and M6P glycoproteome

### Description
This is the raw data and Byonic search results of mouse mouse lung  N-glycoproteome, phosphoproteome, and Mannose-6-Phosphate glycoproteome.

### Sample Protocol
The N-glycoproteome, phosphoproteome, and Mannose-6-Phosphate glycoproteome were enriched from mouse lung protein digests by 4 different methods: 1. Coventional Ti(IV)-IMAC enrichment method. 2. Coventional HILIC enrichment method. 3. HILIC-mode Ti(IV)-IMAC enirhcment without elution fractionation. 4. HILIC-mode Ti(IV)-IMAC enirhcment with acidic and basic elution fractionation.

### Data Protocol
The N-glycoproteome and Mannose-6-Phosphate glycoproteome data was searched by Byonic software and the mannose-6-phosphoate glycan database was added manually. The phosphoproteome data was searched by MaxQuant。

### Publication Abstract
Simultaneous enrichment and fractionation of diverse proteins/peptides possessing different post-translational modifications (PTMs) from the same biological samples is highly desirable to reduce sample consumption, avoid complicated sample processing, and enable studies of potential crosstalks between different PTMs. In this work, we report a new approach to enable simultaneous enrichment and separation of glycopeptides, phosphopeptides, and mannose-6-phosphate (M6P) glycopeptides by using a dual-functional Ti(IV)-IMAC material. Moreover, we also made the separation of neutral and sialyl glycopeptides and mono- and multi-phosphopeptides possible by performing different elution processes according to the differences in their electrostatic or hydrophilic properties. These separations are effective and efficient to eliminate the signal suppression from neutral glycopeptides for sialyl glycopeptide detection, allowing separation of mono-phosphopeptides from multi-phosphopeptides, as well as detection of M6P glycopeptides that are free from the abovementioned modifications. This new strategy significantly improves the coverage and identification numbers of glycopeptides, phosphopeptides, and M6P glycopeptides by 1.9, 2.3, and 4.3-fold compared with the conventional method, respectively. This is the first report on simultaneous enrichment and separation of neutral and sialyl glycopeptides, mono- and multi-phosphopeptides, and M6P glycopeptides via dual-functional Ti(IV)- IMAC, revealing novel insights into potential crosstalk among these important PTMs.

### Keywords
Mannose-6-phosphate glycosylation, Glycoproteome, Mouse, Lung, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin-Madison
School of Pharmacy, Uninvesity of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Junfeng Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
School of Pharmacy, Uninvesity of Wisconsin-Madison


