### Accession
PXD023825

### Title
Ganaspis hookeri (strain GhFl, formerly 'G1') venom gland proteome

### Description
The purpose of this project was to identify venom proteins from the venom gland of Ganaspis hookeri (strain GhFl, formerly 'G1'), a  parasitoid wasp species that infects fruit flies in the genus Drosophila.

### Sample Protocol
We first sequenced the wasp transcriptome to establish a database for comparison with the mass spec data. We then dissected venom glands from approximately 50 female wasps into PBS supplemented with 0.5 mM EDTA and Complete Protease Inhibitor Mixture (Roche) on ice. Venom glands were homogenized under nonlysing conditions, and gland cells were pelleted by centrifugation. Venom proteins from the supernatant were run on SDS/PAGE, separated into eight molecular weight fractions, and trypsinized for proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptide digests were subjected to Nano LC-MS(MS)2. Briefly, peptides were injected onto a Surveyor HPLC plus machine (Thermo) run in-line with a Thermo LTQ XL ion trap mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray source. XCalibur RAW files outputted from the mass spectrometer were collected in profile mode, and centroided and converted to MzXML using ReAdW v. 3.5.1 (Institute for Systems Biology). Mgf files were then created using MzXML2Search (included in TPP v. 3.5, Institute for Systems Biology) for all scans with a precursor mass between 400 Da and 20,000 Da. The peptide sequence data were then queried against the database containing translated wasp abdomen transcripts along with common contaminant sequences such as digestion enzymes and human keratin, using SEQUEST (v.27 rev 12). The SEQUEST results files were first combined for each of the eight fractions per lane, then filtered using peptide and protein probability, grouped by top scoring protein ID, and quantified by normalized spectral counts (label free) using ProteoIQ (NuSep).

### Publication Abstract
Because parasite virulence factors target host immune responses, identification and functional characterization of these factors can provide insight into poorly understood host immune mechanisms. The fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster is a model system for understanding humoral innate immunity, but Drosophila cellular innate immune responses remain incompletely characterized. Fruit flies are regularly infected by parasitoid wasps in nature and, following infection, flies mount a cellular immune response culminating in the cellular encapsulation of the wasp egg. The mechanistic basis of this response is largely unknown, but wasps use a mixture of virulence proteins derived from the venom gland to suppress cellular encapsulation. To gain insight into the mechanisms underlying wasp virulence and fly cellular immunity, we used a joint transcriptomic/proteomic approach to identify venom genes from Ganaspis sp.1 (G1), a previously uncharacterized Drosophila parasitoid species, and found that G1 venom contains a highly abundant sarco/endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase (SERCA) pump. Accordingly, we found that fly immune cells termed plasmatocytes normally undergo a cytoplasmic calcium burst following infection, and that this calcium burst is required for activation of the cellular immune response. We further found that the plasmatocyte calcium burst is suppressed by G1 venom in a SERCA-dependent manner, leading to the failure of plasmatocytes to become activated and migrate toward G1 eggs. Finally, by genetically manipulating plasmatocyte calcium levels, we were able to alter fly immune success against G1 and other parasitoid species. Our characterization of parasitoid wasp venom proteins led us to identify plasmatocyte cytoplasmic calcium bursts as an important aspect of fly cellular immunity.

### Keywords
Parasitoid wasp drosophila ganaspis venom

### Affiliations
University of Arizona, Entomology Department
University of Arizona, Department of Entomology

### Submitter
Todd Schlenke

### Lab Head
Dr Todd A Schlenke
University of Arizona, Department of Entomology


