### Accession
PXD013691

### Title
Molecular signatures of neuroinflammation induced by α-synuclein aggregates-A multi-proteomics approach (Mouse Arm)

### Description
Alpha-synuclein aggregates (αSynAgg) are pathological hallmarks of Parkinson’s disease (PD) that induce microglial activation and immune-mediated neurotoxicity, although the molecular mechanisms of αSynAgg-induced immune activation are poorly defined. We used mass spectrometry to define proteomic changes induced by αSynAgg using in-vitro mouse microglia and an in-vivo fly (Drosophila melanogaster) model with neuron-specific αSyn overexpression. In mouse microglia, αSynAgg induced robust pro-inflammatory activation (increased expression of 864 genes including Irg1, Ifit1 and Pyhin) and increased nuclear proteins involved in RNA synthesis, splicing and anti-viral defense mechanisms. Conversely, αSynAgg decreased expression of 530 proteins (including Cdc123, Sod1 and Grn), which were predominantly cytosolic and involved in antigen presentation as well as metabolic, proteosomal and lysosomal mechanisms. Pathway analyses and confirmatory in -vitro studies suggested that αSynAgg partly mediates its effects via Stat3 activation. 26 proteins differentially-expressed by αSynAgg were also identified as PD risk genes in genome-wide association studies (upregulated: Brd2, Clk1, Siglec1; down-regulated: Memo1, Arhgap18, Fyn and PGgrn/Grn). We then validated progranulin (PGrn/Grn) as a lysosomal PD-associated protein that is decreased in striatal and nigral microglia in post-mortem PD brain compared to non-disease controls, congruent with our in -vitro findings.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse microglial cell (MMC) line was a kind gift from Dr. Golenbock from UMass [30]. MMC were grown in 10% fetal bovine serum, DMEM, 1% penicillin/ streptomycin and 1% glutamate. Treatments were performed in 2% FBS-containing media. Cells were treated with 1 µM αSynAgg for 24 h [31]. The MMC line was chosen over other microglial cell lines for proteomic studies due to its similarity with primary microglia as shown in our previous publications [32].  Samples were prepared essentially as described with slight modifications [36]. MMCs were grown to 75% confluence and then exposed to αSynAgg(1 µM) for 24 h and then harvested. Each cell pellet was individually homogenized in 300 μL of urea lysis buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NaHPO4, pH 8.5), including 3 μL (100× stock) HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Pierce) [20][36]. After lysis for 30 min at 4 °C, protein supernatants were transferred to 1.5-mL Eppendorf tubes and sonicated (Sonic Dismembrator, Fisher Scientific) three times for 5 s with 15 s intervals of rest at 30% amplitude to disrupt nucleic acids and subsequently vortexed. Protein concentration was determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) method, and samples were frozen in aliquots at −80 °C. Protein homogenates (100 μg) were diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of less than 2 M urea and then treated with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 25 °C for 30 min, followed by 5 mM iodoacetimide (IAA) at 25 °C for 30 min in the dark. Protein was digested with 1:100 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) at 25 °C for 2 h and further digested overnight with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega) at 25 °C. Resulting peptides were desalted with a Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters) and dried under vacuum. For LC-MS/MS analysis, derived peptides were re-suspended in 100 μL of loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 0.03% trifluoroacetic acid, 1% acetonitrile). Peptide mixtures (2 μL) were separated on a self-packed C18 (1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch, Germany) fused silica column (25 cm × 75 μM internal diameter (ID); New Objective, Woburn, MA) by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCNano and monitored on a Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Elution was performed over a 2 h gradient at a rate of 400 nL/min with buffer B ranging from 3 to 80% (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water, buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The mass spectrometer cycle was programmed to collect at the top speed for 3-s cycles. The MS scans (400–1600 m/z range; 200,000 AGC; 50 ms maximum ion time) were collected at a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z in profile mode and the HCD MS/MS spectra (0.7 m/z isolation width; 30% collision energy; 10,000 AGC target; 35 ms maximum ion time) were detected in the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previously sequenced precursor ions for 20 s within a 10 ppm window. Precursor ions with +1 and +8 or higher charge states were excluded from sequencing.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant v1.6.3.4 with Thermo Foundation  for RAW file reading capability, as previously published [20]. The search engine Andromeda was used to build and search a concatenated target-decoy IPI/Uniprot mouse reference (downloaded Aug 14, 2015, with human alpha synuclein sequence added, Uniprot ID P37840). Protein methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106 Da) were variable modifications (up to five allowed per peptide); cysteine was assigned a fixed carbamidomethyl modification (+57.0215 Da). Only fully tryptic peptides were considered with up to two miscleavages in the database search. A precursor mass tolerance of ±20 ppm was applied prior to mass accuracy calibration and ±4.5 ppm after internal MaxQuant calibration. Other search settings included a maximum peptide mass of 6000 Da, a minimum peptide length of six residues, and 0.05 Da Tolerance for orbitrap (FTMS) HCD MS/MS scans. Co-fragmented peptide search was enabled to deconvolute multiplex spectra. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectral matches, proteins, and site decoy fraction were all set to 1%. Quantification settings were as follows: re-quantify with a second peak finding attempt after protein identification has completed; match full MS1 peaks between runs; a 0.7-min retention time match window was used after an alignment function was found with a 20 min RT search space. The label-free quantitation (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant [21, 22] was used for protein quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Parkinsons disease, Snca, Alpha synuclein aggregates, Microglia

### Affiliations
Emory University
Department of Neurology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, US

### Submitter
Eric Dammer

### Lab Head
Dr Srikant Rangaraju
Department of Neurology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, US


