### Accession
PXD040308

### Title
Proteomic profiling of centrosomes across multiple cell and tissue types by a new affinity capture method

### Description
Centrosomes are small cytoplasmic organelles that play fundamental roles in a range of cellular processes. Nearly all vertebrate cell types contain centrosomes, but whether centrosome composition and function differ between cell types, tissues and pathologies remains an outstanding question. Until now, probing centrosome composition has relied on proteomic profiling of centrosomes obtained by consecutive sucrose density gradient centrifugations, requiring up to one billion cells, thus rendering studies with multiple conditions cumbersome. Here we describe centrosome affinity capture (CAPture)-mass spectrometry (MS), a method that achieves high-coverage proteomes from 20-30 million cells. Utilising a biotin-labelled peptide derived from the CCDC61 protein, CAPture isolates intact centrosomes in a manner dependent on Ninein, a conserved centrosome component. CAPture-MS performs well across several untransformed and primary cell lines, thereby enabling comparisons of high-resolution centrosome proteomes. Using distal appendage proteins as an example, we demonstrate the utility of CAPture-MS for dissecting hierarchical interactions within the centrosome.  Overall CAPture-MS represents a powerful tool to unveil temporal, regulatory, cell type- and tissue-specific changes in centrosome proteomes in health and disease.

### Sample Protocol
Streptadividin beads with CAPture peptide and centrosomes or without (bead-only) were trypsinised with 100 ng of trypsin in 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (AMBIC, Sigma) for overnight at 37 °C. Trypsin was then added for a further 4 hours at 37 °C. The supernatant was then collected and the reaction stopped with 0.5 % (v/v) formic acid (FA). Peptides were desalted using C18 cartridges (Biochrom) that were conditioned and equilibrated with 50 % acetonitrile (Fisher Scientific) and 0.1 % FA, respectively. Peptide-loaded cartridges were washed with 0.1 % FA and eluted with 60 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid. Dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.1 % FA acid, for further LC–MS/MS analysis. For CEP83-KO experiments, streptadividin beads with CAPture peptide and centrosomes were reduced with 5 mM DTT at 56 °C for 30 min and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Samples were incubated with Lyc_C protease (Promega) for 4 h at 37°C, followed by overnight digestion with trypsin (Promega). Supernatants were transferred to fresh tubes, beads were washed once with 50% acetonitrile/ 0.1% TFA and washes were combined with the corresponding supernatants. Samples were then acidified, speed vac (Savant) to remove acetonitrile and desalted using home-made C18 stage tips (3M Empore) packed with oligo R3 (Thermo Scientific) resin. Bound peptides were eluted with 30-80% acetonitrile in 0.5% FA and partially dried down in Speed Vac.  For RPE1 cells, streptadividin beads with CAPture peptide and centrosomes were suspended in 4x LDS sample buffer (ThermoFisher) and taken for S-TRAPTM digestion, as per the instructions (PROTIFI, NY, USA). Eluted peptides were concentrated in the speedvac concentrator and reconstituted in 0.1% FA.   Sucrose fractionated pellets were resuspended in 20 µl lysis buffer containing 100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma), 0.1 % SDS (Sigma) followed by heating at 90 °C for 5 minutes and probe sonication (Active motif). Complete samples were reduced with 2 µl 50 mM tris-2-caraboxymethyl phosphine (TCEP, Sigma) for 1 hour at 60 °C followed by alkylation with 1 l 200 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, Sigma) for 10 minutes at RT. Protein samples were then digested overnight at 37 °C using trypsin (Thermo Scientific) solution at ratio protein:trypsin ~ 1:30. The next day, protein digest was acidified with FA to a final concentration of 0.5 % (v/v). The peptides were desalted using C18 cartridges (Biochrom) as mentioned above. Dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA acid, for further LC–MS/MS analysis.Unless specified all experiments were run on either a QExactive or QExactiveHF mass spectrometer both coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Dionex). In both cases the following settings were used. Dried peptide samples were reconstituted in 25 µl of 0.1 % (v/v) FA, and 5 µl injected into the LC column for analysis (for sucrose sedimentation samples, each dried peptide sample was reconstituted in 10 μl of 0.1 % (v/v) FA, and 10 μl infected into the LC column for analysis). Peptides were loaded and separated on a reverse-phase trap column (length: 2 cm, inner diameter; 100 μm) and analytical column (length: 25 cm, inner diameter: 75 µm), respectively with 5–45 % acetonitrile gradient in 0.1 % FA at 300 nl/min flow rate. In each data collection cycle, one full MS scan (400–1,600 m/z) was acquired in the Orbitrap (60K resolution, automatic gain control (AGC) setting of 3x106 and Maximum Injection Time (MIT) of 100 ms). The most abundant ions with a top 10 setting were selected for fragmentation by High-energy Collision induced dissociation (HCD). HCD was performed with a collision energy of 28 %, an AGC setting of 2x104, an isolation window of 2.0 Da, a MIT of 100 ms. Previously analysed precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
HCD tandem mass spectra were processed with SequestHT on Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software. The node for SequestHT included the following parameters: Precursor Mass Tolerance 20ppm, Maximum Missed Cleavages sites 2, Fragment Mass Tolerance 0.02Da and Dynamic Modifications were Oxidation of M (+15.995 Da) and Deamidation of N, Q (+0.984 Da). The Minora Feature Detector node was used for label-free quantification and the consensus workflow included the Feature Mapper and the Precursor Ion Quantifier nodes using intensity for the precursor quantification. For peptide confidence, 1% FDR was applied and peptides uniquely matched to a protein were used for quantification. Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific) was used for the processing of HCD tandem mass spectra. Spectra were searched against the Uniprot Homo sapiens or Mus musculus FASTA database using SequestHT. All searches were performed with a static modification of Methylthio at Cysteines (+45.988 Da). Methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) and Deamidation on Asparagine and Glutamine (+0.984 Da) were included as dynamic modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Centrosomes are the major microtubule-organizing centers in animals and play fundamental roles in many cellular processes. Understanding how their composition varies across diverse cell types and how it is altered in disease are major unresolved questions, yet currently available centrosome isolation protocols are cumbersome and time-consuming, and they lack scalability. Here, we report the development of centrosome affinity capture (CAPture)-mass spectrometry (MS), a powerful one-step purification method to obtain high-resolution centrosome proteomes from mammalian cells. Utilizing a synthetic peptide derived from CCDC61 protein, CAPture specifically isolates intact centrosomes. Importantly, as a bead-based affinity method, it enables rapid sample processing and multiplexing unlike conventional approaches. Our study demonstrates the power of CAPture-MS to elucidate cell-type-dependent heterogeneity in centrosome composition, dissect hierarchical interactions, and identify previously unknown centrosome components. Overall, CAPture-MS represents a transformative tool to unveil temporal, regulatory, cell-type- and tissue-specific changes in centrosome proteomes in health and disease.

### Keywords
Capture-ms, Proteomics, Centrosomes, Capture peptide

### Affiliations
Senior Scientific Assistant
1. CRUK Cambridge Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom 2.Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, UK

### Submitter
Evangelia Papachristou

### Lab Head
Dr Fanni Gergely
1. CRUK Cambridge Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom 2.Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, UK


