### Accession
PXD006340

### Title
Characterization of the venom proteome of the emerald jewel wasp, Ampulex compressa

### Description
Characterization of the venom proteome of the emerald jewel wasp, Ampulex compressa

### Sample Protocol
Venom was milked from healthy adult female A. compressa. In brief: CO2 anesthetized wasps were placed into a modified P1000 tip with the abdomen protruding from the tip, covered with parafilm, and allowed to recover. Wasps were aggravated to sting through the parafilm and venom drops were absorbed into 5 µl or deionized water, frozen on dry ice, and stored at -80°C until processed. Proteins were extracted from ten combined venom sacs or venom glands in extraction buffer (50 mM HEPES, 250 mM NaCl, 1X Protease Arrest (G-Biosciences) with 0.5 mM EDTA and 0.1% Nonidet P-40) by gentle homogenization with a pestle. Tissue homogenate was centrifuged at 10,000 rcf for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was purified by C18 SepPak (Waters) and concentrated by SpeedVac (Savant). For analysis by mass spectrometry, 1000 sting equivalents of SepPak-purified milked venom protein were split into two samples: one of which was trypsinized before analysis and the other was to be analyzed without protease treatment.

### Data Protocol
All raw MS data were processed with Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Fishers, San Jose, CA) to generate .mgf files that were used in Mascot searches (version 2.5) against a custom ORF database. All searches were performed with the following settings: peptide mass tolerance: ± 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: ± 0.3 Da, Variable modifications: Acetyl (N-term), Amidated (C-term), Formyl (N-term), Gln-> pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Glu-> pyro-Glu (N-term E), Oxidation (M), with 1 max missed trypsin cleavages. Spectra were accepted for the venom samples if the MASCOT score of the identified protein was greater than the MASCOT score that corresponds to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% against a reversed-decoy database.

### Publication Abstract
The parasitoid emerald jewel wasp <i>Ampulex compressa</i> induces a compliant state of hypokinesia in its host, the American cockroach <i>Periplaneta americana</i> through direct envenomation of the central nervous system (CNS). To elucidate the biochemical strategy underlying venom-induced hypokinesia, we subjected the venom apparatus and milked venom to RNAseq and proteomics analyses to construct a comprehensive "venome," consisting of 264 proteins. Abundant in the venome are enzymes endogenous to the host brain, including M13 family metalloproteases, phospholipases, adenosine deaminase, hyaluronidase, and neuropeptide precursors. The amphipathic, alpha-helical ampulexins are among the most abundant venom components. Also prominent are members of the Toll/NF-&#x3ba;B signaling pathway, including proteases Persephone, Snake, Easter, and the Toll receptor ligand Sp&#xe4;tzle. We find evidence that venom components are processed following envenomation. The acidic (pH&#x223c;4) venom contains unprocessed neuropeptide tachykinin and corazonin precursors and is conspicuously devoid of the corresponding processed, biologically active peptides. Neutralization of venom leads to appearance of mature tachykinin and corazonin, suggesting that the wasp employs precursors as a prolonged time-release strategy within the host brain post-envenomation. Injection of fully processed tachykinin into host cephalic ganglia elicits short-term hypokinesia. Ion channel modifiers and cytolytic toxins are absent in <i>A. compressa</i> venom, which appears to hijack control of the host brain by introducing a "storm" of its own neurochemicals. Our findings deepen understanding of the chemical warfare underlying host-parasitoid interactions and in particular neuromodulatory mechanisms that enable manipulation of host behavior to suit the nutritional needs of opportunistic parasitoid progeny.

### Keywords
Ampulex compressa venom venome

### Affiliations
UC Riverside
Professor of Entomology and Neuroscience

### Submitter
Ryan Arvidson

### Lab Head
Dr Michael E. Adams
Professor of Entomology and Neuroscience


