### Accession
PXD009365

### Title
TMT-based Quantitative Proteomics of Developing Sea Buckthorn (Hippophae rhamnoides) Berries Reveals Candidate Proteins Related to Lipid Metabolism

### Description
Sea buckthorn (Hippophae rhamnoides L.) is an economically important shrub or small tree indigenous to Asia and Europe. The most well-recognized medicinal and nutraceutical products derive from the berry oil, which is rich in essential fatty acids, monounsaturated palmitoleic acid (16:1 ω-7), linoleic (18:2 ω-6) and alpha-linolenic (18:3 ω-3) acids. In this study, tandem mass tags (TMT) MS/MS were used to investigate protein profiles of lipid metabolism in sea buckthorn berries harvested at 30, 50 and 70 days after flowering. A total of 8626 proteins were detected and 6170 of these were quantified. Further analyses of the proteins and their pathways revealed initiation of fatty acid accumulation throughout the whole berry development. Activity of most of key enzymes, which are related to biosynthesis pathways of triacylglycerol and fatty acids, had peaked at 50 days; but triacylglycerol synthesis through the PDAT (phospholipid: diacylglycerol acyltransferase) catalytic pathway of occurred mostly at the early stage of berry development. Protein expression patterns related to lipid accumulation were also verified at the transcript level using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. The proteome profiles determined here will improve our understanding of the process of lipid accumulation and the dynamic changes in metabolic pathways during sea buckthorn berry development.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction. First sea buckthorn berries were grinded using liquid nitrogen, then these powder was transferred to a 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin digestion, TMT labeling, and quantitative proteomic analysis by LC-MS/MS. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to a urea concentration below 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Approximately 100 μg protein for each sample was digested with trypsin for the following experiments. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 6-plex TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent (defined as the amount of reagent required to label 100 μg of protein) was thawed and reconstituted in 24 μL ACN. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA and loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient consisted of an increase from 6% to 22% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) over 22 min, 22% to 36% over 10 min and climbing to 85% in 5 min, then holding at 85% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The resulting peptides were analyzed by Q ExactiveTM plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Hippophae rhamnoides L. database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. For quantification method, TMT-6-plex was selected. All the other parameters in Maxquant were set to default values.

### Publication Abstract
Sea buckthorn ( Hippophae L.) is an economically important shrub or small tree distributed in Eurasia. Most of its well-recognized medicinal and nutraceutical products are derived from its berry oil, which is rich in monounsaturated omega-7 (C16:1) fatty acid and polyunsaturated omega-6 (C18:2) and omega-3 (C18:3) fatty acids. In this study, tandem mass tags (TMT)-based quantitative analysis was used to investigate protein profiles of lipid metabolism in sea buckthorn berries harvested 30, 50, and 70 days after flowering. In total, 8626 proteins were identified, 6170 of which were quantified. Deep analysis results for the proteins identified and related pathways revealed initial fatty acid accumulation during whole-berry development. The abundance of most key enzymes involved in fatty acid and triacylglycerol (TAG) biosynthesis peaked at 50 days after flowering, but TAG synthesis through the PDAT (phospholipid: diacylglycerol acyltransferase) pathway mostly occurred early in berry development. In addition, the patterns of proteins involved in lipid metabolism were confirmed by combined quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and parallel reaction monitoring analyses. Our data on the proteomic spectrum of sea buckthorn berries provide a scientific basic for understanding lipid metabolism and related pathways in the developing berries.

### Keywords
Hippophae rhamnoides, Proteomics, Tmt-based quantitative, Lipid metabolism

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs Inc.
Institute of Plant Resources, Key Laboratory of Biotechnology and Bioresources Utilization, Ministry of Education, Dalian Nationalities University, Dalian 116600, China

### Submitter
Rachel  Green

### Lab Head
Dr Cheng Jiang
Institute of Plant Resources, Key Laboratory of Biotechnology and Bioresources Utilization, Ministry of Education, Dalian Nationalities University, Dalian 116600, China


