### Accession
PXD007243

### Title
Comprehensive profiling of lysine ubiquitome reveals diverse functions of lysine ubiquitination in common wheat

### Description
Protein ubiquitination, which is a major post-translational modifications that occurs in eukaryotic cells, is involved in diverse biological processes. To date, large-scale profiling of the ubiquitome in common wheat has not been reported, despite its status as the major cereal crop in the world. Here, we performed the first ubiquitome analysis of the common wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) variety, Aikang 58. Overall, 433 lysine modification sites were identified in 285 proteins in wheat seedlings, and four putative ubiquitination motifs were revealed. Moreover, ubiquitylated lysines were found to have a significantly different preference for secondary structures when compared with the all lysines. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that the ubiquitinated proteins were involved in a wide variety of biological processes and diverse subcellular localizations. In accordance with previous studies, proteins related to binding and catalytic activity were predicted to be the preferential targets of lysine ubiquitination. Besides, protein interaction network analysis reveals that diverse interactions are modulated by protein ubiquitination. The results presented herein provide a global view of the ubiquitome in common wheat for the first time and lays a foundation for exploring the physiological role of lysine ubiquitination in wheat and other plants.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material and growth conditions The seeds of wheat cultivar Aikang58 were immersed and sterilized with 1% (w/v) H2O2 for 0.5 h, then were thoroughly washed with distilled water. The sterilized seeds were covered with water in Petri dishes for 24 h to germinate, after which they were grown in one-half strength Murashige and Skoog medium. The uniform seedlings (≈ 4.1 ± 0.03 cm) were transferred into plastic pots with soil for growth. The wheat seedlings were kept in an illuminated incubator (RTOP-1000D, Zhejiang, China) at 25°C/15°C day/night temperatures under a 16 h/8 h light/dark photoperiod with 3500 Lx light intensity and relative humidity of 70%–75%. The two-week-old seedlings with two fully expanded leaves were then sampled (mix of 10 plants), then frozen in liquid nitrogen rapidly. Finally, the treated samples were stored at -80°C for protein extraction.  Protein extraction Wheat leaves were ground in liquid nitrogen, after which five volumes of ice-cold 10% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA) in acetone plus 0.07% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol were added and samples were held at -20°C for 4 h. Next, the samples were centrifuged at 14,000 g for 30 min at 4°C, after which the supernatants were discarded and the pellets were washed three times with ice-cold acetone. The pellets were vacuum-dried and resuspended in lysis buffer23 using a Votex for 2 h. The lysates were then sonicated at 80 W output with ten bursts of 10 s each, while being cooled on ice for 15 s between bursts, after which the suspension was centrifuged at 14,000 g for 40 min and 25°C to remove insoluble materials. The cleared lysates were collected and quantified by a Bradford assay (BioRad, California) based on a bovine serum albumin (BSA) standard24.  Tryptic digestion A total of 10 mg of protein were added to dithiothreitol (DTT) (10 mM) and incubated for 2.5 h at 37°C, after which they were cooled to room temperature, then alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA) (50 mM) for 30 min at room temperature in the darkness. The DTT and IAA-treated proteins were diluted by adding 100 mM NH4HCO3 to urea to give a final concentration 1.5 M, after which they were digested with trypsin (Promega) at a trypsin-to-protein ratio of 1:50 overnight (18 h). Finally, the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. After centrifugation for 20 min at 10,000 g, the precipitates were removed and then the supernatants were desalted using Sep-Pak Classic C18 cartridges (Waters) followed by lyophilization.  Enrichment of ubiquitin-remnant-containing peptides Lyophilized peptides were dissolved in immunoaffinity purification (IAP) buffer (50 mM MOPS−NaOH, pH 7.2, 10 mM Na2HPO4, and 50 mM NaCl), then spun at 10,000 g at 4°C for 10 min. di-Gly-Lys antibody beads were used (PTMScan ubiquitin remnant motif K-ε-GG kit, Cell Signaling Technology) and di-Gly-Lys-containing peptides were enriched as previously described5.  Liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectroscopy (MS/MS) analysis Enriched peptides were injected for LC–MS/MS analysis. The peptides were loaded onto a column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper C18) connected to an analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3 μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid), then separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The gradient was as follows (0 min–220 min, 0%–55% solvent B; 220 min–228 min, 55%–100% solvent B; 228 min–240 min, solvent B at 100%). LC–MS/MS analysis was conducted on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200. The normalized collision energy was 27 eV, and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at the maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis The MS data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5). MS data were searched against the Uniprot_Triticum_aestivum_101036_20160308.fasta (released at March 08, 2016, 101036 sequences). During the database search, the modifications were set as follows: main search ppm: 6; missed cleavage: 4; MS/MS tolerance ppm: 20; De-Isotopic: TRUE; enzyme: trypsin; fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C); variable modification: oxidation (M), acetyl (Protein N-term), GlyGly (K); decoy database pattern: reverse; iBAQ: TRUE; match between runs: 2 min; minimum peptide length: 7; false discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for proteins, peptides and modification sites: 0.01.  Bioinformatics analysis The Motif-X software was used to analyze the model of sequences with amino acids in specific positions of ubiquityl-15-mers (seven amino acids upstream and downstream of the ubiquitination site) in all of the protein sequences

### Publication Abstract
Protein ubiquitination, which is a major post-translational modifications that occurs in eukaryotic cells, is involved in diverse biological processes. To date, large-scale profiling of the ubiquitome in common wheat has not been reported, despite its status as the major cereal crop in the world. Here, we performed the first ubiquitome analysis of the common wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) variety, Aikang 58. Overall, 433 lysine modification sites were identified in 285 proteins in wheat seedlings, and four putative ubiquitination motifs were revealed. In particular, 83 of the 285 ubiquitinated proteins had ubiquitination orthologs in Oryza sativa L., and Arabidopsis thaliana. Ubiquitylated lysines were found to have a significantly different preference for secondary structures when compared with the all lysines. In accordance with previous studies, proteins related to binding and catalytic activity were predicted to be the preferential targets of lysine ubiquitination. Besides, protein interaction network analysis reveals that diverse interactions are modulated by protein ubiquitination. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that the ubiquitinated proteins were involved in diverse biological processes. Our data provides a global view of the ubiquitome in common wheat for the first time and lays a foundation for exploring the physiological role of lysine ubiquitination in wheat and other plants.

### Keywords
Triticum aestivum l.; post-translational modification; lysine ubiquitination; proteomics; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Agronomy College, Henan Agricultural University, China
 Henan Agricultural University

### Submitter
Ning Zhang 

### Lab Head
Dr Feng Chen
Agronomy College, Henan Agricultural University, China


