### Accession
PXD019428

### Title
Identification of interacting proteins of Pdcd7 (U11-59K)

### Description
In order to identify interacting proteins of Pdcd7 (U11-59K), pCMV6-Pdcd7-Myc was transfected in HEK293T cells, followed by UV cross-linking and immunoprecipitation with Myc antibody. Samples were then analysed on Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples underwent a slightly modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method in a microcon YM-10 10kD molecular weight cutoff (MWCO) filter. Peptide samples were subject to mass analysis using a Thermo Scientific Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano ultra-high performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system coupled directly to a high resolution Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer.  An aliquot of each peptide preparation was injected onto a PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm x 25 cm, Thermo Scientific) and subject to a 90 min, 300 nL/min reversed-phase UPLC method. Peptides were eluted directly into the Q Exactive HF using positive mode nanoflow electrospray ionization.  A data-dependent Top 15 tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) acquisition method was used that implemented the following parameters for MS scan acquisition: 60,000 resolution, 1e6 AGC target, maximum ion time of 60 ms, and a 300 to 1800 m/z mass range of.  MS/MS scan acquisition included the following parameters: 15,000 resolution, maximum ion time of 40 ms, isolation window of 2.0 m/z, 30 s dynamic exclusion window, normalized collision energy of 27, a 200 to 2,000 m/z scan range, and charge exclusion “on” for all unassigned, +1, and >+8 charged species.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified and quantified via label-free quantification using MaxQuant (v1.6.0.1) and the embedded Andromeda search engine (23). The raw data was then searched against an in-house generated protein database consisting of the myc-tagged Pdcd7 primary sequence and the entire Uniprot Homo sapiens proteome database (identifier UP000005640, accessed 20170422). The following parameters were used for the search: variable modifications oxidation of Met, acetylation of Protein N-termini, and Gln to pyro-Glu conversion, fixed carbamidomethylation of Cys, trypsin enzyme specificity with up to 2 missed cleavages, LFQ quantitation “on”, and a minimum of 5 amino acids per peptide.  All results were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate at the peptide and protein levels; all other parameters were kept at default values. MaxQuant-derived output was uploaded into Scaffold Q+S (v 4.0, Proteome Software) for visualization and further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Vertebrate genomes contain major (&gt;99.5%) and minor (&lt;0.5%) introns that are spliced by the major and minor spliceosomes, respectively. Major intron splicing follows the exon-definition model, whereby major spliceosome components first assemble across exons. However, since most genes with minor introns predominately consist of major introns, formation of exon-definition complexes in these genes would require interaction between the major and minor spliceosomes. Here, we report that minor spliceosome protein U11-59K binds to the major spliceosome U2AF complex, thereby supporting a model in which the minor spliceosome interacts with the major spliceosome across an exon to regulate the splicing of minor introns. Inhibition of minor spliceosome snRNAs and U11-59K disrupted exon-bridging interactions, leading to exon skipping by the major spliceosome. The resulting aberrant isoforms contained a premature stop codon, yet were not subjected to nonsense-mediated decay, but rather bound to polysomes. Importantly, we detected elevated levels of these alternatively spliced transcripts in individuals with minor spliceosome-related diseases such as Roifman syndrome, Lowry-Wood syndrome and early-onset cerebellar ataxia. In all, we report that the minor spliceosome informs splicing by the major spliceosome through exon-definition interactions and show that minor spliceosome inhibition results in aberrant alternative splicing in disease.

### Keywords
Pdcd7

### Affiliations
University of Connecticut

### Submitter
Rahul Kanadia

### Lab Head
Dr Rahul Kanadia
University of Connecticut


