### Accession
PXD030826

### Title
Engineered Extracellular Vesicles Prepared by Membrane Extrusion Are Good Substitutes for Natural Extracellular Vesicles

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EV) as drug delivery nanocarriers are under intense investigation. Although clinical-grade EVs have been produced on a large-scale, low yield and high production costs of natural EVs (nEV) limit the relevant industrial translation. Recent studies show that mechanical extrusion of cells can generate nEV-like engineered EVs (eEV) which can also be used as drug nanocarriers. Moreover, in comparison with nEVs, eEVs have similar physicochemical properties. Nevertheless, a comprehensive comparison of cargo between nEVs and eEVs has not been investigated yet. Therefore, the aim of this study is to profile and compare eEVs to nEVs. Our results show that no significant difference was found in size, morphology, and classical markers between nEVs and eEVs derived from MDA-MB-231 cells. Protein sequencing data reveals the similarity of membrane proteins between the two groups was ~71%, while it was ~21% when pertaining to total protein cargo. Notably, a high similarity of membrane proteins was also found between nEVs and eEVs derived from eight additional cancer cell lines. Moreover, analysis of the top 1000 small RNA with RNA sequencing showed a ~65% similarity between the two groups. Altogether, we infer from the high similarity of membrane proteins and small RNA cargo that eEVs can be a good substitute for nEVs. In brief, our findings support previous studies which discovered eEVs own comparable performance of nEVs and could pave the way for clinical implementation of eEV-based therapeutics in the future.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates of nEV and eEV protein samples (16 μg/each) were loaded into stain-free SDS-PAGE gels. Gels loaded with nEV and eEV proteins were run at 100 V for 10min and 60min. One gel fraction of each nEV sample and four gel fractions of each eEV sample were cut into ~1 mm cubes followed by in-gel digestion and extraction of tryptic peptides (Yang et al., 2007). The excised gel pieces were washed consecutively with 200 μl of DI water, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Ambic)/acetonitrile (1:1), and acetonitrile (ACN). The gel pieces were reduced with 70 μl of 10 mM DTT in 100 mM Ambic for 1 h at 56 °C, alkylated with 100 μl of 55 mM Iodoacetamide in 100 mM Ambic at RT in the dark for 45 min. Subsequently, the gel slices were dried and rehydrated with 50 μl of trypsin in 50 mM Ambic, 10% ACN (20 ng/μl) at 37°C for 16 h. The digested peptides were extracted twice with 70 μl of 50% acetonitrile containing 5% formic acid (FA) and once with 70 μl of 90% acetonitrile containing 5% FA. Three extracts from each sample were combined, filtered by a 0.22-μm spinning unit (Corning, USA), and dried down by a Speedvac SC110.

### Data Protocol
The DDA raw files for CID MS/MS were subjected to database searches using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.5 software with the Sequest HT algorithm. The PD 2.5 processing workflow containing an additional node of Minora Feature Detector for precursor ion-based quantification was used for protein identification and protein relatively quantitation analysis between samples. The database search was conducted against a Homo sapiens database containing 81,725 sequences downloaded from NCBI, and a human EVs database that has 60,444 sequences downloaded from Vesiclepedia (http://microvesicles.org). Two-missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. The peptide precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. Variable modification of methionine oxidation, deamidation of asparagines/glutamine, carboxylation on tryptophan, acetylation on protein N-terminal, and fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation, were set for the database search. Identified peptides were further filtered for a maximum 1% FDR using the Percolator algorithm in PD 2.5 along with additional peptide confidence set to high and peptide mass accuracy ≤5 ppm. Relative quantitation of identified proteins among three replicates in nEVs and eEVs was assessed by the Label-Free Quantitation (LFQ) workflow in PD 2.5. Precursor abundance intensity for each peptide identified by MS/MS was automatically determined and their unique peptides for each protein in each sample were summed and used for calculating the protein abundance by PD 2.5 software with normalization against the spiked yeast enolase protein.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EV) as drug delivery nanocarriers are under intense investigation. Although clinical-grade EVs have been produced on a large-scale, low yield and high production costs of natural EVs (nEV) limit the relevant industrial translation. Recent studies show that mechanical extrusion of cells can generate nEV-like cell-derived nanovesicles (CNV) which can also be used as drug nanocarriers. Moreover, in comparison with nEVs, CNVs have similar physicochemical properties. Nevertheless, a comprehensive comparison of cargo between nEVs and CNVs has not been investigated yet. Therefore, the aim of this study is to profile and compare CNVs to nEVs. Our results show that no significant difference was found in size, morphology, and classical markers between nEVs and CNVs derived from MDA-MB-231 cells. Protein sequencing data reveals the similarity of membrane proteins between the two groups was ~71%, while it was ~21% when pertaining to total protein cargo. Notably, a high similarity of membrane proteins was also found between nEVs and CNVs derived from eight additional cancer cell lines. Moreover, analysis of the top 1000 small RNAs with RNA sequencing showed a ~65% similarity between the two groups. Altogether, we infer from the high similarity of membrane proteins and small RNA cargo that CNVs can be a good substitute for nEVs. In brief, our findings support previous studies with a notion that CNVs yield comparable performance with nEVs and could pave the way for clinical implementation of CNV-based therapeutics in the future.

### Keywords
Engineered vesicles, Extracellular vesicles, Drug delivery, Mass sepctrometry, Next generation sequecing

### Affiliations
Cornell University

### Submitter
Sheng Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng Zhang
Cornell University


