### Accession
PXD003939

### Title
Subcellular fractionation in Ramos B-cells

### Description
In order to increase the proteome coverage, a subfractionation strategy has been performed to obtain proteins belonging to four different cellular compartments (i.e., cytoplasm (CYT), membrane (MB), organelle (ORG), and nucleus (NUC)). Experiments have been done in triplicate.

### Sample Protocol
Gel pieces (5 per sample:1-5 for replicate 1; 6-10 for replicate 2; 11-15 for replicate 3) were destained with 15 mM potassium ferrocyanide and 50mM sodium thiosulfate. Protein reduction and alkylation was performed with 10mM DTT at 56ºC for 45 min, and with 55 mM IAA at room temperature for 30 min. Proteins were digested with trypsin (6.25 ng/mL) at 37ºC for 18 h. The peptide solution was acidified with FA and desalted by using C18-Stage-Tips columns20. The samples were partially dried and stored at -20ºC until being analyzed by LC-MS/MS.  A nano-UPLC system (nanoAcquity, Waters Corp., Milford/MA, USA) coupled to a LTQ-Velos-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose/CA, USA) via a nano-electrospray ion source (NanoSpray flex, Proxeon, Thermo) was used for  reversed-phase LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were dissolved in 0.5% FA/3% ACN and loaded onto a trapping column (nanoACQUITY UPLC 2G-V/M Trap Symmetry 5 μm particle size, 180 μm × 20 mm C18 column, Waters Corp., Milford/MA, USA). Peptides were separated on a nanoACQUITY UPLC BEH 1.7 μm, 130 Å, 75 μm × 250 mm C18 column (Waters Corp., Milford/MA, USA) with a linear gradient from 7% to 35% solvent B (ACN/0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min over 120 minutes. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos was operated in the positive ion mode applying a data-dependent automatic switch between survey MS scan and tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) acquisition. Survey scans were acquired in the mass range of m/z 400 to 1600 with 60,000 resolution at m/z 400 with lock mass option enabled for the 445.120025 ion. The 20 most intense peaks having ≥2 charge state and above 500 intensity threshold were selected in the ion trap for fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation with 35% normalized energy, 10 ms activation time, q = 0.25, ±2 m/z precursor isolation width and wideband activation. Maximum injection time was 1000 ms and 50 ms for survey and MS/MS scans, respectively. AGC was 1 x 10E6 for MS and 5 × 10E3 for MS/MS scans. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 90 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were translated to mascot general file (mgf) format using Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer software (v. 1.4.1.14). Peak lists obtained from MS/MS spectra were identified using Comet version 2015.01 rev. 2. The search was conducted using SearchGUI version 1.30.1. Protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy version of all human-reviewed sequences downloaded from the neXtProt database (version of February 2016). The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI. The identification settings were as follows: trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; 10.0 ppm as MS1 and 0.5 Da as MS2 tolerances; fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine, variable modifications: acetylation of the protein n-terminys and oxidation of methionine. Peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using PeptideShaker version 0.41.1. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1% FDR estimated using the decoy hit distribution.

### Publication Abstract
Human Proteome Project (HPP) presents a systematic characterization of the protein landscape under different conditions using several complementary-omic techniques (LC-MS/MS proteomics, affinity proteomics, transcriptomics, etc.). In the present study, using a B-cell lymphoma cell line as a model, comprehensive integration of RNA-Seq transcriptomics, MS/MS, and antibody-based affinity proteomics (combined with size-exclusion chromatography) (SEC-MAP) were performed to uncover correlations that could provide insights into protein dynamics at the intracellular level. Here, 5672 unique proteins were systematically identified by MS/MS analysis and subcellular protein extraction strategies (neXtProt release 2020-21, MS/MS data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003939). Moreover, RNA deep sequencing analysis of this lymphoma B-cell line identified 19,518 expressed genes and 5707 protein coding genes (mapped to neXtProt). Among these data sets, 162 relevant proteins (targeted by 206 antibodies) were systematically analyzed by the SEC-MAP approach, providing information about PTMs, isoforms, protein complexes, and subcellular localization. Finally, a bioinformatic pipeline has been designed and developed for orthogonal integration of these high-content proteomics and transcriptomics datasets, which might be useful for comprehensive and global characterization of intracellular protein profiles.

### Keywords
Human, B-cells, Ramos, Lc-ms/ms, Subfractionation

### Affiliations
Cancer Research Institute-USAL
Department of Medicine and General Cytometry Service-Nucleus, Cancer Research Centre (CSIC/USAL/IBSAL). Avda. Universidad de Coimbra, S/N, 37007 Salamanca, Spain. Phone: +34 923294811 Fax: +34 923294743

### Submitter
Paula Díez

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Fuentes
Department of Medicine and General Cytometry Service-Nucleus, Cancer Research Centre (CSIC/USAL/IBSAL). Avda. Universidad de Coimbra, S/N, 37007 Salamanca, Spain. Phone: +34 923294811 Fax: +34 923294743


