### Accession
PXD030141

### Title
Guanosine-7 tRNA methylation steers tRNA-derived fragment biogenesis and translational control in prostate cancer

### Description
Transfer RNAs (tRNAs) are exceptionally subject to modifications, including methylation. While mRNA methylation is emerging as an important regulator of biological and pathological processes in cancer, how post-transcriptional methylation of tRNAs contributes to cancer is largely unknown. Here we show that the RNA N7-methylguanosine (m7G) methyltransferase METTL1 is highly differentially expressed in prostate cancer compared to non-tumour prostate tissues. METTL1 expression regulation is mediated under the oncogenic PI3K-PTEN pathway. Knockdown of METTL1 dramatically inhibits prostate cancer cell growth and tumour progression in vivo. In contrast, overexpression of the wild type but not the catalytically inactive METTL1 potentiates cell growth. Thus, METTL1-mediated methylation is important for prostate tumorigenesis. Mechanistically we find that METTL1 depletion causes loss of m7G tRNA methylation and increases endonucleolytic cleavage of tRNA leading to an accumulation of 5′ tRNA-derived small RNA fragments. 5′ tRNA-derived fragments steer translation control to favour synthesis of key regulators of tumour growth suppression and immune rejection. In summary, our findings uncover a critical function of m7G tRNA methylation in directing translation control in cancer cells with important implications for tumour growth and unveil METTL1 inhibition as a promising anti-cancer therapeutic strategy.

### Sample Protocol
For cell proteomics, protein was extracted using 7M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS. Samples were incubated for 30 min at RT under agitation and digested following the FASP protocol described by Wisniewski et al. [Wisniewski 2009] with minor modifications. Trypsin was added to a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:10, and the mixture was incubated over night at 37oC. For on-beads digestion proteins were denatured in 8M urea, reduced with DTT (5 mM) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (25 mM). Sample was diluted in ammonium bicarbonate to 1.5 M urea and Trypsin was added in same ration described above and incubated overnight at 37oC as described elsewhere. Resulting peptides in either strategy were concentrated in a speed-vac, and desalted using C18 stage tips (Millipore) prior to acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed in a hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry – quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro with PASEF, Bruker Daltonics) coupled online either to a nano Elute (Bruker) or EvoSep ONE liquid chromatograph (EvoSep).   Protein identification and quantification was carried out using MaxQuant software [Cox 2008] using default settings except for an LFQ min. ratio count of 1. Searches were carried out against a database consisting of human protein entries (Uniprot/Swissprot), with precursor and fragment tolerances of 20ppm and 0.05 Da. Only proteins identified with at least two peptides at FDR<1% were considered for further analysis. Data (LFQ intensities) was loaded onto Perseus platform [Tyanova 2016] and further processed (log2 transformation, imputation).

### Publication Abstract
Newly growing evidence highlights the essential role that epitranscriptomic marks play in the development of many cancers; however, little is known about the role and implications of altered epitranscriptome deposition in prostate cancer. Here, we show that the transfer RNA N<sup>7</sup>-methylguanosine (m<sup>7</sup>G) transferase METTL1 is highly expressed in primary and advanced prostate tumours. Mechanistically, we find that METTL1 depletion causes the loss of m<sup>7</sup>G tRNA methylation and promotes the biogenesis of a novel class of small non-coding RNAs derived from 5'tRNA fragments. 5'tRNA-derived small RNAs steer translation control to favour the synthesis of key regulators of tumour growth suppression, interferon pathway, and immune effectors. Knockdown of Mettl1 in prostate cancer preclinical models increases intratumoural infiltration of pro-inflammatory immune cells and enhances responses to immunotherapy. Collectively, our findings reveal a therapeutically actionable role of METTL1-directed m<sup>7</sup>G tRNA methylation in cancer cell translation control and tumour biology.

### Keywords
Translatome, Protein synthesis, Rna modifications, Trnas, Trna fragments, Prostate cancer, Epitranscriptome, Cancer, 7-methylguanosine

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE, Bizkaia Tec. Park Build. 800, derio 48160 Bizkaia (Spain)
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE, Bizkaia Tec. Park Build. 800, derio 48160 Bizkaia (Spain)


