### Accession
PXD019453

### Title
Integrated Physiological and Large-Scale Chloroplast Proteome Analysis of Wheat Seedling Leaves  under Salt and PEG-Induced Drought Stresses

### Description
The integrative physiological and large-scale quantitative proteomic analysis of wheat chloroplast under salt and polyethylene glycol (PEG)-induced drought stresses by using label-free quantitative technique. We aim to reveal the underlying synergistic responsive mechanisms of wheat chloroplast proteome to salt and osmotic stresses, which could provide a more in-depth and comprehensive understanding on the roles of chloroplast proteome in abiotic stress response and defense.

### Sample Protocol
Chinese elite winter wheat cultivar “Zhongmai 175” (Triticum aestivum L., 2n= 6X=42, AABBDD) was used as material in this study. Plump seeds of Zhongmai 175 were surfacely sterilized with 5% sodium hypochlorite and rinsed 4 times with sterile distilled water. Then, the sterilized seeds were transferred on wet filter paper and germinated at room temperature. After 48 h, uniformly germinated seeds were pick out and further grown in the half strength Hoagland culture solution. The salt and PEG-simulated drought stress treatments were respectively applied to wheat seedlings at three-leaf stage by adding 200 mM sodium chloride and 15% polyethylene glycol (PEG) 6000 to culture solution. Control group was set by remaining wheat seedlings growing in normal culture solution. All treatments included three biological duplications, and the samples of seedling leaves after 0, 24, 48, 72 and 96 h treatments were harvested and frozen in -80°C prior to analysis. Approximately 25 g of wheat seedling leaves were collected from control and treatment groups after 48 h of exposure, and all following steps were performed at 4°C. The leaves were cut into pieces and homogenized by a tissue homogenizer (Ultra Turrax-T18, IKA, Germany) in pre-cooling extract buffer containing 0.45 M sucrose, 15 mM MOPS, 1.5 mM EGTA (pH 7.8), 0.6% PVPP, 0.2% BSA, 10 mM DTT, and 0.2 mM PMSF. The homogenate was filtered twice through three layers of Mirocloth (Calbiochem, USA) to remove plant tissue fragments and cell debris. The filtrate was centrifuged at 200 g for 10 min at 4°C to precipitate nucleus, after which the supernatant was collected and centrifuged at 2000 g for 15 min at 4°C. The crude chloroplast pellets were gently resuspended in isolation buffer containing 0.33 mM sorbitol, 50 mM HEPES/KOH (pH 8.0). Subsequently, the resuspended chloroplasts were loaded onto a discontinuous Percoll gradient (12 mL 15% Percoll, 10 mL 35% Percoll, 5 mL 80% Percoll in isolation buffer) and centrifuged at 3000 g for 1 h at 4 °C in a swing-out rotor. Intact chloroplasts accumulated in the interface between 15% and 35% Percoll gradients were collected and washed twice with the isolation buffer (2 min at 1100 g, 4 °C), and then immediately used for protein extraction. Chloroplast proteome extraction was conducted according to the BPP methods47 with a little modifications. In brief, the intact chloroplast pellets were suspended in 2 mL of extraction buffer (30% sucrose, 1% Triton X-100, 2% β-mercaptoethanol, 100 mM Tris, 100 mM EDTA, 50 mM borax, 50 mM L-ascorbic acid) containing PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (1 tablet/10 mL; Roche, Basel, Switzerland) and vigorously eddied for 20 min at room temperature. Subsequently, an equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0) was added to the mixture and future eddied for 15 min. Followed by centrifugation at 15000 g for 30 min, the upper phenol phase was collected into a new 15 mL centrifuge tube. Proteins were precipitated by adding five volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate and stay at -20°C overnight. On the next day, protein pellets were collected by centrifugations at 15000 g for 30 min and rinsed once with pre-cooling methyl alcohol and three times with pre-cooling acetone containing 20 mM β-mercaptoethanol. After freeze drying, protein samples were stored at −80 °C for label-free proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS data were searched by MaxQuant v1.6.5.0 against Uniprot Triticum aestivum (taxonomy: 4565 143 146 sequences). The main parameters were set as follow: peptide mass tolerance at 20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance at 0.5 Da and trypsin enzyme with number of missed cleavage up to 2. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 in both protein and peptide level. iBAQ was performed in MaxQuant, as previously described.49 In quantitative analysis, quantifiable proteins were defined as those identified at least twice in the three biological replicates and considered to be DAPs as those with the cutoff values of more than 1.5-fold or less than 0.66-fold change (Student’s t-test, p < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Salt stress is the second most important abiotic stress factor in the world, which seriously affects crop growth, development and grain production. In this study, we performed the first integrated physiological and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) proteome analysis of wheat seedling leaves under salt stress using a label-free-based quantitative proteomic approach. Salt stress caused significant decrease in seedling height, root length, relative water content and chlorophyll content of wheat seedling leaves, indicating that wheat seedling growth was significantly inhibited under salt stress. The ER proteome analysis identified 233 ER-localized differentially accumulated proteins (DAPs) in response to salt stress, including 202 upregulated and 31 downregulated proteins. The upregulated proteins were mainly involved in the oxidation-reduction process, transmembrane transport, the carboxylic acid metabolic process, stress response, the arbohydrate metabolic process and proteolysis, while the downregulated proteins mainly participated in the metabolic process, biological regulation and the cellular process. In particular, salt stress induced significant upregulation of protein disulfide isomerase-like proteins and heat shock proteins and significant downregulation of ribosomal protein abundance. Further transcript expression analysis revealed that half of the detected DAP genes showed a consistent pattern with their protein levels under salt stress. A putative metabolic pathway of ER subproteome of wheat seedling leaves in response to salt stress was proposed, which reveals the potential roles of wheat ER proteome in salt stress response and defense.

### Keywords
Salt stress, Physiological characteristics, Drought stress., Chloroplast proteome, Label-free, Wheat

### Affiliations
Capital normal university
College of Life Science, Capital Normal University, 100048 Beijing, China.

### Submitter
Dong Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Yueming Yan
College of Life Science, Capital Normal University, 100048 Beijing, China.


