### Accession
PXD009283

### Title
The ERBB-STAT3 Axis Drives Tasmanian Devil Facial Tumor Disease

### Description
The marsupial Tasmanian devil (Sarcophilus harrisii) faces extinction due to transmissible devil facial tumor disease (DFTD). To unveil the culprit molecular underpinnings, we designed an approach that combines sensitivity to drugs with an integrated systems-biology characterization. Sensitivity to inhibitors of the ERBB family of receptor tyrosine kinases correlated with their overexpression, suggesting a causative link. Proteomic and DNA methylation analyses revealed tumor-specific signatures linked to oncogenic signaling hubs including evolutionary conserved STAT3. Indeed, inhibition of ERBB blocked phosphorylation of STAT3 and arrested cancer cells. Blockade of ERBB signaling prevented tumor growth in a xenograft model and resulted in recovery of MHC-I gene expression. This link between the hyperactive ERBB-STAT3 axis and decreased MHC-I mediated tumor immunosurveillance provides mechanistic insights into horizontal transmissibility and lets us propose a dual chemo-immunotherapeutic strategy to save Tasmanian devils from DFTD.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 1 x 107 cells from DFT1 strain 1 were pelleted (260 x g, 5 min, 4°C), washed three times in PBS and frozen at -80°C until processed. 500-1000 µL of lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 2% SDS, 1 mM PMSF, and protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich)) was added to the tumour and skin samples. Samples were homogenised using the Tissue Lyser II (Qiagen) for 4×2 min, 30 Hz.  Tissue pieces were placed in a 2 mL Eppendorf tube containing 1 mL 1X red blood cell (RBC)-lysis buffer (eBioscience, San Diego, USA). Spleen tissue was homogenised using the ‘Tissue Lyser II’ (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) for 3×30 s, centrifuged at 20,000×g for 10 min and supernatant containing the lysed red blood cells removed. Lysis was performed at room temperature (RT) for 20 min. Lysed samples were heated at 99°C for 5 min and then cooled to RT. The cell lysate was sonicated using a Covaris S2 high performance ultrasonicator (Covaris Inc., Brighton, UK.  The lysate was centrifuged at 20,000×g for 15 min at 20°C, and the protein extract was collected from the supernatant. Total protein content of the whole tissue lysates was determined using the BCA protein assay kit (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL). The assay was performed in a 96-well plate using 10 μL of each lysate and standard protein. The samples were measured in triplicates. Bovine serum albumin (BSA) (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL) was used as the standard protein. 100 µg total protein per tissue was used for FASP digestion. Dithiothreitol (DTT) (SIGMA-Aldrich Chemie, Vienna, Austria) was added to sample to a final concentration of approx. 83 mM.  After incubation of the samples at 99°C for 5 min, FASP digestion was performed using a 30 kDa molecular weight cut-off filter (Microcon-30, Ultracel YM-30, Merck-Millipore Co., Cork, IRL).  Briefly, 200 µL 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) (UA) was added to the samples.  If the volume exceeded 50 µL, then 400 µL UA was added.  After equilibration of the filter units with 200 µL UA and centrifugation at 14,000×g for 15 min, the lysed samples were applied in steps of 250 µL to the filter unit and centrifuged at 14,000×g for 15 min at 20°C to remove SDS. Any remaining SDS was exchanged by urea in a second washing step with 200 μL UA. The proteins were alkylated with 100 μL 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich Chemie, Vienna, Austria) for 30 min at RT. Afterwards, three washing steps with 100 μL UA solution were performed, followed by three washing steps with 100 μL 50 mM TEAB buffer (Sigma-Aldrich, Vienna, Austria). Proteins were digested with trypsin overnight at 37°C.  Peptides were recovered using 40 μL 50 mM TEAB buffer followed by 50 μL of 0.5 M NaCl (Sigma-Aldrich). Two-dimensional liquid chromatography was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at high and low pH. FASP digests were purified by solid-phase extraction (SPE) (MacroSpin Columns, 30-300µg capacity, Nest Group Inc. Southboro) and reconstituted in 23 µL 5% acetonitrile, 10 mM ammonium formate. Peptides were separated on a Gemini-NX C18 (150 × 2 mm, 3 μm, 110 Å, Phenomenex, Torrance, US) using a 30 min gradient from 5 to 90% acetonitrile containing 10 mM ammonium formate buffer, pH 10, at a flow rate of 100 μL/min, using an Agilent 1200 HPLC system (Agilent Biotechnologies). Details of the methodology are as described previously. Ten time-based fractions were collected. Samples were acidified by the addition of 5 μL 5% formic acid. Solvent was removed in a vacuum concentrator, and samples were reconstituted in 5% formic acid. Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry was performed on a hybrid linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) using the Xcalibur version 2.1.0 coupled to an Agilent 1200 HPLC nanoflow system (dual pump system with one trap-column and one analytical column) via a nanoelectrospray ion source using liquid junction (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Solvents for HPLC separation of peptides were as follows: solvent A consisted of 0.4% formic acid (FA) in water, and solvent B consisted of 0.4% FA in 70% methanol and 20% 2-propanol. From a thermostatted microautosampler, 8 μL of the tryptic peptide mixture were automatically loaded onto a trap column (Zorbax 300SB-C18 5 μm, 5 × 0.3 mm, Agilent Biotechnologies) with a binary pump at a ﬂ 5 rate of 45 μL/min. 0.1% triﬂuoroacetic acid (TFA) was used for loading and washing the precolumn. After washing, the peptides were eluted by back-ﬂushing onto a 16 cm fused silica analytical column with an inner diameter of 50 μm packed with C18 reversed phase material (ReproSil-Pur120 C18-AQ, 3 μm). The peptides were eluted from the analytical column with a 27 min gradient ranging from 3% to 30% solvent B, followed by a 25 min gradient from 30% to 70% solvent B, and ﬁnally a 7 min gradient from 70% to  100% solvent B at a constant ﬂow rate of 100 nL/min.

### Data Protocol
The analyses were performed in a data-dependent acquisition mode, and dynamic exclusion for selected ions was 60 s.  A top 15 collision-induced dissociation (CID) method was used, and a single lock mass at m/z 445.120024 (Si(CH3)2O)6) was employed.  Maximal ion accumulation time allowed in CID mode was 50 ms for MSn in the LTQ and 500 ms in the C-trap. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overﬁlling of the ion traps and was set to 5,000 in MS2 mode for the LTQ and 106 ions for a full MS1 FTMS scan. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap Velos at a resolution of 60,000 resolution (at  m/z 400).  The threshold for switching from MS1 to MS2 was 2,000 counts. The data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 against the Uniprot Tasmanian Devil fasta database version 2016.11 including isoforms obtained by VARSPLIC and appended with known contaminants (91064 sequences total). The precursor masses were first recalibrated using the recalibration node (parameters: precursor mass tolerance: 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.5 Da, Carbamidomethylation of cysteine as static modification). The recalibrated data were then searched using Sequest HT and Mascot (v2.3.02, MatrixScience, London, U.K.) search engines with precursor mass tolerance being 4 ppm, fragment ion tolerance was 0.3 Da, methionine oxidation used as dynamic modification, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as static modification in both search engines. Moreover protein N-terminal acetylation was considered as dynamic modification in Sequest HT. Minimum length of peptides was set to 6 and maximum number of missed cleavages was set to two in Sequest HT and to one in Mascot. Percolator was used to filter peptide-spectra matches (PSMs) at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and QVALITY to filter identified peptides at 1% FDR. Identified proteins were also filtered at 1% FDR by considering sum of negative logarithm of posterior error probabilities of connected PSMs. Matches against reversed fasta database were used to estimate FDR at PSM, peptide, and protein level. Abundance of proteins was quantified using the Minora feature detection node and integrating area under the MS1 chromatogram.

### Publication Abstract
The marsupial Tasmanian devil (Sarcophilus harrisii) faces extinction due to transmissible devil facial tumor disease (DFTD). To unveil the molecular underpinnings of this transmissible cancer, we combined pharmacological screens with an integrated systems-biology characterization. Sensitivity to inhibitors of ERBB tyrosine kinases correlated with their overexpression. Proteomic and DNA methylation analyses revealed tumor-specific signatures linked to the evolutionary conserved oncogenic STAT3. ERBB inhibition blocked phosphorylation of STAT3 and arrested cancer cells. Pharmacological blockade of ERBB or STAT3 prevented tumor growth in xenograft models and restored MHC class I expression. This link between the hyperactive ERBB-STAT3 axis and major histocompatibility complex class I-mediated tumor immunosurveillance provides mechanistic insights into horizontal transmissibility and puts forward a dual chemo-immunotherapeutic strategy to save Tasmanian devils from DFTD. VIDEO ABSTRACT.

### Keywords
Tasmanian devil, Dftd, Transmissible cancer, Erbb

### Affiliations
CeMM  Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences Lazarettgasse 14, AKH BT 25.3 1090 Vienna, Austria
CeMM

### Submitter
Alexandra Popa

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Andreas Bergthaler
CeMM  Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences Lazarettgasse 14, AKH BT 25.3 1090 Vienna, Austria


