### Accession
PXD030012

### Title
Detection SARS-CoV-2 infection in mice by ATR-FTIR

### Description
Vero-E6 cell supernatant, mice lavage and human saliva were evaulated after exposure to SARS-CoV-2 via ATR-FTIR spectoscopy. To provide further information about the physiological response, proteins contained in the mouse lavage were assessed via shotgun proteomics (data shown here). Mice were exposed to active SARS-CoV-2 or UV-inactivated SARS-CoV-2 for up to 4 days, lavage collected at day 0, day 2 and day 4 (D4). Lavage proteins were pooled for day 0 (due to low protein abundance) and compared to UV-I-SARS-CoV-2(n=4)and SARS-CoV-2(n=8)samples.

### Sample Protocol
Lavage samples were diluted in ethanol to a final concentration of 75% to inactivate virus. Proteins were precipitated and extracted by centrifugation at 16,000xg for 25 min, 4 degrees Celsius. Protein pellet was washed twice with 50 mM TEAB, resuspended in the same buffer, and quantified by BCA assay. In-solution digest was automated using Agilent BRAVO platform. Sodium deoxycholate was added to a final concentration of 1% to assist with protein solubility. Reduction was completed using 5mM DTT and incubated for 25min, followed by alkylation with 20mM IAA for 20min (dark incubation). Samples were diluted 1:10 in 50mM TEAB to reduce sodium deoxycholate concentrations. Porcine trypsin (Promega) was added to a final concentration of 1:30, trypsin to sample protein ratio, and incubated overnight at 37 degrees Celsius. TFA was added to a final concentration of 0.5% to inactivate Trypsin. Sodium deoxycholate was removed by centrifugation at 5,000xg for 25min. Supernatant was immediately transferred to a new plate for C18 clean up, using AssayMAP tips (Agilent) and following default manufacture’s instruction. Peptides were dried and resuspended in 0.5% TFA to a final peptide concentration of 0.25ug/uL.  4uL of peptide were injected per sample (1ug total). Peptides were resolved on a Thermo U3000 nanoHPLC system and analysed on a Thermo Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer. The HPLC setup used a C18 trap column and a 50 cm EasySpray C-18 analytical column (Thermo Fisher, catalogue: 160454, ES803A). Mobile phases were A: 0.1% formic acid, and B: 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. The loading pump ran on 3% B at 10 μL per minute. 1 µg peptide were loaded in 3% B. The nano-capillary pump ran at 250 nL per minute, starting at 3% B. The multi-step gradient was 3% to 6% B over 1 minute, 6% to 30% B over the following 60 minutes, 30% to 50% B over the following 12 minutes, then 50% to 95% B over 1 minute. After maintaining 95% B for 12 minutes, the system was re-equilibrated to 3% B. The mass spectrometer ran an EasySpray source in positive ion DDA mode, using settings typical for high complexity peptide analyses. Mass lock was set to “Best”. Full MS scans from 350 m/z to 1400 m/z were acquired at 70k resolution, with an AGC target of 3E6 and 100 ms maximum injection time. MS2 fragmentation was carried out on the Top 10 precursors, excluding 1+ and > 7+ charged precursors. The dynamic exclusion window was 30 seconds. Precursor isolation width was 1.4 m/z and NCE was 27. MS2 resolution was 17,500, with an AGC target of 5E5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was completed by MaxQuant using Swiss-Prot mouse proteome (version 2021_04) and default parameters.  Label-free quantitation intensities were analysed by the LFQ-Analyst pipeline to determine differentially abundant proteins based on p-values < 0.1 (Benjamini Hochberg adjusted p-value). Intensities were Z-score normalized and expressed as a heat map.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Covid-19, Ftir

### Affiliations
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute

### Submitter
Harley Robinson

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle M. Hill
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute


