### Accession
PXD014224

### Title
Comparative proteomic study on liver lipid droplets and mitochondria from mouse housed in different temperatures

### Description
Laboratory mice are standardly housed around 23ºC, setting them under chronic cold stress. Metabolic changes of liver in mice housed under thermoneutral, standard and cold temperatures remain unknown. Here we isolated lipid droplets and mitochondria from their livers for comparative proteomic study to investigate the changes. According to proteomic analysis, mitochondrial TCA cycle and retinol metabolism were enhanced while oxidative phosphorylation was no obviously affected under cold condition, suggesting liver mitochondria may increase TCA cycle capacity in biosynthetic pathways as well as retinol metabolism to help liver to adapt. Based on proteomic and immunoblotting results, Perilipin 5 and major urinary proteins were increased significantly while mitochondrial pyruvate carrier was decreased dramatically under cold condition, indicating a role they may play.

### Sample Protocol
10-week mice were housed in their thermoneutral temperature T30, commonly housed temperature T23, and extremely cold temperature T6 for 4 weeks. Two groups of mice (each with three mice), under each temperature were used. Lipid droplet and mitochondria were isolated from livers by density gradient centrifugation. After isolation and quality verification of lipid droplets and mitochondria from livers in three temperatures, LDs and mitochondria were treated with acetone-chloroform (5:1, v/v) and strongly vortexed, respectively. The tubes were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min and proteins were pelleted for MS study.   The precipitated protein was reduced and digested with trypsin. For mitochondrial samples, the digested peptides were desalted. The peptides were labeled by TMT 6plex according manufacturer’s handbook.  Nano LC-MS/MS experiments were performed on a Q Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy n-LC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The labeled peptides were loaded onto a 100 μm id×2 cm fused silica trap column packed in-house with reversed phase silica (Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and then separated on a 75 μm id×20 cm C18 column packed with reversed phase silica (Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH). The peptides bound on the column were eluted with a 78-min linear gradient. The solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water solution and the solvent B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile solution. The segmented gradient was 5–8% B, 8 min; 8–22% B, 50 min; 22–32% B, 12 min; 32-95% B, 1 min; 95% B, 7min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The MS analysis was performed with Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). With the data-dependent acquisition mode, the MS data were acquired at a high resolution 70,000 (m/z 200) across the mass range of 300–1600 m/z. The target value was 3.00E+06 with a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The top 20 precursor ions were selected from each MS full scan with isolation width of 2 m/z for fragmentation in the HCD collision cell with normalized collision energy of 30%. Subsequently, MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution setting of 17,500 at m/z 200. The target value was 5.00E+04 with a maximum injection time of 80 ms. The dynamic exclusion time was 40 s. For nano electrospray ion source setting, the spray voltage was 2.0 kV; no sheath gas flow; the heated capillary temperature was 320°C.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from Q Exactive were analyzed with Proteome Discovery version 2.2.0.388 using Sequest HT search engine for protein identification and Percolator for FDR (false discovery rate) analysis. The UniProt mouse protein database (updated on 10-2017) was used for searching the data. Searching parameters were set as follows: trypsin was selected as enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed for searching; the mass tolerance of precursor was set as 10 ppm and the product ions tolerance was 0.02 Da; TMT 6plex (lysine and N-terminus of peptides) and cysteine carbamidomethylation were specified as fixed modifications; the methionine oxidation was chosen as variable modification. FDR analysis was performed using Percolator and FDR <1% was set for protein identification. The peptide confidence was set as high for peptide filter. Protein quantification was also performed on Proteome Discovery 2.2.0.388 using the ratio of the intensity of reporter ions from the MS/MS spectra. Only unique and razor peptides of proteins were selected for protein relative quantification. The co-isolation threshold was specified as 50% and average reporter S/N value should be above 10. The normalization to the protein median of each sample was used to correct experimental bias and the normalization mode was selected as total peptide amount.

### Publication Abstract
Laboratory mice are standardly housed at around 23&#xa0;&#xb0;C, setting them under chronic cold stress. Metabolic changes in the liver in mice housed at thermoneutral, standard and cold temperatures remain unknown. In the present study, we isolated lipid droplets and mitochondria from their livers in a comparative proteomic study aiming to investigate the changes. According to proteomic analysis, mitochondrial tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA cycle) and retinol metabolism are enhanced, whereas oxidative phosphorylation is not affected obviously under cold conditions, suggesting that liver mitochondria may increase TCA cycle capacity in biosynthetic pathways, as well as retinol metabolism, to help the liver to adapt. Based on proteomic and immunoblotting results, perilipin 5 and major urinary proteins are increased significantly, whereas mitochondrial pyruvate carrier is decreased dramatically under cold conditions, indicating their involvement in liver adaptation.

### Keywords
Mitochondrion, Lipid droplet, Thermoneutral temperature, Liver adaptation, Organellar proteomics, Chronic cold stress

### Affiliations
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Shuyan Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Pingsheng Liu
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences


