### Accession
PXD036295

### Title
Analyzing the mechanisms that facilitate the subtype-specific assembly of γ-aminobutyric acid type A receptors

### Description
Impaired inhibitory signaling underlies the pathophysiology of many neuropsychiatric and neurodevelopmental disorders including autism spectrum disorders and epilepsy. Neuronal inhibition is regulated by synaptic and extrasynaptic γ-aminobutyric acid type A receptors (GABAARs), which mediate phasic and tonic inhibition, respectively. These two GABAAR subtypes differ in their function, ligand sensitivity, and physiological properties. Importantly, they contain different α subunit isoforms: synaptic GABAARs contain the α1-3 subunits whereas extrasynaptic GABAARs contain the α4-6 subunits. While the subunit composition is critical for the distinct roles of synaptic and extrasynaptic GABAAR subtypes in inhibition, the molecular mechanism of the subtype-specific assembly has not been elucidated. To address this issue, we purified endogenous α1- and α4-containing GABAARs from adult murine forebrains and examined their subunit composition and interacting proteins using liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and quantitative analysis. We found that the α1 and α4 subunits form separate populations of GABAARs and interact with distinct sets of binding proteins. We also discovered that the β3 subunit, which co-purifies with both the α1 and α4 subunits, has different levels of phosphorylation on serines 408 and 409 (S408/9) between the two receptor subtypes. To understand the role S408/9 plays in the assembly of α1- and α4-containing GABAARs, we examined the effects of S408/9A (alanine) knock-in mutation on the subunit composition of the two receptor subtypes using LC-MS/MS and quantitative analysis. We discovered that the S408/9A mutation results in the formation of novel α1α4-containing GABAARs. Moreover, in S408/9A mutants, the plasma membrane expression of the α4 subunit is increased whereas its retention in the endoplasmic reticulum is reduced. These findings suggest that S408/9 play a critical role in determining the subtype-specific assembly of GABAARs, and thus the efficacy of neuronal inhibition.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were diluted in 4X NativePAGE sample buffer and 5% G-250 sample additive (Invitrogen BN2008) and loaded onto 4-16% NativePAGE gradient gels (Invitrogen BN1002) as detailed previously (Smalley et al., 2020). Gels were run for approximately 2 hours in anode and cathode buffers (NativePAGE running buffer, Invitrogen BN2001; NativePAGE cathode buffer additive, Invitrogen BN2002). For immunoblotting, proteins were transferred to PVDF membranes overnight at 4°C. The membranes were fixed in 8% acetic acid (v/v), washed with water, and air-dried before de-staining with 100% methanol. The membranes were then blocked in 5% milk (w/v) in tris-buffered saline with 0.1% Tween-20 (v/v; TBS-T) for 1 hour, washed with TBS-T, and incubated with primary antibodies diluted in TBS-T overnight at 4°C. After washing with TBS-T, the membranes were incubated with secondary antibodies diluted in TBS-T for 1 hour at room temperature. Protein bands were visualized with SuperSignal West Dura Extended Duration Substrate (Thermo Scientific 34075) and imaged using a ChemiDoc MP (Bio-Rad). Images were cropped at the bottom (below 150 kDa) to remove the dye front, which contains unbound colloidal Coomassie blue. For liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), the gels were fixed in fixing solution (50% ethanol (v/v), 10% acetic acid (v/v)), washed in ethanol solution (30% ethanol (v/v)), washed in water, then stained overnight with colloidal Coomassie blue (CCB; Sigma-Aldrich G1041). The gels were de-stained in water, imaged, and regions around the bands of interest were excised for LC-MS/MS. Peptides were extracted from gel pieces and the extracts were dried in a speed-vac for 1 hour and stored at 4°C until analysis (Smalley et al., 2020). For analysis, each sample was loaded onto a nanoscale reversed-phase liquid chromatography capillary column packed with C18 silica beads. A gradient was formed between solvent A (97.5% water, 2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 2.5% water, 0.1% formic acid). Eluted peptides were subjected to nanospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan, San Jose, CA, USA). MS1 parameters were: resolution of 70K, scan range of mas-to-charge ratio (m/z) of 85-2000, charge-state screening parameters of +2 to +5, precursor ion isolation window of 2 m/z, and centroid acquisition mode. Eluting peptides were detected and the most intense were isolated using the Top 10 scan mode and fragmented by higher energy C-trap dissociation at the normalized collision energy of 35%. MS2 ions were analyzed by an Orbitrap mass spectrometer with the resolution of 17.5K and the dynamic exclusion settings (repeat count: 1, repeat duration: 30 seconds, exclusion duration: 60 seconds, exclusion mass width: 10 ppm) to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Peptide searches were performed as detailed previously (Smalley et al., 2020). Peptide sequences were determined by matching protein or translated nucleotide databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern using the MSGF+ (Kim and Pevzner, 2014). Raw mzXML files were used to search the UniProt mouse reference proteome (last modified May 4th 2020, containing 21,989 sequences), which contains the Thermo list of common contaminants. For phosphopeptide detection, a variable modification of mass units to serine, threonine, and tyrosine was included in the database searches. The resulting mzID files from the spectral searches were combined with mzXML files using MSnbase package in R (accessed July 20th 2020) and used to calculate peptide counts and the quantitative measurement: spectral index normalized to global intensity (SIGI). The SIGI values for each protein detected by Gabra1 or Gabra4 immunoprecipitation were compared to non-immune IgG purifications by Welch’s t-test to identify significantly enriched proteins. For network analysis, the protein lists were compared against the latest version of the STRINGdb database (Szklarczyk et al., 2019). The interaction for each protein with Gabra1 or Gabra4 was imputed and network diagrams were constructed in R using the igraph package (accessed February 1st, 2019) and the nodes were scaled to the average SIGI values for each protein. The highest scoring Gene Ontology Biological Process term was extracted for each protein using the mygene package (accessed July 29th, 2020). For PCA, The SIGI values for proteins contained within each gel band were normalized by z-transformation using the ggfortify package in R. Only the significantly enriched proteins detected in all replicates were included in the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Impaired inhibitory signaling underlies the pathophysiology of many neuropsychiatric and neurodevelopmental disorders including autism spectrum disorders and epilepsy. Neuronal inhibition is regulated by synaptic and extrasynaptic <i>&#x3b3;</i>-aminobutyric acid type A receptors (GABA <sub><i>A</i></sub> Rs), which mediate phasic and tonic inhibition, respectively. These two GABA <sub><i>A</i></sub> R subtypes differ in their function, ligand sensitivity, and physiological properties. Importantly, they contain different &#x3b1; subunit isoforms: synaptic GABA <sub><i>A</i></sub> Rs contain the &#x3b1;1-3 subunits whereas extrasynaptic GABA <sub><i>A</i></sub> Rs contain the &#x3b1;4-6 subunits. While the subunit composition is critical for the distinct roles of synaptic and extrasynaptic GABA <sub><i>A</i></sub> R subtypes in inhibition, the molecular mechanism of the subtype-specific assembly has not been elucidated. To address this issue, we purified endogenous &#x3b1;1- and &#x3b1;4-containing GABA <sub><i>A</i></sub> Rs from adult murine forebrains and examined their subunit composition and interacting proteins using liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and quantitative analysis. We found that the &#x3b1;1 and &#x3b1;4 subunits form separate populations of GABA <sub><i>A</i></sub> Rs and interact with distinct sets of binding proteins. We also discovered that the &#x3b2;3 subunit, which co-purifies with both the &#x3b1;1 and &#x3b1;4 subunits, has different levels of phosphorylation on serines 408 and 409 (S408/9) between the two receptor subtypes. To understand the role S408/9 plays in the assembly of &#x3b1;1- and &#x3b1;4-containing GABA <sub><i>A</i></sub> Rs, we examined the effects of S408/9A (alanine) knock-in mutation on the subunit composition of the two receptor subtypes using LC-MS/MS and quantitative analysis. We discovered that the S408/9A mutation results in the formation of novel &#x3b1;1&#x3b1;4-containing GABA <sub><i>A</i></sub> Rs. Moreover, in S408/9A mutants, the plasma membrane expression of the &#x3b1;4 subunit is increased whereas its retention in the endoplasmic reticulum is reduced. These findings suggest that S408/9 play a critical role in determining the subtype-specific assembly of GABA <sub><i>A</i></sub> Rs, and thus the efficacy of neuronal inhibition.

### Keywords
Gaba receptors, Phosphorylation, Subunit composition, Protein purification, Trafficking

### Affiliations
Department of Neuroscience, Tufts University School of Medicine
Tufts University

### Submitter
Joshua Smalley

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen James Moss
Department of Neuroscience, Tufts University School of Medicine


