### Accession
PXD043668

### Title
PHB1 and PHB2 deletion cell proteome

### Description
Folding of newly synthesized proteins poses challenges for a functional proteome. Dedicated protein quality control (PQC) systems promote either the folding of nascent polypeptides at ribosomes or, if this fails, ensure their degradation. While well studied for cytosolic protein biogenesis, it is not understood how these processes work for mitochondrially-encoded proteins, key subunits of the oxidative phosphorylation system (OXPHOS). Here, we identify dedicated hubs in proximity to mitoribosomal tunnel exits coordinating mitochondrial translation, protein import, assembly, and protein turnover. Conserved prohibitin/m-AAA protease supercomplexes and the availability of assembly chaperones determine the fate of newly synthesized proteins by molecular triaging. The localization of these competing activities in vicinity to the mitoribosomal tunnel exit allows for a prompt decision whether newly synthesized proteins are fed into OXPHOS assembly or degraded.   This repository hosts the whole proteome of PHB1/2 deletion cells and is related to other repositories:

### Sample Protocol
Whole proteome analysis Five individual colonies were used to inoculate precultures with YP media containing 0.1% glucose and 2% galactose. Main cultures containing the 10 ml of fresh media with the same composition were inoculated to an OD600 = 0.1, and grown for approx. 9 hours to an OD600 = 1.0. Samples were harvested by centrifugation, washed once in 1ml of ultra-pure water and pellets stored at -80°C until further use.  40 µL of 4% SDS in 100 mM HEPES (pH = 8.5) were pre-heated to 70°C and added to the cell pellet for further 10 min incubation at 70°C on a ThermoMixer (shaking: 550 rpm). The protein concentration was determined using the 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #22660). 20 µg of protein was subjected to tryptic digestion. Proteins were reduced (10 mM TCEP) and alkylated (20 mM CAA) in the dark for 45 min at 45 °C. Samples were subjected to an SP3-based digestion (Hughes et al., 2019). Washed SP3 beads (Sera-Mag(TM) Magnetic Carboxylate Modified Particles (Hydrophobic, GE44152105050250),  Sera-Mag(TM) Magnetic Carboxylate Modified Particles (Hydrophilic, GE24152105050250) from Sigma Aldrich) were mixed equally, and 3 µL of bead slurry were added to each sample. Acetonitrile was added to a final concentration of 50% and washed twice using 70 % ethanol (V=200 µL) on an in-house made magnet. After an additional acetonitrile wash (V=200µL), 5 µL digestion solution (10 mM HEPES pH = 8.5 containing 0.5µg Trypsin (Sigma) and 0.5µg LysC (Wako)) was added to each sample and incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were desalted on a magnet using 2 x 200 µL acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted in 10 µL 5% DMSO in LC-MS water (Sigma Aldrich) in an ultrasonic bath for 10 min. Formic acid and acetonitrile were added to a final concentration of 2.5% and 2%, respectively. Samples were stored at -20°C before subjection to LC-MS/MS analysis.  Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry (Whole proteome) LC-MS/MS instrumentation consisted of an Easy-LC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled via a nano-electrospray ionization source to an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). An in-house packed column (inner diameter: 75 µm, length: 40 cm) was used for peptide separation. A binary buffer system (A: 0.1 % formic acid and B: 0.1 % formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) was applied as follows: Linear increase of buffer B from 4% to 27% within 70 min, followed by a linear increase to 45% within 5 min. The buffer B content was further ramped to 65 % within 5 min and then to 95 % within 5 min. 95 % buffer B was kept for a further 5 min to wash the column.  Prior to each sample, the column was washed using 5 µL buffer A and the sample was loaded using 8 µL buffer A. The RF Lens amplitude was set to 55%, the capillary temperature was 275°C and the polarity was set to positive. MS1 profile spectra were acquired using a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z) at a mass range of 320-1150 m/z and an AGC target of 1 × 106.  For MS/MS independent spectra acquisition, 48 equally spaced windows were acquired at an isolation m/z range of 15 Th, and the isolation windows overlapped by 1 Th. The fixed first mass was 200 m/z. The isolation center range covered a mass range of 357–1060 m/z. Fragmentation spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z using a maximal injection time of 22 ms and stepped normalized collision energies (NCE) of 26, 28, and 30. The default charge state was set to 3. The AGC target was set to 3e6 (900% - Exploris 480). MS2 spectra were acquired in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics Data Analysis (Whole proteome) DIA-NN (Data-Independent Acquisition by Neural Networks) v 1.8 (Demichev et al., 2020) was used to analyze data-independent raw files. The spectral library was created using the reviewed-only Uniport reference protein (Saccharomyces cerevisiae (strain ATCC 204508 / S288c), 6060 entries, downloaded December 2022) with the ‘Deep learning-based spectra and RTs prediction’ turned on. Protease was set to Trypsin and a maximum of 1 miss cleavage was allowed. N-term M excision was set as a variable modification and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. The peptide length was set to 7 – 30 amino acids and the precursor m/z range was defined from 340 – 1200 m/z. The option ‘Quantitative matrices’ was enabled. The FDR was set to 1 % and the mass accuracy (MS2 and MS1) as well as the scan window was set to 0 (automatic inference via DIA-NN). Match between runs (MBR) was enabled. The Neuronal network classifier worked in ‘double pass mode’ and protein interference was set to ‘Isoform IDs’. The quantification strategy was set to ‘robust LC (high accuracy)’ and cross-run normalization was defined as ‘RT-dependent’.  The ‘pg’ (protein group) output (MaxLFQ intensities were further processed using Instant Clue including and pairwise comparison using a t-test followed by a permutation-based FDR correction (5%). Uniprot-based Gene Ontology annotations were added based on the protein group identifiers.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phb1, Yeast, Lc-ms/ms, Label-free, Phb2

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, 50931 Cologne, Germany
Thomas Langer  Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Department of Mitochondrial Proteostasis Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Langer
Thomas Langer  Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Department of Mitochondrial Proteostasis Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne


