### Accession
PXD012156

### Title
Light-controlled affinity purification of protein complexes

### Description
Methods to affinity purify proteins are widely used in protein research. One important application is to identify interacting proteins of an affinity-purified protein of interest (POI) by mass spectrometry. Here, we developed an optogenetics-derived and light-controlled affinity purification method based on the light-regulated reversible protein interaction between phytochrome B (PhyB) and its phytochrome interacting factor 6 (PIF6). We engineered a truncated variant of PIF6 comprising only 22 amino acids that can be genetically fused to the POI as an affinity tag. Thereby the POI can be purified with PhyB-functionalized resin material using 660 nm light for binding and washing and 740 nm light for elution. As proof-of-concept, we expressed PIF-tagged variants of the tyrosine kinase ZAP70 in ZAP70-deficient Jurkat T cells, purified ZAP70 and associating proteins using our light-controlled system and identified the interaction partners by mass spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
Please refer to our manuscript for the detailed desccription of our "Light-controlled affinity purification".

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was performed with an UltiMate 3000 RLSCnano HPLC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) Please refer to our manuscript for further details.

### Publication Abstract
Multiprotein complexes control the behavior of cells, such as of lymphocytes of the immune system. Methods to affinity purify protein complexes and to determine their interactome by mass spectrometry are thus widely used. One drawback of these methods is the presence of false positives. In fact, the elution of the protein of interest (POI) is achieved by changing the biochemical properties of the buffer, so that unspecifically bound proteins (the false positives) may also elute. Here, we developed an optogenetics-derived and light-controlled affinity purification method based on the light-regulated reversible protein interaction between phytochrome B (PhyB) and its phytochrome interacting factor 6 (PIF6). We engineered a truncated variant of PIF6 comprising only 22 amino acids that can be genetically fused to the POI as an affinity tag. Thereby the POI can be purified with PhyB-functionalized resin material using 660 nm light for binding and washing, and 740 nm light for elution. Far-red light-induced elution is effective but very mild as the same buffer is used for the wash and elution. As proof-of-concept, we expressed PIF-tagged variants of the tyrosine kinase ZAP70 in ZAP70-deficient Jurkat T cells, purified ZAP70 and associating proteins using our light-controlled system, and identified the interaction partners by quantitative mass spectrometry. Using unstimulated T cells, we were able to detect the known interaction partners, and could filter out all other proteins.

### Keywords
Zap70, Protein-protein interaction, Phytochrome, Optogenetics, Affinity purification, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Germany Signalling Research Centres BIOSS and CIBSS, University of Freiburg, Germany
University of Freiburg

### Submitter
Jennifer Schwarz

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Germany Signalling Research Centres BIOSS and CIBSS, University of Freiburg, Germany


