### Accession
PXD018575

### Title
Global profiling of the C.elegans redoxome

### Description
We used several state-of-the-art site-centric chemoproteomics to systematically map three distinct types of redox forms (-SH, -SOH, and -SO2H) in C.elegans and quantify their dynamic changes in response to a short-term oxidative stress.

### Sample Protocol
For -SH, the protein lysates were incubated with 100 μM IPM at RT for 1 h with rotation and light protection. For -SOH, the protein lysates were incubated with 5 mM BTD at RT for 1 h with rotation. For -SO2H, the protein lysates were incubated with 2.5 mM DPS (Sigma-Aldrich, D5767) at RT for 1 h with rotation and quenched by protein precipitation with methanol/chloroform as described previously. The precipitated proteins were resuspended with 800 μL PBS containing 0.5% SDS, and then labeled with 5 mM DiaAlk probe at 37 °C for 2 h with rotation and light protection.

### Data Protocol
aw data files were searched against C.elegans Uniprot canonical database. Database search were performed with pFind studio (Version 3.0.11). Precursor ion mass and fragmentation tolerance was set as 10 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The maximum number of modiﬁcations allowed per peptide was three, as was the maximum number of missed cleavages allowed. For all analyses, mass shifts of + 15.9949 Da (methionine oxidation) and + 57.0214 Da (iodoacetamide alkylation) were searched as variable modifications. For site-specific mapping of probe-modified -SH, -SOH, and -SO2H sites, mass shifts of + 252.1222 (light IPM-triazohexanoic acid), + 418.1311 (light BTD-triazohexanoic acid), and + 387.1754 (light DiaAlk-triazohexanoic acid) were searched as variable modifications, respectively. A differential modification of 6.0201 Da on probe-derived modification was used for stable-isotopic quantification. The FDRs were estimated by the program from the number and quality of spectral matches to the decoy database. The FDRs at spectrum, peptide, and protein level were < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Post-translational changes in the redox state of cysteine residues can rapidly and reversibly alter protein functions, thereby modulating biological processes. The nematode C. elegans is an ideal model organism for studying cysteine-mediated redox signaling at a network level. Here we present a comprehensive, quantitative, and site-specific profile of the intrinsic reactivity of the cysteinome in wild-type C. elegans. We also describe a global characterization of the C. elegans redoxome in which we measured changes in three major cysteine redox forms after H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> treatment. Our data revealed redox-sensitive events in translation, growth signaling, and stress response pathways, and identified redox-regulated cysteines that are important for signaling through the p38 MAP kinase (MAPK) pathway. Our in-depth proteomic dataset provides a molecular basis for understanding redox signaling in vivo, and will serve as a valuable and rich resource for the field of redox biology.

### Keywords
Cysteine; chemoproteomics

### Affiliations
Beijing Proteome Research Center
National Center for Protein Sciences, Beijing

### Submitter
Jing Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Yang
Beijing Proteome Research Center


