### Accession
PXD026306

### Title
Tau interactome mapping reveals dynamic processes associated with neurodegenerative diseases

### Description
The Tau (MAPT) protein drives neuronal dysfunction and toxicity in the brain in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and other Tauopathies. To dissect the complexity of the Tau interactome that underlies this process we used two proteomic approaches to characterize the dynamic and multifaceted nature of Tau protein-protein interactions in human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived neurons. We used engineered ascorbic acid peroxidase (APEX) for spatiotemporally restricted mapping of Tau interaction proteins in combination with quantitative affinity purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS) to interrogate disease-related changes in the Tau interactome. The APEX method resolved subcellular interactions of wild-type Tau at amino acid level resolution in living neurons as well as novel activity-dependent interactions of Tau with presynaptic vesicle proteins that occurred during Tau secretion from neurons. Among the many Tau interacting proteins revealed by AP-MS, the interaction of mitochondrial proteins with wild-type Tau (TauWT) was more robust than with TauV337M or TauP301L. The mitochondrial proteins that preferentially interacted with TauWT comprised a protein module that is downregulated in multi-omics analyses of human AD brains. Mitochondrial bioenergetics were altered in TauV337M compared to TauWT human iPSC-derived neurons confirming the impact of Tau on mitochondria. These Tau interactome analyses open up novel disease-related processes as potential therapeutic targets to block Tau-mediated pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
APEX proximity-dependent labeling and enrichment of biotinylated proteins To start proximity-dependent labeling by APEX, the neuronal media was removed and cells were washed with extracellular solution warmed to 37°C containing (in mM): 140 NaCl, 5 KCl, 2.5 CaCl2, 2 MgCl2, 10 HEPES, 10 glucose at pH 7.4. Then neurons were incubated in extracellular solution with biotin-phenol (500 µM, Adipogen) in a 37°C cell culture incubator for 30 minutes. The neurons were next treated with 1 mM hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) for 1 minute and quickly washed once with Dulbecco’s phosphate buffered saline (DPBS) followed by two washes with quenching solution consisting of 1 x PBS with 10 mM sodium azide, 10 mM sodium ascorbate, and 5 mM Trolox. The quenching solution was removed, and the neurons were either fixed for immunocytochemistry or lysed to extract proteins. The neurons were lysed at 4°C in buffer containing 50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 0.2% SDS, 2% Triton, 1 mM DTT, a protease inhibitor tablet (Pierce), phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Sigma), 10 mM sodium azide, 10 mM sodium ascorbate, and 5 mM Trolox. The samples were sonicated and then centrifuged at 16,500 g for 10 minutes at 4°C. The collected supernatant was then subjected to dialysis to remove excess free biotin using a Slide-A-Lyzer MINI dialysis device (Thermo Scientific). Proteins were precipitated by adding 9 parts methanol to 1 part lysate. The supernatant was discarded, and the precipitated protein pellet was washed once with methanol and then dried by vacuum centrifugation. Protein was resuspended in 8M urea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, then sonicated with a probe sonicator for 1 minute to re-solubilize the proteins. A Bradford Assay was performed to determine protein concentration and 1 mg of protein was taken out to be processed further. TCEP was added to 4 mM and incubated for half an hour at room temperature. Each sample was treated with 10 mM iodoacetamide, then excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 10 mM DTT. The samples were diluted 4-fold with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin (Promega) was added in a 1:100 enzyme:substrate ratio and samples were incubated overnight at 37°C with agitation. The digested samples were desalted on a 50 mg SepPak column and eluted peptides were dried thoroughly via vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were dissolved in IAP buffer containing 50 mM MOPS, 10 mM HNa2PO4, 50 mM NaCl at pH 7.5. Anti-biotin beads (Immune Chem Pharmaceuticals) were washed twice in IAP buffer before the samples were added to the beads for incubation on a rotator for two hours at 4°C. The beads were washed twice with IAP buffer and twice with H2O (HPLC-grade). The biotinylated peptides were eluted from the beads by 0.15% TFA with vortexing followed by a 10 minute incubation. The elution was repeated twice and the supernatants were collected for desalting on NEST C18 tips then drying by vacuum centrifugation.   Flag pulldown of Tau Neuron cultures were washed three times with DPBS before cold lysis buffer was added containing 50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP40, a protease inhibitor tablet (Pierce), and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Sigma) at pH 7.4.  The samples were lysed by 2 freeze/thaw cycles and then centrifuged at 16,500 g for 15 minutes at 4°C. Magnetic anti-flag beads (Sigma) were washed twice with IP buffer containing 50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.4). Lysates were added to the beads and incubated with rotation at 4°C for 2 hours. The beads were then washed twice times with 50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.05% NP40 (pH 7.4) and then with two additional washes using IP buffer. To elute proteins from the beads a 3xFLAG peptide (100 ug/mL, Sigma) with 0.05% RapiGest in IP buffer was added to the beads for 15 minutes at room temperature with agitation. The elution was repeated a second time and the supernatants were combined with the addition of 1.7M urea, 50 mM Tris, and 1 mM DTT. The samples were incubated at 60°C for 15 minutes, then 3mM iodoacetamide was added for 45 minutes at room temperature. After adding 3mM DTT the samples were digested with trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. Trypsinized samples were acidified with 0.5% TFA then desalted on a C18 stage tip and dried by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry Analyses Samples were resuspended in 4% formic acid, 4% acetonitrile solution, separated by a reversed-phase gradient over a nanoflow column (360 µm O.D. x 75 µm I.D.) packed with 25 cm of 1.8 µm Reprosil C18 particles with (Dr. Maisch). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% FA and mobile phase B consisted of 80% ACN/0.1% FA. Biotinylated peptides were separated by an organic gradient from 12% to 22% mobile phase B over 35 minutes followed by an increase to 40% B over 40 minutes, then held at 100% B for 6 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/minute. Eluting peptides were directly injected into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo). Data was collected in positive ion mode with MS1 detection in profile mode in the orbitrap using 120,000 resolution, 350-1400 m/z scan range, 100 ms maximum injection, and an AGC target of 1e6.  MS2 fragmentation was performed on charge states from 2-6 with a 30s dynamic exclusion, and all MS2 data was collected in centroid mode at a rapid scan rate in the ion trap with HCD (32% normalized collision energy), 15ms maximum injection time, 2e4 AGC. Peptides resulting from FLAG-purified samples were separated by an organic gradient from 7% to 36% mobile phase B over 53 minutes followed by an increase to 95% B over 7 minutes, then held at 90% B for 6 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/minute. Eluting peptides were directly injected into a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo). Data was collected in positive ion mode with MS1 detection in profile mode in the orbitrap using 70,000 resolution, 350-1500 m/z scan range, 250 ms maximum injection, and an AGC target of 1e6.  MS2 fragmentation was performed on charge states from 2-6 with automatic dynamic exclusion, and all MS2 data was collected in centroid mode in the orbitrap at 17,500 resolution with HCD (26% normalized collision energy), 60ms maximum injection time, 5e4 AGC. All raw MS data were searched with MaxQuant against the human proteome (Uniprot canonical protein sequences downloaded March 21, 2018 for anti-biotin samples, or July 21, 2017 for FLAG-purified samples).  Peptides, proteins, and PTMs were filtered to 1% false discovery rate in MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008).  MaxQuant default parameters were used with the exception that label-free quantifcation was turned on with match between runs set to 1 min, and for anti-biotin purified samples a variable mass addition of biotin-phenol (361.14601 Da) on Y residues was considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ppi, Tau, Apex

### Affiliations
UCSF

### Submitter
Danielle Swaney

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan Krogan
UCSF


