### Accession
PXD010500

### Title
Mouse osteoclast-small extracellular vesicles LC-MSMS

### Description
Small extracellular vesicles secreted from maturing osteoclasts were collected and analyzed for identifying their protein components

### Sample Protocol
Mouse osteoclast precursor like cell line Raw264.7 cells were seeded (1×10^4 cells/cm^2) in α-MEM containing 10% FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 ng/mL of GST fused soluble RANKL, and 10 ng/mL macrophage colony stimulating factor. To analyze the products of osteoclast derived small extracellular vesicles, culture supernatants were subjected to serial centrifugations (300 ×g for 10 min, 800 ×g for 10 min, 16,000 ×g for 20 min, and 100,000 ×g for 60 min), and then the final pellet was collected (maturing osteoclast-small extracellular vesicles; mOC-SEVs). The proteins contained in mOC-SEVs was lysed with lysis buffer (PBS supplemented with 0.1 % NP-40). The lysed proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 56 ºC for 30 min and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide at 37 ºC for 30 min. The proteins were then digested with trypsin added at a ratio of 1/50 (w/w) and incubated for 4 hours. The digested proteins were further digested with trypsin added at a ratio of 1/50 (w/w) and incubated for 12 hours. The digested peptides obtained from 2 µg proteins were analyzed on an Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 LC column (75 μm × 150 mm) at 45 ºC, using Easy-nLC connected to Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were separated by a 220 min linear gradient of from 0 to 35 % ACN with 0.1 % formic acid at 300 nl/min, followed by a linear increase to 80 % ACN in 10 min and 80 % for 25 min. Mass spectrometry was performed in the data-dependent MS/MS mode with survey scan acquired at a resolution of 70,000 between 350–1,500 m/z. Up to top 15 most abundant isotope patterns with charge of 2–4 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.0 m/z, fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energy of 27, and analyzed at a resolution of 17,500. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 60 msec for both scan modes, and the ion target value were 3E5 and 5E5, respectively. To minimize repeat sequencing of peptides, dynamic exclusion of the sequenced peptides for 45 sec.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer ver 1.3 (Thermo Scientific). The fragmentation spectra were searched against UniProt database using MASCOT search engine. The target taxonomy was set to Mus musculus, and allowable maximum missed cleavage site is set to 2. Tolerances the peptide mass tolerance value were set to 10 ppm for precursor mass and 0.02 Da for fragment mass. Carabamidomethlyation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and phosphoryklation of tyrosine, serine and threonine were chosen as variable modifications for database searching.  Both peptide and protein identifications were filtered at 1% false discovery rate using Peptide Validator, and the proteins identified at high confidence was judged as proteins incorporated in or associated with mOC-SEVs.

### Publication Abstract
Receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappa B (RANK) ligand (RANKL) binds RANK on the surface of osteoclast precursors to trigger osteoclastogenesis. Recent studies have indicated that osteocytic RANKL has an important role in osteoclastogenesis during bone remodelling; however, the role of osteoblastic RANKL remains unclear. Here we show that vesicular RANK, which is secreted from the maturing osteoclasts, binds osteoblastic RANKL and promotes bone formation by triggering RANKL reverse signalling, which activates Runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2). The proline-rich motif in the RANKL cytoplasmic tail is required for reverse signalling, and a&#xa0;RANKL(Pro29Ala) point mutation reduces activation of the reverse signalling pathway. The coupling of bone resorption and formation is disrupted in RANKL(Pro29Ala) mutant mice, indicating that osteoblastic RANKL functions as a coupling signal acceptor that recognizes vesicular RANK. RANKL reverse signalling is therefore a potential pharmacological target for avoiding the reduced bone formation associated with inhibition of osteoclastogenesis.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Small extracellular vesicles, Osteoclast

### Affiliations
Deparment of Pharmacy, The University of Tokyo Hospital
Department of Pharmacy, The University of Tokyo Hospital

### Submitter
Yoshiaki Kariya

### Lab Head
Dr Hiroshi Suzuki
Department of Pharmacy, The University of Tokyo Hospital


