### Accession
PXD041205

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis reveals apoE4-dependent phosphorylation of the actin regulating protein VASP

### Description
Apolipoprotein (apo) E4 is the major genetic risk factor for Alzheimer’s Disease (AD). While neurons generally produce a minority of the apoE in the central nervous system, neuronal expression of apoE increases dramatically in response to stress and is sufficient to drive pathology. Currently, the molecular mechanisms of how apoE4 expression may regulate pathology are not fully understood. Here we expand upon our previous studies measuring the impact of apoE4 on protein abundance to include the analysis of protein phosphorylation and ubiquitylation signaling in isogenic Neuro-2a cells expressing apoE3 or apoE4. We find that apoE4 expression results in the dramatic increase in VASP S235 phosphorylation in a PKA-dependent manner. This phosphorylation results in the loss of VASP interactions with numerous actin cytoskeletal and microtubular proteins. Reduction of VASP S235 phosphorylation via PKA inhibition results in a significant increase in filopodia formation and neurite outgrowth in apoE4-expressing cells to levels beyond that of apoE3. Our results highlight the pronounced and diverse impact of apoE4 on multiple modes of protein regulation and identify potential therapeutic targets to restore apoE4-related cytoskeletal defects.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and digestion. Cells were lysed by probe sonication on ice in a buffer composed of 8 M urea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, and cOmplete mini protease (Cat.#1183615300, Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (PHOSS-RO, Roche). Proteins were reduced by the addition of 4 mM TCEP and incubated at 22°C for 30 min. Cysteines were alkylated by the addition of 10 mM iodoacetamide and lysates were incubated in the dark at 22°C for 30 min. Alkylation was quenched by the addition of 10 mM DTT and lysates were further incubated in the dark at 22°C for 30 min. Next, proteins were digested overnight at 37°C by the addition of trypsin (Promega) at a 1:100 enzyme:substrate ratio. Samples were acidified to pH 2 with trifluoroacetic acid and desalted on C18 SepPak cartridges (Waters). Phosphopeptide enrichment. Immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) beads for phosphopeptide enrichment were prepared by stripping Ni-NTA Superflow beads (Qiagen) with 100 mM EDTA (pH 7.5), followed by loading of the beads with iron by incubated in 15 mM ferric chloride solution. The beads were then washed with water and then 15uL of beads were loaded into the top of a C18 microspin column. Approximately 1mg of desalted peptides was resuspended in 75% acetonitrile, 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid, and loaded onto IMAC tips by pipetting and incubated for 4 min, with intermittent mixing by pipetting. The lysate was then passed through the column, followed by 4 washes with 200 µL of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. The column was then equilibrated twice for 2 min with 200 µL of 0.5% formic acid, with intermittent mixing by pipetting. Next, the bound phosphorylated peptides were eluted from the IMAC beads onto the C18 column by the addition of 200 µL of 500 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7), which was incubated with the beads for 3 min with intermittent mixing by pipetting. The potassium phosphate elution was repeated once, and then the column was equilibrated twice for 15 s with 200 µL of 0.5% formic acid. Finally, the phosphopeptides were eluted from the C18 column twice by the addition of 75 µL of 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid and the eluted phosphopeptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Ubiquitylated peptide enrichment. Approximately 1/8th of a tube of anti PTMScan Ubiquitin Remnant Motif antibody beads (Cell Signaling Technologies) was used per sample. All steps were performed at 4°C unless otherwise noted. The beads were first washed twice in IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS, 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.2), 50 mM NaCl) and then ~5 mg of desalted peptides that had been resuspended in IAP was added to the beads. The samples were incubated with rotation for 90 min, and then the beads were washed twice with IAP buffer, followed by two washes with water. Next, peptides were eluted from the beads by the addition of 60 µL of 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid to the beads for 10 min with gentle vortexing. The supernatant containing the ubiquitin enriched peptide eluent was then transferred to a new tube, and the elution was repeated by the addition of another 60 µL of 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid. The second elution was combined with the first, and then desalted on C18 columns (The Nest Group). GFP-VASP Affinity Purification MS. Frozen cell pellets were thawed at room temperature and suspended in 0.5 mL Lysis Buffer [IP Buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4 at 4°C, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA) supplemented with 0.5% Nonidet P 40 Substitute (NP40; Fluka Analytical) and cOmplete mini EDTA-free protease and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Roche)]. Cell suspensions were immediately subjected to one freeze-thaw cycle (at least 20 min on dry ice and partial thawing at 37°C) then refrozen and kept at -80°C until immunoprecipitation. Lysis was completed by partially thawing frozen samples at 37°C and incubating on a tube rotator at 4°C for 30 min. After pelleting debris at 13,000 xg, 4°C for 15 minutes, 25 µL lysate was reserved before proceeding (below). 20 μL GFP-Trap beads were equilibrated twice with IP Wash Buffer (IP Buffer supplemented with 0.05% NP40) and incubated with cell lysates for 2 hours. Protein-bound beads were washed three times with IP Wash Buffer and then once with IP Buffer before elution. Beads were suspended with 50 µL 0.05% RapiGest in IP Buffer and gently agitated at room temperature for 30 min to elute proteins. Samples were incubated at 37°C or at room temperature with shaking for the following steps: Denaturation and reduction at 37°C for 30 minutes with 2 M urea and 1 mM DTT in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, alkylation at room temperature for 45 minutes with 3 mM iodoacetamide and quenching for 10 minutes with 3 mM DTT. Trypsin (0.5 μg/μL; Promega) was added twice and further incubated at 37°C for 4 hours and then another 2 hours. Peptides were acidified with TFA and desalted using a BioPureSPE Mini 96-well plate (20mg PROTO 300 C18; The Nest Group).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data acquisition. Peptides were resuspended in 4% formic acid and 3% acetonitrile and directly injected on a 75 μm ID column (New Objective) packed with 25 cm of Reprosil C18 1.9 μm, 120 Å particles (Dr. Maisch) for AB, PH, and UB experiments. For APMS experiments, peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic and and directly injected onto a PepSep column (Bruker) packed with 15 cm of Reprosil C18 1.5 μm, 120 Å particles (Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted in positive ion mode into an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an acetonitrile gradient delivered by an Easy1000 nLC system (PH, AB, and UB) or an Easy1200 nLC system (APMS) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All mobile phases contained 0.1% formic acid as buffer A. For AB and PH experiments the total MS acquisition time was 180 min, during which mobile phase buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) was ramped from 5% to 16% B over 114 min, followed by a ramp to 30% buffer B over a subsequent 50 min, and then a ramp to 95% B to wash the column. For the UB experiment the total MS acquisition time was 120 min, during which mobile phase buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) was ramped from 5% to 33% B over 105 min, followed by a ramp to 100% B to wash the column. For APMS experiments, the total MS acquisition time was 60 min, during which mobile phase buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) was ramped from 3% to 28% B over 44 min, followed by a ramp to 45% B over a subsequent 5 minutes, and lastly a ramp to 88% B to wash the column. For AB, PH, and UB experiments data was collected on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The ion transfer tube was set to 300°C, the spray voltage was 1800-2000V, MS1 scan was collected in the orbtrap in profile mode with 120K resolution over a scan range of 400-1600 m/z, a 100 ms maximum injection time, 2e6 AGC target, S-Lens RF of 60. Charges states 2-7 were considered for MS2 scan selection using MIPS filtering, exclusion of undetermined charge states, a 5e3 minimum signal intensity, and a 20s dynamic exclusion with a +/- 10 ppm window. MS2 scans were performed over the course of a 3s cycle, a 1.6 m/z quadrupole isolation, 29% (UB) or 30% (PH and AB) normalized collision energy, HCD fragmentation, a 110 m/z first mass, ion trap detection with a rapid scan rate, 35ms maximum injection time, 1e4 AGC target, centroid data type, and the allowance to injection ions for all available parallelizable time. For APMS experiments data was collected on an Orbtrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The ion transfer tube was set to 275°C, the spray voltage was 2000V, MS1 scan was collected in the orbtrap in profile mode with 240K resolution over a scan range of 350-1350 m/z, a 50 ms maximum injection time, 1e6 AGC target, S-Lens RF of 30. Charges states 2-5 were considered for MS2 scan selection using MIPS filtering, advance peak determination, exclusion of undetermined charge states, a 5e3 minimum signal intensity, and a 20s dynamic exclusion with a +/- 10 ppm window in which 2 occurrences were allowed. MS2 scans were performed over the course of a 1s cycle, a 0.7 m/z quadrupole isolation, 32% normalized collision energy, HCD fragmentation, a 200-1200 m/z scan range, ion trap detection with a rapid scan rate, 18ms maximum injection time, 3e4 AGC target, centroid data type. Proteomics data analysis. All data were searched against the Mus musculus UniProt database canonical sequences. Additionally, APMS data was searched against the human apoE3 and apoE4 sequences, as well as the Raph1 mouse sequence. Peptide and protein identification searches, as well as label-free quantitation were performed using the MaxQuant data analysis algorithm (Cox and Mann, 2008), and all peptide, protein, and modification site identifications were filtered to a 1% false-discovery rate. Default MaxQuant settings were used, with the exception that match between runs was enabled with a window of 2 min (PH and AB), 1 min (UB), or 0.7 min (APMS) for each data type respectively. Additionally, for phosphorylation data a variable phosphorylation modification was considered on STY residues, while for ubiquitylation data a variable modification of di-glycine was considered on all K residues. Label-free quantification and statistical analysis for both global proteomics and APMS data was performed using MSstats (Choi et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Apolipoprotein (apo) E4 is the major genetic risk factor for Alzheimer's disease. While neurons generally produce a minority of the apoE in the central nervous system, neuronal expression of apoE increases dramatically in response to stress and is sufficient to drive pathology. Currently, the molecular mechanisms of how apoE4 expression may regulate pathology are not fully understood. Here, we expand upon our previous studies measuring the impact of apoE4 on protein abundance to include the analysis of protein phosphorylation and ubiquitylation signaling in isogenic Neuro-2a cells expressing apoE3 or apoE4. ApoE4 expression resulted in a dramatic increase in vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP) S235 phosphorylation in a protein kinase A (PKA)-dependent manner. This phosphorylation disrupted VASP interactions with numerous actin cytoskeletal and microtubular proteins. Reduction of VASP S235 phosphorylation via PKA inhibition resulted in a significant increase in filopodia formation and neurite outgrowth in apoE4-expressing cells, exceeding levels observed in apoE3-expressing cells. Our results highlight the pronounced and diverse impact of apoE4 on multiple modes of protein regulation and identify protein targets to restore apoE4-related cytoskeletal defects.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Ubiquitylation, Ppis, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
UCSF

### Submitter
Danielle Swaney

### Lab Head
Dr Danielle Swaney
UCSF


