### Accession
PXD021676

### Title
T7 DNA Polymerase with fluorescent unnatural amino acid

### Description
A T7 DNA polymerase variant with the fluorescent unnatural amino acid (7-hydroxycoumarin-4-yl) ethylglycine (7-HCou) incorporated at position 514 was expressed in E. coli and purified. The protein was then characterized by mass spec, pre-steady state kinetic experiments, and fluorescence measurements.

### Sample Protocol
Purified protein was separated by SDS-PAGE and the band corresponding to T7 gene product 5 (polymerase) was excised, reduced, alkylated, and trypsinized. The sample was analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion instrument with a 60 minute gradient.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed with Scaffold v4.8 and spectra were searched against a custom database of tripsin digested T7 DNA polymerase and common contaminants with up to 2 missed cleavages. Fixed cysteine carbamidomethyl modifications and variable methionine oxidation and variable glutamic acid substitution with 7-HCou were used in the search. Precursor peptide ions were filtered with a 10 ppm error tolerance and a 0.8 Da error tolerance for fragment ions.

### Publication Abstract
DNA polymerase from bacteriophage T7 undergoes large, substrate-induced conformational changes that are thought to account for high replication fidelity, but prior studies were adversely affected by mutations required to construct a Cys-lite variant needed for site-specific fluorescence labeling. Here we have optimized the direct incorporation of a fluorescent un-natural amino acid, (7-hydroxy-4-coumarin-yl)-ethylglycine, using orthogonal amber suppression machinery in <i>Escherichia coli</i> MS methods verify that the unnatural amino acid is only incorporated at one position with minimal background. We show that the single fluorophore provides a signal to detect nucleotide-induced conformational changes through equilibrium and stopped-flow kinetic measurements of correct nucleotide binding and incorporation. Pre-steady-state chemical quench methods show that the kinetics and fidelity of DNA replication catalyzed by the labeled enzyme are largely unaffected by the unnatural amino acid. These advances enable rigorous analysis to establish the kinetic and mechanistic basis for high-fidelity DNA replication.

### Keywords
Dna polymerase, T7, Unnatural amino acid, 7-hydroxycoumarin-4-yl ethylglycine

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin
Molecular Biosciences, University of Texas at Austin, USA

### Submitter
Tyler Dangerfield

### Lab Head
Dr Kenneth A. Johnson
Molecular Biosciences, University of Texas at Austin, USA


