### Accession
PXD002233

### Title
KSR1 and genotoxic agents in MCF7 (SILAC-MS)

### Description
We use KSR1 overexpression and exposure to doxorubin or etoposide in MCF7 cells  to reveal a comprehensive repertoire of thousands of proteins identified in each dataset and compare the unique proteomic profile as well as functional connections modulated by KSR1 after doxorubicin (Doxo-KSR1) or etoposide (Etop-KSR1) stimulus. From the up-regulated top hits, several proteins, including STAT1, ISG15 and TAP1 were also found to be positively associated with KSR1 expression in patient samples. Moreover, high KSR1 expression, as well as high abundance of these proteins, is correlated with better survival in breast cancer patients who underwent chemotherapy. Our data exemplify a broad functional network conferred by KSR1 with genotoxic agents and highlight its implication in predicting chemotherapy response in breast cancer.

### Sample Protocol
To generate SILAC conditions, normal DMEM medium deficient in arginine (R) and lysine (K) was complemented with stable isotope-encoded arginine and lysine as de- scribed previously [15]. Briefly, for ‘‘medium’’ labelling we used L-[ 13 C 6 ] arginine (R6) and L-[ 2 H 4 ] lysine (K4), and for ‘‘heavy’’ labelling we used L-[ 13 C 6 , 15 N 4 ] arginine (R10) and L-[ 13 C 6 , 15 N 2 ] lysine (K8). For the ‘‘light’’ condition, or unlabelled, L-[ 12 C 6 , 14 N 4 ] arginine (R0) and L-[ 12 C 6 , 14 N 2 ] lysine (K0) were used. The tissue culture media were supplemented with 10 % dialyzed fetal bovine serum with 10 kDa MWCO, 1 % (10 mg/ml) strepto- mycin/(10,000 units/ml) penicillin, 2 mM glutamine and 1 mM sodium pyruvate. The SILAC media were obtained from Dundee Cell Products Ltd (Dundee, UK). MCF7 cells were grown in these custom DMEM mediums along with 10 % dialysed FCS.   Prior to protein digestion, equal amounts of protein (80 lg) from unlabelled and labelled samples were combined. Samples were reduced in 10 mM DTT and alkylated in 50 mM Iodoacetamide prior to boiling in loading buffer, and then separated by one-dimensional SDS-PAGE (4–12 % Bis–Tris Novex mini-gel, Invitrogen) and visu- alised by colloidal Coomassie staining (Novex, Invitrogen). The entire protein gel lanes were excised and cut into 10 slices each. Every gel slice was subjected to in-gel diges- tion with trypsin overnight at 37 °C. The resulting tryptic peptides were extracted by formic acid (1 %) and ace- tonitrile (CH 3 CN), lyophilized in a speedvac and resus- pended in 1 % formic acid.  Trypsin-digested peptides were separated using an Ulti- mate 3000 RSLC (Thermo Scientific) nanoflow LC system. On average 0.5 lg was loaded with a constant flow of 5 ll/ min onto an Acclaim PepMap100 nanoViper C18 trap column (100 lm inner-diameter, 2 cm; Themro Scientific). After trap enrichment, peptides were eluted onto an Ac- claim PepMap RSLC nanoViper, C18 column (75 lm, 15 cm; Thermo Scientific) with a linear gradient of 2–40 % solvent B (80 % acetonitrile with 0.08 % formic acid) over 65 min with a constant flow of 300 nl/min. The HPLC system was coupled to a linear ion trap Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Velos, Thermo Scien- tific) via a nano electrospray ion source (Thermo Scien- tific). The spray voltage was set to 1.2 kV, and the temperature of the heated capillary was set to 250 °C. Full- scan MS survey spectra (m/z 335–1800) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 after accumulation of 1000,000 ions. The fifteen most in- tense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (nor- malised collision energy, 35 %; activation Q, 0.250; and activation time, 10 ms) in the LTQ Orbitrap after the ac- cumulation of 10,000 ions. Maximal filling times were 1000 ms for the full scans and 150 ms for the MS/MS scans. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled, and all unassigned charge states as well as singly charged species were rejected. The dynamic exclusion list was re- stricted to a maximum of 500 entries with a maximum retention period of 180 s and a relative mass window of 15 ppm. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy [17]. Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometric data files obtained for each ex- periment were collated into a single quantitated dataset using MaxQuant (1.3.0.5) [18] and the Andromeda search engine software (1.3.0.5) [19]. The sequence database used was from ipi.HUMAN v.3.68. Enzyme specificity was set to that of trypsin, allowing for cleavage N-terminal to proline residues and between aspartic acid and proline residues. Other pa- rameters used were: (i) variable modifications, methionine oxidation, protein N-acetylation, gln ? pyro-glu; (ii) fixed modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation; (iii) database: target-decoy human MaxQuant; (iv) heavy labels: R6K4 and R10K8; (v) MS/MS tolerance: FTMS- 10 ppm, ITMS- 0.6 Da; (vi) minimum peptide length, 6; (vii) maximum missed cleavages, 2; (viii) maximum of labelled amino acids, 3; and (ix) false discovery rate, 1 %. Peptide ratios were cal- culated for each arginine- and/or lysine-containing peptide as the peak area of labelled arginine/lysine divided by the peak area of non-labelled arginine/lysine for each single-scan mass spectrum. Peptide ratios for all arginine- and lysine-contain- ing peptides sequenced for each protein were averaged. Data are normalised using 1/median ratio value for each identified protein group per labelled sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ksr1, Etoposide, Breast cancer, Silac, Doxorubicin

### Affiliations
Imperial College, London
Imperial College

### Submitter
Georgios Giamas

### Lab Head
Dr Georgios Giamas
Imperial College, London


