### Accession
PXD036441

### Title
Multi-omics of colon tumor progression organoids reveals putative mediators of colorectal cancer metastasis

### Description
The development of metastasis severely reduces the life expectancy of patients with colorectal cancer (CRC). Loss of SMAD4 is a key event in late-stage CRC resulting in the progression to metastatic CRC in 10-30% of the cases. However, the biological processes and underlying molecular mechanisms that it affects are not fully understood. Here, we applied a multi-omics approach to a CRC tumor progression organoid model that faithfully reflects the metastasis-inducing effects of SMAD4 inactivation. We show that loss of SMAD4 results in loss of differentiation and activation of pro-migratory and cell proliferation processes, which is accompanied by the disruption of several key oncogenic pathways, including the TGFB, WNT, and VEGF pathways. In addition, SMAD4 inactivation leads to increased secretion of proteins that are known to be involved in a variety of pro-metastatic processes. Finally, we show that one of the factors that is specifically secreted by metastatic organoids – DKK3 –  reduces the anti-tumor effects of natural killer cells (NKCs). Altogether, our data provides promising new targets concerning the role of SMAD4 perturbation and metastatic disease in CRC.

### Sample Protocol
Whole-cell proteomics was performed by subjecting whole cell lysate of colon tumor progression organoids to FASP-SAX. Samples were measured on a ThermoScientific HFX QE mass spectrometer. For secretomics, nascent protein was labeled with azidohomoalanine and enriched from conditioned medium from tumor progression organoids by click-chemistry. Next, proteins were digested on-bead and measured by a ThermoScientific HFX QE mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics: Protein identification and quantification was done in MaxQuant v1.6.0.1 with default settings, with match-between-runs, iBAQ and label-free quantification enabled. Carbamidomethylation was specified as fixed cysteine modification, and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. The MS/MS spectra were searched against a human Uniprot database downloaded in June 2017.  Common contaminants and decoy database hits were removed from the resulting MaxQuant proteinGroups file and alias gene names were replaced with official gene symbols using the Limma package (Ritchie et al., 2015). If this resulted in duplicate entries, the entry with the highest number of razor+unique peptides was retained. Differentially enriched protein analysis was performed using the DEP package (X. Zhang et al., 2018). All protein groups that were detected in at least all but one replicates of at least one condition were considered for downstream analysis. Imputation of missing values was performed using the MinProb method with the default settings. All proteins that showed an adjusted p-value < 0.05 and an absolute fold change > 1.5 were considered to be differentially expressed.   Secretomics: Protein identification and quantification was done in MaxQuant v1.5.7.1 (Cox & Mann, 2008) with standard settings and requantify enabled. Methionine-to-AHA (-4.98632 Da) and methionine-to-diaminobutanoate (-31.9846 Da) were allowed as variable modifications, in addition to the default N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation modifications. Carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed cysteine modification. Light (+0) and medium (+4) dimethyl labeling on the N-termini and lysine residues was specified under ‘labels’. The MS/MS spectra were searched against a human Uniprot database downloaded in June 2017.  Maxquant protein groups were filtered as described under ‘Proteomics’. All proteins that were detected in both the forward- and reverse-labeled samples of both biological replicates were considered for downstream analysis. The forward and reverse ratios of the two experiments were averaged, and this was used as relative expression values. All proteins with a mean absolute fold change > 2 in both the forward- and reverse-labeled experiment were considered to be differentially secreted.

### Publication Abstract
The development of metastasis severely reduces the life expectancy of patients with colorectal cancer (CRC). Although loss of SMAD4 is a key event in CRC progression, the resulting changes in biological processes in advanced disease and metastasis are not fully understood. Here, we applied a multiomics approach to a CRC organoid model that faithfully reflects the metastasis-supporting effects of SMAD4 inactivation. We show that loss of SMAD4 results in decreased differentiation and activation of pro-migratory and cell proliferation processes, which is accompanied by the disruption of several key oncogenic pathways, including the TGF&#x3b2;, WNT, and VEGF pathways. In addition, SMAD4 inactivation leads to increased secretion of proteins that are known to be involved in a variety of pro-metastatic processes. Finally, we show that one of the factors that is specifically secreted by <i>SMAD</i>4-mutant organoids&#x2500;DKK3&#x2500;reduces the antitumor effects of natural killer cells (NK cells). Altogether, our data provide new insights into the role of SMAD4 perturbation in advanced CRC.

### Keywords
Colon cancer, Smad4, Whole-cell proteomics, Secretomics, Metastasis

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences (RIMLS), Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
RIMLS 

### Submitter
Jelmer Dijkstra

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences (RIMLS), Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands


