### Accession
PXD028040

### Title
Patch-Clamp Proteomics of Single Neurons in Tissue Using Electrophysiology and Subcellular Capillary Electrophoresis Mass Spectrometry

### Description
In this project, we enabled mass spectrometry based proteomics characterization of  single neurons in sections of the mouse brain. We accessed cells in a whole-cell patch clamp configuration and aspirated a portion of the neuronal soma into the patch clamp probe. The collected aspirate was expelled into a microvial, where proteins were extracted and processed for shot-gun analysis. The resulting trace amounts of protein digests were analyzed on a custom-built microanalytical capillary electrophoresis platform that was connected to an electrospray ionization high-resolution mass spectrometer. This “patch proteomics” technology identified ~150 proteins from triplicate measurement of single dopaminergic neurons in the mouse substantia nigra.

### Sample Protocol
Dopaminergic neurons were identified based on location and electrophysiology. A portion of the neural soma was microaspirated, and the collected proteins were extracted and trypsin-digested. The peptide samples were TMT barcoded, vacuum-concentrated, and suspended in 50% acetonitrile with 0.05% acetic acid. The resulting samples were analyzed on a custom-built capillary electrophoresis platform. Electrophoresis was performed in a background electrolyte consisting of 25% acetonitrile with 1 M formic acid. Following ionization in a custom-built CE electrospray ion source, peptide ions were detected using a high-resolution mass spectrometer equipped with a hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap analyzer executing tandem mass spectrometry via data-dependent acquisition (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo).

### Data Protocol
The proteomic mass spectrometry data were processed in MaxQuant 1.6.3.3 using the Andromeda search engine against the mouse proteome (downloaded from UniProt on September 6, 2018). Peptide and protein search parameters were standard. Identifications at both the peptide and protein level were filtered to <1% false discovery rate, calculated against a reversed-sequence decoy database.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding of the relationship between cellular function and molecular composition holds a key to next-generation therapeutics but requires measurement of all types of molecules in cells. Developments in sequencing enabled semiroutine measurement of single-cell genomes and transcriptomes, but analytical tools are scarce for detecting diverse proteins in tissue-embedded cells. To bridge this gap for neuroscience research, we report the integration of patch-clamp electrophysiology with subcellular shot-gun proteomics by high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS). Recording of electrical activity permitted identification of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta. Ca. 20-50% of the neuronal soma content, containing an estimated 100 pg of total protein, was aspirated into the patch pipette filled with ammonium bicarbonate. About 1 pg of somal protein, or &#x223c;0.25% of the total cellular proteome, was analyzed on a custom-built capillary electrophoresis (CE) electrospray ionization platform using orbitrap HRMS for detection. A series of experiments were conducted to systematically enhance detection sensitivity through refinements in sample processing and detection, allowing us to quantify &#x223c;275 different proteins from somal aspirate-equivalent protein digests from cultured neurons. From single neurons, patch-clamp proteomics of the soma quantified 91, 80, and 95 different proteins from three different dopaminergic neurons or 157 proteins in total. Quantification revealed detectable proteomic differences between the somal protein samples. Analysis of canonical knowledge predicted rich interaction networks between the observed proteins. The integration of patch-clamp electrophysiology with subcellular CE-HRMS proteomics expands the analytical toolbox of neuroscience.

### Keywords
Mouse, Capillary electrophoresis, Electrophysiology, Nervous system, Whole-cell patch-clamp, Mass spectrometry, Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Maryland, College Park
Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA

### Submitter
Peter Nemes

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Nemes
Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA


