### Accession
PXD028162

### Title
Integrated Multi-Omics Reveal Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 Restricts Human Trophoblast Induction

### Description
Human naive pluripotent stem cells have unrestricted lineage potential. Underpinning this property, naive cells are thought to lack chromatin-based lineage barriers. However, this assumption has not been tested. Here, we apply multi-omics to comprehensively define the chromatin-associated proteome, histone post-translational modifications and transcriptome of human naive and primed pluripotent stem cells. Integrating the chromatin-bound proteome and histone modification data sets reveals differences in the relative abundance and activities of distinct chromatin modules, identifying a strong enrichment of Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2)-associated H3K27me3 in naive pluripotent stem cell chromatin. Single-cell approaches and human blastoid models reveal that PRC2 activity acts as a chromatin barrier restricting the differentiation of naive cells towards the trophoblast lineage, and inhibiting PRC2 promotes trophoblast fate induction and cavity formation. Our results establish that human naive pluripotent stem cells are not epigenetically unrestricted, but instead possess chromatin mechanisms that oppose the induction of alternative cell fates. Data originating from the LC-MS/MS analysis of the histone PTMs can be consulted via this project.

### Sample Protocol
Histone extraction was performed starting from frozen cell pellets by isolating the nuclei through resuspension in hypotonic lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2), complemented with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and complete protease inhibitors (Roche) at 4∗10ˆ6 cells per 800µl. To promote lysis, cells were rotated for 30 min at 4°C and centrifuged for 10 min at 16000 g. Resuspension of the nuclei in 0.4N HCl (cell density of 8∗10ˆ3 cells/μl) was followed by incubation on a rotator for 30 min at 4°C and centrifugation for 10 min at 16000 g. The supernatant was transferred, and histones were precipitated by using 33% trichloroacetic acid (TCA). The samples were incubated on ice for 30 min followed by centrifugation for 10 min at 16000 g and 4°C. After removal of the supernatant, the samples were washed twice with ice-cold acetone followed by centrifugation for 5 min at 16000 g and 4°C in order to remove the remaining TCA. Of the resulting histone extracts, a fraction corresponding to 4*10^5 cells were isolated for histone quantification and normalization through 1D-PAGE on a 9-18% TGX gel (Biorad). Propionylation and digestion was performed on the remaining 3,6*10^6 cells (= 22,5 μg) of each sample as previously described (10.1002/pmic.201600045, 10.1002/pmic.201600341). Briefly, histones were resuspended in 20 μl 1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and 20μl propionylation reagent (isopropanol:propionic anhydride (158:2)). Following a 30 min incubation at room temperature, 20 μl MilliQ water was added, and the samples were incubated for 30 min at 37°C. After vacuum drying, the samples were resuspended in 500 mM TEAB, 1 mM CaCl2, 5% ACN and trypsin (1:20 ratio) to a final volume of 50 µl. The samples were incubated overnight at 37°C and vacuum dried. The propionylation-reaction was carried out once more, identically to the first reaction, to cap newly formed peptide N-termini. Over-propionylation of serine (S), threonine (T) and tyrosine (Y) was reversed by adding 50 μl 0.5 M NH2OH and 15 μl NH4OH at pH 12 to the vacuum dried samples for 20 minutes at room temperature. Lastly, 30 μl 100% formic acid (FA) was added and samples were vacuum dried. The propionylated samples, complemented with a Beta-Galactosidase (ß-gal) (Sciex) / MPDS (Waters) internal standard, were resuspended in 0,1% FA resulting in 1.5 μg histones and 50 fmol ß-gal / MPDS on column in a 9 µl injection. A quality control (QC) mixture was created by combining 2 μl of each sample. Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) was performed on a TripleTOF 6600+ operating in positive mode (AB Sciex) coupled to an Eksigent NanoLC 425 HPLC system (Eksigent) operating in capillary flow mode (5 μl/min). Trapping and separation of the peptides was respectively carried out on a Triart C18 column (5 x 0.5 mm, YMC) and a Phenomenex Luna Omega Polar C18 column (150 x 0.3 mm, particle size 3 µm) by using a low pH reverse phase gradient. Buffer A and B of the mobile phase consisted respectively of 0,1% FA in water and 0,1% FA in ACN. A 60 min gradient going from 3%–45% Buffer B, with a total run time of 75 min per sample, was applied. The samples were run in a randomized fashion and every five samples a QC injection was incorporated. Each cycle, one full MS1 scan (m/z 400-1250) of 250 ms was followed by an MS2 (m/z 65–2000, high sensitivity mode) of 200 ms. Per cycle, a maximum of 10 precursors (charge state +2 to +5) exceeding 300 cps were monitored followed by an exclusion for 10 s. A rolling collision energy (CE) with a spread of 15V and a cycle time of 2,3 s was applied.

### Data Protocol
Histone PTM analysis Mass spectrometric data analysis was performed as previously described (10.1016/j.mex.2020.101055 ). For all runs, raw data were imported in Progenesis QIP 3.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters) followed by alignment, feature detection, and normalization. Next, an ∗.mgf file was created based on the twenty MS/MS spectra closest to the elution apex and exported for searches using Mascot (Matrix Science). First, a standard search was performed on the exported *.mgf file to identify non-propionylated standards (ß-gal and MPDS) and to verify underpropionylation. Second, to identify the proteins present in the sample and to detect unexpected PTMs, an error tolerant search without biological modifications was carried out against a complete Human Swissprot database (downloaded from Uniprot and supplemented with contaminants from the cRAP database (https: //www.thegpm.org/crap/)). Subsequently, a FASTA-database was created based on the results of the error tolerant search. In addition, the highest ranking PTMs that emerged from this search, complemented with the biologically most interesting PTMs (acetylations and methylations), were selected to establish a 9 PTM-set for further analysis. Next, the three MS/MS spectra closest to the elution apex per feature were merged into a single ∗.mgf file and exported for a Mascot-search including the following parameters: 1) a mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and 50 ppm for the precursor ions and the fragment ions respectively; 2) Arg-C enzyme specificity, allowing for up to one missed cleavage site; 3) variable modifications included acetylation, butyrylation, crotonylation, and trimethylation on K, methylation on R, dimethylation on both K and R, deamidation on asparagine (N), glutamine (Q) and R (the latter representing citrullination), phosphorylation on serine (S) and threonine (T), and oxidation of methionine (M); and 4) fixed modifications included N-terminal propionylation and propionylation on K. The search was performed against the above mentioned custom-made FASTA-database. This Mascot result file (∗.xml-format) was imported into Progenesis QIP 3.0 for annotation. To resolve isobaric near-coelution, features that were identified as histone-peptidoforms were manually validated and curated by an expert. To correct for variations in sample loading, samples were normalized against all histone peptides. Outlier detection and removal was done based on the principal component analysis (PCA). Finally, the deconvoluted peptide ion data of all histones was exported from Progenesis QIP 3.0 for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Histone post-translational modifications, Hpscs, Prc2, Lc-ms/ms, Trophoblast

### Affiliations
ProGenTomics, Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent University, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium
Faculity of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology

### Submitter
Maarten Dhaenens

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Dhaenens
ProGenTomics, Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent University, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium


