### Accession
PXD002179

### Title
CN-CHPP 2015 Testis Project -  Tissue-Based Proteogenomics Reveals that Human Testis Endows Plentiful Missing Proteins

### Description
The testis tissue-based trans-omics was a feasible approach to find more missing proteins (MPs) because it was reported higher gene expression found in testis tissues. Three testis tissues and two protein separation strategies were selected to quantitatively evaluate gene expression abundance at the proteomic and transcriptomic levels. The project have been jointly supervised by Ping Xu and Siqi Liu.

### Sample Protocol
Extracted proteins were resolved by a regular SDS-PAGE (10%) and Tricine-SDS-PAGE (12%), respectively. The gel lanes were cut into multiple bands and digested with trypsin before LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide mixture were separated and analyzed by UPLC (nano AcquityUltra Performance LC, USA)-MS/MS (LTQ OrbitrapVelos, USA) platform. Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 30,000 and target values of 1,000,000 ions over a mass range between 300-1,600 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS data was converted into MGF format and searched by the three search engines (OMSSA v2.1.8, X!Tandem v2009.10.01.1 and MS-GF+ v9733) against the human Swiss-Prot database (2014-12-22) and a contamination database (245 sequences), a decoy (reverse) database was searched meanwhile. Several parameters were set for peptide searching, carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. The precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm, and the product ion tolerance for MS/MS was 0.6 Da. The results from the three search engines were then integrated by IPeak which is a tool to combine multiple search engine results.

### Publication Abstract
Investigations of missing proteins (MPs) are being endorsed by many bioanalytical strategies. We proposed that proteogenomics of testis tissue was a feasible approach to identify more MPs because testis tissues have higher gene expression levels. Here we combined proteomics and transcriptomics to survey gene expression in human testis tissues from three post-mortem individuals. Proteins were extracted and separated with glycine- and tricine-SDS-PAGE. A total of 9597 protein groups were identified; of these, 166 protein groups were listed as MPs, including 138 groups (83.1%) with transcriptional evidence. A total of 2948 proteins are designated as MPs, and 5.6% of these were identified in this study. The high incidence of MPs in testis tissue indicates that this is a rich resource for MPs. Functional category analysis revealed that the biological processes that testis MPs are mainly involved in are sexual reproduction and spermatogenesis. Some of the MPs are potentially involved in tumorgenesis in other tissues. Therefore, this proteogenomics analysis of individual testis tissues provides convincing evidence of the discovery of MPs. All mass spectrometry data from this study have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange (data set identifier PXD002179).

### Keywords
Testis, Transcriptome, Missing proteins, Proteome, Chromosome-centric human proteome project

### Affiliations
Proteomics
BGI-shenzhen

### Submitter
Bo Wen

### Lab Head
Dr Siqi Liu
BGI-shenzhen


