### Accession
PXD027282

### Title
Proteomics informed deconvolution of 3 cell lines

### Description
The project aimed to investigate the possibility to use proteomics data to deconvolute cell line proportions in mixed samples. Samples containing either HEK 293, Caco-2, or A549 cells and mixtures of the three cell lines was analysed using the total protein approach. This was then used for proteomics informed deconvolution. The results show that proteome deconvolution provides an effective tool for investigating cellular composition in mixed samples. This was later applied also to in silico mixtures of primary human liver cells and liver tissue. However, those data are presented elsewhere.

### Sample Protocol
The cell lines HEK 293 (human embryonic kidney), Caco-2 (colorectal carcinoma), and A549 (human non-small cell lung cancer) were cultured as previously described (Treyer et al., 2019). Samples were prepared as separate cell lines, i.e. containing either only one of the cell lines, or as mixtures of known proportions of the three cell lines, blinded for the operator, and not decoded until deconvolution of the individual cell types in the mixtures was complete. The samples contained six million cells each. The samples were prepared for proteomics analysis using a slightly modified MED-FASP protocol as previously described (Ölander et al., 2020; Wiśniewski and Rakus, 2014). In short, the samples were lysed in a buffer containing 50 mM DTT and 2% SDS in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.8. Protein concentration was measured using the tryptophan fluorescence method (Wiśniewski and Gaugaz, 2015). The following proteolytic digestion was subsequently performed with Lys C and trypsin as digestion enzymes. The peptides were desalted using C18 filters and injected on an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Palo Alto, CA, USA). An EASY-Spray C18 column with 50 cm length and 75 µm inner diameter was used and the peptides were eluted using a 145 min water/acetonitrile gradient. The QExactive HF was set to use the Top15 method (full MS followed by 15 ddMS2 scans).

### Data Protocol
The data were analysed using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.16 with the complete human proteome extracted from UniProtKB version 2015 June. Protein concentrations were calculated using the Total Protein Approach (Wiśniewski and Rakus, 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Human liver tissue is composed of heterogeneous mixtures of different cell types and their cellular stoichiometry can provide information on hepatic physiology and disease progression. Deconvolution algorithms for the identification of cell types and their proportions have recently been developed for transcriptomic data. However, no method for the deconvolution of bulk proteomics data has been presented to date. Here, we show that proteomes, which usually contain less data than transcriptomes, can provide useful information for cell type deconvolution using different algorithms. We demonstrate that proteomes from defined mixtures of cell lines, isolated primary liver cells, and human liver biopsies can be deconvoluted with high accuracy. In contrast to transcriptome-based deconvolution, liver tissue proteomes also provided information about extracellular compartments. Using deconvolution of proteomics data from liver biopsies of 56 patients undergoing Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery we show that proportions of immune and stellate cells correlate with inflammatory markers and altered composition of extracellular matrix proteins characteristic of early-stage fibrosis. Our results thus demonstrate that proteome deconvolution can be used as a molecular microscope for investigations of the composition of cell types, extracellular compartments, and for exploring cell-type specific pathological events. We anticipate that these findings will allow the refinement of retrospective analyses of the growing number of proteome datasets from various liver disease states and pave the way for AI-supported clinical and preclinical diagnostics.

### Keywords
Caco-2, Hek 293, A549

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacy, Uppsala University, SE-75123 Uppsala, Sweden.
Uppsala University, Department of Pharmacy, Drug Delivery

### Submitter
Niklas Handin

### Lab Head
Dr Per Artursson
Department of Pharmacy, Uppsala University, SE-75123 Uppsala, Sweden.


