### Accession
PXD004558

### Title
SWATH-MS Analysis of Striatal Synaptic Mitochondria from Pink1 KO rats

### Description
This study investigates the proteomic alterations in striatal synaptic mitochondria isolated from 3-month-old wild-type and Pink1 KO rats using the SWATH-MS strategy. This dataset consists of 32 raw MS files, comprising 8 DIA (SWATH) and 24 DDA runs on a TripleTOF 5600 (SCIEX). Our findings revealed synaptic mitochondrial proteomic changes due to loss of Pink1.

### Sample Protocol
Synaptic mitochondria were isolated using Percoll gradient ultracentrifugation. Filter-aided sample preparation was performed and the resultant peptides were desalted using an Oasis MCX cartridge. Samples were dehydrated and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis using an TripleTOF 5600 (SCIEX)in DDA or DIA (SWATH-MS) mode.

### Data Protocol
ProteinPilot version 4.5 (Paragon Algorithm: 4.5.0.0, 1654) software was used to generate the reference spectral library from the DDA MS files. The default search parameters were selected. PeakView version 2.1 software was used for targeted data extraction from the DIA MS files using the SWATH library. Retention times were calibrated using synthetic peptides spiked-in to the DIA samples. MarkerView version 1.2.1 software was used for data normalization to the median peak ratios.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Parkinson's disease, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center

### Submitter
Kelly Stauch

### Lab Head
Dr Howard S Fox
University of Nebraska Medical Center


