### Accession
PXD046996

### Title
Protein arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5) is an actionable therapeutic target in CDK4/6 inhibitor-resistant ER+/RB-deficient breast cancer

### Description
PRMT5 Co-IP mass spectrometry: Lysates of MCF-7 RB1-knockout cells were pulled down with a PRMT5 antibody or IgG control. The pulldowns were subjected to mass spectrometry analysis. QEX2_981005, QEX2_981006, QEX2_981007: DMSO, IgG QEX2_981008, QEX2_981009, QEX2_981010: DMSO, PRMT5 antibody QEX2_981011, QEX2_981012, QEX2_981013, GSK, IgG QEX2_981014, QEX2_981015, QEX2_981016, GSK, PRMT5 antibody SDMA PTM analysis: MCF-7 RB1-knockout cells were transfected with a PRMT5 siRNA or a control siRNA. Lysates were collected three days after transfection and subjected to mass spectrometry analysis. LUM1_1000791, LUM1_1000792, LUM1_1000793: control SiRNA LUM1_1000794, LUM1_1000795, LUM1_1000796: PRMT5 siRNA [

### Sample Protocol
For Co-IP experiments, cells were lysed with NP-40 lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40, 1 mM EDTA) supplemented with proteinase and phosphatase inhibitors. Protein concentration was determined using the Gold Rapid BCA. Lysates were pre-cleared with protein-G-conjugated Dyna beads (Invitrogen) and then incubated with either a PRMT5 or a FUS antibody or a control IgG overnight at 4oC. Next day, lysates were incubated with protein-G-conjugated Dyna beads for 2 hours at 4oC, washed three times with NP-40 lysis buffer, and then eluted with 0.2 M Glycine (pH 2.0). Eluates were subjected to SDSPAGE and immunoblot analysis. For Co-IP MS analysis, immunoprecipitated proteins were further processed by running in a SDS-PAGE gel followed by Coomassie blue staining, tryptic digestion, reduction with DTT, alkylation with iodoacetamide, and finally cleanup with Oasis MCX solid-phase extraction cartridges (Waters) Cells were lysed with PTMScan® Urea Lysis Buffer (9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0; Cell Signaling) and then sonicated at 25% amplitude using a microtip sonifier (Branson 150). Protein concentration was determined using Gold Rapid BCA, and lysates were reduced and alkylated with DTT and iodoacetamide, respectively. Next, lysates were subjected to tryptic digestion, solid-phase cleanup and SDMA enrichment following the manual instruction of PTMScan® Symmetric Di-Methyl Arginine Motif [sdme-RG] Kit (Cell Signaling). SDMA enriched samples were subjected to secondary digestion, solid-phase cleanup, and finally analyzed by LCMS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MS data were acquired using a Q-Exactive HF Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) for the PRMT5 antibody pulldowns and an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) for the SDMA enriched samples. Data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 and were searched using the human protein database from UniProt. Proteins were filtered for downstream analysis using a cutoff FDR <0.01 with at least two peptides being mapped.

### Publication Abstract
CDK4/6 inhibitors (CDK4/6i) have improved survival of patients with estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) breast cancer. However, patients treated with CDK4/6i eventually develop drug resistance and progress. <i>RB1</i> loss-of-function alterations confer acquired resistance to CDK4/6i, but the optimal therapy for these patients is unclear. Using a genome-wide CRISPR screen, we identified protein arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5) as a molecular vulnerability in ER+/<i>RB1</i>-knockout (RBKO) breast cancer cells. PRMT5 inhibition blocked cell cycle G1-to-S transition independent of RB, thus arresting growth of RBKO cells. Proteomics analysis uncovered fused in sarcoma (FUS) as a downstream effector of PRMT5. Pharmacological inhibition of PRMT5 resulted in dissociation of FUS from RNA polymerase II (Pol II), Ser2 Pol II hyperphosphorylation, and intron retention in genes that promote DNA synthesis. Treatment with the PRMT5i inhibitor pemrametostat and fulvestrant synergistically inhibited growth of ER+/RB-deficient patient-derived xenografts, suggesting dual ER and PRMT5 blockade as a novel therapeutic strategy to treat ER+/RB-deficient breast cancer.

### Keywords
Rb, Prmt5, Cdk4/6 inhibitor, Estrogen receptor, Sdma, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Harold C. Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA

### Submitter
Joe Otto

### Lab Head
Dr Carlos L. Arteaga
Harold C. Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA


