### Accession
PXD040642

### Title
Mouse Kidney LC-MS/MS with HRP-Ism1

### Description
Potential interacting proteins of Isthmin-1 in E11.5 intact tissue during early kidney development.

### Sample Protocol
Flag-Ism1 protein was conjugated with HRP using the EZ-Link Plus Activated Peroxidase kit (#31489, Thermo Scientific) according to the protocol provided by the manufacturer. Kidney rudiments were pre-incubated with 500 μM biotin-phenol (diluted in PBS, purchased from MCE) on ice for 30 min, followed by rIsm1 protein (5 μg/ml, as the control group) or HRP-Ism1 protein (5 μg/ml, as the experimental group) stimulation for 5 minutes on ice, with occasional mixing via pipetting. Hydrogen peroxide was added at a final concentration of 1 mM to initiate the labelling process for 1 minute, followed by washes for 5 times with quenching buffer (10 mM ascorbate acid, 5 mM Trolox, 10mM sodium azide in DPBS). RIPA buffer was added to frozen kidney rudiments to lyse the tissue followed by two rounds of sonication (25%, for 10 sec). After centrifugation for 30 min at 15,000 rpm, 4°C, the supernatant was collected and incubated with 75 μL NeutrAvidin beads O/N with gentle rotation at 4°C to pull down the proximal proteins of HRP-Ism1. On the next day, NeutrAvidin beads were washed five times with pre-cooled RIPA buffer followed by proteins elution by boiling the beads in 2x loading buffer for 10 min. Proteins were subject to Western blotting and Commassie Blue staining followed by mass spectrometry for identification.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant 1.6.14.0. Raw data was searched against Mouse UniProt FASTA database (May 2020) containing 55, 398 entries, using settings as below: oxidized methionine (M), acetylation (Protein N-term) were selected as dynamic modifications, and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modifications with minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids was enabled. Confident proteins were identified using a target-decoy approach with a reversed database, strict false-discovery rate 1% at peptide and peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) level; minimum ≥1 unique peptide, ≥2 peptide spectral matches (PSMs)

### Publication Abstract
Multistep photoswitches are able to engage in different photoisomerization pathways and are challenging to control. Here we demonstrate a multistep sequence of E/Z isomerization and photocyclization/cycloreversion of photoswitches via manipulating the strength and mechanism of noncovalent chalcogen bonding interactions. The incorporation of chalcogens and the formyl group on open ethene bridged dithienylethenes offers a versatile skeleton for single photochromic molecules. While bidirectional E/Z photoswitching is dominated by neutral tellurium arising from enhanced resonance-assisted chalcogen bonding, the creation of cationic telluronium enables the realization of photocyclization/cycloreversion. The reversible nucleophilic substitution reactions further allow interconversion between neutral tellurium and cationic telluronium and selection of photoisomerization mechanisms on purpose. By leveraging unique photoswitching patterns and dynamic covalent reactivity, light and pH stimuli-responsive multistate rewritable materials were constructed, triggered by an activating reagent for additional control. The results should provide ample opportunities to molecular recognition, intelligent switches, information encryption, and smart materials.

### Keywords
Mouse kidney; lc-ms/ms; isthmin-1;

### Affiliations
The University of Hong Kong
School of Biomedical Sciences, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of HongKong

### Submitter
Ge GAO

### Lab Head
Dr Zhongjun ZHOU
School of Biomedical Sciences, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of HongKong


