### Accession
PXD009261

### Title
A proteomic landscape of the human cornea

### Description
The sclera is white, tough outer covering, known for providing structural support to the eyeball and the intraocular contents. Any abnormality in sclera results in disorders such as conjunctivitis, episcleritis, scleritis and hence a proper investigation will help in preventing the same. In the current study, we carried out an in-depth proteomic analysis of human sclera in which the proteins were extracted from the sclera tissue and subjected to both in-gel and in-solution digestion using trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme. The peptides were analyzed using Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer and the data acquired was searched against Human RefSeq 75 protein database using SEQUEST HT and Mascot which resulted in the identification of 4,827 non-redundant proteins.The outcome of this study will facilitate in discovery of potential candidate biomarkers aiding in curbing the scleral disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Sclera tissues from three healthy human donors were obtained and homogenized using liquid nitrogen. The tissues were further lysed using lysis buffer (4% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) and 50mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate) and sonicated for extracting proteins. The amount of protein was estimated using bicinchoninic (BCA)acid assay and same amount of proteins from each specimen was pooled. 150 µg of protein was resolved in 10% SDS PAGE for in-gel digestion where 24 bands were excised and processed for trypsin digestion. Similarly, 300 µg was taken for in-solution digestion. In both in-gel and in-solution digestion cases, the proteins were subjected to reduction using 5mM and 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT), respectively for 20 min and alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in dark for 10 min. It was further subjected to trypsin digestion at a final concentration of 1:20 (w/w). the in-solution digested samples were subjected tofractionation usingbasic Reverse Phase Liquid Chromatography (24 fractions). The samples were further subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with Easy-nLC-1200 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
The acquired mass spectrometry data was searched using Human RefSeq 75 protein database database (consisting of 36,713 entries along with common contaminants) in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 with SEQUEST HT and Mascot search algorithms. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme with two missed cleavages allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was given as fixed modification and acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionine was given as variable modifications. We searched our data with a precursor ion mass tolerance at 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.05 Da.The peptides identified were filtered using 1% false discovery rate (FDR) estimated by searching the target database against the decoy database.

### Publication Abstract
Success rates of corneal transplantation are particularly high owing to its unique, innate immune privilege derived from a phenomenon known as Anterior Chamber-Associated Immune Deviation (ACAID). Of note, cornea is a transparent, avascular structure that acts as a barrier along with sclera to protect the eye and contributes to optical power. Molecular and systems biology mechanisms underlying ACAID and the immunologically unique and privileged status of cornea are not well known. We report here a global unbiased proteomic profiling of the human cornea and the identification of 4824 proteins, the largest catalog of human corneal proteins identified to date. Moreover, signaling pathway analysis revealed enrichment of spliceosome, phagosome, lysosome, and focal adhesion pathways, thereby demonstrating the protective functions of corneal proteins. We observed an enrichment of neutrophil-mediated immune response processes in the cornea as well as proteins belonging to the complement and ER-Phagosome pathways that are suggestive of active immune and inflammatory surveillance response. This study provides a key expression map of the corneal proteome repertoire that should enable future translational medicine studies on the pathological conditions of the cornea and the mechanisms by which cornea immunology are governed. Molecular mechanisms of corneal immune privilege have broad relevance to understand and anticipate graft rejection in the field of organ transplantation.

### Keywords
Protein abundance, Tandem mass spectrometry, Protein profiling, Omics technology, Eye proteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.
Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine, Yenepoya (Deemed to be University), Mangalore 575018

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr T. S. Keshava Prasad
Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine, Yenepoya (Deemed to be University), Mangalore 575018


