### Accession
PXD002069

### Title
Proteome imprinting by N-terminal acetylation is a vital hormone-regulated master switch during stress

### Description
N-terminal acetylation (NTA) catalyzed by N-terminal acetyltransferases (Nats) is among the most common protein modifications in eukaryotes, but its significance is still enigmatic. Characterization of the plant NatA complex reveals evolutionary conservation of NatA biochemical properties within higher eukaryotes and uncovers specific and essential functions of NatA for regulation of development, numerous biosynthetic pathways and stress responses in plants. We show that NTA decreases significantly in case of drought stress, since NatA abundance is rapidly down-regulated by the phytohormone abscisic acid. Accordingly, down-regulation of NatA by genetic engineering is sufficient for induction of the drought stress response and results in strikingly drought resistant plants. Thus, NTA by the NatA complex is a vital cellular surveillance mechanism during stress. We conclude that imprinting of the proteome by NatA is a master switch for control of metabolism, development and cellular stress responses and integrates stress signals by perceiving the hormone abscisic acid.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid nitrogen frozen A. thaliana plant tissues were grounded in 2 ml microcentrifuge tubes containing 3 mm and 5 mm iron beads for 1 min each, using a MM 300 mixer mill at 30 Hz (Qiagen). The resulting fine powder was dissolved in 1 mL of lysis buffer. The homogenates were incubated at 4 °C for 30 min with shaking. The supernatants were separated from the insoluble fraction by centrifugation at 15000g at 4 °C for 30 min and used to determine protein concentration using the Bradford protocol. 1 mg of proteins was denaturated in 6 M Guanidine-HCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8) and 4 mM DTT, reduced for 15 min at 95°C and finally alkylated by the addition of iodacetamide (55mM) for 1 h at room temperature. Proteins were precipitated by the addition of four times the sample volume of cold acetone followed by 1 h centrifugation at -20°C. The resulting pellet was resuspended in 50 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.5) and was subjected to chemical acetylation of the free N-terminus amino groups with N-acetoxy-[2H3]-succinimide according to Ref. 3. After 90 min incubation at 30°C, potential O-acetylation of Ser, Thr, and Tyr side-chains were reversed by adding 10 µl of 50% of hydroxylamine and incubated for 20 min at room temperature. The sample was acetone cold precipitated to remove chemical reagent before trypsin digestion by the addition of 1/100th (w/w) of TPCK treated bovine trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 h at 37°C twice. Peptides were desalted by Sep-Pak (Waters, Milford, MA) solid phase extraction as recommended by the supplier. The retained material was eluted with 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA followed by evaporation to dryness. The peptide mixture was resuspended in SCX-LC buffer A (5 mM KH2PO4, 30% ACN and 0.05% formic acid) and loaded on a Summit LC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) equipped with Polysulfoethyl A 200 x 2.1 mm 5 µm 200 Å column (PolyLC, Colombia, MD). Peptides were eluted with a gradient of increasing KCl (SCX-LC Buffer B: 350 mM KCl in SCX-LC Buffer A; 0 - 5 min, 0% B; 15 - 40 min, 5 - 26% B; 40 - 45 min, 26 - 35% B). Fractions were collected every 2 min for 50 min followed by evaporation to dryness and stored at -20°C before nano-LC-MS analysis. Fractions eluted from SCX chromatography with retention time between 2 to 10 min (fractions 2-5) and 10 to 22 min (Fraction 6-11) were resuspended in 25 µl and 30 µl (nLC Buffer A: 0.1% FA, 5% ACN) respectively. Each fraction was analysed individually (1 hour cycle acquisition method) and 15 µl were loaded onto a pre-column (NS-MP-10, Nanoseparation, Nieuwkoop, Netherland) at a maximum pressure of 200 bars of nLC buffer A followed by a separation using a Nikkyo Technos capillary column (NTCC-360/100-5-153, Nikkyo Technos Co., Tokyo, Japan) over a 42 min gradient (nLC buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in AcN; 5-35% B in 42 min) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The previous fractions 2-5, 6-8 and 9-11 were combined together and 18 µl of this mixture was analysed twice on a 2 hours cycle acquisition (5-35% nLC buffer B in 90 min). The first acquisition includes all precursor ion charges whereas the second acquisition reject singly charged precursors. The nano-LC is coupled to an Orbitrap™ Velos (Thermo scientific). The survey scan was acquired by Fourier-Transform MS scanning 400-2000 Da at 30,000 resolution using internal calibration. The 20 most intense ions were subject to high collision dissociation MS with 20 seconds exclusion time for the selected precursor.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification for N-terminus peptides required the aid of Mascot Distiller (Ver. 2.5.1, Matrix Science). Extraction parameters were optimized for the OrbiTrap acquisition files with a minimum S/N of 1, precursor charges considered 1-5, Corr. Thr. > 0.7 and no grouping assignments. Protein identification were performed using the Mascot identification tool against the Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR) database (TAIR ver. 10, www. arabidopsis.org). Trypsin/P rule was used with parent and fragment mass tolerance defined as 10 ppm and 0.7 respectively. Carbamidomethylcysteine and d3-acetyl on Lys were considered as fix modifications whereas Met-oxidation, protein NTA and d3-NTA were considered as variable modifications. All data were filtered at 1% protein false discovery rate and only peptides with score higher than 30 were retained for the final data treatment.

### Publication Abstract
N-terminal acetylation (NTA) catalysed by N-terminal acetyltransferases (Nats) is among the most common protein modifications in eukaryotes, but its significance is still enigmatic. Here we characterize the plant NatA complex and reveal evolutionary conservation of NatA biochemical properties in higher eukaryotes and uncover specific and essential functions of NatA for development, biosynthetic pathways and stress responses in plants. We show that NTA decreases significantly after drought stress, and NatA abundance is rapidly downregulated by the phytohormone abscisic acid. Accordingly, transgenic downregulation of NatA induces the drought stress response and results in strikingly drought resistant plants. Thus, we propose that NTA by the NatA complex acts as a cellular surveillance mechanism during stress and that imprinting of the proteome by NatA is an important switch for the control of metabolism, development and cellular stress responses downstream of abscisic acid.

### Keywords
Embryogenesis, Drought resistance, Abscisic acid, N-terminal protein acetylation

### Affiliations
CNRS
I2BC, CNRS, Gif/Yvette, France

### Submitter
Willy Bienvenut

### Lab Head
Dr Willy Bienvenut
I2BC, CNRS, Gif/Yvette, France


