### Accession
PXD036747

### Title
H3K79 methyltransferase Dot1p/DOT1L is phosphorylated by proline-directed MAP kinases Hog1p and p38/MAPK11

### Description
Disruptor of telomeric silencing (Dot1p) is an exquisitely conserved histone methyltransferase, and is the sole enzyme responsible for H3K79 methylation in the budding yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. It has been shown to be highly phosphorylated in vivo; however, the upstream kinases that act on Dot1p are unknown in yeast and all other eukaryotes. Here, we used in vitro and in vivo kinase discovery approaches to show that the mitogen-activated protein kinase Hog1p is a bona fide kinase of Dot1p methyltransferase. In in vitro kinase assays, Hog1p phosphorylates Dot1p at multiple sites, including at several proline-adjacent sites that are consistent with its known substrate preference. Hog1p kinase activity was specifically enhanced at these proline-adjacent sites on Dot1p upon its activation by the osmostress-responsive kinase, Pbs2p. We then show that genomic deletion of HOG1 markedly reduces phosphorylation at specific sites on Dot1p in vivo, thus providing evidence for Hog1p kinase activity on Dot1p in budding yeast cells. Phenotypic analysis of knockout and phosphosite mutant yeast strains revealed the importance of Hog1p-catalysed phosphorylation of Dot1p for cellular responses to ultraviolet-induced DNA damage. This kinase-substrate relationship is conserved in mammalian systems, where human DOT1L (ortholog of Dot1p) can be phosphorylated by the proline-directed kinase p38β/MAPK11 (ortholog of Hog1p) at multiple sites in vitro. Taken together, our findings establish Hog1p and p38β/MAPK11 as the first kinases known to act on H3K79 methyltransferase enzymes in any eukaryotic species.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant protein expression and purification: Hexahistidine-tagged enzymes were recombinantly overexpressed in Rosetta E. coli or BY4741 S. cerevisiae, in 200 mL cultures, as described previously (Separovich et al., 2020; Erce et al., 2013; Winter et al., 2018. Following protein expression, cells were resuspended in 30 mL of hexahistidine-tag purification lysis buffer (46.6 mM Na2HPO4, 3.4 mM NaH2PO4, 500 mM NaCl, 40 mM imidazole, 20% (v/v) glycerol, 2% (v/v) Triton-X-100, pH 8.0) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) and pan phosphatase inhibitor (Roche). Bacterial and yeast cells were then lysed by sonication (Erce et al., 2013) and glass-bead homogenisation (Winter et al., 2018), respectively, and resultant lysates were clarified by ultracentrifugation at 22,000 x g for 40 min at 4°C. Purification of hexahistidine tagged proteins was then done using immobilised metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) on 1 mL Ni NTA Superflow Cartridges (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Eluted proteins were concentrated and buffer-exchanged into phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; 46.6 mM Na2HPO4, 3.4 mM NaH2PO4, 200 mM NaCl, pH 7.4) using Amicon Ultra-4 10K centrifugal filters (Merck Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA).  In vitro phosphorylation assays: For in vitro protein assays, equimolar amounts of enzyme and substrate proteins (2 µM) were incubated at 30 °C in 20 µL reactions containing 1× kinase buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 2 mM DTT, pH 7.5) and ATP (3 mM). Note that kinase-treatment assays were done in biological triplicate, and that no enzyme and no ATP negative control assays were also performed. Assays were stopped by boiling in 1× Laemmli buffer (62.5 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8), 100 mM dithiothreitol, 2% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 0.001% (v/v) bromophenol blue), and then electrophoresed by gradient SDS-PAGE on NuPAGE 4-12% Bis Tris Mini protein gels (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA). Coomassie-stained gel bands corresponding to Dot1p, Hog1p, or hDOT1L were then prepared for liquid chromatography mass spectrometry according to Hamey et al., 2016, without reduction or alkylation. Proteolytic digestion was done with trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, WI, sequencing-grade, 50 ng in 20 mM NH4HCO3) or chymotrypsin (Promega, sequencing-grade, 500 ng in 100 mM Tris HCl (pH 8.0), 10 mM CaCl2), as done previously (Separovich et al., 2020). Resultant peptides were extracted from gel bands and vacuum dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) before resuspension in 20 µL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, as per Hamey et al., 2016. For in vitro peptide assays, a Dot1p sequence-derived synthetic peptide (VDESLFSPAARGR; ChinaPeptides, Shanghai, China; 2 µM) was incubated with one or both of purified enzymes Hog1p (2 µM) and Pbs2p (2 µM) in 20 µL reactions, as described above. Resultant peptides were prepared for mass spectrometry using OMIX C18 100 µL StageTips (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) as per the manufacturer’s instructions.  In vivo analysis of Dot1p phosphorylation: To investigate the effects of HOG1 deletion on Dot1p phosphorylation in vivo, hexahistidine tagged Dot1p was homologously overexpressed from plasmid pEGH-DOT1 (Dharmacon) in wild-type BY4741 and HOG1Δ yeast cells. The HOG1 deletion strain was from the Euroscarf Yeast Knockout Collection as a kind gift from Dr Thomas Williams (Macquarie University). Dot1p was overexpressed in triplicate 200 mL S. cerevisiae cultures, and then affinity enriched by hexahistidine-tag affinity chromatography, as described above. Eluted proteins were concentrated and buffer-exchanged into PBS, and then electrophoresed by 4-12% gradient SDS PAGE. Gel bands corresponding to 6XHis-GST-Dot1p (~ 92 kDa) were excised, digested to peptides with chymotrypsin, and prepared for analysis by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry, as done above.  Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry: Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry was performed on mass spectrometers housed at the Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Facility (BMSF) at UNSW. Briefly, peptide samples were separated and ionised by nano electrospray liquid chromatography, following previously described methods (Hart-Smith et al., 2011), before their analysis by tandem mass spectrometry. Analysis was done on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using collision-induced dissociation (CID), or on a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD), as described previously (Hamey et al., 2016).

### Data Protocol
Phosphosite identification: To identify putative phosphosites, mass spectrometry data were converted to Mascot Generic Format (.mgf) using RawConverter (v1.2.0.1) and then searched against the SwissProt database (2021_04, 565,928 sequences) using the Matrix Science MASCOT search engine (v2.6, accessed at https://www.matrixscience.com/). Search parameters were as follows: taxonomy was set to Saccharomyces cerevisiae; precursor ion tolerance was set to 5 ppm; fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.6 Da or 20 mmu for analyses on the LTQ Orbitrap Velos and the Q Exactive Plus, respectively; instrument was set to default; enzyme specificity was Trypsin or TrypChymo for respective preparations, with up to three missed cleavages permitted; variable modifications were oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY). Fragmentation spectra for putative phosphopeptides were manually inspected to confirm unambiguous phosphosite localisation. Exemplar spectra were visualised and annotated in GraphPad Prism v.8.4.2 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA).  Phosphosite quantification: Label-free quantification of phosphosite stoichiometry was done using extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) of identified phosphopeptides and their unmodified counterparts (see manuscript for details) We note that some phosphosites could not be reproducibly quantified across experiments and were thus excluded, that sites on the same peptide were combined for MS1-based quantification, and that phosphopeptides carrying multiple modification sites were not analysed. XICs were generated in the Thermo Xcalibur Qual Browser 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or in Skyline (MacCoss Lab Software, v21.2), within a mass range window ± 10 ppm around the retention time of the identification. Areas under the curve of XIC peaks were then used to quantify relative phosphorylation stoichiometry, as described previously (Separovich et al., 2020; Hamey et al., 2018). Statistical testing of changes in phosphorylation was done using an unpaired Student’s t-test in GraphPad Prism v.8.4.2 (GraphPad Software), with significance thresholds as specified in figure legends.

### Publication Abstract
Disruptor of telomeric silencing 1 (Dot1p) is an exquisitely conserved histone methyltransferase and is the sole enzyme responsible for H3K79 methylation in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. It has been shown to be highly phosphorylated in vivo; however, the upstream kinases that act on Dot1p are almost entirely unknown in yeast and all other eukaryotes. Here, we used in vitro and in vivo kinase discovery approaches to show that mitogen-activated protein kinase HOG1 (Hog1p) is a bona fide kinase of the Dot1p methyltransferase. In vitro kinase assays showed that Hog1p phosphorylates Dot1p at multiple sites, including at several proline-adjacent sites that are consistent with known Hog1p substrate preferences. The activity of Hog1p was specifically enhanced at these proline-adjacent sites on Dot1p upon Hog1p activation by the osmostress-responsive MAP kinase kinase PBS2 (Pbs2p). Genomic deletion of HOG1 reduced phosphorylation at specific sites on Dot1p in vivo, providing further evidence for Hog1p kinase activity on Dot1p in budding yeast cells. Phenotypic analysis of knockout and phosphosite mutant yeast strains revealed the importance of Hog1p-catalysed phosphorylation of Dot1p for cellular responses to ultraviolet-induced DNA damage. In mammalian systems, this kinase-substrate relationship was found to be conserved: human DOT1L (the ortholog of yeast Dot1p) can be phosphorylated by the proline-directed kinase p38&#x3b2; (also known as MAPK11; the ortholog of yeast Hog1p) at multiple sites in vitro. Taken together, our findings establish Hog1p and p38&#x3b2; as newly identified upstream kinases of the Dot1p/DOT1L H3K79 methyltransferase enzymes in eukaryotes.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Yeast, Post-translational regulation, Histone methylation, Epigenetics, Signalling

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Initiative, School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia
University of New South Wales

### Submitter
Ryan Separovich

### Lab Head
Dr Marc R. Wilkins
Systems Biology Initiative, School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia


