### Accession
PXD025712

### Title
Spatial resolution of proteomic changes in lung tissue from a flexible AAV-DTR/DT mouse model of acute cell deletion mimicking epithelial lung injury

### Description
Lung epithelial injury leads to different pathologies, all associated with severe outcome and increased mortality. These pathologies are divided into chronic and acute diseases like idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or the acute lung distress syndrome (ARDS). Hallmarks of both groups of lung diseases are a breakdown of the epithelial barrier and impairment of lung function.  Repeated epithelial injury leads to chronic inflammation, fibroblast activation and ultimately to scarring and stiffening of the lung. The observed decline in lung function is the first symptom of IPF patients. As these changes are occurring slowly over time, patients only present to clinicians at a rather late stage. Therefore, disease driving mechanisms can only be estimated based on observed changes in biomarkers, the transcriptome or proteome. However, alterations in signalling pathways at a very early stage of disease development can only be investigated in vitro or in animal models.  In this study a novel and flexible DTR/DT model of acute epithelial lung injury driven by AAV6.2 mediated human diphtheria toxin receptor (hDTR) expression was developed and characterized. The hDTR is sensitive for diphtheria toxin (DT), thereby inducing apoptosis by blocking protein synthesis. In contrast, a polymorphism of the murine DTR protects mice from DT mediated toxicity. The AAV6.2 variant transduces specifically into bronchial epithelial and alveolar epithelial type II cells leading to their depletion after DT administration.  Using laser-capture microdissection different epithelial cell regions (bronchial epithelium and alveolar epithelium) were isolated from formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded lung tissue of AAV-stuffer and AAV-hDTR mice, which were administered intratracheally with 100 ng DT for 24 h, and analyzed using mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Using laser-capture microdissection different lung epithelial cell regions (bronchial epithelium and normal and infiltrated alveolar tissue, 3000 cells each) were isolated from deparaffinized and H&E-stained lung tissue sections (10 µm thickness) of AAV-stuffer (n=7) and AAV-hDTR mice (0.3E11 vg, n=7). Microdissected tissue samples were resuspended in 100 µL SDS extraction buffer (2% SDS in 300 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0), transferred into 0.5 mL Eppendorf Protein LoBind tubes, boiled (25 min, 99 °C, 350 rpm) and sonicated for 20 cycles (QSonica Q700 with microplate horn, Newtown, CT; 30 s on, 30 s off) followed by heating for 2 h at 80 °C (500 rpm) and another sonication step (20 cycles). Reversibly oxidized cysteines were reduced with 10 mM DTT (30 min, 50 °C, 500 rpm) followed by alkylation of free thiols with 20 mM iodoacetamide (30 min, 22 °C, 500 rpm, in the dark). Protein extracts were cleaned and digested with the SP3 method as described previously with modifications using the KingFisher Flex system (Thermo Scientific). Briefly, 20 µL of a 20 µg/µL SP3 bead stock (Sera-Mag SpeedBead carboxylate-modified magnetic particles; GE Healthcare Life Sciences) and 300 µL acetonitrile (ACN; final concentration of 70%) were added to 100 µL of protein extract in the sample+beads 96 deep-well plate. Proteins were bound to the beads and washed two times each with 70% ethanol and ACN (500 µL each). Binding and washing steps were performed without release of beads. After air-drying beads for 20 s proteins bound to beads were released in 100 µL 100 mM TEAB followed by digestion for 8 h with 0.5 µg LysC/trypsin (37 °C, 1000 rpm). After centrifugation (10 min, 4000 g) beads were collected using the KingFisher Flex system and peptide samples were transferred into 0.5 mL tubes and dried in vacuo in a Concentrator plus. (Eppendorf). Peptides were resuspended in 14 µL 100 mM TEAB. 100 µg TMTpro 16plex tags (Thermo Scientific) were dissolved in 6 µL anhydrous ACN and added to the corresponding samples followed by incubation for 2 h (22 °C, 600 rpm). Unreacted TMTpro tags were quenched with 5 µL 5% hydroxylamine (30 min).  Labelled peptide samples belonging to the same batch were combined and dried in vacuo. TMTpro labelled peptides were fractionated using off-line high pH reversed phase chromatography (Dionex Ultimate 3000; 2.1 x 150 mm XBridge BEH130 C18 column, 3.5 µm, 130 Å; Waters). Peptides were separated into 24 fractions, which were concatenated into 8 fractions and subsequently dried in vacuo.  TMTpro labelled fractions were separated on a Dionex RSLCnano HPLC and analyzed on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer in combination with the FAIMS Pro Interface (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a 100 µm x 2 cm Acclaim PepMap-C18 trap column (5 µm, 100 Å) for 6 min with 3% ACN/0.1% TFA and a constant flow of 10 µL/min and separated on a 75 µm x 75 cm EASY-Spray C18 column (2 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) at 50 °C with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Solvents used were (A) 0.1% formic acid and (B) 80% ACN/0.1% formic acid. Samples were separated over a multi-step gradient from 10% to 20% B in 24 min, to 28% in 37 min and 40% in 52 min with a total measurement time of 150 min. The spray was initiated by applying 1.7 kV to the EASY-Spray emitter. The ion transfer capillary temperature was set to 275 °C and the radio frequency of the ion funnel to 30%. Data were acquired under the control of the Xcalibur software in a data-dependent mode using advanced peak detection. The FAIMS Pro interface was used in standard resolution mode without gas flow. Two compensation voltages with asymmetric cycle times were applied (-40/-60 V for 1.2/0.8 s). The full scan was acquired in the orbitrap (m/z 375-1,500, 120,000, AGC target 100%, max. IT 50 ms). Only precursor ions with charges between 2 and 7, a minimum intensity of 1E4 and a minimum of 70% of signal within an isolation window of m/z 0.7 were selected for fragmentation using CID in the ion trap with 34% collision energy. MS2 spectra were acquired with a rapid ion trap scan rate (AGC target 100%, max. IT 105 ms) using a dynamic exclusion of 60 s. The real-time search algorithm was applied in SPS mode in the cycle with FAIMS CV -40 V using the following settings: UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot mouse database, carbamidomethylation (Cys) and TMTpro (N-term/Lys) as fixed modifications, oxidation (Met) as variable modification, trypsin (full), one missed cleavage, one variable modification per peptide and a maximum search time of 35 ms. An Xcorr of 1.4 and a mass tolerance of 15 ppm for precursor ions were used as scoring thresholds. For MS3 analysis 10 (CV -40) or 7 (CV -60) fragment ions were co-isolated using synchronous precursor selection in a window of m/z 2 and further fragmented with an HCD collision energy of 45%. The resulting fragments were analyzed in the orbitrap (resolution 50,000, AGC target 200%, max. IT 150 ms).

### Data Protocol
Acquired tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot mouse database (downloaded in December 2019, containing 17,025 protein sequences) using the Sequest search engine in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific). Trypsin was specified as the cleavage enzyme, allowing up to two missed cleavages and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMTpro-modification of the N-terminus and lysine were used as fixed modifications and oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus as variable modifications. Using the percolator node a decoy-based false discovery rate of 1% was applied to peptide-spectrum matches. Additionally, an FDR of 1% was applied to peptide and protein identifications (high confidence). For the quantification of TMTpro reporter ion signals from unique peptides correction of isotopic impurities, an average reporter signal-to-noise ratio of 2, an SPS mass matches threshold of 65% and a co-isolation threshold of 100% were applied. Contaminants were excluded and only master proteins, proteins with high confidence and proteins with minimum 2 unique peptides per protein were considered for further analysis. TMT batches were analyzed in independent database searches (BE, NA, NA+IA-hDTR). All protein intensities (summed TMT reporter signal-to-noise ratios of corresponding peptides) of samples within a batch were median-normalized to address differences in sample loadings. Additionally, both alveoli batches (normal tissue hDTR vs stuffer (NA) and hDTR infiltrated vs normal (NA+IA-hDTR)) were searched together followed by median normalization and another normalization step to address the variation between batches. The median of protein quantities of the seven hDTR normal alveolar tissue samples was calculated for both batches and used to calculate a normalization factor.

### Publication Abstract
Animal models are important to mimic certain pathways or biological aspects of human pathologies including acute and chronic pulmonary diseases. We developed a novel and flexible mouse model of acute epithelial lung injury based on adeno-associated virus (AAV) variant 6.2-mediated expression of the human diphtheria toxin receptor (DTR). Following intratracheal administration of diphtheria toxin (DT), a cell-specific death of bronchial and alveolar epithelial cells can be observed. In contrast to other lung injury models, the here described mouse model provides the possibility of targeted injury using specific tropisms of AAV vectors or cell-type-specific promotors to drive the human DTR expression. Also, generation of cell-specific mouse lines is not required. Detailed characterization of the AAV-DTR/DT mouse model including titration of viral genome (vg) load and administered DT amount revealed increasing cell numbers in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL; macrophages, neutrophils, and unspecified cells) and elevation of degenerated cells and infiltrated leukocytes in lung tissue, dependent of vg load and DT dose. Cytokine levels in BAL fluid showed different patterns with higher vg load, e.g., IFN&#x3b3;, TNF&#x3b1;, and IP10 increasing and IL-5 and IL-6 decreasing, whereas lung function was not affected. In addition, laser-capture microdissection (LCM)-based proteomics of bronchial epithelium and alveolar tissue revealed upregulated immune and inflammatory responses in all regions and extracellular matrix deposition in infiltrated alveoli. Overall, our novel AAV-DTR/DT model allows investigation of repair mechanisms following epithelial injury and resembles specific mechanistic aspects of acute and chronic pulmonary diseases.

### Keywords
Dtr, Ffpe, Epithelial cells, Laser-capture microdissection, Aav, Tmt, Diphtheria toxin

### Affiliations
Lung Repair & Regeneration Department, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG
Drug Discoverey Sciences Department, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Biberach an der Riss, Germany

### Submitter
Eva Griesser

### Lab Head
Dr Kerstin Geillinger-Kaestle
Lung Repair & Regeneration Department, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG


