### Accession
PXD038005

### Title
Mapping of Functional SARS-CoV-2 Receptors in Human Lungs Establishes Differences in Variant Binding and SLC1A5 as a Viral Entry Modulator of hACE2

### Description
The COVID-19 pandemic is an infectious disease caused by SARS-CoV-2. The first step of SARS-CoV-2 infection is the recognition of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (hACE2) receptors by the receptor-binding domain (RBD) of the viral spike (S) glycoprotein. Although the molecular and structural bases of the SARS-CoV-2-RBD/hACE2 interaction have been thoroughly investigated in vitro, the relationship between hACE2 expression and in vivo infection is less understood. Here, we developed an efficient SARS-CoV-2-RBD binding assay suitable for super resolution microscopy and simultaneous hACE2 immunodetection and mapped the correlation between hACE2 receptor abundance and SARS-CoV-2-RBD binding, both in vitro and in human lung biopsies. Next, we explored the specific proteome of SARS-CoV-2-RBD/hACE2 through a comparative mass spectrometry approach. We found that only a minority of hACE2 positive spots are actually SARS-CoV-2-RBD binding sites, and that the relationship between SARS-CoV-2-RBD binding and hACE2 presence is variable, suggesting the existence of additional factors. Indeed, we found several interactors that are involved in receptor localization and viral entry and characterized one of them: SLC1A5, an amino acid transporter. High-resolution receptor-binding studies showed that co-expression of membrane-bound SLC1A5 with hACE2 predicted SARS-CoV-2 binding and entry better than hACE2 expression alone. Accordingly, SLC1A5 depletion reduces SARS-CoV-2 binding and entry. Notably, the Omicron variant is more efficient in binding hACE2 sites, but equally sensitive to SLC1A5 downregulation. We propose a method for mapping functional SARS-CoV-2 receptors in vivo. We confirm the existence of hACE2 co-factors that may contribute to differential sensitivity of cells to infection.

### Sample Protocol
hACE2 immunoprecipitated samples, prepared as described above, were loaded on poliacrilamide gels for coomassie blue staining. In brief, boiled samples were loaded on NuPAGE® Novex 4-12% gradient gels (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat no. NP0321PK2), and seven consecutive bands were excised and trypsin-digested following the procedure descried by (19). In all cases, the protocol steps were the following: proprotein reduction in 10 mM DTT for 1 hour at 56º C; protein alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes at room temperature in the dark and digestion with 12.5 ng/µl trypsin overnight at 37ºC. Tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel with 3% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 30% acetonitrile (ACN). The extracted peptides were cleaned up using homemade STAGE Tips microcolumns (20). Peptides were then eluted in 40 µl buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA)). ACN was evaporated using a speed vac concentrator (Eppendorf) and the volume of the eluates were adjusted to 5 µl with 1% TFA, to be then analysed by LC-MS/MS using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. No. LC140) connected to a Q-Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nano-electrospray ion source (EASY-SPRAY, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The nano-LC system was operated in one column set-up with an EasySpray PEPMAP RSLC C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) kept constant at 45°C. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA) and solvent B was 0.1% FA in 80% ACN. Samples were injected in aqueous 1% (TFA) at a constant pressure of 980 Bar. Peptides were separated with a gradient of 3–35% solvent B over 49 min followed by a gradient of 30–60% for 5 min and 60–95% over 5 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The Q-Exactive was operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) to automatically switch between full scan MS and MSMS acquisition. MS spectra (from m/z 375-1650) were analysed in the Orbitrap detector with resolution R=70,000 at m/z 400. The 12 most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 3e6 and fragmented with a normalized collision energy setting of 28% in to the HCD cell. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 20ms for full scans and 80ms for MSMS. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 20s.

### Data Protocol
. Acquired raw data were analysed for using the integrated MaxQuant version 1.6.2.3, using the Andromeda search engine(21). False discovery rate (FDR) of all peptide identifications was set to a maximum of 1%. Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The January 2021 version of the Uniprot Human sequence was used for peptide identification (77027 Entries). The LFQ intensity calculation was enabled, as well as the Match Between Runs (MBRs) feature(22). The “protein groups” output file from MaxQuant was analysed using Perseus software(23). Briefly, no imputation was used, and the data were filtered to have 3 valid values in at least one group. Statistically significant enriched proteins were filtered using a threshold setting for differential analysis of S0=0.1 and FDR=0.05

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spike; super resolution microscopy; ace2 co-factors; rbd; viral binding; viral entry

### Affiliations
IEO
National Institute of Molecular Genetics, "Fondazione Romeo ed Enrica Invernizzi", INGM, 20122 Milan, Italy;

### Submitter
alessandro cuomo

### Lab Head
Dr Nicola Manfrini
National Institute of Molecular Genetics, "Fondazione Romeo ed Enrica Invernizzi", INGM, 20122 Milan, Italy;


