### Accession
PXD019290

### Title
Chemical Penetration Enhancers Increase Hydrogen Peroxide Uptake in C. elegans for In Vivo Fast Photochemical Oxidation of Proteins

### Description
Fast photochemical oxidation of proteins (FPOP) is a hydroxyl radical protein footprinting method that covalently labels solvent accessible amino acids by photolysis of hydrogen peroxide. Recently, we expanded the use of FPOP for in vivo (IV-FPOP) covalent labeling in C. elegans. In initial IV-FPOP studies, 545 proteins were oxidatively modified in all body systems within the worm. Here, with the use of chemical penetration enhancers (CPEs), we increased the number of modified proteins as well as the number of modifications per protein to gain increased structural information. CPEs aid in the delivery of hydrogen peroxide inside C. elegans by disturbing the highly order lipid bilayer of the worm cuticle without affecting worm viability. IV-FPOP experiments performed using the CPE azone showed an increase in oxidatively modified proteins and peptides. This increase correlated with greater hydrogen peroxide uptake by C. elegans quantified using a chemical fluorophore demonstrating the efficacy of using CPEs with IV-FPOP.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides (0.5 µg) were loaded onto an M-class C18 trap column (Waters) and washed with 225 µL of 0.1% FA in water using an M-class Acquity liquid chromatograph (LC) UPLC system. Retained peptides were eluted and separated using a C18 reverse phase in-house packed column. The gradient was pumped at 0.3 µL/min for 130 min as follow: 0-1 min, 3% Solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN); 2-100 min, 10-45% B; 100-110 min, 45-100% B; held at 100% B for 15 min; and the column was re-equilibrated at 3% B for an additional 15 min. Eluted peptides were analyzed by nano electrospray (nESI) under positive ion mode using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectra raw files were searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 against a C. elegans database using the Sequest 1.4 node allowing for one missed cleavage of tryptic peptides. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm with a fragment match tolerance of 0.02 Da. All known side-chain hydroxyl radical modifications were searched as dynamic modifications using a multi-search node workflow. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues were set as fixed modifications. The extent of peptide oxidation was determined using extracted ion chromatograms (XIC).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
In vivo, C. elegans, Chemical penetration enhancers, Fpop, Protein footprinting

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland 21202, United States

### Submitter
Jessica Espino

### Lab Head
Dr Lisa Jones
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland 21202, United States


