### Accession
PXD043021

### Title
Escherichia coli displays a conserved membrane proteomic response to a range of alcohols

### Description
We characterised the changes in the inner and outer membrane proteome of Escherichia coli in response to alcohols of different chain lengths. The study provides a fundamental understanding of the key changes in the membrane proteome of E. coli under alcohol stress and reveals a conserved membrane proteomic response of E. coli to a range of alcohols.

### Sample Protocol
SWATH MS:  Equal amounts of total membrane protein from 12 E. coli samples (01-12) were processed to generate the peptides to be analyzed by LC-MS. The 12 samples consisted of E. coli cells grown:  (A) without alcohol (control):  3 biological replicates (07, 08, 09),  (B) in the presence of ethanol:  3 biological replicates (05, 10, 11),  (C) in the presence of butanol:  3 biological replicates (01, 03, 04), and   (D) in the presence of hexanol:  3 biological replicates (02, 06, 12)  Reversed phase (RP) liquid chromatographic separation of the peptides were performed on the nanoLC425 system (Eksigent) using a C18 trap column (Trajan Scientific and Medical) and a ChromXP-C18-CL analytical column (Eksigent).  MRMHR MS: Equal amounts of total membrane protein from 6 E. coli samples (C1, C2, C3, T1, T2 and T3) were processed to generate the peptides to be analyzed by LC-MS. The 6 samples consisted of E. coli cells grown: (A) without alcohol (control):  3 biological replicates (C1, C2, C3) and (B) in the presence of butanol:  3 biological replicates (T1, T2, T3).

### Data Protocol
SWATH MS:  The reference spectral library was generated by a combined search of three technical replicates using the ProteinPilot 5.02 software (SCIEX). The spectra were identified by searching against UniProt E. coli (strain K12) reference proteome (UP000000625, 2020 July release, 4391 entries), spiked with common contaminant proteins (cRAP) using the “thorough search” mode in the Paragon search engine (v5.0.0.0). The following parameters were specified:  Cysteine alkylation using methyl methanethiosulfonate, common biological modifications and detected protein threshold at 0.05. False discovery rate (FDR) analysis was automatically performed against a decoy database comprising reverse protein sequences generated from the input database. SWATH raw files were analyzed against the reference ion library using the OneOmics workflow hosted on SCIEX Cloud OS platform. The peak area extraction parameters were: 75 ppm ion library tolerance, 10 min extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) extraction window, considering only peptides with at least 99% confidence and less than 1% FDR, and excluding shared peptides. The change in the abundance of every protein under ethanol, butanol and hexanol stress conditions compared to the control condition (without alcohol) was represented by fold change. Fold change= Protein abundance under ethanol, butanol or hexanol stress/ Protein abundance under control condition (without alcohol) Fold change confidence (FCC), a value calculated from the peptide variance and the peptide signal quality values, is an indication of the reproducibility of the reported fold change and can be considered as equivalent to p-value < 0.05 at fold change confidence > 0.75. MRMHR MS:  MRMHR data were processed using the Quantitation Workflow in the Analytics Module in SCIEX OS 2.1.6. Peak integration was performed with the AutoPeak algorithm with the following parameters: retention time half window 60 s and XIC width 0.05 Da.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Membrane proteome, E. coli

### Affiliations
Nanyang Technological University
Aarhus university

### Submitter
Oishi Sen

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Seviour
Aarhus university


