### Accession
PXD033520

### Title
A disease-associated XPA allele interferes with TFIIH binding and primarily affects the transcription-coupled sub-pathway of nucleotide excision repair

### Description
XPA is a central scaffold protein in nucleotide excision repair (NER) that interacts with and coordinates the assembly of repair complexes. Inactivating mutations in XPA causes Xeroderma Pigmentosum (XP), which is characterized by extreme UV sensitivity and a highly elevated skin cancer risk. Here, we describe two Dutch siblings in their late forties carrying a homozygous H244R substitution in the C-terminus of XPA with a mild manifestation of XP without skin cancer, but with neurological features including cerebellar ataxia. We show that the mutant XPA protein shows a severely weakened interaction with the TFIIH complex leading to its inefficient association with NER complexes and an inability to support the efficient association of the ERCC1-XPF endonuclease with repair complexes. Despite these defects, we find that patient-derived fibroblasts and reconstituted knockout cells carrying the H244R substitution show considerable levels of residual global genome repair (~40%), which is in intrinsic property of the mutated protein as revealed by in vitro experiments. In contrast, patient fibroblasts and engineered cells only expressing the mutant XPA protein were fully deficient in transcription-coupled repair. We report a new case of XPA deficiency that interferes with TFIIH binding and primarily affects the transcription-coupled sub-pathway of nucleotide excision repair, which is more closely associated with neurological features than to skin abnormalities.

### Sample Protocol
All mass spectrometry was performed in quadruplicate. Cells were plated in DMEM supplemented with 10% Fetal Calf Serum (FCS). Expression of GFP-tagged proteins was induced by treatment with 2 µg/mL doxycycline for at least 24h. Cells were either kept untreated or exposed to 20 J/m2 UV-C light and allowed to recover for 1 hour. Individual mass spectrometry samples, were subsequently subjected to co-immunoprecipitation using GFP Trap beads as described above. After pulldown, the beads were washed 2 times with EBC-150 buffer II and 2 times with 50 mM (NH4)2CO3 followed by overnight digestion using 2.5 µg trypsin at 37°C under constant shaking. All samples were desalted using a Sep-Pak tC18 cartridge by washing with 0.1 % acetic acid. Finally, peptides were eluted with 0.1 % formic acid / 60 % acetonitrile and lyophilized according to (58).  Mass spectrometry was performed essentially as previously described (59). Samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Germany) coupled to an EASY-nanoLC 1000 system (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Trypsin-digested peptides were separated using a 20 cm fused silica capillary (ID: 75 µm, OD: 375 µm, Polymicro Technologies, California, US) in-house packed with 1.9 µm C18-AQ beads (Reprospher-DE, Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerburch-Entringen, Germany). Peptides were separated by liquid chromatography using a gradient from 2% to 30% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nl/min for 40 min followed by 25 minutes of column re-conditioning. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive-ion mode at 2.8 kV with the capillary heated to 250°C. Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode was used to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS scans, employing a top 7 method. Full scan MS spectra were obtained with a resolution of 70,000, a target value of 3x106 and a scan range from 300 to 1,600 m/z. Higher-Collisional Dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were recorded with a resolution of 35,000, a Acquisition Gain Charge (AGC) target value of 1x105 and a normalized collision energy of 25%. Maximum injection times for MS and MS/MS were 250ms and 120ms, respectively. The minimum AGC target for performing a DDA scan was set to 1x104. For all samples, the precursor ion masses selected for MS/MS analysis were subsequently dynamically excluded from MS/MS analysis for 20 sec. Precursor ions with a charge state of 1 or greater than 6 were excluded from triggering MS/MS events.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were further analysed in MaxQuant v 1.6.7.0 according to (60) using standard settings with the following modifications. Maximum missed cleavages by trypsin was set to 4. Label-free quantification was activated, not enabling Fast LFQ. Searches were performed against an in silico digested database from the human proteome including isoforms and canonical proteins (Uniprot, 27th May 2019). Carbamidomethyl (C) was disabled as fixed modification. The match between runs feature was activated and iBAQ quantification was also enabled with Log fit.

### Publication Abstract
XPA is a central scaffold protein that coordinates the assembly of repair complexes in the global genome (GG-NER) and transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair (TC-NER) subpathways. Inactivating mutations in XPA cause xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), which is characterized by extreme UV sensitivity and a highly elevated skin cancer risk. Here, we describe two Dutch siblings in their late forties carrying a homozygous H244R substitution in the C-terminus of XPA. They present with mild cutaneous manifestations of XP without skin cancer but suffer from marked neurological features, including cerebellar ataxia. We show that the mutant XPA protein has a severely weakened interaction with the transcription factor IIH (TFIIH) complex leading to an impaired association of the mutant XPA and the downstream endonuclease ERCC1-XPF with NER complexes. Despite these defects, the patient-derived fibroblasts and reconstituted knockout cells carrying the XPA-H244R substitution show intermediate UV sensitivity and considerable levels of residual GG-NER (~50%), in line with the intrinsic properties and activities of the purified protein. By contrast, XPA-H244R cells are exquisitely sensitive to transcription-blocking DNA damage, show no detectable recovery of transcription after UV irradiation, and display a severe deficiency in TC-NER-associated unscheduled DNA synthesis. Our characterization of a new case of XPA deficiency that interferes with TFIIH binding and primarily affects the transcription-coupled subpathway of nucleotide excision repair, provides an explanation of the dominant neurological features in these patients, and reveals a specific role for the C-terminus of XPA in TC-NER.

### Keywords
Nucleotide excision repair; xeroderma pigmentosum

### Affiliations
Cell and Chemical Biology LUMC The Netherlands
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred Vertegaal
Cell and Chemical Biology LUMC The Netherlands


