### Accession
PXD037360

### Title
Hypothesis-free Illustration on How Phosphorylation Dynamically  Impact Protein Turnover

### Description
The turnover measurement of proteins and proteoforms has been largely facilitated by the metabolic labeling coupled with mass spectrometry (MS), such as the dynamic Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) experiments, i.e., the dynamic SILAC or pSILAC approach. Very recent studies including ours have integrated post-translational modification (PTM) proteomic methodology, such as phosphoproteomics, with pSILAC experiments in steady-state systems and revealed the link between protein PTM and turnover on the proteome-scale. In this study, we present a novel pSILAC phosphoproteomic dataset in a dynamic process of cell starvation using data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS). We further propose a “hypothesis-free”, time series data analysis strategy to interrogate how phosphorylation dynamically impact protein turnover. With this strategy, we discovered complex relationship between phosphorylation and protein turnover that was previously underexplored. Our results further revealed potential biological features including phosphorylation stoichiometry that are associated with the peptideform turnover of phosphorylation. Our data also suggested that phosphoproteomic abundance regulation during starvation tends to be not correlated with turnover diversity, underscoring the importance of studying PTM site-resolved turnover datasets in the future.

### Sample Protocol
As described in the proteome level study, the cell samples were lysed by sonication at 4 ℃ for two cycle (1 min per cycle) using a VialTweeter device (Hielscher-Ultrasound Technology), and then centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 1 h to remove the insoluble material. The protein concentration assay was performed using the Bio-Rad protein assay dye and a total of 700 ug protein mixture was transferred to new 2 ml Eppendorf tubes for alkylation reduction reaction. The protein mixture was reduced with a final concentration of 10 mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TECP) and incubated 1 hour at 37 ℃. The followed alkylation was performed with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in dark for 1 h at room temperature. After the reduction, five volumes of precooled precipitation solution containing 50% acetone, 50% ethanol, and 0.1% acetic acid were added to the protein mixture and kept at −20 °C overnight. The samples were centrifuged at 20,000×g for 40 min to spin down the protein. The precipitated proteins were washed with 100% acetone and 70% ethanol with centrifugation at 20,000×g, 4°C for 40 min, respectively. The pellets were gently dry 5 min with SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific). For trypsin digestion, all the samples were added with 300 μL 100 mM NH4HCO3 and digested with sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega) at a ratio of 1:20 overnight at 37 °C. The peptide mixture was acidified with 10% formic acid and then purified with C18 column (MacroSpin Columns, NEST Group INC). The amount of the final peptides was determined by Nanodrop (Thermo Scientific). 1 ug peptide/per sample was injected into mass spectrometry.  For the present phosphoproteome dataset, 250 ug purified peptide was used for phosphopeptide enrichment with the High-Select™ Fe-NTA kit (Thermo Scientific, #A32992). The enrichment protocol was the same as described previously. Briefly, the resins of one tube in the kit were used to five samples equally. The peptide-resin mixture was incubated for 30 min at room temperature and gently shake per 10 min, and then transferred into the filter tip (TF-20-L-R-S, Axygen) to remove the supernatant by centrifugation. Then the resins binding phosphopeptides were washed sequentially with 200 µL × 3 washing buffer (80% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and 200 µL × 3 H2O to remove nonspecifically peptides. The phosphopeptides were eluted off the resins by 100 µL × 2 elution buffer (50% ACN, 5% NH3•H2O) and dried with SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific). The enrichment was repeated once with same above steps except using the half of resin. All centrifugation steps above were conducted at 500 g × 30 s. The eluates were dried immediately with SpeedVac and resuspended with buffer A for future mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
All the raw DIA-MS data analyses were performed using Spectronaut version 13 by library-based searching. For the pulsed SILAC DIA library generation, the labels must be specified in the “Labeling” setting, the “Labeling Applied” option was enabled, the “Arg10” and “Lys8” were specified as SILAC labeling in the second channel, and the “In-Silico Generate Missing Channels” and “label” of Workflow setting was selected. The Rattus norvegicus fasta file was downloaded from uniport with 29969 entries. Methionine oxidation was set as variable modification and cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as fixed modification. For the phosphoproteome data search, the phosphorylation at S/T/Y was enabled as variable modification for the generation of phosphoproteomics DIA library.  For the data search of pulsed SILAC datasets, the Inverted Spike-In workflow (ISW) pipeline was used as described previously. The “Qvalue” was selected for all data filtering. Both peptide and protein FDR cutoff were controlled at 1%. To reduce the missing value, the probability of post-translational modifications cutoff was set at 0.75 and 0 to report two datasets, respectively, and then select the overlap hits, means that for a specific phosphorylation site, at least one sample of phosphorylation site score is 0.75 cross over all the samples. All the other Spectronaut settings are kept as Default.

### Publication Abstract
The turnover measurement of proteins and proteoforms has been largely facilitated by workflows coupling metabolic labeling with mass spectrometry (MS), including dynamic stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (dynamic SILAC) or pulsed SILAC (pSILAC). Very recent studies including ours have integrated themeasurement of post-translational modifications (PTMs) at the proteome level (i.e., phosphoproteomics) with pSILAC experiments in steady state systems, exploring the link between PTMs and turnover at the proteome-scale. An open question in the field is how to exactly interpret these complex datasets in a biological perspective. Here, we present a novel pSILAC phosphoproteomic dataset which was obtained during a dynamic process of cell starvation using data-independent acquisition MS (DIA-MS). To provide an unbiased "hypothesis-free" analysis framework, we developed a strategy to interrogate how phosphorylation dynamically impacts protein turnover across the time series data. With this strategy, we discovered a complex relationship between phosphorylation and protein turnover that was previously underexplored. Our results further revealed a link between phosphorylation stoichiometry with the turnover of phosphorylated peptidoforms. Moreover, our results suggested that phosphoproteomic turnover diversity cannot directly explain the abundance regulation of phosphorylation during cell starvation, underscoring the importance of future studies addressing PTM site-resolved protein turnover.

### Keywords
Time course, Phosphorylation, Data analysis, Pulse silac, Peptidoform, Dia-ms, Clustering, Protein turnover, Deltasilac

### Affiliations
Yale University
Yale Cancer Biology Institute, West Haven, USA.

### Submitter
Wenxue Li

### Lab Head
Dr Yansheng Liu
Yale Cancer Biology Institute, West Haven, USA.


