### Accession
PXD022869

### Title
Structural basis of chaperone regulation by a post-translational modification

### Description
The Hsp70 chaperone BiP is covalently modified with adenosine monophosphate (referred to as AMPylation) in order to adapt its activity to the fluctuating folding load within the endoplasmic reticulum. This modification is catalyzed by the only human representative of the family of filamentation induced by cyclic adenosine monophosphate (Fic) enzymes HYPE/FICD. The structural basis for BiP binding and AMPylation has remained elusive due to the low affinity of enzyme substrate complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Purified HYPE (102 – 458, E234G) incubated with ATP/purified AMPylated BiP 19-654 was diluted with 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC, Sigma), and was reduced in presence of 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich) for 30 min at 60°C followed by cysteine alkylation with 20 mM iodo acetamide (Sigma Aldrich) for 30 min at 37°C in the dark and enzymatic degradation with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) over night at 37°C. Digestion was quenched with 1% formic acid (FA), precipitated SDC was removed by centrifugation for 5 min at 14,000 g and the supernatant was dried in a vacuum centrifuge.

### Data Protocol
DDA LC-MS/MS were searched with the Sequest algorithm integrated in the Proteome Discoverer software (v 2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the protein sequence of HYPE (102-458, E234G)/BiP 19-654 and a contaminant data protein sequence database. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification for cysteine residues and the oxidation of methionine, phosphoadenosine at serine and threonine and tyrosine, pyro-glutamate formation at glutamine residues at the peptide N-terminus as well as acetylation of the protein N-terminus were allowed as variable modifications. Potential peptides with AMPylation were manually inspected to confirm presence of characteristic AMP signals at 136.0623 m/z (adenine fragment), 250.0940 m/z (adenosine fragment) and/or 348.0709 m/z (adenosine monophosphate fragment) and only then accepted as a valid peptide AMPylation.

### Publication Abstract
To adapt to fluctuating protein folding loads in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), the Hsp70 chaperone BiP is reversibly modified with adenosine monophosphate (AMP) by the ER-resident Fic-enzyme FICD/HYPE. The structural basis for BiP binding and AMPylation by FICD has remained elusive due to the transient nature of the enzyme-substrate-complex. Here, we use thiol-reactive derivatives of the cosubstrate adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to covalently stabilize the transient FICD:BiP complex and determine its crystal structure. The complex reveals that the TPR-motifs of FICD bind specifically to the conserved hydrophobic linker of BiP and thus mediate specificity for the domain-docked conformation of BiP. Furthermore, we show that both AMPylation and deAMPylation of BiP are not directly regulated by the presence of unfolded proteins. Together, combining chemical biology, crystallography and biochemistry, our study provides structural insights into a key regulatory mechanism that safeguards ER homeostasis.

### Keywords
Hype, Ampylation, Hsp70 chaperone bip

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine
Mass Spectrometric Proteomics
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf Institute of Biochemistry and Signal Transduction Hamburg, Germany

### Submitter
Christoph Krisp

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Aymelt Itzen
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf Institute of Biochemistry and Signal Transduction Hamburg, Germany


