### Accession
PXD012549

### Title
IPs of SETD1A COMPASS-HUMAN LC-MSMS

### Description
Mapping physical interactions of SETD1A COMPOASS in HEK293T cells using endogenous immunoprecipitation followed by label-free quantitative proteomics. We found a novel protein interacts with SETD1A, which is RAD18 (DNA damage repair protein).

### Sample Protocol
All samples of SETD1A,ASH2L,RBBP5,and RAD18 are IPs using protein-A-sepharose beads. Proteins were digested on beads using Trypsin digestion kit and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The software was used MaxQuant and perseus.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using MaxQuant and the human UniProt database. The parameters that were used include: Fixed mod: cyctien carbamidomethylation; variable mods: methionine oxidation; Trypsin/P digest enzyme; missed cleavage: 1; peptide FDR 1%.

### Publication Abstract
SETD1A is a SET domain-containing methyltransferase involved in epigenetic regulation of transcription. It is the main catalytic component of a multiprotein complex that methylates lysine 4 of histone H3, a histone mark associated with gene activation. In humans, six related protein complexes with partly nonredundant cellular functions share several protein subunits but are distinguished by unique catalytic SET-domain proteins. We surveyed physical interactions of the SETD1A-complex using endogenous immunoprecipitation followed by label-free quantitative proteomics on three subunits: SETD1A, RBBP5, and ASH2L. Surprisingly, SETD1A, but not RBBP5 or ASH2L, was found to interact with the DNA damage repair protein RAD18. Reciprocal RAD18 immunoprecipitation experiments confirmed the interaction with SETD1A, whereas size exclusion and protein network analysis suggested an interaction independent of the main SETD1A complex. We found evidence of SETD1A and RAD18 influence on mutual gene expression levels. Further, knockdown of the genes individually showed a DNA damage repair phenotype, whereas simultaneous knockdown resulted in an epistatic effect. This adds to a growing body of work linking epigenetic enzymes to processes involved in genome stability.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Setd1a compass

### Affiliations
University College Dublin (UCD)
School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin4, Ireland

### Submitter
Manal Alsulami

### Lab Head
Dr Gerard Cagney
School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin4, Ireland


