### Accession
PXD010186

### Title
Fish Liver Immune Response LC-MSMS

### Description
High-throughput proteomics was used to determine the role of the fish liver in defense responses to bacterial infection, done using a rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) model following infection with Aeromonas salmonicida, the causative agent of furunculosis. The vertebrate liver has multifaceted roles in innate immunity, metabolism, and growth; we hypothesize this tissue serves a dual function in supporting host defense in parallel to metabolic adjustments that promote effective immune function. While past studies have reported mRNA responses to A. salmonicida in salmonids, the impact of bacterial infectionon the liver proteome remains uncharacterized in fish.

### Sample Protocol
Juvenile rainbow trout (n=25) were kept in two separate 250L freshwater tanks at the University of Aberdeen’s aquarium facilities. Water temperature was maintained at 14oC, and fish were fed a commercial pellet diet at 2% body weight per day. Ten fish (five from each tank) were randomly selected to receive either a bacterial or PBS injection. Each fish weighed approximately 100g at the time of the challenge. A pathogenic strain of the Gram-negative bacterium A. salmonicida (Hooke) was used for the immune challenge. Animals were anaesthetized then injected interperitoneally (i.p.) with 2 x 105 colony forming units (cfu)/mL A. salmonicida in PBS (0.5 mL/fish). The same volume (0.5 mL) of PBS was injected i.p. as a control. Sampling occurred 48 h post-infection. The fish were killed using a Schedule 1 method before liver was immediately sampled, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -70oC until analysis. Liver samples were takenfrom n=10 fish per experimental group (Aeromonas vs. PBS), from which n=6 per group were randomly selected for the proteomics work described below. All animal work was carriedout in compliance with the Animals 145 (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986 by a UK Home Office license holder, approved by the ethics committee at the University of Aberdeen.  Liver tissue was thawed on ice, weighed and lysis buffer added for a final concentrationof ~2 mg/µl. The tissue was ground within the buffer using a micropestle, followed by sonication (Fischer Scientific, Sonic Dismembrator) on ice. The resulting suspension was centrifuged at 13,000 g for 5 min, before the supernatant was separated and stored at -80oC until further analysis. The supernatant was thawed on ice, diluted 50% with moleculargrade water, followed by protein precipitation using a ReadyPrep 2-D clean up kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The resulting pellet was dissolved in 100 µL of 3-10 pH Reswell buffer (Urea, Thiourea, CHAPS, DTT, MilliQ water,and IPG buffer). 5 µL of 3X dissociation buffer (0.5M pH 6.8 Tris-HCl, 25% SDS, 2-mercaptoethanol, glycerol) was combined with 10 µL of the Reswell solution and incubated for 5 min at 100oC. A small, 3 µL aliquot of thissolution was run a short distance into a 10% acrylamide 1-D gel, then stained with colloidal Coomassie Blue G250 (Fisher Scientific). The protein band was excised for an in-gel tryptic (Promega, sequencing grade) digestion (Digilab ProGest robot). The resulting peptide solutions were dried via centrifugal evaporation (Savant SpeedVac Plus) then dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid and centrifuged for 5 min at 14,000 g prior to LC-MS.  An UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano (Dionex/Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus quadrupole-equipped Orbitrap MS LC-MS system was used to analyze samples, where 4 µL of the tryptic peptide solution was injected per sample. A loading solvent of water/acetonitrile/formic acid (98:2:0.1) with a flow rate of 10 µL/min was used to concentrate peptides ona µ-precolumn (C18 PepMap; 300 µm i.d. x 5mm). The µ-precolumn was switched to the analytical flow path after 5 min. Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min along a C18 PepMap RSLC column (2 µm i.d. x 50 cm) fitted to an Easy-Spray nano ESI source. Two solvents were used to separate peptides, Solvent A constituted water/formicacid (1000:1) and Solvent B water/acetonitrile/formic acid (200:800:1). An increasing proportion of solvent B was used along a gradient for the separation of peptides: 3-10% from 5-25 min: 10-45% from 25-185 min; 45-90% from 185-190 min; 90% from 190-205 min, 90-3% from 205-210 min, followed by re-equilibration (3% solvent B, 30 min). A “Top 10” data-dependentacquisition (DDA) method was used, beginning at 5 min into the LC method and lasting for200 min. Theelectrospray voltage was 1.9kV, capillary temperature 270°C and S-lens RF level 60. The MS scans were performed between 375-1750 m/z at resolution 70,000 (m/z 200) with an automatic gain control of 3E+6 and maximum injection timeof50 ms. The 10 most intense ions of charge state 2-5 were sequentially selected (isolation window 1.6 m/z), followed by fragmentation in the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) cell at a normalized collision energy of 26%. MS/MS scans were conducted at resolution 17,500, with an automatic gain control of 5E+4 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. Additional data-dependent settings included: peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes turned one, and a 40 s dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files from the Q-Exactive were analyzed using MaxQuant (v1.5.3.30; Cox and Mann, 2008) with a label-free quantification (LFQ) method. MaxQuant default and recommended settings were predominantly used excepted that unmodified counterpart peptides were not discarded. Trypsin digestion was selected, with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications allowed were oxidation of methionine and protein acetylation at the N-terminus end, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was a fixed modification. Peptide and protein identifications were subject to a 1% false-discovery rate (FDR), with a first search mass tolerance for precursor ions set to 20 ppm and a 4.5 ppm setting for the main search. The ‘Match between runs’ option was used to identify missing spectra across samples. Peptides were matched against a high-quality rainbow trout genome annotation including 71,293 RefSeq proteins (NCBI accession; GCA_002163495). Contaminants, reverse identifications, and identifications only by site were filtered from the MaxQuant ‘proteingroups.txt’ file and only proteins that had LFQ values in five samples were kept for statistical analysis. LFQ values were log-2 transformed and missing values imputed using missForest.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Maxquant, Liver, Immune, Rainbow trout, Fish

### Affiliations
School of Biological Sciences, University of Aberdeen, United Kingdom
University of Aberdeen

### Submitter
Dwight Causey

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Macqueen
School of Biological Sciences, University of Aberdeen, United Kingdom


