### Accession
PXD035704

### Title
IER3-AS1 interacting proteins by AP-MS

### Description
Characterisation IER3-AS1 interacting proteins using chromatin oligo-affinity precipitation (ChOP) followed by mass spectrometry.  The HeLa cell lysates was incubated with biotinylated antisense oligonucleotides (ASO), targeting an experimental target antisense long noncoding RNA IER3-AS1 or a control RNA LacZ. LacZ and IER3-AS1 interacting proteomes were pulldown using Streptavidin beads. The eluted protein samples from both LacZ control ASOs and IER3-AS1 ASOs subjected to mass-spectrometry analyses to identify IER3-AS1 interacting proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Purified pulldown preparations, eluted in 100mM HEPES, 12.5mM Biotin, 0.15% SDS, 0.075% Sarkozyl, 0.02% Na-Deoxycholate (SDC), 75mM NaCl, 1.5mM EDTA, were treated with 100 mM DTT, a reducing agent,  for 30 min at 56 °C and were processed using the modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 6:359-62). In short, the DTT treated samples were transferred to 30 kDa Microcon Centrifugal Filter Units (catalogue no. MRCF0R030, Merck), washed several times with 8 M urea and once with digestion buffer (25 mM TEAB, 0.5% SDC) prior to alkylation with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate in digestion buffer for 30 min. Samples were digested with 0.3 µg Trypsin (Pierce MS grade Trypsin, Thermo Fisher Scientific) overnight, followed by extra incubation with 0.3 µg Trypsin for 2 h, both at 37°C. Proteolytic peptides were collected by centrifugation and filters were additionally washed with 20 µl of 25 mM TEAB to ensure that all material was eluted from the filters. All proteolytic preparations were first purified using HiPPR™ spin columns ((Thermo Scientific), followed by acidification with 10 % TFA to remove remaining SDC.  All peptide preparations were desalted using Pierce peptide desalting spin columns (Thermo Scientific) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. The detergent free preparations were dried down and reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for LC-MS analysis.  Digested samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) interfaced with Easy-nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm x 300 mm, particle size 3 μm, Reprosil-Pur C18, Dr. Maisch) using a gradient from 5% to 28% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 75 min followed by an increase to 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 5 min. The instrument operated in data-dependent mode where the precursor ion mass spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120K and a scan range of 375-1500 m/z. The most abundant ions with a charge state of 2-7 were picked for data-dependent MS/MS analysis. The MS/MS analysis was acquired using HCD at normalized collision energy settings of 30, a “top speed” duty cycle of 1 s, isolation window 0.7 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s and mass tolerance to 10 ppm. MS2 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 30,000 with maximum injection time set to 110 ms. Analytical blank LC-MS were recorded prior to each sample injection.

### Data Protocol
The acquired data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Database searches were performed with Mascot as search against the SwissProt human database. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 30 mmu. Tryptic peptides were accepted with one missed cleavage. Methionine oxidation and cysteine alkylation were set as variable modifications. Decoy search against a reversed database was used for PSM validation with the strict FDR threshold of 1%. The identified proteins were grouped by sharing the same sequences to minimize redundancy and were filtered at 5% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Although antisense transcription is a widespread event in the mammalian genome, double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) formation between sense and antisense transcripts is very rare and mechanisms that control dsRNA remain unknown. By characterizing the FGF-2 regulated transcriptome in normal and cancer cells, we identified sense and antisense transcripts IER3 and IER3-AS1 that play a critical role in FGF-2 controlled oncogenic pathways. We show that IER3 and IER3-AS1 regulate each other's transcription through HnRNPK-mediated post-transcriptional regulation. HnRNPK controls the mRNA stability and colocalization of IER3 and IER3-AS1. HnRNPK interaction with IER3 and IER3-AS1 determines their oncogenic functions by maintaining them in a single-stranded form. hnRNPK depletion neutralizes their oncogenic functions through promoting dsRNA formation and cytoplasmic accumulation. Intriguingly, hnRNPK loss-of-function and gain-of-function experiments reveal its role in maintaining global single- and double-stranded RNA. Thus, our data unveil the critical role of HnRNPK in maintaining single-stranded RNAs and their physiological functions by blocking RNA-RNA interactions.

### Keywords
Chromatin oligo-affinity precipitation, Ier3-as1, Lc-ms/ms, Lncrna, Orbitrap, Long noncoding rna, Hnrnpk

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell biology, University of Gothenburg

### Submitter
Ekaterina Mirgorodskaya

### Lab Head
Dr Chandrasekhar Kanduri
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell biology, University of Gothenburg


