### Accession
PXD025912

### Title
Acetylation level of Pannexin 1 lysine residues following alpha 1 adrenoceptor activation

### Description
Pannexin 1 (Panx1) channels can be activated by alpha 1 adrenoceptor-induced pathways for the sympathetic regulation of blood pressure; however, the molecular mechanisms for this form of Panx1 channel activation remain elusive. To identify potential acetyl-lysine residue(s) of Panx1 channels that might be involved in this receptor-mediated Panx1 channel activation, we performed mass-spectrometry on Strep-tagged Panx1 proteins precipitated from the whole cell lysate of HEK293T cells after stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). Those HEK293T cells were transiently transfected with alpha1D adrenoceptors and human Panx1-Strep, with or without phenylephrine stimulation. Equal amounts of light-labeled (control) and heavy-labeled (phenylephrine stimulated) cell lysates were pooled, and Panx1 proteins were precipitated by Strep-Tactin beads, followed by LC-MS-MS analysis. From three biological replicates, we identified a consistent, albeit modest, reduction of acetylation level at K140, following phenylephrine stimulation. Whereas the acetylation level of other lysine residues (K321, K374, K381, K409) were variable among three replicates or were unaffected by phenylephrine treatment. These results implicate Panx1 K140 as a potential regulatory site for receptor-mediated channel activation via an acetylation-deacetylation mechanism.

### Sample Protocol
Precipitated Panx1 proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE. Colloidal blue-stained gel bands were destained, vacuum dried, and the gel bands were trypsin digested. The digested peptides were extracted, desalted, vacuum dried, resuspended in 0.1% TFA, and then were loaded onto a C18 nanobore trap column, and resolved on a C18 Easy-Spray column by nanoflow LC coupled online with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid MS. The 12 most intense molecular ions in each MS scan were sequentially selected for high-energy collisional dissociation. The mass spectra were acquired at the mass range of m/z 400-1600. Dynamic exclusion (15 s) was enabled to minimize redundant peptide fragmentation events. The RF lens was set to 30% during the MS analysis and both MS1 and MS2 spectra were collected in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched against a Swiss-Prot human protein database using Proteome Discoverer (v.2.1.1.21, Thermo Fisher Scientific) via Mascot (v. 2.5.1, Matrix Science Inc.) with the automatic decoy search option set followed by false-discovery rate (FDR) processing by Percolator. The exact Panx1 (Q96RD7) protein sequence used in the experiments (including the engineered tag and spacer) was added to the Swiss-Prot human protein database. Data were searched with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.05 Da, a maximum of two tryptic miscleavages and dynamic modifications for oxidation (15.9949 Da) on methionine residues and for acetylation (42.01056 Da) on lysine residues. The heavy SILAC labeled lysine (8.014199 Da) and arginine (10.008269 Da) residues were also set for dynamic modification. Resulting peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered using an FDR of ≤1% (Percolator q-value ≤ 0.01).

### Publication Abstract
Activation of Pannexin 1 (PANX1) ion channels causes release of intercellular signaling molecules in a variety of (patho)physiological contexts. PANX1 can be activated by G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), including &#x3b1;1-adrenergic receptors (&#x3b1;1-ARs), but how receptor engagement leads to channel opening remains unclear. Here, we show that GPCR-mediated PANX1 activation can occur via channel deacetylation. We find that &#x3b1;1-AR-mediated activation of PANX1 channels requires G&#x3b1;q but is independent of phospholipase C or intracellular calcium. Instead, &#x3b1;1-AR-mediated PANX1 activation involves RhoA, mammalian diaphanous (mDia)-related formin, and a cytosolic lysine deacetylase activated by mDia - histone deacetylase 6. HDAC6 associates with PANX1 and activates PANX1 channels, even in excised membrane patches, suggesting direct deacetylation of PANX1. Substitution of basally-acetylated intracellular lysine residues identified on PANX1 by mass spectrometry either prevents HDAC6-mediated activation (K140/409Q) or renders the channels constitutively active (K140R). These data define a non-canonical RhoA-mDia-HDAC6 signaling pathway for G&#x3b1;qPCR activation of PANX1 channels and uncover lysine acetylation-deacetylation as an ion channel silencing-activation mechanism.

### Keywords
Panx1, Pannexin, Alpha 1 adrenoceptor, Phenylephrine, Silac, Acetylation

### Affiliations
National Tsing Hua University

### Submitter
Yu-Hsin Chiu

### Lab Head
Dr Yu-Hsin Chiu
National Tsing Hua University


