### Accession
PXD018786

### Title
Cross-linking mass spectrometry identifies interacting regions between VACV A46 and human MAL or MyD88

### Description
Vaccinia virus immunomodulator A46 is a member of the poxviral Bcl-2-like protein family that inhibits the cellular innate immune response at the level of the TIR domain-containing TLR adaptor proteins MAL, MyD88, TRAM and TRIF. The mechanism of interaction of A46 with its targets has remained unclear. We used BS3 and EDC + sulfo-NHS to cross-link A46 to the TIR domains of MAL and MyD88 to help identify interacting residues and regions.

### Sample Protocol
All proteins were expressed in E. coli BL21 (DE3) and purified by HisTrap and size-exclusion chromatography. Cross-linking with BS3 respect. EDC/NHS was carried out according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In short for BS3 cross-linking, proteins were mixed on ice to the desired final concentrations and the required amount of BS3 was added. The samples were incubated at room temperature for 15 minutes before quenching the reaction with TRIS. Cross-linking with EDC/NHS was carried out in a one-step reaction. In short, proteins were buffer-exchanged to the activation buffer (10 mM MES, 150 mM NaCl, pH 6.6, adapted to the MALTIR and MyD88TIR assembly buffer) using ZebaTM Spin Desalting Columns, mixed on ice to the desired final concentrations and incubated under assembling conditions (30°C for 16 h) prior to the addition of the required amounts of EDC and sulfo-NHS. The samples were incubated at room temperature for 5-10 minutes, before quenching the reaction with β-mercapto-ethanol and TRIS. All cross-linked samples were resolved by SDS-PAGE. Coomassie Brilliant Blue-stained excised bands were destained with a 1:1 mixture of acetonitrile and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ambic). Disulfide bridges were reduced using 10 mM DTT in 50 mM ambic for (30 min, 56 °C), and free thiols alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ambic in the dark (30 min, RT). Proteins were digested with trypsin overnight at 37 °C. The reaction was stopped using 10% (v/v) formic acid and extracted peptides were desalted on C18 stage tips. Peptide samples were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow chromatography system using a PepMapAcclaim C18 pre-column for sample loading and a C18 analytical column (PepMapAcclaim C18, 50 cm × 0.75 mm, 2 μm) applying a linear gradient from 2 to 40% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; solvent A 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 230 nl/min over 120 minutes. Eluting peptides were analysed on a Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer: For the data-dependent mode survey scans were acquired in a mass range of 350–1,600 m/z with lock mass on, at a resolution of 120.000 at 200 m/z. The AGC target value was set to 1E6 with a maximal injection time of 60 ms. The 15 most intense ions were selected with an isolation width of 1.2 Da, fragmented in the HCD cell stepping the normalized collision energy from 26 to 30%. Spectra were recorded at a target value of 1E5 with a maximal injection time of 150 ms and a resolution of 60000. Peptides with unassigned charge state, a charge of +1, +2 or > +7 were excluded from fragmentation, the peptide match and exclude isotope features were enabled and selected precursors were dynamically excluded from repeated sampling for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software package v1.6.0.16 was used to identify the most abundant protein hits (default settings) in the database of the target proteins, proteome of E.coli and common contaminants. To identify cross-linked peptides, the spectra were searched against the sequences of the most abundant proteins using pLink software v2.3.7. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed, and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. The enzyme specificity was set to tryptic allowing 4 missed cleavage sites, and BS3 respectively EDC/sulfo-NHS were specified according to the cross-linking chemistry. In case of BS3, side reactivity of BS3 with serine, threonine and tyrosine on one site were allowed. Search results were filtered for 1% FDR (false discovery rate) on the PSM level (peptide-spectrum matches) and a maximum precursor mass deviation of 5 ppm. To remove low quality PSMs, additionally an e-Value cutoff of < 0.001 was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Vaccinia virus A46 is an anti-inflammatory and non-anti-apoptotic, two-domain member of the poxviral Bcl-2-like protein family that inhibits the cellular innate immune response at the level of the Toll/interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) domain-containing TLR adaptor proteins MAL, MyD88, TRAM, and TRIF. The mechanism of interaction of A46 with its targets has remained unclear. The TIR domains of MAL and MyD88 have been shown to signal by forming filamentous assemblies. We show a clear concentration-dependent destruction of both of these assemblies by A46 by means of negative-stain electron microscopy from molar ratios of 1:15 for MAL and 1:30 for MyD88. Using targeted mutagenesis and protein-protein crosslinking, we show that A46 interacts with MAL and MyD88 through several facets, including residues on helices &#x3b1;1 and &#x3b1;7 and the C-terminal flexible region. We propose a model in which A46 targets the MAL and MyD88 signalosome intra-strand interfaces and gradually destroys their assemblies in a concentration-dependent manner.

### Keywords
Qexactive hf-x, Cross-linking ms, Bcl-2-like, Tlr 4, Tir domain, Vaccinia

### Affiliations
Max Perutz Labs, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter
Max Perutz Labs, Mass Spectrometry Facility, University of Vienna

### Submitter
Dorothea Anrather

### Lab Head
Dr Tim Skern
Max Perutz Labs, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter


