### Accession
PXD031891

### Title
HIV-1 gp120 impairs spatial memory through CREB

### Description
HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND) remain an unsolved problem that persists despite using antiretroviral therapy. We have obtained data showing that HIV-gp120 protein contributes to neurodegeneration through metabolic reprogramming. This led to decreased ATP levels, lower mitochondrial DNA copy numbers, and loss of mitochondria cristae, all-important for mitochondrial biogenesis. gp120 protein also disrupted mitochondrial movement and synaptic plasticity. Searching for the mechanisms involved, we found that gp120 alters the cyclic AMP response element-binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation on serine residue 133 necessary for its function as a transcription factor. Since CREB regulates the promoters of PGC1 and BDNF genes, we found that CREB dephosphorylation causes PGC1 and BDNF loss of functions. Our data was validated in vitro and in vivo. The negative effect of gp120 was alleviated in cells and animals in the presence of rolipram that inhibits the phosphodiesterase protein 4 (PDE4) and restores CREB phosphorylation. We concluded that HIV-gp120 protein contributes to HAND via inhibition of CREB protein function.

### Sample Protocol
SH-SY5Y cells treated with gp120B and gp120C for 48 hrs. For label-free global proteomics studies, the proteins were extracted and processed  by modified IST method (Quinn etal, 2022).SH-SY5Y cells treated with gp120B and gp120C for 48 hrs. Mass spec analyses were performed using the  ELITE mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The complete system was entirely controlled by Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
. Mass spectra processing was performed with Proteome discoverer 2.5.The generated de-isotoped peak list was submitted to an in-house Mascot server 2.2.07, Amanda MS 2.0 and Sequest HT databases. All parameters were set as follows: species, homo sapiens; enzyme, trypsin with maximum two missed cleavage; fixed modification, cysteine carboxymethylation; 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor peptide ions; 0.02 Da tolerance for MS/MS fragment ions.

### Publication Abstract
HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND) remain an unsolved problem that persists despite using antiretroviral therapy. We have obtained data showing that HIV-gp120 protein contributes to neurodegeneration through metabolic reprogramming. This led to decreased ATP levels, lower mitochondrial DNA copy numbers, and loss of mitochondria <i>cristae</i>, all-important for mitochondrial biogenesis. gp120 protein also disrupted mitochondrial movement and synaptic plasticity. Searching for the mechanisms involved, we found that gp120 alters the cyclic AMP response element-binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation on serine residue 133 necessary for its function as a transcription factor. Since CREB regulates the promoters of PGC1&#x3b1; and BDNF genes, we found that CREB dephosphorylation causes PGC1&#x3b1; and BDNF loss of functions. The data was validated <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i>. The negative effect of gp120 was alleviated in cells and animals in the presence of rolipram, an inhibitor of phosphodiesterase protein 4 (PDE4), restoring CREB phosphorylation. We concluded that HIV-gp120 protein contributes to HAND via inhibition of CREB protein function.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Rolipram, Creb protein, Hiv, Neurodegeneration, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Temple University
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Temple University School of Pharmacy, Temple University

### Submitter
Carmen Merali

### Lab Head
Dr Salim Merali, Ph.D.
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Temple University School of Pharmacy, Temple University


