### Accession
PXD028796

### Title
Raptor and rapamycin dependent proteomic changes in Akt overexpressing skeletal muscle

### Description
Analysis of proteomic changes upon deletion of Raptor or inhibition by rapamycin in mouse muscles over expressing a constitutively active Akt.

### Sample Protocol
Muscle samples were lysed in Ripa buffer. Proteins were precipitated with ice cold acetone, resuspended in 8M Urea buffer, reduced (10mM DTT) and alkylated (55mM IAA)and subsequently digested with trypsin. Peptides were desalted on Stage tips (SDB-RPS) and eluted for measurement (elution in ammonia, dried in vacuume concentrator, resuspendet in 2% ACN and 5% FA). Measurement on Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo) coupled to nano HPLC (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against Uniprot mouse protein database with MaxQuant (1.5.8.3) using standard settings. LFQ and match between runs were enabled. The data were further analyzed with Perseus (1.5.5.3) and InstantClue (0.10.10).

### Publication Abstract
Loss of skeletal muscle mass and force is of critical importance in numerous pathologies, like age-related sarcopenia or cancer. It has been shown that the Akt-mTORC1 pathway is critical for stimulating adult muscle mass and function, however, it is unknown if mTORC1 is the only mediator downstream of Akt and which intracellular processes are required for functional muscle growth. Here, we show that loss of Raptor reduces muscle hypertrophy after Akt activation and completely prevents increases in muscle force. Interestingly, the residual hypertrophy after Raptor deletion can be completely prevented by administration of the mTORC1 inhibitor rapamycin. Using a quantitative proteomics approach we find that loss of Raptor affects the increases in mitochondrial proteins, while rapamycin mainly affects ribosomal proteins. Taken together, these results suggest that mTORC1 is the key mediator of Akt-dependent muscle growth and its regulation of the mitochondrial proteome is critical for increasing muscle force.

### Keywords
Akt, Raptor, Skeletal muscle, Mtor

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Sciences, 35137, University of Padova, Padova, Italy
University of Cologne, Department of Biology, Institute for Genetics

### Submitter
Frederik Tellkamp

### Lab Head
Dr Bert Blaauw
Department of Biomedical Sciences, 35137, University of Padova, Padova, Italy


