### Accession
PXD009450

### Title
Functional Proteomic Profiling of Secreted Serine Proteases in Health and Inflammatory Bowel Disease

### Description
Dysregulated proteolysis plays a pivotal role in the pathophysiology of inflammatory bowel disease. Nonetheless, the identity of overactive proteases released by human colonic mucosa remains unknown. Herein, we employed a serine protease-targeted activity-based probe (ABP) coupled with mass spectral analysis to identify active forms of proteases secreted by the colonic mucosa of healthy volunteers and inflammatory bowel disease patients. With this approach, we identified seven active serine proteases: cathepsin G, plasma kallikrein, plasmin, tryptase, chymotrypsin-like elastase 3A, aminopeptidase B, and thrombin. Furthermore, cathepsin G and thrombin were overactive in supernatants from inflammatory bowel disease patients once compared to healthy volunteers.

### Sample Protocol
Colonic tissue samples were obtained from well-characterized CD and UC patients undergoing colonoscopy or colonic resection procedures at the Toulouse Hospital Centre (France). Colonic tissue samples from individuals undergoing colon cancer screening who were otherwise healthy were used as healthy volunteers. Written and verbal informed consent was obtained before enrolment in the study, according to guidelines and regulations from the French Ethics Committee (Comité d’Ethique sur les Recherches Non Interventionnelles; Identifier: NCT01990716). Fresh colonic tissue samples were rinsed in isotonic sterile Hanks’ balanced salt solution pH 7.4 (HBSS) and were then immediately incubated in 2 mL of HBSS (containing Ca2+ and Mg2+) at 37°C for 60 min. The concentration of protein in colonic tissue supernatants was determined by using the Pierce Protein BCA Assay Kit, according to instructions (Thermo Scientific). Activity-based probe (ABP) reaction was performed with the biotin-PK-DPP probe, synthesised by the laboratory of Dr. Nigel W. Bunnett (Columbia University, USA), with the participation of Dr. Laura Edgington-Mitchell (Monash University, Australia). This probe presents a relative selectivity towards Enzyme Class 3.4.21.4 and EC 3.4.21.5. Colonic supernatants (40 µg of protein) were diluted in 100 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM CaCl2, pH=8 to a final volume of 900 µL and then split into duplicates. Each duplicate (450 µL) was then pre-treated or not with a final concentration of 4 mM AEBSF (SIGMA) during 15 min at 37ºC under stirring (1000 rpm). The pre-incubation with this irreversible broad-spectrum serine protease inhibitor allows the identification of active proteases, since enzyme inhibition abrogates their interaction with the ABP, impacting the intensity signal of peptides retrieved by mass spectrometry. Then, the ABP biotin-PK-DPP was added to each reaction to a final concentration of 1 μM, and each replicate sample, containing 20 ug of protein, was incubated for 60 min at 37ºC under stirring (1000 rpm). For mass spectrometry analysis, colonic supernatants from 3 representative patients per group were pooled and submitted to an ABP reaction in a final volume of 4.0 mL, as described above. In the following, 3.8 mL of the reaction product were incubated with 50 μL of prewashed Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin C1 (Invitrogen, USA) for 60 min at room temperature under stirring (1000 rpm). The beads were washed 5 times with 1 mL of phosphate buffered saline pH=7.2. The pellets containing the ABP-protease complexes adsorbed to the magnetic beads were washed twice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), and then suspended in 6 M urea and 25 mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich). After 60 min under stirring (850 rpm) at room temperature, the samples were alkylated by the incubation in 90 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) during 30 min in the dark. Bead-bound samples were then washed twice as described above and submitted to overnight proteolysis at 37°C in ammonium bicarbonate buffer (50 mM, pH=8.5) containing 1 μg of trypsin (Promega, USA) per sample. The supernatants were collected, dried under vacuum and solubilized in 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich). The resulting peptides were analysed with a NanoLC (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system Thermo Scientific) coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides extracts (5 μL) were loaded on a C18 pre-column (300 μm inner diameter x 5 mm; Thermo Scientific) in a solvent made of 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, at a flow rate of 20 μl/min. After 5 min of desalting, the pre-column was switched online with the analytical C-18 column (75 μm inner diameter x 50 cm; Reprosil) equilibrated in 95% of solvent A (0.2% formic acid) and 5% of solvent B (80% acetonitrile and 0.2% formic acid). The peptides were eluted using a 5-50% gradient of solvent B over 105 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode with Xcalibur software. MS survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 350–1800 m/z range, with the resolution set to 60,000. The 20 most intense ions per survey scan were selected for fragmentation by collision-induced fragmentation and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap. A 60s dynamic exclusion was used to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide. Triplicate LC-MS measurements were performed for each sample.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) for database search with the Andromeda search engine and for quantitative analysis. Data were searched against human entries in the Swissprot protein database (release UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot 2015-12; 20200 entries). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after K or R, and two missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search, 5 ppm for the main Andromeda database search and minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Andromeda results were validated by the target-decoy approach using a reverse database at both a peptide and a protein false-discovery rates of 1%. For label-free relative quantification of the samples, the match between runs option of MaxQuant was enabled with a time window of 0.7 min, to allow cross-assignment of MS features detected in the different runs. To perform relative quantification between proteins identified, we used the “Intensity” metric from the MaxQuant “protein group.txt” output (sum of peptide intensity values for each protein). Quantitative data were first normalized and missing protein intensity values were replaced by a constant noise value that was determined independently for each sample as the lowest value of the total protein population. Enrichment ratios between AEBSF not treated and AEBSF treated samples were calculated from the mean protein intensities derived from three technical replicate experiments. A potential active protease was selected based on an enrichment ratio > 2 (Intensity AEBSF not treated vs. treated) and a Student’s t-test P-value < 0.05 over the triplicates.

### Publication Abstract
While proteases are essential in gastrointestinal physiology, accumulating evidence indicates that dysregulated proteolysis plays a pivotal role in the pathophysiology of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Nonetheless, the identity of overactive proteases released by human colonic mucosa remains largely unknown. Studies of protease abundance have primarily investigated expression profiles, not taking into account their enzymatic activity. Herein we have used serine protease-targeted activity-based probes (ABPs) coupled with mass spectral analysis to identify active forms of proteases secreted by the colonic mucosa of healthy controls and IBD patients. Profiling of (Pro-Lys)-ABP bound proteases revealed that most of hyperactive proteases from IBD secretome are clustered at 28-kDa. We identified seven active proteases: the serine proteases cathepsin G, plasma kallikrein, plasmin, tryptase, chymotrypsin-like elastase 3&#x2009;A, and thrombin and the aminopeptidase B. Only cathepsin G and thrombin were overactive in supernatants from IBD patient tissues compared to healthy controls. Gene expression analysis highlighted the transcription of genes encoding these proteases into intestinal mucosae. The functional ABP-targeted proteomic approach that we have used to identify active proteases in human colonic samples bears directly on the understanding of the role these enzymes may play in the pathophysiology of IBD.

### Keywords
Inflammatory bowel disease, Functional proteomics, Activity-based probe, Serine protease, Inflammation

### Affiliations
IPBS CNRS
INSERM IRSD U1220 CHU PURPAN PLACE DU DOCTEUR BAYLAC CS 60039 31024 TOULOUSE CEDEX 3 ​FRANCE

### Submitter
Emmanuelle Mouton Barbosa

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandre Denadai-Souza
INSERM IRSD U1220 CHU PURPAN PLACE DU DOCTEUR BAYLAC CS 60039 31024 TOULOUSE CEDEX 3 ​FRANCE


