### Accession
PXD011136

### Title
Uncovering nutrient-regulated surface proteins using stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) proteomics

### Description
The presence of a protein at the cell surface is regulated by the exocytic and endocytic membrane trafficking pathways. We have recently discovered that the nutrient, or amino acids, plays a substantial role in promoting the endocytic membrane trafficking.  Here we ask if the nutrient can regulate the cell surface presentation of proteins, which has not been addressed in the literature according to our knowledge. To that end, HeLa cells are labeled with heavy and light isotopes. In the forward labeling experiment, heavy and light cells are treated with DMEM and HBSS for 2 hours respectively. Cells are surface-biotinylated and are subsequently mixed, lysed and subjected to affinity purification by Streptavidin beads. Reverse labeling experiment is identically performed except that heavy and light cells are treated with HBSS and DMEM respectively. Our proteomics data demonstrate that many cell surface exposed proteins, such as signaling receptors, ligands, extracellular matrix proteins, trans-Golgi network cargo adaptor proteins and Golgi enzymes, can be regulated by the nutrient. Our study implies that the nutrient might play essential roles in intracellular membrane trafficking and in shaping a cell’s interactions with its environment.

### Sample Protocol
“Heavy” HeLa cells were labelled in L-lysine- and L-arginine-free DMEM medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum supplemented with isotope-labelled “heavy” L-Lysine: 2HCl (13C6, 15N2) (Lys8) (100 μg/ml; Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) and L-Arginine: HCl (13C6) (Arg6) (50 μg/ml; Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). “Light” Hela cells were grown in normal DMEM with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum. Both types of cells were cultured for 9 passages to ensure a complete isotope labelling. In the forward labelling experiment, heavy and light cells grown in 15-cm Petri-dishes were treated with DMEM and HBSS, respectively, for 2 h. Next, cells were washed by ice cold PBS and subjected to surface biotinylation by incubating with 2 mg/ml EZ-Link Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 30 min on ice. After washing by 100mM Glycine in PBS, biotinylated cells were lysed with in ice-cold RIPA buffer containing 2 M urea and 1 × protease inhibitor (Roche). The two types of lysates were subsequently mixed. After centrifugation in a table top centrifuge, supernatants were incubated with 500 µl pre-washed Streptavidin magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 2 h at room temperature. Beads were washed by RIPA buffer containing 2 M urea, RIPA buffer containing 2 M urea  and 1 M KCl, RIPA buffer containing 2 M urea + 0.1 M sodium bicarbonate. The biotinylated proteins were eluted from beads by boiling in the SDS sample buffer containing 50 mM dithiothreitol and 2 mM biotin. After separating eluted proteins by SDS-PAGE, protein lanes were collected for quantitative mass spectrometry analysis. The reverse labelling experiment was conducted similarly except that light and heavy cells were treated with DMEM and HBSS, respectively. SILAC-based quantitative mass spectrometry was performed as previously described. All mass spectrometry analysis was performed in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer 2  (Thermo Fisher, MA) together with the Sequest and Mascot search engines. Search parameters included carbamidomethyl at cysteine as static modification; and methionine oxidation, and asparagine and glutamine deamidation as dynamic modifications; trypsin and maximum 2 missed cleavages as digestion parameters; 10ppm precursor mass and 0.02Da fragment mass tolerance. The UniProt Knowledgebase (UniProtKB) of human proteins (downloaded on 25 July, 2016, including 70,849 sequences and 23,964,784 residues) was used as a search database with a false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off of <0.05% both at peptide and protein level. For SILAC quantification Arg6 and Lys8 was set as label Modification. The statistical analysis was performed by using all biological and technical replicates. Statistical significance was calculated using Student's t-Test and volcano plot was plotted to determine the cut off level of the data set. The data from the reverse experiment were reversed and combined with those from the forward experiment during analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The endosome-to-Golgi or endocytic retrograde trafficking pathway is an important post-Golgi recycling route. Here we show that amino acids (AAs) can stimulate the retrograde trafficking and regulate the cell surface localization of certain Golgi membrane proteins. By testing components of the AA-stimulated mTORC1 signaling pathway, we demonstrate that SLC38A9, v-ATPase and Ragulator, but not Rag GTPases and mTORC1, are essential for the AA-stimulated trafficking. Arl5, an ARF-like family small GTPase, interacts with Ragulator in an AA-regulated manner and both Arl5 and its effector, the Golgi-associated retrograde protein complex (GARP), are required for the AA-stimulated trafficking. We have therefore identified a mechanistic connection between the nutrient signaling and the retrograde trafficking pathway, whereby SLC38A9 and v-ATPase sense AA-sufficiency and Ragulator might function as a guanine nucleotide exchange factor to activate Arl5, which, together with GARP, a tethering factor, probably facilitates the endosome-to-Golgi trafficking.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Membrane trafficking, Surface protein, Silac

### Affiliations
Nanyang Technological University

### Submitter
Bamaprasad Dutta

### Lab Head
Dr Siu Kwan SZE
Nanyang Technological University


