### Accession
PXD010277

### Title
Design and synthesis of tailored human caseinolytic protease P inhibitors

### Description
Human caseinolytic protease P (hClpP) is important for degradation of misfolded proteins in the mitochondrial unfolded protein response. We here introduce tailored hClpP inhibitors that utilize a steric discrimination in their core naphthofuran scaffold to selectively address the human enzyme. This novel inhibitor generation exhibited superior activity compared to previously introduced beta-lactones, optimized for bacterial ClpP. Further insights into the bioactivity and binding to cellular targets were obtained via chemical proteomics as well as proliferation- and migration studies in cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
For preparative labeling experiments cells were washed with warm PBS-buffer, centrifuged (600 g, 6 min, r.t.), reconstituted in RPMI medium with 2 mM L-glutamine without FBS and counted using a Neubauer improved counting chamber. 2.9 ∙ 106 cells/mL were seeded in each well of a 6-well plate leading to ≈ 17 ∙ 106 cells per replicate. Labeling was conducted in four technical replicates per state. For this purpose, 1 µL of TG42 in DMSO (20 µM final concentration) or DMSO as control were added to each well and were incubated for 1 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2. Afterwards cells were harvested by gently scraping the surface of each well and transferring the cell suspension into centrifuge tubes, following a centrifugation step (600 g, 6 min, 4 °C), washing with ice-cold PBS-buffer and incubation with lysis buffer. Labeling in Huh7 cell line Huh7 cells were grown on TC150 dishes in DMEM medium supplemented with 10% (v/v) heat inactivated FBS and 2 mM L-glutamine to a confluency of ≈ 70 – 80%. Prior to seeding culture dishes were coated with collagen A (0.1 mg/mL in PBS pH 3.5). For labeling experiments cells were washed once with warm PBS-buffer, then 12 mL labeling medium (DMEM, with 2 mM L-glutamine, without FBS) with probe (20 µM final concentration of TG42 or D3 in DMSO, max. 0.1% DMSO) or DMSO was added and cells were incubated for 1 h at 37 °C with 5% CO2. Afterwards, medium was removed, cells were washed with 10 mL ice cold PBS-buffer, gently scraped off and resuspended in 1 mL lysis buffer. Cell lysis Cells were lysed with lysis buffer (1% (v/v) 4 Nonylphenyl-polyethylene glycol (NP 40), 1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, ddH2O, pH 7.4). Cell pellets were incubated with 1 mL lysis buffer for 30 min (1 h for Huh7) on ice. Cytosolic fraction was obtained by pelletizing membranes and nuclei (21,000 g, 45 min, 4 °C). Protein concentrations were adjusted to 1-2 mg/mL after determination via BCA assay using the Roti®Quant kit (Carl Roth). CuAAC, protein precipitation, enrichment, reduction, alkylation and digestion Cu catalyzed alkyne-azide cycloaddition reaction was performed with 900 µL cytosolic fraction and 60 µL click mastermix (20 µL biotin-N3 10 mM in DMSO, 10 µL TCEP 52 mM in H2O, 30 µL TBTA ligand (1.67 mM in 80% (v/v) t-BuOH, 20% (v/v) DMSO)) and 10 µL CuSO4 (50 mM in ddH2O) for 1 h at room temperature. Click reaction was started by addition of 20 µL CuSO4 (50 mM in ddH2O). Protein precipitation was achieved by addition of four volumes acetone (– 80 °C) and incubation over night at – 20 °C. Precipitated proteins were pelletized by centrifugation (21,000 g, 15 min, 4 °C) and resuspended in 200 µL methanol (– 80 °C, LC-MS grade) by sonication. The supernatant was discarded, the protein pellet was taken up in 500 µL PBS buffer containing 0.2% (w/v) SDS and dissolved by sonication For protein enrichment 50 µL avidin-agarose beads suspension (Sigma-Aldrich, A9207) per sample was washed three times (1 mL PBS-buffer + 0.4% (w/v) SDS, centrifugation 400 g, 2 min, r.t.) and incubated with protein solution under continuous mixing for 1 h at room temperature in LoBind Eppendorf tubes. Afterwards beads were centrifuged (400 g, 3 min, r.t.) and subsequently washed three times with PBS-buffer containing 0.2% (w/v) SDS and five times with PBS-buffer to remove unspecifically bound proteins. 30   50 µL Protein-Avidin beads suspension in PBS-buffer were successively reduced, and digested by addition of 25 µL digestion buffer (5 ng/µL Trypsin (in 50 mM acetic acid), 50 mM Tris-HCl, 2 M urea, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) from fresh 1 M stock in water, pH 8.0) and incubation for 30 min at room temperature. Alkylation and further digestion of proteins was performed by addition of 100 µL alkylation buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 2 M urea, 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (freshly prepared from 550 mM stock in water), pH 8.0) following incubation overnight at 25 °C with continuous shaking at 600 rpm. Digestion was stopped by adjusting the pH to 2 – 3 with 10% (v/v) formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 1% FA. Beads were centrifuged (16,000 g, 3 min, r.t.) and supernatant was desalted using Sep-Pak® C18 columns (50 mg sorbent per cartridge, 55   105 µm particle size, Waters, WAT054955). In brief, columns were washed once with 1 mL acetonitrile (MeCN), once with 500 µL elution buffer (80% MeCN, 19.5% H2O, 0.5% FA) and three times with 1 mL 0.1% FA in H2O. Samples were loaded and eluted in LoBind Eppendorf tubes with 250 µL elution buffer after washing twice with 1 mL 0.1% FA and once with 250 µL 0.5% FA. Samples were dried by speedvac solvent removal and stored at – 80 °C until further analysis. Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS measurement For MS-analysis peptide samples were dissolved in 25   40 µL 1% FA in H2O, sonicated twice for 10 min and filtered with 0.22 µm Ultrafree-MC® centrifugal filters (Merck, UFC30GVNB) equilibrated with 1% FA in H2O. Filtrates were transferred into MS vials and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Measurement on Orbitrap Fusion Samples (Huh7; TG42, D3) were analyzed with an UltiMate 3000 nano HPLC system (Dionex) using Acclaim C18 PepMap100 75 µm ID x 2 cm trap and Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 (75 µm ID x 50 cm) separation columns in an EASY-spray setting coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher). 5 µL peptide samples (8 µL, TG42) were loaded on the trap and washed with 0.1% TFA, then transferred to the analytical column (buffer A: H2O with 0.1% FA, buffer B: MeCN with 0.1% FA, flow 0.3 µL/min, gradient: to 5% buffer B in 7 min, from 5% to 22% buffer B in 105 min, then to 32% buffer B in 10 min, to 90% buffer B in 10 min and hold at 90% buffer B for 10 min, then to 5% buffer B in 0.1 min and hold 5% buffer B for 9.9 min) and ionized by nanospray ionization (NSI) with spray voltage of 1.7 kV (2.1 kV, TG42) and capillary temperature of 275 °C. Orbitrap Fusion was operated in a TOP speed data dependent mode. Full scan acquisition was performed in the orbitrap at a resolution of R = 120,000 and an AGC target of 2e5 in a scan range of 300 – 1500 m/z with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Monoisotopic precursor selection as well as dynamic exclusion (dynamic exclusion duration: 60 s, mass tolerance low/high 10 ppm) was enabled. Precursors with charge states 2   7 and intensities greater than 5e3 were selected for fragmentation. Isolation was performed in the quadrupole using a window of 1.6 m/z. Precursors were analyzed to an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms with “inject ions for all available parallelizable time” set to true. Peptide fragments were generated by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a collision energy of 30% and detected in the orbitrap with ion trap scan rate set to rapid. Measurement on Q Exactive Plus Samples (Jurkat; TG42) were analyzed with an UltiMate 3000 nano HPLC system (Dionex) using Acclaim C18 PepMap100 75 µm ID x 2 cm trap and Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 (75 µm ID x 50 cm) separation columns in an EASY-spray setting coupled to a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher). 5 µL peptide samples were loaded on the trap and washed with 0.1% TFA, then transferred to the analytical column (buffer A: H2O with 0.1% FA, buffer B: MeCN with 0.1% FA, flow 0.3 µL/min, gradient: to 5% buffer B in 7 min, from 5% to 22% buffer B in 105 min, then to 32% buffer B in 10 min, to 90% buffer B in 10 min and hold at 90% buffer B for 10 min, then to 5% buffer B in 0.1 min and hold 5% buffer B for 9.9 min) and ionized at spray voltage of 2.0 kV and a capillary temperature of 275 °C. Q Exactive Plus was operated in a TOP12 data dependent mode with full scan acquisition in the orbitrap at a resolution of R = 140,000 and an AGC target of 3e6 in a scan range of 300 – 1500 m/z with a maximum injection time of 80 ms. Monoisotopic precursor selection as well as dynamic exclusion (dynamic exclusion duration: 60 s) was enabled. Precursors with charge states >1 and intensities greater than 1e4 were selected for fragmentation. Isolation was performed in the quadrupole using a window of 1.6 m/z. Precursors were analyzed in a scan range of 200 – 2000 m/z to an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Peptide fragments were generated by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27% and detected in the orbitrap. Data processing: general comments MaxQuant software versions 1.5.5.0 and 1.6.0.1 were used. Peptides were identified by comparison of MS/MS spectra against Uniprot human reference proteome (9606, canonical, w/o isoforms) using Andromeda search engine. MaxQuant settings were largely set on default. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was used as fixed modifications and methionine oxidation and N terminal acetylation were included as modifications in protein quantification. Trypsin/P was set as digestion enzyme and min. peptide length was set to 7. False discovery rate for proteins, sites and PSM was set to 0.01. Match between runs was enabled with a matching window of 0.7 min and alignment time window of 20 min.  Statistical analysis of proteomics data Data was statistically analyzed with Perseus software (1.6.0.1). ProteinGroups files were loaded to Perseus, following log2 transformation and filtering by categorical columns. Protein groups with the criteria of ‘only identified by site’, ‘reverse’ and ‘potential contaminants’ were excluded. Matrices were filtered based on valid values (min. valids 50. Missing values were replaced by imputation from normal distribution (width 0.3, down shift 0.9, total matrix). GO annotation downloaded from Uniprot and categorical annotation of probe treated samples and DMSO control was performed. To analyze the data two-sided student’s t-tests with DMSO as single control group and Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate correction (FDR 0.05) were applied. Volcano plots were generated by plotting student’s t-test difference (probe/DMSO) against t-test p-value (probe/DMSO).

### Publication Abstract
Human caseinolytic protease P (hClpP) is important for degradation of misfolded proteins in the mitochondrial unfolded protein response. We here introduce tailored hClpP inhibitors that utilize a steric discrimination in their core naphthofuran scaffold to selectively address the human enzyme. This novel inhibitor generation exhibited superior activity compared to previously introduced beta-lactones, optimized for bacterial ClpP. Further insights into the bioactivity and binding to cellular targets were obtained via chemical proteomics as well as proliferation- and migration studies in cancer cells.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Phenyl esters, Clpp, Jurkat, Huh7

### Affiliations
TU Munich
Department of Chemistry
Chair of Organic Chemistry 2
Lichtenbergstraße 4
85748 Garching
Germany
TU Munich, Department of Chemistry Lichtenbergstr. 4 Garching, DE 85747

### Submitter
Thomas Gronauer

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan Axel Sieber
TU Munich, Department of Chemistry Lichtenbergstr. 4 Garching, DE 85747


