### Accession
PXD015148

### Title
Rescuing over-activated microglia by acetaminophen treatment restores cognitive performance in the Dp(16) mouse model of Down Syndrome.

### Description
Microglia are the resident immune cells of the brain and have been implicated in mechanisms essential for cognitive functions. Down syndrome (DS), the most frequent cause of genetic intellectual disability, is caused by the presence of a supernumerary chromosome 21, which contains genes essential for the function of the immune system. Here, we investigated the presence of microglial alterations and their implication for cognitive impairment in the Dp(16) mouse model of DS. In the hippocampus of Dp(16) mice and individuals with DS, we found microglial morphology indicative of an activated state. Accordingly, we found increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and altered interferon signaling in Dp(16) mice. In addition, Dp(16) mice showed decreased dendritic spine density and cognitive deficits. Remarkably, depletion of defective microglia by PLX3397 treatment or rescue of the microglia activated state by the commonly used anti-inflammatory drug acetaminophen fully rescued dendritic-spine density and cognitive deficits in Dp(16) mice. Our data suggest an involvement of microglia in the cognitive impairment of DS animals and identify a new therapeutic approach for the potential rescue of cognitive disabilities in individuals with DS.

### Sample Protocol
Samples of hippocampi Dp(16) and WT littermates were lysed by FASP protocol using the FASP Protein Digestion Kit (Expedeon Inc, Cat. No. 44250). Briefly, the samples were mixed with 0.3ml of 8M Urea in 0.1M Tris/HCl pH 8.5 (UA solution), loaded into the filtration devices, alkylated in 0.1ml of 50mM iodoacetamide in UA solution for 1 h in darkness at RT. The samples were digested using sequentially 1 µg of LysC and 1µg of Trypsin in 50 mM NaHCO3 solution at 37°C overnight. The obtained peptides were collected by centrifugation of the filter units for 10 min and the filter devices were rinsed with two 40 µl washes 50mM NaHCO3 and 50µl 0.5M NaCl to eliminate the hydrophobic interactions.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed with MaxQuant software. The database used by the software was the Mouse human database (release 2016_02). For the search trypsin allowing for cleavage N‐terminal to proline was chosen as enzyme specificity. A contaminants database by the Andromeda search engine, with cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and acetylation protein N-terminal methionine oxidation and deamidation (N, Q) as variable modifications, were selected. For the identification of proteins, a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 was requested. For peptide identification, peptides and peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and a minimum length of 6 amino acids were requested. Quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the built-in label-free quantification algorithm, enabling the “Match Between Runs”. All proteins and peptides matching to the reversed database were filtered out. Label‐free protein quantitation (LFQ) was performed with a minimum ratio count of 1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acetaminophen, Down syndrome, Hippocampus, Microglia

### Affiliations
Gaslini Children's Hospital
Istituto Giannina Gaslini

### Submitter
Andrea Petretto

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
Istituto Giannina Gaslini


