### Accession
PXD009007

### Title
HIV/HCV co-infection proteomics

### Description
Hepatic complications of HCV infection, including fibrosis and cirrhosis are accelerated in HIV-infected individuals. Although liver biopsy remains the gold standard for staging HCV-associated liver disease, this test can result in serious complications and is subject to sampling error. These challenges have prompted a search for non-invasive methods for liver fibrosis staging. To this end, we compared serum proteome profiles at different stages of fibrosis in HIV/HCV co- and HCV mono-infected patients using SELDI-TOF MS.

### Sample Protocol
Samples with the highest and lowest intensities in SELDI-TOF MS analysis for each biomarker were selected as positive and negative controls. Enriched fractions were separated on SDS-PAGE, stained with Coomassie brilliant blue and bands of interest were excised for in-gel digestion. Gel-bound proteins were denatured using dithiothreitol, alkylated with 2-iodoacetamide, and digested by trypsin at 37° C overnight. Tryptic digests were extracted, cleaned-up on C18 reverse-phase ZipTip and eluted in alpha-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (CHCA). The solution was spotted onto a 384-well AB OptiTOF stainless steel target plate and MALDI-TOF MS data were acquired on an AB MSD Sciex 4800 Plus MALDI TOF/TOF Analyzer with the 4000 Series Explorer software. Internal calibration was carried out using a mixture of standard peptides. In the positive-ion reflector mode, MS data were collected over a mass range of 800–4000 Da using a fixed laser intensity of 3200 nJ for 1000 shots/spectrum, with a uniformly random spot search pattern. In each MS spectrum, the 20 most abundant MS peaks were selected for MS/MS using an acquisition method that excluded ions with S/N less than 20. The precursor ions with the strongest S/N were acquired first using a 1 kV MS/MS operating mode in which the relative precursor mass window was set at 50 and the metastable suppression enabled. MS/MS acquisition of selected precursors was set to 2000 shots/spectrum with 50 shots/subspectrum using fixed laser intensity of 4200 nJ.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed with ProteinPilot software using the Paragon algorithm. Peptides present in positive samples but absent in the negative samples were selected. MS/MS data were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (downloaded on March 7, 2017) for Homo sapiens, HCV and HIV. Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme. Other search parameters included cysteine alkylation by iodoacetamide, gel-based thorough ID with a focus on biological modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biomarker discovery, Human, Co-infection, Hiv, Liver, Proteomics, Fibrosis, Maldi, Hcv, Seldi

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
McGill University

### Submitter
Momar Ndao

### Lab Head
Dr Momar Ndao
Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada


