### Accession
PXD043375

### Title
A comprehensive evaluation of the Ewing sarcoma surface and global proteomes reveals actionable immunotherapeutic targets.

### Description
Ewing sarcoma (EwS) is the second most common bone sarcoma in children, with 1 case per 1.5 million in the United States. While the survival rate of patients diagnosed with localized disease is ~70%, this decreases to ~30% for patients with metastatic disease and only ~10% for treatment refractory disease, which remain unchanged for decades. Clearly, new therapeutic strategies are urgently needed for metastatic/refractory EwS. In this study, 19 unique EwS patient or cell line-derived xenografts were analyzed using proteomics to identify surface proteins with potential for immunotherapeutic targeting. Plasma membranes were enriched from each model via density gradient ultracentrifugation and compared to a reference standard consisting of 12 immortalized non-EwS cell lines prepared in a similar manner. In parallel, global proteome analysis was carried out on each model and reference controls to compliment the surfaceome data. All models were analyzed by Tandem Mass Tags (TMT)-based mass spectrometry to quantify identified proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Tumors of sufficient weight (range: 170 mg – 350 mg) were collected in 10 ml Homogenization Buffer (250 mM Sucrose, 10 mM HEPES, 1 mM EDTA + protease inhibitor cocktail (cOmplete EDTA free (Roche), pH 7.4) and dissociated using a handheld tissue shredder (QiaShredder, Qiagen) into a fully fluid mixture. Next, the samples were passed through an 18G needle 3 times, followed by a further 3 times with a 21G needle, and subject to low-speed centrifugation (1000 x G, 15 minutes at 4C) to remove any cellular debris. The supernatant was collected and layered atop a 60% (w/v) Sucrose cushion in a 12.5 ml ultracentrifuge-compatible tube (Beckman Coulter). The samples were centrifuged at 100,000 x G in a SW41 rotor (Beckman) for 1 hour at 4C, resulting in a crude membrane fraction above the 60% sucrose cushion. The crude membrane fraction was collected, transferred to a fresh 12.5 ml ultracentrifuge tube, and equal amounts of sucrose solution of differing percentages (42.8%, 42.3%, 41.8%, 41%, 39%, 37%) were carefully layered above the crude membrane fraction and centrifuged in a SW41 rotor at 100,000 x G overnight (18 hours minimum) at 4C . The following day, the floating membrane fraction was collected from the top of the sucrose gradient and transferred to a fresh 12.5 ml ultracentrifuge tube. The tube was filled with HEPES buffer (150 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES, 2.4 mM K2HPO4, 1.2 mM CaCl2, 1.2 mM MgCl2, pH 7.4) and centrifuged in a SW41 rotor at 150,000 x G for 3-5 hours at 4C. Once complete, the supernatant was discarded and the pellet containing enriched membrane proteins was dissolved in 50 mM HEPES + 10% (w/v) Sodium deoxycholate.  Samples containing membrane proteins were cleaned using Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP). Briefly, enriched membrane proteins were applied to a molecular weight cut-off (10 kDa) filter spin unit (Millipore) and centrifuged at 12,000 x G for 15 minutes at 4C. The flow-through was discarded, HPLC-grade H2O was applied to the filter and centrifuged as per the parameters mentioned previously. This step was repeated for a total of 2 wash-steps. Proteins remaining in the filter column were reduced for 1 hour at room temperature following the addition of 5 mM DTT in 50 mM HEPES. Reduced proteins were further alkylated with the addition of 20 mM Iodoacetimide, left for 30 minutes at room temperature covered from light. The sample was centrifuged at 12,000 x G for 30 minutes at 4C , the flow through discarded, and 5 µg trypsin/LysC (Promega) mix was added to the sample contained within the filter, digestion was performed overnight at room temperature. The TMT reagent (Thermo Scientific) was first reconstituted to a concentration of 10 µg/µl in acetonitrile (Fisher Scientific) and brought to room temperature. Peptides to be labeled were incubated with an excess of TMT reagent (10 µl of TMT label per sample), incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes, and then repeated for a total of 2 incubations. The labelling reaction was quenched with the addition of 10 mM Glycine andl samples were placed into a vacuum centrifuge until the sample volume reduced by at least half. Samples were then desalted using the STop And Go Extraction (STAGE) tip protocol. Due to the presence of SDC, samples required a centrifugation of 20,000 x G for 10 minutes following the addition of 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid to remove the acid-labile SDC. The samples were dried fully in a vacuum centrifuge, and dried plexes were resuspended in 0.1% Formic Acid.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were searched using Sequest HT algorithm through Proteome Discoverer suite (v2.4), against.a human reference (2021/07/16 Swissprot , 20351 sequences). Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set at 10 ppm and 0.05 Da respectively. Dynamic modifications included Oxidation (+15.995 Da, M), Acetylation (+42.011 Da, N-Term). Static modification included Carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da, C)  and TMT (+229.163 Da, K, N-Term). Peptide-to-spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered using Percolator by searching the results against a decoy sequence set, only PSMs with FDR < 1% were retained in the downstream analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ewing sarcoma, Surfaceome

### Affiliations
gsc
Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver V5Z 1L3, Canada

### Submitter
Gian Luca Negri

### Lab Head
Dr Gregg Morin
Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver V5Z 1L3, Canada


