### Accession
PXD042839

### Title
Eimeria necatrix Wall-Forming Bodies and Oocyst Wall Proteomic Analysis by Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) Labeling and Liquid Chromatography Tandem-Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) Techniques

### Description
WFBs and the oocyst wall of Eimeria necatrix were subjected to comparative proteomic analysis using tandem mass tag (TMT) in conjunction with liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) techniques

### Sample Protocol
Protein Sample Preparation for Mass Spectrometry Analysis of WFBs and Oocyst Wall Protein samples for mass spectrometry analysis were prepared by individually mixing WFBs and oocyst wall with lysis buffer comprising 8.0M urea, 0.1% SDS, 1× Protease Inhibitor Cocktail tablets (Roche, Indianapolis, IN, USA), and 1mM PMSF (Biyotime Institute of Biotechnology, Shanghai, China). After 30 minutes of disruption in an ice bath, the mixture was centrifuged at 10,000 g for 15 minutes at 4°C to collect the supernatant. The supernatant was concentrated using a 3 kDa filter (Amicon Ultra-0.5 Centrifugal Filter Unit with Ultracel-3 membrane, Millipore) and stored at -80°C after concentration and aliquoting. Three biological replicates were included for both oocyst wall and WFBs to ensure technical reproducibility. Protein quantification was performed using a BCA kit (Pierce) following the manufacturer instructions. The efficiency of protein extraction was confirmed by running equal amounts (20 μg) of protein on SDS-PAGE gel, followed by Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 staining. Protein digestion and TMT labeling Protein groups (100 μg each) were reduced by adding 5 μL of 200 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and incubated at 55°C for 1 hour. Cysteine groups were then blocked with 5 μL of 375 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 1 hour, protected from light. The samples were digested with 2.5 μg of trypsin and incubated overnight at 37°C. Enzymatic digestion was stopped by adding 1 μL of formic acid. Peptides were concentrated using a SpeedVac system (RVC 2-18, Marin Christ, Osterod, Germany). For TMT labeling, the TMT-10 plex method (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) was used with six digested samples. The oocyst wall samples were labeled as TMT-126 (OW-batch 1), TMT-127 C (OW-batch 2), and TMT-127 N (OW-batch 3), while the WFBs samples were labeled as TMT-128 C (WFB-batch 1), TMT-128 N (WFB-batch 2), and TMT-131 (WFB-batch 3). The labeling reaction was quenched with 5% hydroxylamine at room temperature for 15 minutes. After quenching, the six labeled peptide aliquots were combined for subsequent fractionation. LC/MS analysis The TMT-labelled peptide was analyzed using LC-MS analysis, which utilized a U3000 nano-scale liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) via a nano-electrospray source. Tryptic peptides, labeled with TMT 10-plex tags, were loaded onto a trap column at 5 μl/min using an autosampler. Subsequently, peptide elution occurred from a 25 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter fused silica analytical column packed with 2.0 μm Aqua C18 beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Elution was accomplished using a 43.5 min gradient of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The gradient consisted of the following steps: starting from 100% buffer A, there was a transition to 3% buffer B over 5 min, followed by an increase from 9% to 18% buffer B over 31.5 min, a transition from 25% to 30% buffer B over 2 min, and finally, a 5 min hold at 80% buffer B. The eluted peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization (nano-ESI) source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Ion signals were acquired in data-dependent mode, with a full scan resolution of 70,000 and a scan range of m/z 350-1,600. Sequential fragmentation of precursor ions was achieved using high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) mode, with MS/MS scans performed at a resolution of 3500. The fragmentation process utilized a normalized collision energy of 29, an isolation window of 2 m/z, and a loop count of 20. To avoid redundant analysis, dynamic exclusion settings were implemented, including charge exclusion for unassigned 1 ≥6, preferred peptide match, exclusion of isotopes, and a dynamic exclusion duration of 10 s. The acquired MS/MS data were saved as raw files using Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, version 2.2).

### Data Protocol
Protein Identification Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, USA) was utilized to search the raw MS/MS data files. The sequence database, obtained from NCBI and Uniprot, comprised closely related organisms, including E.necatrix, E.tenella, E.maxima, Toxoplasma gondii, and Plasmodium falciparum. The search parameters included trypsin cleavage specificity, with fixed carbamidomethyl modification and variable oxidation modification. Up to two missed cleavages per peptide and a maximum of three variable PTMs per peptide were allowed. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 15 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance was 0.02 Da. To control the false discovery rate (FDR) at the protein and peptide levels, a fusion-decoy database search strategy with a threshold of ≤1.0% was applied. Confident protein identifications required a minimum of two unique peptides with at least two corresponding spectra.  Quantitation of protein abundance The Proteome Discoverer 2.3 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) processed the raw MS data and quantified protein abundance. Features in each sample were detected using the expectation-maximization algorithm, and alignment of peptide features across samples utilized a high-performance retention time algorithm. Protein expression levels were quantified for each sample, utilizing the combined intensities of the three most prominent ion peaks from tryptic peptides, enabling effective comparisons. Proteins and peptide features with a fold change ≥1.5 and a p-value <0.05 between WFBs and oocyst wall samples were deemed statistically significant. Hierarchical clustering analysis highlighted distinct protein expression profiles of differentially expressed protein groups between WFBs and oocyst walls. Heatmap.2 generated informative heatmap graphs. Bioinformatics Analysis The identified proteins underwent Omicsbean software (http://www.omicsbean.cn/) analysis for biological group and KEGG pathway analysis. Enriched gene ontology (GO) categories were identified by conducting a right-sided hypergeometric test, comparing the GO annotations against the entire species genome as the background set. To control the false discovery rate (FDR), p-values were adjusted using the Bonferroni step-down test. Furthermore, local analysis of the cluster of orthologous group of proteins (COG) was performed by obtaining COG protein sequences.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Tmt, Eimeria necatrix, Oocyst wall, Comparative proteomics, Wall-forming bodies

### Affiliations
College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, PR China

### Submitter
Wang Lele

### Lab Head
Dr Lele Wang
College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, PR China


