### Accession
PXD005715

### Title
Protein Expression in TW Formation

### Description
Tangential sections of 30 µm thickness were taken across the secondary phloem and developing secondary xylem, sections were then pooled to represent the tissues from specific developmental stages. Phloem (P) comprises 3 sections, the cambium (C) - 2 sections, the radial expansion zone (E) - 4 sections, the first to third xylem development zones (X1-X3) - 3 sections each, and the forth to sixth xylem development zones (X4-X6) - 6 sections each.

### Sample Protocol
Tissues from the pooled samples were ground in a mixer-mill for 1 minute, after which highly water-soluble proteins were extracted and digested. The pellet that remained from each sample after the extraction of soluble proteins was treated the same way as the soluble proteins.

### Data Protocol
The proteins identified from the soluble and pellet fractions were combined for each sample prior to final analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Tension wood (TW) is a specialized tissue with contractile properties that is formed by the vascular cambium in response to gravitational stimuli. We quantitatively analysed the proteomes of Populus tremula cambium and its xylem cell derivatives in stems forming normal wood (NW) and TW to reveal the mechanisms underlying TW formation. Phloem-, cambium-, and wood-forming tissues were sampled by tangential cryosectioning and pooled into nine independent samples. The proteomes of TW and NW samples were similar in the phloem and cambium samples, but diverged early during xylogenesis, demonstrating that reprogramming is an integral part of TW formation. For example, 14-3-3, reactive oxygen species, ribosomal and ATPase complex proteins were found to be up-regulated at early stages of xylem differentiation during TW formation. At later stages of xylem differentiation, proteins involved in the biosynthesis of cellulose and enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of rhamnogalacturonan-I, rhamnogalacturonan-II, arabinogalactan-II and fasciclin-like arabinogalactan proteins were up-regulated in TW. Surprisingly, two isoforms of exostosin family proteins with putative xylan xylosyl transferase function and several lignin biosynthesis proteins were also up-regulated, even though xylan and lignin are known to be less abundant in TW than in NW. These data provided new insight into the processes behind TW formation.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Populus, Tension wood

### Affiliations
Umeå Plant Science Centre Department of Forest Genetics & Plant Physiology Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences
Computational Life Science Cluster (CLiC),
Deptartment of Chemistry, Umeå University

### Submitter
Joakim Bygdell

### Lab Head
Dr Gunnar Wingsle
Umeå Plant Science Centre Department of Forest Genetics & Plant Physiology Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences


