### Accession
PXD011934

### Title
Identification of mitochondrial dysfunction in rheumatoid arthritis patients

### Description
Immune cells are majorly dysregulated in rheumatoid arthritis patients and are a major cause of pathogenesis and progression of this autoimmune condition. As mitochondria are master regulators of metabolism of all cells present in human body, it is of prime importance to study mitochondrial homeostasis in immune cells for identifying any dysfunction contributing to pathogenesis or progression of RA. The objective of our study is to understand the mitochondrial and mitochondrially driven alterations in immune cells of RA patients which may cause them to perform abnormal functions and may have an important contribution in progression of the disease.

### Sample Protocol
Five millilitres of peripheral blood sample was collected from RA patients and healthy controls in heparin coated vacutainers. PBMCs were isolated using HiSepTM LSM 1077 according to the manufacturer’s protocol. In order to obtain sufficient mitochondrial proteins, two pools of samples RA1 and RA2 were formed with PBMCs from 17 RA patients each while HC1 and HC2 were formed with PBMCs from 16 and 12 healthy controls respectively. Further for isolation of mitochondria, PBMCs were resuspended in 500µl of a hypotonic buffer (10mM NaCl, 1.5mM MgCl2, 10mM Tris HCl, pH 7.5) and centrifuged at 850g for 2 minutes at 4oC. The pellet was resuspended in 100µl mitochondria isolation buffer (0.3M sucrose, 0.2mM EDTA, 10mM HEPES, pH 7.4 adjusted by KOH) and was dounce homogenized. The samples were centrifuged at 1300g for 10 minutes at 4oC to settle the nuclei, the supernatant was collected in a fresh tube, centrifuged at 17,000g for 15 minutes at 4oC and the mitochondrial pellet thus obtained was retained in 50mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC) buffer. The mitochondrial fraction were lysed by pipetting with lysis buffer (2% SDS, 5 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate in 50 mM TEABC) on ice, followed by centrifugation at 3500rpm for 15 minutes and pellet was discarded. The protein concentration of the supernatant was estimated using BCA protein estimation method and in-solution trypsin digestion was performed where equal amount of protein (120 µg) from each sample was reduced by Dithiothreitol at 60оC for 1 h. The samples were then incubated with cysteine blocking reagent Iodoacetamide (alkylation), at room temperature for 10 min. The samples were subjected to tryptic digestion for 16 h at 37оC and the digests were evaporated to dryness.  Peptides from RA (pool 1and 2) and HC (pool 1and 2) groups were labelled with iTRAQ reagents containing 117, 118, 119 and 121 channels, respectively as per Manufacturer’s protocol. Labelled samples were pooled in equal quantity and dried. The sample were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and then cleaned using C18-stage tip method, and analysed in triplicates on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) in data-dependent SPS-MS3 acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS3 data was analysed using Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.1) software suite (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) for protein identification and quantification. The data was queried against NCBI Human RefSeq protein database (Version 75) containing common contaminants and analysed using SequestHT algorithm. The search parameters included oxidation of methionine as dynamic modification, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and iTRAQ8-plex at peptide N-terminus, Lysine and arginine as static modification. Trypsin was specified as protease with a maximum of two missed cleavage. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. Percolator node in Proteome discoverer was used to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR). 1% FDR cut-off at PSM, peptide levels were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The autoimmune inflammatory disease, Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), has known imbalances in energy metabolism and superoxide levels thus may have an etiology associated with mitochondrial dysfunction. We thus evaluated the presence of a differential mitochondrial proteome as well as other characteristics including mitochondrial mass, membrane potential (&#x3a8;m), total cellular ATP and superoxide levels. Eighteen mitochondrial proteins were down-regulated while four were up-regulated in RA patients in comparison to the healthy controls (HC). A significant decrease in mitochondrial &#x3a8;m, superoxides and cellular ATP levels was observed in RA with constant mitochondrial mass suggesting mitochondrial dysfunction responsible for functional disparity in RA.

### Keywords
Proteins, Mitochondrial dysfunction, Rheumatoid arthritis, Pbmcs

### Affiliations
Disease Biology Lab School of Biotechnology, Campus 11 KIIT Deemed to be University Bhubaneswar Odisha
School of Biotechnology, KIIT

### Submitter
Bhawna Gupta

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Bhawna Gupta
Disease Biology Lab School of Biotechnology, Campus 11 KIIT Deemed to be University Bhubaneswar Odisha


