### Accession
PXD041510

### Title
Tenacibaculum maritimum secretome

### Description
Tenacibaculum maritimum, the etiological agent of tenacibaculosis in marine fish, constitutively secretes extracellular products (ECPs), which play a main role in virulence. However, their protein content has not been yet comprehensively studied. In this study a collection of 64 T. maritimum strains belonging to the four serotypes described so far (O1 to O4) was used to analyse the prevalence of extracellular proteolytic and lipolytic activities related to virulence. Results showed the existence of a large heterogeneity of the enzymatic capacity among serotype O4 isolates. Most notably, the ECPs of T. maritimum SP9.1 belonging to serotype O4 contain a large amount of outer membrane vesicles (OMVs), which were characterized by electron microscopy and purified by successive steps of filtration and centrifugation. Total protein content of ECPs, and the proteins associated to OMVs and soluble fraction of the ECPs (S-ECPs) were identified by nLC-TIMS-QTOF. A total of 641 proteins were identified in ECPs including some virulence related factors, which were mainly found in one of the fractions, either in OMVs or S-ECPs. Outer membrane proteins such as TonB-dependent transporters and the T9SS-related proteins PorP, PorT and SprA appeared to be mainly associated with OMVs. By contrast, putative virulence factors such as sialidase SiaA, chondroitinase CslA, sphingomyelinase Sph, ceramidase Cer and collagenase Col were found only in the S-ECPs. These findings demonstrate that T. maritimum release, through surface blebbing, outer membrane vesicles that are enriched specifically in TonB-dependent siderophore transporters and proteins of the type IX secretion system. Interestingly, our results also showed that OMVs could play a role in virulence by promoting surface adhesion, biofilm formation, and maximizing cytotoxic effects of the ECPs. The T. maritimum secretome analysis provides insights into the extracellular products function and can constitute the basis for future studies aimed to elucidate the role of OMVs in the pathogenesis of fish tenacibaculosis.

### Sample Protocol
Total ECPS, OMVs and Soluble ECPs were isolated following the cellophane overlay method as described previously with some modifications (Liu, 1957; Kadurugamuwa & Beveridge 1995). Briefly, cultures of 50 mL of T. maritimum strain SP9.1 were grown at 25°C for 24 h in FMM, supplemented with the iron chelator EDDA (Sigma-Aldrich) at 20 µM. Two plates of FMM agar (23x23 cm) with the sterile cellophane overlay (Pacon) were incubated with the cell cultures for 48 h at 25 °C, one plate for total ECPs and another one to separate it in two fractions: OMVs and soluble ECPs. This also allowed to minimize growth-phase effects since the different proteases are produced at different times of the growth curve (Gudmundsdottir, 1996). Bacteria of each plate were washed off the cellophane using 40 mL of phosphate buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4), centrifuged at 4,000 rpm for 30 min, and the pellet was discarded. Supernatants of the first plate were sequentially filtered through 0.45‐μm and 0.2‐μm membrane filters (Millipore), resuspended in 10% TCA, incubated for 2-3 h in ice to precipitate total ECPs and stored in small volumes at -20 °C until use. Cell free supernatants of the second plate were centrifuged to collect the vesicles as a pellet by ultracentrifugation using a Beckmann SW32Ti rotor at 24,000 rpm at 4 °C for 2 h. OMVs (the pellet) were resuspended in Urea 7 M, 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. The supernatant (soluble fraction of the ECPs, S-ECPs) was sterilised using 0.22 filters (Millipore), resuspended in 10% TCA, and incubated for 2-3 h in ice to precipitate soluble ECPs. S-ECPs were centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 30 min, resuspended in Urea 7 M and stored at -20°C for further experimentation. Bacterial cultures and purification procedures were made in triplicate to evaluate the reproducibility of the results. Total ECPs, OMVs and soluble ECPs were plated in FMM plates to verify that samples were cell‐free. Protein content of total ECPs, OMVs and soluble ECPs was determined with a Bradford assay kit (Bradford, 1976) using bovine serum albumin as a standard (Bauman and Kuehn 2006) to reach a final concentration of 0.5 mg/mL in all samples. Protein content of three individual biological replicates of ECPs, OMVs and S-ECPs was analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis were performed by the Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Service of the University of Santiago de Compostela as follows. Each protein sample (4 μL) was trypsin-digested using In-Solution Tryptic Digestion and Guanidination Kit (Thermo Scientific). Reduction, alkylation and digestion procedures were done according to kit instructions, omitting the guanidination step. The resulting peptide mixtures were desalted by ZipTip C18 (Milipore) and diluted at 50 ng/μL in 0.1% formic acid. Peptide samples were analysed on an ultrahigh pressure nanoflow chromatography system (nanoElute, Bruker Daltonics) coupled to a trapped ion mobility quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonics) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Captive Spray Source, Bruker Daltonics). Peptides were loaded and separated on an analytical column ReproSil C18 column (150x0,075 mm, 1,9 µm, 120Å) (Bruker FIFTEEN) with a sample injection volume of 2 μL. Mobile phases were water and acetonitrile, buffered with 0.1% formic acid. MS spectra were collected under the following parameters: tims ramp time 100 ms, PASEF on, 200 ms, scan range (m/z, 100−1700; 1/k0, 0.65−1.45 V.s/cm2).

### Data Protocol
The accession, visualization, and further analysis of LC-TIMS-Q-TOF data was provided by the manufacturer’s closed-source library, integrated into Bruker’s proprietary software DataAnalysis (Compass HyStar 5.1, otofControl 6.2 and DataAnalysis 5.3). Proteomics data were curated to remove common contaminants (e.g. keratins and trypsin) using Contaminants MaxQuant1.6.17.0 database. Data acquired (mass/charge ratios) were compared against peptide MS/MS spectra of the T. maritimum SP9.1 theorical proteome. The spectra were searched with the following parameters: peptide mass tolerance 15 ppm, fragment tolerance 0.02 Da, enzyme set as Trypsin and allowance up to 2 missed cleavages, fixed modification of carbamidomethylation (+57 Da), and dynamic modification of acetylation (Protein N‐term, +42.01 Da), deamidation (+0.98 Da), oxidation (+15.99 Da) or dehydration (‐18.01 Da). A protein was unequivocally identified if a minimum of two unique peptides matched to it. For each protein identified, the predicted subcellular location, and COG and KEGG groupings were established using eggNOG-mapper tool version 5.0 (http://eggnog-mapper.embl.de/). Venn diagram was used to visualize numeric data of presence/absence and overlaps between proteins lists identified in each subcellular preparation (ECPs, OMV and S-ECPs). PEAKS Studio 10.6 (Bioinformatics Solutions) was used to study relative peptide abundances. PEAKS Q Module for label-free quantification was used to calculate peptide peak areas (sum of peak areas for each charge state). The Q module mass error tolerance was set to 20.0 ppm, the false discovery rate (FDR) threshold was set to 1%, the retention time shift tolerance was set to 0.05 1/k0, and alignment of the retention time. Peptides and peak areas were TIC normalised. One-way ANOVA was used to identify proteins differentially present in OMV or S-ECPs. A double criteria of P values < 0.05 and fold changes cut-off of ≥ 2 were used to assume the existence of statistical differences. Quantification values of differentially expressed proteins were visualized as a heat map using GraphPad prism 9.0 software. Functional annotations and keywords of identified proteins were adopted from Uniprot Knowledgebase (http://www. uniprot.org).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Tenacibaculum maritimum</i>, the etiological agent of tenacibaculosis in marine fish, constitutively secretes extracellular products (ECPs) in which protein content has not been yet comprehensively studied. In this work, the prevalence of extracellular proteolytic and lipolytic activities related to virulence was analyzed in 64 <i>T. maritimum</i> strains belonging to the O1-O4 serotypes. The results showed the existence of a great intra-specific heterogeneity in the enzymatic capacity, particularly within serotype O4. Thus, the secretome of a strain belonging to this serotype was characterized by analyzing the protein content of ECPs and the possible production of outer membrane vesicles (OMVs). Notably, the ECPs of <i>T. maritimum</i> SP9.1 contain a large amount of OMVs that were characterized by electron microscopy and purified. Thus, ECPs were divided into soluble (S-ECPs) and insoluble fractions (OMVs), and their protein content was analyzed by a high-throughput proteomic approach. A total of 641 proteins were identified in ECPs including some virulence-related factors, which were mainly found in one of the fractions, either OMVs or S-ECPs. Outer membrane proteins such as TonB-dependent siderophore transporters and the type IX secretion system (T9SS)-related proteins PorP, PorT, and SprA appeared to be mainly associated with OMVs. By contrast, putative virulence factors such as sialidase SiaA, chondroitinase CslA, sphingomyelinase Sph, ceramidase Cer, and collagenase Col were found only in the S-ECPs. These findings clearly demonstrate that <i>T. maritimum</i> releases, through surface blebbing, OMVs specifically enriched in TonB-dependent transporters and T9SS proteins. Interestingly, <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i> assays also showed that OMVs could play a key role in virulence by promoting surface adhesion and biofilm formation and maximizing the cytotoxic effects of the ECPs. The characterization of <i>T. maritimum</i> secretome provides insights into ECP function and can constitute the basis for future studies aimed to elucidate the full role of OMVs in the pathogenesis of fish tenacibaculosis.

### Keywords
Extracellular products (ecps), Virulence factors, Tenacibaculosis, Tenacibaculum maritimum, Outer membrane vesicle (omv)

### Affiliations
University of Santiago de Compostela
University Santiago de Compostela

### Submitter
Pilar Escribano

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel L. Lemos
University of Santiago de Compostela


