### Accession
PXD038126

### Title
Arabidopsis meiotic-specific recombinase DMC1 IP-MS

### Description
To search for regulators of DMC1 stability, we generated DMC1-FLAG transgenic Arabidopsis plants and conducted immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry (IP-MS) assay. 6,477 peptides corresponding to 2309 proteins were identified and 1009 proteins remained after removing background interactions using plants transformed with the corresponding empty vector (FLAG). GO term analysis was performed with the obtained data and revealed that ubiquitin proteasome pathway components are significantly enriched among the candidate proteins.

### Sample Protocol
The FASP digestion was adapted in Microcon PL-10 filters. After three-time buffer displacement (8 M Urea and 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5), proteins were reduced by 10 mM DTT at 37 °C for 30 min, and followed by alkylation with 30 mM iodoacetamide at 25 °C for 45 min in dark. Then three-time buffer displacement was performed to the sample with digestion buffer (30 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0). Trypsin (enzyme : protein as 1 : 50) was used for the digestion at 37 °C for 12 h. The solution was filtrated out after digestion and the filter was washed twice with 15% ACN. All the filtrates were pooled and vacuum-dried.

### Data Protocol
The results were processed with Arabidopsis database TAIR (32790 entries, 201307) and the Proteome Discoverer (v1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Mascot (v2.7, Matrix Science). The mass tolerances were 10 ppm for precursor and fragment Mass Tolerance 0.05 Da, respectively. Up to two missed cleavages were permitted. The carbamidomethylation on cysteine as a fixed modification, and acetylation on the N-terminal of protein and oxidation on methionine as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Meiotic recombination requires the specific RecA homolog DMC1 recombinase to stabilize strand exchange intermediates in most eukaryotes. Normal DMC1 levels are crucial for its function, yet the regulatory mechanisms of DMC1 stability are unknown in any organism. Here, we show that the degradation of Arabidopsis DMC1 by the 26S proteasome depends on F-box proteins RMF1/2-mediated ubiquitination. Furthermore, RMF1/2 interact with the Skp1 ortholog ASK1 to form the ubiquitin ligase complex SCF<sup>RMF1/2</sup>. Genetic analyses demonstrate that RMF1/2, ASK1 and DMC1 act in the same pathway downstream of SPO11-1 dependent meiotic DNA double strand break formation and that the proper removal of DMC1 is crucial for meiotic crossover formation. Moreover, six DMC1 lysine residues were identified as important for its ubiquitination but not its interaction with RMF1/2. Our results reveal mechanistic insights into how the stability of a key meiotic recombinase that is broadly conserved in eukaryotes is regulated.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Dmc1, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Fudan University
School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, China.

### Submitter
Wanyue Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Yingxiang Wang
School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, China.


