### Accession
PXD038821

### Title
Endogenous TOM20 proximity labelling: a Swiss-knife for the study of mitochondrial proteins in human cells

### Description
The majority of mitochondrial proteins are encoded by the nuclear genome and must be imported into the mitochondria. There are two main paths for mitochondrial protein import: post-translational and co-translational import. Co-translational import couples the translation and the translocation of the mitochondrial proteins, alleviating the energy cost typically associated with the post-translational import relying on chaperone systems. The mitochondrial co-translational import mechanisms are still unclear with few actors identified but none have been described in mammals yet. We thus profiled the TOM20 proxisome using BioID, assuming that some of identified proteins could be molecular actors of the co-translational import in human cells. The obtained results showed a high enrichment of RNA binding proteins close to the TOM complex. However, for the few selected candidates, we could not demonstrate a role in the mitochondrial co-translational import process. Nonetheless, we were able to demonstrate a new mitochondrial localization for nuclear proteins. Besides, additional analyses revealed a negative correlation between the abundance of mitochondrial proteins and their reported half-life. This experimental approach is thus proposed to potentially characterize mitochondrial co-translational import effectors in human cells and to monitor protein entry inside mitochondria with a potential application in the prediction of mitochondrial protein half-life.

### Sample Protocol
Genomically-modified HCT116 cell lines (TOM20-mTb and CPT1A-mTb) were incubated 24h with 50 µM biotin and were then lysed in RIPA buffer and 2.3 mg of protein were loaded on 1 mg of streptavidin beads. After 16h of purification on wheel, the proteins were successively washed with different washing buffer and were resuspended in 20 mM Tris-Hcl. Samples were then digested with 1 µg of Trypsin for 16h and then for 3h with 500 ng of Trypsin at 37°C. The digested peptides were then rinsed using Pierce C18 Spin Tips & Columns system according to manufacturer’s instructions and were analyzed using nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS tims TOF Pro (Bruker) coupled with an UHPLC nanoElute.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using PEAKS Studio X Pro with ion mobility module and Q module for label-free quantification (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). Protein identifications were conducted using PEAKS search engine with 15 ppm as parent mass error tolerance and 0.05 Da as fragment mass error tolerance. Oxidation of methionine, biotinylation of lysine and acetylation (N-term) were allowed as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and the maximum number of missed cleavages per peptide was set at two. The peak lists were searched against the Homo Sapiens taxonomy with isoforms from UNIREF 100 (195195 sequences) and the sequence of the miniTurbo protein was added. Peptide spectrum matches and protein identifications were normalized to less than 1.0 % false discovery rate.  Label-free quantitation (LFQ) method is based on expectation - maximization algorithm on the extracted Ion chromatograms of the three most abundant unique peptides of a protein to calculate the area under the curve [69]. For the quantitation, mass error and ion mobility tolerance were set respectively to 15 ppm and 0.08 1/k0.  For the label-free quantitation results, peptide quality score was set to be ≥ 3 and protein significance score threshold was set to 15. The significance score is calculated as the -10log10 of the significance testing p-value (0.05), the ANOVA used as the significance testing method. Total ion current was used for the normalization of each extracted ion current. Only 2 replicates of the TOM20-mTb condition could be used for quantification analysis because of the poor quality of the third replicate showing high deviation compared to the 2 others. The exported PEAKS data of label-free quantification were sorted and represented using R software with the “EnhancedVolcano” package [70]. The fold change cutoff was set at 2 and the significance cutoff was set at 10e-15.

### Publication Abstract
Biotin-based proximity labeling approaches, such as BioID, have demonstrated their use for the study of mitochondria proteomes in living cells. The use of genetically engineered BioID cell lines enables the detailed characterization of poorly characterized processes such as mitochondrial co-translational import. In this process, translation is coupled to the translocation of the mitochondrial proteins, alleviating the energy cost typically associated with the post-translational import relying on chaperone systems. However, the mechanisms are still unclear with only few actors identified but none that have been described in mammals yet. We thus profiled the TOM20 proxisome using BioID, assuming that some of the identified proteins could be molecular actors of the co-translational import in human cells. The obtained results showed a high enrichment of RNA binding proteins close to the TOM complex. However, for the few selected candidates, we could not demonstrate a role in the mitochondrial co-translational import process. Nonetheless, we were able to demonstrate additional uses of our BioID cell line. Indeed, the experimental approach used in this study is thus proposed for the identification of mitochondrial co-translational import effectors and for the monitoring of protein entry inside mitochondria with a potential application in the prediction of mitochondrial protein half-life.

### Keywords
Mitochondria; co-translational import; bioid; protein identification; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
1 URBC, Namur Research Institute for Life Sciences (Narilis), University of Namur (UNamur), 5000, Namur, Belgium
University of Namur - MaSUN

### Submitter
Marc Dieu

### Lab Head
Dr Patricia Renard
1 URBC, Namur Research Institute for Life Sciences (Narilis), University of Namur (UNamur), 5000, Namur, Belgium


