### Accession
PXD025899

### Title
Human eccrine sweat shotgun proteomics for personalized monitoring and therapy

### Description
The potential of eccrine sweat as a bio-fluid of interest for diagnosis and personalized therapy has not yet been fully evaluated, due to the lack of in-depth sweat characterization studies. Thanks to recent developments in the field of omics together with the availability of accredited eccrine sweat collection methods, the analysis of human sweat may now be envisioned as a standardized, non-invasive test for individualized monitoring and personalized medicine. Here, we characterized individual sweat samples, collected from 28 healthy adult volunteers under the most standardized sampling methodology, by applying an optimized Shotgun proteomic analysis. This deep characterization of the sweat proteome allowed the identification of about 1000 unique proteins from which 347 were identified across all samples. Annotation-wise, the study of the sweat proteome unveiled the over-representation of newly addressed Actin dynamics, oxidative stress and proteasome-related functions, in addition to well-described proteolysis and anti-microbial immunity. The sweat proteome composition appeared to be correlated to the inter-individual variability of sweat secretion parameters (water and solute losses). Besides, both gender-exclusive proteins and gender-specific protein abundances were highlighted in spite of the high similarity between human female and male sweat proteomes.  In conclusion, standardized sample collection coupled to optimized shotgun proteomics significantly improved the depth of sweat proteome coverage, far beyond previous similar studies. The identified proteins were involved in many diverse biological processes and molecular functions indicating the potential of this bio-fluid as a valuable biological matrix for further studies. Addressing sweat variability, our results prove the proteomic profiling of sweat to be a promising bio-fluid for individualized, non-invasive monitoring and personalized medicine.

### Sample Protocol
Sweat protein concentration was estimated using the Pierce Micro BCA™ Protein Assay kit (#23235, ThermoFisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Ten micrograms of proteins were precipitated by incubation in 90% acetonitrile for 30 min at 4 °C followed by centrifugation for 10 min, at 4 °C, at 10 000 g. The protein pellet was re-suspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated in : i) 10 mM DTT for 40 min at 56 °C, under stirring at 600 rpm (Thermomixer comfort, Eppendorf), to reduce disulfide bonds, ii) 20 mM iodoacetamide protected from light for 30 min, at room temperature, to alkylate/block cysteine residues, iii) 11 mM DTT protected from light for 10 min, at room temperature, to quench the residual iodoacetamide, iv) mass-spectrometry grade trypsin (Pierce™ Trypsin Protease, MS Grade, ThermoFisher Scientific) at a 1: 50 enzyme: protein ratio (protein concentration = 0.25 µg.µL-1), for 18 h at 37 °C, under stirring at 600 rpm, v) MS-grade trypsin in 80% acetonitrile, at a 1:100 enzyme: protein ratio, for 3 h at 37 °C, under stirring at 600 rpm. Digestion was stopped by adding TFA to a final concentration of 0.5 % (v/v). Samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator and re-suspended at 3.75 µg / 20 µL in 0.1 % TFA. At this step, aliquots from each sample were collected and mixed in three 10-sample pools, considering three series of 10 individual samples and an average pooled sample per series. Individual samples and pooled samples were desalted with C18 Zip Tips according to the manufacturer’s recommendations, dried and re-suspended at 3 µg / 9 µL (injection volume) in 0.1 % TFA spiked with an equivalent of MassPREP Digestion Standard Mixture 1 (#186002865, Waters) corresponding to 50 fmol of ADH (Alcohol dehydrogenase 1 from S. cerevisiae) content per injection volume. The individual samples and pooled samples were randomly sorted into three series of ten samples plus one pooled mix and analyzed using an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class liquid chromatography system (Waters) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Three acquisition rounds (1 per series) were performed to avoid any technical bias that might come from a single LC-MS acquisition series. The chromatographic separation consisted in a 3-minute long trapping step performed on a reversed-phase (RP) ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Trap Column (nanoEase MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column, 100 Å, 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm, Waters) followed by a 177-min elution step on a ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Analytical Column (nanoEase MZ HSS T3 C18 Analytical Column, 100 Å, 1.8 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm, Waters) using a gradient of mixed water and acetonitrile, both supplemented with 0.1 % formic acid, as eluents. The mass acquisition was operated in data-dependent positive ion mode. Source parameters were set at: i) 2.3 kV for spray voltage, ii) 270 °C for capillary temperature. For individual samples, MS spectra were obtained for scans between m/z 400 and m/z 1600 with a mass resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, an Automated Gain Control (AGC) of 3E+6, a maximum Injection Time (IT) of 200 ms and an internal lock mass calibration at m/z 445.12003. MS/MS spectra were obtained for the top 10 most intense ions of each MS scan (TopN = 10) with a mass resolution of 17.500 at m/z 200, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z with an isolation offset of 0.5 m/z, an AGC of 1E+5, a maximum IT of 200 ms and a (N)CE at 28. The exclusion of single-charged ions and a 10-second dynamic exclusion were enabled. For each pooled sample, the MS acquisition consisted in a two-step strategy of three injections each. During both steps, MS spectra were obtained for scans between m/z 400 and m/z 528.3, m/z 524.3 and m/z 662.8 or m/z 658.8 and m/z 1600, in three independent analyses respectively, with a mass resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, an AGC of 3E+6, a maximum IT of 200 ms and internal lock mass calibrations at m/z 445.12003, m/z 536.16537 and m/z 684.20295, respectively. During the first acquisition step, MS/MS spectra were obtained for the top 25 most intense ions of each MS scan (TopN = 25) with a mass resolution of 17.500 at m/z 200, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z with an isolation offset of 0.5 m/z, an AGC of 1E+5, a maximum IT of 250 ms and a (N)CE at 28. For the second acquisition step, an exclusion list for all signals related to peptides identified at the first step with more than 4 PSM (peptide-spectrum matches) was uploaded to the methods. During the second acquisition step, MS/MS spectra were obtained for the top 10 most intense ions of each MS scan (TopN = 10) with a mass resolution of 17.500 at m/z 200, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z with an isolation offset of 0.5 m/z, an AGC of 1E+5, a maximum IT of 600 ms and a (N)CE at 28. The exclusion of single-charged ions and a 15-second dynamic exclusion were enabled for both steps.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were submitted to protein identification and label-free quantification by the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.6.0) using default settings when not specified otherwise. Identification consisted in a search against a custom-made reviewed Uniprot Homo sapiens database (August 2019, entries) with Carbamidomethyl (C) set as a fixed modification Oxidation (M), Deamidation (NQ) set as variable modifications and a minimum of two peptides (including one unique peptide) required. LFQ was enabled with a minimum LFQ ratio count of 1, no Fast LFQ and no requirement of MS/MS for LFQ comparison. The ‘match between runs’ option was enabled and tuned to allow matches from the library (pooled aliquots considered as parameter group 1, ‘match from’) and between individual samples (parameter group 0, ‘match from and to’). A match time window of 2.5 minutes was used. MaxQuant output data (proteingroups.txt) were submitted to statistical analysis using the Perseus software (version 1.6.10.43). ‘Only identified by site’, ‘REVERSED’ and Contaminant data were filtered out. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and proteins with less than 50 % of valid values were filtered out. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was performed on Z-score-normalized LFQ intensities. Male versus female comparison was addressed by a two-sample Student’s t-test with a permutation-based FDR calculation. Proteins with a fold change above 2 and a FDR below 0.05 were considered significantly differently expressed between female and male groups. Heat-map representation and hierarchical clustering were generated using the average Euclidian distance calculation.

### Publication Abstract
The potential of eccrine sweat as a bio-fluid of interest for diagnosis and personalized therapy has not yet been fully evaluated, due to the lack of in-depth sweat characterization studies. Thanks to recent developments in omics, together with the availability of accredited sweat collection methods, the analysis of human sweat may now be envisioned as a standardized, non-invasive test for individualized monitoring and personalized medicine. Here, we characterized individual sweat samples, collected from 28 healthy adult volunteers under the most standardized sampling methodology, by applying optimized shotgun proteomics. The thorough characterization of the sweat proteome allowed the identification of 983 unique proteins from which 344 were identified across all samples. Annotation-wise, the study of the sweat proteome unveiled the over-representation of newly addressed actin dynamics, oxidative stress and proteasome-related functions, in addition to well-described proteolysis and anti-microbial immunity. The sweat proteome composition correlated with the inter-individual variability of sweat secretion parameters. In addition, both gender-exclusive proteins and gender-specific protein abundances were highlighted, despite the high similarity between human female and male sweat proteomes. In conclusion, standardized sample collection coupled with optimized shotgun proteomics significantly improved the depth of sweat proteome coverage, far beyond previous similar studies. The identified proteins were involved in many diverse biological processes and molecular functions, indicating the potential of this bio-fluid as a valuable biological matrix for further studies. Addressing sweat variability, our results prove the proteomic profiling of sweat to be a promising bio-fluid analysis for individualized, non-invasive monitoring and personalized medicine.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Shotgun proteomics, Eccrine sweat

### Affiliations
MSLab, MolSys RU, University of Liege
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry-Director MolSys Research Unit-Director CART (Center for Analytical Research and Technology)-Director Liège Université, Liège, Belgium

### Submitter
Bastien Burat

### Lab Head
Dr Gauthier EPPE
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry-Director MolSys Research Unit-Director CART (Center for Analytical Research and Technology)-Director Liège Université, Liège, Belgium


