### Accession
PXD018742

### Title
MCU activity compensates for Complex I dysfunction

### Description
Co-immunoprecipitation experiments were performed in HEK293T cells in the absence and presence of Flag-tagged MCU and binding proteins were identified by tandem mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were diluted with 200 µL UA buffer (8M urea, 0.1M Tris/HCl, pH 8.5) and loaded onto a Vivacon 500 30,000 MWCO Hydrosart Membrane (Sartorius, #VN01H22) and centrifuged at 13,000×g at 25°C for 15 minutes, repeated twice more to wash samples. Samples were then carbamidomethylated with 100 µL of UA buffer plus 50mM iodoacetamide for 20 minutes in the dark, and then spun at 13,000×g at 25°C for 15 minutes. Samples were then washed twice with UA buffer and twice with ammonium bicarbonate solution (50mM ammonium bicarbonate [Sigma, #101240595] in Mass Spectrometry Grade Water (Fisher, Optima LC/MS #W6-4) Protein concentration was measured using the BCA protein assay (Pierce) and trypsin (Thermo) was added at 1 μg trypsin: 40 μg protein and incubated for 18 hrs at 37°C. Peptides were collected by centrifugation at 13,000×g and filters washed with 40 µL of mass spec grade water (Fisher, Optima LC/MS #W6-4). The samples were then acidified using 1% formic acid and placed in an MS sample vial.  Peptides were analyzed with an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo) interfaced with an EASY nLC-1000 UPLC and outfitted with a PicoFrit reversed phase column (15 cm x 75 μm inner diameter, 3 μm particle size, 120 Å pore diameter, New Objective). Gradient was established with 0.1% formic acid and 5% dimethyl sulfoxide in mass spec grade water (Buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid with 5% dimethyl sulfoxide in acetonitrile (Buffer B). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 400 nl/min with a gradient of 2%-10% Buffer B for the first 3 minutes, followed by a gradient of 10%-35% for the next 67 minutes. Afterwards, hydrophobic peptides were eluted with a flow rate of 500 nl/min and a 10-minute gradient from 35-90% Buffer B and then sustained at 90% Buffer B for 10 additional minutes (90 minute run in total). Spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode with dynamic exclusion and peptides were fragmented using CID fragmentation. The top twenty MS1 peaks were analyzed at a resolution of 30,000. Samples were run in duplicate to generate technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
The resulting spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.0.16 against the UniprotKB human database. Database search engine parameters were as follows: trypsin digestion, two missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, and dynamic acetyl (Protein N-term), and oxidation (M), The false discovery rate (FDR) was 1% and modified peptides had a minimum Andromeda score of 40. The proteins identified were further filtered to only include those identified in at least 50% of all FLAG pull downs as confident interactors. For relative quantification, peptide abundance (measured as intensity values for area under the curve) were transformed and missing values were imputated with Perseus 1.6.5.0. Normalized log2 intensities of peptides were used in statistical comparisons of groups: Student’s two sample t-test was used for comparisons between the two sample groups and volcano plots were generated with an FDR of 0.1. Statistical analyses were performed in Perseus 1.6.5.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Mitochondria, Lc-ms/ms, Co-ip, Label-free

### Affiliations
CVRTI, University of Utah (lab head)
University of Utah

### Submitter
Ryan Bia

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Franklin
CVRTI, University of Utah (lab head)


