### Accession
PXD015537

### Title
Oligomerisation-driven MLKL ubiquitylation antagonises necroptosis

### Description
Mixed lineage kinase domain-like (MLKL) is the executioner in the caspase 8-independent form of programmed cell death called necroptosis. Once Receptor Interacting serine/threonine Protein Kinase 3 (RIPK3) is activated by upstream cell death signals, it phosphorylates MLKL and triggers the oligomerization and membrane translocation required for MLKL induced membrane disruption. Besides phosphorylation, MLKL also undergoes ubiquitylation during the early stages of necroptosis, yet neither the mechanism nor the significance of this event has been demonstrated. Here we show that necroptosis-specific, multi-mono-ubiquitylation of MLKL occurs on biological membranes, and requires its activation and oligomerisation. Inactive MLKL mutants recruited to membranes during necroptosis are ubiquitylated but this results in their proteasome and lysosome dependent turnover. We identified several ubiquitylated lysines however mutation of these did not affect MLKL ubiquitylation in response to a necroptotic stimulus.

### Sample Protocol
FLAG-IP elutions were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using the FASP protein digestion method.

### Data Protocol
Raw files consisting of high-resolution MS/MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3) for feature detection and protein identification using the Andromeda search engine. Extracted peak lists were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Mus musculus database (October 2016) and a separate reverse decoy database to empirically assess the false discovery rate (FDR) using strict trypsin specificity allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. The minimum required peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. The mass tolerance for precursor ions and fragment ions were 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The search included variable modifications of oxidation (methionine), amino-terminal acetylation, carbamidomethyl (cysteine), GlyGly or ubiquitylation (lysine), phosphorylation (serine, threonine or tyrosine) and N-ethylmaleimide (cysteine).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Membranes, Mlkl, Necroptosis, Ubiquitylation, Oligomerisation

### Affiliations
Laboratory Head, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Australia
WEHI

### Submitter
Laura Dagley

### Lab Head
Dr John Silke
Laboratory Head, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Australia


