### Accession
PXD005986

### Title
Global PTM Mapping for Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation in one Oryza Sativa Japonica sample

### Description
By the combination of affinity enrichment and high-resolution LC-MS/MS analysis, large-scale lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrlome analysis was performed in Oryza Sativa. Altogether, 9916 lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation sites in 2512 protein groups were identified. Intensive bioinformatic analysis was then carried out to annotate those lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylated targets, including protein annotation, functional classification, functional enrichment, functional enrichment-based cluster analysis, etc. Based on the results, further studies following the large-scale lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylome analysis were suggested.

### Sample Protocol
3.1.2. Protein Extraction Sample was first grinded by liquid nitrogen, then the cell powder was transferred to 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 10 mM DTT, 2 mM EDTA, 3μM TSA, 50mM NAM and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Ⅵ). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NH4CO3, pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 3.1.3. Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM NH4CO3 to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.  3.1.4. HPLC Fractionation The sample was then fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 10 over 80 min into 80 fractions, Then, the peptides were combined into 8 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. 3.1.5. Affinity Enrichment To enrich K2-hybu peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% TFA. The eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. The resulting peptides were cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against UniProt_OSjaponica  (63,195 sequences) database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation  on Lys and 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The site localization probability was set as > 0.75.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation is a recently identified protein post-translational modification that is known to affect the association between histone and DNA. However, non-histone protein lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation remains largely unexplored. Utilizing antibody-based affinity enrichment and nano-HPLC/MS/MS analyses of 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation peptides, we efficaciously identified 9,916 2-hydroxyisobutyryl lysine sites on 2,512 proteins in developing rice seeds, representing the first lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylome dataset in plants. Functional annotation analyses indicated that a wide variety of vital biological processes were preferably targeted by lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation, including glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, TCA cycle, starch biosynthesis, lipid metabolism, protein biosynthesis and processing. Our finding showed that 2-hydroxyisobutyrylated histone sites were conserved across plants, human, and mouse. A number of 2-hydroxyisobutyryl sites were shared with other lysine acylations in both histone and non-histone proteins. Comprehensive analysis of the lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation sites illustrated that the modification sites were highly sequence specific with distinct motifs, and they had less surface accessibility than other lysine residues in the protein. Overall, our study provides the first systematic analysis of lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation proteome in plants, and it serves as an important resource for future investigations of the regulatory mechanisms and functions of lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation.

### Keywords
Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation oryza sativa post-translational modification

### Affiliations
Mississippi State University, Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, Entomology & Plant Pathology
company

### Submitter
Jones Macke

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaojun Peng
Mississippi State University, Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, Entomology & Plant Pathology


