### Accession
PXD024350

### Title
Analysis of Ataxin-2 interactome using LC-MS/MS

### Description
We analyzed Ataxin-2 interactome using liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).  HEK293T cell lysate was subjected to immunoprecipitation (IP) with either anti-Ataxin-2 antibody or control IgG.  The interaction between Ataxin-2 and the copurified proteins do not appear to be mediated by RNA, as the immunoprecipitation experiments were performed under buffer conditions that include RNase A and RNase I.  The proteins purified using anti-Ataxin-2 and control IgG were separated by SDS-PAGE.  CBB-stained gel was divided into three parts per lane in order to increase the detection sensitivity.  Proteins extracted from the gels were analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry to identify their protein content.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were lysed in buffer A [20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM EDTA, 0.5% Nonidet P-40, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 1×Protease inhibitor cocktail (nacalai tesque), 10μg/ml RNaseA, 50U/ml RNaseI (New England Biolabs)] at 4°C for 10 min.  After centrifugation at 15,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C, the supernatant was incubated with either anti-Ataxin-2 antibody or control IgG, which were cross-linked with Protein A Sepharose 4 Fast Flow (GE Healthcare) using DDS (Thermo Scientific), for 2h at 10°C. Following washing of the agarose resin using buffer B [20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM EDTA, 0.5% Nonidet P-40, 1 mM DTT], the bound proteins were eluted with buffer C [0.1 M Glycine-HCl (pH2.7)].  The elutions were neutralized with sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) sample buffer and 1M Tris-HCl (pH 8.6) and analyzed by silver staining.   The samples were resolved by SDS-PAGE.  CBB-stained gel was divided into the three parts per lane.  Each gel was de-stained with Decoloring liquid (30% acetonitrile, 25 mM Ammonium bicarbonate) and washed with 100% acetonitrile.  Proteins in the gels were then reduced with Reducing liquid (10 mM DTT, 25 mM Ammonium bicarbonate) and alkylated with 2-iodoacetamide.  The gels washed with Wash buffer (25 mM Ammonium bicarbonate) and 100% acetonitrile. Trypsin solution [Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega), 25 mM Ammonium bicarbonate] was added and digestion was performed overnight.  Extraction buffer (50% acetonitrile, 5% trifluoroacetic acid) was added to the gel pieces and the mixture was incubated at 45°C for 10 min. The extracted peptides were dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific). The pre-column was a Acclaim PepMap 100 (75 μm × 20 mm, 3 μm, C18) (Thermo Scientific) while the analytical column was a nano-capillary column (75 μm × 125 mm, 3 μm, C18) (Nikkyo Technos).  The peptides were separated by liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), operated at 300 nl/min, using a 60 min gradient from 5 to 80% mobile phase B.  Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% water; mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile.  The separated peptides were analyzed using a Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), measuring at a scan range of m/z 350-2000.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data was analyzed with Mascot (ver. 2.6.1; Matrix science) and Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Ataxin-2

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nagoya City University

### Submitter
Hiroto Inagaki

### Lab Head
Dr Shin-ichi Hoshino
Department of Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nagoya City University


