### Accession
PXD033459

### Title
Native SEC-MS of the human HT29 colon adenocarcinoma cell line treated with the HSP90 inhibitor tanespimycin (17-AAG)

### Description
The molecular chaperone heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) works in concert with its co-chaperones to stabilize its client proteins, which include several drivers of oncogenesis and malignant progression. Pharmacologic inhibitors of HSP90 are proposed to trigger widespread remodeling of cellular protein complexes, including dissociation of co-chaperones from HSP90, disruption of client protein signaling networks, and recruitment of the protein ubiquitination and degradation machinery. However, proteomic studies to date have focused on inhibitor-induced changes in total protein levels, often overlooking protein complex alterations. Here, we use size-exclusion chromatography in combination with mass spectrometry (SEC-MS) to characterize the changes in native protein complexes following treatment with the HSP90 inhibitor 17-AAG in the human HT29 colon adenocarcinoma cell line.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Treatment & Lysis. Five 15 cm dishes (50 % confluent) of HT29 cells were treated with 62.5 nM 17-AAG (equivalent to 5x GI50 for the cell line), or mock-treated with equivalent volume of DMSO. After 8 h, the cells were scraped on ice in 500 µL of ice-cold PBS containing cOmplete(TM) Protease Inhibitors EDTA-free (Roche) and PhosStop (Roche). The collected cells were sonicated with a Diagenode Bioruptor (30 cycles: 30 s on, 30 s off) at 4 °C and then centrifuged at 17,000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C. Samples were filtered through 0.45 µm Ultrafree-MC centrifugal filter units (Millipore) at 12,000 x g for 10 min. Using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific), the filtered cell lysates were injected (200 µL per injection) onto a Superose 6 10/300GL column (GE Life Sciences) equilibriated with PBS (pH 7.2) with a flow rate of 0.2 ml/min. 24 200 µL fractions were collected using a low protein-binding 96-deep-well plate (Eppendorf, Germany). Approximate protein concentrations were estimated using the EZQ(TM) Protein Quantitation Kit (Thermo Scientific). Tris-HCl (1 M, pH 8.0) was added to each fraction to a final concentration of 0.1 M Tris-HCl to adjust the pH to 8.0. After reduction and alkylation using DTT and iodoacetamide, respectively, proteins in each fraction were digested to peptides for 18 h at 37 °C using either LysC alone or both LysC & Trypsin diluted in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0 at a final enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 by weight. For peptide desalting, trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to a 1 % (v/v) final concentration, and peptides were purified using a Sep-Pak tC18 96-well µ-elution plate (Waters). Peptides were eluted in 500 µL of 50 % (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1 % TFA, and dried in a SpeedVac prior to resuspension in 5 % (v/v) formic acid. Peptide concentrations were determined using the CBQCA assay (Thermo Scientific) after 25-fold dilution of peptide samples in 0.1 M borate buffer, pH 9.3. Using a Thermo Scientific Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system, 1 µg of peptides in 5 % (v/v) formic acid (~ 10 µL) was injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 2 % (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid, peptides were resolved on a 150 mm x 75 µm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse-phase analytical column over a gradient from 2 % to 80 % acetonitrile over 100 min with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 1.2 kV using a fused silica emitter with an internal diameter of 5 µm (New Objective, Woburn, MA). Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using CID fragmentation. Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) involved acquiring MS/MS spectra on the 30 most abundant ions at any point during the gradient.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.1.3) using the default settings and searched against the human UniProt database (June 7, 2011) with common contaminant entries. The settings used for MaxQuant analysis were: enzymes set as LysC/P and Trypsin/P, with maximum of 2 missed cleavages; fixed modification was Carbamidomethyl (Cys); variable modifications were Acetyl (Protein N-term), Carbamidomethyl (His, Lys), Carbamidomethyl (N-term), Deamidation (Gln, Asn), DiCarbamidomethyl (His, Lys), DiCarbamidomethyl (N-term), Gln to pyro-Gle, Oxidation (Met); Mass tolerance 20 ppm (FTMS) and 0.5 Da (ITMS); False Discovery Rate for both protein and peptide identification was 0.01. The ‘Re-quantify’ and ‘Match between runs’ features were both enabled. The entire 'txt' folder from the resultant Maxquant output was zipped and deposited here as a 'SEARCH' file. Note that initial attempts to analyse the 384 raw files with MaxQuant indicated errors in reading five files from the EXP2 samples (Trypsin-digested fractions 17 (PT4508-233), 22 (PT4508-238), & 24 (PT4508-240) in the Control condition, and LysC+Trypsin-digested fractions 1 (PT4508-241) & 2 (PT4508-242) in the HSP90i condition). Therefore, for these fractions, only the sample digested with the other (MaxQuant-readable) enzyme schema was included in the MaxQuant input files.

### Publication Abstract
The molecular chaperone heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) works in concert with co-chaperones to stabilize its client proteins, which include multiple drivers of oncogenesis and malignant progression. Pharmacologic inhibitors of HSP90 have been observed to exert a wide range of effects on the proteome, including depletion of client proteins, induction of heat shock proteins, dissociation of co-chaperones from HSP90, disruption of client protein signaling networks, and recruitment of the protein ubiquitylation and degradation machinery-suggesting widespread remodeling of cellular protein complexes. However, proteomics studies to date have focused on inhibitor-induced changes in total protein levels, often overlooking protein complex alterations. Here, we use size-exclusion chromatography in combination with mass spectrometry (SEC-MS) to characterize the early changes in native protein complexes following treatment with the HSP90 inhibitor tanespimycin (17-AAG) for 8&#xa0;h in the HT29 colon adenocarcinoma cell line. After confirming the signature cellular response to HSP90 inhibition (e.g., induction of heat shock proteins, decreased total levels of client proteins), we were surprised to find only modest perturbations to the global distribution of protein elution profiles in inhibitor-treated HT29&#xa0;cells at this relatively early time-point. Similarly, co-chaperones that co-eluted with HSP90 displayed no clear difference between control and treated conditions. However, two distinct analysis strategies identified multiple inhibitor-induced changes, including known and unknown components of the HSP90-dependent proteome. We validate two of these-the actin-binding protein Anillin and the mitochondrial isocitrate dehydrogenase 3 complex-as novel HSP90 inhibitor-modulated proteins. We present this dataset as a resource for the HSP90, proteostasis, and cancer communities (https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/shiny/HSP90/SEC-MS/), laying the groundwork for future mechanistic and therapeutic studies related to HSP90 pharmacology. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD033459.

### Keywords
Human, Hsp90, Adenocarcinoma, Colorectal, Lc-msms, Pharmacology, Colon, Cofrac-ms, Sec-ms, Cancer, Protein complexes

### Affiliations
Signalling Programme, The Babraham Institute, Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK
Babraham Institute

### Submitter
Rahul Samant

### Lab Head
Dr Rahul S. Samant
Signalling Programme, The Babraham Institute, Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK


