### Accession
PXD018042

### Title
NCKAP1L defects lead to primary immunodeficincy and lymphoproliferation within a Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis-like syndrome

### Description
The Nck-Associated Protein 1-Like NCKAP1L gene, alternatively called Hematopoietic protein 1 (HEM-1), encodes a hematopoietic-specific regulator of the actin cytoskeleton, part of the WAVE2 complex. NCKAP1L is involved in lymphocyte development, phagocytosis and neutrophils migration. Here we report the first cases of NCKAP1L-deficiency in man, as homozygous non-sense or splice variants, observed in 2 independent patients of Middle-Eastern origin of 1.5 months and 9 years of age respectively. We described a novel nosological entity, combining to various degrees, immune deficiency, lymphoproliferation within a highly inflammatory syndrome, reminiscent, yet distinct of HLH; due to recessive mutations in NCKAP1L.

### Sample Protocol
For shotgun proteomics, proteins were extracted and stacked in an acrylamide SDS-PAGE stacking gel. After tryptic digestion and peptides extraction, nanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a nanoAcquity UPLC device (Waters, Milford, MA) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer or a Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
NanoLC-MS/MS data was interpreted to do label-free extracted ion chromatogram-based differential analysis using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16). Peaks were assigned with the Andromeda search engine with full trypsin (Trypsin/P) specificity against an in-house generated protein sequence database containing all human entries extracted from UniProtKB-SwissProt and common contaminants (release of 15-07-2019; 20 409 sequences, Taxonomy ID 9606) using the MSDA software suite. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionines and protein N-terminal acetylation were defined as variable modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 5 ppm for the main search. The maximum false discovery rate was 1% at PSM, peptide and protein levels with the use of a target/decoy strategy.  Label-free quantification was done on unique peptides (LFQ min. ratio count of 2) without the match between runs option. Unmodified peptides and those with carbamidomethylated cysteines were used for protein quantification. All other parameters were set as default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis-like syndrome, Rnaseq, Immunophenotying, Shotgun proteomics, Nckap1l-deficiency

### Affiliations
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Bio-Organique (LSMBO), IPHC, UMR 7178, France
LSMBO, IPHC

### Submitter
Aurélie Hirschler

### Lab Head
Dr Carapito Christine
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Bio-Organique (LSMBO), IPHC, UMR 7178, France


