### Accession
PXD012094

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of an intact synthetic microRNA

### Description
The field of epitranscriptomics is growing in importance, with chemical modification of RNA being associated with a wide variety of biological phenomena. Mass spectrometry (MS) enables the identification of modified RNA residues within their sequence contexts, by using analogous approaches to shotgun proteomics. We have developed a free and open-source database search engine for RNA MS data, called NucleicAcidSearchEngine (NASE), as part of the OpenMS software framework. NASE allows the reliable identification of (modified) RNA sequences from LC-MS/MS data in a high-throughput fashion. For this validation dataset, oligonucleotides with the sequence of mature Drosophila let-7 microRNA, 21 nt in length, were produced synthetically in unmodified and modified (2’-O-methylated at the 3’ uridine) forms. We characterised a 1:1 mixture of both forms of this RNA.

### Sample Protocol
A mature Drosophila let-7 sequence was prepared by solid-phase synthesis and purchased from IDT. The RNA was synthesised in unmethylated and methylated forms, i.e.  with or without a 2’-O-methyluridine (Um) at position 21 (3’ end). A sample was prepared by mixing both forms, and was analysed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS as follows: The RNA sample was separated by reversed-phase ion-pair liquid chromatography (using 200 mM HFIP + 8.5 mM TEA in H2O as eluent A, and 100 mM HFIP + 4.25 mM TEA in methanol as eluent B) and characterised by negative ion MS/MS in a hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher). A gradient of 2.5 to 25% eluent B eluted oligonucleotides over 35 min from nanoflow Acclaim PepMap C18 solid phase (Thermo Fisher) at 200 nL/min. Precursor ion spectra were collected at a scan range of 600 to 3500 m/z at 120k resolution in data-dependent mode, with the top five MS1 species selected for fragmentation (NCE: 20) and MS2 at 60k resolution.

### Data Protocol
The proprietary raw file was converted to mzML format without compression and with vendor peak-picking using MSConvert (https://github.com/ProteoWizard). In the analysis with NASE, the full list of fragment ion types (a-B, a, b, c, d, w, x, y, z) was considered for peak matching. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were both set to 3 ppm. For precursor mass correction, the monoisotopic up to the fifth (+4 neutrons) isotopologue peak were considered. This dataset data was searched with NASE using unspecific cleavage to account for incomplete RNA synthesis products. An extensive set of potential adducts (Na+, K+, Na22+, K22+, NaK2+, Na33+, K33+, Na2K3+, NaK23+) was used because of the substantial salt that remained from the RNA synthesis reactions. Two copies of the let-7 sequence, one with a fixed 2’O-methylation of uridine (Um) at the 5’ position, were specified in the FASTA sequence file. NASE produced two output files containing the search results: An mzTab-like text file suitable for further analysis, and an idXML file suitable for visualisation in OpenMS’ TOPPView.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Epitranscriptomics, Rna, Mirna, Let-7

### Affiliations
STORM Therapeutics Limited
STORM Therapeutics Limited Cambridge United Kingdom

### Submitter
Hendrik Weisser

### Lab Head
Dr Byron Andrews
STORM Therapeutics Limited Cambridge United Kingdom


