### Accession
PXD036512

### Title
Serine ADP-ribosylation in Drosophila provides insights into the evolution of reversible ADP-ribosylation signaling

### Description
In the mammalian DNA damage response, ADP-ribosylation signaling is of crucial importance to mark sites of DNA damage as well as recruit and regulate repairs factors. Specifically, the PARP1:HPF1 complex recognizes damaged DNA and catalyzes the formation of serine-linked ADP-ribosylation marks (mono-Ser-ADPr), which are extended into ADP-ribose polymers (poly-Ser-ADPr) by PARP1 alone. Poly-Ser-ADPr is reversed by PARG, while the terminal mono-Ser-ADPr is removed by ARH3. Despite its significance and apparent evolutionary conservation, little is known about ADP-ribosylation signaling in non-mammalian Animalia. The presence of HPF1, but absence of ARH3, in some insect genomes, including Drosophila species, raises questions regarding the existence and reversal of serine-ADP-ribosylation in these species. Here we show by quantitative proteomics that Ser-ADPr is the major form of ADP-ribosylation in the DNA damage response of Drosophila melanogaster and is dependent on the Parp1:Hpf1 complex. Moreover, our structural and biochemical data reveal a new mechanism of mono-Ser-ADPr removal by Drosophila Parg.

### Sample Protocol
ADP-ribosylated peptides were lysed and enriched as described previously (Buch-Larsen et al., 2020; Hendriks et al., 2019; Larsen et al., 2018). In brief, cell pellets were lysed in 10 pellet volumes of Lysis Buffer (6 M guanidine hydrochloride, 50 mM TrisHCl [pH 8.5]), and complete lysis was achieved by alternating vigorous shaking with vigorous vortexing. Upon reduction and alkylation using TCEP and CAA, proteins were digested using Lysyl Endopeptidase (Lys-C, 1:100 w/w; Wako Chemicals) for 3 h and diluted with three volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were further digested overnight using modified sequencing grade Trypsin (1:100 w/w; Sigma Aldrich). Digested samples were purified using reversed-phase C18 cartridges according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Elution of peptides was performed with 30% ACN in 0.1% TFA, peptides were frozen overnight at −80 °C, and afterwards lyophilized for 96 h.  Lyophilized peptides were dissolved in AP buffer (50 mM TrisHCl [pH 8.0], 1 mM MgCl2, 250 μM DTT, and 50 mM NaCl), and ~2 mg of peptide was used for each replicate experiment. Samples were incubated with Af1521 and left head-over-tail rotating at 4 °C for 4 h. The beads were washed twice in freshly prepared ice-cold AP buffer, twice in ice-cold PBS with DTT, and twice in ice-cold MQ water, with a tube change every time the buffer was changed. ADPr-modified peptides were eluted off the beads by addition of ice-cold 0.15% TFA. Eluted peptides were passed through 0.45 μm spin filters, and afterward through pre-washed 100 kDa cut-off spin filters (Vivacon 500, Satorius), after which they were high pH fractionated into three fractions and an additional F0 (Buch-Larsen et al., 2021; Hendriks et al., 2019; Hendriks et al., 2021; Larsen et al., 2018). All MS experiments were analyzed on an EASY-nLC 1200 HPLC system (Thermo) connected to a Fusion Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo). Each sample was separated on a 15 cm analytical column, with an internal diameter of 75 μm, packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18 beads (ReproSil-Pur-AQ, Dr. Maisch), and heated to 40 °C using a column oven. Peptide separation was performed using a 60 min gradient at a flow rate of 250 nL/min, utilizing buffer A consisting of 0.1% FA, and buffer B consisting of 80% ACN in 0.1% FA. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, with full scans performed at a resolution of 120,000 and a maximum injection time of 250 ms. Precursor fragmentation was accomplished using electron transfer disassociation with supplemental higher-collisional disassociation (EThcD), with supplemental activation energy of 20. Precursors with charge state 3-5 were included and prioritized from charge 3 (highest) to charge 5 (lowest), using the decision tree algorithm. Selected precursors were excluded from repeated sequencing by setting a dynamic exclusion of 45 seconds. MS/MS spectra were measured in the Orbitrap, with a maximum precursor injection time of 500 ms, and a scan resolution of 60,000.

### Data Protocol
All MS raw data was analyzed using the MaxQuant software suite version 1.5.3.30 (Cox and Mann, 2008), and searched against the drosophila proteome in FASTA file format, as downloaded from UniProt on the 11th of November 2020. Default MaxQuant settings were used except from the following; cysteine carbamidomethylation, and ADP-ribosylation on cysteine, aspartic acid, glutamic acid, histidine, lysine, arginine, serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues were included as variable modifications. The Andromeda delta score was set to minimum 20 for modified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Adp-ribosylation, Parg, Drosophila, Proteomics, Af1521, Ethcd, Adpr, Parp

### Affiliations
Proteomics Program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen
NNF Center for Protein Research

### Submitter
Sara Larsen

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Proteomics Program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen


