### Accession
PXD011360

### Title
Bacterial and host proteins along and across the porcine GIT

### Description
Digesta and mucosa samples from stomach, jejunum, ileum, cecum and colon of the porcine GIT from four animals were analysed by metaproteomics to obtain a deeper insight into the functions of bacterial groups with a concomitant analyses of host proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Each sample containing 5 g of fresh substance was resuspended in 10 ml of washing buffer. The following steps of sample preparation, protein extraction, quantification and digestion were performed as described by Tilocca, et al.(2017). Purified peptides were analysed using an EASY-nLC 1000 system coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). Peptides were injected and separated into an EASY-Spray analytical column (2 µm, 100 ˚APepMapRSLC C18, 25 cm x 75 µ, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the following 235 min gradient: 2-10% solvent B in 100 min; 10-22% solvent B in 80 min; 22-45% solvent B in 55 min; 45-90% solvent B in 5 min, 15 min isocratic at 90% solvent B; 90-2% solvent B in 1 min; Reequilibration at 2% solvent B for 40 min. Solvent A contained 0.5% acetic acid and solvent B consisted of 0.5% acetic acid in ACN/H2O (80/20). The flow rate was 250 nL/min and the column temperature was constantly on 35◦C. The MS spectra (m/z = 300 - 1,600) were ascertained at a resolution of 70,000 (m/z = 200) using a maximum injection time (MIT) of 50 ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 1 x 106. The internal calibration of the Orbitrap analyzer was conducted consulting lock-mass ions from ambient air following the method of Olsen, et al. The 10 highest peptides precursors were used for data dependent MS/MS spectra. Therefore, high energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation was used with the following settings: resolution 17,500; normalized collision energy of 25; intensity threshold of 2 x 105. For fragmentation exclusively ions with charge states between +2 and +5 were chosen. Therefore, an isolation width of 1.6 Da was set. AGC was adjusted at 1 x 106 whereat MIT was set at 50 ms for each MS/MS scan. To prevent further fragmentation it was decided to eliminate fragmented precursor ions for 30 s within a 5 ppm mass window.

### Data Protocol
The gained dataset from the mass spectrometer was analysed by MaxQuant (v 1.5.1.2) using theNCBInr database with sequences of Sus scrofa and a database consisting of bacterial proteinsidentified in a previous study analysing 84 porcine fecal samples [Tilocca et al 2017].

### Publication Abstract
Pigs are among the most important farm animals worldwide and research to optimize their feed efficiency and improve their welfare is still in progress. The porcine intestinal microbiome is so far mainly known from sequencing-based studies. Digesta and mucosa samples from five different porcine gastrointestinal tract sections were analyzed by metaproteomics to obtain a deeper insight into the functions of bacterial groups with concomitant analyses of host proteins. Firmicutes (Prevotellaceae) dominated mucosa and digesta samples, followed by Bacteroidetes. Actinobacteria and Proteobacteria were much higher in abundance in mucosa compared to digesta samples. Functional profiling reveals the presence of core functions shared between digesta and mucosa samples. Protein abundances of energy production and conversion were higher in mucosa samples, whereas in digesta samples more proteins were involved in lipid transport and metabolism; short-chain fatty acids production were detected. Differences were also highlighted between sections, with the small intestine appearing more involved in carbohydrate transport and metabolism than the large intestine. Thus, this study produced the first functional analyses of the porcine GIT biology, discussing the findings in relation to expected bacterial and host functions.

### Keywords
Metaproetomics, Bacteria, Pig

### Affiliations
University of Hohenheim
University of Hohenheim, Animal Science, Stuttgart, Germany

### Submitter
Jana Seifert

### Lab Head
Dr Jana Seifert
University of Hohenheim, Animal Science, Stuttgart, Germany


