### Accession
PXD003673

### Title
Differential Enzymatic 16O/18O Labelling for the Detection of Cross-Linked Nucleic Acid-Protein Heteroconjugates

### Description
Enzymatic differential 16O/18O labelling of nucelic acid-protein heteroconjugates. Heteroconjugates are identified against a complex background using an automated analysis workflow.

### Sample Protocol
To label the C-terminus of the peptide moiety with 16O2 or 18O2 Heteroconjugates are labelled by trypsin in H216O or H218O. Digestion and labelling using nuclease P1 is performed in order to label the 5’ monophosphate of the digested DNA moiety with 16O or 18O. Samples are then combined and analysed by LC/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data is converted to mzML. Spectra are filter to reduce the impact of noise. Pairs of light and heavy labeled heteroconjugates are detected using FeatureFinderMultiplex.

### Publication Abstract
Cross-linking of nucleic acids to proteins in combination with mass spectrometry permits the precise identification of interacting residues between nucleic acid-protein complexes. However, the mass spectrometric identification and characterization of cross-linked nucleic acid-protein heteroconjugates within a complex sample is challenging. Here we establish a novel enzymatic differential <sup>16</sup>O/<sup>18</sup>O-labeling approach, which uniquely labels heteroconjugates. We have developed an automated data analysis workflow based on OpenMS for the identification of differentially isotopically labeled heteroconjugates against a complex background. We validated our method using synthetic model DNA oligonucleotide-peptide heteroconjugates, which were subjected to the labeling reaction and analyzed by high-resolution FTICR mass spectrometry.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Nucelic acid-protein heteroconjugates, Cross-linking

### Affiliations
Center for Bioinformatics, Quantitative Biology Center and Department of Computer Science, University of Tübingen, Sand 14, 72076 Tübingen, Germany Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Spemannstr. 35, 72076 Tübingen, Germany
University of Tübingen

### Submitter
Timo Sachsenberg

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Kohlbacher
Center for Bioinformatics, Quantitative Biology Center and Department of Computer Science, University of Tübingen, Sand 14, 72076 Tübingen, Germany Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Spemannstr. 35, 72076 Tübingen, Germany


