### Accession
PXD017206

### Title
SWATH-MS proteome of Moraxella catarrhalis under iron restricted conditions

### Description
Moraxella catarrhalis is a human-restricted bacterial pathogen that causes otitis media in children and exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in adults. Iron is a co-factor required for the function of proteins involved in respiration and DNA replication, and thus is essential to life for most bacterial species. As iron is sequestered by host tissues, all host-adapted pathogens encounter periods of iron starvation. Previous studies have defined the repertoire of genes required for growth of M. catarrhalis under iron restricted conditions, and described differential expression at the transcriptional level. However, global changes in protein expression in response to iron starvation have not been investigated. Here we provide a SWATH-MS dataset describing differential expression of the M. catarrhalis CCRI-195ME proteome under iron restricted versus iron replete conditions.

### Sample Protocol
M. catarrhalis CCRI-195ME was grown to mid-log phase in Brain Heart Infusion broth with or without 30 µM desferral, at 37°C. Protein samples (100 μL of 1 μg/μL protein in TEAB) were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol at 65°C for 30 mins, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide at 25°C for 30 mins, and digested with 4 μg trypsin at 37°C for 16 hours. Samples were then acidified with 1 μL 100% formic acid, pelleted, and re-suspended in 100 μL of loading buffer (2% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid). SWATH-MS experiments were performed by the Australian Proteome Analysis Facility (Sydney, NSW, Australia) using a 5600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer (AB Sciex) with an Ultra nanoLC system (Eksigent) as previously described (4). For 1D-IDA, replicates were pooled and 10 μl was injected. For 2D-IDA, all samples were pooled and fractionated using a High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation kit (Pierce). 13 fractions were collected (20-86 mins), dried and re-suspended in 20 μl of loading buffer, and 10 μl was injected. For SWATH-MS experiments, each sample was diluted in 1:1 in loading buffer and 10 μl was injected in random order with one blank run between samples.

### Data Protocol
IDA protein identification was performed with ProteinPilot (v4.2) in ‘thorough mode’ using the database M. catarrhalis CCRI-195ME CDS (2,136 proteins). A SWATH library was constructed by merging all 1D-IDA and 2D-IDA runs using SwathXtend https://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/SwathXtend.html. SWATH data was extracted using PeakView (v2.1) with the following parameters: 6 most intense fragments of each peptide were extracted (75 ppm mass tolerance, 10 min retention time window), shared and modified peptides were excluded, peptides with confidence ≥ 99% and FDR ≤ 1% were used for quantitation. Protein peak areas were analysed with in-house analysis software. Peptide peak areas were normalised to the total peak area for each run. Statistical analysis was performed as previously described. Proteins are considered differentially expressed if the quantitation ratios are ≥1.5 or ≤0.67 and respective p-values are ≤0.05.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Moraxella catarrhalis</i> is a leading cause of otitis media and exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; however, its response to iron starvation during infection is not completely understood. Here, we announce a sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra mass spectrometry (SWATH-MS) data set describing the differential expression of the <i>M. catarrhalis</i> CCRI-195ME proteome under iron-restricted versus iron-replete conditions.

### Keywords
Moraxella catarrhalis, Iron restriction, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Institute for Glycomics, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Queensland, 4215, Australia
Institute for Glycomics, Griffith University

### Submitter
Luke Blakeway

### Lab Head
Dr Kate L. Seib
Institute for Glycomics, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Queensland, 4215, Australia


