### Accession
PXD025642

### Title
Proteomic Responses of Contrasting Alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.)Varieties to High Temperature Stress

### Description
Two alfalfa varieties contrasting in heat tolerance, MS30 and MS37, were used for this experiment, and their seeds were provided by Sichuan Academy of Grassland Sciences. After two months of growth, both alfalfa varieties grow into adult-plants. Select 10-15 healthy plants with consistent growth to remain in each nutritional bowl. All materials are transferred to artificial climate boxes for high temperature stress treatment. The light cycle is still the day/night cycle:16/8h. According to the results of a prior experiment and based on the relevant report, the treatment temperature was set to 20℃, 25℃, 30℃, 35℃, 40℃ and 4℃, which is a gradient upward trend. Among them, alfalfa growing at 20°C were used as the control (non-HT stress). All alfalfa varieties were treated at each temperature gradient for 7 days and the leaves was collected for the determination of physiological indicators. Moreover, the physiological conditions of the plants and the humidity of the climate box were observed at any time. water the plants properly once a day, and the alfalfa special fertilizer was applied once in each cycle of temperature stress treatment to ensure the water and nutrition demand of the plant. Based on the results of the above experiment, some physiological responses demonstrated that most alfalfa varieties showed the most significant variation at 20℃, 35℃ and 43℃. Therefore, leaf samples collected from plants after exposure to the rising temperature 7 days were harvested for further TMT quantitative proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The sample was grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). (Note: For PTM experiments, inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer, e.g. 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM for acetylation.) The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 20% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 12,000 g 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit/iTRAQ kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT/iTRAQ reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against human uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
High temperature (HT) is an important factor for limiting global plant distribution and agricultural production. As the global temperature continues to rise, it is essential to clarify the physiological and molecular mechanisms of alfalfa responding the high temperature, which will contribute to the improvement of heat resistance in leguminous crops. In this study, the physiological and proteomic responses of two alfalfa (<i>Medicago sativa</i> L.) varieties contrasting in heat tolerance, MS30 (heat-tolerant) and MS37 (heat-sensitive), were comparatively analyzed under the treatments of continuously rising temperatures for 42 days. The results showed that under the HT stress, the chlorophyll content and the chlorophyll fluorescence parameter (Fv/Fm) of alfalfa were significant reduced and some key photosynthesis-related proteins showed a down-regulated trend. Moreover, the content of Malondialdehyde (MDA) and the electrolyte leakage (EL) of alfalfa showed an upward trend, which indicates both alfalfa varieties were damaged under HT stress. However, because the antioxidation-reduction and osmotic adjustment ability of MS30 were significantly stronger than MS37, the damage degree of the photosynthetic system and membrane system of MS30 is significantly lower than that of MS37. On this basis, the global proteomics analysis was undertaken by tandem mass tags (TMT) technique, a total of 6,704 proteins were identified and quantified. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis indicated that a series of key pathways including photosynthesis, metabolism, adjustment and repair were affected by HT stress. Through analyzing Venn diagrams of two alfalfa varieties, 160 and 213 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) that had dynamic changes under HT stress were identified from MS30 and MS37, respectively. Among these DEPs, we screened out some key DEPs, such as ATP-dependent zinc metalloprotease FTSH protein, vitamin K epoxide reductase family protein, ClpB3, etc., which plays important functions in response to HT stress. In conclusion, the stronger heat-tolerance of MS30 was attributed to its higher adjustment and repair ability, which could cause the metabolic process of MS30 is more conducive to maintaining its survival and growth than MS37, especially at the later period of HT stress. This study provides a useful catalog of the <i>Medicago sativa</i> L. proteomes with the insight into its future genetic improvement of heat-resistance.

### Keywords
Alfalfa; leaf; high temperature stress; isobaric tandem mass tag labeling (tmt)

### Affiliations
Sichuan Academy of Grassland Sciences

### Submitter
Xinrui Li

### Lab Head
Dr Xinrui li
Sichuan Academy of Grassland Sciences


