### Accession
PXD013443

### Title
Polyamines and eIF5A hypusination modulate mitochondrial respiration and macrophage activation

### Description
How cells adapt metabolism to meet demands is an active area of interest across biology. Amongst a broad range of functions, the polyamine spermidine is needed to hypusinate the translation factor eukaryotic initiation factor 5A (eIF5A). We show here that hypusinated eIF5A (eIF5AH) promotes the efficient expression of a subset of mitochondrial proteins involved in the TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). Several of these proteins have mitochondrial targeting sequences (MTS) that in part, confer an increased dependency on eIF5AH. In macrophages, metabolic switching between OXPHOS and glycolysis supports divergent functional fates stimulated by activation signals.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were prepared usign iST protocol while LC-MS analysis was conducted using nLC100 coupled to Orbitrap Q Exactive mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptides idenfification was carried out by searching the raw files against mouse database using MaxQuant platform. Andromeda algorith which is implemented in MaxQuant, was used for identifying proteins and peptides. Perseus tool was used for samples grouping and for the statistical analysis to reveal the list of differentially expressed proteins. MaxQuant was used to search the raw data and produce the list of idenified proteins and peptides.  while Perseus platform was used for samples grouping and statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
How cells adapt metabolism to meet demands is an active area of interest across biology. Among a broad range of functions, the polyamine spermidine is needed to hypusinate the translation factor eukaryotic initiation factor 5A (eIF5A). We show here that hypusinated eIF5A (eIF5A<sup>H</sup>) promotes the efficient expression of a subset of mitochondrial proteins involved in the TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). Several of these proteins have mitochondrial targeting sequences (MTSs) that in part confer an increased dependency on eIF5AH. In macrophages, metabolic switching between OXPHOS and glycolysis supports divergent functional fates stimulated by activation signals. In these cells, hypusination of eIF5A appears to be dynamically regulated after activation. Using in&#xa0;vivo and in&#xa0;vitro models, we show that acute inhibition of this pathway blunts OXPHOS-dependent alternative activation, while leaving aerobic glycolysis-dependent classical activation intact. These results might have implications for therapeutically controlling macrophage activation by targeting the polyamine-eIF5A-hypusine axis.

### Keywords
Polyamine, Eif5a, Proteomics, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Immunobiology and Epigenetics
Dr. Gerhard Mittler Group Leader Proteomics Unit MPI Immunobiology and Epigenetics Stuebeweg 51 D-79108 Freiburg, Germany Phone: +49 (0)761 5108 712

### Submitter
Yaarub Musa

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Gerhard Mittler
Dr. Gerhard Mittler Group Leader Proteomics Unit MPI Immunobiology and Epigenetics Stuebeweg 51 D-79108 Freiburg, Germany Phone: +49 (0)761 5108 712


