### Accession
PXD014871

### Title
Proteomic changes in human sperm during sequential in vitro capacitation and acrosome reaction.

### Description
The male gamete is not completely mature after ejaculation and requires further events in the female genital tract to acquire fertilizing ability, including the processes of capacitation and acrosome reaction. In order to shed light on dynamic protein changes experienced by the sperm cell in preparation for fertilization, a comprehensive quantitative proteomic profiling based on isotopic peptide labeling and liquid chromatography followed by tandem mass spectrometry was performed on spermatozoa from three donors of proven fertility under three sequential conditions: purification with density gradient centrifugation, incubation with capacitation medium, and induction of acrosome reaction by the exposure to the calcium ionophore A23187. After applying strict selection criteria for peptide quantification and for statistical analyses, 36 proteins with significant changes in their relative abundance within sperm protein extracts were detected. Moreover, the presence of peptide residues potentially harboring sites for post-translational modification was revealed, suggesting that protein modification may be an important mechanism in sperm maturation. In this regard, increased levels of proteins mainly involved in motility and signaling, both regulated by protein modifiers, were detected in sperm lysates following incubation with capacitation medium. In contrast, less abundant proteins in acrosome-reacted cell lysates did not contain potentially modifiable residues, suggesting the possibility that all those proteins might be relocated or released during the process. Protein-protein interaction analysis revealed a subset of proteins potentially involved in sperm maturation, including ERLIN2, GGH, TMED 10, and ATP synthases. These results contribute to the current knowledge of the molecular basis of human fertilization and propose new candidates to be validated as modulators of male fertility.

### Sample Protocol
Human semen samples were obtained from 3 donors of proven fertility. Semen was allowed to liquefy at room temperature and an initial evaluation of the seminal parameters was taken for concentration and motility assessment using the automatic semen analysis system CASA. Each ejaculate was processed under three continuous conditions: Each ejaculate was processed under three continuous conditions (Figure 1): density-gradient centrifugation (DGC sperm), incubation in capacitation medium (CAP sperm) and incubation with the calcium ionophore A23187 to in vitro induce the acrosome reaction (AR sperm). The acrosome reaction was monitored by assessing the integrity of the sperm acrosome vesicle by the PSA-FITC labeling method. This fluorescent probe binds to the alpha-methyl mannose and labels the acrosomal content of sperm. From each sperm preparation (DGC, CAP and AR sperm; 3 donors), proteins were solubilized by incubating 20 million spermatozoa with 50 µL of lysis buffer containing 2% SDS and 1mM Phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), for 30 minutes at room temperature with constant gentle shaking. Lysates were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10 min at 4°C. Proteins in the soluble fraction were quantified using the BCA method. A total of 9 protein extracts were used for the proteomic study, corresponding to the DGC, CAP and AR sperm preparations from three different semen donors. Differential peptide labeling was performed using Tandem Mass TagTM 6-plex (TMTsixplexTM) Reagents. Labeled peptides from each sample were then combined constituting two different multiplex pools: Run 1 with 5 samples (TMT tags 127, 128, 129, 130 and 131) and 1 internal control (TMT tag 126), and Run 2 with 4 samples (TMT tags 127, 128, 129, and 130) and 1 internal control (TMT tag 126). Labeled peptides were analyzed via LC-MS/MS with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) interfaced with an Eksigent nanoLC ultra 2D plus system (AB Sciex, Switzerland).Peptides were injected onto a Pepmap 100 trap column (300 µm x 5 mm, 5μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. For analytical separation, the trap was switched inline to an Acclaim Pepmap C18 column (75 μm × 15 cm, 3 μm, 100 Å) using a 240 min linear gradient from 5 to 30% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. MS/MS analyses were performed using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a nanoelectrospray ion source. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos settings included one 30,000 resolution scan for precursor ions followed by MS2 scans of the 20 most intense precursor ions in positive ion mode. MS/MS data acquisition was completed using Xcalibur 2.1 (ThermoFisher Scientific). The fragmentation method used for identification of TMT labeled peptides was based on higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with 40% fixed collision energy (CE).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were analysed by Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 (ThermoFisher Scientific). For database searching, raw MS files were submitted to an in-house Homo sapiens UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot 2018 database including Sus scrofa trypsin (HUMAN_PIG_Uniprot_Release_2018_03.fasta). SEQUEST HT version 28.0 was used (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Searches were performed using the following settings: 2 maximum miss cleavage sites for trypsin, TMT as a N-Terminal modification, lysine-TMT (+229.163 Da) and methionine-oxidation (+15.995 Da) as dynamic modifications, cysteine-carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) as static modification, 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.6 Da fragment mass tolerance, and 5 ppm peak integration tolerance. The criteria used for protein identification was set as 1% FDR and a minimum of one peptide match per protein. Quantitative analysis were performed simultaneously with protein identification using Proteome Discoverer software. For quantification, only unambiguous and unique peptides were considered. For that, the 'ungrouping' of proteins from their respective families was used during the quantification process. This avoids the possible ambiguity associated with different isoforms of the same protein (Amaral et al., 2014b; Barrachina et al., 2018; Bogle et al., 2017). The normalized TMT quantification values for each identified spectrum were extracted from the ratio between the reported ion intensities corresponding to each individual sample (TMT-127 to TMT-131) and the reporter ion intensity from the internal control (TMT-126). Quantification values were corrected according to the isotopic purities of the reporter ions provided by the manufacturer. In order to avoid any chance of false positive findings, robust statistics were performed by applying strict selection criteria on the proteomic data. Specifically, only those proteins with at least 1 unique peptide quantified by ≥ 2 peptide-to-spectrum matches (PSMs) in all the samples, and with a coefficient of variation < 50% in at least 75% of the samples, were considered for further statistical analyses. This pipeline was set by our group in a previous publication (Barrachina et al., 2018). Statistical analysis were conducted in R (Team and R Development Core Team, 2016) with the package “car” (Fox and Weisberg, 2011). Significant differences among the different sperm lysates in the three donors were evaluated using repeated-measures ANOVA test on log-transformed proteomic quantification values. P-values <0.05 were considered significant if the assumption of sphericity assessed by Mauchly’s test had not been violated. In contrast, Greenhouse-Geisser and Huynh-Feldt corrections were applied when data violated the sphericity assumption. Subsequently, the pairwise t-test combined with Holm-Sidak adjustment was applied to identify significant differences between pairs of sample preparations (DGC-CAP, CAP-AR, and DGC-AR). P-values <0.05 after Holm-Sidak adjustment were considered significant. These results were further filtered by applying similar statistical analysis at peptide level, in order to discard those significant proteins whose corresponding individual peptides do not show statistically significant differences between sperm preparations. Protein abundance alterations were considered significant only when corrected p-values <0.05 were found at both protein and peptide levels.

### Publication Abstract
The male gamete is not completely mature after ejaculation and requires further events in the female genital tract to acquire fertilizing ability, including the processes of capacitation and acrosome reaction. In order to shed light on protein changes experienced by the sperm cell in preparation for fertilization, a comprehensive quantitative proteomic profiling based on isotopic peptide labeling and liquid chromatography followed by tandem mass spectrometry was performed on spermatozoa from three donors of proven fertility under three sequential conditions: purification with density gradient centrifugation, incubation with capacitation medium, and induction of acrosome reaction by exposure to the calcium ionophore A23187. After applying strict selection criteria for peptide quantification and for statistical analyses, 36 proteins with significant changes in their relative abundance within sperm protein extracts were detected. Moreover, the presence of peptide residues potentially harboring sites for post-translational modification was revealed, suggesting that protein modification may be an important mechanism in sperm maturation. In this regard, increased levels of proteins mainly involved in motility and signaling, both regulated by protein modifiers, were detected in sperm lysates following incubation with capacitation medium. In contrast, less abundant proteins in acrosome-reacted cell lysates did not contain potentially modifiable residues, suggesting the possibility that all those proteins might be relocated or released during the process. Protein-protein interaction analysis revealed a subset of proteins potentially involved in sperm maturation, including the proteins Erlin-2 (ERLIN2), Gamma-glutamyl hydrolase (GGH) and Transmembrane emp24 domain-containing protein 10 (TMED10). These results contribute to the current knowledge of the molecular basis of human fertilization. It should now be possible to further validate the potential role of the detected altered proteins as modulators of male infertility.

### Keywords
Capacitation, Spermatozoa, Tmt labeling, Sperm, Proteomics, Acrosome reaction, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), University of Barcelona
Molecular Biology of Reproduction and Development Research Group; Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS); Fundació Clínic per a la Recerca Biomèdica (FCRB); Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universitat de Barcelona; Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Service, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain

### Submitter
Judit Castillo

### Lab Head
Dr Rafael Oliva Virgili
Molecular Biology of Reproduction and Development Research Group; Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS); Fundació Clínic per a la Recerca Biomèdica (FCRB); Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universitat de Barcelona; Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Service, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain


