### Accession
PXD012349

### Title
Coacervation of Lipid Bilayer in Natural Cell Membranes for Extraction and Enrichment of Proteins in Proteomics Studies

### Description
This is the first report on fluoroalcohol-induced coacervation of lipid components in natural cell membranes and incorporation of this novel process for extraction, fractionation, and enrichment of proteins in proteomics workflow.

### Sample Protocol
After two-phase formation by lipid-HFIP coacervation, top aqueous-rich and bottom lipid-coacervate phases were separated and bottom-up proteomic analysis was performed. Proteins inthe aqueous-rich phase, coacervate phase and a sample without phase separation in urea (control sample) were digested and identified from LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The RAW data were analyzed using MaxQuant (Ver. 1.6.1.0) incorporated with Andromeda search engine. Proteins identified in at least three out of four replicates were considered in further data analysis. The reviewed yeast database was downloaded from UniProt and configured into the software.

### Publication Abstract
This is the first report where hexafluoroisopropanol (HFIP) was used to induce the coacervation of lipid components in natural cell membranes that would concomitantly result in solubilization, extraction, and enrichment of hydrophobic proteins (e.g., integral membrane proteins, IMP) into the coacervate phase, and extraction of hydrophilic proteins in a separate aqueous phase. The incorporation of this innovative approach in the proteomics workflow would allow the fractionation of proteins in separate aqueous and coacervate phases and would also eliminate the need for using surfactants. Subsequently, proteins can be identified by the bottom-up proteomics approach where samples were digested in solution after phase separation. Yeast cell wall proteins, anchored membrane proteins, and proteins related to some regulatory activities were mostly found in the aqueous-rich phase. On the other hand, most integral membrane proteins, proteins involved in metabolic processes, and proteins responsible for ions or drug binding were identified in the coacervate phase. The detergent-free, facile, and rapid process of natural lipid coacervation increased the number of identified proteins by 8% (vs no-phase separation experiment). The identification of all IMPs and organelle IMPs was improved by 13% and 29%, respectively. In addition, 25% more low-abundance proteins (less than 20 ppm) were identified.

### Keywords
Natural lipid coacervates, Membrane proteomics, Low abundance and hydrophobic proteins, Protein separation and enrichment

### Affiliations
The University of Texas at Arlington, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Arlington, TX, USA
University of Texas at Arlington

### Submitter
Amir Koolivand

### Lab Head
Dr Morteza Khaledi
The University of Texas at Arlington, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Arlington, TX, USA


