### Accession
PXD029399

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of non hodgkin's

### Description
Abstract: ArtinM, a D-mannose-binding lectin from Artocarpus heterophyllus induces the activation of a Mast cell, neutrophils, macrophages, and CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, via carbohydrate recognition. we previously reported, that ArtinM is able to induce IL-17 and IL-12p40 production in murine B cells. Here, we further investigated the effects of ArtinM on murine B lymphocytes and Raji and Daudi cells, both human cell lines derived from non-Hodgkin lymphoma. We showed that ArtinM did not induce cell proliferation and low levels of IL-2, IFN-γ, and IL-12 were produced by murine B cells. However, high concentrations of ArtinM induced apoptosis of murine B cells. Then, evaluated the cytotoxic effect of ArtinM lectin against Raji and Daudi cells. we observed the ArtinM ability to reduce cell growth and cell viability, with a more pronounced cytotoxic effect on Raji cells. In addition, we observed the absence of DNA fragmentation, a strong indication of the exclusion of the apoptosis cascade via mitochondrial pathway, and the possible involvement of PTK, kinases of Src family, and CD45 phosphatase activity under Lck molecule in the cytotoxic effect of ArtinM in the Raji and Daudi cells. Thus, the present work demonstrates the limitations of the immunomodulatory effect of ArtinM under murine B cells, and provides insights in the investigative field in the non-Hodgkin lymphoma treatment, via carbohydrate recognition.

### Sample Protocol
4.7 In-solution trypsin digestion The in-solution trypsin digestion was performed according to the protocol described by Pessotti et al. (2020) Briefly, a solution of 6 M guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl) was added to a sample of 100 μg of protein from each secretome to a final concentration of 3 M GuHCl, followed by the addition of 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (final concentration). The mixture was incubated at 65 °C for 60 min. Iodoacetamide (IAA) was then added to a final concentration of 15 mM and the samples were incubated for 60 min at room temperature, in the dark. To quench the excess of IAA, DTT was added to a final concentration of 15 mM. Clean-up of samples was performed by the addition of ice-cold acetone (8 volumes) and methanol (1 volume), followed by the incubation of samples for 3 h at -80° C. After centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 10 min, protein pellets were washed twice with one volume of ice cold methanol and then resolubilized with NaOH solution (final concentration of 2.5 mM), followed by the addition of 50 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.5, to a final volume of 100 L. Trypsin (Proteomics grade; Sigma, USA) was added at 1:100 ratio (enzyme/substrate) and protein samples were incubated at 37 °C for 18 h. Tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007), dried in a SpeedVac and redissolved in 50 L of 0.1% formic acid prior to nanoflow liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC−MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
4.8 Mass spectrometry LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on a Synapt G2 HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters) coupled to the chromatographic system nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters). Digested peptide samples (7 µg) were loaded in a trap column (Acquity UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 Trap Column,100 Å, 5 μm, 300 μm x 25 mm, Waters) at 8 μL/min of loading solution (5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water) for 5 min. Then, the mixture of trapped peptides was eluted in an analytical column (Acquity UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column, 1.8 μm, 300 μm x 150 mm, Waters) with a gradient of 5-35% of phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, phase A: 0.1% formic acid in water), over 60 min at a flow rate of 3 µl/min. MS data were acquired in the data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode UDMSE using ion mobility separation (Distler et al., 2014), in the m/z range of 50-2000 and in resolution mode. Peptide ions were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID), in which collision energies were alternated between low (4 eV) and high energy (ramped from 17 to 60 eV) for precursor ion and fragment ions, respectively, using scan times of 1.0 s. The ESI source was operated in the positive mode with a capillary voltage of 2.7 kV, block temperature of 100°C, and cone voltage of 40 V. The column temperature was set to 55 °C. For lock mass correction, a [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B solution (500 fmol/l in 50% methanol, 0.1 % formic acid; Peptide 2.0) was infused through the reference sprayer at 2 μl/min and sampled every 60 s for external calibration (Pedroso et al., 2017). 4.9 Quantitative Proteomics Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed in Progenesis QI for proteomics (NonLinear Dynamics) as previously reported (Câmara et al., 2020, Simizo et al. 2020). Briefly, the raw files were loaded in the software and the peaks were aligned based on precursor ion retention time of the reference run, which was automatically selected. Default peak picking parameters were applied. The MS data were processed by the Apex3D module using a low energy threshold of 750 counts and high energy threshold of 50 counts. The MS/MS spectra were exported as a .mgf file for protein identification in PEAKS Studio 7.5 (Bioinformatics Solution Inc.). Database search was performed against Homo sapiens sequences from the UniprotKB/Swissprot database (www.uniprot.org; reviewed; 26,577 sequences; downloaded on May 10th, 2021). Search parameters were set as follows: mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.025 Da for fragment ions, up to two missed cleavage sites allowed for trypsin digestion, maximum false discovery rate (FDR)  of 1% at the peptide level, and minimum of 2 peptides per protein. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was selected as fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and asparagine/glutamine deamidation as variable modifications. The identification results were then reimported to Progenesis QI for Proteomics as .pepXml file. Proteins were quantified by the sum of all the unique (non-conflicting) normalized peptide ion abundances corresponding to the protein.

### Publication Abstract
Receptors on the immune cell surface have a variety of glycans that may account for the immunomodulation induced by lectins, which have a carbohydrate recognition domain (CRD) that binds to monosaccharides or oligosaccharides in a specific manner. ArtinM, a D-mannose-binding lectin obtained from Artocarpus heterophyllus, has affinity for the N-glycans core. Immunomodulation by ArtinM toward the Th1 phenotype occurs via its interaction with TLR2/CD14 N-glycans on antigen-presenting cells, as well as recognition of CD3&#x3b3; N-glycans on murine CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. ArtinM exerts a cytotoxic effect on Jurkat human leukemic T-cell line and human myeloid leukemia cell line (NB4). The current study evaluated the effects of ArtinM on murine and human B cells derived from non-Hodgkin&#x2019;s lymphoma. We found that murine B cells are recognized by ArtinM via the CRD, and the ArtinM stimulus did not augment the proliferation rate or production of IL-2. However, murine B cell incubation with ArtinM augmented the rate of apoptosis, and this cytotoxic effect of ArtinM was also seen in human B cell-lines sourced from non-Hodgkin&#x2019;s lymphoma Raji cell line. This cytotoxic effect was inhibited by the phosphatase activity of CD45 on Lck, and the protein kinases of the Src family contribute to cell death triggered by ArtinM.

### Keywords
B cells; artinm; burkitt’s lymphoma; death cells; apoptosis; carbohydrate recognition

### Affiliations
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo
Department of Biochemistry, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Federal University of São Paulo, (EPM/UNIFESP), São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

### Submitter
Alexandre Keiji Tashima

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandre Keiji Tashima
Department of Biochemistry, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Federal University of São Paulo, (EPM/UNIFESP), São Paulo, SP, Brazil.


