### Accession
PXD001217

### Title
Snake venom serine proteinases specificity mapping by proteomic identification of cleavage sites

### Description
Serine proteinases have been shown to play the role of toxins in the venoms of many snakes. They act mainly on components of the coagulation cascade, and fibrinolytic and kallikrein-kinin systems to trigger various pathological effects observed in the envenomation. Despite showing high similarity in terms of primary structure snake venom serine proteinases (SVSPs) show exquisite specificity towards macromolecular substrates. Therefore, the characterization of their peptide bond specificity is important for understanding the active site preference associated with effective proteolysis as well as for the design of peptide substrates and inhibitors. Bothrops jararaca contains various SVSPs among which Bothrops protease A (BPA) is a specific fibrinogenolytic agent and PA-BJ is a platelet-activating enzyme. In this study we used proteome derived peptide libraries in the Proteomic Identification of protease Cleavage Sites (PICS) approach to explore the peptide bond specificity of BPA and PA-BJ in order to determine their individual peptide cleavage sequences. A total of 371 cleavage sites (208 for BPA and 163 for PA-BJ) were detected and both proteinases displayed a clear preference for arginine at the P1 position. Moreover, the analysis of the specificity profiles of BPA and PA-BJ revealed subtle differences in the preferences along P6-P6’, despite a common preference for Pro at P2. Taken together, these results illustrate the subsite specificity of both SVSPs and shed light in the functional differences between these proteinases.

### Sample Protocol
PICS assay Two hundred micrograms of PICS library was used for each SVSP and the enzyme/library ratio was 1:100 (w:w). Incubation was carried out in 50 mM HEPES buffer, containing 5 mM CaCl2, pH 7.5, at 37°C for 16 h. After incubation, 5 uL of 20 mM sulfo-NHS-SS-biotin, prepared in DMSO (Pierce) were added to each reaction and the mixtures were left at room temperature for 2 h. Biotinylated cleavage products were incubated at 4°C for 16 h with 1.2 mL streptavidin-sepharose slurry (GE Healthcare) in 50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.5. After adding the elution buffer (900 uL of 40 mM DTT in 50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.5) incubation was prolonged for 90 min at room temperature.

### Data Protocol
LTQ-Orbitrap XL raw data were converted to mzXML or MGF formats using the MS convert tool (ProteoWizard version 3.0.3535, http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/) for database searching with X!Tandem (CYCLONE release, 2012.10.01; The Global Proteome Machine Organization) through the Trans Proteomic Pipeline platform (Keller et al.;Mol Syst Biol 2005;1:2005.0017). or Mascot (Matrix Science, UK) search engines, respectively. The resulting peak lists were searched against the SwissProt database restricted to the taxa Homo sapiens (35,173 entries; downloaded in December, 17th, 2010) with a decoy database appended in which all entries had their sequences reverse-oriented. Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for parent ions and 0.8 Da for fragment ions. Semi-specific enzyme specificity was selected (i.e. semi-Glu-C), with up to 2 missed cleavages. Thioacylation of peptide N-terminus (+87.998285 Da), iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine (+57.021464Da) and dimethylation of the lysine -amino group (+28.031300 Da) were selected as static modifications whereas oxidation of methionine (+15.994919 Da) was selected as variable modification. Peptide identifications from both search engines were combined and further analyzed with iProphet tool (Shteynberg et al., Mol Cell Proteomics 2011;10(12):M111.007690) with a 1% of False Discovery Rate (FDR) at the peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Snake venom, Proteinase, Pproteomic identification of protease cleavage sites, Serine proteinase, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Functional Proteomics  -

Department of Science and Technology -
Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Jose dos Campos-SP, Brazil
Laboratório Especial de Toxinologia Aplicada Instituto Butantan Av. Vital Brasil 1500, 05503-000, São Paulo, Brazil Tel 55 11 2627 9732 Fax 55 11 3726 1024

### Submitter
Andre Zelanis

### Lab Head
Dr Solange M. T. Serrano
Laboratório Especial de Toxinologia Aplicada Instituto Butantan Av. Vital Brasil 1500, 05503-000, São Paulo, Brazil Tel 55 11 2627 9732 Fax 55 11 3726 1024


