### Accession
PXD001056

### Title
Label free IMS-MSE protein quantification for plant Golgi protein localisation and abundance

### Description
Golgi resident proteins in Arabidopsis thaliana are challenging to quantify since the abundance of this organelle is relatively low within the cell. In this study an organelle fractionation approach, targeting the Golgi apparatus, was combined with a label free quantitative MS, data-independent acquisition (DIA) method employing ion mobility separation known as LC-IMS-MSE, to simultaneously localise proteins to the Golgi apparatus and assess their relative quantity. In total 33 proteins were localised to Golgi apparatus and 102 Golgi localised proteins were quantified.

### Sample Protocol
Analysis was performed in two biological replicas. Homogenate from 60g of callus tissue was cleared by centrifugation at 2.200xg for 30 min. The organelles were concentrated by cushion centrifugation for 2 h at 100.000g, and separated by ultracentrifugation for 4 h at 350.000g in a self-forming iodixanol density gradient. Ten 0.5ml fractions were collected from the upper part of the gradient. The protein samples were TCA precipitated, solubilised in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and 1% RapiGest SF, quanified by BCA assay and reduced, alkylated and digested as recommended by Rapigest manufacturer (Waters corp).

### Data Protocol
For analysis of protein localisation raw data was processed using PLGS 2.5.2. The csv output was used to fill missing values by identification transfer using synapter R-package. Protein quantitation inference was performed in MSnbase R-package. SVM paramaters optimisation and organelle localisation was performed in pRoloc R-package. Absolute protein quantitation was performed by PLGS 2.5.2 by top3 method.

### Publication Abstract
The proteomic composition of the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) Golgi apparatus is currently reasonably well documented; however, little is known about the relative abundances between different proteins within this compartment. Accurate quantitative information of Golgi resident proteins is of great importance: it facilitates a better understanding of the biochemical processes that take place within this organelle, especially those of different polysaccharide synthesis pathways. Golgi resident proteins are challenging to quantify because the abundance of this organelle is relatively low within the cell. In this study, an organelle fractionation approach targeting the Golgi apparatus was combined with a label-free quantitative mass spectrometry (data-independent acquisition method using ion mobility separation known as LC-IMS-MS(E) [or HDMS(E)]) to simultaneously localize proteins to the Golgi apparatus and assess their relative quantity. In total, 102 Golgi-localized proteins were quantified. These data show that organelle fractionation in conjunction with label-free quantitative mass spectrometry is a powerful and relatively simple tool to access protein organelle localization and their relative abundances. The findings presented open a unique view on the organization of the plant Golgi apparatus, leading toward unique hypotheses centered on the biochemical processes of this organelle.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Ims-mse, Lopims, Hdmse, Organelle proteomics, Absolute quantitation, Lopit, Mse, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Cambridge Center For Proteomics
Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, UK

### Submitter
Pavel Shliaha

### Lab Head
Dr Kathryn Susan Lilley
Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, UK


