### Accession
PXD032386

### Title
A reliable approach for pure Yeast Cell Wall protein isolation from Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast cells

### Description
Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast is a fungus presenting a peripheral organelle called the cell wall. The cell wall protects the yeast cell from stress and provides means for communication with the surrounding environment. It has a complex molecular structure, composed of an internal part of cross-linked polysaccharides and an external part of mannoproteins. These latter are very interesting owing to their functional properties, dependent of their molecular features with massive mannosylations. Therefore, the molecular characterization of mannoproteins is a must relying on the optimal isolation and preparation of the cell wall fraction. Multiple methods are well reported for yeast cell wall isolation. The most ap-plied one consists of yeast cell lysis by mechanical disruption. However, applying this classical approach to S288C yeast cells showed a considerable contamination with non-cell wall proteins, mainly comprising mitochondrial proteins. Here-in, we tried to further purify the yeast cell wall preparation by two means: ultracentrifugation and Triton X-100 addition. While the first strategy showed limited outcomes in mitochondrial proteins removal, the second strategy showed optimal results when Triton X-100 was added at 5%, allowing the identification of more mannoproteins and enriching significant-ly their amounts. This promising method could be reliably implemented in lab-scale and industrial processes for “pure” cell wall isolation.

### Sample Protocol
Classical bottom-up proteomics workflow was performed according to eFASP method.36 Briefly, tryptic digestion was carried out overnight at 37 °C in ammonium bicar-bonate buffer pH 8.8 inside Amicon® 10 kDa MWCO filtra-tion devices (Millipore), through the addition of 1 µg of sequencing grade trypsin (V5111, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) to 50 µg of proteins from YCW isolates or ultracen-trifugation fractions. For complete peptide recovery, fil-tration units were subsequently washed twice with 50 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and extracted with ethyl acetate (270989; Sigma-Aldrich). Peptides were dried in Concentrator plus (Concentrator Savant ISS110, EppendorfTM). Peptides concentration was determined after adding 10 µL of 0.1% formic acid using the absorb-ance measurement at 214 nm with a spectrophoto-meter (Denovix® DS-11 + spectrophotometer; Denovix Inc., Wilmington, NC, USA). A nanoflow HPLC instrument (U3000 RSLC ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was used, coupled on-line to a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a nanoelec-trospray ion source. 1 µg of peptides or glycopeptides were loaded onto the preconcentration trap (ThermoFish-er Scientific, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 µm, 300 µm i.d × 5 mm) using partial loop injection, for 5 minutes at a flow rate of 10 µL.min−1 with buffer A (5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and separated on a reversed phase column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 3 µm, 75 mm i.d. × 500 mm) with a linear gradient of 5–50% buffer B (75% ace-tonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nL.min−1 and at 45 °C. The gradient length was 160 minutes. The column was washed with 99% of buffer B for 10 minutes and reconditioned with buffer A. The total time for an LC-MS/MS run was about 180 minutes long.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw files were analyzed with Proteome dis-covererTM 2.2 software (ThermoFisher Scientific) with Sequest search engine against Saccharomyces cerevisiae S288C strain dataset (orf_trans_all) from Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD) (last modified in January 2015, verified with the last released database in April 2021). The mass tolerance for peptides was specified at 10 ppm and 0.01 Da for MS/MS. Variable modifications included were as follows: the search included variable modifica-tions of methionine oxidation and asparagine deami-dation. Proteins were identified with two unique peptides. A label free quantification method was implemented in data processing. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis using Uni-prot Knowledgebase (UniprotKB) and SGD GO Slim map-per tool was performed, specifically in what related to cellular component category permitting to study proteins’ subcellular location. Statistical analysis was performed by one-way ANOVA test using XLSTAT software, with a significance threshold of 0.05. The experiments were performed in three independent biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> yeast is a fungus presenting a peripheral organelle called the cell wall. The cell wall protects the yeast cell from stress and provides means for communication with the surrounding environment. It has a complex molecular structure, composed of an internal part of cross-linked polysaccharides and an external part of mannoproteins. These latter are very interesting owing to their functional properties, dependent on their molecular features with massive mannosylations. Therefore, the molecular characterization of mannoproteins is a must relying on the optimal isolation and preparation of the cell wall fraction. Multiple methods are well reported for yeast cell wall isolation. The most applied one consists of yeast cell lysis by mechanical disruption. However, applying this classical approach to S288C yeast cells showed considerable contamination with noncell wall proteins, mainly comprising mitochondrial proteins. Herein, we tried to further purify the yeast cell wall preparation by two means: ultracentrifugation and Triton X-100 addition. While the first strategy showed limited outcomes in mitochondrial protein removal, the second strategy showed optimal results when Triton X-100 was added at 5%, allowing the identification of more mannoproteins and significantly enriching their amounts. This promising method could be reliably implemented on the lab scale for identification of mannoproteins and molecular characterization and industrial processes for "pure" cell wall isolation.

### Keywords
Cell wall proteins (cwps), Yeast cell wall (ycw), Ultracentrifugation, Mannoproteins (mnps), Mass spectrometry, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Bottom-up proteomics, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
1-University of Lille, CNRS, UAR 3290, MSAP, Miniaturisation pour la Synthèse l'Analyse et la Protéomique, F-59650 Villeneuve d’Ascq, France  2-Shrieking sixties, 1-3 Allée Lavoisier, F-59650 Villeneuve d'Ascq, France.
University of Lille, CNRS, USR 3290, MSAP, Miniaturisation pour la Synthèse, l'Analyse et la Protéomique 

### Submitter
Marie YAMMINE

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Rolando
1-University of Lille, CNRS, UAR 3290, MSAP, Miniaturisation pour la Synthèse l'Analyse et la Protéomique, F-59650 Villeneuve d’Ascq, France  2-Shrieking sixties, 1-3 Allée Lavoisier, F-59650 Villeneuve d'Ascq, France.


