### Accession
PXD001472

### Title
Use of SWATH mass spectrometry for quantitative proteomic investigation of Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 biofilms grown on graphite cloth electrodes

### Description
. In this study we show successful use of SWATH-MS for quantitative proteomic analysis of a microbial electrochemically active biofilm. Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 was grown on carbon cloth electrodes under continuous anodic electrochemical polarizations in a bioelectrochemical system. Using lactate as the electron donor, anodes serving as terminal microbial electron acceptors were operated at three different electrode potentials (+0.71V, +0.21V & -0.19V vs. SHE) and the development of catalytic activity was monitored by measuring the current traces over time. Once maximum current was reached (usually within 21-29 hours) the electrochemical systems were shut off and biofilm proteins were extracted from the electrodes for proteomic assessment.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell protein was extracted from electrode biofilms. The protein was then reduced & alkylated and digested with trypsin. The IDA SWATH samples were analysed using a Triple-Tof5 600 instrument (ABSciex).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data from IDA analyses were searched using ProteinPilot software v4.5 (ABSciex, Forster City CA) .The IDA spectral library, protein sequences and SWATH MS data were loaded into PeakView software v1.2 for processing. The MSstats program in "R" (i386 3.0.2) was used for statistical analysis and Pathway Tools (V17.5)  was used to visualise the statistical data on metabolic pathways.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative proteomics from low biomass, biofilm samples is not well documented. In this study we show successful use of SWATH-MS for quantitative proteomic analysis of a microbial electrochemically active biofilm. Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 was grown on carbon cloth electrodes under continuous anodic electrochemical polarizations in a bioelectrochemical system (BES). Using lactate as the electron donor, anodes serving as terminal microbial electron acceptors were operated at three different electrode potentials (+0.71 V, +0.21 V &amp; -0.19 V vs. SHE) and the development of catalytic activity was monitored by measuring the current traces over time. Once maximum current was reached (usually within 21-29 h) the electrochemical systems were shut off and biofilm proteins were extracted from the electrodes for proteomic assessment. SWATH-MS analysis identified 704 proteins, and quantitative comparison was made of those associated with tricarboxcylic acid (TCA) cycle. Metabolic differences detected between the biofilms suggested a branching of the S. oneidensis TCA cycle when grown at the different electrode potentials. In addition, the higher abundance of enzymes involved in the TCA cycle at higher potential indicates an increase in metabolic activity, which is expected given the assumed higher energy gains. This study demonstrates high numbers of identifications on BES biofilm samples can be achieved in comparison to what is currently reported. This is most likely due to the minimal preparation steps required for SWATH-MS.

### Keywords
Shewanella oneidensis mr-1, Bioelectrochemical system, Proteomics

### Affiliations
The University of Queensland
The University of Queensland, Advanced Water Management Centre, St. Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia  The University of Queensland, School of Chemical and Molecular Biosciences, St. Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia

### Submitter
Christy Grobbler

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Philip L. Bond
The University of Queensland, Advanced Water Management Centre, St. Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia  The University of Queensland, School of Chemical and Molecular Biosciences, St. Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia


