### Accession
PXD001785

### Title
Gel-free based nano LC-MS/MS analysis of green rice leafhopper saliva

### Description
Saliva was collected from diet reared leafhoppers, pooled and concentrated. Samples were coming from Nephotettix cincticeps.

### Sample Protocol
Alkylated proteins were digested with trypsin and lysyl endopeptidase. Peptides were analyzed using nanospray LTQ XL Orbitrap MS. Protein identification from the MS/MS data was performed using using MASCOT software (Matrix Science) to correlate the data against N.cincticeps salivary gland RNA-seq data with 51,788 contigs (DDBJ Bio-Project Database ID PRJDB1562,) available at ftp://ftp.ddbj.nig.ac.jp/ddbj_database/dra/fastq/DRA002/DRA002228/DRZ003173/provisional/).

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the parameters used in Mascot searches were  as follows: carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was  specified as the proteolytic enzyme and one missed cleavage was allowed. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da,  and peptide charge was set at +2, +3, and +4. An automatic decoy database search was performed as part of the search.

### Publication Abstract
The green rice leafhopper, Nephotettix cincticeps, is a vascular bundle feeder that discharges watery and gelling saliva during the feeding process. To understand the potential functions of saliva for successful and safe feeding on host plants, we analyzed the complexity of proteinaceous components in the watery saliva of N. cincticeps. Salivary proteins were collected from a sucrose diet that adult leafhoppers had fed on through a membrane of stretched parafilm. Protein concentrates were separated using SDS-PAGE under reducing and non-reducing conditions. Six proteins were identified by a gas-phase protein sequencer and two proteins were identified using LC-MS/MS analysis with reference to expressed sequence tag (EST) databases of this species. Full -length cDNAs encoding these major proteins were obtained by rapid amplification of cDNA ends-PCR (RACE-PCR) and degenerate PCR. Furthermore, gel-free proteome analysis that was performed to cover the broad range of salivary proteins with reference to the latest RNA-sequencing data from the salivary gland of N. cincticeps, yielded 63 additional protein species. Out of 71 novel proteins identified from the watery saliva, about 60 % of those were enzymes or other functional proteins, including GH5 cellulase, transferrin, carbonic anhydrases, aminopeptidase, regucalcin, and apolipoprotein. The remaining proteins appeared to be unique and species- specific. This is the first study to identify and characterize the proteins in watery saliva of Auchenorrhyncha species, especially sheath-producing, vascular bundle-feeders.

### Keywords
Green rice leafhopper saliva, Gel-free, Nano lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
NARO Institute of Crop Science
University of Tsukuba

### Submitter
xiaojian Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
NARO Institute of Crop Science


