### Accession
PXD019371

### Title
The iron-regulated surface determinant B (IsdB) protein from Staphylococcus aureus acts as a vitronectin receptor

### Description
The iron-regulated surface determinant B (IsdB) protein from Staphylococcus aureus plays a fundamental role as a receptor for the plasma and extracellular matrix protein vitronectin. Vn binding was strictly related to the expression of IsdB by bacterial strains. Adherence to and invasion of epithelial and endothelial cells by S. aureus expressing IsdB was promoted by Vn, which acts as a bridge between IsdB and the Vn host receptors.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins released by lysostaphin digestion of bacterial cells were separated by 12.5% SDS-PAGE and stained with GelCode Blue Stain Reagent. Protein band was excised from the gel using a sterile scalpel and in gel digested with proteomic grade trypsin as protease. Tryptic peptides were mixed with CHCA (alpha-Cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid) and spotted onto the target plate. The spectra were acquired with TOF/TOF 5800 system using TOF/TOF Series Explorer acquisition software. MS spectra were recorded in Reflecton positive mode (settings: Fixed laser intensity 3200 units, Pulse Rate 400 Hz, Total shots/spectrum 1000, Mass range (Da) 1000 - 4000 m/z.). Calibration was performed using Peptide calibration Mix4. MSMS spectra of the most intensive MS signals were recorded in MSMS positive mode (settings: Fixed laser intensity 3500 units, Laser Pulse Rate 1000 Hz, Total shots/ spectrum 5000).

### Data Protocol
MSMS spectra were analyzed with ProteinPilotTM Software 5.0 against the UniProtKB database updated August 2, 2016  using the following Analysis Parameters: (a) Sample Type: Identification, (b) Digestion: Trypsin, (c) Detected Protein Treshold [Unused Protscore (Conf)] ˃ 0.05 (10%), (d) Cysteine Alkylation: Iodoacetamide, (e) ID Focus: Biological modifications, Amino acid substitutions, (f) FDR Analysis: No, (g) Taxonomy: no species.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Extracellular matrix protein, Plasma, Cell invasion, Innate immunity, Adhesion, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Medicine, Unit of Biochemistry, Pavia
Departement of Molecular Medicine, unit of Biochemistry

### Submitter
giampiero pietrocola

### Lab Head
Dr Giampiero Pietrocola
Department of Molecular Medicine, Unit of Biochemistry, Pavia


