### Accession
PXD040201

### Title
Bovine uterine fluid extracellular vesicle proteome on different timepoints of the oestrous cycle

### Description
Healthy cow uterine fluid (UF) was collected from synchronized cattle at day 0, 7 and 16 after ovulation. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) were isolated from UF. UF-EVs from same cattle on different timepoints were subjected to LC-MS/MS. Additionally, one sample before EV purification was subjected to LC-MS/MS (corresponding EV sample is named 1D0).

### Sample Protocol
Proteins of the samples were precipitated using trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and sodium deoxycholate (DOC) protocol. Briefly, precipitation solution (DOC 4 mg/ml in 100% TCA) to 20% (v/v) was added to the samples, incubated overnight at 4oC, and then centrifuged at 17000 g for 15 min at room temperature (RT). Next, the supernatant was discarded and pellet was washed with 100% acetone by incubating for 10 min and then centrifugating for 15 min at 17000 g at RT. The washing process was repeated after discarding the supernatant. Rough protein concentrations were estimated by Micro BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Precipitated proteins were then solubilized in 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h and alkylated with 20 mM chloroacetamide in the dark for 1 h. Pre-digestion was performed with 1:50 (enzyme to protein ratio) Lys-C (Fujifilm Wako Pure Chemical, Osaka, Japan) for 4 h at 25oC. Next, the solution was diluted five times with 100 mM ABC and a further digested with 1:50 dimethylated trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) for overnight at 25oC. Samples were then acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 1.0% and desalted on in-house made C18 material (3M) solid phase extraction tips. Purified peptides were reconstituted in 0.5% TFA for nano-LC/MS/MS. For determining final peptide injection amounts, a twentyfold dilution of the final sample was first pre-analysed with LC-MS/MS, integrating the peptide signal from each sample and then equal amount of each sample was injected for a final run. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed by loading injected peptides to a 0.3 × 5 mm trap-column (5 µm C18 particles; Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). Peptides were eluted to an in-house packed (3 µm C18 particles; Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) analytical 50 cm × 75 µm emitter-column (New Objective, Littleton, MA, USA) and separated with an A to B 8-40% 1 h gradient (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid, buffer B: 80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid). Separated peptides were on-line electrosprayed to a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) mass spectrometer via a nano-electrospray source (positive mode, spray voltage of 2.5 kV). The MS was operated with a top-12 data-dependent acquisition strategy. Briefly, one 350-1,400 m/z full MS scan at a resolution setting of R = 60,000 at 200 m/z was followed by higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation (normalized collision energy of 26) of the 12 most intense ions (z: +2 to +6) at R = 30,000. MS and MS/MS ion target values were 3,000,000 and 100,000 ions with 50 and 45 ms injection times, respectively. MS/MS isolation was carried out with 1.2 m/z isolation windows. Dynamic exclusion was limited to 20 s.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software package (version 2.0.3.0). The variable modifications were set for methionine oxidation, and protein N-terminal acetylation, while cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. Search was performed against UniProt (www.uniprot.org) Bos Taurus proteome database (downloaded: 2022 June) using the tryptic digestion rule (cleavages after lysine and arginine without proline restriction). Only identifications with at least 1 peptide ≥ 7 amino acids long (with up to 2 missed cleavages) were accepted and transfer of identifications between runs based on accurate mass and retention time was enabled. Label-free normalization with MaxQuant LFQ algorithm was also applied. LFQ ratio count (i.e. number of quantified peptides for reporting a protein intensity) was set to 2. Peptide-spectrum match and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% using a target-decoy approach. All other parameters were used in their default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Uterine environment is tightly and finely regulated via various signaling pathways mediated through endocrine, exocrine, autocrine, juxtacrine, and paracrine mechanisms. In utero signaling processes are paramount for normal and abnormal physiology which involves cell to cell, cells to gametes, cells to embryo, and even interkingdom communications due to presence of uterine microbiota. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) in the uterine fluid (UF) and their cargo components are known to be mediators of in utero signaling and communications. Interestingly, the changes in UF-EV proteome during the bovine estrous cycle and the effects of these differentially enriched proteins on embryo development are yet to be fully discovered. In this study, shotgun quantitative proteomics-based mass spectrometry was employed to compare UF-EV proteomes at day 0, 7, and 16 of the estrous cycle to understand the estrous cycle-dependent dynamics. Furthermore, different phase UF-EVs were supplemented in embryo cultures to evaluate their impact on embryo development. One hundred fifty-nine UF-EV proteins were differentially enriched at different time points indicating the UF-EV proteome is cycle-dependent. Overall, many identified pathways are important for normal uterine functions, early embryo development, and its nutritional needs, such as antioxidant activity, cell morphology and cycle, cellular homeostasis, cell adhesion, and carbohydrate metabolic process. Furthermore, the luteal phase UF-EVs supplementation increased in&#xa0;vitro blastocyst rates from 25.0 &#xb1; 5.9% to 41.0 &#xb1; 4.0% (p &#x2264; 0.05). Our findings highlight the importance of bovine UF-EV in uterine communications throughout the estrous cycle. Interestingly, comparison of hormone-synchronized EV proteomes to natural cycle UF-EVs indicated shift of signaling. Finally, UF-EVs can be used to improve embryo production in&#xa0;vitro.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles, Lc-ms/ms, Oestrous cycle timepoints

### Affiliations
Estonian University of Life Sciences
Professor, Estonian University of Life Sciences, Institute of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Sciences, Chair of Veterinary biomedicine and Food hygiene, Estonia

### Submitter
Johanna Piibor

### Lab Head
Professor Alireza Fazeli
Professor, Estonian University of Life Sciences, Institute of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Sciences, Chair of Veterinary biomedicine and Food hygiene, Estonia


