### Accession
PXD023471

### Title
Loss of hepatic miR-33 improves metabolic homeostasis and liver function without altering body weight or atherosclerosis

### Description
miR-33 is an intronic microRNA within the gene encoding the SREBP2 transcription factor. Like its host gene, miR-33 has been shown to be an important regulator of lipid metabolism. Inhibition of miR-33 has been shown to promote cholesterol efflux in macrophages by targeting the cholesterol transporter ABCA1, thus reducing atherosclerotic plaque burden. Inhibition of miR-33 has also been shown to improve high-density lipoprotein (HDL) biogenesis in the liver and increase circulating HDL-C levels in both rodents and nonhuman primates. However, evaluating the extent to which these changes in HDL metabolism contribute to atherogenesis has been hindered by the obesity and metabolic dysfunction observed in whole-body miR-33–knockout mice. To determine the impact of hepatic miR-33 deficiency on obesity, metabolic function, and atherosclerosis, we have generated a conditional knockout mouse model that lacks miR-33 only in the liver. Characterization of this model demonstrates that loss of miR-33 in the liver does not lead to increased body weight or adiposity. Hepatic miR-33 deficiency actually improves regulation of glucose homeostasis and impedes the development of fibrosis and inflammation. We further demonstrate that hepatic miR-33 deficiency increases circulating HDL-C levels and reverse cholesterol transport capacity in mice fed a chow diet, but these changes are not sufficient to reduce atherosclerotic plaque size under hyperlipidemic conditions. By elucidating the role of miR-33 in the liver and the impact of hepatic miR-33 deficiency on obesity and atherosclerosis, this work will help inform ongoing efforts to develop novel targeted therapies against cardiometabolic diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples were denatured by the addition of a final concentration of 6 M urea and 2 M thiourea and reduced by the addition of a final concentration of 10 mM DTT followed by incubation at 37 °C for 1 h and 240 rpm. The samples were then cooled down to room temperature before being alkylated by the addition of a final concentration of 50 mM iodoacetamide followed by incubation in the dark for 30 min. Prechilled (−20 °C) acetone (10× volume) was used to precipitate the samples overnight at −20 °C. Samples were centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 40 min at 4 °C and the supernatant subsequently discarded. Protein pellets were dried using a Speed Vac (Savant SPD131DDA; Thermo Scientific), resus- Q: 14 pended in 0.1 M TEAB buffer, pH 8.0, containing MS-grade Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega; 1:25 enzyme:protein), and digested overnight at 37 °C and 240 rpm.Digestion was stopped by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptide samples were then purified by solid-phase extraction with C18 cartridges (Bravo AssayMAP; Agilent Technologies).

### Data Protocol
The dried peptide samples were reconstituted with 0.05% TFA in 2% ACN and separated by a nanoflow LC system (Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano). Samples were injected onto a Nano-Trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 Trap, 5 mm × 300 μm, 5 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 25 μL/min for 3 min using 0.1% FA in H2O. The following nano-LC gradient was then run at 0.25 μL/min to separate the peptides: 0 to 10 min, 4 to 10% B; 10 to 75 min, 10 to 30% B; 75 to 80 min, 30 to 40% B; 80 to 85 min, 40 to 99% B; 85 to 89.8 min, 99% B; 89.8 to 90 min, 99 to 4% B; 90 to 120 min, 4% B; where A is 0.1% FA in H2O and B is 80% ACN, 0.1% FA in H2O. The nano column (EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm × 50 cm), set at 40 °C, was connected to an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Spectra were collected from an Orbitrap mass analyzer (Q Exactive HF Lumos Tribrid; Thermo Scientific) using full MS mode [resolution of 120,000 at 400 mass-to-charge ratio (m/z)] over the m/z range of 375 to 1,500. Data-dependent MS2 scan was performed using Quadrupole isolation in Top 15 mode using CID activation and ion-trap detection in each full MS scan with Q: 15 dynamic exclusion enabled.

### Publication Abstract
miR-33 is an intronic microRNA within the gene encoding the SREBP2 transcription factor. Like its host gene, miR-33 has been shown to be an important regulator of lipid metabolism. Inhibition of miR-33 has been shown to promote cholesterol efflux in macrophages by targeting the cholesterol transporter ABCA1, thus reducing atherosclerotic plaque burden. Inhibition of miR-33 has also been shown to improve high-density lipoprotein (HDL) biogenesis in the liver and increase circulating HDL-C levels in both rodents and nonhuman primates. However, evaluating the extent to which these changes in HDL metabolism contribute to atherogenesis has been hindered by the obesity and metabolic dysfunction observed in whole-body miR-33-knockout mice. To determine the impact of hepatic miR-33 deficiency on obesity, metabolic function, and atherosclerosis, we have generated a conditional knockout mouse model that lacks miR-33 only in the liver. Characterization of this model demonstrates that loss of miR-33 in the liver does not lead to increased body weight or adiposity. Hepatic miR-33 deficiency actually improves regulation of glucose homeostasis and impedes the development of fibrosis and inflammation. We further demonstrate that hepatic miR-33 deficiency increases circulating HDL-C levels and reverse cholesterol transport capacity in mice fed a chow diet, but these changes are not sufficient to reduce atherosclerotic plaque size under hyperlipidemic conditions. By elucidating the role of miR-33 in the liver and the impact of hepatic miR-33 deficiency on obesity and atherosclerosis, this work will help inform ongoing efforts to develop novel targeted therapies against cardiometabolic diseases.

### Keywords
Mouse plasma

### Affiliations
King's British Hear Foundation Centre, King's College London
King's College London

### Submitter
Sean Burnap

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Mayr
King's British Hear Foundation Centre, King's College London


