### Accession
PXD016241

### Title
Identifying nucleic acid-associated proteins in Mycobacterium smegmatis by mass spectrometry-based proteomics

### Description
Background: The intracellular pathogen Mycobacterium tuberculosis is known to encounter several stress conditions during infection, including low pH, hypoxia, starvation and oxidative and nitrosative stress. Mycobacterial adaptation to stress conditions is, in part, mediated by several nucleic acid-associated proteins. In this study, we sought to establish an affinity purification-mass spectrometry (AP-MS) approach that would enable the collective identification of nucleic acid-associated proteins in mycobacteria. We hypothesized that targeting the RNA polymerase complex through affinity purification would allow for the identification of RNA- and DNA-associated proteins that not only maintain the bacterial chromosome but also enable transcription and translation. Results: AP-MS analysis of the RNA polymerase β-subunit cross-linked to nucleic acids identified 275 putative nucleic acid-associated proteins in the model organism Mycobacterium smegmatis under standard culturing conditions. The AP-MS approach successfully identified proteins that are known to make up the RNA polymerase complex, as well as several other known RNA polymerase complex-associated proteins such as a DNA polymerase, sigma factors, transcriptional regulators, and helicases. Gene ontology enrichment analysis of the identified proteins revealed that this approach selected for proteins with GO terms associated with nucleic acids and cellular metabolism. Importantly, we identified several proteins of unknown function not previously known to be associated with nucleic acids. Validation of several candidate nucleic acid-associated proteins demonstrated for the first time DNA association of ectopically expressed MSMEG_1060, MSMEG_2695 and MSMEG_4306 through affinity purification.  Conclusions: Effective identification of nucleic acid-associated proteins, which make up the RNA polymerase complex as well as other DNA- and RNA-associated proteins, was facilitated by affinity purification of the RNA polymerase β-subunit in M. smegmatis. The successful identification of several transcriptional regulators suggest that our approach could be sensitive enough to investigate the nucleic acid-associated proteins that maintain cellular functions and mediate transcriptional and translational change in response to environmental stress.

### Sample Protocol
M. smegmatis cultures (2 x 50ml) grown to an OD600 of 0.4 were treated with formaldehyde (1% final concentration) for 10 minutes at 37°C with shaking. Cross-linking was quenched using glycine (final concentration 125 mM) and cells were washed using Tris-buffered saline (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl) prior to storage at -80°C. Individual cell pellets were resuspended in 4 ml immunoprecipitation buffer I (IP buffer I) (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 2% TritonX-100) supplemented with protease inhibitors (Roche cOmpleteTM mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail). Cells were subsequently sonicated (QSonica Q700 probe sonicator) four times for 20 seconds at an amplitude of 30 with 2 minute intervals on ice to lyse cells. Mycobacterial DNA was further fragmented through the addition of micrococcal nuclease (100 U, Roche), CaCl2 (9 mM) and RNAseA (0.002 mg/ml) followed by incubation at 4°C for 1 hour with rotation. DNA fragmentation was stopped with the addition of EDTA (10 mM) and insoluble cellular debris was removed by centrifugation. Cell lysates were pooled prior to incubation of 2 ml of cell lysate with either 50 µl of Protein G Dynabeads or 5 µg anti-RNAP β-subunit antibody or 10 µg anti-MYH7 antibody immobilized on 50 µl Protein G Dynabeads, respectively. Immunoprecipitations were incubated with an excess cell lysate to fully saturate antibody binding during pull-downs. Nucleoprotein complexes were immunoprecipitated for 2 hours at 4°C, with rotation. Beads were washed twice with IP buffer II (50 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% Sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS) supplemented with protease inhibitors, twice with IP buffer II plus 500 mM NaCl, twice with IP buffer II plus 750 mM NaCl, and twice with wash buffer IV (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 250 mM LiCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% IGEPAL® CA-630, 0.5% Sodium deoxycholate). Immunoprecipitated nucleoprotein complexes were subjected to on-bead tryptic digestion by incubation of beads with 200 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 2 µg sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega) for 18 hours at 37°C with shaking at 700 rpm. Eluted peptides were desalted before mass spectrometry analysis using in-house packed STAGE-tips. Samples were concentrated prior to being loaded onto methanol-activated and 2% acetonitrile equilibrated EmporeTM Octadecyl C18 STAGE-tips. STAGE-tips were washed with 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid prior to elution of peptides using a solution of 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Eluted samples were dried using a Concentratorplus (Eppendorf) before being resuspended in loading solvent (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). Immunoprecipitation experiments were performed in biological triplicate experiments. Liquid chromatography was performed using a Dionex-UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a 2 cm x 100 μm C18 trap column and a custom 35 cm x 75 μm C18 analytical column (Luna C18, 5 μm, Phenomenex). Peptide samples were loaded onto the trap column using 100% Solvent A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 5 μl/min using a temperature controlled autosampler set at 7°C. The trap column was washed for 10 minutes before elution at 350 nL/min using the following gradient: 2% - 10% solvent B (99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid solution) over 5 minutes, 10% - 25% solvent B over 45 minutes, 25% - 45% solvent B over 15 minutes, using ChromeleonTM 6.80 non-linear gradient 6. The column was subsequently washed for 10 minutes with 80% solvent B solution followed by equilibration using solvent A. Chromatography was performed at 50°C and the outflow was delivered to the mass spectrometer through a stainless steel nano-bore emitter. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on the Orbitrap FusionTM TribridTM Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and data was collected in positive mode with a spray voltage set to 2kV and ion transfer capillary set to 275°C. Spectra was internally calibrated using polysiloxane ions at m/z = 445.12003 and 371.10024. For MS1 scan analysis, the Orbitrap detector was set to a resolution of R = 120 000 over a scan range of 350-1650 with the AGC target at 3E5 with a maximum injection time of 40 ms. Data was acquired in profile mode. MS2 acquisition was performed using monoisotopic precursor selection for ion charges between +2 and +6 with the error tolerance set to +/- 10 ppm and the exclusion of precursor ions from repeat fragmentation for 30 seconds. Precursor ions were selected for fragmentation using the quadrupole mass analyser and fragmented using an HCD energy of 32.5%. Fragment ions were detected within the ion trap mass analyser using a rapid scan rate. The AGC target was set at 1E4 with a maximum injection time of 45 ms. Data was acquired in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.5.0.25 was used to analyse mass spectrometry data using the M. smegmatis mc2 155 database (UP000000757) containing 8794 predicted protein entries obtained from UniProt, October 2014 [41]. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Four variable modifications (oxidized methionine, the addition of glycine on lysine, serine and threonine residues, the addition of methylol and glycine on any histidine, asparagine, glutamine, tryptophan and tyrosine as well as the possible di-methylation of lysine and arginine residues) were included in our automated database search using MaxQuant. Two missed tryptic cleavages were allowed, and proteins were identified with a minimum of 1 unique peptide detected per protein. The protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) set at less than 0.01. A label-free approach was followed during MaxQuant data analysis and the “match between runs” algorithm was selected to detect peptides which were not selected for MS/MS analysis in other experiments. LFQ intensity data was used for statistical analyses using Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna polymerase, Nucleic acid-associated proteins, Mycobacterium, Affinity-purification

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Stellenbosch University, South Africa
Stellenbosch Univeristy

### Submitter
Nastassja Kriel

### Lab Head
Dr Robin Mark Warren
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Stellenbosch University, South Africa


