### Accession
PXD036197

### Title
IQCN disruption causes fertilization failure and male infertility due to manchette assembly defect

### Description
Total fertilization failure (TFF) is an important cause of infertility; however, the genetic basis of TFF caused by male factors remain to be clarified. In this study, whole-exome sequencing was firstly used to screen for genetic causes of TFF after intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), and homozygous variants in the novel gene IQ motif containing N (IQCN) were identified in two affected individuals with abnormal acrosome structure. Then, Iqcn knockout mice were generated by CRISPR-Cas9 technology and showed that the knockout male mice resembled TFF phenotype with oocyte activation failure. Additionally, we found that IQCN regulates the microtubule nucleation during manchette assembly via calmodulin and related calmodulin-binding proteins, which resulted in head deformity with aberrant oocyte activation factor PLCζ. Fortunately, ICSI with assisted oocyte activation can overcome IQCN-associate male infertility. Thus, our study firstly identifies the function of IQCN, highlights the relationship between the manchette assembly and fertilization, and provides a genetic marker and a therapeutic option for male-source TFF.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, 10 μg of calmodulin 1/2/3 antibody (Abcam, ab2860 [immunogen: 1–200 amino acids in mouse IQCN], China) was cross-linked to 30 μL of Protein A/G-coated magnetic beads from the PierceTM Crosslink Magnetic IP kit (Thermo Fisher, 88805) using standard methods. Two 8-week-old WT and Iqcn-/- mice testes were homogenized in 800 μL of lysis buffer and protease inhibitor PMSF (Beyotime, ST506). The lysate particles were removed by centrifugation at 20000 g for 15 min at 4°C. The lysate was then cleared by incubation with 15 μL prepared beads. The lysate and beads were incubated at 4°C overnight on an orbital shaker. After elution and neutralization, the eluents were used for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were searched against the Mus_musculus_10090_SP_20210721.fasta (17089 entries) using the MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0) and its implemented Andromeda search engine to obtain protein identifications and their respective label-free quantification (LFQ) values using standard parameters. The ProteinGroup.txt file was analyzed by the following steps: (1) contaminant proteins, reverse sequences, and proteins identified “only by site” were filtered out; and (2) the LFQ intensity was normalized by the median of commonly identified proteins in each sample and the missing values were imputed with the minimum value. Differentially expressed proteins were selected with the fold change of normalized mean LFQ in WT and Iqcn-/- group, which were more than 1.5-fold enrichment. The enrichment analysis was performed using the Metascape for GO databases against the mouse reference proteome.

### Publication Abstract
Total fertilization failure (TFF) is an important cause of infertility; however, the genetic basis of TFF caused by male factors remains to be clarified. In this study, whole-exome sequencing was firstly used to screen for genetic causes of TFF after intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), and homozygous variants in the novel gene IQ motif-containing N (IQCN) were identified in two affected individuals with abnormal acrosome structures. Then, Iqcn-knockout mice were generated by CRISPR-Cas9 technology and showed that the knockout male mice resembled the human phenotypes. Additionally, we found that IQCN regulates microtubule nucleation during manchette assembly via calmodulin and related calmodulin-binding proteins, which resulted in head deformity with aberrant oocyte activation factor PLC&#x3b6;. Fortunately, ICSI with assisted oocyte activation can overcome IQCN-associate TFF and male infertility. Thus, our study firstly identified the function of IQCN, highlights the relationship between the manchette assembly and fertilization, and provides a genetic marker and a therapeutic option for male-source TFF.

### Keywords
Iqcn; manchette; fertilization failure

### Affiliations
School of Basic Medical Science, Central South University

### Submitter
Jing Dai

### Lab Head
Dr Ge Lin
School of Basic Medical Science, Central South University


