### Accession
PXD012951

### Title
NET induced by different stimuli: a comparative proteomic analysis

### Description
Neutrophil extracellular traps (NET) formation is part of the neutrophil response to infections, but excessive or inappropriate NETosis may trigger the production of autoantibodies and cause organ damage in autoimmune disorders. Spontaneously netting neutrophils are not frequent and induction of NET in vitro by selected stimuli is necessary to investigate their structure. In the present work, the protein composition and post-translational modifications of NET produced under different stimuli is studied by means of proteomic analysis. Neutrophils from healthy donors were stimulated by PMA, A23187, E.Coli LPS or untreated; after 3 hours cells were washed, treated with DNase and supernatants collected for mass spectrometry. Data were analyzed by unsupervised hierarchical clustering analyses. We identified proteins contained in NETs of any source or exclusive of one stimulus: LPS-induced and spontaneous NET diverge in protein composition, while PMA- and A23187-induced NET appear more similar. Among the post-translational modifications we examined, methionine sulfoxidation is frequent especially in PMA- and LPS-induced NETs. Myeloperoxidase is the protein more extensively modified. Thus, proteomic analysis indicates that NETs induced by different stimuli are heterogeneous in terms of both protein composition and post-translational modifications, suggesting that NET induced in different conditions may have different biological effects.

### Sample Protocol
The supernatant containing NET proteins was precipitated with acetone and NET pellets were re-suspended in 25 µl of lysis buffer (6M GdmCl, 10mM TCEP, 40mM CAA, 100mM Tris pH8.5). The samples were reduced, alkylated and lastly digested in a single step and then loaded into StageTip.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software, version 1.5.5.30, was used to process the raw data, setting a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for the identification of proteins, peptides and PSM (peptide-spectrum match), moreover a minimum length of 6 amino acids for peptide identification was required. Andromeda engine, incorporated into MaxQuant software, was used to search MS/MS spectra against Uniprot human database (release UP000005640_9606 February 2016).Two different elaborations were made to identify the PTMs in order to limit the false positives. In the first processing, variable modifications were Acetylation (Protein N-Term), Oxidation (M), Deamidation (NQR) and Carbamido-methylation (C). Finally, in order to overcome the common limitations of search engine based PTM analysis, we used the unbiased PTM Dependent Peptide (DP) search option, taking advantage of high mass accuracy data collected in high resolution mode with an internal calibration (MS1 error < 1 ppm).

### Publication Abstract
Neutrophil extracellular traps (NET) formation is part of the neutrophil response to infections, but excessive or inappropriate NETosis may trigger the production of autoantibodies and cause organ damage in autoimmune disorders. Spontaneously netting neutrophils are not frequent and induction of NET in vitro by selected stimuli is necessary to investigate their structure. In the present work, the protein composition and post-translational modifications of NET produced under different stimuli have been studied by means of proteomic analysis. Neutrophils from healthy donors were stimulated by PMA, A23187, Escherichia coli LPS or untreated; after three hours, cells were washed, treated with DNase and supernatants collected for mass spectrometry. Data were analyzed by unsupervised hierarchical clustering analyses. We identified proteins contained in NETs of any source or exclusive of one stimulus: LPS-induced and spontaneous NET diverge in protein composition, while PMA- and A23187-induced NET appear more similar. Among the post-translational modifications we examined, methionine sulfoxidation is frequent especially in PMA- and LPS-induced NETs. Myeloperoxidase is the protein more extensively modified. Thus, proteomic analysis indicates that NETs induced by different stimuli are heterogeneous in terms of both protein composition and post-translational modifications, suggesting that NET induced in different conditions may have different biological effects.

### Keywords
Neutrophil extracellular traps; proteomics; post-translational modifications

### Affiliations
Gaslini Children's Hospital
Ist. G. Gaslini

### Submitter
Andrea Petretto

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
Ist. G. Gaslini


