### Accession
PXD035216

### Title
LC-MS/MS of extracellular vesicles from murine osteosarcoma cell line K7 and K7M2

### Description
Extracellular vesicles have been shown to be highly enriched in proteins with various functions, including organotropic metastasis. To identify possible protein cargos involved in regulating mestastatic potential of osteosarcoma cell line, we performed quantitative mass spectrometry analysis of EVs from highly metastatic K7M2 cells and poorly metastatic parental K7 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Aliquots of lysates were mixed with 200 ul of 8M urea in Nanosep Centrifugal Devices (PALL). The device was centrifuged at 14,000g at 20℃ for 20 min. All following centrifugation steps were performed applying the same conditions allowing maximal concentration. The concentrate was diluted with 200 ul of 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 and the device was centrifuged. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 2 h at 56 °C. Subsequently, the samples were incubated in 5 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark to block reduced cysteine residues followed by centrifugation. The resulting concentrate was diluted with 200 ul 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 and concentrated again. This step was repeated 2 times, and the concentrate was subjected to proteolytic digestion overnight at 37 °C. The digests were collected by centrifugation.The lyophilized peptide fractions were re-suspended in ddH2O containing 0.1% formic acid, and 2ul aliquots of which was loaded into a nanoViper C18 (3 μm, 100 Å) trap column. The online Chromatography seperation was performed on the Easy nLC 1200 system (ThermoFisher). The trapping, desalting procedure were carried out with a volumn of 20 μL 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid). Then, an elution gradient of 8-38% solvent B(80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min (0–40 min, 5–38% B; 40–42 min, 38–100% B; 42–50 min, 100% B) in 1200 min was used on an analytical column (50μm×15 cm C18-3 μm 100 Å). DDA (data-dependent acquisition) mass spectrum techniques were used to acquire tandem MS data on a ThermoFisher Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, USA) fitted with a Nano Flex ion source. Data was acquired using an ion spray voltage of 1.9 kV, and an interface heater temperature of 275℃. The MS was operated with FULL-MS scans. For DDA, survey scans were acquired in 250 ms and up to 20 product ion scans (50 ms) were collected. Only spectra with a charge state of 2-4 were seleceted for fragmentaion by higher-energy collision energy. Dynamic exclusion was set for 25.

### Data Protocol
The obtained data were analyzed for protein identification and quantification using Proteome Discoverer. The local false discovery rate was 1.0% after searching against the Mus musculus sequence with a maximum of two missed cleavages and one missed terminus cleavage. The following settings were selected: oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term), deamidation (NQ), pyro-glu from E, pyro-glu from Q for variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) for fixed modifications. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Osteosarcoma, Extracellular vesicles, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Cancer Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
Sun yat-sen university cancer center

### Submitter
Chuangzhong Deng

### Lab Head
Dr Chuangzhong Deng
Cancer Hospital of Sun Yat-sen


