### Accession
PXD025764

### Title
The impact of Zika virus exposure on the placental proteomic profile

### Description
Zika virus (ZIKV) infection has caused severe unexpected clinical outcomes in neonates and adults during the recent outbreak in Latin America, particularly in Brazil. Congenital malformations associated with ZIKV have been frequently reported; nevertheless, the mechanism of vertical transmission and the involvement of placental cells remains unclear. In this study, we applied quantitative proteomics analysis in a floating explant model of chorionic villi of human placental tissues incubated with ZIKV and with ZIKV pre-adsorbed with anti-ZIKV envelope protein. The regulation of specific proteins was measured using immunofluorescence and immunoperoxidase assays. Altered levels of proteins were involved in cell proliferation, apoptosis, inflammatory processes, and the integrin-cytoskeleton complex. Antibody-opsonized ZIKV particles differentially modulated the pattern of protein expression in placental cells; this phenomenon may play a pivotal role in determining the course of infection and the role of mixed infections. These data fill gaps in our understanding of ZIKV in the placenta and help identify infection control targets.

### Sample Protocol
At term, human placentas (n = 6) were collected from women with healthy babies and without pregnancy complications from elective cesarean sections at 38–40 gestation weeks. The samples were processed under aseptic conditions within 30 minutes of delivery. The fetal side from cotyledons was removed at random and placed in cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS 0.1 M pH 7.4) containing 1% penicillin/ streptomycin, 0.5% gentamicin, 0.25% amphotericin B, and 25 mM glucose, and cultivated according to a floating explant model. Briefly, the terminal villi were carefully separated from cotyledons in individual explants, weighed, and equally distributed at 10 mg per well in culture plates containing supplemented DMEM/F12 (1% antibiotics, 10% FBS, 0.01% insulin, 520 μg/mL calcium lactate, 56 μg/mL sodium pyruvate, and 1% nucleosides). Gelatin (2% in sterile distilled water) was used to coat the plate surfaces for proper adhesion of explants. Cultures were maintained at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 for 24 hours. Placental explants were washed with DMEM/F12 supplemented with 1% FBS (serum-restricted conditions) and infected with an MOI = 10, with ZIKVBR (IEC strain, kindly provided by the Evandro Chagas Institute in Belém - Pará) in the presence and absence of the mouse Flavivirus-specific IgG 4G2 (hybridoma D1-4G2-4-15, ATCC HB-112, Manassas, Virginia, USA) diluted 1:200, pre-incubated with viral inoculum for 2 hours at 37 °C. Uninfected explants were used as the mock-infected group. Antibody-free virus inocula were maintained at 37 °C  for 2 h before infections. Assays were performed in sextuplicate and repeated at least twice on different occasions. Samples of clarified supernatants and total cells were harvested at 6, 12, 24, and 48 h post-infection for viral quantification using reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and immunofluorescence analyses. We used 6-h cultured explants for proteomic analysis. Placental explants were exposed to ZIKVBR in the presence or absence of a mouse Flavivirus-specific IgG for 6 hours, as described above. Uninfected explants were used as the control group. After mechanical lysis, villous cells were resuspended in denaturing buffer containing 8 M urea, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, and protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Extracted proteins were reduced at a final concentration of 10 mM DTT for 30 min at room temperature, following alkylation at a final concentration of 40 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. Protein quantification was performed using a QubitTM fluorometric quantitation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Subsequently, the initial urea concentration was diluted 10 times, and protein digestion was completed with trypsin 2% (w/w) overnight at room temperature. Samples were acidified to 1% formic acid and centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 10 min. Supernatants were desalted on a POROS Oligo R3 reversed-phase microcolumn. Each sample was suspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA), and peptides were loaded on an in-house packed pre-column (2 cm × 100 μm inner diameter 5 μm) using an Easy-nanoLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated by a gradient from 1 to 7% solvent B in 5 min, 7–22% for 110 min, 22–40% B for 8 min, 40–95% B for 5 min, and 8 min at 100% B (A = 0.1% FA; B = 90% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow of 250 nL/min on analytical Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ column (17 cm × 100 μm, 3 μm inner diameter). The Easy-nanoLC system was connected online to an Orbitrap FusionTM LumosTM mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in positive ion mode and using data-dependent acquisition. Data acquisition of fragmented peptides was analyzed both in Orbitrap and in Iontrap in independent injections. The Orbitrap acquired the full mass spectrometry (MS) scan with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 4 × 105 ions and a maximum fill time of 50 ms. Each MS scan was acquired at 120,000 resolution, scan range of 400–1200 m/z with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm and isolation window of 0.7. For the Orbitrap acquisition, the most abundant peptide ions were subjected to higher energy collisional activation dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (NCE = 39) with a maximum injection time of 150 ms at 30,000 resolution. For the Iontrap acquisition, the most abundant peptide ions were subjected to HCD fragmentation (NCE = 35) with a maximum injection time of 200 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from large-scale mass spectrometry-based proteomic experiments were processed using Proteome Discoverer v2.4.1.15 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against the Uniprot-SwissProt human reference database (July 2020, 20,304 sequences) using the embedded Sequest HT. Database searches were performed using the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, production mass tolerance of 0.05, and 0.6 Da for Orbitrap and Iontrap acquisitions, respectively, allowing two missed cleavages for trypsin. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) was set as fixed, and methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) and protein N-terminus acetylation (+42.011 Da) were set as dynamic modifications. The Percolator algorithm was used to select peptides with FDR < 1% and a q-value up to 0.01. Quantification was performed based on precursor ion intensity and normalized to total peptide amount. Differentially regulated proteins were determined by background-based t-test with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction (Navarro et al., 2014). Adjusted p-value < 0.05 were used as a cut-off for proteins identified with two or more peptides. The term “upregulated” describes proteins and peptides more abundant in a given comparison, while “downregulated” refers to those less abundant ones.

### Publication Abstract
Zika virus (ZIKV) infection has caused severe unexpected clinical outcomes in neonates and adults during the recent outbreak in Latin America, particularly in Brazil. Congenital malformations associated with ZIKV have been frequently reported; nevertheless, the mechanism of vertical transmission and the involvement of placental cells remains unclear. In this study, we applied quantitative proteomics analysis in a floating explant model of chorionic villi of human placental tissues incubated with ZIKV and with ZIKV pre-adsorbed with anti-ZIKV envelope protein. Proteomic data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD025764. Altered levels of proteins were involved in cell proliferation, apoptosis, inflammatory processes, and the integrin-cytoskeleton complex. Antibody-opsonized ZIKV particles differentially modulated the pattern of protein expression in placental cells; this phenomenon may play a pivotal role in determining the course of infection and the role of mixed infections. The expression of specific proteins was also evaluated by immunoperoxidase assays. These data fill gaps in our understanding of early events after ZIKV placental exposure and help identify infection control targets.

### Keywords
Placenta, Cell death, Proteomics, Antibody opsonization, Zika virus

### Affiliations
University of Sao Paulo
Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of São Paulo, 05508-000 São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

### Submitter
Giuseppe Palmisano

### Lab Head
Dr Estela M. A. F. Bevilacqua
Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of São Paulo, 05508-000 São Paulo, SP, Brazil.


