### Accession
PXD011925

### Title
A proteomics-based interaction screen links DYRK1A to RNF169 and to the DNA damage response

### Description
DYRK1A is a protein kinase whose dysregulation is linked to disease in humans. On the one side, its overexpression in trisomy 21 has been linked to certain Down syndrome pathological traits, while inactivating mutations in just one allele that hinders its function are responsible for a rare clinical syndrome. Moreover, altered expression of this kinase could be at the basis of other human pathologies including cancer and diabetes. Although, a few DYRK1A substrates have been described there is still a poor knowledge on both upstream regulators and downstream targets that could explain DYRK1A cellular activities. Where, we carried out a proteomics screen using antibody-based affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry to identify cellular proteins that bind directly or indirectly to endogenous DYRK1A. We show that the use of a cell line not expressing DYRK1A, generated by CRISPR/Cas9 technology, was needed to discriminate between true positives and non-specific interactors. Most of the proteins found in the screen are novel DYRK1A interactor candidates, which are linked to a variety of cellular functions. The in-depth characterization of the functional interaction with one of them, the E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF169, has revealed a role forfor the link of DYRK1A inwith the DNA damage response. We found that RNF169 is a DYRK1A substrate and identified several phosphositesof its phosphorylation sites. In particular, one of the sites appears to contribute to the ability of RNF169 to displaced 53BP1 from sites of DNA damage at chromatin. Additionally, depletion of DYRK1A increases cell sensitivity to DNA damage. Therefore, our unbiased proteomic screen has revealed a novel functional activity for DYRK1A expanding the complex role of this kinase in controlling cellular homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
To identify proteins in DYRK1A immunocomplexes, endogenous DYRK1A were immunoprecipitated from 1 mg of total Hela cell lysates (or Hela nuclear extracts) using 10 µg of specific Ab or mouse/rabbit IgGs (normal rabbit IgGs, Cell Signaling, 2729S; normal mouse IgGs, Santa Cruz, sc-2025). Experiments were performed in triplicate, and at least two independent experiments for each Ab/cell line were analyzed. Beads used in immunoprecipitation were cleaned three times with 500 µl of 200 mM NH4HCO3 and 60 µl of 6M Urea / 200mM NH4HCO3 were added. Samples were then reduced with dithiothreitol (30 nmol, 37 ºC, 60 min), alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (60 nmol, 25 ºC, 30 min) and diluted to 1M urea with 200 mM NH4HCO3 for trypsin digestion (1 µg, 37ºC, 8h, Promega cat # V5113). For the identification of RNF169 phosphosites, bacterially expressed and purified RNF169 was incubated with GST-DYRK1A (Life Technologies) in phosphorylation buffer for 20 min at 30ºC. Two biological replicas were loaded into an SDS gel prior to digestion with trypsin.  After digestion, peptide mix was acidified with formic acid and desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher  Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded onto the 2-cm Nano Trap column with an inner diameter of 100 μm packed with C18 particles of 5 μm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 25-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 1.9 μm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd. Japan). Chromatographic gradients started at 93% buffer A and 7% buffer B with a flow rate of 250 nl/min for 5 minutes and gradually increased 65% buffer A and 35% buffer B in 60 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 15 min with 10% buffer A and 90% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.1 kV and source temperature at 300°C. Ultramark 1621 for the was used for external calibration of the FT mass analyzer prior the analyses, and an internal calibration was performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.1200. The acquisition was performed in data-dependent adquisition (DDA) mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 60,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-2000 with detection in the Orbitrap. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 1E6, dynamic exclusion (60 seconds) and charge state filtering disqualifying singly charged peptides was activated. In each cycle of DDA analysis, following each survey scan, the top twenty most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 were selected for fragmentation. Fragment ion spectra were produced via collision-induced dissociation (CID) at normalized collision energy of 35% and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. AGC was set to 1E4, isolation window of 2.0 m/z, and an activation time of 10 ms and a maximum injection time of 100 ms were used. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v2.2. Digested bovine serum albumin (New england biolabs cat # P8108S) was analyzed between each sample to avoid sample carryover and to assure stability of the instrument.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.5, Matrix Science). The data were searches against a Swiss-Prot human database plus a list of common contaminants  and all the corresponding decoy entries. For peptide identification a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. For RNF169 kinase experiments, phosphorylation on Ser, Thr and Tyr were also considered as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%. For the identification of DYRK1A interactors, Significance Analysis of INTeractome (SAINT) Express algorithm was used.

### Publication Abstract
Dysregulation of the DYRK1A protein kinase has been associated with human disease. On the one hand, its overexpression in trisomy 21 has been linked to certain pathological traits of Down syndrome, while on the other, inactivating mutations in just one allele are responsible for a distinct yet rare clinical syndrome, DYRK1A haploinsufficiency. Moreover, altered expression of this kinase may also provoke other human pathologies, including cancer and diabetes. Although a few DYRK1A substrates have been described, its upstream regulators and downstream targets are still poorly understood, an&#xa0;information that could shed light on the functions of DYRK1A in the cell. Here, we carried out a proteomic screen using antibody-based affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry to identify proteins that directly or indirectly bind to endogenous DYRK1A. We show that the use of a cell line not expressing DYRK1A, generated by CRISPR/Cas9 technology, was needed in order to discriminate between true positives and non-specific interactions. Most of the proteins identified in the screen are novel candidate DYRK1A interactors linked to a variety of activities in the cell. The in-depth characterization of DYRK1A's functional interaction with one of them, the E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF169, revealed a role for this kinase in the DNA damage response. We found that RNF169 is a DYRK1A substrate and we identified several of its phosphorylation sites. In particular, one of these sites appears to modify the ability of RNF169 to displace 53BP1 from sites of DNA damage. Indeed, DYRK1A depletion increases cell sensitivity to ionizing irradiation. Therefore, our unbiased proteomic screen has revealed a novel activity of DYRK1A, expanding the complex role of this kinase in controlling cell homeostasis.

### Keywords
Rnf169, Interactome, Lcmsms, Dyrk1a, Dna damage

### Affiliations
UPF
Center for Genomic Regulation and University Pompeu Fabra

### Submitter
Eva Borràs

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabido
Center for Genomic Regulation and University Pompeu Fabra


