### Accession
PXD003056

### Title
SWATH-MS analysis of nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions of rat Sertoli cells

### Description
The Sertoli cells (Sc) of 5 days (infant) and 12 days (pubertal) old rat were isolated and cultured in triplicates. Nuclear and cytoplasmic fractionation was done for both the cases. All the four protein fractions (nuclear and cytoplasm of infant and pubertal Sc) were anaysed using Lc-MS/MS. SWATH analysis was done for all the four samples in biological and technical replicates. The objective was to quantity the proteins of all the samples with respect to each other at whole proteome level.

### Sample Protocol
Sertoli cell (Sc) from the testes of 5 days and 12 days old rat were isolated and cultured in triplicates as described in the concerned publication. Nuclear and cytoplasmic fractionation of the cultured cells were performed using NE-PER (Nuclear and Cytoplasmic extraction kit, from Thermo Scientific). All the three replicates of each of the four cellular fractions (nuclear and cytoplasm of 5 days and 12 days old rat Sc) were diluted in 10mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by reduction with 25mM Dithiothreitol and alkylation with 55mM Iodoacetamide. The samples were then incubated with trypsin for overnight @ 37 degree C (trypsin:protein :: 1:10).

### Data Protocol
SWATH assay library was generated using the DDA data submission by us to ProteomeXchange (PXD003050). This DDA data was used to generate a consensus spectral library using SpectraST based on the peptide spectrum matches with a probability higher than 0.65, which corresponds to a decoy estimated error rate of 0.41% on peptide level). SWATH assays were generated from this spectral library essentially as reported previously (Schubert, O. T. et al. 2015). To normalize the retention time of the peptide, the retention time of the peptides of all the runs were adjusted to the run with maximum number of identifications by linear regression. The normalized retention time of each peptide was then determined, by taking the median of all the retention time determined for the individual runs. Finally, the SWATH assay library was updated with the normalized retention times. This assay library were interrogated with the SWATH data (Fig. 4b) using MS/MS(ALL)with SWATH™ Acquisition MicroApp 2.0 Software with PeakView 2.2 software (SCIEX, Concord, ON, Ca). Maximum six peptides were allowed for quantification of a single protein with a maximum of six transitions per peptide. The transition were extracted in a retention time window of 5 minutes (+/- 2.5 minutes) and with a mass tolerance of 75 ppm. Peptides with a minimum confidence level of 95 % were used. FDR threshold was kept below 5%. The filtered proteins and associated peptides were exported to MarkerView™ (version 1.2.1, Sciex) for relative quantitative analysis. The median peak ratio method was used for the normalization of the quantitative protein data for all samples of different groups. Statistical analysis of the relative quantitation was performed by t-test analysis. The protein levels with a P-value less than 0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Differential next-generation-omics approaches aid in the visualization of biological processes and pave the way for divulging important events and/or interactions leading to a functional output at cellular or systems level. To this end, we undertook an integrated Nextgen transcriptomics and proteomics approach to divulge differential gene expression of infant and pubertal rat Sertoli cells (Sc).Unlike, pubertal Sc, infant Sc are immature and fail to support spermatogenesis. We found exclusive association of 14 and 19 transcription factor binding sites to infantile and pubertal states of Sc, respectively, using differential transcriptomics-guided genome-wide computational analysis of relevant promoters employing 220 Positional Weight Matrices from the TRANSFAC database. Proteomic SWATH-MS analysis provided extensive quantification of nuclear and cytoplasmic protein fractions revealing 1,670 proteins differentially located between the nucleus and cytoplasm of infant Sc and 890 proteins differentially located within those of pubertal Sc. Based on our multi-omics approach, the transcription factor YY1 was identified as one of the lead candidates regulating differentiation of Sc.YY1 was found to have abundant binding sites on promoters of genes upregulated during puberty. To determine its significance, we generated transgenic rats with Sc specific knockdown of YY1 that led to compromised spermatogenesis.

### Keywords
Sertoli cell, Nucleus, Cytoplasm

### Affiliations
National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi, India

### Submitter
Kamal Mandal

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Subeer S. Majumdar
National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi, India


