### Accession
PXD031173

### Title
Bacterial necromass is rapidly metabolized by heterotrophic bacteria and supports multiple trophic levels of the groundwater microbiome

### Description
Pristine groundwater is a highly stable environment with microbes adapted to dark, oligotrophic conditions. Input events like heavy rainfalls can introduce excess particulate organic matter including surface-derived microbes into the groundwater, hereby creating a disturbance to the groundwater microbiome. Some of the translocated bacteria are not able to thrive in groundwater and will form necromass. Here, we investigated the effects of necromass addition to the microbial community in fractured bedrock groundwater, using groundwater mesocosms as model systems. We followed the uptake of 13C-labeled necromass by the bacterial and eukaryotic groundwater community quantitatively and over time by employing a combined protein and DNA stable isotope probing approach. Necromass was rapidly depleted in the mesocosms within four days, accompanied by a strong decrease of Shannon diversity and an increase of bacterial 16S rRNA gene copy numbers by one order of magnitude. Species of Flavobacterium, Massilia, Rheinheimera, Rhodoferax and Undibacterium dominated the microbial community within two days and were identified as key players in necromass degradation, based on a 13C incorporation of > 90% in their peptides. Their proteomes showed various uptake and transport related proteins, and many proteins involved in metabolizing amino acids. After four and eight days of incubation, autotrophic and mixotrophic groundwater species of Nitrosomonas, Limnohabitans, Paucibacter and Acidovorax increased in abundance, with a 13C incorporation between 0.5 and 23%. Our data point towards a very fast and exclusive uptake of labeled necromass by a few specialists followed by a concerted action of groundwater microorganisms, including autotrophs presumably fueled by released, reduced nitrogen and sulfur compounds generated during necromass degradation.

### Sample Protocol
In total, 21 10 L bottles were filled with 9 L groundwater directly after sampling. While three bottles were used as T0, the remaining 18 bottles were supplemented with 12C or 13C labeled necromass equivalent to 2×108 cells L-1. While the average abundances of bacteria at this sampling site range between 1×107 and 6×107 cells L-1 (Geesink et al., 2020), the high amount of biomass added corresponds to biomass that can be introduced to groundwater via seepage (Herrmann et al., 2019). The water within the bottles without added necromass was directly filterer on 0.1 µm polyethersulfone (PES) filters (Supor, PALL Corporation) for biomass collection. All other mesocosms were incubated at 15°C in the dark for the entire course of the experiment. Oxygen concentrations were monitored daily using a FDO 925 sensor (WTW; Table S1). On day 2, 4 and 8 the entire water of three 12C- as well as three 13C-mesocosms was filtered on 0.1 µm PES filters (Supor, PALL Corporation) for biomass collection. All filters were directly stored at  80 °C until further processing. Proteins were extracted from the filters as previously described (Taubert et al., 2018) with slight modifications. No beads were added to the lysis solution. Instead, lysis was performed during a 2h incubation at 60°C. The obtained protein extracts underwent an SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis as well as a subsequent in-gel tryptic digestion. Peptides were purified and concentrated following Taubert et al. (2018). Subsequently, the peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (v/v) for the following LC-MS/MS analysis on a Q Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a TriVersa NanoMate source (Advion Ltd.) in LC chip coupling mode. A volume of 5 μL of the peptide lysates were separated via an Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC-system (Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v1.4.0288, Thermo Scientific) was used to identify the proteins and the acquired MS/MS spectra were searched against a custom database created from Uniprot based on taxonomic information of the community composition within the incubations based on 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing using the SequestHT algorithm. Following Taubert and Grob et al. (2019), trypsin was picked as cleavage enzyme, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. A precursor mass tolerance (in MS) of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance (in MS/MS) of 0.05 Da were applied. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was considered as fixed and oxidation of methionine was set as dynamic modification. The peptide spectrum matches were validated using Percolator (v2.04) with a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% and quality filtered for XCorr ≥ 2.25 (for charge state +2) and ≥ 2.5 (for charge state +3). Identified peptides were grouped using the strict parsimony principle (Nesvizhskii and Aebersold, 2005).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stable isotope probing, Surface input, Groundwater, Metaproteomics, Aquadiva, Necromass, Subsurface

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ GmbH Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstrasse 15 04316 Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ GmbH Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstrasse 15 04316 Leipzig, Germany


