### Accession
PXD000384

### Title
V5-tagged LIMD1 in HEK293 cells with or without JNK2 activation

### Description
The experiment was conducted to identify JNK phosphorylation sites on human LIM domain containing protein-1 (LIMD1). V5-tagged LIMD1 was co-transfected or not with a constitutively active form of JNK2 and purified. The purified proteins were subjected to SDS-PAGE, protease K digestion and MS/MS analysis. The data were searched against Swissprot using Mascot server v2.3. The fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of C, and variable modifications were set to oxidation of M, phosphorylation of ST, phosphorylation of Y. Mass values were set as monoisotopic. Peptide mass tolerance was set to +/-10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set to +/-0.8Da.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Wounding, apoptosis, or infection can trigger a proliferative response in neighboring cells to replace damaged tissue. Studies in Drosophila have implicated c-Jun amino-terminal kinase (JNK)-dependent activation of Yorkie (Yki) as essential to regeneration-associated growth, as well as growth associated with neoplastic tumors. Yki is a transcriptional coactivator that is inhibited by Hippo signaling, a conserved pathway that regulates growth. We identified a conserved mechanism by which JNK regulated Hippo signaling. Genetic studies in Drosophila identified Jub (also known as Ajuba LIM protein) as required for JNK-mediated activation of Yki and showed that Jub contributed to wing regeneration after wounding and to tumor growth. Biochemical studies revealed that JNK promoted the phosphorylation of Ajuba family proteins in both Drosophila and mammalian cells. Binding studies in mammalian cells indicated that JNK increased binding between the Ajuba family proteins LIMD1 or WTIP and LATS1, a kinase within the Hippo pathway that inhibits the Yki homolog YAP. Moreover, JNK promoted binding of LIMD1 and LATS1 through direct phosphorylation of LIMD1. These results identify Ajuba family proteins as a conserved link between JNK and Hippo signaling, and imply that JNK increases Yki and YAP activity by promoting the binding of Ajuba family proteins to Warts and LATS.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Waksman Institute of Microbiology

### Submitter
Gongping Sun

### Lab Head


