### Accession
PXD004007

### Title
Phosphoproteome profiling reveals molecular mechanisms of growth factor mediated kinase inhibitor resistance in cancer cells

### Description
Although substantial progress has been made regarding the use of molecularly targeted cancer therapies, resistance almost invariably develops and presents a major clinical challenge. To evade the selective pressure of kinase inhibitors, cells often activate bypass signaling tracks and become intrinsically resistant. Apart from intrinsic cellular adaptation, the tumor microenvironment can rescue cancer cells by growth factor mediated induction of pro-survival signaling. We show that EGFR inhibition by Gefitinib is counteracted by several growth factors notably FGF2 and we assessed the global consequences of FGF2-mediated Gefitinib resistance at the proteome and phosphoproteome level. Multiplexed tandem mass tag (TMT) peptide labeling in conjunction with high resolution tandem mass spectrometry allowed the identification and quantification of ~22,000 phosphopeptides and ~8,800 proteins in biological triplicates without missing values. The data shows that Gefitinib treated cells are forced into developing intrinsic resistance by reprogramming of the proteome and phosphoproteome, whereas co-treatment with FGF2 largely reverted these changes to resemble the molecular composition of untreated cells. Simultaneous small molecule EGFR and FGFR inhibition overcomes FGF2 induced Gefitinib resistance and the phosphoproteomic experiments further prioritized the RAS/MEK/ERK axis as well as the PI3K/mTOR axis for combination treatment. Consequently, the MEK inhibitor Trametinib prevented FGF2-mediated survival of EGFR inhibitor resistant cells when used in combination with Gefitinib. Surprisingly, the pase II PI3K/mTOR inhibitor GSK2126458 reversed resistance mediated by all four growth factors tested, making it an interesting candidate for targeting the survival signals provided by the tumor microenvironment.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 200 µg of protein for each experimental condition was used for digestion. Disulfide bonds were reduced with DTT in a final concentration of 10 mM and reduction was performed for 45 min at 37 °C. Cysteine residues were alkylated with 55 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the darkness. The sample was diluted with three volumes of 40 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6 to decrease the urea concentration. Trypsin was added in a protease-to-protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w) and pre-digestion was performed for 4 h at 37 °C in a thermoshaker at 700 rpm. For the final digestion, protease was added again in a 1:50 (w/w) protease-to-protein ratio for incubation at 37 °C overnight. Next day samples were cooled to room temperature and acidified by addition of 0.5 % TFA. The sample was centrifuged at 5000 x g to precipitate insoluble matter. A 50 mg Sep-Pak column (Waters) was placed into a vacuum manifold and 1 ml of eluent solution (B) containing 0.07 % TFA, 50 % ACN was loaded and passed through the column. The column was equilibrated to loading conditions by adding two times 1 ml binding solution (A) containing 0.07 % TFA in deionized water. Cleared sample supernatant was transferred to the column and slowly passed through the column to allow proper peptide binding. Peptides were washed using three times 1 ml solution A and peptides were eluted into a reaction vessel using 2 times 150 µl solution B. In the following the sample was frozen to -80 °C and peptides were lyophilized in a speed vac. Lyophilized peptides (200 µg) were dissolved for 10 min at 700 rpm in 62 µl of 50 mM TEAB buffer. TMT compounds (Thermo Scientific) were dissolved in water free ACN to a concentration of 60 mM. A volume of 12.5 µl TMT solution was added to each sample resulting in a final concentration of 10 mM TMT and incubation was performed at 700 rpm for 1 h at room temperature. Labeling reaction was stopped by adding hydroxylamine to a concentration of 0.4 %. After 15 min samples were acidified and diluted with 0.07 % TFA in deionized water to decrease the ACN concentration below 1 %. Samples were desalted according to the procedure described above. Samples were dissolved in 0.07 % TFA and a labeling test was performed by measuring mixed peptides on a short LC-MS/MS run. Peptides were than mixed in equimolar ratios for proteomics and phosphoproteomics analysis.  An Fe-IMAC column (ProPac IMAC-10 column, 4 x 50 mm, Thermo Scientific) was charged with Fe3+ ions using FeCl3 (Sigma Aldrich). Three ml FeCl3 solution were slowly applied to the IMAC column. The column was equilibrated with the solvent A (30 % ACN, 0.07 % TFA) and connected to an Aekta FPLC system. An amount of 1.5 mg TMT labeled peptides was reconstituted in 500 µl solvent A and was loaded onto the column (5 min, 0.2 ml/min). Peptides were eluted with solvent B (0.3 % NH4OH) in a stepwise gradient of 0-16 % (5-6.72 min, 3 ml/min), 16-26.25 % (6.7-11.7 min, 0.55 ml/min), 26.25-50 % (11.7-12.35 min, 3 ml/min), and 12.35-15 min 0 % (3 ml/min). The phosphopeptide containing peak was collected in 1 ml into a reaction vessel and was dried down in the speed vac for high pH reversed-phase fractionation.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis, the MaxQuantversion 1.5.2.8 including the integrated search engine Andromedawas used. Raw files were searched against the UniProtKB database (v.22.07.13, containing 88,381 entries). Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification. In the phosphoproteomics dataset phosphorylation of serine, threonine, tyrosine, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were allowed as variable modifications. In the proteome dataset only oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were allowed as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing for cleavage after proline. Minimum peptide length of seven amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites were allowed for peptide identification. Quantification was performed on TMT reporter ions for protein and p-peptide analysis. All tandem mass tags were corrected for their isotopic impurities. The mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and to 20 ppm for fragment ions. The dataset was adjusted to 1% FDR on the level of proteins and peptide spectrum matches (PSMs).

### Publication Abstract
Although substantial progress has been made regarding the use of molecularly targeted cancer therapies, resistance almost invariably develops and presents a major clinical challenge. The tumor microenvironment can rescue cancer cells from kinase inhibitors by growth-factor-mediated induction of pro-survival pathways. Here we show that epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibition by Gefitinib is counteracted by growth factors, notably FGF2, and we assessed the global molecular consequences of this resistance at the proteome and phosphoproteome level in A431 cells. Tandem mass tag peptide labeling and quantitative mass spectrometry allowed the identification and quantification of 22&#x202f;000 phosphopeptides and 8800 proteins in biological triplicates without missing values. The data show that FGF2 protects the cells from the antiproliferative effect of Gefitinib and largely prevents reprogramming of the proteome and phosphoproteome. Simultaneous EGFR/FGFR or EGFR/GSG2 (Haspin) inhibition overcomes this resistance, and the phosphoproteomic experiments further prioritized the RAS/MEK/ERK as well as the PI3K/mTOR axis for combination treatment. Consequently, the MEK inhibitor Trametinib prevented FGF2-mediated survival of EGFR inhibitor-resistant cells when used in combination with Gefitinib. Surprisingly, the PI3K/mTOR inhibitor Omipalisib reversed resistance mediated by all four growth factors tested, making it an interesting candidate for mitigating the effects of the tumor microenvironment.

### Keywords
Gefitinib resistance

### Affiliations
Technische Universitaet Muenchen
Chair for Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany

### Submitter
Heiner Koch

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair for Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany


