### Accession
PXD044462

### Title
Impact of mutations on the plant-based production of recombinant SARS-CoV-2 RBD

### Description
Recombinant RBD variants from SARS-CoV-2 spike were produced by transient expression in Nicotiana benthamiana plants and purified. The purified proteins were digested with proteases and glycopeptides were analysed by MS to identify the N-glycan structures.

### Sample Protocol
Nicotiana benthamiana grown on soil in a growth chamber, with 16h light/8h dark at 24°C and 50% humidity. Leaves infiltrated with agrobacteria (strain UIA 143, pMP90) carrying the plasmid for protein expression (expression vector pEAQ-HT) were harvested 3 to 4 days after infiltration. Leaf material was either directly processed or stored at -80°C. Proteins were purified by IMAC from apoplasitc fluid, S-alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested in-solution with endoproteinases LysC (Roche) and GluC (Promega). Glycopeptides were analysed using a Vanquish™ Neo UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) system coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The possible N-glycopeptides were identified as sets of peaks consisting of the peptide moiety and the attached N-glycan varying in the number of HexNAc units, hexose, pentose and deoxyhexose residues. The theoretical masses of these glycopeptides were determined with an EXCEL spread sheet using the monoisotopic masses for amino acids and monosaccharides. The expected glycopeptides were manually detected and analysed with FreeStyle 1.8 program (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The deconvoluted, positively charged glycopeptides are shown in a mass range of 1900-4200 Da.

### Data Protocol
No bioinformatic pipeline was used. Data were not searched against a database. The aim was to identify and characterize RBD glycopeptides (sites N331 and N343 of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein).

### Publication Abstract
Subunit vaccines based on recombinant viral antigens are valuable interventions to fight existing and evolving viruses and can be produced at large-scale in plant-based expression systems. The recombinant viral antigens are often derived from glycosylated envelope proteins of the virus and glycosylation plays an important role for the immunogenicity by shielding protein epitopes. The receptor-binding domain (RBD) of the SARS-CoV-2 spike is a principal target for vaccine development and has been produced in plants, but the yields of recombinant RBD variants were low and the role of the N-glycosylation in RBD from different SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern is less studied. Here, we investigated the expression and glycosylation of six different RBD variants transiently expressed in leaves of <i>Nicotiana benthamiana</i>. All of the purified RBD variants were functional in terms of receptor binding and displayed almost full N-glycan occupancy at both glycosylation sites with predominately complex N-glycans. Despite the high structural sequence conservation of the RBD variants, we detected a variation in yield which can be attributed to lower expression and differences in unintentional proteolytic processing of the C-terminal polyhistidine tag used for purification. Glycoengineering towards a human-type complex N-glycan profile with core &#x3b1;1,6-fucose, showed that the reactivity of the neutralizing antibody S309 differs depending on the N-glycan profile and the RBD variant.

### Keywords
Virus, Antigen, Nicotiana benthamiana, Spike protein, Glycoprotein, Glycosylation, Vaccine

### Affiliations
University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences Vienna
Department of Applied Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Richard Strasser

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Strasser
Department of Applied Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna, Austria


