### Accession
PXD005469

### Title
pSILAC-SP3 of RGC axonal growth cones

### Description
To form operative neuronal networks neurons connect to their synaptic partners by axonal outgrowth guided by the movement of the axon tip, a specialized structure known as the growth cone (GC), which travels along stereotypical paths by sensing extracellular guidance cues. Interestingly, GCs contain complex transcriptomes and different guidance cues can rapidly regulate the translation of specific mRNAs which help to remodel the GC cytoskeleton thus steering axon navigation. However, the full landscape of proteomic changes elicited by different cues is not known and the precise protein synthesis (PS)-dependent molecular mechanisms underlying GC repulsive and attractive turning remain largely elusive. Here we have investigated the cue-induced changes in the nascent proteome by pulse Stable Isotope Labeling by Amino acids in Cell culture (pSILAC) in somaless developing retinal axons derived from Xenopus laevis primary cultures. The experimental approach presented major challenges due to the limited quantity of axonal material (~2 μg per condition) and to the desired rapid (5-15 min) time-scale (no previous work has accomplished SILAC with a pulse less than 20 min). To overcome these difficulties we used a superior protocol, termed Single-Pot Solid- Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation, based on ultrasensitive paramagnetic bead technology which allows high proteomic sample recovery from sub-microgram amounts of material. By employing this method we were able to identify up to 500 newly synthesized proteins after only 5 min of pSILAC. Subsequently, we successfully validated the purity and viability of the axonal samples and the reliability of the method. Finally, to characterize and quantify the global patterns of the axonal translational changes in response to specific guidance cues and to unravel the switch between repulsive and attractive responses, we carried out pSILAC in the presence of different repulsive cues and pharmacological reagents that convert repulsion into attraction. Our results uncovered a surprisingly high level of translational activity within the axonal compartment, even in basal conditions. Remarkably, comparative analysis revealed many changes in the nascent proteome in response to different cues, some distinct and some common. Interestingly, several proteins showed cue-specific downregulation. Taken together, our findings suggest a comprehensive GC PS-dependent chemotropic model and novel cue-specific molecular mechanisms possibly underlying the integration of chemotropic responses.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for MS Samples were supplemented with 25 units Benzonase nuclease (Merck), and lysed in a Bioruptor (Diagenode) for 5 minutes. Alkylation was performed by addition of 30 mM Chloroacetamide. Protein clean-up, digestion and peptide clean-up were performed using our recently developed ultrasensitive sample preparation protocol SP3(Hughes et al., 2014). In brief, 2 µL of beads (1:1 mixture of hydrophilic and hydrophobic SeraMag Carboxylate-Modified beads, GE Life Sciences) were added to each sample. Acidified acetonitrile was added to achieve a final fraction of organic solvent of 50%. Beads were incubated for 8 min to allow complete binding of proteins to the beads. Protein clean-up was performed on an in-house build magnetic rack. The supernatant was discarded and beads were washed two times with 70% Ethanol and once with Acetonitrile. For digestion, 0.1 µg sequencing grade Trypsin/LysC (Promega) was added and digestion was performed at 37°C for 16 h. Acetonitrile was added to achieve 95% organic solvent. Beads were washed 2x with Acetonitrile and peptides were eluted with 9 µL 5% DMSO. Mass Spectrometry Samples were analyzed on Orbitrap Velos Pro, Q-Exactive, or Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometers (all Thermo Scientific) using default settings. Mass spectrometers were coupled to UPLC systems (Waters nanoAcquity UPLC or Thermo EASY LC 1200). Peptides were loaded onto trap columns (Waters nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm or Acclaim PepMap100 C18 Nano-Trap 2cm × 100 μm × 5 μm) with Buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and separated over 25 or 50 cm analytical columns (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 μm × 2 μm) using 90, 145 or 240 minute linear gradients from 3-40% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid in ACN). Peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer using a Pico-Tip Emitter (360 μm outer diameter × 20 μm inner diameter, 10 μm tip, New Objective). MS2 Fragmentation was set to HCD (Q-Exactive and Fusion) or CID (Orbitrap Velos Pro), and MSMS scans were acquired in the ion trap (Orbitrap Velos Pro and Fusion) or Orbitrap (Q-Exactive).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.4.1.2) (Cox and Mann, 2008) using default settings. MSMS spectra were searched against the Xenopus laevis Uniprot database (v20140925) concatenated to a database containing protein sequences of common contaminants. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were used as variable modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to six amino acids. The mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm for the first search, and 6 ppm for the main search. False discovery rates for peptide and protein identification were set to 1%. The match-between-runs and re-quantify options were enabled. For protein quantification a minimum ratio count of 2 was set. The iBAQ was calculated to determine relative abundance levels of the pre-existing light-labelled proteins. Protein ratios were log2-transformed, and H/M ratios of newly synthesized proteins were normalized to the median ratio using the Perseus computational framework(Tyanova et al., 2016). Data was filtered and proteins with a standard deviation <= 1, and an average log2 ratio larger than 0.378 or smaller than -0.378 (corresponding to a 1,3-fold change) were subjected to further statistical analysis. To test, whether the log2 ratio of each protein was different from zero, p-values were computed by a moderated t-test implemented in the R/Bioconductor package limma (Ritchie et al., 2015). p-values were corrected for multiple testing by controlling the false discovery rate with the method of Benjamini-Hochberg. Enrichment of categorical annotations (Gene Ontology, KEGG) was determined using DAVID (Huang et al., 2009). For comparison with Axon-TRAP data (Shigeoka et al., 2016) Uniprot identifiers from Mus musculus were mapped to Xenopus laevis using the Hovergen phylogenetic database (Duret et al., 1994).

### Publication Abstract
Axonal protein synthesis and degradation are rapidly regulated by extrinsic signals during neural wiring, but the full landscape of proteomic changes remains unknown due to limitations in axon sampling and sensitivity. By combining pulsed stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture with single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation, we characterized the nascent proteome of isolated retinal axons on an unparalleled rapid timescale (5&#xa0;min). Our analysis detects 350 basally translated axonal proteins on average, including several linked to neurological disease. Axons stimulated by different cues (Netrin-1, BDNF, Sema3A) show distinct signatures with more than 100 different nascent protein species up- or downregulated within the first 5&#xa0;min followed by further dynamic remodeling. Switching repulsion to attraction triggers opposite regulation of a subset of common nascent proteins. Our findings thus reveal the rapid remodeling of the axonal proteomic landscape by extrinsic cues and uncover a logic underlying attraction versus repulsion.

### Keywords
Psilac, Axon

### Affiliations
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens
German Cancer Research center (DKFZ), Dept. Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer (B230), Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Frese

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
German Cancer Research center (DKFZ), Dept. Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer (B230), Heidelberg, Germany


