### Accession
PXD026607

### Title
Liver proteomics identifies metabolic pathways affected by pantothenic acid deficiency in Pekin ducks

### Description
We characterized the liver proteome of six Pekin ducks from pantothenic acid-deficient (PAD) group and the pantothenic acid-adequate (control, CON) group.

### Sample Protocol
Liver tissues of ducks from each group (PAD or CON) were obtained immediately, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80 °C. Three individual liver samples were randomly chosen from each group to conduct the iTRAQ assays. Proteins were extracted and digested as described. The digested samples were labelled according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 8-plex iTRAQ reagents (AB SCIEX, Foster City, USA) as follows: the PAD samples were labelled with iTRAQ tags 113, 114, and 115, and the CON samples were labelled with tags 116, 117, and 118. Labelled samples were mixed and fractionated into 20 fractions by HPLC (DINOEX Ultimate 3000 BioRS, Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA) using a Durashell C18 column (5 µm, 100 Å, 4.6 × 250 mm). LC-electrospray ionization-MS/MS analysis was carried out with a Triple TOF 5600 plus system (AB SCIEX, Framingham, USA).

### Data Protocol
The original MS/MS file data for identification and quantitation were analysed against the database UniProt_Mallard_8839 using ProteinPilot Software version 4.5 (AB SCIEX). To minimize false-positive results, we counted only peptides at the 95% CI and a false discovery rate < 0.01, containing at least one unique peptide. For protein quantitation, a differentially expressed protein containing at least two unique spectra was used with a Fold Change (FC) value > 1.5 or < -1.5 with P < 0.05 between the PAD and the CON groups.

### Publication Abstract
Pantothenic acid deficiency (PAD) in animals causes growth depression, fasting hypoglycemia and impaired lipid and glucose metabolism. However, a systematic multi-omics analysis of effects of PAD on hepatic function has apparently not been reported. We investigated liver proteome and metabolome changes induced by PAD to explain its effects on growth and liver metabolic disorders. Pekin ducks (1-d-old, <i>n</i>&#xa0;=&#xa0;128) were allocated into 2 groups, with 8 replicates and 8 birds per replicate. For 16&#xa0;d, all ducks had ad libitum access to either a PAD or a pantothenic acid adequate (control, CON) diet, formulated by supplementing a basal diet with 0 or 8&#xa0;mg pantothenic acid/kg of diet, respectively. Liver enlargement, elevated liver glycogen concentrations and decreased liver concentrations of triglyceride and unsaturated fatty acids were present in the PAD group compared to the CON group. Based on integrated liver proteomics and metabolomics, PAD mainly affected glycogen synthesis and degradation, glycolysis and gluconeogenesis, tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) signaling pathway, fatty acid beta oxidation, and oxidative phosphorylation. Selected proteins were confirmed by Western blotting. Downregulation of proteins and metabolites involved in glycogen synthesis and degradation, glycolysis and gluconeogenesis implied that these processes were impaired in PAD ducks, which could have contributed to fasting hypoglycemia, liver glycogen storage, insufficient ATP production, and growth retardation. In contrast, PAD also upregulated proteins and metabolites involved in fatty acid beta oxidation, the TCA cycle, and oxidative phosphorylation processes in the liver; presumably compensatory responses to produce ATP. We inferred that PAD decreased liver triglyceride and unsaturated fatty acids by activating fatty acid beta oxidation and impairing unsaturated fatty acid synthesis. These findings contributed to our understanding of the mechanisms of PAD-induced changes in hepatic metabolism.

### Keywords
Pekin ducks, Liver, Proteomics, Pantothenic acid deficiency

### Affiliations
Institute of Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Jing Tang

### Lab Head
Dr Shuisheng Hou
Institute of Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences


