### Accession
PXD034187

### Title
HBO1 Catalyzes Lysine Benzoylation in Mammalian Cells

### Description
Lysine benzoylation (Kbz) is a newly discovered protein post-translational modification (PTM). This PTM can be stimulated by benzoate and contributes to gene expression. However, its regulatory enzymes and substrate proteins remain largely unknown, hindering further functional studies. Here we identified and validated the lysine acetyltransferase (KAT) HBO1 as a “writer” of Kbz in mammalian cells. In addition, we report the first benzoylome in mammalian cells, identifying 1747 Kbz sites, among them at least 77 are the HBO1-targeted Kbz substrates. Bioinformatics analysis showed that HBO1-targeted Kbz sites were involved in multiple processes, including chromatin remodeling, transcription regulation, immune regulation, and tumor growth. Our results thus identify key regulatory elements of the Kbz pathway, and reveal new enzymatic activity and functions of HBO1 in cellular physiology.

### Sample Protocol
The peptide samples in NH4HCO3 solution were incubated with 30 μL of pan anti-Kbz beads at 4oC overnight. After incubation, the beads were washed three times with NETN buffer (50mM Tris pH 8.0, 100mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 0.5% NP40), twice with ETN buffer (50mM Tris pH 8.0, 100mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA), and once with water. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and vacuum-dried.

### Data Protocol
The quantitative proteomics experiments were performed with three biological replicates. All the Kbz site ratios were normalized by corresponding quantified protein expression levels. The quantitative Kbz proteome was analyzed by two-tailed Student’s t-test for the two groups with HBO1 or vector plasmids transfection. GO, KEGG, and GSEA analyses were adopted with a hypergeometric test in the R clusterProfiler package(17). The consensus sequence logo analysis was performed using iceLogo (v1.2).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Lysine benzoylation, Transferase, Hbo1

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica
Chinese Academy of Sciences Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica

### Submitter
He Huang

### Lab Head
Dr He Huang
Chinese Academy of Sciences Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica


