### Accession
PXD024243

### Title
Cellular proteomic changes in the immediate early phase of HIV-1 and 2 transduction

### Description
Human immunodeficiency viruses type 1 and 2 (HIV-1 and 2) are known to depend on cellular host machinery for their replication and survival. While most of the studies on cellular proteomic and transcriptomic changes focused on the late-phase of the infection, studies of those changes in the early time-points; especially in the case of HIV-2 infection, are widely lacking. Using 2nd generation HIV-1 and 2 VSV-G pseudotyped lentiviral vectors, we transduced HEK-293T cells, and carried out transcriptomic profiling and  proteomic analysis of harvested cells at 2h time point, which is representative of the immediate early-phase events in the infection cycle.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry Lysis of the Mock, HIV-1 and HIV-2 transfected cells were performed in 100 µl lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.3, 1 mM EDTA, 17 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 0.5% (V/V) Triton-X100) by three freeze–thaw cycles. Protein concentration of the samples was determined by the Bradford method and 100 µg of protein in each case was subjected to purification by electrophoresis. Samples were run into a 5% SDS-polyacrylamide gel using 100V current for 20 minutes. The proteins were stained with PageBlue Protein Staining solution (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and the stained gel slice was excised from the gel in case of each sample. The sliced gel piece was separated to three equal portions and the in-gel trypsin digestion was performed. Reduction was done with 20mM dithiothreitol (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) for one hour at 56°C followed by alkylation with 55mM iodoacetamide (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) for 45 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Overnight trypsin digestion was performed at 37°C using stabilized MS grade TPCK-treated bovine trypsin (ABSciex, Framingham, MA, USA). The digested peptides were extracted and lyophilized. The peptides were re-dissolved in 33 μl 1% formic acid (VWR Ltd., Radnor, PA, USA) before LC-MS/MS analysis. Prior to mass spectrometry analyses the samples were spiked with equal amount of indexed retention time (iRT) peptide mixtures (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) and the samples were analyzed in duplicates. In case of each sample, 10 μg digest was injected into the LC system.    LC-MS analysis Prior to the mass spectrometric analyses, peptides were separated on a 180 minute water/acetonitrile gradient using an Easy nLC 1200 nano UPLC (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The peptide mixture was desalted on an ACQUITY UPLC Symmetry C18 trap column (20mm x 180 µm, 5 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Waters, Milford, MA, USA), followed by separation on Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical columns (150 mm x 50 μm 2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The chromatographic separation was done using a gradient of 5–7% solvent B over 5 minutes, followed by a rise to 15% of solvent B over 50 minutes, and then to 35 % solvent B over 60 minutes. Thereafter solvent B was increased to 40 % over 28 minutes and then to 85% over 5 minutes, followed by a 10 minutes rinse to 85% of solvent B, after which the system returned to 5% solvent B in 1 minute for a 16 minutes hold-on. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in LC water; solvent B was 95% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. The flow rate was set to 300 nl/min. Data-dependent analyses were carried out on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The 14 most abundant multiply charged ions were selected from each survey MS scan using a scan range of 350-1600 m/z for MS/MS analyses (Orbitrap analyser resolution: 60000, AGC target: 4.0e5, acquired in profile mode). CID fragmentation was performed in the linear ion trap with 35% normalized collision energy (AGC target: 2.0e3, acquired in centroid mode). Dynamic exclusion was enabled during the cycles (exclusion time: 45 seconds).

### Data Protocol
The acquired LC-MS/MS data were used for protein identification with the help of MaxQuant 1.6.2.10 software (Cox & Mann, 2008) searching against the Human SwissProt database (release: 2020.02, 558125 sequence entries) and the HIV-1 and HIV-2 SwissProt databases (release:2020.02, 381 sequence entries for HIV-1 and 109 sequence entries for HIV-2). Cys carbamidomethylation, Met oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Maximum 2 missed cleavage sites were allowed. The results were imported into the Scaffold 4.8.9 software (ProteomeSoftware Inc.). Proteins were accepted with at least 3 identified peptides using 1% protein FDR and 0,1% peptide FDR. For label-free quantification, the normalized total precursor intensities were used and quantitative values of the identified proteins were normalized to the quantitative values of the iRT mixture.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hiv-1, Hiv-2, Cellular proteome change

### Affiliations
University of Debrecen
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Debrecen, Hungary

### Submitter
Gergő Kalló

### Lab Head
Dr Jozsef Tozser
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Debrecen, Hungary


