### Accession
PXD016799

### Title
PRMT1 inhibition induces differentiation of colon cancer cells

### Description
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most commonly occurring cancer in men and the second most commonly occurring cancer in women, with over 1.8 million new cases in 20181. Differentiation therapy has been recently revisited as a prospective approach in cancer therapy2 by targeting the aberrant growth, differentiation and cell death programs of cancer cells. Standard of care chemotherapy may eradicate cancer cells, but the aggressive cells can survive and resistance gradually develops. In contrast, differentiation therapy aims not to eradicate cancer bulk, but rather directs cancer cells towards inhibited proliferation and restoration of the apoptotic program, while maintaining a limited toxicity. Current data suggests that differentiation therapy can be an effective anti-cancer treatment approach, however discovery of the new differentiation inducing molecules with a higher therapeutic index is essential. We performed HTS screen for compounds mediating differentiation of colon cancer cell using a novel dual multiplex assay3. Here we show that PRMT type 1 inhibitor MS023 is a potent inducer of colon cancer cell differentiation with a large therapeutic window. Our findings has a great importance for following investigation and development of effective differentiation based anti CRC therapy applicable in the clinic.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic sample preparation       HT-29 cells were plated in 10-well plates (120,000 cells/well) in 10ml of regular growth medium. 2h later cells were treated with either DMSO or MS023 (5µM). After 5 days cells were trypsinazed, washed with PBS, and pellets were stored in -80C until processing. Frozen HT-29 cell pellets were lysed in 5% SDS in 50 mM Tris pH 7.4 and 100µg of total protein were taken for the tryptic digest. The samples volume was adjusted to 50µl with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, digested with trypsin using S-trap (Protifi, Huntington NY, USA)34 according to the manufacturer’s instructions, vacuum dried and stored in -80°C prior to fractionation. All chemicals were from Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis MO, USA, unless stated otherwise. Liquid chromatography       ULC/MS grade solvents were used for all chromatographic steps. Each sample was fractionated using high pH reversed phase followed by low pH reversed phase separation. 100µg digested protein was loaded using high Performance Liquid Chromatography (Acquity H Class Bio, Waters, Milford MA, USA). Mobile phase was: A) 20mM ammonium formate pH 10.0, B) acetonitrile. Peptides were separated on an XBridge C18 column (XBridgeC18, 2.5um, 3.0X150mm(186006710)  Waters) at 45oC, 300µl/min flow using the following gradient: 3% B for 2 minutes, linear gradient to 40% B in 50 min, 5 min to 95% B, maintained at 95% B for 5 min and then back to initial conditions. Peptides were fractionated into 15 fractions. The fractions were then pooled: 1 was combined with 2, 3, 13, 14 and 15; 4 with 9; 5 with 10; 6 with 11; 8 with 12; while 7 was kept separately. Each fraction was vacuum dried, then reconstituted in 50µl of 97:3 acetonitrile: water + 0.1% formic acid. Each pooled fraction was loaded using split-less nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (10 kpsi nanoAcquity; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile phase was: A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and B) acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Desalting of the samples was performed online using a reversed-phase Symmetry C18 trapping column (180µm internal diameter, 20mm length, 5µm particle size; Waters). The peptides were then separated using a T3 HSS nano-column (75µm internal diameter, 250mm length, 1.8µm particle size; Waters) at 0.35 µl/min. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 4% to 27% B in 105 min, 27% to 90% B in 5 min, maintained at 90% for 5min and then back to initial conditions. Mass Spectrometry      The nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nanoESI emitter (10 μm tip; New Objective; Woburn, MA, USA) to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive PlusHFX, Thermo Scientific) using a FlexIon nanospray apparatus (Proxeon). Data was acquired in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, using a Top10 method. MS1 resolution was set to 120,000 (at 400 m/z), mass range of 375-1,650 m/z, AGC of 3e6 and maximum injection time was set to 60 msec. MS2 resolution was set to 15,000, quadrupole isolation 1.7 m/z, AGC of 1e5, dynamic exclusion of 30 sec and maximum injection time of 60 msec.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics raw data was processed in Maxquant version 1.6.6.0. Data was searched against the SwissProt human database (November 2018 version) appended with common laboratory contaminant proteins40. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteine and variable modifications were set to protein N-term acetylation and oxidation of methionine. Search results were filtered to achieve maximum false discovery rate of 1% at the protein level. Protein LFQ intensities were calculated based on unique peptides. The LFQ values were further processed in Perseus version 1.6.2.3. A Student’s t-test, after logarithmic transformation, was used to identify significant differences in LFQ intensities across the biological replica. Pathway enrichment: Canonical Pathways enrichment and functional analysis were performed using Ingenuity-Pathway-Analysis (IPA) software (QIAGEN Inc., CA, US). Genes were considered differentially expressed according to the threshold of P-value < 0.05 and fold change > 2 or <-2.

### Publication Abstract
Differentiation therapy has been recently revisited as a prospective approach in cancer therapy by targeting the aberrant growth, and repairing the differentiation and cell death programs of cancer cells. However, differentiation therapy of solid tumors is a challenging issue and progress in this field is limited. We performed High Throughput Screening (HTS) using a novel dual multiplex assay to discover compounds, which induce differentiation of human colon cancer cells. Here we show that the protein arginine methyl transferase (PRMT) type 1 inhibitor, MS023, is a potent inducer of colon cancer cell differentiation with a large therapeutic window. Differentiation changes in the highly aggressive human colon cancer cell line (HT-29) were proved by proteomic and genomic approaches. Growth of HT-29 xenograft in nude mice was significantly delayed upon MS023 treatment and immunohistochemistry of tumor indicated differentiation changes. These findings may lead to development of clinically effective anti-cancer drugs based on the mechanism of cancer cell differentiation.

### Keywords
Pmrt1 inhibitors, Colorectal cancer, Ms023

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Wohl Institute for Drug Discovery, High Throughput Screening unit, Grand Israel National Center for Personalized Medicine, the Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel

### Submitter
Meital Kupervaser

### Lab Head
Dr Barr Haim
Wohl Institute for Drug Discovery, High Throughput Screening unit, Grand Israel National Center for Personalized Medicine, the Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel


