### Accession
PXD000579

### Title
A proteome reference map of the wine lactic acid bacterium Oenococcus oeni ATCC BAA-1163

### Description
Oenococcus oeni is the main lactic acid bacterium that carries out the malolactic fermentation in virtually all red wines and in some white and sparkling wines. O. oeni possesses an array of metabolic activities which can modify the taste and aromatic properties of wine. There is therefore industrial interest in the proteins involved in these metabolic pathways and related transport systems of this bacterium. In this work, we report the characterization of the O. oeni ATCC BAA-1163 proteome. Total and membrane protein preparations from O. oeni were standardized and analyzed by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Using tandem mass spectrometry we identified 226 different polypeptides corresponding to 155 unique proteins, which have been classified by their putative function and subjected to bioinformatics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Oenococcus oeni is the main lactic acid bacterium that carries out the malolactic fermentation in virtually all red wines and in some white and sparkling wines. Oenococcus oeni possesses an array of metabolic activities that can modify the taste and aromatic properties of wine. There is, therefore, industrial interest in the proteins involved in these metabolic pathways and related transport systems of this bacterium. In this work, we report the characterization of the O. oeni ATCC BAA-1163 proteome. Total and membrane protein preparations from O. oeni were standardized and analysed by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Using tandem mass spectrometry, we identified 224 different spots corresponding to 152 unique proteins, which have been classified by their putative function and subjected to bioinformatics analysis.

### Keywords
Miape, Maldi, Oenococcus oeni

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit

### Submitter
Sergio Ciordia Higuera

### Lab Head


