### Accession
PXD005101

### Title
Lipid metabolism modulation is associated with molecular injury and kidney dysfunction in a rat ischemia model

### Description
Due to organ shortage, the transplantation community are increasingly using kidney from deceased donors such as donation after circulatory death (DCD) and donation after brain death (DBD). However, DCD donation have increased delayed graft function compared to DBD, an underline mechanism is still not well defied at the molecular level.  In this study, we employed a rat model to mimic warm ischemia (45 mins) and reperfusion injury (IRI) for 4h and 24h. Apoptotic and tissue histological staining confirmed apoptosis and necrosis occurred at 4h and 24h post IRI respectively. Tissue proteome study revealed acute phase response, coagulation and complement activation and lipid X receptor activation as major pathway altered in intervention kidneys. Metabolomics follow up disclosed an increased level of lipids and fatty acids (FA). Mitochondrial function analysed by mitochondrial complex I activity and oxygen consumption and ATP levels in intervention kidney tissues were maintained 4h post IRI, but was significantly reduced 24h post IRI. Integrated proteo-metabolome analysis discovered an increased FA beta-oxidation 4h post IRI to sustain energy production. Kidney function were declined 24h post IRI indicated by increased blood creatinine and lactate levels. This study provides the frame work for the design of future metabolic intervention strategies to minimize kidney injury.

### Sample Protocol
The kidney cortex was carefully dissected (20-30 mg sections) and placed in a bead-beater tubes containing lysis buffer (8M urea, 50mM Tris-HCL, pH 8.5, 5 mM DTT, 1% SDS, protease inhibitor) to make it 20mg/ml. Tissues were homogenized for 4 times at 6,500 Hz for 40 seconds in a beads-beater (Stretton, UK). The samples were centrifuged at 10,000g for 5 min at 4 °C to remove insoluble tissue debris. The protein concentration in the homogenates was determined by a BCA assay (Thermo Fisher, UK) and 100 µg of total proteins were added to a 30 kDa filter (Millipore, UK). Proteins were reduced by 20 mM DTT (Sigma, UK) at 37 °C for 1 hour, and then alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma, UK) for 45 min in the dark, at room temperature. Samples were centrifuged for 20 min at 14,000 g to remove DTT and IAA and followed by buffer exchange with 8 M urea twice and 50 mM ammonia bicarbonate for 3 times. One hundred microliters of trypsin were added at a trypsin/protein ratio of 1:50 for digestion at 37 °C overnight. Digested peptides were collected by upside down spin and membrane filters washed twice with 0.5 M NaCl and water respectively. The peptides were purified by SepPak C18 cartridge (Waters, UK), dried by Speed Vac centrifugation and resuspended in buffer A (2% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid) for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out by Nano-ultra performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometer analysis was carried out using a 75 µm-inner diameter x 25 cm C18 nanoAcquity UPLC column (1.7-µm particle size, Waters). Peptides were separated with a 120 min gradient of 3–40% solvent B (solvent A: 99.9% H2O, 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: 99.9% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at 250 nl/min and injected into a Q ExactiveTM HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) acquiring data in electron spray ionisation (ESI) positive mode. The MS survey was set with a resolution of 60,000 FWHM with a recording window between 300 and 2,000 m/z, a maximum of 20 MS/MS scans were triggered in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data were uploaded to LC-Progenesis IQ software (Waters), and total ion chromatograms (TICs) including retention time and m/z were used for automatic sample alignment. Merged files containing all the MS/MS spectra from all samples were submitted to a Mascot (V2.5) Matrix science searches against the Swissprot rat database (UPR_Rattus Norvegicus, 34,165 entries). Proteins were identified with at least one matched peptide, a peptide score above 20, and an estimated false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%, representing confidence of identification. Protein quantities were measured by the sum of top three unique peptide precursor ion intensities quantity, derived from the same protein after quantity normalization. Statistical analysis was conducted using one-way ANOVA for comparing the independent sample types.

### Publication Abstract
Ischaemia and reperfusion injury (IRI) is the leading cause of acute kidney injury (AKI), which contributes to high morbidity and mortality rates in a wide range of injuries as well as the development of chronic kidney disease. The cellular and molecular responses of the kidney to IRI are complex and not fully understood. Here, we used an integrated proteomic and metabolomic approach to investigate the effects of IRI on protein abundance and metabolite levels. Rat kidneys were subjected to 45&#x2009;min of warm ischaemia followed by 4&#x2009;h and 24&#x2009;h reperfusion, with contralateral and separate healthy kidneys serving as controls. Kidney tissue proteomics after IRI revealed elevated proteins belonging to the acute phase response, coagulation and complement pathways, and fatty acid (FA) signalling. Metabolic changes were already evident after 4&#x2009;h reperfusion and showed increased level of glycolysis, lipids and FAs, whilst mitochondrial function and ATP production was impaired after 24&#x2009;h. This deficit was partially compensated for by the contralateral kidney. Such a metabolic balance counteracts for the developing energy deficit due to reduced mitochondrial function in the injured kidney.

### Keywords
Gcxgc-ms, Metabolomics, Proteomics, Ischaemia reperfusion injury (iri), Lipid metabolism, Fatty acids, Β-oxidation, Kidney transplantation

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Target Discovery Institute, NDMRB, University of Oxford

### Submitter
Philip Charles

### Lab Head
Dr Benedikt Kessler
Target Discovery Institute, NDMRB, University of Oxford


