### Accession
PXD011345

### Title
Analysis of the Escherichia coli membrane vesicle proteome identifies markers of purity and culture conditions

### Description
Bacteria release nano-sized membrane vesicles (MVs) into the extracellular milieu. Bacterial MVs contain molecular cargo originating from the parent bacterium and have important roles in bacterial survival and pathogenesis. Using 8-plex iTRAQ approaches, we profiled the MV proteome of two Escherichia coli strains - uropathogenic E. coli (UPEC) 536 and probiotic Nissle 1917. For these strains, we compared the difference in the MV proteome between a crude input MV prepared by ultracentrifugation alone with that from MVs that were further purified by either density gradient centrifugation (DGC) or size exclusion chromatography (SEC); and also compared MVs from bacterial cultures that were grown in iron-restricted (R) and ironsupplemented (RF) conditions. We found that overall, outer membrane components were highly enriched, and bacterial inner membrane components were significantly depleted in both UPEC and Nissle MVs, in keeping with an outer membrane origin. In addition, we found enrichment of ribosome-related Gene Ontology terms in UPEC MV, and proteins involved in glycolytic process and ligase activity in Nissle MV. We have identified that three proteins (RbsB of UPEC in R; YoeA of UPEC in RF; BamA of Nissle in R) were consistently enriched in the DGC- and SEC-purified MV samples in comparison to their crude input MV, whereas conversely the 60 kDa chaperonin GroEL was enriched in the crude input MVs for both UPEC and Nissle in R condition. Such proteins may have a potential utility as technical markers for assessing the purity from contaminating non-vesicular protein after MV purification. Several proteins were changed in their abundance depending on the iron availability in the media.

### Sample Protocol
Crude input preparation and MV fractionation by DGC and SEC UPEC 536 (O6:K15:H31) and Nissle 1917 (O6:K5:H1) were grown at 37°C in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10 µM FeCl3 (RF) or without (R). Bacterial cells were removed from the culture broths by centrifugation at 7,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C followed by filtration through 0.22 μm, and crude input MV was prepared from the cleared supernatants by ultracentrifugation at 75,000 x g for 2.5 hr at 4°C. The crude input MV preparations were further purified by either DGC. DGC was performed by centrifugation of crude input MVs at 100,000 x g for 16 hr at 4ᵒC with 6 layers of Optiprep solutions (45, 40, 35, 30, 25 and 20%); and SEC was carried out using qEV columns (IZON) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Crude input and DGC- or SEC-purified MVs were subjected to bicinchoninic acid protein assay, protein gel electrophoresis and nanoparticle tracking analysis. Results from these analyses enabled us to select the MV-rich fractions and these were pooled for the proteomics analysis. Peptide preparation Proteins were extracted from DGC- and SEC-purified pooled MV samples and their matching crude input MV samples, using methanol-chloroform precipitation/lipid removal.  Protein pellets (50 µg of protein for each UPEC sample; 42.5 µg for each Nissle sample) were solublised in 50 µl lysis buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol (DTT), 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Disulfide bonds were reduced by incubation in lysis buffer at 56°C for 45 min. Cysteines were alkylated by addition of iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 50 mM, followed by incubation at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Excess iodoacetamide was quenched by addition of DTT to 20 mM. Samples were diluted 10-fold with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and digested with trypsin at 37°C for 16 hr. Digested peptides were acidified with formic acid, and desalted on Oasis HLB Vac cartridges. Desalted peptides were eluted with 300 µl of 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, and dried using SpeedVac concentrator. Peptide labelling with iTRAQ reagents Peptide samples were resuspended in 500 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and labelled with iTRAQ 8-plex reagents (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s supplied protocol. Labelling reactions were allowed to proceed for 2 hr before samples were concentrated and peptides resuspended in 0.1% formic acid at a concentration equivalent to 1 µg/µl starting material. For each sample pool, equal amounts of labelled peptide were pooled and desalted on Oasis HLB 1 cc Vac cartridges as described above. All 8 UPECderived MV samples were pooled together to be analysed simultaneously in a single run (named as iTRAQ#1) and all the other 8 Nissle MV samples were pooled together similarly for the second run (iTRAQ#2). Mass spectrometry and protein identification and quantitation Data were acquired on an AB Sciex TripleTOF 6600 Quadrupole-Time-of-Flight mass spectrometer with an Eksigent ekspert nano HPLC system (AB Sciex). Solvents were 0.1% formic acid in water (Solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (Solvent B). Samples were injected onto a 0.3 x 10 mm trap column packed with Reprosil C18 media (Dr.Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) and desalted at 2 µl/min with 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid before being separated on a 0.075 x 200 mm PicoFrit column (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) packed in-house with Reprosil C18 media. For elution of peptides, the following solvent B gradient was formed at 250 nl/min: 0 min 1%; 2 min 1%; 105 min 35.2%; 110 min 98%; 115 min 98%; 116 min 1%; 120 min 1%. The mass spectrometer was programmed to perform cycles of one survey scan with a duration of 250 ms (m/z 350-1600), followed by 40 ms MS/MS scans on the 40 most abundant multiply-charged peptides (m/z 80-1600). The mass spectrometer and HPLC system were under the control of the Analyst TF 1.7 software package (AB Sciex).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and quantified using ProteinPilot software (v5.0.0.0, 4769; AB SCIEX). Spectral data files were searched against the UniProt E. coli proteome database (19,517 sequence entries, downloaded on August 17th 2015 from www.uniprot.org) with following analysis parameters: Sample type - iTRAQ 8-plex (Peptide Labeled); Cysteine alkylation - iodoacetamide; Digestion - trypsin; Instrument – TripleTOF 6600; Search effort – thorough; FDR analysis - yes. Automatic bias correction was applied to normalize the variability due to unequal mixing of different labelled peptide samples. Proteins were grouped by the Pro Group algorithm of ProteinPilot to minimise redundancy.

### Publication Abstract
Bacteria release nano-sized extracellular vesicles (EVs) into the extracellular milieu. Bacterial EVs contain molecular cargo originating from the parent bacterium and have important roles in bacterial survival and pathogenesis. Using 8-plex iTRAQ approaches, we profiled the EV proteome of two <i>Escherichia coli</i> strains, uropathogenic (UPEC) 536 and probiotic Nissle 1917. For these strains, we compared the proteome of crude input EVs prepared by ultracentrifugation alone with EVs purified by either density gradient centrifugation (DGC) or size exclusion chromatography (SEC). We further compared the proteome of EVs from bacterial cultures that were grown in iron-restricted (R) and iron-supplemented (RF) conditions. Overall, outer membrane components were highly enriched, and bacterial inner membrane components were significantly depleted in both UPEC and Nissle EVs, in keeping with an outer membrane origin. In addition, we found enrichment of ribosome-related Gene Ontology terms in UPEC EVs and proteins involved in glycolytic processes and ligase activity in Nissle EVs. We have identified that three proteins (RbsB of UPEC in R; YoeA of UPEC in RF; BamA of Nissle in R) were consistently enriched in the DGC- and SEC-purified EV samples in comparison to their crude input EV, whereas conversely the 60 kDa chaperonin GroEL was enriched in the crude input EVs for both UPEC and Nissle in R condition. Such proteins may have utility as technical markers for assessing the purity of <i>E. coli</i> EV preparations. Several proteins were changed in their abundance depending on the iron availability in the media. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD011345. In summary, we have undertaken a comprehensive characterization of the protein content of <i>E. coli</i> EVs and found evidence of specific EV cargos for physiological activity and conserved protein cargo that may find utility as markers in the future. <b>Abbreviation:</b> DGC: density gradient centrifugation; DTT: 1,4-dithiothreitol; EV: extracellular vesicles; FDR: false discovery rate; GO: Gene Ontology; R: iron-restricted; RF: iron-supplemented; iTRAQ: isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation; OMV: outer membrane vesicle; SWATH-MS: sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra; SEC: size exclusion chromatography.

### Keywords
Membrane vesicles; extracellular vesicles; pathogen; microbe; proteomics; iron

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Medicine and Pathology, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
School of Biological Sciences, University of Auckland

### Submitter
Leo Payne

### Lab Head
Dr Simon Swift
Department of Molecular Medicine and Pathology, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand


