### Accession
PXD035456

### Title
Rapid Detection of Procalcitonin in septic serum  by Immunoaffinity MALDI Chips

### Description
PCT concentration in the bloodstream correlates well with sepsis presence and in severe cases increases up to a thousand times from the healthy physiological values in a short time. In this study, we developed a rapid technique for PCT detection by MALDI-MS, that uses in-situ enrichment directly on the specialized immuno MALDI chips that are utilized directly as MALDI plates. The method’s ability to detect PCT was confirmed by comparing the results with LC-MS bottom-up workflow.

### Sample Protocol
For LC-MS/MS analysis, five microliters of sample were mixed with 20 µL of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. The sample pH was adjusted with NH4OH solution to pH 7-8. The sample was incubated at 60 °C for 40 min. After a cooling down to the room temperature, iodoacetamide was added to the final concentration of 30 mM, and the sample was incubated for 30 min in the dark. Additional DTT was added to the final concentration of 50 mM to stop the alkylation reaction. Trypsin (0.1 µg/mL) was added, and the reaction mixture was incubated overnight at 37 °C. Samples were analyzed using a liquid chromatograp (Agilent 1200 series, Agilent Technologies) connected to the timsToF Pro PASEF mass spectrometer equipped with Captive spray (Bruker Daltonics). Mass spectrometer was  operated in positive mode and data-dependent method was used. Five microliters of peptide mixture were injected by autosampler on the C18 trap column (UHPLC Fully Porous Polar C18 2.1mm ID, Phenomenex). After 5 min of trapping at the flow rate of 20 L/min, peptides were eluted from the trap column and separated on a C18 column (Luna Omega 3 μm Polar C18 100 Å, 150 x 0.3 mm, Phenomenex) by a linear 35 min water−acetonitrile gradient from 5% (v/v) to 35% (v/v) acetonitrile at a flow rate of 4 L/min. The trap and analytical column were both heated to 50C. Parameters from the standard proteomics PASEF method were used to set timsTOF Pro. The target intensity per individual PASEF precursor was set to 6000, and the intensity threshold was set to 1500. The scan range was set between 0.6 and 1.6 V s/ cm2 with a ramp time of 100 ms. The number of PASEF MS/MS scans was 10. Precursor ions in the m/z range between 100 and 1700 with charge states ≥2+ and ≤6+ were selected for fragmentation. The active exclusion was enabled for 0.4 min.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed by PeaksStudio 10.0 software (Bioinformatics Solutions, Canada). The search parameters were set as follows: enzyme – trypsin (specific), carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, and acetylation of protein N-terminus as variable modifications. Database: UniProt (human, virus and bacteria, 01/2021).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Maldi-tof, Immunoaffinity chips, Procalcitonin, Sepsis

### Affiliations
Institute of Biotechnology, Czech Republic
Intitute of Biotechnology

### Submitter
Petr Pompach

### Lab Head
Dr Petr Pompach
Institute of Biotechnology, Czech Republic


