### Accession
PXD020618

### Title
Clinical Proteomics of Metastatic Melanoma Reveals Profiles of Organ-Specificity and Treatment Resistance

### Description
Immunotherapy and targeted therapy dramatically changed the treatment of metastatic melanoma. Yet, many patients do not respond to these treatments and improve the understanding of response and resistance is an urgent need. Thus, we utilized mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis of 185 metastatic melanoma samples. Metastases from different sites demonstrate differences in cellular processes such as immune, metabolism, translation and proliferation. Complementary epidemiology analysis uncovers prognosis variance between different metastases locations after treated with anti-PD1.  Examination of lung melanoma metastases reveals clinical and molecular heterogeneity that mainly reflected in immune-related processes. Analysis of BRAF mutation status and prior treatments with MAPK inhibitors also indicate differences in immune and metabolic processes and suggest a molecular basis for the combination of immunotherapy and targeted therapy. These results shed new light into biology and therapeutic resistant mechanisms and the pathogenesis of metastatic melanoma.

### Sample Protocol
Clinical samples were prepared according to the procedure described in our previous research by Harel et al. Briefly, samples were prepared from slides of FFPE blocks that were macro-dissected of stage IV metastatic melanoma patients. For sample preparation, we selected only areas rich with tumor cells. Samples were taken shortly before the initiation of the indicated treatment (except for 12 samples taken two weeks to 7 months after starting treatment). Clinical information of each patient is included in Table S1A. To obtain accurate proteome quantification, we designed a super-SILAC mix, which was composed of five SILAC-labeled melanoma cell lines that served as a reference for normalization. For the unpublished additional samples, we used similar method as previous. The extracted tissues were lysed with 50% 2-2-2 trifluoroethanol (TFE), 25mM ABC. Samples were boiled for 1 h at 99°C, sonicated and centrifuged at 20,000 x g. Following protein determination using the Bradford protocol, the heavy labeled super-SILAC standard lysate (in the same buffer) and the tumor lysates were mixed at a 1:1 ratio. Proteins were reduced using 5 mM DTT, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide, diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by overnight digestion with Lys-C-Trypsin mix (1:100 enzyme to protein ratio) and trypsin (Promega; 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio). Peptides were then acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid, separated into five fractions using strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography in a stage tip format and then purified on C-18 (3M) stage tips.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS-based proteomics Peptides were separated by reverse-phase chromatography using the nano-ultra high-performance liquid chromatography system (UHPLC) (Easy-nLC1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled to the Q-Exactive HF or Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher Scientific)34. Peptides were separated with 140-220 minutes linear gradients of water/acetonitrile(ACN). Gradient ACN percentages were modified according to the pH of the fraction. The resolutions of the MS and MS/MS spectra were 70,000 and 17,500 for Q-Exactive Plus, respectively. The resolutions of the MS and MS/MS spectra were 60,000 and 30,000 for Q-Exactive HF, respectively. The m/z range was set to 300-1700 or 380-1800 Th. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent mode, with target values of 3E+06 and 1E+05 or 5E+04 for MS and MS/MS scans, respectively, and a top-10 method.  Proteomics raw MS data processing MS raw files of all samples were jointly analyzed by MaxQuant35 version 1.6.2.6 and the integrated Andromeda search engine36. MS/MS spectra were referenced to the Uniprot human proteome (http://www.uniprot.org/) released in April 2018. False discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 was used on both the peptide and protein levels.  Peptides were allowed to have methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications and cysteine carbimdomethyl as a fixed modification. The ‘‘match between runs’’ option was enabled to transfer identification between separate LC-MS/MS runs based on their accurate mass and retention time after retention time alignment. The settings for the SILAC-labeled tumor sample runs included Lys-8 and Arg-10 as heavy labels.   Data pre-processing and statistics Analyses were performed using the Perseus software version 1.6.2.337, R environment, GraphPad PRISM version 8 (www.graphpad.com) and IBM SPSS software version 25. For all proteomic analyses, the proteinGroups output table was used. Reverse proteins, proteins that were only identified by site, and potential contaminants (excluding keratins) were filtered out, and normalized ratio tumor/SILAC data were log2-transformed. We identified 10,178 proteins in total but in order to retain high-quality quantifications, protein groups were filtered to have at least 60% valid values, reaching a list of 4883 protein groups, which were further used for all downstream analyses. Data were normalized by subtracting most frequent value in each sample. The initial dataset consisted of 185 samples and we excluded samples with less than 3,500 proteins (11 samples). The remaining 174 samples were taken for further analysis. Missing value imputation was performed sample-wise by drawing values from a normal distribution with a width of 1.6 and a downshift of 0.4 standard deviations of the specific sample. Batch effect originating from dataset integration, time gaps and differences in sample preparation techniques was corrected by performing linear modeling using the R limma package (Fig. S1A-B). Student's t-tests and ANOVA tests were performed also by using the R limma package. 1D annotations enrichment analysis and Fisher exact test enrichment analysis were done in Perseus software with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR < 0.02 as mentioned specifically in each part. Kaplan-Meier and log-rank tests were performed using PRISM,  R's survival (https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=survival) and survminer (https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/survminer/index.html) packages. Logistic regression was done in SPSS software. For the upregulated proteins network analysis we use the String database (http://string-db.org) to derive the protein-protein interaction information within each group. Next, to combine two networks we use the Cytoscape software and the DyNet plugin. Biological annotations were taken from Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG).  Weighted gene correlation network analysis (WGCNA) and unsupervised clustering  WGCNA was performed using the WGCNA implementation in Perseus software. We used a soft-threshold beta power=12 to create a robust signed network. We used Pearson correlation to calculate the correlation between the module eigengene and clinical annotations (Fig. S2A-B). For the unsupervised clustering approach and to obtain a robust classification, we applied the consensus clustering algorithm using R package Consensus Cluster Plus (parameters used: max. Number of clusters – 6; number of iterations – 1000; subsampling fraction - 0.8; clustering algorithm – hierarchical; distance matrix - Pearson correlation). Before applying the algorithm ratios across proteins and samples were Z scored normalized.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunotherapy, Melanoma, Proteomics, Braf, Metastases

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Tamar Geiger
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel


