### Accession
PXD046797

### Title
Identification of the late endosome LE/MVB proteome related to the endosomal microautophagy eMI activity in the rat liver.

### Description
To identify the late endosome LE/MVB proteome related to the endosomal microautophagy eMI activity we purified subcellular organelles including cytosol, late endosomes (LE/MVBs) and lysosomes (CMA+) from the rat liver and performed co-Ip experiment with antibodies directed against the major cellular chaperones mediating CMA and eMI.  As such, we analyzed Hsc70-interacting proteins in LE/MVB, CMA+ lysosomes and cytosol by performing pull-down experiments (co-IP) using anti-Hsc70 antibodies.  A comparative analysis of the Hsc-70 interactomes revealed that proteins bound to Hsc70 in cytosol and LE/MVBs or in cytosol and CMA+ lysosomes were considered eMI or CMA substrates, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: Isolation of subcellular compartments Rodent liver lysosomes and LE/MVBs were isolated after tissue homogenization and centrifugation in density gradients. For lysosomes, homogenates were subjected to differential centrifugation to obtain a light mitochondrial/lysosome fraction, which was subsequently ultracentrifuged in a discontinuous metrizamide density gradient. 63 Lysosomes active (+) or inactive (-) for CMA were separated by differential centrifugation as described before 39. LE/MVBs were isolated from rodent livers through consecutive discontinuous density gradients of sucrose and Percoll (GE Healthcare) as described previously. 18,64 Endolysosomal compartment integrity after isolation was assessed by measuring enzymatic β-hexosaminidase activity released from the pelleted organelles. 65 Only isolations with less than 10% membrane breakage were used for subsequent analyses. Cytosol was obtained by centrifugation at 100000xg for one hour of the post-nuclear supernatant. Except for the transport studies, all fractions were supplemented with protease inhibitor (10mM leupeptin, 10mM 4-(2-aminoethyl) benzenesulfonyl fluoride hydrochloride, 1mM pepstatin, 100mM EDTA) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails 2 (Sigma P5726) and 3 (Sigma P0044) prior to freezing. Co-Immunoprecipitation Isolated LE/MVBs were resuspended in co-immunoprecipitation (coIP) buffer (20mM MOPS, 0.3M sucrose, 1mM DTT, 0.5% NP-40, pH 7.3) supplemented with a cocktail of protease inhibitors and incubated on ice for ten minutes before centrifugation at 16000xg for 15 minutes at 4°C. Solubilized proteins were incubated with primary antibodies (isotype control anti-rat IgG and rabbit anti-rat Hsc-70) for 2h under continuous rotation. Protein A/G Plus agarose beads (Santa Cruz, sc-2003) were added for an additional 1h. After extensive washing, immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted and prepared for in solution digestion with trypsin and nanoLC/MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Eluted and desalted tryptic peptides were further subjected to nanoLC/MS/MS using Orbitrap (MS Scan Mode: FT-ICR/Orbitrap MS/MS Scan Mode: Linear Ion Trap) and Q-Exactive HF quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to an Easy nLC 1000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source.  The mass spectrometer was operated using an already published protocol describing data–dependent acquisition (DDA) and positive ionization mode. Raw files from each technical and biological replicate were filtered, de novo sequenced, and assigned with protein ID using Peaks X+/Pro software (Bioinformatics Solutions) by searching against the reviewed rat (Rattus norvegicus) Swiss-Prot database (February 2015; 7880 reviewed entries) using the following parameters:  trypsin, as restriction enzyme and two allowed missed cleaved at one or both peptide end.  The parent mass tolerance was set to 15-20 ppm using monoisotopic mass, and fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.5-0.6 Da for the data generated by the Orbitrap (linear ion trap) and 0.05-0.06 Da for the data generated by the Q-Exactive (Orbi-Orbi).  Carbamidomethyl cysteine (+57.0215 on C) was specified in PEAKS as a fixed modification.  Methionine, lysine, proline, arginine, cysteine, and asparagine oxidations (+15.99 on CKMNPR), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (NQ-0.98) and pyro-Glu from glutamine (Q-18.01 N-term) were set as variable modifications. For one given experiment, the  data were validated using the false discovery rate (FDR) method built in PEAKS X, and protein identifications were accepted with a confidence score (−10lgP) >15 for peptides and (−10lgP) >15 for proteins; a minimum of one peptide per protein was allowed after data were filtered for <1.5% FDR for peptides and <2% FDR for proteins identifications (P < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA) and endosomal microautophagy (eMI) are pathways for selective degradation of cytosolic proteins in lysosomes and late endosomes, respectively. These autophagic processes share as a first step the recognition of the same five-amino-acid motif in substrate proteins by the Hsc70 chaperone, raising the possibility of coordinated activity of both pathways. In this work, we show the existence of a compensatory relationship between CMA and eMI and identify a role for the chaperone protein Bag6 in triage and internalization of eMI substrates into late endosomes. Association and dynamics of Bag6 at the late endosome membrane change during starvation, a stressor that, contrary to other autophagic pathways, causes a decline in eMI activity. Collectively, these results show a coordinated function of eMI with CMA, identify the interchangeable subproteome degraded by these pathways, and start to elucidate the molecular mechanisms that facilitate the switch between them.

### Keywords
Lysosomes and cytosol, Rat liver, Cma vs microautophagy; hsc-70-co-ip-ms/ms in late endosomes

### Affiliations
Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.
Weill Cornell Medicine

### Submitter
Cristina Clement

### Lab Head
Dr Anna-Maria Cuervo
Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.


