### Accession
PXD000619

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of gallbladder cancer

### Description
We carried out an iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis of gallbladder cancer and adjacent non-tumor tissue to systematically identify differentially expressed proteins in gallbladder cancer. Ten gallbladder adenocarcinoma and ten adjacent non-tumor tissue samples were selected post pathological confirmation for the study. Samples were pooled and In-solution trypsin digestion was carried out. Post digestion, peptides were iTRAQ labeled with 114 and 115 (gallbladder adenocarcinoma) and 116 and 117 (adjacent non-tumor samples). LC-MS/MS analysis of SCX fractions was carried out using a reversed phase analytical C18 column connected to 1200 Series Nanoflow LC interfaced with LTQ-Orbitrap Velos. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 2.1. Proteome Discoverer (v 1.3) suite was used for quantitation and database searches. LC-MS/MS data were searched using Mascot and SEQUEST search algorithms against Human RefSeq 50 supplemented with frequently observed contaminants.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Gallbladder cancer is an uncommon but lethal malignancy with particularly high incidence in Chile, India, Japan and China. There is a paucity of unbiased large-scale studies investigating molecular basis of gallbladder cancer. To systematically identify differentially regulated proteins in gallbladder cancer, iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomics of gallbladder cancer was carried out using Fourier transform high resolution mass spectrometry. Of the 2575 proteins identified, proteins upregulated in gallbladder cancer included several lysosomal proteins such as prosaposin, cathepsin Z and cathepsin H. Downregulated proteins included serine protease HTRA1 and transgelin, which have been reported to be downregulated in several other cancers. Novel biomarker candidates including prosaposin and transgelin were validated to be upregulated and downregulated, respectively, in gallbladder cancer using tissue microarrays. Our study provides the first large scale proteomic characterization of gallbladder cancer which will serve as a resource for future discovery of biomarkers for gallbladder cancer.

### Keywords
Transgelin, Quantitative proteomics, Biomarkers, Itraq, Gallbladder cancer, Prosaposin

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head


