### Accession
PXD013349

### Title
ETS transcription factor ELF5 modulates estrogen action in breast cancer via participation in FOXA1-ER driven transcription

### Description
The ETS transcription factor ELF5 drives mammary alveolar development in preparation for lactation by forcing differentiation within the progenitor cell population. In luminal A breast cancer, early disease progression is predicted by high levels of ELF5, and in preclinical models elevated ELF5 is associated with its two key features, the acquisition of resistance to endocrine therapy and increased metastasis. Here we demonstrate using chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing that ELF5 binding overlaps with FOXA1 and ER at enhancers and promoters, and when elevated causes FOXA1 and ER to bind to new regions of the genome involved in resistance to endocrine therapy.

### Sample Protocol
MCF7 breast cancer cells were lysed, cross-linked and immunoprecipitation for ELF5 or IgG control were performed. Samples were reduced (DTT) and alkylated (IAA) and digested on the beads with trypsin overnight. Data dependent acquisition mass spectrometry for RIME1 was performed on a LTQ Orbitrrap Velos mass spectrometer and RIME 2-5 on a SCIEX 5600 Triple TOF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
For RIME 1, received raw data (.raw) were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.3.For RIME 2-5 raw data (.wiff and .wiff.scan) were converted into mgf files using the ProteinPilot software version 4.2 (SCIEX). Decoy database search was enabled to allow false discovery rate (FDR) calculation. Proteins accepted to be present in a sample had a FDR < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Acquired resistance to endocrine therapy is responsible for half of the therapeutic failures in the treatment of breast cancer. Recent findings have implicated increased expression of the ETS transcription factor ELF5 as a potential modulator of estrogen action and driver of endocrine resistance, and here we provide the first insight into the mechanisms by which ELF5 modulates estrogen sensitivity. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing we found that ELF5 binding overlapped with FOXA1 and ER at super enhancers, enhancers and promoters, and when elevated, caused FOXA1 and ER to bind to new regions of the genome, in a pattern that replicated the alterations to the ER/FOXA1 cistrome caused by the acquisition of resistance to endocrine therapy. RNA sequencing demonstrated that these changes altered estrogen-driven patterns of gene expression, the expression of ER transcription-complex members, and 6 genes known to be involved in driving the acquisition of endocrine resistance. Using rapid immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry of endogenous proteins, and proximity ligation assays, we found that ELF5 interacted physically with members of the ER transcription complex, such as DNA-PKcs. We found 2 cases of endocrine-resistant brain metastases where ELF5 levels were greatly increased and ELF5 patterns of gene expression were enriched, compared to the matched primary tumour. Thus ELF5 alters ER-driven gene expression by modulating the ER/FOXA1 cistrome, by interacting with it, and by modulating the expression of members of the ER transcriptional complex, providing multiple mechanisms by which ELF5 can drive endocrine resistance.

### Keywords
Human, Estrogen activation, Rime, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine
Mass Spectrometric Proteomics
1 Garvan Institute of Medical Research and The Kinghorn Cancer Centre, 384 Victoria Street Darlinghurst Sydney, NSW, 2010, Australia. 2 St Vincent’s Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine, UNSW Sydney, Australia.

### Submitter
Christoph Krisp

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Ormandy
1 Garvan Institute of Medical Research and The Kinghorn Cancer Centre, 384 Victoria Street Darlinghurst Sydney, NSW, 2010, Australia. 2 St Vincent’s Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine, UNSW Sydney, Australia.


