### Accession
PXD008891

### Title
Multiplex Biomarker Screening Assay for Urinary Extracellular Vesicles Study:  A Targeted Label-Free Proteomic Approach

### Description
The recent advance in targeted label-free proteomics, SWATH-MS, can provide consistent protein detection and reproducible protein quantitation, which is a considerable advantage for biomarker study of urinary exosome-enriched extracellular vesicles (EVs). We developed a SWATH-MS workflow with a curated spectral library of 1,073 targets. Application of the workflow across nine replicates of three sample types (EVs, microvesicles (MVs) and urine proteins (UP)) resulting in the quantitation of 842 proteins. The median-coefficient of variation of the 842 proteins in the EV sample was 7.6%, indicating excellent reproducibility. Data analysis showed common EV markers, (i.e. CD9, CD63, ALIX, TSG101 and HSP70) were enriched in urinary EVs as compared to MV and UP samples. Further development and applicationof this SWATH-MS workflow to a variety of kidney diseases may allow for new and robust avenues for biomarker identification and validation for clinical use.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation MVs and EVs were consecutively isolated from urine (48-mL) by differential centrifugation at 10,000xg, 4°C, 20-min and at 100,000xg, 4°C, 1-h (OptimaXE-100, Beckman Coulter, IN; SW60Ti rotor; k-factor 107.36). UP was concentrated by 3-kDa ultrafiltration (MilliporeSigma, MA). Vesicle pellets were solubilized by RIPA buffer containing 60 mg/mL dithiothreitol with sonication (30% amplitude, 3-sec for five times) for protein analysis. Protein concentration was determined by Pierce660 assay (ThermoFisher, KY). Peptide samples were prepared by in-gel tryptic digestion. Ten micrograms of each sample was resolved in a short length of 1.5 cm in the 1D (4-12%) Bis-Tris minigel. The gel was then fixed in 50% ethanol/10% acetic acid at room temperature, overnight, then washed in 30% ethanol for 10 min followed by two 10-min washes in deionized water. The corresponding lanes was cut into small gel pieces (~1 x 1 mm). The gel pieces were wash with 50 mM NH4HCO3, which then reduced and alkylated with 10 mM DTT and 100 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM NH4HCO3, respectively. Proteins in the gel pieces were digested with a final ratio of 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega Corp., WI, USA) in 25 mM NH4HCO3 and incubated at 37°C for 16-h. The digested peptides were collected and dried by a speed-vac (Speed-Vac plus, Savant, Ramsey, MN) and then recovered in 0.1% formic acid for proteomic analysis.  Nanoliquid chromatography coupled to electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS) NanoLC-ESI-MS/MS analyses was performed by a TripleTof 5600+ mass spectrometer (Sciex; Concord, Ontario, Canada) coupled with a nanoLC-ultra nanoflow system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA). An amount of peptide sample corresponding to 2.5 μg of total protein was load via an Eksigent NanoLC-AS-2 autosampler onto a column trap (Eksigent Chrom XP C18-CL-3 µm 120 Å, 350 µm x 0.5 mm; Sciex, Toronto, Canada) at 2 µL/min in 0.1% formic acid for 15 min to desalt and concentrate the sample, which subsequently submitted into Acclaim PepMap100 C18 LC column (75 µm x 15 cm, C18 particle sizes of 3 µm, 120 Å) (Dionex; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) for chromatographic separation. The peptides was eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a variable mobile phase (MP) gradient from 95% phase A (0.1% formic acid) to 40% phase B (99.9% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) for 70 minutes, from 40% phase B to 85% phase B for 5 minutes, and then keeping 85% phase B for 5 minutes. The nanoLC eluate was ionized and sprayed into the mass spectrometer using NANOSpray III Source (Sciex). Ion source gas 1 (GS1), ion source gas 2 (GS2) and curtain gas (CUR) were respectively kept at 13, 0  and 35 vendor specified arbitrary units. Interface heater temperature and ion spray voltage were kept at 150°C and at 2.6 kV, respectively.   Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode DDA method was operated in positive ion mode set to go through 1,929 cycles for 90 minutes, where each cycle performed 1 time of flight (TOF) mass spectrometry scan type (250 ms accumulation time, 350-1250 m/z window with a charge state of 2+ to 4+) followed by information dependent acquisition of the most 50 intense candidate ions. The minimum MS signal for triggering MS/MS scan was set to 150 counts. Each MS/MS scan was operated in high sensitivity mode, an accumulation time of 50 ms and a mass tolerance of 100 ppm. Former MS/MS-analyzed candidate ions were excluded for 12 sec after its first occurrence to reduce redundant peptide sequencing. The DDA data file (*.wiff) was recorded using Analyst-TF (v.1.7) software.   Data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode DIA method was built using the SWATH-MS acquisition method editor. A predefined mass window width of 8 m/z with overlapping of 1 m/z for 57 transmission windows was used. A TOF MS scan was set to go through 1,715 cycles, where each cycle performs one TOF-MS scan type (250 ms accumulation time, across the 350-750 precursor mass range) acquired in every cycle for a total cycle time of ~3.15 s. MS spectra were collected from 100-1250 m/z with an accumulation time of 50 ms per SWATH window width. Nominal resolving power for MS1 and SWATH-MS2 scan are 30,000 and 15,000, respectively. The rolling collision energy was applied with the collision energy spread of 15. The DIA data file (*.wiff) was recorded by Analyst-TF (v.1.7) software.

### Data Protocol
Spectral library generation A total of 16 DDA data from various urinary EV, MV and UP fractionations were used for spectral library generation. Merge search of 16 DDA files were accomplished by Protein Pilot v.5.0, revision 4769 (Sciex) using Paragon algorithm against SwissProt Homo Sapiens database (v.113016, 20,200 entries) with an automated false discovery rate and the searching parameters as followed; alkylation on cysteine by iodoacetamide, tryptic digestion, TripleTOF 5600 instrument, gel-based ID special factors, ID focus on biological modification, thorough ID search effort, and detected protein threshold [unused ProtScore (Conf)] > 0.05 (10%). The search result was manually inspected for unique peptides and proteins with false discovery rate (FDR) <1% which were considered valid. The Protein Pilot search result (*.group) was loaded onto SWATH Acquisition MicroApp v.2.0.2133 in PeakView software v.2.2 (Sciex). The maximum number of protein to import for spectral library generation was set as the number of proteins identified at 1% global FDR from fit. The original spectral library file (*.txt) was then imported into an Excel worksheet for manual curation. To reduce the source of assay inconsistency and variability, the spectral library was manually curated to exclude; i) any peptide with modification, but except carboxamidomethyl (CAM) of cysteine; ii) any peptide with missed cleavage; iii) any peptide that not terminated by lysine or arginine (which considered as non-tryptic peptide); iv) any peptide that identified as contamination or reversed sequences. The curated spectral library was imported back for further processing in SWATH Acquisition MicroApp in PeakView software. Since albumin and Tamm-Horsfall protein (THP) almost always presented in protein samples prepared from human urine, combination of albumin and THP peptides with various RT covered chromatographic separation was applied as the internal peptide standards for calibration. Retention time (RT) alignment was then be performed to calibrate RT of each peptide in different sample sets by the endogenous peptide strategy. The curated spectral library was used for SWATH data extraction.  SWATH-MS analysis For SWATH-MS analysis, peptide samples corresponding to 2.5 μg proteins obtained from EV, MV and UP samples (3 replicates for each sample) were submitted into NanoLC-ESI-MS/MS operated in DIA mode to obtain digital protein records (DIA files in *.wiff). SWATH data extraction was performed by SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (Sciex) using an extraction window of 5 min and the following parameters: 10 peptides per protein, 6 transitions per peptide, excluding shared peptides, peptide confidence of >99% with FDR<1%, and XIC width of 0.05 Da.   Data preprocessing and statistical analysis  After data extraction, quantitative data of all valid peptides and proteins were exported to the Excel worksheet. Data preprocessing was performed by Total Area Sum (TAS) approach using the following equation; [TAS-normalized protein intensity = (raw SWATH intensity of a particular protein/total intensity of all measured proteins) x 1.0E+08]. Missing value was not imputed, and thus, was set as 0 by the default. TAS-normalized protein intensity was used for data analysis. Data and statistical analyses were performed by Excel, R package MetaboAnalystR (www.metaboanalyst.ca), Heml (v.1.0.3.7), and David Bioinformatics Resources 6.820 as appropriate, and p-value<0.05 after Benjamini-Hochberg correction was considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
The recent advance in targeted label-free proteomics, SWATH-MS, can provide consistent protein detection and reproducible protein quantitation, which is a considerable advantage for biomarker study of urinary extracellular vesicles. We developed a SWATH-MS workflow with a curated spectral library of 1,145 targets. Application of the workflow across nine replicates of three sample types (exosome-like vesicles (ELVs), microvesicles (MVs) and urine proteins (UPs)) resulted in the quantitation of 888 proteins at FDR &lt;1%. The median-coefficient of variation of the 888 proteins in the ELV sample was 7.7%, indicating excellent reproducibility. Data analysis showed common exosome markers, (i.e. CD9, CD63, ALIX, TSG101 and HSP70) were enriched in urinary ELVs as compared to MVs and UPs. The use of a multiplex biomarker screening assay focused on ELVs was investigated, and perspectives in future applications are discussed.

### Keywords
Biomarker; exosomes; human urine; microvesicles; post-acquisition data extraction; proteome

### Affiliations
UC Proteomics Laboratory, Department of Cancer Biology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States.
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio

### Submitter
Somchai Chutipongtanate

### Lab Head
Dr Kenneth D. Greis
UC Proteomics Laboratory, Department of Cancer Biology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States.


