### Accession
PXD022583

### Title
dezocine pull down LC-MSMS in MDA-MB-231 CELLS

### Description
To reveal the direct target and molecular mechanisms underlying the effects of dezocine, a pull-down assay and HPLC-MS/MS were performed.l the direct target and molecular mechanisms underlying the effects of dezocine, a pull-down assay and HPLC-MS/MS were performed.

### Sample Protocol
Dezocine  was incubated with Sepharose 4B beads (200ml/g; GE Healthcare Life Sciences) in binding buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 5 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 0.01% Nonidet P-40, 4 μg/ml bovine serum albumin, 0.02 mM PMSF, 1X protease inhibitor mixture) with gentle rocking overnight at 4˚C to form dezocine-Sepharose 4B. The dezocine-Sepharose 4B beads were then washed three times with washing buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 5 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 0.01% Nonidet P-40, 0.02 mM PMSF). MDA-MB-231 cellular supernatant fraction (1 mg)  was then incubated with 200 μl dezocine-Sepharose 4B or Sepharose 4B (as a negative control) in binding buffer. After incubation overnight at 4˚C with gentle rocking, the beads were washed five times with washing buffer, and the proteins bound to the beads were analyzed by LC-MS/MS and western blotting.

### Data Protocol
The initial protein structure was built based on its X-ray crystal structure (PDB code: 2GVJ) (16). Computational docking was performed using the program Autodock Vina (17). The search space for docking was large enough to include the default pocket of the protein and for the ligand to rotate in. Potential binding configurations were then selected based on their binding affinity energy. Molecular dynamic simulations were performed from the selected docking conformation with Amber18 software using FF14SB force filed for the protein, GaFF2 forcefield for the ligand, and the TIP3P water model (18, 19). The protein was solvated in a rhombic octahedral box with periodic boundary conditions and a distance of 10 Å between the boundary and the nearest protein atoms. Sodium and chloride ions were added to neutralize the simulated system. The system was minimized for 10000 steps using a steepest descent algorithm, followed by a 1 ns heating process to increase the temperature from 10 K to 310 K, and 1 ns of NPT simulation with weak restraints on heavy atoms. The 20 ns of NPT MD production simulation was performed at 310 K, and snapshots from the last 10 ns were used for MM/GBSA calculations.

### Publication Abstract
Opioids are a potential adjuvant treatment for certain cancers; while they are primarily used to relieve chronic pain, these drugs may also affect cancer progression and recurrence. Dezocine is one opioid commonly used in China, but its effects on cancer cells are unknown. Here, we demonstrated the inhibitory effect of dezocine on triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells, and determined the underlying molecular mechanism. We found that dezocine suppressed cell proliferation, migration and invasion, and induced apoptosis in TNBC cells. Xenograft models demonstrated the inhibitory effects of dezocine treatment on TNBC tumor growth <i>in vivo</i>. The anticancer effects of dezocine were independent of opioid receptors, which are not highly expressed by normal breast or breast cancer tissues. A pull-down assay and LC-MS/MS analysis indicated that dezocine directly targets NAMPT: computer modeling verified that the free energy of dezocine kinetically bound into the pocket of NAMPT was -17.4&#xa0;kcal/mol. Consequently, dezocine treatment inhibited NAMPT enzyme activity, resulting in cellular NAD abolishment. We confirmed the dezocine-induced inhibition of cell proliferation by both NAMPT knockdown and upon treatment with the inhibitor FK866. Our results suggest that both dezocine and NAMPT might represent novel therapeutic targets for TNBC.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Breast cancer, Mda-mb-231

### Affiliations
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Regional Immunity and Diseases, Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Translational Medicine of Tumor, International Cancer Center, Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, School of Medicine, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518055, China.
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Regional Immunity and Diseases, Shenzhen University International Cancer Center, Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, School of Medicine, College of Life Sciences and Oceanography, Shenzhen University

### Submitter
Chenyang Xue

### Lab Head
Dr Duo Zheng
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Regional Immunity and Diseases, Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Translational Medicine of Tumor, International Cancer Center, Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, School of Medicine, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518055, China.


