### Accession
PXD035080

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the secretome of selected Mycobacterium tuberculosis Erdman strains

### Description
Extracellular Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) aggregates can evade phagocytosis and intracellular host-cell defenses by inducing macrophage killing. We showed that Mtb aggregates require a functional ESX-1 type VII secretion system and production of the surface-exposed lipid phthiocerol dimycocerosate (PDIM) to induce cell death upon contact with macrophages. We used quantitative proteomics to compare the secretome of a panel of Mtb mutant strains that induce or do not induce macrophage death and identified secreted bacteria factors involved in macrophage death induction.

### Sample Protocol
Mtb was inoculated in 10 ml cultures (or 30 ml cultures for proteomics samples) in Sauton’s medium supplemented with 0.05% Tween 80 at a starting OD600 of 0.1 and incubated at 37°C with shaking.  After 4 days the cells were harvested by centrifugation, washed with PBS and resuspended in 10 ml (or 30 ml cultures for proteomics samples) of Sauton’s medium without Tween 80 and incubated at 37°C with agitation for 4 days.  Cultures were pelleted by centrifugation and the collected culture media were filtered through a 0.2-μm-pore-size filter. Culture filtrates (secretomes) were concentrated 50x using Amicon Ultra centrifugal filters with 3-kDa cut-off (Millipore).  Mass spectrometry-based proteomics-related experiments were performed by the Proteomics Core Facility at EPFL.  Each sample was digested by filter aided sample preparation (FASP) with minor modifications.  Proteins (40 μg) were reduced with 10 mM TCEP in 8 M Urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0 at 37ºC for 60 min and further alkylated in 40 mM iodoacetamide at 37ºC for 45 min in the dark. Proteins were digested overnight at 37ºC using 1/50 w/w enzyme-to-protein ratio of mass spectrometry grade trypsin gold and LysC.  Generated peptides were desalted in StageTips using 6 disks from an Empore C18 (3 M) filter based on the standard protocol.  Purified peptides were dried down by vacuum centrifugation.  Samples were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (Biosolve), 0.1% FA and nano-flow separations were performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) on-line connected with an Orbitrap Exploris Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific).  A capillary precolumn (Acclaim Pepmap C18, 3 μm-100Å, 2 cm x 75μm ID) was used for sample trapping and cleaning.  A 50cm long capillary column (75 μm ID; in-house packed using ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm silica beads; Dr. Maisch) was then used for analytical separations at 250 nl/min over 150 min biphasic gradients.  Acquisitions were performed through Top Speed Data-Dependent acquisition mode using a cycle time of 2 seconds.  First MS scans were acquired with a resolution of 60’000 (at 200 m/z) and the most intense parent ions were selected and fragmented by High energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) with a Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) of 30% using an isolation window of 2 m/z.  Fragmented ions were acquired with a resolution 15’000 (at 200m/z) and selected ions were then excluded for the following 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant 1.6.10.43 [75] against the Uniprot Reference Proteome Mycobacterium Tuberculosis Erdman strain (4222 sequences, LM201030).  Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), phosphorylation (S, T, Y), acetylation (Protein N-term) and glutamine to pyroglutamate were considered as variable modifications.  A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed and “Match between runs” option was enabled.  A minimum of 2 peptides was required for protein identification and the false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff was set to 0.01 for both peptides and proteins.  Label-free quantification and normalisation was performed by Maxquant using the MaxLFQ algorithm, with the standard settings. The statistical analysis was performed using Perseus version 1.6.12.0 from the MaxQuant tool suite.  Reverse proteins, potential contaminants and proteins only identified by sites were filtered out.  Protein groups containing at least 2 valid values in at least one condition were conserved for further analysis.  Missing values were imputed with random numbers from a normal distribution (Width: 0.3 and Down shift: 1.8 sd).  A two-sample t-test with permutation-based FDR statistics (250 permutations, FDR=0.05, S0=1) was performed to determine significant differentially abundant candidates.

### Publication Abstract
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) infection is initiated by inhalation of bacteria into lung alveoli, where they are phagocytosed by resident macrophages. Intracellular Mtb replication induces the death of the infected macrophages and the release of bacterial aggregates. Here, we show that these aggregates can evade phagocytosis by killing macrophages in a contact-dependent but uptake-independent manner. We use time-lapse fluorescence microscopy to show that contact with extracellular Mtb aggregates triggers macrophage plasma membrane perturbation, cytosolic calcium accumulation, and pyroptotic cell death. These effects depend on the Mtb ESX-1 secretion system, however, this system alone cannot induce calcium accumulation and macrophage death in the absence of the Mtb surface-exposed lipid phthiocerol dimycocerosate. Unexpectedly, we found that blocking ESX-1-mediated secretion of the EsxA/EsxB virulence factors does not eliminate the uptake-independent killing of macrophages and that the 50-kDa isoform of the ESX-1-secreted protein EspB can mediate killing in the absence of EsxA/EsxB secretion. Treatment with an ESX-1 inhibitor reduces uptake-independent killing of macrophages by Mtb aggregates, suggesting that novel therapies targeting this anti-phagocytic mechanism could prevent the propagation of extracellular bacteria within the lung.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Secretome, Esx-1 secretion system

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL)
Ecole Polotechnique Federale de Lausanne (EPFL), SV, GHI, UPKIN

### Submitter
Chiara Toniolo

### Lab Head
Dr John McKinney
School of Life Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL)


