### Accession
PXD014227

### Title
Genotyping, generation and lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation identification of the first human autosomal dominant osteopetrosis type II specific induced pluripotent stem cells

### Description
Background: Autosomal dominant osteopetrosis type II (ADO2) is a rare human genetic disease that has been broadly studied as an important osteopetrosis model; however, there are no disease-specific induced pluripotent stem cells (ADO2-iPSCs) that may be valuable for understanding the pathogenesis and may be a potential source of cells for autologous cell therapy.  Methods: To generate the first human ADO2-iPSCs from a Chinese family with ADO2 and to identify their characteristics, blood samples were collected from the proband and his parents and were used for genotyping by whole-exome sequencing (WES); the urine-derived cells of the proband were reprogrammed with episomal plasmids that contained transcription factors, such as KLF4, OCT4, c-MYC, and SOX2. The proteome-wide analysis of lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation in the ADO2-iPSCs and control cell lines was performed by high-resolution LC-MS/MS and a bioinformatics analysis.  Results: WES with filtering strategies identified a mutation in CLCN7 (R286W) in the proband and his father, which was absent in the proband’s mother and the healthy controls; this was confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The ADO2-iPSCs were successfully generated, which carried the normal male karyotype (46, XY) and carried the mutation of CLCN7 (R286W); the ADO2-iPSCs positively expressed alkaline phosphatase and other surface markers; and no vector and transgene was detected. The ADO2-iPSCs could differentiate into all three germ cell layers, both in vitro and in vivo. Our proteomic profiling detected 7, 405 proteins and revealed 3,684 2-hydroxyisobutyrylated sites in 1,036 proteins in the ADO2-iPSCs. Conclusions: Our data indicated that mutation CLCN7 (R286W) may be a cause of the osteopetrosis family. The generated vector-free and transgene-free ADO2-iPSCs with identified lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation may be valuable for personalized and cell-based regenerative medicine in the future.

### Sample Protocol
1. Experimental Procedures 1.1 Protein Extraction Cells were sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (SCIENTZ Biotechnology, Ningbo, China) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The protein extracts were stored at -80 °C for further proteomic and Western blotting studies. 1.2 In-solution trypsin digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol ( Sigma ) for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. 1.3 TMT Labeling After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 6-plex TMT Kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT Reagent (Thermo, defined as the amount of reagent required to label 1 mg of protein) were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. 1.4 HPLC Fractionation and Affinity Enrichment The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. To enrich 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation modified peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were  incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Bio) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. Then the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 1.5 LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY -nLC 1000 UPLC system.  The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV.  The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. 1.6 Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem MS were searched against 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Data Protocol
2. Bioinformatics analysis 2.1 Protein annotation Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Firstly, Converting identified protein ID to UniProt ID and then mapping to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan v.5.14-53.0 (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. The 2-hydroxyisobutyrylated proteins were then further classified by GO annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)database was used to annotate protein pathway. Firstly, using KEGG online service tools KAAS v.2.0 (http://www.genome.jp/kaas-bin/kaas_main) to annotated protein’s KEGG database description. Then mapping the annotation result on the KEGG pathway database using KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper V2.5 (http://www.kegg.jp/kegg/mapper.html). Identified 2-hydroxyisobutyrylated proteins domain functional description were annotated by InterProScan on InterPro domain database via web-based interfaces and services. There, we used wolfpsort a subcellular localization predication soft to predict subcellular localization. Wolfpsort v.0.2 (http://www.genscript.com/psort/wolf_psort.html) is an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences. 2.2 Motif Analysis MoMoV5.0.2 (http://meme-suite.org/tools/momo) was used to analysis the model of sequences constituted with amino acids in specific positions of modify-21-mers (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site, but phosphorylation with modify-13-mers that 6 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site) in all protein sequences. And all the database protein sequences were used as background database parameter. Minimum number of occurrences was set to 20. Emulate original motif-x was ticked, and other parameters with default. 2.3 Enrichment of GO, pathway and protein domain analysis A two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The GO function, KEGG pathway and protein domain with a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant. For further hierarchical clustering based on different protein functional classification (such as: GO, Domain, Pathway). We first collated all the categories obtained after enrichment along with their P values, and then filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P value <0.05. This filtered P value matrix was transformed by the function x = −log10 (P value). Finally these x values were z-transformed for each functional category. These z scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Cluster membership were visualized by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package v.2.0.3 (https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/cluster/). 2.4 Protein-protein Interaction Network All differentially expressed modified protein database accession or sequence were searched against the STRING database version 10.5 for protein-protein interactions. Only interactions between the proteins belonging to the searched data set were selected, thereby excluding external candidates. STRING defines a metric called “confidence score”to define interaction confidence; we fetched all interactions that had a confidence score >0.7 (high confidence). Interaction network form STRING was visualized in R package “networkD3” v.0.4 (https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/networkD3/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
2-hydroxyisobutyrylation, Clcn7, Osteopetrosis, Whole exome sequencing, Ipscs

### Affiliations
Clinical Medical Research Center of Second Clinical Medical College, Jinan University, Shenzhen People's Hospital, No.1017, Dongmen North Road, Luohu District, Shenzhen 518020, China.
Shenzhen People’s Hospital

### Submitter
Donge Tang

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Dai
Clinical Medical Research Center of Second Clinical Medical College, Jinan University, Shenzhen People's Hospital, No.1017, Dongmen North Road, Luohu District, Shenzhen 518020, China.


