### Accession
PXD002659

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of Daoy and UW228 medulloblastoma cell lines

### Description
The goal of this study was to profile the total proteome and transcriptome of the established medulloblastoma cell lines, Daoy and UW228, using label-free nano-LC-MS/MS-based quantitative proteomics and high-throughput RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq), coupled with pathway analysis to identify differentially expressed genes, proteins and signaling pathways with potential as prognostic markers. A total of 14250 and 12870 transcripts were detected for Daoy and UW228, respectively. Proteomic profiling identified 2630 and 1235 proteins in Daoy and UW228, representing 18% and 10% of detected transcripts, respectively. Interestingly, Daoy proteome included >50% unique proteins, while almost 90% of proteins expressed by UW228 were commonly expressed in Daoy. Differential expression of a number of adhesion, cytoskeletal and signaling molecules were observed between the two cell lines. Upregulation of a number of proteins and enrichment of key signaling pathways, including WNT, Sonic hedgehog (SHH) and integrin signaling pathways, were uniquely observed in MB cell lines, in particular in Daoy.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in in DMEM media supplemented with 10% FBS and L-glutamine (1%) at 37ᵒ C/5% CO2. Cells were washed 3 times in ice-cold PBS and then collected, using a cell scraper, in lysis buffer containing 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% v/v Nonidet P-40 and protease inhibitor cocktail. The suspended cells were incubated for 30 min and ultra sonicated at intervals of 15 s for a total of 2 min (with 15 s pause between each treatment), followed by centrifugation at 17000× g for 1 h. All the above steps were performed at 4ᵒ C. Three biological replicates were performed for each analysis. Samples (70 μg total lysate protein per lane) were loaded onto NuPage 4−12% Bis-Tris precast gradient mini gel. Gels were fixed in 10% (v/v) acetic acid and 40% (v/v) methanol and stained overnight with Coomassie Blue, followed by destain with 10% (v/v) acetic acid until background was clear. Proteins in each slice (10 slices per lane) were reduced, alkylated and subjected to trypsin digestion. Tryptic digests were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Peptide mixtures in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid were loaded onto a C18 reversed phase column, packed in-house [2.7 μm (particle size) HaloLink Resins, Promega, column dimensions: 100 mm (length) × 75 μm (ID)]. Separation of peptides was performed over a 60 min gradient with the first 50 min of the linear gradient increasing from 0 to 50% in solvent B [0.1% (v/v) aqueous formic acid/100% (v/v) ACN] and then to 85% in solvent B for the next 2 min and maintained at 85% for 8 min. The flow rate was constant at 300 nL/min. The Easy-nLC (Thermo Scientific) was connected directly to the nano-ESI source of the Q-Exactive. MS full scans were acquired with resolution of 35,000 in the positive ion mode over m/z 350–2,000 range and an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1 × 106. The top 10 most intense precursor ions were then isolated for MS/MS using higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation at 17,500 resolution with the following settings: collision energy: 30%; AGC target: 2 × 105; isolation window: m/z 3.0; and dynamic exclusion enabled. Precursors with unassigned or Z = +1 charge states were ignored for MS/MS selection.

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer platform (version 1.3, Thermo Scientific), interfaced with an in-house Mascot server, was used for data parsing and protein identification, according to the following criteria: peptide mass tolerance of ±10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.1 Da, maximum of 2 missed tryptic cleavage sites. Deamidation (N,Q) and oxidation (M) were allowed as potential variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification. Peptide spectrum matches (PSM) were identified using thresholds (Xcorr scores above the following thresholds: ≥3.8 for 3+ and higher charge state ions, ≥2.2 for 2+ ions, and ≥1.9 for 1+ ions) to achieve a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% based upon decoy database matches. The spectral counts were used to measure relative abundance of protein samples as previously reported.

### Publication Abstract
Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant pediatric brain tumor. Patient survival has remained largely the same for the past 20 years, with therapies causing significant health, cognitive, behavioral and developmental complications for those who survive the tumor. In this study, we profiled the total transcriptome and proteome of two established MB cell lines, Daoy and UW228, using high-throughput RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) and label-free nano-LC-MS/MS-based quantitative proteomics, coupled with advanced pathway analysis. While Daoy has been suggested to belong to the sonic hedgehog (SHH) subtype, the exact UW228 subtype is not yet clearly established. Thus, a goal of this study was to identify protein markers and pathways that would help elucidate their subtype classification. A number of differentially expressed genes and proteins, including a number of adhesion, cytoskeletal and signaling molecules, were observed between the two cell lines. While several cancer-associated genes/proteins exhibited similar expression across the two cell lines, upregulation of a number of signature proteins and enrichment of key components of SHH and WNT signaling pathways were uniquely observed in Daoy and UW228, respectively. The novel information on differentially expressed genes/proteins and enriched pathways provide insights into the biology of MB, which could help elucidate their subtype classification.

### Keywords
Uw228, Medulloblastoma, Daoy, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Sciences Faculty of Medicine and Health Science Macquarie University
Biomedical Sciences

### Submitter
Susan Fanayan

### Lab Head
Dr Susan Fanayan
Department of Biomedical Sciences Faculty of Medicine and Health Science Macquarie University


