### Accession
PXD023915

### Title
iTRAQ quantitative analysis for AIS study

### Description
Relative quantitative analysis was performed to compare the proteomic profiles in plasma samples between healthy control and AIS subjects with different risk of curve progression.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples were collected from subjects upon informed consents. High abundance protein depletion was carried out followed by protein digestion with trypsin. The peptides were further subjected to iTRAQ Reagent 8-plex labelling. Labelled samples were mixed and separated into 20 fractions. Then each fraction was subjected to LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched against database and relative quantitation was performed to identify DEPs among groups. The DEPs were subjected to functional analysis including GO annotation, KEGG pathway analysis and protein-protein interaction analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Previous studies have reported abnormal muscle morphology and functions in patients with adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS). To answer whether such abnormalities could be reflected in their circulation and their clinical implication for predicting curve progression to the surgical threshold, this preliminary study explored the presence of baseline muscle-related proteins and their association with curve progression. Plasma samples were collected at the first clinical visit for AIS, with patients divided into non-progressive or progressive groups (<i>N</i> = four and four) according to their Cobb angle in six-year follow-ups, with age- and sex-matched healthy subjects (<i>N</i> = 50). Then, the samples were subjected to isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) for global comparison of untargeted protein expression. Seventy-one differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were found elevated in progressive AIS. Functional analysis showed that 18 of these are expressed in muscles and play an essential role in muscle activities. Among the muscle-related DEPs, &#x3b1;-actin had the highest fold change in progressive/non-progressive groups. This preliminary study firstly suggested higher circulating levels of muscle structural proteins in progressive AIS, indicating the likelihood of structural damage at the microscopic level and its association with progression to the surgical threshold. Further studies with larger sample sizes are warranted to validate these novel candidates for early diagnosis and predicting progression.

### Keywords
Plasma, Ais, Itraq

### Affiliations
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
CUHK

### Submitter
Yujia Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Wayne YW Lee
The Chinese University of Hong Kong


