### Accession
PXD027217

### Title
Nuclear-capture of endosomes drives depletion of nuclear G-actin to promote SRF/MRTF gene expression and cancer cell invasiveness.

### Description
Signals are relayed from receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) at the cell surface to effector systems in the cytoplasm and nucleus, and coordination of this process is important for the execution of migratory phenotypes, such as cell scattering and invasion.  The endosomal system influences how RTK signalling is coded, but the ways in which it transmits these signals to the nucleus to influence gene expression are not yet clear. Here we show that an RTK, MET promotes Rab17- and clathrin-dependent endocytosis of EphA2, another RTK, followed by centripetal transport of EphA2-positive endosomes. EphA2 then mediates physical capture of endosomes on the outer surface of the nucleus; a process involving interaction between the nuclear import machinery and a nuclear localisation sequence in EphA2’s cytodomain. Nuclear capture of EphA2 promotes RhoG-dependent phosphorylation of the actin-binding protein, cofilin to oppose nuclear import of G-actin. The resulting depletion of nuclear G-actin drives transcription of Myocardin-related transcription factor (MRTF)/serum-response factor (SRF)-target genes to implement cell scattering and the invasive behaviour of cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
On-beads proteolytic digestion Immunoprecipitation were repeated five times for each condition, and purified proteins were digested on beads as previously described [Hubner NC, Bird AW, Cox J, Splettstoesser B, Bandilla P, Poser I, Hyman A, Mann M. Quantitative proteomics combined with BAC TransgeneOmics reveals in vivo protein interactions. J Cell Biol. 2010 May 17;189(4):739-54], and desalted using StageTip [Rappsilber J, Mann M, Ishihama Y. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc. 2007;2(8):1896-906.].  Mass Spectrometry Desalted tryptic peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC II 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded into a 50 cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH). The emitter was kept at 50 °C by means of a column oven (Sonation) integrated into the nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Elution was carried out at a flow rate of 300  nl/min using a binary gradient with buffer A (2% acetonitrile) and B (80% acetonitrile), both containing 0.1% formic acid. An Active Background Ion Reduction Device (ESI Source Solutions) was used to decrease air contaminants signal level. Data were acquired using Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific), with a mass spectrometer operating in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) in positive ion mode. A full scan was acquired over mass range of 350-1400 m/z, with 60,000 resolution at 200 m/z, for a maximum injection time of 50 ms and with a target value of 5e5 ions with MonoIsotopic Precursor Selection set to “Peptide” mode. Higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation was performed on the 15 most intense ions, for a maximum injection time of 100 ms, or a target value of 75,000 ions. Peptide fragments were analysed in the Orbitrap at 15,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis. The MaxQuant software [Cox, J. and M. Mann, MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotech, 2008. 26(12): p. 1367-1372] version 1.6.14.0 was used to process MS Raw files and searched with Andromeda search engine [Cox, J., et al., Andromeda: A Peptide Search Engine Integrated into the MaxQuant Environment. J Proteome Res, 2011. 10(4): p. 1794-1805.], querying UniProt [The UniProt Consortium, The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) in 2010. Nucleic Acids Res, 2010. 38 (Database issue): p. D142-D148] Homo sapiens database (09/07/2016; 92,939 entries). Specificity for trypsin cleavage and maximum two missed cleavages were requested for the search. Methionine oxidation, di-Gly-lysine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications, and Cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. The peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%.  MaxQuant outputs were analysed with Perseus software (Tyanova, S. et al. The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat. Methods 13, 731–740 (2016)) version 1.6.2.3.  The common reverse and contaminant hits (as defined in MaxQuant output) were removed. Only protein groups identified with at least one uniquely assigned peptide were used for the quantification. For label-free quantification, proteins quantified in all five replicates in at least one group, were measured according to the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm available in MaxQuant [Cox, J., Hein, M. Y., Luber, C. A., Paron, I., Nagaraj, N. and Mann, M. (2014). Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 13, 2513-2526]. All protein intensity measured in each replicate experiment were normalised against the correspondent EPHA2 protein intensity. Missing values were imputed separately for each column (width 0.3, down shift 1.8), and significantly enriched proteins were selected using a t-test with a 5% FDR (permutation based).

### Publication Abstract
Signals are relayed from receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) at the cell surface to effector systems in the cytoplasm and nucleus, and coordination of this process is important for the execution of migratory phenotypes, such as cell scattering and invasion. The endosomal system influences how RTK signalling is coded, but the ways in which it transmits these signals to the nucleus to influence gene expression are not yet clear. Here we show that hepatocyte growth factor, an activator of MET (an RTK), promotes Rab17- and clathrin-dependent endocytosis of EphA2, another RTK, followed by centripetal transport of EphA2-positive endosomes. EphA2 then mediates physical capture of endosomes on the outer surface of the nucleus; a process involving interaction between the nuclear import machinery and a nuclear localisation sequence in EphA2's cytodomain. Nuclear capture of EphA2 promotes RhoG-dependent phosphorylation of the actin-binding protein, cofilin to oppose nuclear import of G-actin. The resulting depletion of nuclear G-actin drives transcription of Myocardin-related transcription factor (MRTF)/serum-response factor (SRF)-target genes to implement cell scattering and the invasive behaviour of cancer cells.

### Keywords
Actin polymerisation, Nuclear g-actin, Invasiveness, Nuclear import, Rab17, Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (pdac), Cell:cell repulsion, Serum-response factor (srf), Heptocyte growth factor (hgf), Myocardin-related transcription factor (mrtf), Epha2

### Affiliations
Proteomics
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom


