### Accession
PXD021039

### Title
Mass spectrometry runs and analysis of host proteins co-immunoprecipitated with RABV M protein

### Description
To explore the role of the matrix protein in RABV infection of host cells, we looked for host proteins that interact with the RABV M protein. We performed Flag-tag-based immunoprecipitation of lysates of HEK293T cells transfected with plasmids expressing either N- or C-terminally Flag-tagged M protein (M-NF or M-CF, respectively), and identified host proteins that interacted with the M proteins by using mass spectrometry (MS). Proteins were detected in lysates of cells transfected with the plasmid expressing Flag-tagged M proteins but not in those of cells transfected with the control plasmid. We identified a total of 2,672 host proteins that co-immunoprecipitated with the M protein; 492 proteins co-immunoprecipitated to both M-NF and M-CF, 1,761 proteins co-immunoprecipitated with M-NF only, and 419 proteins co-immunoprecipitated with M-CF only.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with pM-NF or pM-CF, or the control plasmids pNF or pCF by using the TransIT-293 (Mirus, USA) transfection reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The cells were incubated with lysis buffer [50 mM Tris·HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% Nonidet P-40, and protease inhibitor mixture Complete Mini (Roche, USA)] for 1 h at 4°C at 24 h post transfection. Supernatants, clarified by centrifugation, were incubated with an anti-Flag affinity gel (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) for 18 h at 4°C. Proteins bound to the affinity gel were eluted with elution buffer [50 mM Tris·HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, and 0.5 mg/mL Flag peptide (Sigma-Aldrich, USA)] for 1 h at 4℃. Then, a 10% (vol/vol) volume of the eluted proteins was subjected to SDS/PAGE and silver staining (Thermo Invitrogen, USA); the remaining 90% (vol/vol) volume of eluted proteins was subjected to liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis to identify co-immunoprecipitated host proteins. Samples was mixed with trypsin and digested at 37°C overnight. LC-MS/MS were implemented by using an EASY-nLCTM 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher) coupled with an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) at Novogene Genetics, Beijing, China.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS signals were then processed against the Uniprot human protein database (155,558 sequences as of October 15, 2016) using the Mascot algorithm (version 2.2; Matrix Science) with the following parameters: dynamical modifications: oxidation (M); fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl: (C); maximum missed cleavages, 2; filter by score >= 20. The search parameters of mass spectrometry were listed. Name of peaklist-generating software: Tune (release version 2.9 SP2 Build 2947); name of the search engine: Mascot algorithm (version 2.2; Matrix Science); name of sequence database searched: Uniprot (release version/date October 15, 2016); number of entries in the database actually searched: 155,558 sequences; specificity of all proteases used to generate peptides: trpsin; number of missed and/or non-specific cleavages permitted: 2; list of all fixed modifications (including residue specificity) considered: Carbamidomethyl / +57.021 Da (C); list of all variable modifications (including residue specificity) considered: Oxidation / +15.995 Da (M); mass tolerance for precursor ions: 10 ppm; mass tolerance for fragment ions: 0.02 Da; threshold score/Expectation value for accepting individual spectra: Q ≤ 0.01; estimation of false discovery rate (FDR) and how calculated (for large datasets): the target library and the decoy library are used to participate in the spectrum matching, and the comprehensive reliability score is from high to low. When the scoring threshold of the instrument is reached, the matching is stopped, and the results of all target / decoy PSM greater than this score are calculated as FDR values; mass-labeled MS/MS spectra of N-MFlag and C-MFlag has been provided as PDFs.

### Publication Abstract
Rabies virus (RABV) matrix protein (M) plays crucial roles in viral transcription, replication, assembly, and budding; however, its function during the early stage of virus replication remains unknown. Here, we mapped the protein interactome between RABV M and human host factors using a proteomic approach, finding a link to the V-type proton ATPase catalytic subunit A (ATP6V1A), which is located in the endosomes where RABV first enters. By downregulating or upregulating ATP6V1A expression in HEK293T cells, we found that ATP6V1A facilitated RABV replication. We further found that ATP6V1A was involved in the dissociation of incoming viral M proteins during viral uncoating. Coimmunoprecipitation demonstrated that M interacted with the full length or middle domain of ATP6V1A, which was dependent on the lysine residue at position 256 and the glutamic acid residue at position 279. RABV growth and uncoating in ATP6V1A-depleted cells was restored by trans-complementation with the full length or interaction domain of ATP6V1A. Moreover, stably overexpressed ATP6V1A enhanced RABV growth in Vero cells, which are used for the production of rabies vaccine. Our findings identify a new partner for RABV M proteins and establish a new role of ATP6V1A by promoting virion uncoating during RABV replication.

### Keywords
Host proteins, Co-immunoprecipitation, Rabv, Matrix protein, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, State Key Lab of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, China
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Xing Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Zhigao Bu
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, State Key Lab of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, China


