### Accession
PXD028317

### Title
Proteomic detection of mouse liver

### Description
This study aimed to investigate the mechanism of SYT on lipid metabolism and insulin sensitivity in high-fat diet (HFD)-induced obese mice by means of combining lipidomics and proteomics. The obese mice models were developed via HFD feeding for 20 consecutive weeks. Mice in the treatment group were given metformin and SYT respectively, and the effects of SYT on body weight, blood glucose, insulin sensitivity, fat accumulation in the organs, and pathological changes in the liver were monitored. Lipid metabolism was examined by lipidomics. Further determination of signaling pathways was detected by proteomics. The biological contributions of the compounds detected in SYT's chemical fingerprint were predicted by network pharmacology. Overall, our study provides supportive evidence for the mechanism of SYT's therapeutic effect on dysregulated lipid metabolism in diabesity.

### Sample Protocol
Mice were randomly divided into 5 groups: basal diet group (Con), high-fat diet (HFD) group, HFD with 100mg/kg metformin (MET) group, HFD with 0.2g/kg SYT (SYTL) group, and HFD with 0.4g/kg SYT (SYTH) group. Since our pharmacological experiment indicated that high dose SYT (SYTH) exhibited better efficacy than low dose SYT (SYTL), we obtained samples of liver tissue in Con group, HFD group, SYTH group for further mechanism study by proteomics. Briefly, at the end of the experiment, the mice were anesthetized with tribromoethanol solution. After blood collection, liver was promptly removed. Protein was extracted by SDT (4% SDS, 150mM Tris/HCl pH 8.0, 1mM DTT, and protease inhibitor) lysis method. Protein digestion was performed according to the FASP procedure. The resulting peptide mixture was labeled using the 16-plex TMT reagent (Applied Biosystems, MA, USA).TMT labeled peptides were fractionated by SCX chromatography using the AKTA Purifier system (GE Healthcare, MA, USA).Each fraction was concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40µL of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. lExperiments were performed on a Q Exactive HF-X orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) coupled with Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). 5μL of each fraction was injected for nano-LC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture (2μg) was loaded onto a C18 reversed-phase column packed in-house with RP-C18 5μm resin in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250nL/min over 90min. MS data were then acquired using a data-dependent top 20 method, dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300-1800m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Determination of the target value was based on predictive Automatic Gain Control (pAGC). Dynamic exclusion duration was 60s. The scans were obtained at the resolution of 70000 at m/z 200, the value of resolution for high energy collisional dissociation spectra was set at 60000 at m/z 200 (TMT 16 plex), and the width of isolation was 2m/z. The normalized collision energy was 30eV, and the AGC Target was 200000. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled. 

### Data Protocol
Mascot 2.2 and Proteome Discoverer 1.4 were used to analyze the LC-MS/MS raw data for library identification and quantitative analysis. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set as ≤ 0.01. Proteome Discoverer determined quantitative analysis of the ionic peak strength values of peptide segment. Differentially expressed proteins were identified through ratio-fold change (> 1.2 or < 0.83) as well as P value (< 0.05) calculated with a t-test. The differentially expressed proteins were performed for future bioinformatics analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Sanye Tablet (SYT) is a patent prescription widely used in treating T2D and pre-diabetes, especially T2D comorbid with hypertriglyceridemia, for many years in China. However, the underlying mechanism that accounts for the anti-diabetic potential of SYT by regulating lipid-related intermediates remains to be elucidated. This study aimed to investigate the mechanism of SYT on lipid metabolism and insulin sensitivity in high-fat diet (HFD)-induced obese mice by means of combining lipidomics and proteomics. The obese mice models were developed via HFD feeding for 20 consecutive weeks. Mice in the treatment group were given metformin and SYT respectively, and the effects of SYT on body weight, blood glucose, insulin sensitivity, fat accumulation in the organs, and pathological changes in the liver were monitored. Lipid metabolism was examined by lipidomics. Further determination of signaling pathways was detected by proteomics. The biological contributions of the compounds detected in SYT's chemical fingerprint were predicted by network pharmacology. SYT treatment reduced body weight, inhibited viscera and hepatic steatosis lipid accumulation, and prevented insulin resistance. Furthermore, it was found that circulatory inflammatory cytokines were reduced by SYT treatment. In addition, lipidomics analysis indicated that SYT targets lipid intermediates, including diacylglycerol (DAG) and Ceramide (Cer). Mechanistically, SYT positively affected these lipid intermediates by suppressing liver lipogenesis via downregulation of SREBP1/ACC and the JAK/STAT signaling pathway. Our results predicted that astragalin and rosmarinic acid might regulate the JAK-STAT pathway by targeting PIM2 and STAT1, respectively, while paeoniflorin and rosmarinic acid were likely to regulate inflammatory responses by targeting TNF&#x3b1;, IL-6, and IL-4 during T2D. Overall, our study provides supportive evidence for the mechanism of SYT's therapeutic effect on dysregulated lipid metabolism in diabesity.

### Keywords
Mouse, Liver

### Affiliations
shanghai
Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
yanzhen Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Lin Li
Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine


