### Accession
PXD005072

### Title
TGFβ-signalling and FOXG1 expression hallmark astrocyte lineage diversity in the murine ventral and dorsal forebrain

### Description
Heterogeneous astrocyte populations are defined by diversity in cellular environment, progenitor identity or function. Yet, little is known about the extent of the heterogeneity and how this diversity is acquired during development. We used SILAC and quantitative proteomics to characterise primary murine telencephalic progenitor cells from FOXG1 (forkhead box G1)-cre driven Tgfbr2 (transforming growth factor beta receptor 2) knockout mice and identified differential protein expression of the astrocyte proteins GFAP (glial fibrillary acidic protein) and MFGE8 (milk fat globule-EGF factor 8). Biochemical and histological investigations revealed distinct populations of astrocytes in the dorsal and ventral telencephalon marked by GFAP or MFGE8 protein expression. The two subtypes differed in their response to TGFβ-signalling. Impaired TGFβ-signalling affected numbers of GFAP-astrocytes in the ventral telencephalon. In contrast, TGFβ reduced MFGE8 expression in astrocytes deriving from both regions. Additionally, lineage tracing revealed that both GFAP and MFGE8 astrocyte subtypes derived partly from FOXG1-expressing neural precursor cells.

### Sample Protocol
Primary embryonic neural progenitor cells from Tgfbr2-cKO and control mouse telencephalon were labelled with two different pairs of heavy lysine and arginine employing SILAC for 12 days in vitro. Protein lysates were mixed in a 1:1 ratio and separated by SDS-PAGE. Proteins were digested in the gel with trypsin, extracted from the gel and desalted. LC/MS analyses were performed on a LTQ Orbitrap XL coupled to a HPLC with a C18 column. Peptides were eluted from by a gradient from 2% to 80% acetonitrile. MS data were acquired in the range of 350 - 2500 m/z and the five most abundant peptides were fragmented.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed with MaxQuant (1.5.3.30) against the UniProt mus musculus sequence database using default settings. SILAC pairs were asigned and trypsin used as the proteolytic enzyme. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was 5 ppm and 0.5 kDa. Protein groups were quantified only by ''razor and unique'' peptides. A false discovery rate of 1 % was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Heterogeneous astrocyte populations are defined by diversity in cellular environment, progenitor identity or function. Yet, little is known about the extent of the heterogeneity and how this diversity is acquired during development. To investigate the impact of TGF (transforming growth factor) &#x3b2;-signaling on astrocyte development in the telencephalon we deleted the TGFBR2 (transforming growth factor beta receptor 2) in early neural progenitor cells in mice using a FOXG1 (forkhead box G1)-driven CRE-recombinase. We used quantitative proteomics to characterize TGFBR2-deficient cells derived from the mouse telencephalon and identified differential protein expression of the astrocyte proteins GFAP (glial fibrillary acidic protein) and MFGE8 (milk fat globule-EGF factor 8). Biochemical and histological investigations revealed distinct populations of astrocytes in the dorsal and ventral telencephalon marked by GFAP or MFGE8 protein expression. The two subtypes differed in their response to TGF&#x3b2;-signaling. Impaired TGF&#x3b2;-signaling affected numbers of GFAP astrocytes in the ventral telencephalon. In contrast, TGF&#x3b2; reduced MFGE8-expression in astrocytes deriving from both regions. Additionally, lineage tracing revealed that both GFAP and MFGE8 astrocyte subtypes derived partly from FOXG1-expressing neural precursor cells.

### Keywords
Astrocytes, Silac, Neural progenitors, Ls-ms

### Affiliations
Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg
Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology Dept. Molecular Embryology Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg Germany

### Submitter
Stefan Weise

### Lab Head
Dr Tanja Vogel
Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology Dept. Molecular Embryology Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg Germany


