### Accession
PXD006593

### Title
Ubiquitome analysis of UHRF1 and UHRF2-deficient mESCs

### Description
The E3 ligase UHRF1 is an essential epigenetic cofactor for DNMT1 dependent maintenance DNA methylation, which provides a binding platform for DNMT1 by both cooperative binding of histones and hemi-methylated DNA as well as by ubiquitinating histone H3. Here, we conduct a comprehensive screen to identify novel ubiquitination targets of UHRF1 and its paralogue UHRF2 by comparing the ubiquitome of wildtype (wt), UHRF1- and UHRF2-deficient mouse embryonic stem cells. With an antibody-dependent enrichment of ubiquitin remnant motif-containing peptides followed by isobaric-labeling based quantitative mass spectrometry, we find both known and novel E3 ligase substrates of UHRF1 involved in a variety of biological processes such as RNA processing, DNA methylation and DNA damage repair.

### Sample Protocol
J1 wt, Uhrf1-/- and Uhrf2-/- mouse embryonic stem cells were cultured under serum/LIF conditions. For whole cell proteome analysis, 106 cells were harvested in biological quadruplicates and further processed using the iST Sample Preparation Kit (PreOmics).  For enrichment of K-gly-gly-peptides, proteins were extracted from 2 × 107 cells per sample, digested to peptides and then used for antibody dependent enrichment as described before (Udeshi et al. 2013). In brief, cell were lysed in urea lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 × Protease inhibitor, 50 μM PR-619, 1 mM chloroacetamide, 1 mM PMSF) and protein concentration was determined using a 660 nm Protein Assay (Pierce™). Proteins were reduced using 5 mM DTT, alkylated with 10 mM chloroacetamide and digested overnight using Lys-C (Wako Chemicals, 1:250 enzyme/protein ratio) and Trypsin (TPCK-treated, Worthington Biochem, 1:50 enzyme/protein ratio). Peptides were desalted using 200 mg tC18 Sep Pak Cartridges (Waters) and eluates were dried completely by vacuum centrifugation. For enrichment of K-gly-gly peptides, peptides were reconstituted in IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM NaCl) and incubated for 1 h at 4°C with 120 µg α-K-gly-gly antibody (Cell Signaling Technology) crosslinked to protein G sepharose beads (Roche) with dimethyl pimelimidate dihydrochloride (DMP, Sigma). Beads were washed twice with IAP buffer and twice with phosphate buffered saline (Sigma) and peptides were eluted in 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Enriched peptide fractions were labeled using isobaric Tandem Mass Tag™ (TMTsixplex™, Thermo Fisher Scientific) reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions and pooled into one sample. Subsequently, the sample complexity was reduced by high pH reversed-phase chromatography (High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit, Pierce™). Peptides were separated to five fractions based on their hydrophobicity with buffers containing 17.5%, 20%, 22.5%, 25% or 30% acetonitrile in 0.1% triethylamine, respectively. For mass spectrometry analysis, desalted peptide fractions were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) and separated in a 15-cm analytical column (75 μm ID packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 2.4 μm from Dr. Maisch) with a 60 min gradient from 5 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Qexactive HF (Thermo) operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 350–1400) were acquired with resolution R=120,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3 × 106). The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 3 and 6 were sequentially isolated (window 0.7 m/z) to a target value of 1 × 105, with resolution R=30,000, fragmented at 32% normalized collision energy and fixed first mass 100 m/z. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250°C; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts.

### Data Protocol
Raw data analysis was performed using the MaxQuant software suite version 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann 2008). Peptide sequences were searched against the UniprotKB mouse proteome database (Swissprot) (UniProt Consortium 2015). Trypsin/P and Lys-C derived peptides with a maximum of three missed cleavages and a protein false discovery rate of 1% were set as analysis parameters. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was considered a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation and Gly-Gly modification of lysines were defined as variable modifications. For whole cell extract analysis, peptides were quantified based on MS1 intensities with the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al. 2014). Reporter ions derived from the fragmented tandem mass tag were quantified on MS2 level with a minimum precursor intensity fraction of 75% and a reporter mass tolerance of 0.01 Da. Lot-specific reporter ion isotopic distributions of the TMT label reagents were used as isotopic correction factor. Quantified K-gly-gly peptides were further evaluated using R (R Core Team 2016) and Perseus version 1.5.4.1 or 1.5.5.1 (Tyanova et al. 2016). The dataset was filtered for common contaminants classified by the MaxQuant algorithm and only proteins quantified across both biological replicates were subjected to statistical analysis. Differentially ubiquitinated peptides were identified using the Limma software package (Ritchie et al. 2015; Smyth 2004) after variance stabilization normalization (vsn) of peptides intensities (Huber et al. 2002).

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitination is a multifunctional posttranslational modification controlling the activity, subcellular localization and stability of proteins. The E3 ubiquitin ligase ubiquitin-like PHD and RING finger domain-containing protein 1 (UHRF1) is an essential epigenetic factor that recognizes repressive histone marks as well as hemi-methylated DNA and recruits DNA methyltransferase 1. To explore enzymatic functions of UHRF1 beyond epigenetic regulation, we conducted a comprehensive screen in mouse embryonic stem cells to identify novel ubiquitination targets of UHRF1 and its paralogue UHRF2. We found differentially ubiquitinated peptides associated with a variety of biological processes such as transcriptional regulation and DNA damage response. Most prominently, we identified PCNA-associated factor 15 (PAF15; also known as Pclaf, Ns5atp9, KIAA0101 and OEATC-1) as a specific ubiquitination target of UHRF1. Although the function of PAF15 ubiquitination in translesion DNA synthesis is well characterized, the respective E3 ligase had been unknown. We could show that UHRF1 ubiquitinates PAF15 at Lys 15 and Lys 24 and promotes its binding to PCNA during late S-phase. In summary, we identified novel ubiquitination targets that link UHRF1 to transcriptional regulation and DNA damage response.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Paf, Mouse embryonic stem cells, Uhrf

### Affiliations
Ludwig-Maximilians Universität München
Department of Biology II and Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich (CIPSM), Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München

### Submitter
Elisabeth Karg

### Lab Head
Dr Heinrich Leonhardt
Department of Biology II and Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich (CIPSM), Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München


