### Accession
PXD044006

### Title
High-throughput drug target discovery by fully automated proteomics sample preparation platform

### Description
Drug development is plagued by inefficiency and high costs due to issues such as inadequate drug efficacy and unexpected toxicity. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics, particularly isobaric quantitative proteomics, offers a solution to unveil resistance mechanisms and unforeseen side effects related to off-targeting pathways. Thermal proteome profiling (TPP) has gained popularity for drug target identification at the proteome scale. However, it involves experiments with multiple temperature points, resulting in numerous samples and considerable variability in large-scale TPP analysis. We propose a high-throughput drug target discovery workflow that integrates single-temperature TPP, a fully automated proteomics sample preparation platform (autoSISPROT), and Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) quantification. The autoSISPROT platform enables the simultaneous processing of 96 samples in less than 2.5 hours, achieving protein digestion, desalting, and optional TMT labeling (requires an additional 1 hour) with 96-channel all-in-tip operations. The results demonstrated excellent sample preparation performance with >94% digestion efficiency, >98% TMT labeling efficiency, and >0.9 of intraand inter-batch Pearson correlation coefficients. By automatically processing 87 samples, we identified both known targets and potential off-targets of 20 kinase inhibitors, affording over a 10-fold improvement in throughput compared to classical TPP. This fully automated workflow offers a high-throughput solution for proteomics sample preparation and drug target/off-target identification.

### Sample Protocol
The autoSISPROT method was carried out using an AssayMAP Bravo equipped with 96-well ultra-low dead volume syringes and the homemade disposable SISPROT-based cartridges

### Data Protocol
The output results from MaxQuant were used to generate density plots, heat maps, boxplots, and dot plots using R (version 3.4.0). The output results from Proteome Discoverer or Spectronaut were used to generate violin plots, melting curves, scatter plots of Tm and ΔTm shifts using Python (version 3.9). All the volcano plots were created using the ProSAP software and the p-value was calculated to assess the statistical significance of Tm after a Benjamini-Hochberg correction

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fully automated， high-throughput drug target discovery

### Affiliations
South University of Science and Technology of China
Department of Chemistry, Southern University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Qiong Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Ruijun Tian
Department of Chemistry, Southern University of Science and Technology


