### Accession
PXD018764

### Title
Inverted chromatin immunoprecipitation identifies Tcf1 as a negative regulator of Foxp3 expression

### Description
Regulatory T (Treg) cells are important regulators of the immune system and have versatile functions for the homeostasis and repair of tissues. They express the forkhead box transcription factor Foxp3 as a lineage-defining protein. In mature Treg cells, the Foxp3 core promoter is unmethylated indicating that this area could harbor a transcription factor complex to initiate or repress gene expression, respectively. We used an unbiased method to identify Foxp3-promoter-binding transcription factors (TFs) by inverted chromatin immunoprecipitation (IP) followed by quantitative mass spectrometry. We identified several candidate factors which showed Foxp3-promoter suppressive capacity, one of which was T-cell factor 1 (Tcf1). Using viral overexpression and CRISPR/Cas knockout studies, we identified Tcf1 as a repressor of Foxp3 expression in primary conventional CD4 T cells (Tconv).  In Tcf1-deficient animals, increased levels of Foxp3intermediateCD25negative T cells were identified in secondary lymphoid tissues, implicating that Tcf1 protects Foxp3-negative T cells from inadvertent Foxp3 expression.

### Sample Protocol
The inverted Chromatin IP procedure is visualized in Figure 1b. First, carefully washed streptavidin beads were linked individually to Foxp3-Fra1 probes, Foxp3-Fra 2 probes, or Foxp3-Fra 3 probes for 3 hours at RT. Then, free bead binding sites were blocked and beads were washed again. Nuclear protein was pre-incubated with unlabeled beads to remove non-specific bead-binding proteins. The cleared nuclear protein was then added to each probe-labeled bead and incubated on a rotating wheel for 3 hours at 4°C. After incubation, beads were washed to remove unbound protein and bead-bound sequence-specific proteins were eluted. Protein was trypsin-digested and peptides were labeled with stable isotopes by dimethylation of N-termini and lysines. Samples were then combined and reduced by isoelectric focusing. Finally, samples were subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis, which allows the quantitative detection of peptides that were originally bound to specific probe-labeled beads. Results of the proteomic screen are available in the source data file of this manuscript or upon request by the corresponding author.

### Data Protocol
RAW data were processed with MaxQuant using default settings. MSMS spectra were searched against the Uniprot databases (Swissprot Mouse). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were used as variable modifications. Peptide labeling method was applied by DimethLys0, DimethLys4, DimethLys8 and DimethNter0, DimethNter4, DimethNter8. Global false discovery rate for both protein and peptides was set to 1%. The match-between-runs and re-quantify options were enabled. After canonical filtering (Reverse, potential contaminants and proteins only identified by site) only proteins with at least 1 unique peptide in all the replicates were considered as identified.

### Publication Abstract
Regulatory T&#xa0;cells are important regulators of the immune system and have versatile functions for the homeostasis and repair of tissues. They express the forkhead box transcription factor Foxp3 as a lineage-defining protein. Negative regulators of Foxp3 expression are not well understood. Here, we generated double-stranded DNA probes complementary to the Foxp3 promoter sequence and performed a pull-down with nuclear protein in&#xa0;vitro, followed by elution of bound proteins and quantitative mass spectrometry. Of the Foxp3-promoter-binding transcription factors identified with this approach, one was T&#xa0;cell factor 1 (TCF1). Using viral over-expression, we identified TCF1 as a repressor of Foxp3 expression. In TCF1-deficient animals, increased levels of Foxp3<sup>intermediate</sup>CD25<sup>negative</sup> T&#xa0;cells were identified. CRISPR-Cas9 knockout studies in primary human and mouse conventional CD4&#xa0;T (T<sub>conv</sub>) cells revealed that TCF1 protects T<sub>conv</sub> cells from inadvertent Foxp3 expression. Our data implicate a role of TCF1 in suppressing Foxp3 expression in activated T&#xa0;cells.

### Keywords
T-cell factor 1 (tcf1), Foxp3-promoter, Regulatory t (treg) cells

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer (B230) German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Heidelberg University Medical Faculty

### Submitter
Mahmoudreza Rafiee

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer (B230) German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Heidelberg University Medical Faculty


