### Accession
PXD035623

### Title
Low dose ribosomal DNA P-loop mutation affects development and enforces autophagy in Arabidopsis

### Description
Arabidopsis contains hundreds of ribosomal DNA copies organised within the nucleolar organising regions (NORs) in chromosomes 2 and 4. There are four major types of variants of rDNA, VAR1-4, based on the polymorphisms of 3' external transcribed sequences and these are variably expressed during plant development. We created a mutant by the CRISPR-Cas9-mediated excision of ~25 nt from only the copies of NOR4 ribosomal DNA, obtaining mosaic mutational events on ~5% of all rDNA copies. The excised region consist of P-loop and Helix-82 region of 25S rRNA. The mutation led to allelic, dosage-dependent defects marked by lateral root inhibition, reduced size, and pointy leaves typical of defective ribosomal function. The mutation in NOR4 led to dosage compensation from the NOR2 copies, marked by its associated single-nucleotide polymorphisms and, thus, resulted in an altered rRNA sub-population. Furthermore, it caused rRNA maturation defects specifically in the minor pathway characterised by 32S pre-rRNA accumulation. The mutated rRNAs were not incorporated into the translating ribosomes and, thus, the accompanying elevated autophagic flux was likely to be related to ribophagy.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis, Mendelian-segregating ploop KD +/- plant-derived seeds were grown on MS containing 1% (w/v) sucrose for 10d. The seedlings were phenotypically scored to background and homozygous-looking seedlings and were then ground to fine powder in liquid nitrogen. The proteins were extracted, pre-fractionated (1D SDS-PAGE), trypsin digested and desalted (using a C18 spec plate) using the shotgun proteomics approach according to previously described methods (Ghatak et al., 2020; Chaturvedi et al., 2013). Prior to mass spectrometric measurement, the tryptic peptide pellets were dissolved in 4% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. One µg of each sample (4 replicates) was loaded onto a C18 reverse-phase column (Thermo Scientific, EASY-SprayTM 500 mm, 2 µm particle size). Separation was achieved with a 90 min gradient from 98% solution A (0.1% formic acid) and 2% solution B (90% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) at 0 min to 40% solution B (90% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) at 90 min with a flow rate of 300 nL min−1. nESI-MS/MS measurements were performed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with the following settings: full scan range 350–1, 800 m/z resolution 120,000 max. 20 MS2 scans (activation type CID), repeat count 1, repeat duration 30 sec, exclusion list size 500, exclusion duration 30 sec, charge state screening enabled with the rejection of unassigned and +1 charge states, minimum signal threshold 500.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched with the SEQUEST algorithm present in Proteome Discoverer version 1.3 (Thermo Fisher, Germany) as described previously (Chaturvedi et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2021). For the identification of proteins, protein FASTA from the TAIR database was used. The identified proteins were quantified based on the total ion count, followed by an NSAF normalisation strategy (Paoletti et al., 2006).

### Publication Abstract
Arabidopsis contains hundreds of ribosomal DNA copies organized within the nucleolar organizing regions (NORs) in chromosomes 2 and 4. There are four major types of variants of rDNA, VAR1-4, based on the polymorphisms of 3' external transcribed sequences. The variants are known to be differentially expressed during plant development. We created a mutant by the CRISPR-Cas9-mediated excision of&#x2009;~&#x2009;25 nt from predominantly NOR4 ribosomal DNA copies, obtaining mosaic mutational events on&#x2009;~&#x2009;5% of all rDNA copies. The excised region consists of P-loop and Helix-82 segments of 25S rRNA. The mutation led to allelic, dosage-dependent defects marked by lateral root inhibition, reduced size, and pointy leaves, all previously observed for defective ribosomal function. The mutation in NOR4 led to dosage compensation from the NOR2 copies by elevated expression of VAR1 in mutants and further associated single-nucleotide variants, thus, resulting in altered rRNA sub-population. Furthermore, the mutants exhibited rRNA maturation defects specifically in the minor pathway typified by 32S pre-rRNA accumulation. Density-gradient fractionation and subsequent RT-PCR of rRNA analyses revealed that mutated copies were not incorporated into the translating ribosomes. The mutants in addition displayed an elevated autophagic flux as shown by the autophagic marker GFP-ATG8e, likely related to ribophagy.

### Keywords
Autophagy / crispr / development / plants / rrna

### Affiliations
University of Vienna

### Submitter
Palak Chaturvedi

### Lab Head
Dr Palak Chaturvedi
University of Vienna


