### Accession
PXD013164

### Title
Ultrasonic-based OCT-removal from solid tumor biopsies.

### Description
A new method for proteomic studies of OCT-embedded samples based on ultrasound energy is proposed. The cleaning of OCT from mouse kidney embedded tissues were evaluated through the aid of ultrasound energy, with two different frequencies. Simultaneously, vortex agitation was used as control. The optimized method obtained was then applied in human tumor kidney biopsies including chromophobe renal cell carcinomas (chRCC) and renal oncocytomas (RO).

### Sample Protocol
Mouse kidneys tissues were powdered and embedded in OCT compound in order to mimic clinical preserved tumor biopsies. Then, OCT-embedded tissues were subjected to the OCT cleaning through three different treatments (i) Ultrasonic (US) bath, at 35 kHz for 2 min at 100% amplitude, (ii) US bath at 130 kHz for 2 min at 100% amplitude, and (iii) gentle vortex agitation. Then an ultrasonic probe was used for the solid-liquid extraction of proteins and a microplate horn assembly to accelerate the cleavage of the extracted proteome.  The novel ultrasonic-based methodology was applied in human kidney biopsies as a proof of concept. Based on proteomic profiles recovered from OCT-embedded biopsies through this new approach, a successful discrimination of the two types of tumors, chRCC and RO, was achieved.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data were processed in DataAnalysis 4.2 and subsequently exported to Protein-Scape 4.0 for auto-mated protein identification. CID-MS2 spectra were first searched against the mouse or human subset of the Swis-sProt database, using the Mascot search engine with the following parameters: (i) two missed cleavage; (ii) fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation (C); (iii) variable modifications: oxidation of methionine, Acetyl (Protein N-term), Glu- > pyro-Glu (N-term E), Gln- > pyro-Glu (N- term Q), (vi) peptide mass tolerance up to 20 ppm, (v) fragment mass tolerance 0.05 Da and (vi) FDR adjusted to 1%.  Relative label-free quantification was carried out using MaxQuant software V1.6.0.16. All raw files were processed in a single run with default parameters. Database searches were performed using Andromeda search engine with the UniProt-SwissProt M. musculus as a reference and a contaminants database of common contaminants. Data processing was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.2.3) with default settings. Protein group LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and the quantitative profiles were filtered for missing values with the following settings: min valid percentage of 70 in at least one group, and values greater than 0. To overcome the obstacle of missing LFQ values, missing values were imputed using default parameter, with = 0.3 and down shift = 1.8. Log ratios were calculated as the difference in average log2 LFQ intensity values between the tested conditions (two-tailed, Student’s t-test). A protein was considered statistically significant if its fold change was ≥ 1.5 and FDR ≤ 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
An effective three-step proteomics workflow is proposed to overcome the pitfalls caused by polymers present in optimum cutting temperature (OCT)-embedded tissue during its preparation for mass spectrometry analysis. First, the OCT-embedded tissue biopsies are cleaned using ethanol and water in a sequential series of ultrasonic washes in an ultrasound bath (35 kHz ultrasonic frequency, 100% ultrasonic amplitude, 2 min of ultrasonic duty time). Second, a fast ultrasonic-assisted extraction of proteins is done using an ultrasonic probe (30 kHz ultrasonic frequency, 50% ultrasonic amplitude, 2 min of ultrasonic duty time, 1 mm diameter tip). Third, a rapid ultrasonic digestion of complex proteomes is performed using a microplate horn assembly device (20 kHz ultrasonic frequency, 25% ultrasonic amplitude, 4 min of ultrasonic duty time). As a proof of concept, the new workflow was applied to human normal and tumor kidney biopsies including chromophobe renal cell carcinomas (chRCCs) and renal oncocytomas (ROs). A successful cluster of proteomics profiles was obtained comprising 511 and 172 unique proteins found in chRCC and RO samples, respectively. The new method provides high sample throughput and comprehensive protein recovery from OCT samples.

### Keywords
Renal oncocytoma, Sample treatment, Mass spectrometry., Oct-embedded samples, Ultrasound energy, Chromophobe renal cell carcinoma

### Affiliations
Faculty of sciences, Universidade NOVA de Lisboa
LAQV-REQUIMTE, Department of Chemistry, School of Science and Technology, NOVA University of Lisbon

### Submitter
Hugo M. Santos

### Lab Head
Dr Hugo M. Santos
Faculty of sciences, Universidade NOVA de Lisboa


