### Accession
PXD023169

### Title
The Flash Oxidation (FOX) System: A Novel Laser-free Fast Photochemical Oxidation Protein Footprinting Platform

### Description
To validate the FOX flash photolysis system for hydroxyl radical footprinting of proteins experiments, TNF-alpha was oxidized in the presence and absence of a specific monoclonal antibody, adalimumab. The peptides that show decrease in oxidation correlate well with the known epitope for adalimumab.

### Sample Protocol
The TNF alpha was oxidized in the presence as well as the absence of adalimumab by a novel laser-free flash photolysis system using hydrogen peroxide. Flash voltage was adjusted to account for the radical scavenging by the addition of adalimumab.  The samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS after digestion with trypsin and the peptides were fragmented by the CID and ETD with supplemental energy.

### Data Protocol
Unmodified peptides were identified using Byonic from Protein Metrics. Peptide oxidation levels were calculated by FoxWare Software from GenNext Technologies. Standard deviation from triplicate measurements were used to create error bars.

### Publication Abstract
Hydroxyl radical protein footprinting (HRPF) is a powerful and flexible technique for probing changes in protein topography. With the development of the fast photochemical oxidation of proteins (FPOP), it became possible for researchers to perform HRPF in their laboratory on a very short time scale. While FPOP has grown significantly in popularity since its inception, adoption remains limited due to technical and safety issues involved in the operation of a hazardous Class IV UV laser and irreproducibility often caused by improper laser operation and/or differential radical scavenging by various sample components. Here, we present a new integrated FOX (Flash OXidation) Protein Footprinting System. This platform delivers sample <i>via</i> flow injection to a facile and safe-to-use high-pressure flash lamp with a flash duration of 10 &#x3bc;s fwhm. Integrated optics collect the radiant light and focus it into the lumen of a capillary flow cell. An inline radical dosimeter measures the hydroxyl radical dose delivered and allows for real-time compensation for differential radical scavenging. A programmable fraction collector collects and quenches only the sample that received the desired effective hydroxyl radical dose, diverting the carrier liquid and improperly oxidized sample to waste. We demonstrate the utility of the FOX Protein Footprinting System by determining the epitope of TNF&#x3b1; recognized by adalimumab. We successfully identify the surface of the protein that serves as the epitope for adalimumab, identifying four of the five regions previously noted by X-ray crystallography while seeing no changes in peptides not involved in the epitope interface. The FOX Protein Footprinting System allows for FPOP-like experiments with real-time dosimetry in a safe, compact, and integrated benchtop platform.

### Keywords
Hrpf, Tumor necrosis factor-alpha, Fpop, Flash photolysis, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Mississippi
Department of BioMOlecular Sciences University of Mississippi

### Submitter
Sandeep Misra

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua Shane Sharp
Department of BioMOlecular Sciences University of Mississippi


