### Accession
PXD023747

### Title
Divergent evolutionary strategies for selective sex chromosome regulation in Drosophila

### Description
The dosage compensation complex (DCC) of Drosophila identifies its X chromosomal binding sites with exquisite selectivity. The principles that assure this vital targeting are known from the D. melanogaster model: DCC-intrinsic specificity of DNA binding, cooperativity with the CLAMP protein, and non-coding roX2 RNA transcribed from the X chromosome. We found that in D. virilis, a species separated from melanogaster by 40 million years of evolution, all principles are active, but contribute differently to X-specificity. In melanogaster, the DCC subunit MSL2 evolved intrinsic DNA-binding selectivity for rare PionX sites, which mark the X chromosome. In virilis, PionX sites are abundant and not X-enriched. Accordingly, MSL2 lacks specific recognition. Here, roX2 RNA plays a more instructive role, counteracting a non-productive interaction of CLAMP and modulating DCC binding selectivity. Remarkably, roX2 triggers a low-diffusion chromatin binding mode characteristic of DCC. Evidently, X-specific regulation is achieved by divergent evolution of similar components.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry experiments, after pull-down beads were washed three times with 50mM NH4HCO3 and incubated with 10 ng/µL trypsin in 1 M urea 50mM NH4HCO3 for 30 minutes, washed with 50mM NH4HCO3 and then supernatant digested ON in presence of 1mM DTT. Digested peptides were alkylated and desalted prior to LC-MS analysis. For LC-MS/MS purposes, desalted peptides were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo), separated in a 15-cm analytical column (75μm ID with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 2.4 μm from Dr. Maisch) with a 50-min gradient from 5 to 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Qexactive HF (Thermo) operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375–1600) were acquired with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1x105, and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250ºC; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.6.3.4 was used to identify proteins and quantify by iBAQ with the following parameters: Database, Uniprot_Dvirilis_3AUP000008792_20170810.fasta; MS tol, 10ppm; MS/MS tol, 20 ppm; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 5; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2.

### Publication Abstract
The dosage compensation complex (DCC) of <i>Drosophila</i> identifies its X-chromosomal binding sites with exquisite selectivity. The principles that assure this vital targeting are known from the <i>D. melanogaster</i> model: DCC-intrinsic specificity of DNA binding, cooperativity with the CLAMP protein, and noncoding roX2 RNA transcribed from the X chromosome. We found that in <i>D. virilis</i>, a species separated from <i>melanogaster</i> by 40 million years of evolution, all principles are active but contribute differently to X specificity. In <i>melanogaster</i>, the DCC subunit MSL2 evolved intrinsic DNA-binding selectivity for rare PionX sites, which mark the X chromosome. In <i>virilis</i>, PionX motifs are abundant and not X-enriched. Accordingly, MSL2 lacks specific recognition. Here, roX2 RNA plays a more instructive role, counteracting a nonproductive interaction of CLAMP and modulating DCC binding selectivity. Remarkably, roX2 triggers a stable chromatin binding mode characteristic of DCC. Evidently, X-specific regulation is achieved by divergent evolution of protein, DNA, and RNA components.

### Keywords
Virilis, Dosage compensation, Targeting, Msl2, Evolution, Rox, Long non-coding rna

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Molecular Biology Dept, Biomedical Center, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Großhadernerstr. 9,  82152 Planegg-Martinsried (Germany)

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Peter B. Becker
Molecular Biology Dept, Biomedical Center, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Großhadernerstr. 9,  82152 Planegg-Martinsried (Germany)


