### Accession
PXD021730

### Title
Discovery of unique peptide markers in NZ mānuka (Leptospermum scoparium) honey

### Description
Proteomic analysis was performed on both manuka (Leptospermum scoparium) and non-manuka honeys and nectars to identify unique peptide markers which can be used for manuka honey authentication.

### Sample Protocol
Honey and nectar proteins were extracted by chemical precipitation with TCA. Honeys were diluted 1 in 5 with water to a concentration of 20% w/v and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 30 min to remove pollen. For nectar, whole nectar solutions (40 μL) were used for precipitation. A 20% w/v aqueous TCA solution was added to the recovered honey supernatants and whole nectar solutions at 1:1 volumetric ratio. The honey- and nectar-TCA solutions were centrifuged at 13,000 rpm and 4 °C for 30 min. The supernatant was carefully removed, and the pelleted proteins were washed in cold acetone. The washed pellets were dried and solubilised in urea solution (7 M urea and 2 M thiourea in 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 8). All samples were stored at -80 °C until analysis. However, due to low protein content in the nectar precipitate, whole nectar was used instead for the peptide analysis.For honey, a 5 μL aliquot of honey protein extract was diluted ten-fold with 10 mM TCEP in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The samples were incubated in water bath at 56 °C for 1 hour, and alkylated with 25 μL 1 M iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. The iodoacetamide reaction was quenched with 10 μL 1 M DTT. The sample pH was tested post-alkylation with a pH strip and adjusted to pH 8 as necessary with 25 μL 1 M ammonium bicarbonate to provide an optimal pH for trypsin activity. For nectar, 20 μL of whole nectar was diluted five-fold with 10 mM TCEP in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and incubated at 56 °C for 1 hour. The post-reduction alkylation step was carried out by addition of 5 μL 1 M iodoacetamide, followed by 30 min room temperature-incubation in the dark. The iodoacetamide reaction was quenched with 2 μL 1 M DTT, and the sample pH was adjusted to pH 8 as necessary with 5 μL 1 M ammonium bicarbonate. A stock solution of 1 μg/μL trypsin was prepared in trypsin buffer as supplied by the manufacturer, and diluted ten-fold with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Addition of trypsin to samples was carried out at 1:20 trypsin:protein ratio based on measured protein content of the samples as determined by EZQ® assay. All samples were incubated for 12 hours at 37 °C. The trypsin activity was terminated by addition of 50 μL 10% aqueous formic acid. Following trypsin digest, a sample clean-up step was performed using Strata-X 33 μm Polymeric Reversed Phase (10 mg/mL) SPE cartridges (Phenomenex, Auckland, New Zealand). The cartridges were conditioned with 500 μL methanol, followed by equilibration with 500 μL 0.1% aqueous formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the cartridges and washed with 1 mL 0.1% aqueous formic acid. Peptides were eluted with 250 μL 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Both sample loading and peptide elution steps were carried out at one drop every 2–3 sec. The eluate was collected and concentrated to near-dryness in a vacuum concentrator at 45 °C. The peptide concentrate was reconstituted to 20 μL with 0.1% aqueous formic acid. All samples were stored at -20 °C until analysis. 2.7. Mass spectrometry analysis Analyses of samples was carried out on a Triple-TOF 6600 hybrid Qq-TOF tandem mass spectrometer coupled to an Eksigent nanoflow UPLC system (AB Sciex, Victoria, Australia).  The reconstituted honey and nectar peptide concentrates were analysed as 20% v/v and 50% v/v solutions in 0.1% aqueous formic acid, respectively, at a 5 μL aliquot injection volume. Chromatographic separation was performed on a ReproSil-Pur 120 trap column (10 x 0.3 mm; ESI Source Solutions, Woburn, MA, USA) coupled to an in-house packed ReproSil-Pur 120 picofrit column (3 μm; 150 mm x 75 μm; ESI Source Solutions, Woburn, MA, USA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The binary mobile phase consisted of 0.1% aqueous formic acid (Solvent A) and acidified acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid (Solvent B). A 60-min gradient elution programme was applied: initial (5% B, held 1 min), 50 min (40% B), 52 min (95% B, held 3 min), 55 min (5% B, held 5 min).  The picofrit eluate was directed into the mass spectrometer. The instrument was operated at an ion spray voltage of 2.7 kV, curtain gas of 35 unit, nebuliser gas of 25 unit, interface heater temperature of 150 °C, focusing voltage of 10 V, and declustering potential of 80 V. Mass spectra were acquired by information dependent acquisition (IDA) in positive ion mode. Survey scans (m/z 350–1600) were acquired in 250 ms, and up to 40 product ion scans (m/z 100–1600) were collected for features exceeding 50 counts/s and with a +2 to +5 charge-state over 40 ms. Eight time bins were summed for each product ion scan at a pulse frequency of 16.9 kHz. A rolling collision energy was applied to all precursor ions for collision induced dissociation (CID). Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 s and dynamic accumulation enabled.

### Data Protocol
The acquired mass spectral data (.wiff-files) were processed using ProteinPilot software (Version 5.0) (AB Sciex, Victoria, Australia). An in-house FASTA search database was compiled consisting of the Uniprot Eucalyptus proteome (downloaded 14th September 2020) appended with common contaminant sequences. The database search was carried out in ‘Thorough ID’ mode using the Paragon algorithm in ProteinPilot. The search parameters were set to allow for unexpected cleavages and post-translational modifications, and up to two amino acid substitutions per peptide match were permitted.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics is an emerging tool in food authentication that has not been optimised for honey analysis. In this study, we present a qualitative proteomic analysis of New Zealand m&#x101;nuka (Leptospermum scoparium) honey. A total of fifty bee-derived proteins were identified in the honey, the most predominant being major royal jelly proteins (MRJPs). We also demonstrate for the first time the presence of unique nectar-derived proteins in m&#x101;nuka honey. A total of 17 m&#x101;nuka plant proteins were identified, a-third of which were putative pathogenesis-related proteins. Two proteins involved in drought tolerance were also identified. Twelve candidate peptides were selected as potential authentication markers based on their uniqueness to m&#x101;nuka honey. Nectar analyses confirmed the origin and specificity of these peptides to L. scoparium nectar, thus presenting peptide profiling as a viable and novel approach for m&#x101;nuka honey authentication. Raw data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD021730.

### Keywords
Peptide markers, Mānuka honey (leptospermum scoparium)

### Affiliations
University of Auckland
School of Biological Sciences, University of Auckland

### Submitter
Leo Payne

### Lab Head
Dr Kerry Loomes
University of Auckland


