### Accession
PXD007884

### Title
Temporal Expression Profiling of Plasma Proteins in Type 1 Diabetes Progression

### Description
A longitudinal proteomic profiling of human plasma using TMT-10plex-based LC-MS/MS analysis was performed to track temporal proteomic changes of T1D patients (n = 11) across 9 serial time points, spanning the period of T1D natural progression, in comparison with those of the matching healthy controls (n = 10). Longitudinal expression profiles of >2000 human plasma proteins in T1D natural progression were presented in the current study.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. Briefly, 5 mg plasma proteins from each sample were depleted to remove the top 14 most abundant proteins using an  MARS Human-14 column (Agilent Technologies), and the flow-through fractions (depleted plasma) were collected and concentrated. The depleted plasma proteins were denatured, reduced, alkylated, and digested, and the C18 SPE desalted peptide solution was completely dried before isobaric labeling. Aliquots of each individual sample from all healthy subjects were pooled to create the common reference sample used for healthy control group, to be used in subsequent TMT labeling as reference channel. The 9 serial samples from each subject and the common reference sample were included in one TMT10 labeling experiment set. This labeling strategy avoids the potential missing value issues resulted from data-dependent MS/MS acquisitions because all samples from the same subject were included in the same labeling experiment.  After labeling, the 10 labeled samples in each TMT labeling experiment set were pooled, concentrated and fractionated using high-pH RPLC on an XBridge C18 analytical column (particle size of 5 µm, 250 x 4.6 mm, Waters). Mobile phases A and B consisted of 10 mM ammonium formate in water (pH 10) and 90% CH3CN ( pH 10), respectively. In total, 24 fractions were generated, dried, stored at -80 ℃, and reconstituted in 0.1% FA until LC-MS/MS analysis. Quantitative LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer through an EASY-Spray ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a PepMap C18 analytical column (2 μm particle, 50 cm x 75 μm i.d.). A binary solvent system consisting of 0.1% FA in ddH2O (solvent A) and 0.1% FA in CH3CN (solvent B) was used to separate peptides at a flow rate of 250 nL min-1. LC separation was performed using the following gradient setting: held at 4% B for 3 min, from 4% to 8% B in 0.1 min, 8% to 40% B in 90 min, 40% to 90% B in 0.1% min, held at 90% B for 10 min, 90% to 4% B in 0.1 min, and held at 4% B for 17 min for re-equilibrating column. MS data was acquired in profile mode using a data-dependent top 15 method and resolution for full scans (m/z 400-1950) was set to 120,000 at m/z 200 with maximum fill time of 50 ms. Precursors were isolated with a window of 1.4 m/z  and fragmented with HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 32. Resolution for MS/MS spectrum was set to 60,000 at m/z 200 with maximum fill time of 100 ms. AGC target for full scan and MS/MS scan was 3e6 and 1e5, respectively. Precursor ions with unassigned, single, seven, and higher charge states were excluded, and dynamic exclusion time was set to 20 s.

### Data Protocol
All raw files obtained from LC-MS/MS analyses were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.30, and searched against Swiss-Prot human protein database (91,960 protein entries, 02/17/2016 release) using the built-in Andromeda search algorithm. Semispecific Trypsin/P was selected as the enzyme. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMT-10plex labeled N-terminus and lysine were set as fixed modifications. Methionine oxidation was set as variable modifications. FDR was set at 1% for proteins and peptides level identification using decoy database, and precursor intensity fraction was set to >0.75. Other parameters were used as default settings for Orbitrap-type data. The search results in proteinGroups.txt generated by MaxQuant were processed in Perseus software version 1.5.1.6. Identified protein is represented as protein group in the database search output when the search algorithm identifies a cluster of proteins with high sequence similarity or protein isoforms, which cannot be further differentiated on the basis of shared peptides. The potential contaminants (manually selected for contaminants with no protein names), reverse hits and proteins only identified by modification site were excluded from the identification list. Furthermore, a filtering criterion was set to keep the identified proteins with the quantified values of all ten reporter ions (no missing value) in at least one individual. The longitudinal expression data of this confident protein list was used for statistical trend analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Temporal proteome change; type 1 diabetes; tmt10; pediatric plasma proteome; longitudinal profiling

### Affiliations
UNCG
Center for Translational Biomedical Research, University of North Carolina at Greensboro

### Submitter
Qibin  Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Qibin Zhang
Center for Translational Biomedical Research, University of North Carolina at Greensboro


