### Accession
PXD015606

### Title
ProteoViz: A toolset for interactive analysis of phosphoproteomics data

### Description
Quantitative proteomics generates large datasets with increasing depth and quantitative information.  Even after data processing and statistical analysis, interpreting the results and relating their significance back to the system of study remains challenging.  Often, this process is performed by scientists with expertise in their field, but limited experience in proteomic or phosphoproteomic analysis.  We developed a set of tools for simple, interactive exploration of phosphoproteomics data that can be easily interpreted into biological knowledge.  These tools are designed to expedite the processes of reviewing raw data from statistical output, identifying and verifying enriched sequence motifs, and viewing the data from the perspective of functional pathways.  Here, we present the workflow and demonstrate its functionality by analyzing a phosphoproteomic data set from two lymphoma cell lines treated with kinase inhibitors.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culturing  The VAL cell line was previously obtained from Dr. Staudt (NCI) and the SUDHL5 cell line was purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (CRL-2958). Both diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cell lines were cultured in RPMI supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin. Cell lines were tested for mycoplasma every 6 months using the MycoAlert Plus detection kit (Lonza) with the MycoAlert Assay control set and authenticated by the University of Arizona Genetics Core (Tucson, AZ) using the PowerPlex 16 System (Promega), which consists of forensic-style 15 autosomal STR loci, including 13 CODIS DNA markers (nine of the standard loci collected by ATCC), amelogenin, and a mouse-specific locus, every 12 months.   Sample preparation  Cells were grown to confluence at >90% viability before setting in 25 mL cell culture flask at a density of 250,000 cells/mL and equilibrated overnight. Cells were then treated with vehicle (0.1% DMSO), iCCK1 (inhibitor of cell cycle kinase 1), or iCCK2 and incubated for 96 hours at 37˚ C, 5% CO2.  The final concentrations for iCCK1 treatment were 240 nM or 80 nM, VAL or SUDHL5, respectively. For iCCK2 treatment, both VAL and SUDHL5 received 470 nM. Three independent treatments were performed and cell pellets from each were harvested by centrifugation (400g, 5 min) and washed three times with 1X PBS (pH =7.4) before flash freezing in liquid nitrogen. Cell pellets were stored at -80˚ C before the triplicate samples were submitted for TMS-MS proteomics.  Mass spectrometry Purified proteins were reduced, alkylated, and digested using filter-aided sample preparation [Nature Methods 6: 359-62 (2009)].  Tryptic peptides were labeled using a tandem mass tag 10-plex isobaric label reagent set (Thermo) and enriched using a High-Select TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment kit (Thermo) following the manufacturer’s instructions.  Both enriched and un-enriched labeled peptides were separated into 36 fractions on a 100 x 1.0 mm Acquity BEH C18 column (Waters) using an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo) with a 40 min gradient from 99:1 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio under basic pH conditions, and then consolidated into 12 super-fractions.  Buffer A contains 0.1% formic acid and 0.5% acetonitrile. Buffer B contains 0.1% formic acid and 99.9% acetonitrile. Each super-fraction was then further separated by reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 um resin (Waters) on an in-line 150 x 0.075 mm column using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo).  Peptides were eluted using a 60 min gradient from 97:3 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio.  Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.15 kV) followed by mass spectrometric analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo) using multi-notch MS3 parameters.  MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in top-speed profile mode at a resolution of 120,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z.  Following CID activation with normalized collision energy of 35.0, MS/MS data were acquired using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range.  Using synchronous precursor selection, up to 10 MS/MS precursors were selected for HCD activation with normalized collision energy of 65.0, followed by acquisition of MS3 reporter ion data using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 50,000 over a range of 100-500 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and reporter ions quantified by searching the UniprotKB Homo sapiens database (April 2019) using MaxQuant (version 1.6.5.0, Max Planck Institute) with a parent ion tolerance of 3 ppm, a fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da, a reporter ion tolerance of 0.001 Da, trypsin/P enzyme with 2 missed cleavages, variable modifications including oxidation on M, Acetyl on Protein N-term, and phosphorylation on STY, and fixed modification of Carbamidomethyl on C.  Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established with less than 1.0% false discovery.  Proteins identified only by modified peptides were removed. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm [Anal. Chem. 75: 4646-58 (2003)].  TMT MS3 reporter ion intensity values were analyzed for changes in total protein using the unenriched lysate sample.  Phospho(STY) modifications were identified using the samples enriched for phosphorylated peptides. The enriched and un-enriched samples were multiplexed using two TMT10-plex batches, one for the enriched and one for the un-enriched samples. Relative abundances were used in a limma

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative proteomics generates large datasets with increasing depth and quantitative information. With the advance of mass spectrometry and increasingly larger data sets, streamlined methodologies and tools for analysis and visualization of phosphoproteomics are needed both at the protein and modified peptide levels. To assist in addressing this need, we developed ProteoViz, which includes a set of R scripts that perform normalization and differential expression analysis of both the proteins and enriched phosphorylated peptides, and identify sequence motifs, kinases, and gene set enrichment pathways. The tool generates interactive visualization plots that allow users to interact with the phosphoproteomics results and quickly identify proteins and phosphorylated peptides of interest for their biological study. The tool also links significant phosphosites with sequence motifs and pathways that will help explain the experimental conditions and guide future experiments. Here, we present the workflow and demonstrate its functionality by analyzing a phosphoproteomic data set from two lymphoma cell lines treated with kinase inhibitors. The scripts and data are freely available at and via the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD015606.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Tmt, Shiny

### Affiliations
UAMS
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205 Arkansas Children's Research Institute, Little Rock, AR

### Submitter
Stephanie Byrum

### Lab Head
Dr Stephanie Diane Byrum
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205 Arkansas Children's Research Institute, Little Rock, AR


