### Accession
PXD034894

### Title
Integrative structure determination of an 85-kilodalton PTBP1-IRES complex in solution reveals a strong compaction with pronounced conformational flexibility

### Description
Cross-linking of isotope-labelled RNA coupled with mass spectrometry (CLIR-MS) was used to study the interaction between the four RNA recognition motifs (RRMs) of the protein PTBP1 with the internal ribosome entry site (IRES) of encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV). These results are a reanalysis of PXD005566, with a broader parameter set.

### Sample Protocol
The sample processing protocol is described in the original PRIDE submission (PXD005566).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were downloaded from the previous PRIDE submission (PXD005566) and converted to .mzXML format using ProteoWizard/msconvert.exe. Files were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012) against a database containing only the target PTBP1 protein sequence, with expected light-heavy RNA adducts defined as “mono-link” mass shifts. Adducts with lengths of 1-4 nucleotides were considered. In addition to the whole RNA adduct, the following neutral losses were considered: -H2O, -H4O, -HPO3, -H3PO3, -H2, -HPO3+H2O, -HPO2, -H4O2, -H5PO5. Further details about the expanded parameter set (compared with the original submission) can be found elsewhere (Sarnowski et al., bioRxiv, 2022). All amino acids were set as cross-linkable. Delta masses for each adduct were defined depending on the nucleotide sequence composition, as described previously (Dorn et al., Nat. Commun., 2017). Further parameters used for xQuest searching: delta mass tolerance: +/- 15 ppm, retention time tolerance: 60 s, enzyme = Trypsin, maximum missed cleavages = 2, MS1 mass tolerance = 10 ppm, MS2 mass tolerance = 0.2 Da. Identifications with an ld.Score > 20 (according to the scoring scheme described previously (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012)) were considered. Further details are provided in the corresponding publication.  Cross-link identifications for the data set are compiled in a spreadsheet file in csv format.

### Publication Abstract
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are crucial regulators of gene expression, often composed of defined domains interspersed with flexible, intrinsically disordered regions. Determining the structure of ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes involving such RBPs necessitates integrative structural modeling due to their lack of a single stable state. In this study, we integrate magnetic resonance, mass spectrometry, and small-angle scattering data to determine the solution structure of the polypyrimidine-tract binding protein 1 (PTBP1/hnRNP I) bound to an RNA fragment from the internal ribosome entry site (IRES) of the encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV). This binding, essential for enhancing the translation of viral RNA, leads to a complex structure that demonstrates RNA and protein compaction, while maintaining pronounced conformational flexibility. Acting as an RNA chaperone, PTBP1 orchestrates the IRES RNA into a few distinct conformations, exposing the RNA stems outward. This conformational diversity is likely common among RNP structures and functionally important. Our approach enables atomic-level characterization of heterogeneous RNP structures.

### Keywords
Uv cross-linking; ptbp1; ires; rrm; splicing; structural proteomics; protein-rna; rna-protein; protein-rna complex; rna-protein complex; clir-ms; integrative modelling; structure

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zürich
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Christopher Sarnowski

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology


