### Accession
PXD005301

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis reveals system-wide signaling pathways regulated by site-specific phosphorylation on Keratin-8 in skin squamous cell carcinoma derived cell-line

### Description
The epithelial specific keratin pair, Keratin 8/18 (K8/18), has been reported to be aberrantly expressed in squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) which is also correlated with increased invasiveness and poor prognosis.  A Majority of Keratin 8 (K8) functions are governed by its phosphorylation at Serine73 (head domain) and Serine431 (tail domain) residues. Although deregulation of K8 phosphorylation has been associated with progression of different carcinomas, its role in skin SCC and the underlying mechanism is obscured. To understand the molecular basis of K8 phosphorylation mediated regulation of skin SCC progression, we performed TMT-based quantitative phosphoproteomics by expressing K8 wild type, phosphodead and phosphomimetic mutants in K8 deficient A431 cells. Bioinformatic analysis of our phosphoproteomic data showed differential regulation of phosphoproteins associated with migratory, proliferative and invasive potential in these cells. Further validation of protein phosphorylation levels and phenotypic validation of our phosphoproteomic data suggested potential role of K8 site specific phosphorylation/dephosphorylation in neoplastic progression of A431 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates were prepared in lysis buffer TEABC lysis Buffer. The cell lysates were sonicated and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 minutes. The protein concentration was estimated using Bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA). 8mg of proteins from each cell type were reduced by 5mM DTT and alkylated using 10mM iodoacetamide for 10 minutes at room temperature in the dark. We employed filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol to remove SDS. After SDS removal again protein estimation was carried out. 1.4 mg of proteins from each cell types were subjected to protein using TPCK treated trypsin at 37°C for 12-16hours. Peptides from each cell type were labelled using 10plex-TMT labelling method as per manufacturer’s instruction. Peptides derived from wild type (KD-8WT) were labelled with TMT tag 126 and 127C, KD8-S73A with TMT tag 127N and 128C, KD8-S431A with TMT tag 128N and 129C, KD8-S73D with TMT tag 129N, and 130C and KD8-S431D with TMT tag 130N and 131. After labelling all the peptides were pooled and subjected to basic reverse phase liquid chromatography.The enriched phosphopeptides were analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with Easy-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark). The peptide digests were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto trap column (75 µm x 2 cm) packed in-house with Magic C18 AQ (Michrom Bioresources, Inc., Auburn, CA, USA). Peptides were resolved on an analytical column (75 µm x 20 cm) at a flow rate of 350 nL/min using a linear gradient of 10-35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile) over 80 minutes. Data dependent acquisition with full scans in 350-1700 m/z range was carried out using an Orbitrap mass analyzer at a mass resolution of 120,000 at 400 m/z. Fifteen most intense precursor ions from a survey scan were selected for MS/MS fragmented using HCD fragmentation with 32% normalized collision energy and detected at a mass resolution of 30,000 at 400 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set for 30 seconds with a 10 ppm mass window. Internal calibration was carried out using lock mass option (m/z 445.1200025) from ambient air.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry derived data was searched against Human RefSeq protein database (Version 65, containing 36211 protein entries with common contaminants added) using SEQUEST and Mascot search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer platform (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Scientific,). The search parameters for both algorithms included: carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT 10-plex (C229.163) modification at N-terminus of peptide and lysine as fixed modifications; N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine (+79.966 Da) as variable modifications. MS/MS spectra were searched with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.05Da. Trypsin was specified as protease and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. The data were searched against decoy database and the false discovery rate was set to 1% at the PSM level. The probability of phosphosite localization for each Serine/Thrionine site on each protein was calculated by the phosphoRS 3.1 node in the Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific). Phosphopeptides with > 75% localization probability was considered. The phosphorylation sites that were identified with >75% localization probability but were assigned to different sites by the search algorithm were manually corrected based on the phosphoRS localization probability for a given residue. Peptide with ratio greater than 1.5-fold cutoff was considered for differential phosphosites.

### Publication Abstract
Keratin 8/18, a simple epithelia specific keratin pair, is often aberrantly expressed in squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) where its expression is correlated with increased invasion and poor prognosis. Majority of Keratin 8 (K8) functions are governed by its phosphorylation at Serine<sup>73</sup> (head-domain) and Serine<sup>431</sup> (tail-domain) residues. Although, deregulation of K8 phosphorylation is associated with progression of different carcinomas, its role in skin-SCC and the underlying mechanism is obscure. In this direction, we performed tandem mass tag-based quantitative phosphoproteomics by expressing K8 wild type, phosphodead, and phosphomimetic mutants in K8-deficient A431 cells. Further analysis of our phosphoproteomics data showed a significant proportion of total phosphoproteome associated with migratory, proliferative, and invasive potential of these cells to be differentially phosphorylated. Differential phosphorylation of CDK1<sup>T14,Y15</sup> , EIF4EBP1<sup>T46,T50</sup> , EIF4B<sup>S422</sup> , AKT1S1<sup>T246,S247</sup> , CTTN1<sup>T401,S405,Y421</sup> , and CAP1<sup>S307/309</sup> in K8-S73A/D mutant and CTTN1<sup>T401,S405,Y421</sup> , BUB1B<sup>S1043</sup> , and CARHSP1<sup>S30,S32</sup> in K8-S431A/D mutants as well as some anonymous phosphosites including MYC<sup>S176</sup> , ZYX<sup>S344</sup> , and PNN<sup>S692</sup> could be potential candidates associated with K8 phosphorylation mediated tumorigenicity. Biochemical validation followed by phenotypic analysis further confirmed our quantitative phosphoproteomics data. In conclusion, our study provides the first global picture of K8 site-specific phosphorylation function in neoplastic progression of A431 cells and suggests various potential starting points for further mechanistic studies.

### Keywords
Keratin 8 phosphorylation, Tmt based quantitative phosphoproteomics, Human epidermoid carcinoma cell-line

### Affiliations
Scientific Officer-G Advanced Centre for Treatment, Research and Education in Cancer, Tata Memorial Centre, Navi Mumbai-410210, India
Scientific Officer G

### Submitter
Milind Vaidya

### Lab Head
Dr Milind M Vaidya
Scientific Officer-G Advanced Centre for Treatment, Research and Education in Cancer, Tata Memorial Centre, Navi Mumbai-410210, India


