### Accession
PXD020377

### Title
The proteomic inventory reveals the chloroplast ribosome as nexus within a diverse protein network

### Description
In plant cells, chloroplast gene expression is predominantly controlled through regulation of translation. Fine-tuning of protein synthesis is vital for plant development, acclimation to environmental challenges and for the assembly of major protein complexes such as the photosynthesis machinery. However, little is known about the degree and nature of the regulatory network, mainly due to challenges associated with the specific isolation of chloroplast ribosomes under conditions that also retain weak or transient interactions. Here, we established a ribosome affinity purification method, which enabled us to map the global interaction network of chloroplast ribosomes. Endogenously tagging a protein of the large or small subunit revealed not only interactors of the holo complex, but also preferential interactors of the two subunits. This includes known canonical regulatory proteins as well as several new proteins belonging to the categories of protein and RNA regulation, photosystem biogenesis, redox control and plastidic metabolism. By further characterizing identified proteins, we provide the first evidence for the existence of a co-translational N-acetyltransferase process in chloroplasts. Our dataset establishes the chloroplast ribosome as nexus in a highly choreographed, spatially interconnected protein network and reveals its wide-ranging regulatory potential during gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in logarithmic phase and were pretreated for 5 min with 100 µg/mL (w/v) chloramphenicol (CAP) or 100 µg/ml (w/v) puromycin, respectively. Formaldehyde was added to 0.37% (v/v) final concentration and cells were kept for additional 10 min in light. Crosslinking was quenched by addition of 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 for 5 min and cells were harvested via rapid cooling over plastic ice cubes, and agitated until the temperature dropped to 4 °C. Cells were pelleted at 4000 g and 4 °C for 2 min and washed in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 25 mM KCl, 25 mM MgCl2, 25 mM EGTA, 1 mM PMSF and 100 µg/mL CAP, or 800 mM of KCl and 100µg/mL puromycin instead of CAP for the high salt condition). Before lysis, 200 µg/ml Heparin and 100 U SUPERase·In™ RNase Inhibitor were added to each sample, except for the RNase digest samples. Cells were lysed in the respective lysis buffer including protease inhibitors (cOmplete™ EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche and 1 mM PMSF) by Avestine pressure homogenization at 3 bar. After lysis, 1% (w/v) n-Dodecyl-beta-maltoside was added and incubated for 5 min rotating at 4 °C. The lysates were precleared by 15 min centrifugation at 4 °C and 15000 g. For the RNase treatment, the RNA concentration was measured with a photometer and 1 U Ambion® RNase I (Thermo Fisher) per µg of RNA and 0.02 U TURBO™ DNase (Thermo Fisher) per µL lysate were added. Affinity purification was done with anti-HA Magnetic Beads (Thermo Scientific) for 90 minutes at 4 °C and constant gentle mixing. Beads were thoroughly washed three times with ice cold HKM-T buffer containing 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 25 mM KCl, 25 mM MgCl2 and 0.05% (v/v) Tween20 and another three times with the same buffer without Tween20. During the first washing step 10 µL of SUPERase·In™ were added to the RNAse treatment samples and incubated for 10 min, to quench the RNase. Proteins were eluted with 2x SDS-PAGE buffer (125 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 20% (v/v) glycerol, 4% (w/v) SDS, 0.005% (w/v) Bromphenol blue) and incubated for 5 min at 96 °C. After transfer into fresh tubes, protein crosslinks were reverted by additional incubation for 5 min at 96 °C in the presence of 0.1 M DTT. HA-affinity purification samples were briefly separated by 10% SDS-PAGE (until samples migrated for 1 cm in the gel), bands were visualized by Colloidal coomassie stain and cut into two bands per lane to separate the low molecular weight fraction below 55 kDa from higher molecular weight fractions. Tryptic digest and peptide elution were described before (Rohr et al., 2019). For reduction, gel pieces were swollen in 40 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (ABC) and 10 mM DTT and incubated at 55 °C for 15 min, followed by another 15 min at ambient temperature. The supernatant was removed, and for the alcylation 100 mM Iodoacetamide (freshly prepared) in 40 mM ABC was added and incubated for 15 min in the dark at ambient temperature. Again, the supernatant was removed, and the gel pieces were washed with 40 mM ABC for 10 min. The gel pieces were then dehydrated by incubation in 100% acetonitrile followed by drying under vacuum. Desalted peptides were separated on reverse phase columns (40 cm, 0.75 m inner diameter) packed in-house with ReprosSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.8 m resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) and directly injected into a Q Exactive HF spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
A 90 min gradient of 2-95% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid) at a constant flow rate was used to elute peptides. Mass spectra were acquired in a data dependent fashion using a top15 method for peptide sequencing. Raw data was processed with MaxQuant Version 1.6.3.3 using a label-free algorithm (Cox et al., 2014). MS/MS spectra were searched against the Chlamydomonas database (https://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov/pz/portal.html).

### Publication Abstract
In plant cells, chloroplast gene expression is predominantly controlled through post-transcriptional regulation. Such fine-tuning is vital for precisely orchestrating protein complex assembly as for the photosynthesis machinery and for quickly responding to environmental changes. While regulation of chloroplast protein synthesis is of central importance, little is known about the degree and nature of the regulatory network, mainly due to challenges associated with the specific isolation of transient ribosome interactors. Here, we established a ribosome affinity purification method, which enabled us to broadly uncover putative ribosome-associated proteins in chloroplasts. Endogenously tagging of a protein of the large or small subunit revealed not only interactors of the holo complex, but also preferential interactors of the two subunits. This includes known canonical regulatory proteins as well as several new proteins belonging to the categories of protein and RNA regulation, photosystem biogenesis, redox control and metabolism. The sensitivity of the here applied screen was validated for various transiently interacting proteins. We further provided evidence for the existence of a ribosome-associated N&#x3b1;-acetyltransferase in chloroplasts and its ability to acetylate substrate proteins at their N-terminus. The broad set of ribosome interactors underscores the potential to regulate chloroplast gene expression on the level of protein synthesis.

### Keywords
Ribosome, Lcms, Chlamydomonas rheinhardtii, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Technische Universität Kaiserslautern

### Submitter
Robin Roth

### Lab Head
Dr Zuzana Storchova
Technische Universität Kaiserslautern


