### Accession
PXD010961

### Title
“Overlapping pictures, proteomic study of the membrane components of signaling cascades in Botrytis cinerea controlled by phosphorylation”

### Description
The phytopathogen Botrytis cinerea is a ubiquitous fungus with a high capacity to adapt its metabolism to different hosts and environmental conditions in order to deploy a variety of virulence and pathogenicity factors and develop a successful plant infection. Here we report the first comparative phosphomembranome study of B. cinerea, aimed to analyze the membrane phosphoproteins composition of the fungus and its changes under different phenotypical conditions induced by two different carbon sources as plant based elicitors: glucose and deproteinized tomato cell wall (TCW). Proteomics analysisof membrane phosphoproteins was carried out by mass spectrometry. A total of 1115 proteins were successfully identified. Further analyses showed significant differences in the phosphomembranome composition depending on the available carbon source: 64 proteins were exclusively identified or overexpressed when the fungus was cultured with glucose as a sole carbon source, and 243 proteins were exclusively identified or overexpressed with TCW. GO and KEGG enrichment and clustering interaction analysis revealed changes in the composition of phosphomembranome with increase of autophagy in glucose conditions and protein degradation process, unfolded protein response (UPR) and ribosome biogenesis in TCW conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Membrane protein extraction was carried out from 100 mg of powdered mycelium using “ReadyPrep Protein Extraction Kit (membrane I)” (Bio-Rad, USA) according to the manufacturer specifications. For each biological sample, a total of five membrane protein extractions were done. After protein extraction, only detergent-rich fractions were used. All the replicas from the same biological sample were pooled, precipitated with acetone and re-dissolved in 300 L of Urea 6 M, Ammonium Bicarbonate 0.2 M buffer . The total membrane protein extracts were quantified by Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer system (Invitrogen, USA).  500 μg of each sample dissolved in 6 M urea, 0.2 M NH4HCO3 were reduced with dithiothreitol (10 mM, 37 °C, 60 min), and alkylated with iodoacetamide (20 mM, 25 °C, 30 min). Samples were diluted up to 2 M urea, digested overnight with Lys-C at 37 °C, and then diluted again 2-fold prior being digested overnight with trypsin at 37 °C. Crude peptide mixtures were desalted using a MacroSpin Column C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc., Southborough, MA).  250 μg of each digested sample was subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using titanium dioxide. Briefly, TiO2 micro-columns were prepared in gel loading tips (0.5 mg) and were equilibrated with loading buffer (80% ACNinwater+6% TFA). Samples were loaded in loading buffer and the columns were washed with 80% ACN in water +0.1% TFA. Finally, membrane phosphopeptides were eluted with 30 μL of elution buffer(5% NH3 in water) into a 1.5-mL tube containing 30 μL of 20% of formic acid in water. Crude membrane phosphopeptide mixtures were desalted using a MacroSpin column C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc., Southborough,MA). The enriched phosphopeptide mixture was analyzed using a LTQOrbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, SanJose, CA) coupled to a nano-LC (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) equipped with a reversed-phase chromatography column (25 cm, inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 1.9 μm C18 particles; Nikkyo Technos, Japan). A gradient of 3 to 35% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in 360 min at a flow of 250 μL/min was used. The Orbitrap Velos was operated in positive ion mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.2 kV and source temperature at 325 °C. The instrument was externally calibrated using Ultramark 1621 for the FT mass analyzer. An internal calibration was performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.120025 as the calibrant. The instrument was operated in datadependent mode. In all experiments, full MS scans were acquired over a mass range of m/z 350–2000 with detection in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution setting of 60,000. For each MS scan, the twenty most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 were fragmented using collision-induced dissociation with multistage activation (activation of neutral losses of 98, 65.4, 49,32.7) at a normalized collision energy of 35% in the LTQ linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
All data were acquired with Xcalibur v2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific,United States). Protein identification was performed with the Proteome Discoverer software suite v.1.4.0.288 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States)using MASCOT v2.3 (Matrix Science, United Kingdom) as search engine.Peptide tolerance was set at 7 ppm in MS and at 0.5 Da in MS/MS mode. The maximum number of missed cleavages was set at 3, and peptides were filtered based on a false discovery rate (FDR) lower than 1%. Phosphosite location was assigned by the PhosphoRS algorithm. For protein topology prediction different algorithms were used: TMHMM Server v.2.0 (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TMHMM/), Pred-GPI (http://gpcr.biocomp.unibo.it/predgpi/pred.htm), big-PI Fungal Predictor (https://mendel.imp.ac.at/gpi/fungi_server.html), GPS-Lipid 1.0 server (http://lipid.biocuckoo.org/webserver.php), Prenylated Prediction Suite (PrepS)(http://mendel.imp.ac.at/PrePS/), NMT-TheMyr predictor,(http://mendel.imp.ac.at/myristate/SUPLpredictor.htm)and CSS-Palm 4.0 (http://csspalm.biocuckoo.org/1.0/index.php), SignalP 4.1 server (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SignalP/) and SecretomeP 2.0 server (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SecretomeP/). The STRING protein interaction database was used to generate a protein interaction network of the identified membrane proteins (confidence  0.4). The obtained protein-protein network was then imported to Cytoscape (version 3.3.1)and the clustering algorithm MCODE (version 1.5.1) to identify potential functional modules. GO classification of identified proteins according to their involvement on biological process (BP) and molecular function (MF) was carried out by Agbase web server(http://agbase.msstate.edu/). KEGG classification were performed by BlastKOALA version 2.1 and KEGG mapper version 3.1.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation and membrane proteins play an important role in the infection of plants by phytopathogenic fungi, given their involvement in signal transduction cascades. Botrytis cinerea is a well-studied necrotrophic fungus taken as a model organism in fungal plant pathology, given its broad host range and adverse economic impact. To elucidate relevant events during infection, several proteomics analyses have been performed in B. cinerea, but they cover only 10% of the total proteins predicted in the genome database of this fungus. To increase coverage, we analysed by LC-MS/MS the first-reported overlapped proteome in phytopathogenic fungi, the "phosphomembranome" of B. cinerea, combining the two most important signal transduction subproteomes. Of the 1112 membrane-associated phosphoproteins identified, 64 and 243 were classified as exclusively identified or overexpressed under glucose and deproteinized tomato cell wall conditions, respectively. Seven proteins were found under both conditions, but these presented a specific phosphorylation pattern, so they were considered as exclusively identified or overexpressed proteins. From bioinformatics analysis, those differences in the membrane-associated phosphoproteins composition were associated with various processes, including pyruvate metabolism, unfolded protein response, oxidative stress response, autophagy and cell death. Our results suggest these proteins play a significant role in the B. cinerea pathogenic cycle.

### Keywords
Botrytis cinerea, Lc-ms/ms, Phosphomembranome

### Affiliations
University of Cadiz
Andalusian CenterforGrapeandGrapevineResearch,CeiA3,MarineandEnvironmentalSciencesFaculty,Laboratory of Microbiology,UniversityofCadiz (UCA),PuertoReal,11510Cádiz,Spain

### Submitter
Francisco Fernández-Acero

### Lab Head
Dr Francisco Javier Fernández Acero
Andalusian CenterforGrapeandGrapevineResearch,CeiA3,MarineandEnvironmentalSciencesFaculty,Laboratory of Microbiology,UniversityofCadiz (UCA),PuertoReal,11510Cádiz,Spain


