### Accession
PXD011119

### Title
Mouse Nedd4-2 and control with Pirfenidone

### Description
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a chronic progressive interstitial lung disease characterized by patchy scarring of the distal lung with limited therapeutic options and poor prognosis. Here, we show that conditional deletion of the ubiquitin ligase Nedd4-2 in lung epithelial cells in adult mice produces chronic lung disease that shares key features with IPF including progressive fibrosis and bronchiolization with increased expression of Muc5b in peripheral airways, honeycombing and characteristic alterations in the lung proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Two lobes of the right lung were collected and homogenized in 0.5 ml PBS with a tissue homogenizer (IKA T10 basic ULTRA TURRAX homogenizer). The resulting suspension was centrifuged at 10 000 ×g for 10 minutes at 4°C. Supernatant and the insoluble pellet were stored separately at -80°C. The insoluble pellets were lysed using 10 M urea in 250 mM NH4HCO3 supplemented with 0.1% Rapigest (Waters) and shaken for 30 min. The lysed pellets were combined with the corresponding soluble fractions and the whole tissue lysates were sonicated followed by reduction (10 mM β-mercaptoethanol, Sigma), alkylation (20 mM Chloracetamide, Sigma) and quenching (10 mM β-mercaptoethanol). Proteins were digested with LysC/Trypsin mix (Promega) added at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:25 at 4 M Urea for 4 hours followed by sample dilution to 1 M urea for overnight digestion. Peptides were purified using stage-tips containing C18 material (Empore C18 47 mm Extraction Disc, 3M) as described previously21. Samples were measured using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by direct injection into a 30 cm 75 µm inner diameter column (New Objective) self-packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm particles (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH). A two-hour gradient (100 min to 24% ACN, 20 min to 30% ACN) was used. Top-20 method was applied for MS scans in an m/z range of 350–1300 with an MS1 resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z and an MS2 resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 1.5.6.0 with protein sequence reviewed fasta files downloaded from Swiss-Prot on 16.01.2018 was used. Two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as fixed modification while methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and hydroxyproline as variable modifications. A decoy database was created reversing original sequences. 1% FDR for both peptide and protein identification was chosen. A minimum of one unique peptide was required. The LFQ algorithm with skipped normalization and minimum ratio count of two was applied. The resulting MaxQuant output file “protein groups” was used for protein quantification

### Publication Abstract
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a chronic progressive interstitial lung disease characterized by patchy scarring of the distal lung with limited therapeutic options and poor prognosis. Here, we show that conditional deletion of the ubiquitin ligase Nedd4-2 (Nedd4l) in lung epithelial cells in adult mice produces chronic lung disease sharing key features with IPF including progressive fibrosis and bronchiolization with increased expression of Muc5b in peripheral airways, honeycombing and characteristic alterations in the lung proteome. NEDD4-2 is implicated in the regulation of the epithelial Na<sup>+</sup> channel critical for proper airway surface hydration and mucus clearance and the regulation of TGF&#x3b2; signaling, which promotes fibrotic remodeling. Our data support a role of mucociliary dysfunction and aberrant epithelial pro-fibrotic response in the multifactorial disease pathogenesis. Further, treatment with the anti-fibrotic drug pirfenidone reduced pulmonary fibrosis in this model. This model may therefore aid studies of the pathogenesis and therapy of IPF.

### Keywords
Pirfenidone, Nedd4-2

### Affiliations
DKFZ Heidelberg
Division Systems Biology of Signal Transduction, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Alexander Held

### Lab Head
Dr Ursula Klingmüller
Division Systems Biology of Signal Transduction, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany


