### Accession
PXD033082

### Title
Proteomic evaluation of yeast pre-60S ribosomes_2022

### Description
The Nsa1-TAP and Rlp7-TAP purified pre-60S ribosomes from WT or tif4631Δ cell were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Purified ribosomal complexes were separated in SDS-PAGE. The gel slices were cut and performed in-gel digestion with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
The search engine is Mascot 2.3 and the setting parameters were set as below: missed cleavage: 2; MS tolerance: 10 ppm; MS/MS tolerance: 0.02 Da; Modification: Oxidation (M), Deamidation (NQ), Carbamidomethyl (C); and FDR: <1%. Only mascot score bigger than 30 was selected. Only more than two peptides identified in one protein was recorded. The relative abundances were calculated between WT and mutant in two independent experiments. Data were normalized by setting the ratios of the bait proteins to one.

### Publication Abstract
eIF4G is an important eukaryotic translation initiation factor. In this study, eIF4G1, one of the eIF4G isoforms, was shown to directly participate in biogenesis of the large (60S) ribosomal subunit in Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells. Mutation of eIF4G1 decreased the amount 60S ribosomal subunits significantly. The C-terminal fragment of eIF4G1 could complement the function in 60S biogenesis. Analyses of its purified complex with mass spectrometry indicated that eIF4G1 associated with the pre-60S form directly. Strong genetic and direct protein-protein interactions were observed between eIF4G1 and Ssf1 protein. Upon deletion of eIF4G1, Ssf1, Rrp15, Rrp14 and Mak16 were abnormally retained on the pre-60S complex. This purturbed the loading of Arx1 and eL31 at the polypeptide exit tunnel (PET) site and the transition to a Nog2 complex. Our data indicate that eIF4G1 is important in facilitating PET maturation and 27S processing correctly. This article has an associated First Person interview with the first author of the paper.

### Keywords
Yeast, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
National Taiwan University
Department of Agricultural Chemistry, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan

### Submitter
Yun-Ting Tseng

### Lab Head
Dr Lo, Kai-Yin
Department of Agricultural Chemistry, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan


