### Accession
PXD014995

### Title
The Function of Ectopic ATP Synthase  in Extracellular Vesicles.

### Description
Ectopic adenosine triphosphate synthase (eATP synthase) was found on the cell surface to generate extracellular ATP in various cancer cells. Recently using proteomics approach, several reports identified ATP synthase in extracellular vesicles (EVs) which are important in cell-cell communications. However, the functions of ATP synthase in EVs are still unclear. Here we increased the expression of eATP synthase on the plasma membrane of lung cancer A549 cells via 0.1% FBS starvation and collected EVs including microvesicles and exosomes from the culture medium using serial centrifugation. Both of them were assuredly isolated and confirmed by transmission electron microscopy, nano tracking analysis, and specific EV markers. We also used western blot to demonstrate the presence of ATP synthase in EVs. Besides, dot blot experiment revealed that the F1 portion faced towards extracellular space using anti-ATP beta subunit antibody. Under starvation, the expression of eATP synthase was enhanced on cell surface and exosomes as well as increased EV secretion. To further investigate the functions, we first elucidated whether eATP synthase on EV membrane produced ATP by ATP luciferase analysis. Our data showed that there was no significant ATP production. Moreover, we performed proteomic analysis using dimethyl labeling and LC-MS/MS to compare the difference between EVs released by A549 control and starvation. We identified a total of 1504 and 869 proteins in microvesicles and exosomes, respectively. Using 1.5- and 0.67-fold change as the thresholds, there were 171 and 46 differential expressed proteins in microvesicles and exosomes, respectively. Seven ATP synthase subunits in microvesicles and five in exosomes were identified. The proteomic data were further analyzed using gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) within the C2 (curated gene sets) subclasses and setting 0.25 as FDR cutoff to find out biological functions related to eATP synthase. Among these up-regulated terms, metabolism, cell cycle and apoptosis were enriched, which indicating that starvation influences cell behavior. Additionally, the immune response is upregulated strikingly in exosomes within C2 gene set. One of these immune response pathways, MHC-1 antigen presentation, was previously proved to interact with eATP synthase which could be recognized by several immune cells.

### Sample Protocol
　　The pallets of microvesicles and exosomes were resuspended in lysis buffer containing 1% (v/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol, and protease inhibitor cocktail. After sonication for 10 min, the concentration of proteins was determined using PierceTM BCA Protein Assay kit. 600 μg of proteins were separated using 10% SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue for 20 min. After staining, the gel was transferred into destain buffer, which containing 40% (v/v) methanol and 10% (v/v) acetic acid. The gel was then cut into small pieces and repeatedly washed with 25 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and 25 mM TEABC/50% (v/v) acetonitrile ( until the detergents completely removed. The gels were further dehydrated with 100% ACN and totally dried with a centrifugal evaporator (CVE-2000; Eyela, Tokyo, Japan) for about 20 min. 25 mM TEABC was then added to rehydrate the gel and trypsin (protein: trypsin = 10:1, w/w) for digestion. To ensure the gels were completely covered by the solution, an additional volume of 25 mM TEABC was added to the gel, and the samples were incubated in a water bath at 37 °C for 16 h. Peptides were adjusted to a pH 3-4 with 10% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich, St, Louis, MO, USA), and finally extracted from the gel with 50% (v/v) ACN/0.1% (v/v) TFA and 100% ANC sequentially. The liquid part of the sample was collected and combined, the peptide solution was then dried with a centrifugal evaporator (CVE-2000, Eyela, Tokyo, Japan). 100 μg of peptide samples were re-dissolved in 400 μl of 100 mM TEAB solution. The peptide of control (EVs isolated from normally cultured medium) and treatment (EVs isolated from serum-depletion medium) were added with 16 μl of 4% (v/v) formaldehyde-H2 and 4% (v/v) formaldehyde-D2, respectively, followed by adding 16 μl of 0.6 M sodium cyanoborohydride (Sigma-Aldrich, St, Louis, MO, USA) as catalyst. Each mixture was vortexed and incubated on a rotator (SR-100, Digisystem Laboratory Instruments Inc., Taiwan) in the dark RT for 1 hr. The samples were added 64 μl 1% (v/v) Ammonia (Wako, Osaka, Japan) on ice to stop the reaction of dimethyl labeling and 10% (v/v) formic acid (FA, Sigma-Aldrich, St, Louis, MO, USA) to adjust the pH to 3. Last, the light and the heavy dimethyl-labeled samples were combined at 1: 1 ratio (v/v) and then desalted by SDB-XC stage tips. After digestion and dimethyl labeling, peptides were desalted by SDB-XC stage tips. SDB-XC Stage Tips were conditioned with 0.1% (v/v) TFA, 80% (v/v) ACN, and equilibrated with 0.1% (v/v) TFA, 80% (v/v) CAN by centrifugation at 1000 xg for 1 min to rinse the membrane. Then, the tips were equilibrated with 0.1% (v/v) TFA, 5% (v/v) ACN by centrifugation at 1000 xg for 1 min. Next, the peptides were loaded into tips with centrifugation at 500 xg for 3 min. The tips were washed with 0.1% (v/v) TFA, 5% (v/v) ACN by centrifugation at 1000 xg for 1 min. Finally, the peptides were eluted with 0.1% (v/v) TFA, 80% (v/v) ACN by centrifugation at 1000 xg for 2 min. Samples were fractionated using strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography. Custom-made C8 Stage tip was prepared before starting fractionation. The tips were washed with methanol, buffer B (80% ACN/ 0.1% TFA), buffer A (5% ACN/ 0.1% TFA) and 500 mM ammonium acetate, all steps were centrifugation at 1,000 xg for 30 sec. And tips were stayed for 10 min, then centrifuged at 1,000 xg for 30 sec. After that, the tips were washed with buffer containing 10% TFA/ 15% ACN by centrifugation at 1,000 xg for 1 min. The samples were then loaded into the stage tips and centrifuged at 500 xg for 1 min. The peptides were eluted sequentially with buffers containing 10% TFA, 15% ACN and 0%, 1%, 2%, 3.5%, 5%, 7.5%, 10%, 30% and 50% 1M NH4OAc, respectively. The samples were finally acidified with TFA to a pH of 3 and desalted by ZipTip. Before MS analysis, the samples were dried with a centrifugal evaporator (CVE-2000, Eyela, Tokyo, Japan) NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a nanoAcquity system  connected to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL hybrid mass spectrometer  equipped with a nanospray interface  by Academia Sinica Common Mass Spectrometry Facilities. Peptide samples were loaded onto a 2 cm × 180 μm capillary trap column and separated in a 75 μm ×25 cm nanoACQUITY 1.7 μm BEH C18 column at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, and B consisted of 0.1% formic acid and 80% ACN. A linear gradient of 10% to 40% B in 90 min and 40% to 85% B in 10 min was employed throughout this study. Mass spectra from survey full scans were acquired on the Orbitrap (m/z 350-1500). The resolution was set to 60,000 at m/z values triggering MS/MS were put on an exclusion list for 90 sec. The top ten most-intense precursor ions were selected from the MS scan for subsequent collision-induced dissociation MS/MS scan by ion trap (AGC target at 7000)

### Data Protocol
　Raw MS spectral information was processed for peak detection and identification using MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8. Peptide identification was performed by the Andromeda search engine against the UniProt human proteome database (Published Jun 2018). Search criteria used in this study were trypsin specificity, fix modification of carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications of oxidation (M), and allowed for up to two missed cleavages. The type selected Standard, and multiplicity chose 2. The type of label chose Dimethyl Lys0 and Dimethyl Nter0 in Light, while DIMETHYL LYS6 and DIMETHYL NTER6 in Heavy. A minimum of seven amino acids in the peptide length was required. The precursor mass tolerance was 3 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was 0.5 Da.  Peptide identification was accepted based on posterior error ability with a false discovery rate of 1%. Identification peptides were searched and recalculated by using “match between runs” option in MaxQuant

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ectopic atp synthases; extracellular vesicles; proteomic analysis; serum depletion; human lymphoma jurkat t cells

### Affiliations
Institude of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University
Department of Life Science,National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan

### Submitter
Chang Nai-Wen

### Lab Head
Dr Hsueh-Fen Juan
Department of Life Science,National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan


