### Accession
PXD041774

### Title
LptM promotes oxidative maturation of the lipopolysaccharide translocon by substrate binding mimicry.

### Description
Insertion of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) into the outer membrane (OM) of Gram-negative bacteria is mediated by a druggable OM translocon consisting of a beta-barrel membrane protein, LptD, and a lipoprotein, LptE. The beta-barrel assembly machinery (BAM) assembles LptD together with LptE to form a plug-and-barrel structure. In the enterobacterium Escherichia coli, formation of two native disulfide bonds in LptD controls LPS translocon activation. Here we report the discovery of LptM (formerly YifL), a conserved lipoprotein that assembles together with LptD and LptE at the BAM complex. We demonstrate that LptM stabilizes a conformation of LptD that can efficiently acquire native disulfide bonds and be released as mature LPS translocon by the BAM complex. Inactivation of LptM causes the accumulation of non-natively oxidized LptD, making disulfide bond isomerization by DsbC become essential for viability. Our structural prediction and biochemical analyses indicate that LptM binds to sites in both LptD and LptE that are proposed to coordinate LPS insertion into the OM. These results suggest that, by mimicking LPS binding, LptM facilitates oxidative maturation of LptD, thereby activating the LPS translocon.

### Sample Protocol
Native Mass Spectrometry: Prior to native MS analysis, 100 µL LptDE(His) (7 µM) and LptDEM(His) (10 µM) samples were desalted in 200 mM ammonium acetate, pH 7.4 supplemented with 0.03% DDM using ultrafiltration with MWCO 30 kDa Vivacon 500 (Sartorius) and concentrated to ~10-20 µM. Samples were analysed on a SYNAPT G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters, Manchester, UK) running in positive ion mode and coupled to an automated chip-based nano-electrospray source (Triversa Nanomate, Advion Biosciences, Ithaca, NY, USA). The voltages applied to the chip, the sample cone and the ion energy resolving quadrupole were set to 1.8 kV, 200 V and -1.0 V, respectively. Proteins were activation in the collision cell with 200 V trap collision energy and an argon flow of 8 mL/min. The instrument was calibrated with a 2 mg.ml-1 cesium iodide solution in 50% isopropanol.  Automated Hydrogen-Deuterium eXchange coupled to Mass Spectrometry (HDX-MS). HDX-MS experiments were performed on a Synapt-G2 HDMS (Waters Scientific, Manchester, UK) coupled to a Twin HTS PAL dispensing and labelling robot (LEAP Technologies, Carborro, NC, USA) via a NanoAcquity system with HDX technology (Waters, Manchester, UK). Briefly, 5.2 µL of protein at 20 µM were diluted in 98.8 µL of protonated (for peptide mapping) or deuterated buffer (20 mM MES pD 6.5, 200 mM NaCl) and incubated at 20 °C for 0, 0.5, 5, 10 and 30 min. 99 µL were then transferred to vials containing 11 µL of pre-cooled quenching solution (500 mM glycine at pH 2.3). A maximally deuterated control was obtained to estimate the amount of deuterium back-change, by incubating 15 µL of LpDE at 50 µM in 285 µl d4-Urea 8 M pH 4.5. After 24 h, 300 µL D2O (Eurisotop) were added to reduce the urea concentration and 5 µL DCl 10% (Eurisotop) were added to reduce pH to 2.5. After 30 s quench, 105 µL were injected to a 100 µL loop. Proteins were digested on-line with a 2.1 mm x 30 mm EnzymateTM BEH Pepsin column (Waters Scientific, Manchester, UK). Peptides were desalted for 2 min on a C18 pre-column (Acquity UPLC BEH 1.7 µm, VANGUARD) and separated on a C18 column (Acquity UPLC BEH 1.7 µm, 1.0 mm x 100 mm) by a linear gradient (2% to 40% acetonitrile in 13 min). Experiments were run in triplicates and protonated buffer was injected between each triplicate to wash the column and avoid cross over contamination.

### Data Protocol
Native Mass Spectrometry: Raw data were acquired with MassLynx 4.1 (Waters, Manchester, UK) and analyzed manually.  Automated Hydrogen-Deuterium eXchange coupled to Mass Spectrometry (HDX-MS). Peptide identification was performed with ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS, Waters, Manchester, UK) based on the MSE data acquired on the non-deuterated samples. Peptides were filtered in DynamX 3.0 with the following parameters: peptides identified in at least 3 out of 5 acquisitions, 0.3 fragments per amino-acid, intensity threshold 1000. Deuteros 2.0 software (https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa677) was used for data visualization and statistical analysis. The online web application HDX-Viewer (https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btz550) and PyMOL (The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, Version 2.3.0 Schrödinger, LLC) were used to represent the HDX-MS data on either the LptDE and LptDEM models.

### Publication Abstract
Insertion of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) into the bacterial outer membrane (OM) is mediated by a druggable OM translocon consisting of a &#x3b2;-barrel membrane protein, LptD, and a lipoprotein, LptE. The &#x3b2;-barrel assembly machinery (BAM) assembles LptD together with LptE at the OM. In the enterobacterium Escherichia coli, formation of two native disulfide bonds in LptD controls translocon activation. Here we report the discovery of LptM (formerly YifL), a lipoprotein conserved in Enterobacteriaceae, that assembles together with LptD and LptE at the BAM complex. LptM stabilizes a conformation of LptD that can efficiently acquire native disulfide bonds, whereas its inactivation makes disulfide bond isomerization by DsbC become essential for viability. Our structural prediction and biochemical analyses indicate that LptM binds to sites in both LptD and LptE that are proposed to coordinate LPS insertion into the OM. These results suggest that, by mimicking LPS binding, LptM facilitates oxidative maturation of LptD, thereby activating the LPS translocon.

### Keywords
Lptde, Hdx-ms, Membrane protein, Translocon, Native ms

### Affiliations
IPBS
IPBS-Toulouse BP64182 205 route de Narbonne 31077 Toulouse Cedex04

### Submitter
Julien Marcoux

### Lab Head
Dr Julien Marcoux
IPBS-Toulouse BP64182 205 route de Narbonne 31077 Toulouse Cedex04


