### Accession
PXD018733

### Title
The translation release factor methyltransferase Mtq2-Trm112 is required for ribosome biogenesis

### Description
The Mtq2-Trm112 methyltransferase is known to modify the translational eukaryotic release factor eRF1 on the glutamine side chain of a universally conserved GGQ motif, which is essential to translation termination. The exact role of eRF1 methylation remains unknown. As the deletion of MTQ2 leads to severe growth impairment in S. cerevisiae, we have investigated its role further. Here we report an unexpected function of Mtq2 in ribosome biogenesis. We reveal that Mtq2 is part of nuclear precursor ribosomes to 60S subunits, and we demonstrate that its catalytic activity is required for the stable production of mature 5.8S and 25S rRNAs and for pre-60S export. Consistently, in the absence of Mtq2 function pre-60S subunits enriched in the export factors Nmd3 and Arx1 accumulate in the nucleus. We conclude that, in addition to its role as a translation terminator modification enzyme, Mtq2 is a ribosome assembly factor which is important for late-stage large ribosomal subunit formation.

### Sample Protocol
Nano-LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a nanoAcquity UPLC device (Waters, Milford, MA) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Shotgun data was processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16). Raw data-derived peak lists were searched using the Andromeda search engine against an in-house generated database containing all Saccharomyces cerevisiae entries extracted from UniProtKB-SwissProt (release of 04/2018, 7,905 entries). Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search. Fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Trypsin/P was chosen as digestion enzyme and one missed cleavage was tolerated. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. The minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids. The maximum false discovery rate was 1% for peptides and proteins with the use of a decoy strategy. The “match between runs” option was not used. Peptides with modified methionines, as well as their unmodified counterparts, were excluded from protein quantification. The final protein list was obtained after suppression of contaminants, reverse entries, and proteins only identified with modified peptides. All other parameters were set as default. The “proteingroups.txt” file with LFQ intensities (normalized intensities) was used.

### Publication Abstract
The Mtq2-Trm112 methyltransferase modifies the eukaryotic translation termination factor eRF1 on the glutamine side chain of a universally conserved GGQ motif that is essential for release of newly synthesized peptides. Although this modification is found in the three domains of life, its exact role in eukaryotes remains unknown. As the deletion of MTQ2 leads to severe growth impairment in yeast, we have investigated its role further and tested its putative involvement in ribosome biogenesis. We found that Mtq2 is associated with nuclear 60S subunit precursors, and we demonstrate that its catalytic activity is required for nucleolar release of pre-60S and for efficient production of mature 5.8S and 25S rRNAs. Thus, we identify Mtq2 as a novel ribosome assembly factor important for large ribosomal subunit formation. We propose that Mtq2-Trm112 might modify eRF1 in the nucleus as part of a quality control mechanism aimed at proof-reading the peptidyl transferase center, where it will subsequently bind during translation termination.

### Keywords
Translation, Ribosome, Methyltransferase, Rna processing

### Affiliations
IPHC (LSMBO - Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Bio-Organique), UMR 7178, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS
University of Strasbourg

### Submitter
Nicolas Pythoud

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Carapito
IPHC (LSMBO - Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Bio-Organique), UMR 7178, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS


