### Accession
PXD027909

### Title
Identification of protein corona on graphene oxide in B medium

### Description
As antimicrobials, graphene materials (GMs) may have advantages over traditional antibiotics due to their physical mechanisms of action which ensure less chance of development of microbial resistance. However, the fundamental question as to whether the antibacterial mechanism of GMs originates from penetration by their sharp edges or wrapping of the cell membrane, or from a combination of these and other mechanisms, remains controversial. In this study, we show both experimentally and theoretically that GMs with high surface oxygen content (SOC) predominantly attach in parallel to the bacterial cell surface when in the suspension phase. The interaction mode shifts to perpendicular interaction when the SOC reaches a threshold of ~ 0.3 (the atomic percent of O in the total atoms). However, neither mode necessarily kills bacteria. Rather, bactericidal activity depends on the interaction of GMs with surrounding biomolecules. Proteomic study shows that protein corona forms on the surface graphene oxide in LB medium, thus explain the different antibacterial activity in different culture medium.

### Sample Protocol
Nano-LC-MS peptide analyses were performed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nano-HPLC system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer. Samples were injected as 18 μL aqueous solutions containing 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were concentrated on a PepMap100 C18 trap column (300 µm i.d., 5 mm length, 5μm particles with 100 Å pore size) and separated on a fritless pulled fused-silica capillary column (100 µm i.d., 20 cm length) packed with 2.4 µm reversed-phase material (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ with 120 Å pores). The gradient (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: 0.1% formic acid in 85% acetonitrile) was initially isocratic at 4% B for 4 min. Solvent B was then increased linearly to 35% within 53 min, and to 100% over 5 min, was kept at 100% for 5 min, and reduced linearly to 4% over 5 min. A flowrate of 300 nL/min was applied.

### Data Protocol
Fragment spectra were matched against the Uniprot database Download version 08. Dec 2020, 257613 sequence entries and the Saccharomyces cerevisiae database Download version 10. Sep 2020, 5983 sequence entries, using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (ThermoFisher Scientific). The search parameters were as follows: Fixed modification was carbamidomethyl-cysteine; variable modifications were oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus. The precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and the MS/MS mass tolerance was 0.02 Da. Two missed cleavages were allowed and identified proteins are accepted as a real hit protein with at least two high confidence peptides. The required false positive rate was set to 1% at the peptide and at the protein level, respectively, and was calculated via the Percolator node.

### Publication Abstract
As antimicrobials, graphene materials (GMs) may have advantages over traditional antibiotics due to their physical mechanisms of action which ensure less chance of development of microbial resistance. However, the fundamental question as to whether the antibacterial mechanism of GMs originates from parallel interaction or perpendicular interaction, or from a combination of these, remains poorly understood. Here, we show both experimentally and theoretically that GMs with high surface oxygen content (SOC) predominantly attach in parallel to the bacterial cell surface when in the suspension phase. The interaction mode shifts to perpendicular interaction when the SOC reaches a threshold of &#x223c;0.3 (the atomic percent of O in the total atoms). Such distinct interaction modes are highly related to the rigidity of GMs. Graphene oxide (GO) with high SOC is very flexible and thus can wrap bacteria while reduced GO (rGO) with lower SOC has higher rigidity and tends to contact bacteria with their edges. Neither mode necessarily kills bacteria. Rather, bactericidal activity depends on the interaction of GMs with surrounding biomolecules. These findings suggest that variation of SOC of GMs is a key factor driving the interaction mode with bacteria, thus helping to understand the different possible physical mechanisms leading to their antibacterial activity.

### Keywords
Lb medium, Graphene oxide, Protein corona

### Affiliations
University of Birmingham

### Submitter
Peng Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Peng Zhang
University of Birmingham


