### Accession
PXD042366

### Title
Secretome analysis of breast cancer cells treated with Ipomoea turpethum extract-loaded polymeric nanoparticles.

### Description
Nanoparticle-based formulations bypass biological barriers, allowing for longer blood circulation times, simultaneous tumor targeting, and increased drug accumulation in tumors. They have a higher therapeutic efficiency than traditional treatment due to better specificity for effective drug targeting, no solubility, and stability issues. In our previous study, we showed that Ipomoea turpethum extract-loaded polymeric nanoparticles induce cytotoxicity in breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7 and MDA MB-231) by regulating pathways involved in apoptosis and cell proliferation 9. Many researchers demonstrated the use of tumor microenvironments for prognostic, diagnostics, and therapeutic purposes. In the present study, we have analyzed the effect of NVA-IT treatment on the tumor microenvironment via secretory proteins present in the medium of the tumor cells. We have used Nano LCMS/MS to identify the differentially expressed proteins present in the culture medium of the NVA-IT treated tumor cells compared to untreated tumor cells. The differentially expressed proteins were further analyzed using bioinformatics tools.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were dissolved in 6M Gn-HCl (50 mM TRIS, pH 8.8) buffer. 50ug of protein sample was used for digestion and reduced with 5 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine). Alkylation was done with 50 mM iodoacetamide and further digested with Trypsin (1:50, Trypsin/lysate ratio) for 16 h at 37 °C. the resultant digests were cleaned using a C18 silica cartridge to remove the salt and dried using a speed vacuum. The dried pellet was resuspended in buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).Mass Spectrometric Analysis of Peptide Mixtures was performed using RSLC Nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to Thermo Fisher-QExactive Plus equipped with Nano electrospray ion source. 1ug of sample was loaded on C18 column 50 cm, 3.0μm Easy-spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted with a 0–40% gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min) and injected for MS analysis. Liquid chromatography gradients were run for 100 minutes.  MS1 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at 70k resolution. Dynamic exclusion was employed for 10s excluding all charge states for a given precursor. MS2 spectra were acquired at 17500 resolutions.

### Data Protocol
All the samples once processed, were subjected to a mass spectrometry run. Raw files containing mass/charge values were generated for each of the samples. Further, these raw files were analyzed through Thermo Proteome Discoverer (v2.2) against the Uniprot Human database. For Sequest and Amanda search, the precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The protease used to generate peptides, i.e., enzyme specificity was set for trypsin/P (cleavage at the C terminus of “K/R: unless followed by “P”) along with maximum missed cleavage value of two. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, and acetylation N terminus both were considered variable modifications for database search. Both peptide spectrum match and protein false discovery rate were set to 0.01 FDR.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> Breast cancer is the leading cause of frequent malignancy and morbidity among women across the globe, with an increment of 0.5% incidences every year. The deleterious effects of traditional treatment on off-target surrounding cells make it difficult to win the battle against breast cancer. Hence, an advancement in the therapeutic approach is crucial. Nanotechnology is one of the emerging methods for precise, targeted, and efficient drug delivery in cells. The previous study has demonstrated the cytotoxic effect of <i>Ipomoea turpethum</i> extract on breast cancer cells delivered via NIPAAM-VP-AA nanoparticles (NVA-IT). Manipulating the tumor microenvironment (TME) to inhibit cancer progression, invasion, and metastasis seems to be very insightful for researchers these days. With the help of secretome analysis of breast cancer cells after treatment with NVA-IT, we have tried to find out the possible TME manipulation achieved to favor a better prognosis of the disease. <b>Method:</b> MCF-7 and MDA MB-231 cells were treated with the IC<sub>50</sub> value of NVA-IT, and the medium was separated from the cells after 24&#xa0;h of the treatment. Nano LCMS/MS analysis was performed to identify the secretory proteins in the media. Further bioinformatics tools like GENT2, GSCA, GeneCodis 4, and STRING were used to identify the key proteins and their interactions. <b>Result:</b> From the nano LCMS/MS analysis, 70 differentially expressed secretory proteins in MCF-7 and 191 in MDA MB-231 were identified in the cell's media. Fifteen key target proteins were filtered using bioinformatics analysis, and the interaction of proteins involved in vesicular trafficking, cell cycle checkpoints, and oxidative stress-related proteins was prominent. <b>Conclusion:</b> This study concluded that <i>I. turpethum</i> extract-loaded NIPAAM-VP-AA nanoparticles alter the secretory proteins constituting the TME to cease cancer cell growth and metastasis.

### Keywords
Nanoparticles, Nano lcms/ms, Secretome analysis, Bioinformatics., Breast cancer, Ipomoea turpethum

### Affiliations
Department of Biotechnology, School of Chemical & Life Sciences, Jamia Hamdard, Hamdard Nagar, New Delhi, 110062, India
Department of Biotechnology, School of Chemical & Life Sciences, Jamia Hamdard, Hamdard Nagar, New Delhi, 110062.

### Submitter
SAIMA WAJID

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Saima Wajid
Department of Biotechnology, School of Chemical & Life Sciences, Jamia Hamdard, Hamdard Nagar, New Delhi, 110062, India


