### Accession
PXD039441

### Title
Characterization of Arginine Methylation in Cancer Cell using LC-MS/MS

### Description
Protein arginine methyltransferase 9 (PRMT9) activity has been observed to be elevated in cancer patients, including many types of leukemias, correlating with poor prognosis and decreased response to immune checkpoint inhibitors. By targeting PRMT9, we can eliminate PRMT9-proficient/immune-cold cancers via mechanisms such as Type-I Interferon associated immunity. Deleting PRMT9 resulted in a decrease in arginine methylation of regulators involved in RNA translation and DNA damage response. Through global proteomics and SILAC methyl(R) enrichment, we characterized arginine methylation changes in AML cell lines via LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC heavy and light labeled cells were lysed in 9 M Urea with protease and phosphatase inhibitors in 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0) buffer. Samples were sonicated and the lysates were clarified by centrifugation. Equal amount of extracted protein from heavy and light SILAC culture was combined and processed for sequential in-solution lysC and trypsin digestion. Tryptic peptides were reconstituted in IAP buffer. Arg-methylated peptides were enriched using sequential incubation of peptides with Arg-Monomethyl antibody beads (PTMScan® Mono-Methyl Arginine Motif Kit) and Arg-Dimethyl antibody beads (PTMScan® Symmetric Di-Methyl Arginine Motif Kit). Enriched peptides were reconstituted in loading solvent transferred to autosampler vials. One microgram of non-enriched peptides was taken up for global protein identification.  Mass spectrometry data were either acquired on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (methylated peptides) or Orbitrap Eclipse with FAIMS Pro interface (unmodified peptides) coupled to a U3000 RSLCnano LC system running binary solvent A (water, 0.1% formic acid) and B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at 300 nl/min. Methylated peptides (5 µl injection volume) were directly loaded on a 25 cm EasySpray C18 column and eluted over 120 minute gradient. Unmodified peptides (1 µg peptides, 5 µl injection volume) were directly loaded on a 50 cm EasySpray C18 column and eluted over 240 minutes. Using Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA), full scans were performed in the Orbitrap. Using a duty cycle of 3 second (Lumos) or 1 second (Eclipse) per FAIMS CV (-40/-60/-80), most abundant precursors with charge state between 2-7 were fragmented by HCD and measured in the iontrap. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 seconds to prevent resampling of previously analyzed precursors.

### Data Protocol
MS RAW files were searched against a 2020 human Uniprot protein database  plus common contaminant database using MaxQuant v1.6.17.0. Search parameters include: fully tryptic peptides with up to 2 missed cleavages, fixed modification of Cys carbamidomethylation, dynamic modification on Arg mono/di-methylation, Met oxidation and N-terminal acetylation. Protein identification required at least 1 unique peptide and results were filtered to 1% Protein and Site False Discovery Rate (FDR). Resulting methyl peptides SILAC ratios obtained from MaxQuant evidence.txt output file were normalized to their protein SILAC ratios prior to further analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Translational Genomics Research Institute
TGen

### Submitter
Krystine Mansfield

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Pirrotte
Translational Genomics Research Institute


