### Accession
PXD032201

### Title
Human hepatocellular carcinoma MHCC97H proteome

### Description
In this work, we generated a MHCC97H proteome datasets by In-gel digestion on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. We systematically compared RNC-seq and Ribo-seq in the context of proteome identification, especially when identifying protein isoforms from AS. We also demonstrated that the single-molecule long read sequencing technique identified thousands of new splice variants and guided the MS identifications of new protein isoforms.

### Sample Protocol
MHCC97H Cell line was cultured to 80–90% coverage and treated with 1% SDS lysis buffer (Beyotime, Shanghai, China) and the protein concentration was measured using a BCA kit (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA).  The protein digestion was performed by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) as we previously described. In brief, firstly, 1 mg protein samples were reduced and alkylated using dithiothreitol solution (DTT) (Solarbio, Beijing, China) and iodoacetamide solution (IAA) (I6125, Merck, Kenilworth, NJ, USA) at a final concentration of 4 M urea (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5). Secondly, all the solution was transferred to a 10KD ultrafiltration tube (Merck, Kenilworth, NJ, USA) and centrifuged at 12000g, and then washed 3 times with 50 mM TEAB (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA ). Thirdly, trypsin (V5280, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added in a ratio of 1:40, and incubated overnight at 37 °C. The peptides were collected into low-binding collection tube (Thermo Scientific™, Waltham, MA, USA) and then measured the concentration using Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific™, Waltham, MA, USA). Finally, the peptides were freeze-dried and stored at -80 ° C. Firstly, the total peptides were fractionated using high-pH reverse-phase liquid chromatography (RPLC). Specifically, 600 µg peptide was re-dissolved in 100 µL buffer A (2% (v/v) ACN, pH 10), and loaded onto the C18 column (4.6 × 250 mm, C18, 3 µm, 186003581, Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The elution gradient was buffer B (98% ACN, pH 10; flow rate, 800µL/min) for 65 min, the elution gradient was as follows: 5% B, 0 min; 5% B, 6 min; 37% B, 28 min; 46% B, 45 min; 90% B, 46 min; 90% B, 54 min; 95% B, 55 min; 95% B, 65 min. The eluted peptides were collected every minute from the 6th minute until the 54th minute, and then the front, middle and rear fractions were combined into 16 fractions with equal peak area, finally, the fractionated peptides were freeze-dried.  Secondly, the 16 fractionated peptides were redissolved in 0.5% (V/V) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Macklin, Shanghai, China) and were desalted using a Mono tip C18 columns (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) following the manufacturer’s instructions and freeze-dried.  Finally, the 16 fractions of the desalted peptide were re-dissolved in 0.1% (V/V) formic acid (FA) (Thermo Scientific™, Waltham, MA, USA) and then preformed DDA analysis by using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer equipped with EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific™, Waltham, MA, USA). 2µg of each fractions peptides were loaded on a nano trap column (C18, 150 µm x 20 mm, 1.9μm, homemade), and then separated onto an analytical column (C18, 150μm x 300 mm, 1.9μm, homemade) using a 120 min linear gradient (solvent A: 98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA; solvent B: 98% ACN, 2% H2O, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 600 nL/min. The detailed solvent gradient was as follows: 5–12% B, 28 min; 12–24% B, 58 min; 24–38% B, 25 min; 38–95% B, 1 min; 95% B, 8 min. The MS1 scan was acquired from 350 to 1500 m/z with a resolution of 120k, the MS2 scans were performed at a resolution of 15k with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, the cycle time was set to 3s with a dynamic exclusion of 30s.

### Data Protocol
The custom protein isoforms databases were built by translating identified AS isoforms into protein sequences. neXtProt (release 2020-07-17) database was used as a negative control. pFind (version3.1.4) was utilized to search protein isoforms in mass spectrometric datasets. The FDR threshold was set to 0.01 at both peptide level and protein level. The carbamidomethyl[C] was set as fixed modification, and oxidation[M] as variable modification during the search. The product ion tolerance was set as default parameters and precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm. The missed cleavage was set to 2 for each peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Alternative splicing (AS) isoforms create numerous proteoforms, expanding the complexity of the genome. Highly similar sequences, incomplete reference databases and the insufficient sequence coverage of mass spectrometry limit the identification of AS proteoforms. Here, we demonstrated full-length translating mRNAs (ribosome nascent-chain complex-bound mRNAs, RNC-mRNAs) sequencing (RNC-seq) strategy to sequence the entire translating mRNA using next-generation sequencing, including short-read and long-read technologies, to construct a protein database containing all translating AS isoforms. Taking the advantage of read length, short-read RNC-seq identified up to 15,289 genes and 15,906 AS isoforms in a single human cell line, much more than the Ribo-seq. The single-molecule long-read RNC-seq supplemented 4,429 annotated AS isoforms that were not identified by short-read datasets, and 4,525 novel AS isoforms that were not included in the public databases. Using such RNC-seq-guided database, we identified 6,766 annotated protein isoforms and 50 novel protein isoforms in mass spectrometry datasets. These results demonstrated the potential of full-length RNC-seq in investigating the proteome of AS isoforms.

### Keywords
Human, Liver, Mhcc97h, Lc-ms/ms, In-gel digestion

### Affiliations
JiNan University
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University , Guangzhou 510632, China.

### Submitter
wang hongwei

### Lab Head
Dr Gong Zhang
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University , Guangzhou 510632, China.


