### Accession
PXD003037

### Title
Systemic remodeling of translation efficiencies on oxygen stimulus.

### Description
Protein concentrations evolve under greater evolutionary constraint than mRNA levels. In addition, translation efficiency of mRNA populations represents the chief determinant of basal protein concentrations.   This raises a fundamental question as to how mRNA and protein levels are actively coordinated in dynamic systems responding to acute physiological stimuli. This report examines the contributions of mRNA abundance and translation efficiency to protein output in cells responding to oxygen stimulus. We show that alternative translation efficiencies, not mRNA levels, represent the major adaptive mechanism that governs the cellular response to perturbations in [O2]. This phenomenon is coordinated by eIF4F under atmospheric [O2] and the previously uncharacterized hypoxic eIF4F (eIF4FH) under low [O2]. The oxygen-regulated remodeling of translation efficiency enables oxygenated and hypoxic cells to produce surprisingly divergent translatomes of similar complexity, with minimal dependence on mRNA levels. Changes in mRNA concentrations observed between normoxic and hypoxic cells are likely neutral, as they are during evolution. We propose that mRNAs contain hard-wired translation efficiency determinants for their triage by the translation apparatus on [O2] stimulus.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were maintained in “light” (R0K0) media under standard cell culture conditions at 21% O2, following which they were subjected to pre-treatment with 1% O2 or 21% O2 for 6 hr. Light media was then removed and cells were washed once with warm PBS to maximize removal of residual light media. “Heavy” (R10K8) media was then added to the cells, which were left to grow 1% O2 or 21% O2 for 24 hr. Following 24 hr of labeling with heavy media, total cellular protein was harvested using a urea lysis buffer (9 M Urea, 20 mM HEPES at pH 8.0). Lysates were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 15 min at 4 0C, and the supernatant were subjected to in-solution digestion followed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS/MS). Samples were analyzed on a linear ion trap-Orbitrap hybrid analyzer (Orbitrap Elite, Thermo Fisher Scientific) outfitted with a nanospray source and EASY-nLC split-free nano-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Lyophilized peptide mixtures were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto a 75μm x 50cm PepMax RSLC EASY-Spray column filled with 2 μM C18 beads (Thermo Fisher) at a pressure of 800 BAR. Peptides were eluted over 240 min at a rate of 250 nl/min using a 0 to 35% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were introduced by nano electrospray into an Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The instrument method consisted of one MS full scan (400–1500 m/z) in the Orbitrap mass analyzer, an automatic gain control target of 500,000 with a maximum ion injection of 200 ms, one microscan, and a resolution of 120,000. Ten data-dependent MS/MS scans were performed in the linear ion trap using the ten most intense ions at 35% normalized collision energy. The MS and MS/MS scans were obtained in parallel fashion. In MS/MS mode automatic gain control targets were 10,000 with a maximum ion injection time of 100 ms. A minimum ion intensity of 1000 was required to trigger an MS/MS spectrum. The dynamic exclusion was applied using a maximum exclusion list of 500 with one repeat count with a repeat duration of 15 s and exclusion duration of 45 s. Alternatively, cells were sequentially extracted into Digitonin-soluble, Triton-soluble, and Triton-insoluble fractions. These fractions were separated by size on a 4 – 20% Tris- Glycine (TGX) gel (Biorad), following which each lane was cut into 8 equal-sized bands. Gel bands were then subjected to in-gel digestion followed by LC-MS/MS on an LTQ-Orbitrap XL hybrid ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data generated by LC-MS/MS (peaklists generated by Xcalibur 2.2) were analyzed using Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for ion current analysis, and were searched against the international protein index human database, downloaded from http://www.ebi.ac.uk/IPI/IPIhelp.html (downloaded May 13 2014). Database searching was done by using SEQUEST version 1.3.0.339 (through Proteome Discoverer, Thermo Fisher Scientific). SEQUEST search data was then imported into Scaffold (Proteome Software) and X!Tandem database searching was performed on import. Databases were searched with a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM, and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6Da. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, label:13C(6)15N(2) of lysine, label:13C(6)15N(4) of arginine and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. Proteins were annotated with GO terms from gene_association.goa_human (downloaded Nov 4, 2014) (Ashburner et al., 2000). Scaffold Q+ (version Scaffold_4.4.3, Proteome Software) was used to quantitate SILAC Label Based Quantitation peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Acquired intensities in the experiment were globally normalized across all acquisition runs. Individual quantitative samples were normalized within each acquisition run. Intensities for each peptide identification were normalized within the assigned protein. The reference channels were normalized to produce a 1:1 fold change. All normalization calculations were performed using averages to multiplicatively normalize data. Scaffold Q+ was used to determine the Log2 of the normalized heavy label intensities. Both normoxia and hypoxia light channels were considered references, while the heavy channels were compared against each other.

### Publication Abstract
Protein concentrations evolve under greater evolutionary constraint than mRNA levels. Translation efficiency of mRNA represents the chief determinant of basal protein concentrations. This raises a fundamental question of how mRNA and protein levels are coordinated in dynamic systems responding to physiological stimuli. This report examines the contributions of mRNA abundance and translation efficiency to protein output in cells responding to oxygen stimulus. We show that changes in translation efficiencies, and not mRNA levels, represent the major mechanism governing cellular responses to [O2] perturbations. Two distinct cap-dependent protein synthesis machineries select mRNAs for translation: the normoxic eIF4F and the hypoxic eIF4F(H). O2-dependent remodeling of translation efficiencies enables cells to produce adaptive translatomes from preexisting mRNA pools. Differences in mRNA expression observed under different [O2] are likely neutral, given that they occur during evolution. We propose that mRNAs contain translation efficiency determinants for their triage by the translation apparatus on [O2] stimulus.

### Keywords
Translation, Rna sequencing, Hypoxia, Silac, Eif4e2, Eif4e, Cancer

### Affiliations
Bioinformatics Solutions Inc
Professor Director, Executive Ph.D. Program Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center Miller School of Medicine University of Miami R. Bunn Gauthier Building, Rm 216 Miami, FL, 33101-6129

### Submitter
Jonathan Krieger

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen Lee
Professor Director, Executive Ph.D. Program Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center Miller School of Medicine University of Miami R. Bunn Gauthier Building, Rm 216 Miami, FL, 33101-6129


