### Accession
PXD031685

### Title
Mitochondrial Hepatopathy Proteomics - Whole Tissue

### Description
Identification of altered proteins following mitochondrial hepatopathy

### Sample Protocol
50 ug of liver protein homogenate was loaded onto a 4-20% Mini-PROTEAN TGX precast protein gel (BioRad), stained with Coomassie Blue, and destained. Samples were analyzed at the UT Southwestern Proteomics Core. Gel slices were digested overnight with trypsin (Pierce) following reduction and alkylation with DTT and iodoacetamide (Sigma–Aldrich). The samples then underwent solid-phase extraction cleanup with an Oasis HLB plate (Waters) and the resulting samples were injected onto an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC-Nano liquid chromatography system. Samples were injected onto a 75 um i.d., 75-cm long EasySpray column (Thermo) and eluted with a gradient from 0-28% buffer B over 90 min. Buffer A contained 2% (v/v) ACN and 0.1% formic acid in water, and buffer B contained 80% (v/v) ACN, 10% (v/v) trifluoroethanol, and 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode with a source voltage of 1.8 kV and an ion transfer tube temperature of 275 °C. MS scans were acquired at 120,000 resolution in the Orbitrap and up to 10 MS/MS spectra were obtained in the ion trap for each full spectrum acquired using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) for ions with charges 2-7. Dynamic exclusion was set for 25 s after an ion was selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer v2.4 SP1 (Thermo), with peptide identification performed using Sequest HT searching against the mouse protein database from UniProt. Fragment and precursor tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.6 Da were specified, and three missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification, with oxidation of Met set as a variable modification. The false-discovery rate (FDR) cutoff was 1% for all peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lcms mitochondria hepatopathy

### Affiliations
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
University of Pennsylvania

### Submitter
Nicholas Lesner

### Lab Head
Dr Prashant Mishra
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center


