### Accession
PXD018600

### Title
A Structure-Based Mechanism for DNA Entry into the Cohesin Ring

### Description
The ring-shaped cohesin complex is thought to fulfil its roles in sister chromatid cohesion, genome stability and gene regulation by topologically encircling DNAs. The ring is formed by two Structural Maintenance of Chromosome (SMC) subunits, whose ATPase heads are linked by a kleisin subunit. Additional components, including the Mis4Scc2/NIPL cohesin loader, engage the kleisin. Here, we visualize a DNA gripping intermediate during cohesin loading onto DNA by cryo-electron microscopy. ATP-dependent head engagement creates an interaction surface onto which Mis4Scc2/NIPL clamps the DNA. We use biophysical tools to establish the order of events during cohesin loading. DNA first traverses an N-terminal kleisin gate that was opened by ATP binding and closed again as the loader locks the DNA. Ensuing ATP hydrolysis and head disengagement, assisted by Mis4Scc2/NIPL, will complete DNA entry. A conserved kleisin N-terminal tail guides the DNA on its trajectory to successful topological DNA entry into the cohesin ring.

### Sample Protocol
For DNA-protein cross-linking, we prepared two different kind of dsDNA probes, 125bp short linear DNA and 3000bp circular DNA. 125bp linear dsDNA was amplified by PCR with 5’-biotinylated oligonucleotide TH1 and non-modified oligonucleotide TH5 using pBluescript dsDNA as the template. PCR reaction mixture contains 5 ng/ml template DNA, 0.3 μM each primer, 0.2 mM dATP-dCTP-dGTP, 0.02 mM dTTP, 0.18 mM aminoallyl-dUTP and 0.025 unit/μl Go-taq DNA polymerase in 1x Go-taq buffer (Promega). 3000bp circular dsDNA was prepared by primer extension on single strand DNA. 5’-biotinylated TH1 oligonucleotide primer was annealed to single strand DNA templates of pBluescript, prepared by using M13KO7 helper phage. For second strand synthesis, the primer-template mix was incubated in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 0.4 mM dATP- dCTP- dGTP, 0.4 mM aminoallyl-dUTP, 0.1 mg/ml BSA and 0.04 unit/μl T7 DNA polymerase (New England Biolabs) at 37℃ for 3 hours. After amine-dUTP incorporation, buffer of DNA sample was exchanged with SDAD cross-linking buffer (100mM NaHCO3 pH8.3) by passing through micro spin-column S400 (GE Healthcare). 1 μg of dsDNA was incubated with 2 mM SDAD cross-linker in 25 μl of SDAD cross-linking buffer at 25℃ for overnight. Diazirin-immobilized dsDNA (SDAD-DNA probe) was dialyzed in DNA dialysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 0.1 mM EDTA).  For DNA-protein cross-linking in Figure 6B and C, 200 nM cohesin, 200 nM Mis4-Ssl3, 20ng/μl 125bp or 3000bp SDAD-DNA probe were mixed in reaction buffer, and DNA gripping reaction was spiked by addition of 0.5 mM ADP and 0.5 mM BeSO4-10 mM NaF at 32℃ for 30 min. After incubation, equal volume of 2 x washing buffer D was added to the reaction mixture and incubated at 4℃ for 10 min. The sample was applied on the 96-well plate, placed on ice at a distance of 5 cm from the UV-A lamp and irradiated for 10 min as same as SDA-based cross-linking. After UV irradiation, buffer of the sample was exchanged with Protease buffer (100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8) by using micro spin-column S400. Lys-C protease was added (Lys-C: Protein=1:20 (weight: weight)) to the sample, and incubated at 37 ℃ for overnight. To dissociate non-cross-linking peptide from DNA, equal volume of 2 x RIPA buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 100 mM NaCl, 0.2% SDS) was added to the sample, followed by incubation at 50 ºC for 30 min. The peptide-DNA cross-linking complex was separated by Superdex75 size-exclusion chromatography developed with 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl. The recovered peptide-DNA complex in the void fraction was supplemented with NaCl (final 1M) and Tween-20 (final 0.1% (w/v)), and the biotinylated DNA was pulled down by Streptavidin M280 magnetic beads (Invitrogen) at 25℃ for 1 hour. DNA-beads was washed 3 times with 1 x RIPA buffer, 5 times with peptide elution buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl). DNA-cross-linking peptides were eluted by addition of peptide elution buffer containing 25 mM DTT and incubation at 37℃ for 30 min.    Peptide solutions in the DTT peptide elution buffer described above were transferred into Total Recovery vials (Waters) for injection without further clean-up or concentration.  Samples were analysed by online nanoflow LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano (Thermo Scientific). Sample was pre-concentrated onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 75µm x 2 cm nanoviper trap column with loading buffer, 2% v/v acetonitrile, 0.05% v/v trifluoroacetic acid, 97.95% water (Optima grade, Fisher Scientific).  Peptides were gradient eluted and separated with a C18 75 µm x 50 cm, 2µm particle size, 100Å pore size, reversed phase EASY-Spray analytical column (Thermo Scientific). Gradient elution buffers were A 0.1% v/v formic acid, 5% v/v DMSO, 94.9% v/v water and B 0.1% v/v formic acid, 5% v/v DMSO, 20% v/v water, 74.9% v/v acetonitrile (all Optima grade, Fisher Scientific aside from DMSO, Honeywell Research Chemicals).  The gradient elution profile used was 8% B to 40% B over 60 minutes.    The instrument method used an MS1 Orbitrap scan resolution of 120,000 at FWHM m/z 200, quadrupole isolation, mass range 375-1500 m/z, RF Lens 40%, AGC target 4e5, maximum injection time 50 ms and spectra were acquired in profile mode.  MS2 scans were acquired in the ion trap at following HCD fragmentation with fixed collision energy of 32% and was performed on all selected precursor masses using a cycle time based data dependant mode of acquisition set to 3s.  The parameters used for the HCD MS2 scan were quadrupole isolation with an isolation window width of 1.2 m/z, first mass 110 m/z, AGC target 2e3, maximum injection time 300ms and the scan data was acquired in centroid mode at the rapid scan rate.

### Data Protocol
A fasta database containing only the sequences of the six subunits of the cohesion complex was used for the PEAKS search conducted within PEAKS Studio (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc). A modification corresponding to the diazirine moiety after reduction (C7H13NOS, 159.07178) was created and considered as a variable modification along with the oxidation of methionine residues. Other parameters of the search were digestion enzyme LysC with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, peptide mass tolerance 5ppm and fragment mass tolerance 0.6Da.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Abc-atpase, Dna-protein crosslink mass spectrometry, S. pombe, Mis4/scc2/nipbl, Smc complexes, Sister chromatid cohesion, Cohesin, Chromosome segregation, Cryo-electron microscopy

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Science Technology Platform The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road London United Kingdom

### Submitter
Helen Flynn

### Lab Head
Dr Helen Flynn
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Science Technology Platform The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road London United Kingdom


