### Accession
PXD014328

### Title
Co-exposure to preadipocytes and Dioxin increase breast cancer cells aggressiveness through the generation of polynuclear giants cells.

### Description
Breast cancer (BC) is an important disease with high incidence as well as mortality among women, and critical socio-economic impacts. In the past 50 years, it has become a major health problem for women worldwide with over 2 million new cases diagnosed in 2018. This represents about 12% of all new cancer cases, 25% of all cancers in women and more than 600.000 cases of deaths worldwide in 2018 (Bray et al, 2018). If the cancer is located only in the breast, the 5-year relative survival rate of people with BC is 99% but this rate decreases if it is spread to lymph nodes (85%) and more dramatically if diagnosed with distant metastasis (26%) (Howlader et al, 2019; Siegel et al, 2017). Metastatic process, or the spread of tumor cells throughout the body, is responsible for about 90% of cancer patient deaths (Chaffer et al, 2011) and represents the central clinical challenge of solid tumor oncology. The development and progression of BC are complex processes that involve hormonal factors as well as numerous genetic and epigenetic alterations. During the past 10 years, many studies have focused on the role of the tumor microenvironment and the peritumoral stromal fraction, composed of adipose tissue, cancer-associated fibroblasts, endothelial cells and immune cells as macrophages and leukocytes. During tumor progression, cancer cells will deeply modify their microenvironment which in return will promote the growth and dissemination of the tumor (Allen et al, 2011; Polanska et al, 2013). Adipose tissue, consisting of mainly mature adipocytes and progenitors (preadipocytes and adipose-derived stem cells (ADSCs), is the most abundant component surrounding BC cells. Adipose tissue exerts a major endocrine and secretory role, and represents then an essential actor in the inflammatory, angiogenic or remodeling responses of the extracellular matrix, which influences tumor behavior.

### Sample Protocol
. FASP (Filter-aided sample preparation) procedure for protein digestion was performed as described previously (Lipecka et al, 2016) using 30kDa MWCO centrifugal filter units (Microcon, Millipore, Cat No MRCF0R030) on 50µg of each lysate in RIPA buffer. Proteins were reduced with 0.1M dithiotreitol (DTT) for 30min at 60°C, then applied to the filters, mixed with 200µL of 8M urea, 100mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8 (UA buffer) and finally centrifuged for 15min at 15,000g. In order to remove detergents and DTT, the filters were washed twice with 200µl of UA buffer. Alkylation was carried out by incubation for 20min in the dark with 50mM iodoacetamide. Filters were then washed twice with 100µl of UA buffer (15 000 x g for 15min) followed by two washes with 100µl of ABC buffer (15 000 x g for 10min) to remove urea. All centrifugation steps were performed at room temperature. Finally, trypsin was added in 1:30 ratio and digestion was achieved by overnight incubation at 37°C.

### Data Protocol
. Samples were vacuum dried, and resuspended in 50 µL of 10% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, for LC-MS/MS. For each run, 1 µL was injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were separated on a 50cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (Pepmap C18, Thermo Scienfitic). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient 5% to 40% B (120 min), 40% to 80% (10 minutes). At 131 min, the gradient returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 30 minutes before the next injection. Two blanks were run between triplicates to prevent sample carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top-10 acquisition method. Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z. MS and MS/MS scans were recorded in profile mode. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 sec duration. Three replicates of each sample were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exposomics, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
Plateforme protéomique 3P5-Necker, Université Paris Descartes - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris 75014, France.

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Chiara Guerrera
Plateforme protéomique 3P5-Necker, Université Paris Descartes - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris 75014, France.


