### Accession
PXD031443

### Title
Multiple cis acting polypyrimidine tract elements regulate a cooperative mechanism for Triticum mosaic virus internal ribosomal entry site activity=]

### Description
Diverse elements within the 5’ untranslated region of an mRNA can influence the translation efficiency at the main AUG codon. We previously identified a core picornaviral like Y16X11-AUG motif with 16-nt polypyrimidine CU-tract separated by an 11-nt spacer sequence from the 13th AUG codon recognized as the preferred initiation site within the Triticum mosaic virus (TriMV) internal ribosome entry site (IRES) element. The motif is proposed to function as an internal ribosomal landing site at the designated start codon. Here we exposed the cooperative role of multiple CU-rich segments flanking the TriMV YX-AUG motif to drive internal initiation of translation at the preferred start site. We propose that these auxiliary domains may enhance the ribosome capacity at proximity of the correct initiation site. These polypyrimidine tracts can be modulated with a cryptic AUG and in a position-dependent manner to replace the native YX-AUG motif and to reprogram translation to the upstream sites, and thus uncovering a new layer of control of the selection of the initiation site. In line with these observations, mass spec analysis of proteins directly interacting with translationally impaired TriMV IRES mutants that bear these motifs indicated an enrichment in 40S and 60S ribosomal related proteins, revealing a new function of polypyrimidine tracts to regulate IRES-driven translation.  Accessibility of these RNA regions for in trans interaction was validated by SHAPE analysis of the entire TriMV leader sequence and supported by the ability of anti-sense oligonucleotides designed to block the CU-tracts accessibility to impair IRES activity. This is the first evidence that defines the core modular domains required for start codon selection in a complex, multi-AUG viral 5’UTR for translation in plants.

### Sample Protocol
5’UTR RNA fragments were synthesized in vitro by first linearizing the firefly luciferase construct above mentioned with BbsI to remove the luciferase coding region and produce only 5’UTR segments. The digestion fragment was then in vitro transcribed using the transcription protocol described above. The RNA fragments bear a stable stem loop structure at their 5’ end and were biotinylated at the 3’ end using the Pierce RNA 3’ End Desthiobiotinylation kit from Thermo Fisher (Product No. 20163) and following the manufacturer’s instructions. After biotinylation, RNA was cleaned using the NucleoSpin RNA Clean-up kit from Macherey-Nagel (Product No. 740948.50) and RNA integrity was verified in a 1% agarose gel. 100 ul translation reactions were set up using wheat germ extract sy stem kit (Promega, Madison, WI) with 50ul of wheat germ extract, 8 ul of amino acid mix, 8 ul of 1M potassium acetate, 4 ul of 50mM of GMP-PNP and 25 pmol of labeled RNA. Reactions were incubated for 10 min at 25ºC and UV crosslinked using 254nm bulbs, for 45-60 sec using the auto-crosslink function. After crosslinking, a pull-down of bound proteins was conducted using the Pierce Magnetic RNA-Protein Pull-Down Kit (Product No. 20164) using the manufacturer’s instructions. After incubation with streptavidin beads, 5 washes were preformed prior to the final elution, to remove all unbound proteins and reduce the occurrence of unspecific bounded proteins. An aliquot of the final elution samples was loaded in an SDS-PAGE and revealed with silver staining to verify protein presence. Remaining final elution was sent to the Mass Spectrometry Core Facility at the University of Wisconsin-Madison for Nano Liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS-MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Resulting data was used to search against the Triticum aestivum (130,673 entries) Uniprot amino acid sequence database and results were analyzed using the Scaffold software (Proteome Software, Inc).

### Publication Abstract
Diverse elements within the 5' untranslated region of an mRNA can influence the translation efficiency at the main AUG codon. We previously identified a core picornaviral like Y<sub>16</sub>X<sub>11</sub>-AUG motif with 16-nt polypyrimidine CU tract separated by an 11-nt spacer sequence from the 13th AUG codon, which is recognized as the preferred initiation site within the <i>Triticum mosaic virus</i> (TriMV) internal ribosome entry site (IRES) element. The motif is proposed to function as an internal ribosomal landing site at the designated start codon. Here, we exposed the cooperative role of multiple CU-rich segments flanking the TriMV YX-AUG motif to reach and drive internal initiation of translation at the preferred start site. We propose that these auxiliary domains may enhance the ribosome capacity and their delivery at proximity of the correct initiation site. These polypyrimidine tracts can be modulated with a cryptic AUG in a position-dependent manner to replace the native YX-AUG motif, and thus uncovering a new layer of control of start codon selection. In line with these observations, mass spectrometry analysis of proteins directly interacting with translationally impaired TriMV IRES mutants that bear these motifs indicated an enrichment in 40S and 60S ribosomal related proteins, revealing a new function of polypyrimidine tracts to regulate IRES-driven translation. Accessibility of these RNA regions for <i>in trans</i> interaction was validated by SHAPE analysis of the entire TriMV leader sequence and supported by the ability of anti-sense oligonucleotides designed to block the CU tracts accessibility to impair IRES activity. This is the first evidence that defines the core modular domains required for ribosomal recruitment and start codon selection in a complex, multi-AUG viral 5' UTR for translation in plants.

### Keywords
Aug selection, Polypyrimidine-tract, Yx-aug, Ires, Translation initiation, Ribosomal subunit, Triticum mosaic virus

### Affiliations
UW - Madison
University of Wisconsin - Madison, Plant Pathology Department.

### Submitter
Helena Jaramillo Mesa

### Lab Head
Dr Aurelie Rakotondrafara
University of Wisconsin - Madison, Plant Pathology Department.


