### Accession
PXD009602

### Title
Mapping the HLA ligandome of Colorectal Cancer Reveals an Imprint of Malignant Cell Transformation

### Description
Immunopeptidome analysis of colorectal adenocarcinoma tissues as well as adjacent benign tissues was performed to characterize the natural HLA class I and class II presented ligandome represented in the context of malignancy as well as in benign tissue of the colon.

### Sample Protocol
HLA class I and II molecules were isolated by standard immunoaffinity purification as described previously (Kowalewski et al. Methods Mol Biol. 2013;960:145-157.). Pan-HLA class I-specific mAb W6/32 (Barnstable et al. Cell. 1978;14(1):9-20.) was employed for HLA class I immunoprecipitation and pan-HLA class II mAb T端39 (Ziegler et al. Immunobiology. 1986;171(1-2):77-92.) as well as HLA-DR-specific mAb L243 (Goldman et al. Br J Haematol. 1982;52(3):411-20.) were used for HLA class II immunoprecipitation and subsequently eluted using 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid. Typically > 0.5 g of tissue samples were employed for lysis and HLA ligand isolation.

### Data Protocol
not applicable; raw data files are provides. Files are labelled according to identifiers (UPN) given in Supplementary table 3; Files are categorized according to assessed sample materials as CRC (colorectal adenocarcinoma; bulk tissue; malignant); NMT (colon; bulk tissue; non-malignant); Samples adjusted for label-free quantitation (LFQ) of relative HLA-ligand abundances in technical replicates and normalized according to the relative sample amounts in the respective ligand extracts, estimated based on the summed intensities of all peptide identifications detected in dose-finding mass spectrometry runs are labelled as REP#; samples measured previous to adjusting relative sample amounts in dose-finding mass spectrometry runs are labelled by PA (pre-adjustment); remaining sample material measured after measurement of technical replicates are labelled R(#) (remnant).

### Publication Abstract
Immune cell infiltrates have proven highly relevant for colorectal carcinoma prognosis, making colorectal cancer a promising candidate for immunotherapy. Because tumors interact with the immune system via HLA-presented peptide ligands, exact knowledge of the peptidome constitution is fundamental for understanding this relationship. Here, we comprehensively describe the naturally presented HLA ligandome of colorectal carcinoma and corresponding nonmalignant colon (NMC) tissue. Mass spectrometry identified 35,367 and 28,132 HLA class I ligands on colorectal carcinoma and NMC, attributable to 7,684 and 6,312 distinct source proteins, respectively. Cancer-exclusive peptides were assessed on source protein level using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and protein analysis through evolutionary relationships (PANTHER), revealing pathognomonic colorectal carcinoma-associated pathways, including Wnt, TGF&#x3b2;, PI3K, p53, and RTK-RAS. Relative quantitation of peptide presentation on paired colorectal carcinoma and NMC tissue further identified source proteins from cancer- and infection-associated pathways to be overrepresented merely within the colorectal carcinoma ligandome. From the pool of tumor-exclusive peptides, a selected HLA-ligand subset was assessed for immunogenicity, with the majority exhibiting an existing T-cell repertoire. Overall, these data show that the HLA ligandome reflects cancer-associated pathways implicated in colorectal carcinoma oncogenesis, suggesting that alterations in tumor cell metabolism could result in cancer-specific, albeit not mutation-derived, tumor antigens. Hence, a defined pool of unique tumor peptides, attributable to complex cellular alterations that are exclusive to malignant cells, might comprise promising candidates for immunotherapeutic applications.<b>Significance:</b> Cancer-associated pathways are reflected in the antigenic landscape of colorectal cancer, suggesting that tumor-specific antigens do not necessarily have to be mutation-derived but may also originate from other alterations in cancer cells. <i>Cancer Res; 78(16); 4627-41. &#xa9;2018 AACR</i>.

### Keywords
Hla-ligandomics, Colon cancer, Colorectal adenocarcinoma, Hla-restricted peptide, Hla-ligand, Colon, Neoplasia, Hla, Peptide, Cancer

### Affiliations
University of T端bingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology Department of Immunology Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany
Department of Immunology, T端bingen

### Submitter
Michael Ghosh

### Lab Head
Dr Hans-Georg Rammensee
University of T端bingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology Department of Immunology Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany


### SDRF
- organism: homo sapiens
- organism part: colon, sigmoid colon, rectum, caecum
- cell type: not available
- disease: colorectal adenocarcinoma
- label: label free sample
- instrument: LTQ Orbitrap XL
- modification parameters: Oxidation
- factor value[disease: malignant, benign

