### Accession
PXD044900

### Title
Papillary thyroid cancer proteomics

### Description
Label-free proteomics profiling of 37 paired tumor-normal tissues of papillary thyroid cancer

### Sample Protocol
The samples were homogenized in lysis buffer consisting of 2.5% SDS/100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). Then the samples were subjected to treatment with ultra sonication. After centrifugation, proteins in the supernatant were precipitated by adding 4 times of pre-cooled acetone. The protein pellet was dissolved in 8 M Urea/100 mM Tris-Cl. After centrifugation, the supernatant was used for the reduction reaction (10 mM DTT, 37 °C for 1 h), followed by an alkylation reaction (40 mM iodoacetamide, room temperature/dark place for 30 min). Protein concentration was measured by the Bradford method. Urea was diluted below 2 M using 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). Trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:50 (enzyme: protein, w/w) for overnight digestion at 37 °C. The next day, TFA was used to bring the pH down to 6.0 to end the digestion. After centrifugation (12000×g, 15 min), the supernatant was subjected to peptide purification using Sep-Pak C18 desalting column. The peptide eluate was vacuum dried and stored at -20 °C for later use.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant v1.6.6 using the Andromeda database search algorithm. Spectra files were searched against the UniProt Human proteome database using the following parameters: LFQ mode was checked for quantification; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term) & Deamidation (NQ); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Digestion, Trypsin/P; The MS1 match tolerance was set as 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search; the MS2 tolerance was set as 20 ppm; Match between runs was used for identification transfer. Search results were filtered with 1% FDR at both protein and peptide levels. Proteins denoted as decoy hits, contaminants, or only identified by sites were removed, the remaining identifications were used for further quantification analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Thyroid cancer, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Dalian Institute of Chemcial and Physics, China
Dalian Institute of Chemical and Physics

### Submitter
Di Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Hai-long Piao
Dalian Institute of Chemcial and Physics, China


