### Accession
PXD005054

### Title
Combinatory shotgun proteomics and shotgun eicosadomics study of platelets activated by calcium mobilization - secreted proteins of platelets stimulated for 3h with ionomycin

### Description
Platelets are involved in relevant physiological and pathophysiological processes such as hemostasis and tumor progression. These anucleate blood particles exert their functions essentially by releasing effector molecules such as proteins from intracellular granules and by generating and secreting specific lipids. In order to contribute to a systematic proteomics and eicosadomics analysis of platelets activated by calcium mobilization, we have investigated proteins and eicosanoids in lysates and secretomes of platelets activated with ionomycin. To this end, self-established shotgun proteomics and shotgun lipidomics platforms were used. Applying an FDR of less than 0.01 at both, peptide and protein level, a total of 2543 protein groups was identified. Several regulatory effects concerning proteins were determined, including protein secretion, degradation, as well as protein synthesis. Incorporation of 35S-methionine in platelet proteins determined by 2D-PAGE confirmed de-novo protein synthesis. Moreover, we were able to determine a complex set of eicosanoids synthesized by activated platelets, including 15S-HETE, prostaglandin E2 and pro-survival factors such as 12-HETE, as well as eicosanoids previously undescribed to have platelet functions, such as 9-HETE and 11-HETE. Proteomics data complemented the findings from lipidomics experiments and supported the generation of a map indicating pathways leading to eicosanoid production in platelets upon calcium mobilization.

### Sample Protocol
Peripheral venous blood was drawn from four healthy volunteers. Two blood collection tubes containing 3.2% sodium citrate (Vacuette system; Greiner, Kremsmuenster, Austria) were used per donor. To avoid premature activation of platelets, blood was collected into pre-opened tubes, letting the blood drop freely into the tubes after discarding the first few drops. The tubes were closed and gently inverted four times. To obtain platelet rich plasma (PRP), blood samples were centrifuged for 20min at 100g, yielding 1ml of PRP per tube. To obtain a purified platelet suspension, PRP was further purified through a sepharose column. Firstly, 10ml of sepharose 2B (Sigma, Germany) were mixed with 10ml RPMI medium (Gibco, UK), containing no FCS, and filled in plastic columns plugged with cotton wool. Then, 1ml of PRP was applied on top of each column. Elution was performed with RPMI medium, and, after discarding 2.5ml, a fraction of 1.5ml containing the platelet suspension was collected in a 15ml tube. The two platelet fractions of a same donor were pooled and kept for 1h at room temperature in a dark place, turning the tubes occasionally. Platelet samples were divided into three fractions each of 1ml, using one as a control and the two others for platelet activation (15min and 3h of activation). Activation was performed by adding 100µl of 10µM ionomycin (Sigma, Germany) dissolved in PBS, to a final concentration of 1µM. After 3 hours of activation, one sample was centrifuged at 1500g for 10min. After centrifugation, the supernatant was mixed with 4ml of ice cold absolute ethanol (Merck, Germany) and incubated at -20°C overnight to precipitate proteins from the secretome. After centrifugation for 20min at 4800g and 4°C, the protein pellet was dissolved in 100µl sample buffer (7.5 M urea, 1.5 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 0.05% SDS, 100 mM dithiothreitol).   For digestion of proteins, a variation of the FASP protocol was used. 10kD MWCO filters (Pall Austria Filter GmbH) were rinsed with LC-MS grade water (Millipore GesmbH). 20µg of each protein sample was concentrated onto the pre-washed filter by centrifugation at 15000g for 15min to get a final sample volume of 10-20µl. For reduction, 200µl of DTT solution (5mg/ml dissolved in 8M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (ABC buffer), pH 8) were added and incubation was performed at 56°C for 30min. After centrifugation at 14000g for 10min, a washing step with ABC buffer was performed. For alkylation, 200µl of IAA solution (10mg/ml in 8M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50mM ABC buffer) were added and incubation was performed in the dark for 45min. After centrifugation at 14000g for 10min, proteins on top of the filter were washed with ABC buffer. Afterwards, filters (with a maximum of 50µl sample volume) were placed in a new Eppendorf tube and 100µl ABC buffer as well as 10µl trypsin/LysC mix (0.1µg/µl) were added and incubation was performed at 37°C for 18h. A second digestion step was performed afterwards using fresh trypsin/LysC mix and incubating for another 6h at 37°C. After digestion, peptide samples were eluted with 50µl water and subsequently with 50µl 0.5% TFA, dried via vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20°C prior to LC/MS analyses. For LC-MS/MS analyses, dried samples were reconstituted in 5µl 30% formic acid (FA) and diluted with 40µl mobile phase A (H2O: ACN: FA = 98: 2: 0.1). 10µl of this solution were then injected into the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC-system coupled to a QExactive orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria). All samples were analyzed in duplicates. As a pre-concentration step, peptides were loaded on a 2cm x75µm C18 Pepmap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) at a flow rate of 10µl/min using mobile phase A. Elution from the pre-column to a 50cm x75µm Pepmap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) and subsequent separation was achieved at a flow rate of 300nl/min over 43min beginning with 7% and ending up with 40% mobile phase B (ACN: H2O: FA = 80: 20: 0.1). For mass spectrometric detection, MS scans were performed in the range from m/z 400-1400 at a resolution of 70000 (at m/z =200). MS/MS scans of the 8 most abundant ions were achieved through HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy and analyzed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17500 (at m/z =200).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification. Protein identification was achieved searching against the UniProt database for human proteins (version 102014 with 20 195 entries, restricted to reviewed entries only), allowing a mass tolerance of 10ppm for MS spectra and 50mmu for MS/MS spectra as well as a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Organometallic metal(arene) anticancer agents require ligand exchange for their anticancer activity and this is generally believed to confer low selectivity for potential cellular targets. However, using an integrated proteomics-based target-response profiling approach as a potent hypothesis-generating procedure, we found an unexpected target selectivity of a ruthenium(arene) pyridinecarbothioamide (plecstatin) for plectin, a scaffold protein and cytolinker, which was validated in a plectin knock-out model in&#x2005;vitro. Plectin targeting shows potential as a strategy to inhibit tumor invasiveness as shown in cultured tumor spheroids while oral administration of plecstatin-1 to mice reduces tumor growth more efficiently in the invasive B16&#x2005;melanoma than in the CT26&#x2005;colon tumor model.

### Keywords
Shotgun proteomics and eicosadomics, Lysates, Human platelets, Secretomes, Mass spectrometry, Activation by calcium mobilization

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


