### Accession
PXD035273

### Title
Phosphorylation of TRF2 promotes its interaction with TIN2 and regulates DNA repair at damaged telomeres.

### Description
Protein phosphatase magnesium-dependent 1 delta (PPM1D) terminates the cell cycle checkpoint by dephosphorylating the tumour suppressor protein p53. By targeting additional substrates at chromatin, PPM1D contributes to the control of DNA damage response and DNA repair. Using proximity biotinylation followed by proteomic analysis, we identified a novel interaction between PPM1D and the shelterin complex that protects telomeric DNA. In addition, confocal microscopy revealed that endogenous PPM1D colocalized with TRF2 at telomeres. Further, we found that ATR phosphorylated TRF2 at S410 after induction of DNA double strand breaks at telomeres and this modification increased after inhibition or loss of PPM1D. TRF2 phosphorylation stimulated its interaction with TIN2 both in vitro and at telomeres. Conversely, induced expression of PPM1D impaired localisation of TIN2 and TPP1 at telomeres. Finally, recruitment of the DNA repair factor 53BP1 to the telomeric breaks was strongly reduced after inhibition of PPM1D and was rescued by the expression of TRF2-S410A mutant. Our results suggest that TRF2 phosphorylation promotes the association of TIN2 within the shelterin complex and regulates DNA repair at telomeres.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide pull-downs of three independent experiments (3x Ctrl TRF2 peptide vs 3x phosphorylated peptide as a bait) and subsequent LC-MS analysis were performed as follows. Biotin-Ahx-ISRLVLEEDpSQSTEPSAGLN-amide (TRF2-pS410) and Biotin-Ahx-ISRLVLEEDSQSTEPSAGLN-amide (TRF2-CTRL) peptides were synthesized (Genscript), dissolved in ammonia water and then diluted to 1 mg/mL in TBST (150 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 25 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, 0.1 % Tween20). Peptide pull down was performed as described (EMBO Rep 2008, 9(8):795-801, PMID: 18583988). Dynabeads M-280 Streptavidin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were incubated with peptides (20 mg) in TBST for 60 min and then beads were washed 3 times with TBST. Coupled beads were incubated with Hela nuclear extract (6 mg/ml, IpraCell) for 90 min at 4 °C and then were washed 3 times with TBST and once with PBS. Proteins bound to the beads were processed "on-beads". Samples were solubilized by sodium deoxycholate (final concentration 1% (w/v) in 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0), reduced with 5 mM TCEP [tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine], alkylated with 10 mM MMTS (S-methyl methanethiosulfonate) and digested with trypsin. Tryptic peptides were extracted with ethylacetate saturated with water (J Proteome Res 2008, 7(2):731-40, PMID: 18183947), desalted on StageTips (3 layers of Empore C18 solid phase extraction disks, Supelco/Sigma 66883-U), dried in Speedvac and dissolved in 0.1% TFA + 2% acetonitrile. LC-MS/MS experiments were performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoLS coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples (ca. 0.5 µg of desalted peptide digests) were loaded onto a PepMap100 C18 trap column (0.3x5 mm) at a flow rate of 17.5 µl/min loading solvent (0.05% TFA, 2 % ACN) for 2 minutes. Following sample loading, peptides were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase EASY-Spray column (ES903, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 60 minute gradient from 3 % mobile phase A (0.1 % FA in H2O) to 35 % mobile phase B (0.1 % FA, 80 % ACN) at a flowrate of 300 nl/min. The MS was operated in a DDA mode with a full scan set at a resolution of 120000, an AGC target of 3e6, scanning a mass range from 350 to 1500 m/z, dynamic exclusion after 1x for 60 s. Data-dependent MS2 scans with a resolution of 15000, an AGC target of 0.75e5 and a maximum fill time of 50 ms were acquried for a total cycle time of 2 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Resulting raw files were analyzed in MaxQuant (v. 1.6.17.0) with label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm MaxLFQ and match between runs feature activated (Nat Protoc 2016, 11(12):2301-2319, PMID: 27809316). FDR was set as 0.01 at all levels. UniProt human fasta proteome file was used (UP000005640_9606.fasta, Release 2021_01). MMTS alkylated cysteine was selected as a fixed modification (Methylthio (C), composition: H(2) C S, +45.988). Variable modifications were Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term). Downstream processing of the proteinGroups.txt file was performed in Perseus v. 1.6.15.0. LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed, sample groups assigned (TRF2_1A-C grouped as TRF2ctrl, TRF2ph_2A-C as TRF2phospho), and the rows were filtered based on valid values (min. 2 in at least one group). Missing values were imputed (width 0.3, down shift 1.8, separately for each column) and the Volcano plot of TRF2phospho- TRF2ctrl was visualized.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphatase magnesium-dependent 1 delta (PPM1D) terminates the cell cycle checkpoint by dephosphorylating the tumour suppressor protein p53. By targeting additional substrates at chromatin, PPM1D contributes to the control of DNA damage response and DNA repair. Using proximity biotinylation followed by proteomic analysis, we identified a novel interaction between PPM1D and the shelterin complex that protects telomeric DNA. In addition, confocal microscopy revealed that endogenous PPM1D localises at telomeres. Further, we found that ATR phosphorylated TRF2 at S410 after induction of DNA double strand breaks at telomeres and this modification increased after inhibition or loss of PPM1D. TRF2 phosphorylation stimulated its interaction with TIN2 both in vitro and at telomeres. Conversely, induced expression of PPM1D impaired localisation of TIN2 and TPP1 at telomeres. Finally, recruitment of the DNA repair factor 53BP1 to the telomeric breaks was strongly reduced after inhibition of PPM1D and was rescued by the expression of TRF2-S410A mutant. Our results suggest that TRF2 phosphorylation promotes the association of TIN2 within the shelterin complex and regulates DNA repair at telomeres.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Ppm1d phosphatase, Shelterin, Trf2, Telomere

### Affiliations
Czech Academy of Sciences
Laboratory of Cancer Cell Biology Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Czech Academy of Sciences Prague Czech Republic

### Submitter
Marek Vrbacky

### Lab Head
Dr dr. Libor Macurek
Laboratory of Cancer Cell Biology Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Czech Academy of Sciences Prague Czech Republic


