### Accession
PXD045850

### Title
Mind Bomb 2 limits inflammatory dermatitis in Sharpin mutant mice independently of cell death

### Description
Skin inflammation is a complex process implicated in various dermatological disorders. The chronic proliferative dermatitis (cpd) phenotype driven by the cpd mutation (cpdm) in the Sharpin gene is characterized by dermal inflammation and epidermal abnormalities. TNF and caspase-8-driven cell death causes the pathogenesis of Sharpincpdm mice, however, the role of MIB2, a pro-survival E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in TNF-signalling, in skin inflammation remains unknown. Here we demonstrate that MIB2 antagonises inflammatory dermatitis in the context of the cpd mutation. Surprisingly, the role of MIB2 in limiting skin inflammation  is independent of its known pro-survival function and E3 ligase activity. Instead, MIB2 enhances the production of wound healing molecules, G-CSF and Eotaxin, within the skin. This discovery advances our comprehension of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines involved in cpdm pathogenesis, and highlights the significance of MIB2 in inflammatory skin disease that is independent of its ability to regulate TNF-induced cell death.

### Sample Protocol
Protein lysates were subjected to S-TRAP sample digestion method (Protifi, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions.  Peptides were subjected to C18 stage tip clean up prior to LC-MS analysis on a timsTOF Pro MS instrument (Bruker) using a diaPASEF method.

### Data Protocol
DIA data were analysed using DIA-NN 1.8 in library-free mode. diaPASEF d. files were searched against reviewed sequences from mouse Uniprot Reference Proteome (downloaded November 2022) with the following settings: trypsin specificity, peptide length of 7-30 residues, cysteine carbidomethylation as a fixed modification, variable modifications set to n-terminal protein acetylation and oxidation of methionine, the maximum number of missed cleavages at 2. Mass accuracy was set to 10 ppm for both MS1 and MS2 spectra and match between runs (MBR) enabled, and filtering outputs  set at a precursor q-value < 1%.  Data processing and analysis were conducted using R (version 4.2.1). Proteins lacking proteotypic precursors, with a q-value greater than 0.01, and/or identified by fewer than two peptides were excluded. Additionally, only proteins quantified in at least 50% of replicates in at least one condition were retained. A distinction was made between whether missing values were missing at random (MAR) or missing not at random (MNAR). Since the missingness was identified as MNAR, the Barycenter method, implemented in the msImpute package (v. 1.9.0), was applied. The dataset was then normalized using the cyclicloess method, as implemented in limma (v. 3.52.4).  Differential analysis was conducted using limma. A protein was deemed significantly differentially expressed if the false discovery rate (FDR) was ≤ 5% after correction for multiple testing using the Benjamini–Hochberg (BH) approach.

### Publication Abstract
Skin inflammation is a complex process implicated in various dermatological disorders. The chronic proliferative dermatitis (cpd) phenotype driven by the cpd mutation (cpdm) in the Sharpin gene is characterized by dermal inflammation and epidermal abnormalities. Tumour necrosis factor (TNF) and caspase-8-driven cell death causes the pathogenesis of <i>Sharpin<sup>cpdm</sup></i> mice; however, the role of mind bomb 2 (MIB2), a pro-survival E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in TNF signaling, in skin inflammation remains unknown. Here, we demonstrate that MIB2 antagonizes inflammatory dermatitis in the context of the cpd mutation. Surprisingly, the role of MIB2 in limiting skin inflammation is independent of its known pro-survival function and E3 ligase activity. Instead, MIB2 enhances the production of wound-healing molecules, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, and Eotaxin, within the skin. This discovery advances our comprehension of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines associated with cpdm pathogenesis and highlights the significance of MIB2 in inflammatory skin disease that is independent of its ability to regulate TNF-induced cell death.

### Keywords
Mind bomb 2, Sharpin, Cpdm, Tnf, Dermatitis

### Affiliations
Laboratory Head The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research 1G Royal Parade Parkville Victoria 3052 Australia
WEHI

### Submitter
Laura Dagley

### Lab Head
Dr Rebecca Feltham
Laboratory Head The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research 1G Royal Parade Parkville Victoria 3052 Australia


