### Accession
PXD016690

### Title
Alteration of the plasma peptidome of gastrectomised patients during an OGTT

### Description
Performing gastric bypass surgery on patients severely changes their gut hormone response to glucose. The plasma concentrations of Insulin and a number of associated incretin peptides are significantly raised shortly after ingestion of glucose. Typically the plasma concentrations of these peptides are monitored using immunoassays. A simple and high throughput plasma peptidomics approach was used to simulatneously monitor a large number of these peptides. Comparison of gastresctomised and control individuals showed significant increases of insulin, glucagon gene products, PYY and neurotensin.

### Sample Protocol
Two aliquots of plasma (50uL) was precipitated using 80% ACN and 80% ACN with 0.1% ACN containing bovine insulin as an internal standard. The supernatant was combined and evaporated under oxygen free nitrogen at 40 degrees. The residue was reconstituted and extracted using SPE (Waters Oasis HLB prime) The eluant was dried and reconstituted into 0.1% formic acid for injection onto the LC-MS system

### Data Protocol
LC-MS files were searched using PEAKS 8.5 against the swissprot database with a human filter applied. Initial pilot study performed a reduction and alkylation step. The larger cohort study didnt use reduction and alkylation. The data was searched with N-terminal pyroglutamate, N-terminal acetylation and c-terminal amidation as variable modifications. Results were filtered using a 1% FDR setting.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Gut hormones, Ogtt, Peptidome

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust, MRC Institute of Metabolic Science, Cambridge University
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Richard Kay

### Lab Head
Dr Fiona Gribble, Frank Reimann
Wellcome Trust, MRC Institute of Metabolic Science, Cambridge University


