### Accession
PXD014349

### Title
Pyrin oligomerization nucleates antiviral IFI16 sensing of herpesvirus DNA

### Description
The formation of multimerized protein assemblies has emerged as a core component of immune signal amplification, yet the biochemical basis of this phenomenon remains unclear for many mammalian proteins within host defense pathways. The interferon-inducible protein 16 (IFI16) is a viral DNA sensor that oligomerizes upon binding to nuclear viral DNA and induces downstream antiviral responses. Here, we first generated oligomerization-incompetent IFI16 mutants that exhibit severely reduced ability to induce antiviral cytokine expression, suppress herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) protein levels, and restrict viral progeny production. Using immunoaffinity purification and targeted mass spectrometry, we establish that oligomerization promotes IFI16 interactions with several proteins involved in transcriptional regulation, including PAF1C, UBTF, and ND10

### Sample Protocol
Cells expressing IFI16-GFP (HEK293Ts for DDA, HFFs for PRM) were lysed by detergent lysis and IPs were performed using GFP-Trap_MA beads (Chromotek). For DDA, proteins were digested with trypsin via overnight filter aided sample preparation. Samples were then desalted with SDB-RPS membranes. For PRM, digestion was performed with trypsin and suspension trapping columns (S-Trap, Protifi) for 1 hour. Peptides were analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry with a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap intrument (Thermo Scientific) using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) or parallel-reaction monitoring (PRM) modes. Peptides (2 µL injections) were separated with a 3% solvent B to 30% solvent B gradient (solvent A: 0.1% FA, solvent B: 0.1% FA, 97% ACN) over 60 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min on an EASYSpray C18 column (75 µm x 50 cm) heated to 50 °C. For DDA, the full scan range was set to 350-1800 m/z at 120,000 resolution and recorded in profile. The top 15 most intense precursors were subjected to HCD fragmentation – normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28 – for MS2 analysis at 30,000 resolution

### Data Protocol
Tandem MS spectra collected from DDA mode were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer v2.2. MS spectra were searched using the Sequest HT algorithm against a UniProt human database containing herpesvirus sequences and common contaminants (22,349 sequences, downloaded 2016-04). The Spectrum RC node was used to perform offline mass recalibration and the Minora Feature Detector node was used for label-free MS1 quantitation. Posttranslational modifications (PTMs) including static carbamidomethylation of cysteine, dynamic oxidation of methionine, dynamic deamidation of asparagine, dynamic loss of methionine plus acetylation of the protein N-terminus, and dynamic phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were all allowed. The Percolator node was then used to perform peptide spectrum match (PSM) validation and ptmRS node was used for assigning PTM sites.

### Publication Abstract
The formation of multimerized protein assemblies has emerged as a core component of immune signal amplification, yet the biochemical basis of this phenomenon remains unclear for many mammalian proteins within host defense pathways. The interferon-inducible protein 16 (IFI16) is a viral DNA sensor that oligomerizes upon binding to nuclear viral DNA and induces downstream antiviral responses. Here, we identify the pyrin domain (PYD) residues that mediate IFI16 oligomerization in a charge-dependent manner. Based on structure modeling, these residues are predicted to be surface exposed within distinct &#x3b1;-helices. By generating oligomerization-deficient mutants, we demonstrate that IFI16 homotypic clustering is necessary for its assembly onto parental viral genomes at the nuclear periphery upon herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) infection. Preventing oligomerization severely hampered the capacity of IFI16 to induce antiviral cytokine expression, suppress viral protein levels, and restrict viral progeny production. Restoring oligomerization via residue-specific charge mimics partially rescued IFI16 antiviral roles. We show that pyrin domains from PYHIN proteins are functionally interchangeable, facilitating cooperative assembly with the IFI16 HINs, highlighting an inherent role for pyrin domains in antiviral response. Using immunoaffinity purification and targeted mass spectrometry, we establish that oligomerization promotes IFI16 interactions with proteins involved in transcriptional regulation, including PAF1C, UBTF, and ND10 bodies. We further discover PAF1C as an HSV-1 restriction factor. Altogether, our study uncovers intrinsic properties that govern IFI16 oligomerization, which serves as a signal amplification platform to activate innate immune responses and to recruit transcriptional regulatory proteins that suppress HSV-1 replication.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> The ability of mammalian cells to detect the genomes of nuclear-replicating viruses via cellular DNA sensors is fundamental to innate immunity. Recently, mounting evidence is supporting the universal role of polymerization in these host defense factors as a signal amplification strategy. Yet, what has remained unclear are the intrinsic properties that govern their immune signal transmission. Here, we uncover the biochemical basis for oligomerization of the nuclear DNA sensor, IFI16. Upon infection with herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) in human fibroblasts, we characterize the contribution of IFI16 oligomerization to downstream protein interactions and antiviral functions, including cytokine induction and suppression of HSV-1 replication. Until now, the global characterization of oligomerization-dependent protein interactions for an immune receptor has never been explored. Our integrative quantitative proteomics, molecular CRISPR/Cas9-based assays, mutational analyses, and confocal microscopy shed light on the dynamics of immune signaling cascades activated against pathogens.

### Keywords
Hsv-1, Oligomerization, Ip-ms, Ifi16, Dna sensing

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University

### Submitter
Tim Howard

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana M Cristea
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University


