### Accession
PXD013711

### Title
Constructing a Tandem Mass Spectral Library for Forensic Ricin Identification

### Description
Ricin, a protein found in castor seeds, is a lethal toxin that is designated as a category 2 select agent. Because castor seeds are easy to obtain and the toxin can be easily extracted, cases of attempted ricin poisoning are relatively common. A shotgun proteomics method for ricin identification has recently been developed (manuscript in preparation), in which ricin peptides are identified by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) followed by proteomics database search, and peptide-spectrum matches are verified and compared to standard spectra by a human expert. To make this process more reproducible, objective, and high-throughput, we have created a ricin spectral library for peptide identification to supplement the human review step. To construct these spectral libraries, two pure ricin samples (from a proposed standard reference material) and crude castor seed extracts were digested with trypsin and analyzed using a standard shotgun LC-MS/MS protocol. Spectral libraries were created from the filtered search results from four database search tools. The library was then used in a search using SpectraST on samples from castor seeds. Analysis showed that the spectral library search resulted in more peptides identified from crude castor seed samples compared to MS-GF+ and Sequest plus Percolator. These results suggest that computational comparison of putative ricin peptide spectra to library spectra can be an effective method of confirming the presence of ricin, and that spectral library search may be suitable to augment the more manual and subjective aspects of the currently recommended human expert review.

### Sample Protocol
Two samples of ricin were processed, one from the Robert-Koch Institute, referred to as RKI, and the other from Vector Laboratories, referred to as Vec. To minimize sample loss during digestion, ricin samples were digested in the presence of trifluoroethanol as the denaturant. 68 µg ricin in a volume of 13-45 µL (supplied as a 1.51 µg/µL solution in phosphate-buffered saline for RKI ricin or a 5 µg/µL solution for Vector ricin) was mixed with an equal volume of neat 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubated at 60 °C for 2 hours with gentle shaking. To reduce disulfide bonds (ricin has five, including one between the A and B chains) 50 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in water was added to a final concentration of 2 mM, and samples were incubated at 60 °C for 1 hour with gentle shaking. Reduced thiol groups were alkylated with iodoacetamide by adding 200 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer to a final concentration of 10 mM, followed by incubation in the dark for 1 hour at 60 °C. The alkylation reaction was quenched by adding a volume of 50 mM DTT, sufficient to raise the final DTT concentration by an additional 10 mM, and an additional 1-hour incubation in the dark at 60 °C. After quenching, the sample was diluted 5-fold with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Mass Spectrometry Grade Trypsin Gold (Promega) was reconstituted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 0.2 µg/µL, and added to the ricin sample at a ratio of 1:50 trypsin:ricin by mass. Protein amount was estimated from the known starting concentration. The sample was gently mixed and digested at 37 °C overnight with shaking. Following digestion, the sample was heated at 95 °C for at least 5 minutes in a heat block to inactivate any residual intact/native ricin. The sample was concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge to a final volume of ~100 µL and then centrifuged at ~16,000 × g for 5 minutes to remove any particulate matter. Finally, the concentration was estimated by the bicinchoninic acid assay (Pierce BCA Assay Kit, Thermo Scientific). The sample was diluted to 0.05 µg/µL in an autosampler vial and stored at -80 °C until analysis. Digested peptides from ricin standards were separated by reverse-phase liquid chromatography on a Waters NanoAcquity dual pump liquid chromatograph, using a water/acetonitrile/formic acid solvent system. The LC was interfaced to a Q Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole/Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Precursor spectra were acquired at resolution R=60,000 for precursor spectra and R=15,000 for higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra.

### Data Protocol
Peptides present in the LC-MS/MS samples were identified using MS-GF+ version 2018.07.17 (downloaded from omics.pnl.gov/software/ms-gf). The MS-GF+ database search used a fixed carbamidomethyl modification on cysteine residues, a variable oxidation modification on methionine residues, and precursor mass tolerance set to 20 ppm. The rest of the MS-GF+ parameters used were as follows: isotope error range set to 0 to 1, decoy database search turned on, and the number of tolerable termini was set to 1. Resulting mzID files were converted to tsv files using the MS-GF+ tool MzIDToTsv, with “unroll” set to 0. For convenience, the full MS-GF+ command line call was: ‘$ java.exe -Xmx3G -jar "[MSGF path]/MSGFPlus.jar" -s "[mzML path]\."  -d “[database path]\uniprot_2_27_2018_proteome_AND_Chloroplast_crap_1_29_2015.fasta" -mod “[mod path]\Mods.txt”  -t 20ppm -ti 0,1 -tda 1 -ntt 1 -m 3 -inst 3 -e 1 -protocol 0 -n 1 -addFeatures 1’. The database used was composed of the castor proteome version 2-27-2018 from UniProt, including chloroplast proteins, combined with the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins database from 1-29-2015 (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/index.html). Peptides were additionally identified using in SequestHT in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific), Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science), and PeaksDB 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions). The Mascot search used the following parameters: instrument type set to “MALDI-TOF-TOF”, charges set to 1+, 2+ and 3+, MS/MS tolerance set to .02 Da, and a maximum number of missed cleavages set to 1. The instrument type setting in Mascot controls which types of fragment ions Mascot will consider. Percolator was run on the Mascot output as implemented in Mascot. SequestHT parameters used were as follows: enzyme used was trypsin semi; maximum number of missed cleavages, 2; and maximum number of dynamic modifications, 3. Percolator was run on the Sequest output as implemented in Proteome Discoverer. PeaksDB from PEAKS Studio version 8.5 was run with a maximum number of PTMs per peptide set to 3 and maximum number of missed cleavages set to 1. The MS-GF+ results were filtered to mass measurement accuracy ±10 ppm and XREA (Na and Paek, 2006), a measure of the tandem mass spectral quality that gauges signal-to-noise and dynamic range, value greater than 0.4. Crux’s assign-confidence tool was used on the remaining PSMs to calculate FDR, and results were filtered to a FDR of 0.1%. The outputs from PeaksDB and Mascot were unable to go through this process. In PeaksDB, a -10ln (P) filter was selected to approximate a FDR of 0.1% and Mascot results were filtered by PEP < .001. The PeaksDB and Mascot results were filtered to ±10 ppm and XREA greater than 0.4. Three spectral libraries were then made: one from the RKI ricin sample, one from the Vec ricin sample, and one from crude castor seed extracts from PRIDE Project PXD007933. Custom R scripts were employed to filter peptide-spectrum matches from all database search tools and create ssl files. The list of accepted spectra in ssl format was converted to a library in BiblioSpec’s blib format with BlibBuild and was then converted to MS2 format using BiblioSpec’s BlibToMS2. The libraries were converted to SpectraST’s splib format using SpectraST’s create mode with variable modifications for carbamidomethyl (C +57.021463) and methionine oxidation (M +15.99491). Decoy spectra were created using SpectraST to create artificial decoy spectra with the parameters: minimum number of replicates set to 1, ratio of target to decoys set to 1, concatenate real and decoy libraries turned on, and the post-translational modifications previously mentioned.

### Publication Abstract
Ricin, a protein found in castor seeds, is a lethal toxin that is designated as a category 2 select agent, and cases of attempted ricin poisoning are relatively common. Many methods to detect protein toxins such as ricin use targeted liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to identify toxin peptides, usually tryptic peptides. The successful use of untargeted methods has also been reported. However, the use of untargeted proteomics methods, including database search, for peptide and protein identification is less common in forensic practice and may be unfamiliar to forensic science practitioners. Here, we propose a method to create spectral libraries of tryptic ricin peptides and use these libraries for ricin identification by spectral library search, which may be more familiar to forensic scientists because of the use of spectral libraries in small molecule identification. Peptide spectral libraries offer a direct comparison to an authentic standard, a key element of forensic analysis, but have not previously been used in a forensic context. To construct these spectral libraries, two pure ricin samples (one from a proposed standard reference material) were digested with trypsin and analyzed using a standard shotgun LC-MS/MS protocol. Spectral libraries were created from resulting tryptic peptides identified from filtered search results from four database search tools. The library was then used in a search using SpectraST on forensically realistic castor seed extracts. These castor seed samples were made using the crude methods commonly encountered in real-world ricin cases. Analysis showed that the spectral library search resulted in more peptides identified from crude castor seed samples compared to MS-GF+ and Sequest plus Percolator database searches. These results, the first published use of spectral library search to detect protein toxins in forensically relevant samples, suggest that computational comparison of putative ricin peptide spectra to library spectra can be an effective method to detect ricin in an unknown sample. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD013711.

### Keywords
Forensic proteomics, Spectral library, Castor, Ricin, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
PNNL
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Isabelle O'Bryon

### Lab Head
Dr Karen Wahl
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


