### Accession
PXD036643

### Title
Proteome of Human hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines

### Description
The proteomic profiling of nine commonly used HCC cell lines Hep3B, HepG2, HepG2.2.15, HUH7, PLC/PRF/5, MHCC97L,MHCC97H,HCCLM3 and HCCLM6

### Sample Protocol
Nine HCC cell lines were cultured, and then their total protein lysates were extracted and then trypsindigested to peptides. Peptides of each cell line were fractionated by Hp-RP to six fractions and analysed by LC-MS/MS using data dependent acquisition mode. Cultured cell line samples were minced and lysed in Tissue Protein Extraction Reagent (T-PER, Thermo Scientific, USA) followed by 3 min of ultrasonic (1 second on and 2 second off, power 200 Watts) (SCIENTZT, JY92-II). The lysate was then centrifuged at 14,000g for 15 min at 25°C, and the supernatant was collected. The concentration of protein lysate was measured by the Bradford assay. The protein digestion was performed by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). The peptide mixture was fractionated by high-pH reversed-phase chromatography (Hp-RP) to six fractions with stepwise gradients manually.

### Data Protocol
The DDA raw files were searched against the human UniProt database (updated at 2022-09-07 with 20,398 protein groups and the iRT peptide sequence) with MaxQuant v2.0.3.0. The digestion mode was set to specific, and trypsin/P was chosen. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-term of peptides were set as variable modification, and Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was set as fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 on both PSM and protein groups level. The max peptide mass range was set to 4600 Da, and the peptide length range was set from 7 to 25, and the missed cleavage was set to 2. The MS/MS match tolerance was set to 20 ppm, and MS/MS de novo tolerance was set to 10 ppm. The “proteinGroups.txt” file generated by MaxQuant v2.0.3.0 was then imported into Perseus v1.5.2.6 to extract the iBAQ value of each protein group of each cell line. 

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines

### Affiliations
Beijing institute of Lifeomics

### Submitter
Mingchao Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Mingchao Wang
Beijing institute of Lifeomics


