### Accession
PXD021731

### Title
Proteomics link translational reprogramming to S-glutathionalytion and induced priming during cold acclimation in barley roots

### Description
Plants due to their sessile nature rely on root systems to mediate many challenging stimuli. A major cornerstone of the responses are root proteomes, shaped to overcome biotic and abiotic cues. Proteome-wide reprogramming events are magnified in root meristems due to their active protein production. Using root meristems as a test system, we here study the major rewiring that plants face during cold acclimation. To achieve that, we performed tandem mass tag (TMT) label-mediated bottom-up proteomics of two consecutive segments of barley root apexes, comparing changes in global protein contents and individual protein abundances. We report an intricate translational reprogramming happening in the distal apex zone. The reprogramming includes all the translational machinery from ribosome biogenesis to protein folding, even suggesting roles for cold-specific ribosomal protein (RP) paralogs. Finally, this event is accompanied by upregulation of glutathione production and S-glutathionylation assemblage machineries. To summarize, we couple previous reports of an alternatively cold-spliced transcriptome to potential cold-specialized ribosomes and subsequent posttranslational modification (PTM), S-glutathione, of proteins. We propose that these PTMs protect the proteome during cold by acting as ROS scavengers, and consequently, provide a mechanistic link to the cold priming capabilities for root-specific biotic stress.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction, digestion, TMT labelling and LC-MS/MS analysis. Detailed protocol will be uploaded later.

### Data Protocol
RAW chromatogram files obtained from the Orbitrap and processed with MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008). TMT data correction (Thompson et al., 2003) was performed by inserting the relative enrichment percentages reported by the manufacturer of the tags into the MaxQuant upon initializing the software search. Subsequently the TMT-corrected reporter intensities matrix (from the proteinGroups.txt file) was imported into Perseus software (Tyanova et al., 2016) for further preprocessing. Firstly, intensities were normalized to pooled samples (a pool sample was run within each six-plex TMT sample), the pools corresponded to every tip and tip-adjacent sample, and the normalization was meant to enable relative quantitation between root zones. Secondly, the reverse search rows at the end of the file, corresponding to reverse FASTA hits, were used to adjust the annotations using the FDR (1%) reverse search, which was complemented by acceptance of razor + unique peptides with a collective value of one or more. In the end, the pre-processing workflow delivered a data matrix ready for statistics with identified proteins in rows and treatments in columns, featuring the intensities in cells.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Barley; cv keel; proteins; cold acclimation; fungal stress; root meristem; proteomics; ribosome; priming elicitors; chitin; chitosan

### Affiliations
School of BioSciences, The University of Melbourne Parkville VIC 3010, Australia Australian National Phenome Centre, Murdoch University, Murdoch, WA 6150, Australia
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Shuai Nie

### Lab Head
Dr Berin A. Boughton
School of BioSciences, The University of Melbourne Parkville VIC 3010, Australia Australian National Phenome Centre, Murdoch University, Murdoch, WA 6150, Australia


