### Accession
PXD014967

### Title
Insights into Early Recovery from Influenza Pneumonia by Spatial and Temporal Quantification of Putative Lung Regeneration Cells and buy Lung Proteomics

### Description
During influenza pneumonia, the alveolar epithelial cells of the lungs are targeted by influenza virus. The distal airway stem cells (DASCs) and proliferating alveolar type II (AT2) cells are reported to be putative lung repair cells. However, their relative spatial and temporal distribution is still unknown during influenza-induced acute lung injury. Here, we investigated the distribution of these cells, and concurrently performed global proteomic analysis of the infected lungs to elucidate and link the cellular and molecular events during influenza pneumonia recovery. BALB/c mice were infected with a sub-lethal dose of influenza H1N1 virus. From 5 to 25 days post-infection (dpi), mouse lungs were subjected to histopathologic and immunofluorescence analysis to probe for global distribution of lung repair cells (using P63 and KRT5 markers for DASCs; PCNA and SPC markers for AT2 cells). At 7 and 15 dpi, infected mouse lungs were also subjected to protein mass spectrometry for relative protein quantification. DASCs appeared only in the damaged area of the lung from 7 dpi onwards, reaching a peak at 21 dpi, and persisted at 25 dpi. However, no differentiation of DASCs to AT2 cells was observed by 25 dpi. In contrast, AT2 cells began proliferating from 7 dpi to replenish its population. Mass spectrometry and gene ontology analysis revealed prominent innate immune response at 7 dpi, which shifted towards adaptive immune responses by 15 dpi. Hence, proliferating AT2 cells but not DASCs contribute to AT2 cell regeneration following transition from innate to adaptive immune responses during the early phase of recovery from influenza pneumonia up to 25 dpi.

### Sample Protocol
BALB/c mice were infected as described with sub-lethal dose of influenza PR8 (20 PFU each). Two mice each were euthanized at 7 and 15 dpi, and their lungs homogenized in urea lysis buffer. Uninfected mouse lungs served as the control. The homogenized lungs from each time-point were pooled, and subjected to in-solution digestion. Briefly, proteins underwent reduction (5 mM dithiothreitol) and alkylation (10 mM indole-3-acetic acid). The proteins were then subjected to overnight digestion with LysC (Wako) at a protease-to-protein ratio of 1:100 at 37°C, followed by sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at a protease to protein ratio of 1:50 at 37°C for 4 h. The resultant peptide solutions were acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid and desalted using 3M Empore 1-mL C18 SPE cartridge. Desalted peptides 34 were eluted with 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile/water. Tandem Mass Tag™ 6-plex (TMTsixplex™) reagents were used to label the desalted peptides. The TMT-labeled peptides were further fractionated using Agilent 3100 OFFGEL Fractionator (Agilent, G3100AA) on a 13-cm IPG strip of pH 3-10. The 12 fractionated samples were desalted using self-packed C18 stage tips and analyzed on an EASY-nLC 1000 (ThermoScientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific). The peptides were resolved and separated on a 50-cm analytical EASY-Spray column equipped with pre-column over a 180-min gradient ranging from 8 to 40% of 0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile/water. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z 310–1800) were acquired with a resolution of 120k, an AGC target of 2 × 105 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. MS2 scans were acquired with quadrupole isolation mode with CID activation using ion trap detector of an AGC target of 3 × 104, a maximum injection time of 35 ms, and filtered with TMT isobaric tag loss exclusion. MS3 scans selected synchronous precursor using HCD activation of 65% collision energy and resolution of 60000 for mass scan range of 100-500 with AGC target of 1 × 105 and maximum injection of 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data was analyzed using the MaxQuant software [22]. Differential protein expression analysis was performed using the mapDIA tool [23], and functional enrichment analysis was achieved by an in-house implementation of hypergeometric test-based pathway enrichment tool and a combination of Gene Ontology [24] and Consensus Pathway DB [25]. Protein fold-change was calculated as a ratio of protein abundance at 7 or 15 dpi, with reference to uninfected mice. Each protein was considered differentially abundant if the reported false detection rate (FDR) was lower than 0.01, and each protein was quantified by at least 5 peptides.

### Publication Abstract
During influenza pneumonia, the alveolar epithelial cells of the lungs are targeted by the influenza virus. The distal airway stem cells (DASCs) and proliferating alveolar type II (AT2) cells are reported to be putative lung repair cells. However, their relative spatial and temporal distribution is still unknown during influenza-induced acute lung injury. Here, we investigated the distribution of these cells, and concurrently performed global proteomic analysis of the infected lungs to elucidate and link the cellular and molecular events during influenza pneumonia recovery. BALB/c mice were infected with a sub-lethal dose of influenza H1N1 virus. From 5 to 25 days post-infection (dpi), mouse lungs were subjected to histopathologic and immunofluorescence analysis to probe for global distribution of lung repair cells (using P63 and KRT5 markers for DASCs; SPC and PCNA markers for AT2 cells). At 7 and 15 dpi, infected mouse lungs were also subjected to protein mass spectrometry for relative protein quantification. DASCs appeared only in the damaged area of the lung from 7 dpi onwards, reaching a peak at 21 dpi, and persisted until 25 dpi. However, no differentiation of DASCs to AT2 cells was observed by 25 dpi. In contrast, AT2 cells began proliferating from 7 dpi to replenish their population, especially within the boundary area between damaged and undamaged areas of the infected lungs. Mass spectrometry and gene ontology analysis revealed prominent innate immune responses at 7 dpi, which shifted towards adaptive immune responses by 15 dpi. Hence, proliferating AT2 cells but not DASCs contribute to AT2 cell regeneration following transition from innate to adaptive immune responses during the early phase of recovery from influenza pneumonia up to 25 dpi.

### Keywords
Influenza; pneumonia; lung regeneration; stem cells; comparative quantification; p63; krt5; proliferating alveolar type 2 cells; proteomics

### Affiliations
National University of Singapore
Department: Department of Microbiology and Immunology Lab: Host and Pathogen Interactivity Lab Institute: National University of Singapore Country: Singapore

### Submitter
Joe Ong

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent T. K. Chow
Department: Department of Microbiology and Immunology Lab: Host and Pathogen Interactivity Lab Institute: National University of Singapore Country: Singapore


