### Accession
PXD016054

### Title
Transcriptomic and proteomic choreography in response to light quality variation reveals metabolic acclimation in marine Nannochloropsis oceanica

### Description
Analysis of the carbon, photosynthesis etc. pathway under normal and red/blue light conditions in Nannochloropsis oceanica Imet1

### Sample Protocol
For the sample processing the samples were cultivated under normal light conditions (f2-media) to OD of 5, then they were separated into two groups the red light was induced on one group (Red) the other group is blue light conditions (Blue). All samples were cultivated without extra carbon dioxide supplementation. Cell samples were taken after 0, 12, 24 hours. The cell pellets were freeze dried in liquid nitrogen for storage at -80 degrees. The samples were grinded under liquid nitrogen and extracted with extraction buffer. The protein was loaded onto a SDS-LAEMMLI-Gel, after the run the protein gel lanes were cut into 4 fractions per timepoint. these replicates were measured in an UPLC-MS/MS mass spectrometer (Velos Elite, Thermo) with a 90 minutes gradient via CID fragmentation. The data was organized as followed: For each cultivation method (red light (Red) or blue light (Blue)) three biological replicates per time point were measured. They were labeled as follows: Date_time _light treatments (r or b) _replicate number _fraction number (example 20170225_12hb_3_2 which means blue light treated sample taken at 12 hours, third replicate and second fraction of this replicate of gel lane).

### Data Protocol
The data were searched with MAXQUANT version 1553 and statistical test were performed in Perseus Version 1553 the data was filtered by at least 2 unique peptides and a FDR of 0.05.  Protein Database:  0823_IMET1_protein_annotation+keratin.fasta Enzyme Name:  Trypsin (Full) Modifications: Max. Equal Modifications Per Peptide:  3, Max. Dynamic Modifications Per Peptide:  4. Dynamic Modification:  Oxidation / +15.995 Da (M) Static Modification:  Carbamidomethyl / +57.021 Da (C).   MAXQUANT Version 1551 settings: First search peptide tolerance 20 ppm Main search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm Isotope match tolerance 2 ppm Centroid match tolerance 8 ppm Centroid half width 35 ppm Time valley factor 1.4 ppm Isotope valley factor 1.2 ppm Isotope time correlation 0.6 ppm Min. peak length 2 Max. charge 7 Min score for recalibration 70 Cut peaks: yes Gap scans 1 Intensity determination: Value at maximum Identification settings: PSM FDR 0.01 Protein FDR 0.01 Site decoy fraction 0.01 Min. peptides 1 Min. razor = unique peptides 1 Min. unique peptides 0 Min score for unmodified peptides 0 Min score for modified peptides 40 Min delta score for unmodified peptides 0 Min score for modified peptides 6 Main search max. combinations 200 Base FDR calculations on delta score: no Razor protein FDR: yes The data was then exported into excel. The excel sheet was imported to PERSEUS Version 1553 and the PSM values were used for label free quantification of the proteome.

### Publication Abstract
Photosynthetic organisms need to respond frequently to the fluctuation of light quality and light quantity in their habitat. In response to the fluctuation of different single wavelength lights, these organisms have to adjust and optimize the employment of light energy by redistributing excitation energy and remodeling photosystem stoichiometry or light complex structure. However, the response of whole cellular processes to fluctuations in single wavelength light is mostly unknown. Here, we report the transcriptomic and proteomic dynamics and metabolic adaptation mechanisms of Nannochloropsis oceanica to blue and red light. Preferential exposure to different light spectra induces massive reprogramming of the Nannochloropsis transcriptome and proteome. Combined with physiological and biochemical investigation, the rewiring of many cellular processes was observed, including carbon/nitrogen assimilation, photosynthesis, chlorophyll and cartenoid biosynthesis, reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging systems, and chromatin state regulation. A strong and rapid regulation of genes or proteins related to nitrogen metabolism, photosynthesis, chlorophyll synthesis, ROS scavenging system, and carotenoid metabolism were observed during 12&#xa0;h and 24&#xa0;h of exposure under red light. Additionally, two light harvesting complex proteins induced by blue light and one by red light were observed. The differential responses of N. oceanica to red and blue irradiation reveal how marine microalgae adapt to change in light quality and can be exploited for biofuel feedstock development.

### Keywords
Light quality, Nannochloropsis oceanica, Light harvesting complex, Lc-ms/ms, Photosynthesis, Carbon/nitrogen metabolism

### Affiliations
Ruhr Uni Bochum
Lehrstuhl Biochemie der Pflanzen Fakultät für Biologie und Biotechnologie Ruhr-Universität Bochum

### Submitter
Wuxin You

### Lab Head
Dr Ansgar Poetsch
Lehrstuhl Biochemie der Pflanzen Fakultät für Biologie und Biotechnologie Ruhr-Universität Bochum


