### Accession
PXD005206

### Title
Stop trashing your spectra! Use a “Quantify then Identify” pipeline based on machine learning to maximize your isobaric tagging data

### Description
Being inspired by metabolomic data processing, we have developed a bioinformatic pipeline that optimizes the processing of mass spectral data obtained from isobaric Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) experiments. Our method focuses on the tandem mass spectral level by first quantifying and then identifying (QtI), while preserving unidentified spectra for further investigations. The raw datasets were previously generated [1, 2]. Two-proteome model experiments were considered where identical pools of human CSF or plasma samples were mixed with E. coli samples at different concentrations. E. coli protein extract was spiked in 400 µL of CSF at amounts of 0, 2, 3, 5, 6.25, and 7.5 µg. Such sets of 6 spiked CSF samples were prepared in triplicate for comparison using sixplex isobaric tagging and analyzed in triplicates on two independent but identical LC MS/MS, for a total of 18 raw files [1]; this experiment is called “CSF-E.coli”. E. coli protein extract was spiked at 0, 2.5, 5, 6.25, 12.5, and 25 µg in 30 µL human plasma. Such sets of 6 spiked plasma samples were prepared in quadruplicate for comparison using sixplex isobaric tagging and analyzed in triplicates on one LC MS/MS, for a total of 12 raw files [2]; this experiment is referred as “Plasma-E.coli”.The so-called “96samples-CSF” experiment consists of 16 replicate TMT sixplex experiments measuring identical CSF samples from the pool described above [2], analyzed in triplicates on one LCMS/MS for a total of 48 raw files. The so-called “96samples-plasma” experiment consists of 16 replicate TMT sixplex experiments measuring identical plasma samples from the pool described before, analyzed in triplicates on one LC MS/MS for a total of 48 raw files [1].  References: [1] Dayon, L., Núñez Galindo, A., Corthésy, J., Cominetti, O. & Kussmann, M. Comprehensive and scalable highly automated MS-based proteomic workflow for clinical biomarker discovery in human plasma. J. Proteome Res. 13, 3837-3845 (2014). [2] Núñez Galindo, A., Kussmann, M. & Dayon, L. Proteomics of Cerebrospinal Fluid: Throughput and Robustness Using a Scalable Automated Analysis Pipeline for Biomarker Discovery. Anal. Chem. 87, 10755-10761 (2015).

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. All samples were prepared using a highly automated proteomic workflow that includes spiking of β-lactoglobulin protein standard, abundant protein depletion, buffer exchange, reduction, alkylation, digestion, TMT sixplex labelling, sample pooling, and purification as previously described [1, 2]. RP-LC MS/MS. RP-LC MS/MS was performed with LTQ-OT Elite instruments coupled to Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano systems. Proteolytic peptides were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap 75 µm × 2 cm (C18, 3 µm, 100 Å) pre-column and separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 µm × 50 cm (C18, 2 µm, 100 Å) column coupled to a stainless steel nanobore emitter (40 mm, OD 1/32”) mounted on a Nanospray Flex Ion Source. The analytical separation was run for 150 min using a gradient that reached 30% of CH3CN after 140 min and 80% of CH3CN after 150 min at a flow rate of 220 nL•min−1.  For MS survey scans, the OT resolution was 120000 (ion population of 1 × 106) with an m/z window ranging from 300 to 1500. For MS/MS with higher-energy collisional dissociation at 35% of the normalized collision energy, ion population was set to 1 × 105 (isolation width of 2), with a resolution of 15000, first mass at m/z = 100, and a maximum injection time of 250 ms in the OT. A maximum of 10 precursor ions (most intense) were selected for MS/MS. Ions with 1+ and unassigned charge-states were rejected from MS/MS analysis. Dynamic exclusion was set for 60 seconds within a ± 5 ppm window. A lock mass of m/z = 445.1200 was used. Each sample was analyzed at least in triplicate. In addition, samples of the “E.coli-CSF” experiment were analyzed in triplicate on two independent but identical RP-LCMS/MS platforms.  References: [1] Dayon, L., Núñez Galindo, A., Corthésy, J., Cominetti, O. & Kussmann, M. Comprehensive and scalable highly automated MS-based proteomic workflow for clinical biomarker discovery in human plasma. J. Proteome Res. 13, 3837-3845 (2014). [2] Núñez Galindo, A., Kussmann, M. & Dayon, L. Proteomics of Cerebrospinal Fluid: Throughput and Robustness Using a Scalable Automated Analysis Pipeline for Biomarker Discovery. Anal. Chem. 87, 10755-10761 (2015).

### Data Protocol
Identification was performed against the human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database including the LACB sequence or UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database restrained to the E. coli taxonomy. Mascot was used as search engine. The variable amino acid modifications which were included in the search were oxidized methionine, deamidated asparagine/glutamine, and sixplex TMT-labeled peptide amino terminus. sixplex TMT-labeled lysine was set as a fixed modification as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Trypsin was selected as the proteolytic enzyme, with a maximum of two potential missed cleavages. Peptide and fragment ion tolerance were set to, respectively, 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. All Mascot result files were loaded into Scaffold Q+S to be further searched with X! Tandem. Both peptide and protein FDRs were fixed at 1%, with a 2 unique peptide criterion to report protein identification. Alternatively, the developpedQtI pipeline was used. It is a four step procedure enriched with an initial conversion of the raw files to mzML format as well as some manual steps for searching using state-of-the-art tools such as Mascot and Scaffold (see above). The overall pipeline uses machine learning algorithms to optimize pre-processing parameters; quantifies; aligns spectra prior to merging; selects spectra; trains/tests multi-classification models; and – using a new Peptide-Match Rescue (PMR) method – identifies more peptides than the classical identification/quantification method.

### Publication Abstract
Isobaric tagging is the method of choice in mass-spectrometry-based proteomics for comparing several conditions at a time. Despite its multiplexing capabilities, some drawbacks appear when multiple experiments are merged for comparison in large sample-size studies due to the presence of missing values, which result from the stochastic nature of the data-dependent acquisition mode. Another indirect cause of data incompleteness might derive from the proteomic-typical data-processing workflow that first identifies proteins in individual experiments and then only quantifies those identified proteins, leaving a large number of unmatched spectra with quantitative information unexploited. Inspired by untargeted metabolomic and label-free proteomic workflows, we developed a quantification-driven bioinformatic pipeline (Quantify then Identify (QtI)) that optimizes the processing of isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT) data from large-scale studies. This pipeline includes innovative features, such as peak filtering with a self-adaptive preprocessing pipeline optimization method, Peptide Match Rescue, and Optimized Post-Translational Modification. QtI outperforms a classical benchmark workflow in terms of quantification and identification rates, significantly reducing missing data while preserving unmatched features for quantitative comparison. The number of unexploited tandem mass spectra was reduced by 77 and 62% for two human cerebrospinal fluid and plasma data sets, respectively.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Plasma, 6-plex, Csf, Tmt, Orbitrap, Isobaric tagging

### Affiliations
Proteomics Team, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, Lausanne, Switzerland
Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences

### Submitter
John Corthésy

### Lab Head
Dr Loïc Dayon
Proteomics Team, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, Lausanne, Switzerland


