### Accession
PXD017807

### Title
DELTEX2 C-terminal domain recruits ADP-ribosylated DNA damage repair proteins for ubiquitination.

### Description
Crosstalk between ubiquitination and ADP-ribosylation regulates spatio-temporal recruitment of key players during DNA damage repair (DDR). The Deltex family of ubiquitin ligases (DTX1–4 and DTX3L), are characterized by a RING domain followed by a C-terminal domain (DTC) of unknown function; four Deltex proteins have other domains or partner proteins for binding poly-ADP-ribose (PAR), suggesting a role for these proteins in mediating crosstalk between ubiquitination and ADP-ribosylation. Here, we use two label-free mass spectrometry techniques to identify substrates of human DTX2 and demonstrate that DDR proteins are abundant in the DTX2 interactome. Using a combination of structural, biochemical and cell-based techniques, we show that: 1) the DTC domain binds the ADP-ribose moiety of ADP-ribosylated proteins; 2) the DTC domain recruits ADP-ribosylated DDR proteins for ubiquitination; and 3) the efficiency of DDR depends on this function of the DTC domain in DTX2. These findings uncover a new ADP-ribose-binding domain that facilitates PAR-dependent ubiquitination.

### Sample Protocol
For preparing samples for the determination of interactomes of different Deltex proteins, empty vector (EV), Myc-tagged full-length DTX1, DTX2, DTX3L and DTX4 were expressed in HEK293 cells and pulled down with Myc-trap in triplicate experiments. The beads were washed twice with IP lysis buffer and once each with IP wash buffer and HPLC grade water, and processed following a previously established protocol (Hubner et al., 2010). Digestion of samples was performed by subsequent use of both endoLysC and trypsin in AMBIC. For preparing samples for Ub remnant motif analysis of DTX2-ubiquitinated substrate peptides, EV and GFP-DTX2 were overexpressed in HEK293 cells in triplicate plates, induced with 50 μM H2O2 for 10 min and further treated with MG132 for 1 hr. Lysates were prepared and processed following the manufacturer’s protocol. Peptides resulting from all trypsin digestions were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC II 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Elution was carried out at a flow rate of 300  nl/min using a binary gradient, into a 50 cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch, GmbH), for a total run-time duration of 135 minutes.  The packed emitter was kept at 50 °C by means of a column oven (Sonation) integrated into the Thermo Scientific™ Nanospray Flex™ ion source from which eluting peptides were electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer.  An Active Background Ion Reduction Device (ESI Source Solutions) was used to decrease air contaminant signals. Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific) was used for data acquisition.  A full scan over a mass range of 350–1400 m/z was acquired at 120,000 resolution at 200 m/z. Higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation was performed on the 15 most intense ions, and peptide fragments generated were analyzed in the Orbitrap at 15,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
The MS Raw data were processed with MaxQuant software version 1.6.3.3 (Cox and Mann, 2008) and peptides identified with the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011), querying SwissProt (UniProt, 2019) Homo sapiens (30/04/2019; 42411 entries). First and main searches were performed with precursor mass tolerances of 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively, and an MS/MS tolerance of 20 ppm. The minimum peptide length was set to six amino acids and specificity for trypsin cleavage was required. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications, whereas cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. For the ubiquitin remnant experiment, GlyGly–Lys was included as a variable modification. The peptide, protein, and site false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%.  All MaxQuant outputs were analyzed with Perseus software version 1.6.2.3 (Tyanova et al., 2016).  For the affinity purification mass spectrometry experiment, protein abundance was measured using label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities. Only proteins quantified in all 3 replicates in at least one group were measured according to the label-free quantification algorithm available in MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2014). Missing values were imputed separately for each column (width 0.3, down shift 1.8), and significantly enriched proteins were selected using a t-test with a 5% FDR (permutation-based). Only significantly enriched proteins in which log2 (Myc-DTX2/EV)>0 were considered for further evaluation/validation and colored in the volcano plot.   The MaxQuant output GlyGly-Lys file was used for quantification of ubiquitinated peptides. Reverse and potential contaminant flagged peptides were removed. Missing values were imputed separately for each column (width 0.3, down shift 1.8). Only ubiquitinated peptides that had a “score diff” greater than 5, a localization probability higher than 0.75 and were robustly quantified all three replicate experiments were included in the analysis. To determine significantly changing ubiquitinated peptides, a Student t-test with a 1% FDR (permutation-based) was applied to the peptides intensities. For the volcano analysis, s0 and FDR% were 0.5 and 1%, respectively. Only ubiquitinated peptides more abundant in the lysates from cells expressing GFP-DTX2 were considered for further evaluation/validation and only the “DNA repair” peptides from this set are colored in the volcano plot.

### Publication Abstract
Cross-talk between ubiquitination and ADP-ribosylation regulates spatiotemporal recruitment of key players in many signaling pathways. The DELTEX family ubiquitin ligases (DTX1 to DTX4 and DTX3L) are characterized by a RING domain followed by a C-terminal domain (DTC) of hitherto unknown function. Here, we use two label-free mass spectrometry techniques to investigate the interactome and ubiquitinated substrates of human DTX2 and identify a large proportion of proteins associated with the DNA damage repair pathway. We show that DTX2-catalyzed ubiquitination of these interacting proteins requires PARP1/2-mediated ADP-ribosylation and depends on the DTC domain. Using a combination of structural, biochemical, and cell-based techniques, we show that the DTX2 DTC domain harbors an ADP-ribose-binding pocket and recruits poly-ADP-ribose (PAR)-modified proteins for ubiquitination. This PAR-binding property of DTC domain is conserved across the DELTEX family E3s. These findings uncover a new ADP-ribose-binding domain that facilitates PAR-dependent ubiquitination.

### Keywords
Deltex c-terminal domain, Dtx, Dna damage, Par-binding domain, Parylation-dependent ubiquitination

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute, Switchback Road, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK.
Proteomics

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK Beatson Institute, Switchback Road, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK.


