### Accession
PXD016665

### Title
SHANK2A and SHANK2A(R841X) mouse brain SWATH quantitative proteomics

### Description
The high molecular complexity of the SHANK scaffold and its fundamental role in neural circuitries governing social behavior is not well understood. Here we analyzed two newly generated transgenic mouse lines with the SHANK2A wild-type isoform and the other with SHANK2A carrying a SHANK2A(R841X) point mutation. The proteome of hippocampal synapse-enriched fraction for both lines was investigated by quantitative SWATH proteomic analysis in order to identify synaptic proteins and signaling pathways that respond to the SHANK2 isoforms.

### Sample Protocol
Hippocampus from mice brains were dissected, homogenized and P2 fractions were prepared. In-solution digestion of proteins was performed by using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. For SWATH MS, peptides were subjected to micro LC MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 LC system and TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (Sciex).

### Data Protocol
The data was analyzed using Spectronaut (Version 12.0.20491.4.23092) with a spectral library previously generated from synaptosomal preparations by data-dependent acquisition. Cross-run normalization was enabled and the peptide abundances were exported for further processing using R language. Limma R package was used for normalization and statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Lc-msms, Mouse, Swath, Hippocampus, Shank2a

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, VU Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Miguel A. Gonzalez-Lozano

### Lab Head
Dr Ka Wan Li
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, VU Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


