### Accession
PXD029989

### Title
DIA Based quantitative proteomics analysis reveals MAPK pathway a important role onthe Tremella fuciformis dimorphism

### Description
Tremella fuciformis is a dimorphic fungus that can undertake the reversible transition between yeast-like spores and hypha forms. In this project, we attempted to explore the differential proteins profile of dikaryotic yeast-like spores (FBMDS) and dikaryotic mycelium (DM) by applying the HRMS1-DIA full proteomics and PRM target proteomics synthetically. The results showed that a total of 5687 proteins were quantified, and 2220 of them (39.01%) showed more than a two-fold change in expression. The functional analysis of differential expression proteins (DEPs) confirmed that the DEPs were mainly located on membrane and nucleus, and FBMDS tended to express proteins involved in DNA replication and transcription, DNA damage repair, biosynthesis, and metabolism. At the same time, DM exhibited increased expression of signal transduction such as MAPK signaling pathway, Ras signaling pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) was performed to build the spectral library. Briefly, 10 peptide fractions were individually loaded onto the Omics High-resolution Series Monolithic Capillary HPLC columns (100μM×50cm, KYOTO MONOTCHE) with column temperature of 50°C using the EASY-nLC1000 chromatographic system (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) at a rate of 2.0 μL for 8 min. The peptides were subjected to a 120 min runtime elution at 600 nL/min using mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) and phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) with the following gradients: 0-4 min, 4-7% B, 4-79 min, 7-20% B, 79-108 min, 20-30% B, 108-110 min, 30-90% B, 110-120 min, 90% B. The electrospray voltage of 2.2 kV versus the inlet of the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) was used and the mass spectrometry parameters were briefly as follow: (1) MS: scan range (m/z)=350-1500; resolution=60,000; AGC target=4e5; RF lens=40%; (2) HCD-MS/MS: resolution=30,000; AGC target=5e4; collision energy=32, maximum injection time=120 m, isolation window=1.6 Da. For DIA analysis, the chromatographic condition was set as the DDA analysis, and the mass spectrometry parameters were set as the previous description with some modifications [18]. Briefly, the full MS experiment included one broadband scan acquired over m/z 350–1550 at a resolution of 120,000 with an AGC target value of 4et and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The MS/MS experiment included 20 scans/cycle (for a total of 60 scans) acquired at R =30,000 with an AGC target value of 2e5, with a maximum injection time of 72 ms，HCD energy 32%.

### Data Protocol
To obtain a confidential and comprehensive spectral library, DDA raw data and DIA raw data were both searched against the protein database by Spectronaut 15 (Biognosys AG, Switzerland) with default settings: Carbamidomethyl (C) was fixed modification, Oxidation (M) was variable modifications, tolerance was 20 ppm, precursor and protein FDR level was 1%. Then the HRMS1-DIA raw data were performed identification and quantification as the following parameter: Qvalue cutoff on precursor and protein level was applied 1%, decoy generation was set to mutate, which was similar to scrambled but will only apply a random number of AA position swamps (min=2, max=length/2). All selected precursors passing the filters are used for MS1 quantification. MS2 interference will remove all interfering fragment ions except for the three least interfering ones. The top 3 filtered peptides that passed the 1% Qvalue cutoff were used to calculate the major group quantities. The significance of log2-fold change values was determined using the Student’s one-tailed t-test (p<0.05). The PRM raw data was loaded to Protein Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) to perform peptides identification, and the pdResults File containing peptides spectral was read by Skyline 20.1.0[22]. With the cutoff score >0.9, 7 aa< peptides length <30 aa, ion type b, y, p, Skyline 20.1.0 build the translation list and spectral library, and 3 productions with dot p-value more than 0.8 was used to peptides quantification and proteins quantification.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Tremella fuciformis</i> is a dimorphic fungus that can undertake a reversible transition between yeast-like conidia and hyphal forms. The transformation mechanism and proteomic differences between these two forms have not been reported. Therefore, in this study, we attempted to explore the differential protein profiles of dikaryotic yeast-like conidia from fruiting bodies and mycelia (FBMds) and dikaryotic mycelia (DM) by synthetically applying high-resolution MS1-based quantitative data-independent acquisition (HRMS1-DIA) full proteomics and parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) targeted proteomics. The results showed that a total of 5687 proteins were quantified, and 2220 of them (39.01%) showed more than a two-fold change in expression. The functional analysis of the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) confirmed that the DEPs were mainly located in the membrane and nucleus. The FBMds tended to express proteins involved in biosynthesis, metabolism, DNA replication and transcription, and DNA damage repair. At the same time, DM exhibited an increased expression of proteins involved in signal transduction mechanisms such as the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway and the Ras signaling pathway. Further, phosphorylation analysis confirmed the importance of the MAPK signaling pathway in <i>T. fuciformis</i> dimorphism, and comparative metabolism analysis demonstrated the metabolic difference between FBMds and DM. The information obtained in the present study will provide new insights into the difference between FBMds and DM and lay a foundation for further research on the dimorphism formation mechanism of <i>T. fuciformis</i>.

### Keywords
Tremella fuciformis;dimorphism;mapk signaling pathway

### Affiliations
Fujian argricuture and forestry university
College of Life Sciences, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University,

### Submitter
Li Yaxing

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Shujing
College of Life Sciences, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University,


