### Accession
PXD008824

### Title
Identification of non-overlapping functions between adaptor proteins NCK1 and NCK2

### Description
Signals from cell surface receptors are often relayed via adaptor proteins. NCK1 and NCK2 are Src-Homology (SH) 2 and 3 domain adaptors that regulate processes requiring a remodelling of the actin cytoskeleton. Evidence from gene inactivation in mouse suggest that NCK1 and NCK2 are functionally redundant, although recent reports support the idea of unique functions for NCK1 and NCK2. We sought to examine this question further by delineating NCK1- and NCK2-specific signalling networks. We used both affinity purification-mass spectrometry and BioID proximity labelling to identify NCK1/2 signalling networks comprised of 98 proteins. Strikingly, we found 30 proteins restricted to NCK1 and 28 proteins specifically associated with NCK2, thus suggesting differences in their function. We report that Nck2-/-, but not Nck1-/- mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) are multi-nucleated and display extended protrusions reminiscent of intercellular bridges, which correlate with an extended time spent in cytokinesis as well as a failure of a significant proportion of cells to complete abscission. Our data also show that the midbody of NCK2-deficient cells is not only increased in length, but also altered in composition, as judged by the mislocalization of AURKB, PLK1 and ECT2. Finally, we show that NCK2 function during cytokinesis requires its SH2 domain. Taken together, our data delineate the first high-confidence interactome for NCK1/2 adaptors and highlight a number of proteins specifically associated with either protein. We further demonstrate that contrary to what is generally accepted, NCK1 and NCK2 are not completely redundant, and shed light on a previously uncharacterized function for the NCK2 adaptor protein in cell division.

### Sample Protocol
Human embryonic kidney 293T cells (HEK293T)were cultured in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's medium (DMEM, Life Technologies) high glucose supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Sigma-Aldrich). Tyrosine phosphatase inhibition was achieved by addition of 100 μM sodium orthovanadate (Sigma-Aldrich) pre-activated with 30% H2O2 (1: 200) to cell medium for 20 minutes. Cells were washed with ice cold PBS before lysis. Proteins were extracted by scraping the cells in ice-cold lysis buffer, as described elsewhere, and normalized according to their protein concentrations as measured by Lowry. Lysates were incubated for 2h at 4 °C with M2 affinity resin (Sigma-Aldrich) for FLAG APs. Beads were washed three times with lysis buffer. For Western blotting, beads were resuspended in 4x Laemmli buffer. For MS experiments, beads were additionally washed twice with 20 mM Tris pH 7.4 and proteins were eluted by incubating with agitation at 4 °C with 50 mM H3PO4 before digestion. Samples for mass spectrometry were prepared as detailed here : Beigbeder A, Vélot L, James DA, Bisson N. Sample Preparation for Mass Spectrometry Analysis of Protein-Protein Interactions in Cancer Cell Lines and Tissues. Methods Mol. Biol. Clifton NJ. 2016;1458:339–347

### Data Protocol
We used data from three independent AP-MS experiments including a 3xFLAG-GFP line as a negative control to performe a significance analysis using SAINT to focus on high-confidence interactions as described elsewhere. Choi, H., Larsen, B., Lin, Z. Y., Breitkreutz, A., Mellacheruvu, D., Fermin, D., Qin, Z. S., Tyers, M., Gingras, A. C., and Nesvizhskii, A. I. (2011) SAINT: probabilistic scoring of affinity purification-mass spectrometry data. Nature methods 8, 70-73 Choi, H., Liu, G., Mellacheruvu, D., Tyers, M., Gingras, A. C., and Nesvizhskii, A. I. (2012) Analyzing protein-protein interactions from affinity purification-mass spectrometry data with SAINT. Curr Protoc Bioinformatics Chapter 8, Unit8 15

### Publication Abstract
Signals from cell surface receptors are often relayed via adaptor proteins. NCK1 and NCK2 are Src-Homology (SH) 2 and 3 domain adaptors that regulate processes requiring a remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton. Evidence from gene inactivation in mouse suggests that NCK1 and NCK2 are functionally redundant, although recent reports support the idea of unique functions for NCK1 and NCK2. We sought to examine this question further by delineating NCK1- and NCK2-specific signaling networks. We used both affinity purification-mass spectrometry and BioID proximity labeling to identify NCK1/2 signaling networks comprised of 98 proteins. Strikingly, we found 30 proteins restricted to NCK1 and 28 proteins specifically associated with NCK2, suggesting differences in their function. We report that <i>Nck2</i><sup>-/-</sup>, but not <i>Nck1</i><sup>-/-</sup> mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) are multinucleated and display extended protrusions reminiscent of intercellular bridges, which correlate with an extended time spent in cytokinesis as well as a failure of a significant proportion of cells to complete abscission. Our data also show that the midbody of NCK2-deficient cells is not only increased in length, but also altered in composition, as judged by the mislocalization of AURKB, PLK1 and ECT2. Finally, we show that NCK2 function during cytokinesis requires its SH2 domain. Taken together, our data delineate the first high-confidence interactome for NCK1/2 adaptors and highlight several proteins specifically associated with either protein. Thus, contrary to what is generally accepted, we demonstrate that NCK1 and NCK2 are not completely redundant, and shed light on a previously uncharacterized function for the NCK2 adaptor protein in cell division.

### Keywords
Nck adaptors, Specificity, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
CRC quebec
Centre de Recherche sur le Cancer, PROTEO et Département de Biologie Moléculaire, Biochimie Médicale et Pathologie, Université Laval, Division Oncologie, Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) de Québec, Québec, Canada

### Submitter
Kevin Jacquet

### Lab Head
Dr Nicolas Bisson
Centre de Recherche sur le Cancer, PROTEO et Département de Biologie Moléculaire, Biochimie Médicale et Pathologie, Université Laval, Division Oncologie, Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) de Québec, Québec, Canada


