### Accession
PXD030577

### Title
Characterization of peptide-protein relationships in protein ambiguity groups via bipartite graphs - data set D2 (without isoforms)

### Description
Motivation: In bottom-up mass spectrometry proteins are enzymatically digested before measurement. The relationship between proteins and peptides can be represented by bipartite graphs that can be split into connected components. This representation is useful to aid protein inference and quantification, which is complex due to the occurrence of shared peptides. We conducted a comprehensive analysis of these bipartite graphs using peptides from an in silico digestion of protein databases as well as quantified peptides. Results: The graphs based on quantified peptides are smaller and have less complex structures compared to the database level. However, the proportion of protein nodes without unique peptides and the proportion of graphs that contain these proteins increase. Large differences between the different underlying organisms on database as well as quantitative level could be observed. Insights of this analysis may be useful for the development of protein inference and quantification algorithms. Link to preprint: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.07.28.454128v1?ct=

### Sample Protocol
For details see the original publication from Ramus et al. (PMID: 26862574).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were taken from the ProteomXchange repository, identifier PXD001819, and re-analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 and Andromeda. The settings were taken from Workflow 7 of the corresponding publication by Ramus et al. (PMID: 26862574) except that Trypsin (no cuts after proline) was used instead of Trypsin/P, to match the corresponding in silico digestion of the database. In summary, precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for first search and to 6 ppm for main search and the fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to six amino acids and maximum peptide mass to 4600 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were used as variable modifications. The peptide.txt result file was used for further processing of the quantitative peptide-level data. The corresponding database (in total 6,342 entries) consists of the Uniprot yeast proteome without isoforms (2020-01-31, 6,049 entries), the UPS1 fasta containing the 48 sequences, as well as the contaminants database used by Andromeda (245 sequences).

### Publication Abstract
In bottom-up proteomics, proteins are enzymatically digested into peptides before measurement with mass spectrometry. The relationship between proteins and their corresponding peptides can be represented by bipartite graphs. We conduct a comprehensive analysis of bipartite graphs using quantified peptides from measured data sets as well as theoretical peptides from an in silico digestion of the corresponding complete taxonomic protein sequence databases. The aim of this study is to characterize and structure the different types of graphs that occur and to compare them between data sets. We observed a large influence of the accepted minimum peptide length during in silico digestion. When changing from theoretical peptides to measured ones, the graph structures are subject to two opposite effects. On the one hand, the graphs based on measured peptides are on average smaller and less complex compared to graphs using theoretical peptides. On the other hand, the proportion of protein nodes without unique peptides, which are a complicated case for protein inference and quantification, is considerably larger for measured data. Additionally, the proportion of graphs containing at least one protein node without unique peptides rises when going from database to quantitative level. The fraction of shared peptides and proteins without unique peptides as well as the complexity and size of the graphs highly depends on the data set and organism. Large differences between the structures of bipartite peptide-protein graphs have been observed between database and quantitative level as well as between analyzed species. In the analyzed measured data sets, the proportion of protein nodes without unique peptides ranged from 6.4% to 55.0%. This highlights the need for novel methods that can quantify proteins without unique peptides. The knowledge about the structure of the bipartite peptide-protein graphs gained in this study will be useful for the development of such algorithms.

### Keywords
Ups1, Yeast, Spike-in

### Affiliations
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-University Bochum
Ruhr-University Bochum, Medical Faculty, Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Medical Bioinformatics. Ruhr-University Bochum, Medical Proteome Analysis, Center for Proteindiagnostics (PRODI)

### Submitter
Karin Schork

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Eisenacher
Ruhr-University Bochum, Medical Faculty, Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Medical Bioinformatics. Ruhr-University Bochum, Medical Proteome Analysis, Center for Proteindiagnostics (PRODI)


### SDRF
- Organism: Saccharomyces cerevisiae
- organism part: not available
- disease: not available
- cell type: not applicable
- label: label free sample
- instrument: LTQ Orbitrap Velos
- modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl
- modification parameters: Oxidation
- modification parameters: Acetyl

