### Accession
PXD020136

### Title
The role of RodAp-conserved cysteine residues in the Aspergillus fumigatus conidial surface organization

### Description
Immune inertness of Aspergillus fumigatus conidia, an airborne fungal pathogen, is attributed to its surface rodlet-layer made up of RodAp, a protein belonging to the hydrophobin family, characterized by eight conserved cysteine residues forming four disulfide bonding. Earlier, we showed that the conserved cysteine residue point (ccrp) mutations result in conidia devoid of the rodlet-layer. Here we extended our study in comparing ccrp-mutation with RODA deletion on their mutant conidial surface organization, permeability and immunoreactivity. Western blot using anti-RodAp antibodies indicated the absence of RodAp in the cytoplasm of ccrp-mutant conidia. Upon immunolabelling, ccrp-mutant conidia showed strong positivity for -(1,3)-glucan and weak positivity for -(1,3)-glucan, which was reverse in ∆rodA conidia, and the parental strain conidia were negative; all of their conidial cell wall permeability was similar. Proteomic analyses of the conidial surface exposed proteins of the ccrp-mutants, although lower in number, showed more similarities with the parental strain, but a significant difference with the RODA deletion mutant strain. Further, ccrp-mutant conidia are less immunostimulatory compared to ∆rodA conidia. Together, our data suggest that (i) the conserved cysteine residues are essential for the trafficking of RodAp and the organization of rodlet-layer on the conidial surface, and (ii) point-mutation could be an alternative strategy to study the proteins involved in the organization of fungal cell wall.

### Sample Protocol
A. fumigatus strain used was CEA17_ΔakuBKU80, the RodAp-cysteine residue point-mutant strains, and RodA deletion mutant. All the strains were maintained on 2% malt-agar slants at ambient temperature. A. fumigatus were grown for seven days at 37°C on Aspergillus minimal medium [70 mM NaNO3, 11.2 mM KH2PO4, 7 mM KCl, 2 mM MgSO4, and 1 µL/mL trace element solution (pH 6.5)] agar plates with 1% (w/v) glucose. The trace element solution was composed of 1 g FeSO4 • 7 H2O, 8.8 g ZnSO4 • 7 H2O, 0.4 g CuSO4 • 5 H2O, 0.15 g MnSO4 • H2O, 0.1 g NaB4O7 • 10 H2O, 0.05 g (NH4)6Mo7O24 • 4 H2O, and ultra-filtrated water to 1000 mL [12,13]. Conidia collected from three 10-cm plates (~1e9 conidia) were used immediately after collection in water, washed thrice with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and collected by centrifugation (1,800×g, 10 min, ambient temperature). The conidia were resuspended in 800 µL of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and treated with 5 µg MS-approved trypsin (Serva) for 5 min at 37°C with gentle agitation. Samples were then immediately passed through a 0.2 µm cellulose acetate filter (Sartorius) and collected in a microcentrifuge tube, followed by washing of the syringe filter with 200 µL of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate; 9 µL of 89% (v/v) formic acid was added to stop the tryptic digestion and the samples were dried using a SpeedVac Concentrator (Thermo Fisher), resuspended in 25 µL of 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.05% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid, and centrifuged for 15 min through a 0.22 µm pore size Spin X cellulose acetate spin filter (Corning Costar). LC-MS/MS analysis of trypsin-shaved surface peptides were performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano instrument coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously. Tryptic peptides were trapped for 4 min on an Acclaim Pep Map 100 column (2 cm × 75 μm, 3 μm) at a flow-rate of 5 μL/min. The peptides were then separated on an Acclaim Pep Map column (50 cm × 75 μm, 2 μm) using a binary gradient (A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in H2O; B: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 90:10 (v/v) ACN/H2O): 0-4 min at 4% B, 5 min at 8% B, 20 min at 12% B, 30 min at 18% B, 40 min at 25% B, 50 min at 35% B, 57 min at 50% B, 62-65 min at 96% B, 65.1-90 min at 4% B. Positively charged ions were generated by a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a stainless steel emitter with 2.2 kV spray voltage. Ions were measured in Full MS/ddMS2 (Top10) mode, i.e. precursors were scanned at m/z 300-1500 (R: 60,000 FWHM; AGC target: 1e6; max. IT: 100  ms). Fragment ions generated in the HCD cell at 30% normalized collision energy using N2 were scanned (R: 15,000 FWHM; AGC  target: 2e5; max. IT: 100 ms) in a data-dependent manner (dynamic exclusion: 30s).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were searched against the A. fumigatus Af293 database of the AspGD (http://www.aspergillusgenome.org/download/sequence/A_fumigatus_Af293/archive/A_fumigatus_Af293_version_s03-m05-r16_orf_trans_all.fasta.gz, 2019/11/03, YYYY/MM/DD) using Proteome discoverer 2.2 and the algorithms of Mascot 2.4.1, Sequest HT, and MS Amanda 2.0. Two missed cleavages were allowed for tryptic peptides, the precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The dynamic modification was oxidation of Met. Only rank-1 peptides were counted exclusively for top scored proteins and a strict target false-discovery rate (FDR) of <1% (calculated against a reverse decoy database) on both peptide and protein level was required. Search engine score thresholds were >30 for Mascot, >300 for MS Amanda, and >4 for Sequest.

### Publication Abstract
Immune inertness of <i>Aspergillus</i> <i>fumigatus</i> conidia is attributed to its surface rodlet-layer made up of RodAp, characterized by eight conserved cysteine residues forming four disulfide bonds. Earlier, we showed that the conserved cysteine residue point (ccrp<i>)</i> mutations result in conidia devoid of the rodlet layer. Here, we extended our study comparing the surface organization and immunoreactivity of conidia carrying ccrp-mutations with the <i>RODA</i> deletion mutant (&#x2206;<i>rodA</i>). Western blot analysis using anti-RodAp antibodies indicated the absence of RodAp in the cytoplasm of ccrp<i>-</i>mutant conidia. Immunolabeling revealed differential reactivity to conidial surface glucans, the ccrp-mutant conidia preferentially binding to &#x3b1;-(1,3)-glucan, &#x2206;<i>rodA</i> conidia selectively bound to &#x3b2;-(1,3)-glucan; the parental strain conidia showed negative labeling. However, permeability of ccrp-mutants and &#x2206;<i>rodA</i> was similar to the parental strain conidia. Proteomic analyses of the conidial surface exposed proteins of the ccrp-mutants showed more similarities with the parental strain, but were significantly different from the &#x2206;<i>rodA</i>. Ccrp-mutant conidia were less immunostimulatory compared to &#x2206;<i>rodA</i> conidia. Our data suggest that (i) the conserved cysteine residues are essential for the trafficking of RodAp and the organization of the rodlet layer on the conidial surface, and (ii) targeted point mutation could be an alternative approach to study the role of fungal cell-wall genes in host-fungal interaction.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Surface proteomics, Roda, Aspergillus fumigatus, Conidia

### Affiliations
Department for Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute, Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Department for Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute, Germany


