### Accession
PXD036718

### Title
Proteomic signatures of the serological response to flu vaccination in a large human cohort study

### Description
This project investigates the serum proteomic signatures of the serological response to flu vaccination. We profiled the serum proteome of 160 flu vaccine recipients from a cohort study conducted in 2019-2020 season, with DIA-MS based proteomics. We compared the protein level between low and high responders based on the response measure seroconversion, as well as the adjusted seroconversion which excludes the confoudning effects of all the semographic factors recorded for these participants. We did the analysis for the composite seroconversion as well as for the individual strains. We also investigated the complex impact of age.

### Sample Protocol
We processed 225 serum samples including individual and quality control 160 samples as per the protocol described elsewhere (Allgoewer K, 2021). Briefly, 1 μl of serum sample (~70-80 μg protein) was lysed with 0.1% Rapigest (Waters, MA, USA) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma, MO, USA) followed by denaturation at 95◦C for 5 min. Later, the samples were reduced using 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma) at 60◦C for 30 min, and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. The samples were subsequently quenched with 10 mM DTT with overnight digestion at 37◦C using Trypsin gold (Promega, WI, USA). The digestion was terminated and the surfactant was cleaved by treating the samples with 200 mM HCl (Sigma) for 30 min at 37◦C. The desalting of the samples was performed using Hypersep C-18 spin tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). The eluted peptides were dried under vacuum at room temperature (Eppendorf, CT, USA) and were resuspended in 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (Thermo Scientific). The resulting peptides were quantified by fluorometric peptide assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) before mass spectrometry analysis. The samples were subjected to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analytical column RSLC PepMan C-18 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 2uM, 100Å, 75μm id x 50cm) was used at 55◦C to analyze the samples with the mobile phase of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in MS grade water) and buffer B (90% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) and injecting approximately 400 ng peptides. The liquid chromatography gradient was of 155 min from buffer A to buffer B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min having the following steps: 2 to 5% buffer B for 5 min, 5 to 25% buffer B for 110 min, 25 to 40% buffer B for 25 min, 40 to 80% buffer B for 5 min, and 80 to 95% buffer B for 5 min and an additional 5 min hold at 95% for Buffer B. Further, the serum samples were processed using data independent acquisition (DIA) with the given parameters: for full-scan MS acquisition in the Orbitrap, the resolution was set to 120,000, having the scan range of 350 to 1650 m/z with the maximum injection time of 100 ms, and automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6. The data acquisition was carried out using 17 DIA variable windows in the Orbitrap with resolution setting at 60,000, AGC target of 1e6, and the maximum injection time in auto mode. The sample run order was randomized and with approximately every 6 samples, a quality control (QC) sample was run. The QC samples consisted of pooled serum samples processed in the same way as the above samples.

### Data Protocol
We used Spectronaut for all primary processing (v14, https://biognosys.com/software/spectronaut/). All 225 raw files were first converted to the HTRMS format with the HTRMS converter (centroid method). The converted files were then analyzed with the directDIA method using default settings. We exported intensity information at the fragment level for data preprocessing. We used in-house R scripts to remove analysis sequence and batch effects arising from a change in chromatographic columns, as well as the downstream analyses.

### Publication Abstract
The serological response to the influenza virus vaccine is highly heterogeneous for reasons that are not entirely clear. While the impact of demographic factors such as age, body mass index (BMI), sex, prior vaccination and titer levels are known to impact seroconversion, they only explain a fraction of the response. To identify signatures of the vaccine response, we analyzed 273 protein levels from 138 serum samples of influenza vaccine recipients (2019-2020 season). We found that levels of proteins functioning in cholesterol transport were positively associated with seroconversion, likely linking to the known impact of BMI. When adjusting seroconversion for the demographic factors, we identified additional, unexpected signatures: proteins regulating actin cytoskeleton dynamics were significantly elevated in participants with high adjusted seroconversion. Viral strain specific analysis showed that this trend was largely driven by the H3N2 strain. Further, we identified complex associations between adjusted seroconversion and other factors: levels of proteins of the complement system associated positively with adjusted seroconversion in younger participants, while they were associated negatively in the older population. We observed the opposite trends for proteins of high density lipoprotein remodeling, transcription, and hemostasis. In sum, careful integrative modeling can extract new signatures of seroconversion from highly variable data that suggest links between the humoral response as well as immune cell communication and migration.

### Keywords
Serum proteomics, Flu vaccination, Human cohort

### Affiliations
New York University
Vogel lab, Department of Biology, New York University

### Submitter
Shaohuan Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Vogel
Vogel lab, Department of Biology, New York University


