### Accession
PXD010571

### Title
Evaluation of a Dual Isolation Width Acquisition (DIWA) method for isobaric labelling ratio decompression

### Description
Stable isotope labelling of peptides using isobaric reagents such as iTRAQ and TMT enables the multiplexed analysis of proteomes with deep quantitative coverage. Isobaric tagging demonstrates high precision but imperfect accuracy due to ratio underestimation caused by co-fragmentation of ions with mass-to-charge ratios within the isolation window of the targeted precursors. Prompted by empirical observations of isobaric-labelled peptide MS2 spectra, we argue that although a very narrow isolation window will result in severe loss of backbone fragment ions, rendering the spectra unsuitable for peptide identification, the reporter ion signals will remain intense enough to generate quantitative information for a significant portion of the spectra. Based on this assumption we have designed a Dual Isolation Width Acquisition (DIWA) method, in which each precursor is first fragmented with HCD using a standard isolation width for peptide identification and preliminary quantification followed by a concomitant MS2 HCD fragmentation using a much narrower isolation width for the acquisition of quantification-only spectra with reduced interference. We leverage the quantitative values obtained by the “narrow” scans to build linear regression models and apply these to decompress the fold-changes measured at the “standard” scans. Here, we evaluate the DIWA method using a two species TMT-6plex model and discuss the potential of this approach.

### Sample Protocol
We analysed a mixture of Escherichia coli tryptic peptides at ratios 2:1, 4:1, 8:1 (×2 each) and tryptic peptides from three human cell lines (hiPSC ARID1A KO, hiPSC WT, CL-40) at ratios 1:1:1. Three TMT channels (129,130,131) were overlapping between E. coli and Human peptides whilst three channels (126,127,128) were used for interference-free E. coli peptides. Duplicate aliquots of 20 μg (TMT: 126 and 131), 10 μg (TMT: 127 and 130), and 2.5 μg (TMT: 128 and 129) of  E. coli protein and aliquots of 50 μg of hiPSC ARID1A KO (TMT: 129), hiPSC WT (TMT: 130) and CL-40 (TMT: 131) were prepared for trypsin digestion. Cysteines were reduced with 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP) for 1 h at 60 °C and blocked by 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature in dark. Trypsin (Pierce, MS grade) solution was added at a final concentration 70 ng/μL to each sample for overnight digestion. The peptide samples were finally labelled with the TMT-6plex reagents (Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The labelled peptides were fractionated with high-pH reversed-phase HPLC and the 25 fractions were analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos. The analysis of the fractions was performed three times at three different “narrow” isolation widths (0.1, 0.2 and 0.3 Th). For the DIWA method, the five most abundant multiply charged precursors within 380 -1500 m/z were selected with FT mass resolution of 30,000 and isolated for HCD fragmentation twice with isolation width 2.0 and 0.1 or 0.2 or 0.3 Th in an Nth order double play method. Normalized collision energy was set at 40 for the standard scans and at 41 for the narrow scans. Tandem mass spectra were acquired at 7,500 FT resolution with 40 seconds dynamic exclusion and 10 ppm mass tolerance. FT maximum ion time for full MS experiments was set at 200 ms and FT MSn maximum ion time was set at 50 ms. The AGC target vales were 3×10e6 for full FTMS and 5×10e5 for MSn FTMS.

### Data Protocol
The MS2 spectra collected with collision energy 40 were searched against Uniprot human (reviewed only) and Escherichia coli entries using SequestHT in Proteome Discoverer 2.2. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 30 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.02 Da. Static modifications were: TMT6plex at N-termimi/K, and carbamidomethyl at C. Dynamic modifications included oxidation of M and deamidation of N/Q. The data were processed twice, first with maximum collision energy 40 for quantification using the “standard” scans and with minimum collision energy 41 for quantification using the “narrow” scans (Reporter Ions Quantifier node). Quantification was based on un-normalized signal-to-noise (S/N) values. Peptide confidence was estimated with the Percolator node.

### Publication Abstract
Isobaric labeling is a highly precise approach for protein quantification. However, due to the isolation interference problem, isobaric tagging suffers from ratio underestimation at the MS2 level. The use of narrow isolation widths is a rational approach to alleviate the interference problem; however, this approach compromises proteome coverage. We reasoned that although a very narrow isolation window will result in loss of peptide fragment ions, the reporter ion signals will be retained for a significant portion of the spectra. On the basis of this assumption, we have designed a dual isolation width acquisition (DIWA) method, in which each precursor is first fragmented with HCD using a standard isolation width for peptide identification and preliminary quantification, followed by a second MS2 HCD scan using a much narrower isolation width for the acquisition of quantitative spectra with reduced interference. We leverage the quantification obtained by the "narrow" scans to build linear regression models and apply these to decompress the fold-changes measured at the "standard" scans. We evaluate the DIWA approach using a nested two species/gene knockout TMT-6plex experimental design and discuss the perspectives of this approach.

### Keywords
Method development, Msms, Tmt, Diwa

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
The Institute of Cancer Research


