### Accession
PXD011577

### Title
lnc-EAPV binding proteins in  C57BL/6J BMDMs

### Description
Endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) are transposable elements that cause host genome instability and usually play deleterious roles such as tumorigenesis. Recent advances also suggest that this 'enemy within' may encode viral mimic to induce antiviral immune responses through viral sensors. Here, through whole genome RNA-seq we discovered a full-length ERV-derived long non-coding RNA (lncRNA), designated lnc-EPAV (ERV-derived lncRNA positively regulates antiviral responses), as a positive regulator of NF-κB signaling.  Lnc-EPAV expression was rapidly up-regulated by viral RNA mimic or RNA viruses to facilitate the expression of RELA, an NF-κB subunit that plays a critical role in antiviral responses. In turn, RELA promoted the transcription of lnc-EPAV to form a positive feedback loop. Transcriptome analysis of lnc-EPAV-silenced macrophages, combined with gain- and loss-of-function experiments, showed that lnc-EPAV was critical for induction of type I interferon (IFN) and inflammatory cytokine expression by RNA viruses. Consistently, lnc-EPAV-deficient mice exhibited reduced expression of type I IFNs, and consequently increased viral loads and mortality following lethal RNA virus infection. Mechanistically, lnc-EPAV promoted expression of RELA by competitively binding to and displacing SFPQ, a transcriptional repressor of RELA. The binding between ERV-derived RNAs and SFPQ also existed in human cells. Altogether, our work demonstrates an alternative mechanism by which ERVs regulate antiviral immune responses.

### Sample Protocol
Biotin labeled RNA probes lnc-EPAV and lnc-EPAV-E2 (960 bp, 1041-2000) were made in vitro using HiScribe™ T7 Quick High Yield RNA Synthesis Kit (NEB, UK) and Biotin RNA Labeling Mix (Roche, Germany). Biotinylated probes were incubated with BMDMs nuclear extracts (Beyotime, China) for 4 hr at room temperature followed by incubation with Dynabeads MyOne™ Streptavidin C1 beads (Thermo Fisher, USA) at 4℃ for 4hr. The proteins on beads were separated by SDS-PAGE followed by silver staining and mass spectrometry (MS) identification.

### Data Protocol
The Xcalibur raw data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an in-house Mascot server (version 2.3, Matrix Science, London, UK). Mus musculus protein database were downloaded from UniProt. Data were searched using the following parameters: trypsin/P as the enzyme; up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed; 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS fragment ions; carbamidomethyl on cysteine as fixed modifications; oxidation on methionine, pyroglutamate on peptide N-terminal, acetylation and methylation on protein N-terminal, acetylation on cysteine and lysine, and methylation on lysine and arginine as variable modifications. The incorporated Target Decoy PSM Validator in Proteome Discoverer and the mascot expectation value was used to validate the search results and only the hits with FDR ≤ 0.01 and MASCOT expected value ≤ 0.05 were accepted for discussion.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lnc-epav;rbp;bmdms

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences Fudan University

### Submitter
Bin Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Feng Qian
School of Life Sciences Fudan University


