### Accession
PXD032766

### Title
Integrated multi-omics analysis of adverse cardiac remodeling and metabolic inflexibility upon ErbB2 and ERR⍺ deficiency

### Description
Functional oncogenic links between ErbB2 and ERR⍺ in HER2+ breast cancer patients support a therapeutic benefit of co-targeted therapies. However, ErbB2 and ERR⍺ also play key roles in heart physiology, and this approach could pose a potential liability to cardiovascular health. Using integrated phosphoproteomic, transcriptomic and metabolic profiling, we uncovered molecular mechanisms associated with the adverse remodeling of cardiac functions in mice with combined attenuation of ErbB2 and ERR⍺ activity. Genetic disruption of both effectors results in profound effects on cardiomyocyte architecture, inflammatory response and metabolism, the latter leading to a decrease in fatty acyl-carnitine species further increasing the reliance on glucose as a metabolic fuel, a hallmark of failing hearts. Furthermore, integrated omics signatures of ERR⍺ loss-of-function and doxorubicin treatment exhibit reciprocal features of chemotherapeutic cardiotoxicity. These findings thus reveal potential cardiovascular risks in discrete combination therapies in the treatment of breast and other cancers.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Lysis and Digestion  For each sample (n=5 per group), 20 mg of frozen heart tissue powder (corresponding to an approximate protein amount of 1 mg) were lysed, reduced, and alkylated in lysis buffer (8M Urea, 2mM DTT, 100 uM Orthovanadate, supplemented with 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) after half an hour). The samples were then diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to a Urea concentration of 1M. Proteins were digested overnight at 25°C with trypsin (Promega) with an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:250. After digestion, samples were supplemented with 2 volumes of acetonitrile (ACN) and 6% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and precipitate was eliminated after a 10 min centrifugation in an Eppendorf centrifuge at 14,000 rpm.   Phosphorylated Peptide Enrichment  The supernatant was transferred to Eppendorf tubes containing 10 μL of 5 micron TiO2 beads (Canadian Biosciences) and incubated for 30 minutes on a rotating wheel. The supernatant was collected and the TiO2 beads were washed twice with 50% ACN/0.5% TFA in 200 mM NaCl and once with 50% ACN/0.1% formic acid (FA). Phosphopeptides were eluted with 10% ammonia in 50% ACN. This process was repeated once, to ensure quantitative phosphopeptide capture. Samples were dried down in a speed vac, resuspended in 20 μL of 0.1% FA in water and stored frozen, if not processed immediately.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry: RP-nanoLC-MS/MS  The data were acquired using an UHPLC Easy nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). 50% of the phosphopeptide enriched samples were first trapped (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 3 μm, 2 cm) before being separated on an analytical column (Acclaim, C18 2 μm, 25 cm). Trapping was performed in solvent A (0.1% FA in water), and the gradient was as follows: 2-20 % solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN) in 90 min, 20-38 % in 60 min, 38-90% in 10 min, maintained at 90% for 10 min, then, back to 0% solvent B in 10 minutes. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode. Full-scan MS spectra from m/z 375–1500 were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400 after accumulation to a target value of 5 × 106. Up to 25 most intense precursor ions were selected for fragmentation. HCD fragmentation was performed at normalized collision energy of 35% after the accumulation to a target value of 1 × 105. MS/MS was acquired at a resolution of 30,000. A dynamic exclusion was set at 6 seconds.  Mass Spectrometry Searches and Data Analysis Raw mass spectrometry data was searched using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0) allowing for 3 missed trypsin cleavage sites, a fixed carbamidomethyl modification on cysteine (C) residues, and variable modifications on specified residues, including: oxidation (M), phosphorylation (S, T, Y), deamidation (N, Q), acetylation (protein N-terminus). First search peptide tolerance was set at 20 ppm and main search peptide tolerance was set at 4.5 ppm. Protein identification tolerance was set at a 1% false discovery calculated based on the search of a reverse sequence decoy database. Second peptide search and matching between run (0.7 min match time window, 20 min alignment time window) settings were enabled. Phosphorylation site search results (Phospho(STY)Sites.txt) were processed using Perseus (version 1.6.0.7). MaxQuant label-free intensities were used for quantification of phosphorylation site data (based on precursor ion intensity) after first filtering to remove identifications from the reverse database, phosphorylation sites with localization probability lower than 0.7, and those sites for which quantitative values were not found in at least 3 samples from at least one experimental group. The label-free intensities reflect the sum of all peptide intensities attributed to a specific protein group. There was no imputation of missing values and data were log2 transformed and normalized by width adjustment in Perseus. For this normalization, the first, second and third quartile (q1, q2, q3) are calculated from the distribution of all values. The second quartile (which is the median) is subtracted from each value to center the distribution. Then we divide by the width in an asymmetric way. All values that are positive after subtraction of the median are divided by q3 - q2 while all negative values are divided by q2 - q1. Significant deregulated phosphopeptides between groups were determined using the limma R/bioconductor package (p < 0.05) and 1.5 linear fold changes as the cut-offs. False discovery rates were estimated for each comparison using Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p-values.

### Publication Abstract
Functional oncogenic links between ErbB2 and ERR&#x3b1; in HER2+ breast cancer patients support a therapeutic benefit of co-targeted therapies. However, ErbB2 and ERR&#x3b1; also play key roles in heart physiology, and this approach could pose a potential liability to cardiovascular health. Herein, using integrated phosphoproteomic, transcriptomic and metabolic profiling, we uncovered molecular mechanisms associated with the adverse remodeling of cardiac functions in mice with combined attenuation of ErbB2 and ERR&#x3b1; activity. Genetic disruption of both effectors results in profound effects on cardiomyocyte architecture, inflammatory response and metabolism, the latter leading to a decrease in fatty acyl-carnitine species further increasing the reliance on glucose as a metabolic fuel, a hallmark of failing hearts. Furthermore, integrated omics signatures of ERR&#x3b1; loss-of-function and doxorubicin treatment exhibit common features of chemotherapeutic cardiotoxicity. These findings thus reveal potential cardiovascular risks in discrete combination therapies in the treatment of breast and other cancers.

### Keywords
Heart, Estrogen related receptor, Mouse, Erbb2, Dilated cardiomyopathy, Cardiac, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
McGill University
McGill University - Rosalind & Morris Goodman Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Vincent Giguere

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent Giguere
McGill University - Rosalind & Morris Goodman Cancer Institute


