### Accession
PXD012161

### Title
Tbeta4 identification CaCo2 cells

### Description
The paper describes new experiments about thymosin beta 4 nuclear translocation using different in vitro cellular stress in CaCo2 cell line adding new details regarding the role of this peptide during adaptive and defensive response. To this purpose, CaCo2 cells were submitted to different stress treatments, including serum starvation, DMSO and Butyrate treatment. The expression of Tβ4 was studied in culture cells before and after stress treatment in the cytosolic and nuclear fractions, with the use of different apporaches: immunohistochemistry with anti-Tβ4 antibody; mass-spectrometry characterization and quantification, and mRNA analysis.

### Sample Protocol
To evaluate the levels of Tβ4 in the cytosol and in the nucleus of the cells under different growing conditions (normal and stressing), subcellular fractions were prepared by using the commercial kit NE-PER Nucleus and Cytoplasmyc Extraction Reagents (Thermo Scientific-USA, www.thermoscientific.com/pierce). Cytosolic and nuclear proteins/peptides were fractionated with Amicon centrifugal filters (30 KDa cutoff) (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), dialyzed in 25 mM sodium acetate at pH 4.2 and then lyophilized. The powder was dissolved in 100 μL of 0.1% aqueous trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), centrifuged at 8000 g for 10 min at 4 ° C, and the supernatant analyzed by HPLC-ESI-MS. Triplicates of the samples were prepared. A Surveyor HPLC system (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA, USA) connected to an LCQ Advantage mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) was used for HPLC-low-resolution ESI-MS measurements. The chromatographic column was a Vydac (Hesperia, CA, USA) C8 with 5 mm particle diameter (column dimensions 150x2.1 mm). The eluents utilized for the chromatographic separations were: (eluent A) 0.056% aqueous TFA and (eluent B) 0.050% TFA in acetonitrile-water 80/20 (v/v). The applied gradient was linear from 0 to 54% in 39 min (linear) and from 54% to 100% in 10 min (linear), at a flow rate of 0.10 mL/min. During the first 5 min of separation, eluate was discarded in order to avoid source contamination and instrument damage due to the high salt concentration. Mass spectra were collected every 3 millisecond in the positive ion mode. MS spray voltage was 5.0 kV and capillary temperature was 255°C. Tβ4 was searched in the Total Ion Current (TIC) chromatographic profiles of the analyzed samples by using the eXtracting Ion Current (XIC) procedure. The XIC search allowed to selectively extracting the ion current peak generated by specific multiply-charged ions (charge) of Tβ4: 993.80 (+5), 1241.90 (+4) and 1655.50 (+3) m/z. A window of ± 0.5 Da was used to extract the XIC peak. Experimental average mass value (Mav) was obtained by deconvolution of averaged ESI-MS spectra automatically performed by using MagTran 1.0 software.  Experimental Mav was compared with the theoretical one available at the UniProt-KB human data-bank (http://us.expasy.org/tools) with the entry P62328.  HPLC- high-resolution ESI-MS/MS analysis Characterization of Tβ4 was performed on the intact peptide present in the samples, by using an Ultimate 3000 Micro HPLC apparatus (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) equipped with a FLM-3000-Flow manager module and coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL apparatus (Thermofisher). The injection volume was 20 μL. The column was a Zorbax 300SB-C8 (3.5 μm particle diameter; 1.0 x 150 mm), and eluents were: A, 0.1% aqueous formic acid solution, and B, 0.1% aqueous formic acid solution in acetonitrile/water 80:20 v/v. The applied gradient was from 5 to 55% B in 40 min, from 55 to 100% B in 2 min, from 100 to 5% B in 2 min for a total acquisition time of 61 min at a flow rate of 80 L/min. The MS spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode in the m/z range from 300 to 2000. The three most abundant ions were selected and fragmented by using collision-induced dissociation (CID, 35% normalized collision energy for 30 ms, with an isolation width of 6−10 m/z, activation q of 0.25). MS and MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 60000. The capillary temperature was set to 250°C, source voltage 4 kV.

### Data Protocol
The area of XIC peak was used for quantification, since it is proportional to the peptide concentration under constant analytical conditions. XIC peak areas were integrated by using the following peak parameters: baseline window 15; area noise factor 50; peak noise factor 50; peak height 15% and tailing factor 1.5.  Estimated percentage error of the XIC procedure was <8%. The areas of XIC peaks were correlated to the concentrations expressed in µM, after obtaining a linear regression between the known concentrations of the standard Tβ4 (0.005, 0.025, 0.05, 0.10, 0.25, 0.35, 0.5, 0.75, 1.00, 1.25, 1.50 μM) and the respective XIC peak areas obtained by HPLC-ESI-MS analysis.  Relative abundance (%) in nuclear fraction (NF) with respect to cytosolic fraction (CF) was calculated in the three series of Caco2 cells as follows: % NF = NF XIC peak area x 100 /(NF + CF XIC peak areas). Data were generated by Xcalibur 2.2 SP1.48 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using default parameters of the Xtract program for the deconvolution. MS/MS data were analyzed by the Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific), based on SEQUEST HT cluster as search engine against UniProtKB human database (163,117 entries, release 2018_02). For peptide matching, high-confidence filter settings were applied: the peptide score threshold was 3.0; the limits for FDR setting were Xcorr scores greater than 1.2 for singly charged ions and 1.9 and 2.3 for doubly and triply charged ions, respectively. Precursor mass search tolerance was 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance 0.6 Da. The analysis was performed by using as dynamic modification the N-terminal acetylation (+42.011 Da). Peptide sequence was validated by manual inspection of the experimental fragmentation spectra against the theoretical ones generated by MS-Product software available at the ProteinProspector website (http://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/mshome.htm).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Caco2, Thymisin beta4

### Affiliations
University of Cagliari, Dep. of Life and Environmental Sciences
University of Cagliari, DISVA

### Submitter
Tiziana Cabras

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Cabras
University of Cagliari, Dep. of Life and Environmental Sciences


