### Accession
PXD031351

### Title
Control of variant surface glycoprotein expression by CFB2 in African trypanosomes and quantitative proteomic connections to translation and cytokinesis initiation

### Description
Variant Surface Glycoproteins (VSG) coat parasitic African trypanosomes and underpin antigenic variation and immune evasion. This VSG is a super-abundant virulence factor that is subject to post-transcriptional gene expression controls mediated via the VSG 3’-untranslated region (3’-UTR). To identify positive VSG regulators in bloodstream form cells, we used prior genome-scale screening data to prioritise mRNA binding protein (mRBPs) knockdowns that phenocopy VSG mRNA knockdown, displaying both loss-of-fitness and pre-cytokinesis accumulation. The top three candidate VSG regulators were CFB2 (cyclin F-box protein 2, Tb927.1.4650), MKT1 (Tb927.6.4770) and PBP1 (polyadenylate binding-protein binding-protein, Tb927.8.4540). Notably, CFB2 was recently found to regulate VSG transcript stability, and all three proteins were found to associate with each other. We used data-independent acquisition for accurate label-free quantification and deep proteome coverage to quantify expression profiles following depletion of each mRBP. Only CFB2 knockdown significantly reduced VSG expression and the expression of a reporter under the control of a VSG 3’-untranslated region (3’-UTR). CFB2 knockdown also triggered depletion of cytoplasmic ribosomal proteins, consistent with translation arrest observed when VSG synthesis is blocked. In contrast, PBP1 knockdown triggered depletion of CFB2, MKT1, and other components of the PBP1-complex. Finally, all three knockdowns triggered depletion of cytokinesis initiation factors, consistent with the cytokinesis defect that was confirmed here for all three knockdowns. Thus, genome-scale knockdown datasets facilitate the triage and prioritisation of candidate regulators. Quantitative proteomic analysis confirms 3’-UTR dependent positive control of VSG expression by CFB2 and interactions with additional mRBPs. Our results also reveal connections between VSG expression control by CFB2, ribosomal protein expression, and cytokinesis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins for each RNAi strain were extracted from ~5 x 107 cells after growing for 24 h in standard conditions with or without TET. Cell extracts were resuspended in 100 µl of 5% SDS and 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and submitted to the Fingerprints Proteomics Facility at the University of Dundee to be analysed by directDIA using SpectronautTM software (Biognosys). Triplicate samples of each RNAi strain were submitted for proteomics analysis in two batches: first including MKT1 and PBP1 RNAi strains, and second including the CFB2 RNAi strain. The reporter strain was included in triplicate in both batches as a further control. Samples were processed (µBCA, Strap processed, QC-ed and peptide quantified) using 200 µg from each sample and the final peptide quantification yielded between 72 and 120 µg. For Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis, 1.5 µg for each sample was injected onto a nanoscale C18 reverse-phase chromatography system (UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano, Thermo Scientific), then electrosprayed into a Q Exactive HF-X Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). For liquid chromatography, buffers were as follows: buffer A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v). Samples were loaded at 10 μL/min onto a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. The trap column was washed for 3 min at the same flow rate with 0.1% TFA then switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific, resolving C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å). The peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 3% buffer B to 6% buffer B in 5 min, then from 6% buffer B to 35% buffer B in 115 min, and finally to 80% buffer B within 7 min. The column was then washed with 80% buffer B for 4 min and re-equilibrated in 35% buffer B for 5 min. Two blanks were run between each sample to reduce carry-over. The column was kept at a constant temperature of 40 °C.  The data were acquired using an easy spray source operated in positive mode with spray voltage at 2.500 kV, and the ion transfer tube temperature at 250 °C. The MS was operated in DIA mode. A scan cycle comprised a full MS scan (m/z range from 350-1650), with RF lens at 40%, AGC target set to custom, normalised AGC target at 300, maximum injection time mode set to custom, maximum injection time at 20 ms and source fragmentation disabled. MS survey scan was followed by MS/MS DIA scan events using the following parameters: multiplex ions set to false, collision energy mode set to stepped, collision energy type set to normalized, HCD collision energies set to 25.5, 27 and 30, orbitrap resolution 30000, first mass 200, RF lens 40, AGC target set to custom, normalized AGC target 3000, maximum injection time 55 ms. Data for both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in profile mode. Mass accuracy was checked before the start of samples analysis.

### Data Protocol
SpectronautTM directDIA analysis was carried out using version 15.4.210913.50606 (Biognosys). Trypsin was set as the enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Fixed modification was set for Carbamidomethyl and variable modifications set for protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine, dioxidation of methionine and tryptophan, glutamine to pyroglutamate and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine. The identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% at both peptide and protein levels. The Protein LFQ Method was set to Quant 2.0 (SN Standard) and Data Filtering set to Qvalue. All other settings were set to default.  Although we used the T. brucei Lister 427 strain, for protein identifications, we used the protein database of the T. brucei 927 reference strain, obtained from TriTrypDB (https://tritrypdb.org/tritrypdb/app/), combined with predicted proteins from the expression sites from the Lister 427 strain (Hertz-Fowler et al., 2008).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Trypanosoma brucei; mkt1, Mrna-binding; pbp1, Proteomics; rnai.

### Affiliations
Dundee University
The Wellcome Trust Centre for Anti-Infectives Research, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK.

### Submitter
Michele Tinti

### Lab Head
Dr David Horn
The Wellcome Trust Centre for Anti-Infectives Research, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK.


