### Accession
PXD008605

### Title
Cryo-EM structure of the full human PRC2 and regulation by AEBP2 and JARID2

### Description
Structural study of the PRC2 complex and its regulators AEPB2 and JARID2 combining cryo-EM, cross-linking, targeted MS and hydrogen/deuterium exchange MS.

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking was performed following previously described procedures (Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014). Samples were digested using endoproteinase Lys-C and trypsin, digests were fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography and SEC fractions were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS spectrometry on a Thermo Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer. Additional details are provided in the corresponding publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.5, against the sequences of target proteins and identified contaminants and corresponding decoy sequences. Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance = -15 to +15 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions.

### Publication Abstract
Transcriptionally repressive histone H3 lysine 27 methylation by Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is essential for cellular differentiation and development. Here we report cryo-electron microscopy structures of human PRC2 in a basal state and two distinct active states while in complex with its cofactors JARID2 and AEBP2. Both cofactors mimic the binding of histone H3 tails. JARID2, methylated by PRC2, mimics a methylated H3 tail to stimulate PRC2 activity, whereas AEBP2 interacts with the RBAP48 subunit, mimicking an unmodified H3 tail. SUZ12 interacts with all other subunits within the assembly and thus contributes to the stability of the complex. Our analysis defines the complete architecture of a functionally relevant PRC2 and provides a structural framework to understand its regulation by cofactors, histone tails, and RNA.

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking, Chromatin, Structural proteomics, Dss, Cryo-em, Xl-ms, Prc2, Integrative stuctural biology

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, 8093, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Marco Faini

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, 8093, Zurich, Switzerland


