### Accession
PXD005822

### Title
SECRETOME DATA only from “Selective stalling of human translation through small molecule engagement of the ribosome nascent chain”

### Description
Human genetics as well as pharmacological intervention reveal that Proprotein Convertase Subtilisin/Kexin Type 9 (PCSK9) plays a key role in regulating the levels of plasma low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C). Here we demonstrate that the compound PF-06446846 inhibits translation of PCSK9 by stalling the ribosome near codon 34 of its messenger RNA. Inhibition by PF-06446846 is sensitive to the amino acid sequence of the PCSK9 nascent chain, and not the messenger RNA. PF-06446846 also reduces plasma PCSK9 and total cholesterol levels in rats following oral dosing. Using ribosome profiling to examine the proteome-wide effects of PF-06446846, we find that it is exceptionally specific for PCSK9 and has no measurable effect on 99.7% of the translatome at concentrations sufficient for 90% inhibition of PCSK9 expression.  Together, PF-06446846 represents the first example of an orally administered small molecule directly targeting PCSK9 that functions by a mechanism inhibiting translation during elongation with a high degree of selectivity.  Selective inhibition of translation in human may represent a new approach to target proteins with small molecules.

### Sample Protocol
These data come from a triple-SILAC experiment designed to examine the selectivity with which PF-06446846 inhibits the release of proprotein convertase subtilisin-kexin type 9 (PCSK9) from cells of the human liver line Huh7.  [SILAC labeling:  medium = Lys4, Arg6;  heavy = Lys8, Arg10].  Proteins secreted from the cells in the absence or presence of compound at 4 h and 16 h were analyzed, and results were filtered to ignore proteins presumed to be released from lysed cells, i.e. only proteins designated as Secreted in UniProtKB were retained.  This process is described in detail in the Methods section included with this deposit.  Proteins were fractionated by SDS-PAGE, digested in-gel, and gel sections were analyzed fraction-by-fractionon using a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap Elite spectrometer fronted  by nano-HPLC.  All experiments were conducted in 2012 by Jiang Wu.

### Data Protocol
For publication, analyses of the secretome (4 h and 16 h of treatment at two doses with matched controls) were reanalyzed in 2015 using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 with the Mascot search engine against a database that combined UniProtHuman, UniProtBovine (to acommodate medium-sourced proteins), and standard contaminants (trypsin, keratins, etc.).  Individual .DAT files from Mascot correspond to Thermo .RAW files bearing the same root file name.  In response to a reviewer, data from the cell lysates (4 h and 16 h) were reanalyzed in 2016 using Proteome Discover 2.0.  For these data, the batch search resulted in multiple .DAT files that cannot be linked 1-to-1 with the .RAW files, but in aggregate contain all the peptide identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) plays a key role in regulating the levels of plasma low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C). Here, we demonstrate that the compound PF-06446846 inhibits translation of PCSK9 by inducing the ribosome to stall around codon 34, mediated by the sequence of the nascent chain within the exit tunnel. We further show that PF-06446846 reduces plasma PCSK9 and total cholesterol levels in rats following oral dosing. Using ribosome profiling, we demonstrate that PF-06446846 is highly selective for the inhibition of PCSK9 translation. The mechanism of action employed by PF-06446846 reveals a previously unexpected tunability of the human ribosome that allows small molecules to specifically block translation of individual transcripts.

### Keywords
Huh7 cells, Pcsk9, Cell lysate, Translational stalling, Silac, Secretome

### Affiliations
Pfizer Worldwide Research
Pfizer Worldwide Research Groton CT 06340 USA

### Submitter
Kieran Geoghegan

### Lab Head
Dr Kieran Francis Geoghegan
Pfizer Worldwide Research Groton CT 06340 USA


