### Accession
PXD012770

### Title
emc1_Marquez -  Disrupted ER membrane protein complex-mediated topogenesis drives congenital neural crest defects

### Description
Experiment consisted of MO knockdown of emc1 in Xenopus and comparison of proteome in emc1 depleted stage 24 embryos vs MO control injected embryos.

### Sample Protocol
Embryos were homogenized in RIPA buffer (Thermo) using a pestle. Lysates were centrifuged to remove embryonic debris. Chloroform-methanol:water protein precipitation was performed to recover a dried protein pellet. Resuspension and label free quantitative mass spectrometry was carried out as previously described (Klein et al., 2017). Label-Free Quantitation (LFQ) was performed on a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were processed with Progenesis QI Proteomics software (Nonlinear Dynamics, version 2.0) with protein identification carried out using the Mascot search algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Multipass membrane proteins have a myriad of functions, including transduction of cell-cell signals, ion transport, and photoreception. Insertion of these proteins into the membrane depends on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane protein complex (EMC). Recently, birth defects have been observed in patients with variants in the gene encoding a member of this complex, EMC1. Patient phenotypes include congenital heart disease, craniofacial malformations, and neurodevelopmental disease. However, a molecular connection between EMC1 and these birth defects is lacking. Using Xenopus, we identified defects in neural crest cells (NCCs) upon emc1 depletion. We then used unbiased proteomics and discovered a critical role for emc1 in WNT signaling. Consistent with this, readouts of WNT signaling and Frizzled (Fzd) levels were reduced in emc1-depleted embryos, while NCC defects could be rescued with &#x3b2;-catenin. Interestingly, other transmembrane proteins were mislocalized upon emc1 depletion, providing insight into additional patient phenotypes. To translate our findings back to humans, we found that EMC1 was necessary for human NCC development in vitro. Finally, we tested patient variants in our Xenopus model and found the majority to be loss-of-function alleles. Our findings define molecular mechanisms whereby EMC1 dysfunction causes disease phenotypes through dysfunctional multipass membrane protein topogenesis.

### Keywords
Emc1, Xenopus tropicalis

### Affiliations
Yale University
Pediatrics, Genetics

### Submitter
Jonathan Marquez

### Lab Head
Dr Mustafa K Khokha
Pediatrics, Genetics


