### Accession
PXD003800

### Title
Epstein-Barr virus protein EB2 stimulates translation initiation of mRNAs through direct interactions with both PABP and eIF4G

### Description
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) expresses several mRNAs produced from intronless genes that could be unfavorably translated in front of cellular spliced mRNAs. To overpass these limitations, the virus encodes a RNA-binding protein (RBP), EB2, which is already known to facilitate nuclear mRNAs export and to increase their translational yield. Here we show that EB2 binds both nuclear and cytoplasmic cap-binding complexes (respectively, CBC and eIF4F), and the poly(A)-binding protein (PABP) to enhance translation initiation of a given mRNP. Interestingly, such effect can be obtained only if EB2 was initially bound to the native mRNPs in the nucleus. We also demonstrate that the EB2-eIF4F-PABP association renders the translation of these mRNPs less sensitive to inhibitors of initiation. Taken together, our new data suggest that EB2 binds and stabilizes cap-binding complexes to increase mRNP translation and demonstrate the importance of the mRNP assembly process in the nucleus to promote translation in the cytoplasm.

### Sample Protocol
DNA constructs and in vitro transcription Cell culture and transfection : HeLa cells were grown at 37°C in DMEM supplemented with 10% Foetal Bovine Serum (FBS) and penicillin-streptomycin. HEK293BMLF1-KO cells have been previously described {Gruffat:2002vc} HeLa cells ribosomal fraction isolation and depletion of ribosomes from reticulocyte lysate.. The detailed method was previously described {Panthu:2015jl} RNA extraction and quantitative RT-PCR. In vitro translation assays Immunoprecipitation, SDS-Page and LC-MSMS Analysis

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using the MASCOT 2.4.1 Algorithm through the Proteome Discoverer software v1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the Swiss-Prot database [release 2014_11].

### Publication Abstract
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) expresses several mRNAs produced from intronless genes that could potentially be unfavorably translated compared to cellular spliced mRNAs. To overcome this situation, the virus encodes an RNA-binding protein (RBP) called EB2, which was previously found to both facilitate the export of nuclear mRNAs and increase their translational yield. Here, we show that EB2 binds both nuclear and cytoplasmic cap-binding complexes (CBC and eukaryotic initiation factor 4F [eIF4F], respectively) as well as the poly(A)-binding protein (PABP) to enhance translation initiation of a given messenger ribonucleoparticle (mRNP). Interestingly, such an effect can be obtained only if EB2 is initially bound to the native mRNPs in the nucleus. We also demonstrate that the EB2-eIF4F-PABP association renders translation of these mRNPs less sensitive to translation initiation inhibitors. Taken together, our data suggest that EB2 binds and stabilizes cap-binding complexes in order to increase mRNP translation and furthermore demonstrate the importance of the mRNP assembly process in the nucleus to promote protein synthesis in the cytoplasm.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Most herpesvirus early and late genes are devoid of introns. However, it is now well documented that mRNA splicing facilitates recruitment on the mRNAs of cellular factors involved in nuclear mRNA export and translation efficiency. To overcome the absence of splicing of herpesvirus mRNAs, a viral protein, EB2 in the case of Epstein-Barr virus, is produced to facilitate the cytoplasmic accumulation of viral mRNAs. Although we previously showed that EB2 also specifically enhances translation of its target mRNAs, the mechanism was unknown. Here, we show that EB2 first is recruited to the mRNA cap structure in the nucleus and then interacts with the proteins eIF4G and PABP to enhance the initiation step of translation.

### Keywords
Translation, Lc-msms, Epstein-barr virus, Eb2-bmlf1

### Affiliations
UMS3444, Protein Science Facility, FRANCE
CNRS UMS3444 Protein Science Facility

### Submitter
Frederic DELOLME

### Lab Head
Dr Frederic DELOLME
UMS3444, Protein Science Facility, FRANCE


