### Accession
PXD029496

### Title
A novel C-terminal DxRSDxE motif in ceramide synthases  involved in dimer formation

### Description
Ceramide is synthesized via the ceramide synthases (CerSs), six of which have been identified in mammalian cells, with each using a unique subset of acyl-CoAs for ceramide synthesis. The CerSs are part of a larger gene family, the Tram-Lag-CLN8 (TLC) domain family. We now identify a unique, C-terminal motif, the DxRSDxE motif, which is only found in CerS and not in other TLC family members. Deletion of this motif in either CerS2-HA or in CerS6-Flag did not affect the ability of either to generate ceramide using both an in vitro assay and upon metabolic labeling, but deletion of this motif did affect the activity of CerS2-HA when co-expressed with CerS6-Flag. Surprisingly, transfection of cells with either CerS2-HA or CerS6-Flag lacking the motif did not result in changes in cellular ceramide levels. CerS2-HA and CerS6-Flag interact with each other, as shown by immunoprecipitation, but deletion of the DxRSDxE motif impedes this interaction. Moreover, proteomics analysis of cells transfected with CerS6Δ338-344-Flag indicated that deletion of the C-terminal motif impacted cellular protein expression, and in particular, levels of ORMDL1, a negative regulator of sphingolipid synthesis. We suggest that this novel C-terminus motif regulates CerS dimer formation and thereby impacts ceramide synthesis.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Cell pellets were lysed with 5% SDS in 50 mM Tris-HCl. Lysates were incubated at 96 °C for 5 min, followed by six cycles of 30 s of sonication (Bioruptor Pico, Diagenode, USA). Protein concentration was measured using the BCA assay (Thermo Scientific, USA) and a total of 20 μg protein was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark. Each sample was loaded onto S-Trap microcolumns (Protifi, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, after loading, samples were washed with 90:10% methanol/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were then digested with trypsin (1:50 trypsin/protein) for 1.5 h at 47 °C. The digested peptides were eluted using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate; trypsin was added to this fraction and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Two more elutions were made using 0.2% formic acid and 0.2% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile. The three elutions were pooled together and vacuum-centrifuged to dry. Samples were kept at −80 °C until analysis. Liquid chromatography  ULC/MS grade solvents were used for all chromatographic steps. Each sample was loaded using split-less nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (10 kpsi nanoAcquity; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile phase was: A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and B) acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Desalting of the samples was performed online using a reversed-phase Symmetry C18 trapping column (180 µm internal diameter, 20 mm length, 5 µm particle size; Waters). The peptides were then separated using a T3 HSS nano-column (75 µm internal diameter, 250 mm length, 1.8 µm particle size; Waters) at 0.35 µL/min. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 4% to 27%B in 155 min, 27% to 90%B in 5 min, maintained at 90%B for 5 min and then back to initial conditions. Mass Spectrometry The nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nanoESI emitter (10 μm tip; New Objective; Woburn, MA, USA) to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HFX, Thermo Scientific) using a FlexIon nanospray apparatus (Proxeon). Data was acquired in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, using a Top10 method. MS1 resolution was set to 120,000 (at 200 m/z), mass range of 375-1650 m/z, AGC of 3e6 and maximum injection time was set to 60 msec. MS2 resolution was set to 15,000, quadrupole isolation 1.7 m/z, AGC of 1e5, dynamic exclusion of 45 sec  and maximum injection time of 60 msec.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant v1.6.0.16. The data was searched with the Andromeda search engine against the SwissProt human proteome database (November 2018 version). Minimum peptide ratio was set to 1 and the LFQ quantification was performed using unique peptides only. Match between runs was enabled. Rest of the parameters were kept as default. The LFQ intensities were used for further calculations using Perseus v1.6.0.7. Decoy hits were filtered out, as well as proteins that were identified on the basis of a modified peptide only. The LFQ intensities were log transformed and only proteins that had at least 2 valid values in at least one experimental group were kept. The remaining missing values were imputed by a random low range distribution. Student’s t-tests were performed between the relevant groups to identify significant changes in protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
Ceramide is a lipid moiety synthesized via the enzymatic activity of ceramide synthases (CerSs), six of which have been identified in mammalian cells, and each of which uses a unique subset of acyl-CoAs for ceramide synthesis. The CerSs are part of a larger gene family, the Tram-Lag-CLN8 domain family. Here, we identify a unique, C-terminal motif, the DxRSDxE motif, which is only found in CerSs and not in other Tram-Lag-CLN8 family members. Deletion of this motif in either CerS2 or in CerS6 did not affect the ability of either enzyme to generate ceramide using both an in&#xa0;vitro assay and metabolic labeling, but deletion of this motif did affect the activity of CerS2 when coexpressed with CerS6. Surprisingly, transfection of cells with either CerS2 or CerS6 lacking the motif did not result in changes in cellular ceramide levels. We found that CerS2 and CerS6 interact with each other, as shown by immunoprecipitation, but deletion of the DxRSDxE motif impeded this interaction. Moreover, proteomics analysis of cells transfected with CerS6<sup>&#x394;338-344</sup> indicated that deletion of the C-terminal motif impacted cellular protein expression, and in particular, the levels of ORMDL1, a negative regulator of sphingolipid synthesis. We suggest that this novel C-terminal motif regulates CerS dimer formation and thereby impacts ceramide synthesis.

### Keywords
Ceramide, Dimer, Sphingolipids, Ceramide synthase, Motif

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel

### Submitter
Meital Kupervaser

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony, H, Futerman
Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel


