### Accession
PXD040199

### Title
TUBA1C: a new potential target of LncRNA EGFR-AS1 promotes gastric cancer progression

### Description
Background: The lack of obvious symptoms of early gastric cancer (GC) as well as the absence of sensitive and specific biomarkers results in poor clinical outcomes. Tubulin is currently emerging as important regulators of the microtubule cytoskeleton and thus have a strong potential to be implicated in a number of disorders, however, its mechanism of action in gastric cancer is still unclear. Tubulin alpha-1C(TUBA1C) is a subtype of α-tubulin, high TUBA1C expression has been shown to be closely related to a poor prognosis in in various cancers,this study, for the first time, revealed the mechanism of  TUBA1C  promotes malignant progression of gastric cancer in vitro and in vivo.  Methods: The expression of lncRNA EGFR-AS1 was detected in human GC cell lines by qRT–PCR. Mass spectrometry experiments following RNA pulldown assays found that EGFR-AS1 directly binds to TUBA1C, the CCK8, EdU, transwell, wound-healing, cell cycle assays and animal experiments were conducted to investigate the function of TUBA1C in GC. Combined with bioinformatics analyses, reveal interaction between Ki-67, E2F1, PCNA and TUBA1C by western blot. Rescue experiments furtherly demonstrated the relationship of EGFR-AS1and TUBA1C. Results: TUBA1C was proved to be a direct target of EGFR-AS1, TUBA1C promotes gastric cancer proliferation, migration and invasion by accelerating the progression of the cell cycle from the G1 phase to the S phase and activating the expression of oncogenes: Ki-67,E2F1 and PCNA. Conclusions: TUBA1C is a new potential target of LncRNA EGFR-AS1 promotes gastric cancer progression and could be a novel biomarker and therapeutic target for GC.

### Sample Protocol
RNA pull-down and mass-spectrometry assay The plasmid pcDNA3.0 containing sense or antisense sequence was designed and synthesized by Genomeditech (Shanghai, China).  The RNA sequences were linearized with the FastDigest XhoI Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham,MA, USA) and T7 MEGAscript Kit (Invitrogen, USA), and purified with Purification Kit (TianGen Biotech, Beijing, China). The RNA pull-down assay was accomplished by using the Magnetic RNA-Protein Pulldown Kit (Thermo Scientific, USA) based on the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, biotinylated RNA was captured on streptavidin magnetic beads and was then incubated with cell lysates at 4 °C for 6 h before washing and elution of RNA–protein complexes. The proteins interacting with lncRNAs were detected and analyzed by mass spectrometry at Shandong University(Shandong, China). Briefly, samples were desalted and normalized for protein content using a gel-based method. Proteins were digested using trypsin and the generated peptides were analyzed using an Orbitrap nanoLC-MS/MS 90–120 minute gradient. Mascot software was used to map identified peptides to proteins can calculate relative peptide scores. The extracted protein was separated on polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) gels and stained with a silver staining kit (Thermo Scientific, USA). The proteins identified were listed in supplementary table 3.

### Data Protocol
RNA pull-down and mass-spectrometry assay The plasmid pcDNA3.0 containing sense or antisense sequence was designed and synthesized by Genomeditech (Shanghai, China).  The RNA sequences were linearized with the FastDigest XhoI Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham,MA, USA) and T7 MEGAscript Kit (Invitrogen, USA), and purified with Purification Kit (TianGen Biotech, Beijing, China). The RNA pull-down assay was accomplished by using the Magnetic RNA-Protein Pulldown Kit (Thermo Scientific, USA) based on the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, biotinylated RNA was captured on streptavidin magnetic beads and was then incubated with cell lysates at 4 °C for 6 h before washing and elution of RNA–protein complexes. The proteins interacting with lncRNAs were detected and analyzed by mass spectrometry at Shandong University(Shandong, China). Briefly, samples were desalted and normalized for protein content using a gel-based method. Proteins were digested using trypsin and the generated peptides were analyzed using an Orbitrap nanoLC-MS/MS 90–120 minute gradient. Mascot software was used to map identified peptides to proteins can calculate relative peptide scores. The extracted protein was separated on polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) gels and stained with a silver staining kit (Thermo Scientific, USA). The proteins identified were listed in supplementary table 3.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tuba1c, Cell cycle, Lncrna egfr-as1, Gastric cancer

### Affiliations
Shandong Provincial Hospital.
Shandong Provincial Hospital


### Submitter
lipan peng

### Lab Head
Dr Lipan Peng
Shandong Provincial Hospital.


