### Accession
PXD033814

### Title
Influence of a high dietary level of the microalgae Chlorella vulgaris alone and combined with exogenous carbohydrases on muscle transcriptome and proteome of finishing pigs: an integrated approach

### Description
Background: monogastric feeding is dependent on conventional feedstuffs such as corn and soybean meal. However, these are increasingly expensive and environmentally unsustainable. Therefore, there is an increasing interest in high quality and sustainable alternative feedstuffs, namely microalgae. Chlorella vulgaris is one of such alternatives, with a high level of crude protein and bioactive compounds. However, its recalcitrant cell wall hinders the digestive process. CAZyme supplementation is a possible solution to overcome such a problem. The objective of this work was to evaluate the effect of a 5% dietary C. vulgaris (CV) and enzymatic supplementation (CV+R – Rovabio® Excel AP; CV+M – four CAZyme mix) on muscle transcriptome and proteome of finishing pigs in an integrated approach.  Results: there were no differences concerning the live pig production performance. Pigs that were fed with the microalga had increased deposition of n-3 PUFA, including C20:5n-3 (EPA) in the muscle. Control pigs increased the abundance of contractile apparatus (e.g. MYH1, MYH2, MYH4) and energy metabolism (e.g. CKMT1, NDUFS3) proteins, demonstrating increased nutrient availability. Moreover, they had increased abundance of SCD, characteristic of increased glucose availability via the activation of SREBP-1c and ChREBP. CV and CV+R pigs upregulated proteolytic and apoptotic genes (e.g. BAX, DDA1), whilst increasing the abundance of glucose (UQCRFS1) and fatty acid catabolism (ACADS) proteins. CV+R pigs upregulated ACOT8 and SIRT3 genes as a response to reduced nutrient availability, to maintain energy homeostasis and oxidative status. The CV+M pigs showed the least number of significant differences in both omics platforms.  Conclusions: the four-CAZyme mix designed to degrade the microalgal cell wall was efficient in re-establishing the muscle metabolism, mitigating the otherwise negative effects of microalga incorporation in the diet.

### Sample Protocol
Six samples were randomly chosen per experimental group (n=6). They were processed in tubes containing lysing matrix A (MP Biomedicals, Irvine, CA, USA) and lysis buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 10 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) and protease inhibitors. Protein homogenization was performed using the FastPrep-24 equipment (MP Biomedicals, Eschwege, Germany) at 6 m/s in 3 cycles of 30 s each, with intervals of 5 minutes at 4ºC. Protein extracts were then centrifuged for 5 minutes at 13,400 rpm and transferred into 1.5 mL low protein binding tubes. All extracts were incubated for 10 min at 95 ºC under agitation (Thermomixer, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany), then sonicated for ten cycles of 30 s at 4 ºC (Bioruptor, Diagenode, Liège, Belgium) and centrifuged again. The lysate was transferred onto a new 1.5 mL tube. Then, 100 µg of protein from each sample was processed for proteomics analysis. Enzymatic digestion was performed with trypsin/LysC (2 micrograms) overnight at 37 ºC at 1000 rpm. Peptide concentration was measured by fluorescence.   Protein identification and quantitation were performed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system coupled to a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Five hundred nanograms of peptides of each sample were loaded onto a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap C18 100 Å, 5 mm × 300 µm i.d., 160454, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in a mobile phase of 2% ACN, 0.1% FA at 10 µL/min. After 3 min loading, the trap column was switched in-line to a 50 cm × 75 µm inner diameter EASYSpray column (ES803, PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 µm, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) at 250 nL/min. Separation was achieved by mixing A: 0.1% FA and B: 80% ACN, 0.1% FA with the following gradient: 5 min (2.5% B to 10% B), 120 min (10% B to 30% B), 20 min (30% B to 50% B), 5 min (50% B to 99% B), and 10 min (hold 99% B). The column was equilibrated with 2.5% B for 17 min. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 4.0 and Tune 2.9 software (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).  The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent (dd) positive acquisition mode alternating between a full scan (m/z 380-1580) and subsequent HCD MS/MS of the 10 most intense peaks from a full scan (normalized collision energy of 27%). The ESI spray voltage was 1.9 kV. The global settings were as follows: use lock masses best (m/z 445.12003), lock mass injection Full MS and chromatographic peak width (FWHM) of 15 s. The full scan settings were as follows: 70 k resolution (m/z 200), AGC target 3 × 106, maximum injection time 120 ms; dd settings: minimum AGC target 8 × 103, intensity threshold 7.3 × 104, charge exclusion: unassigned, 1, 8, >8, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, and dynamic exclusion 45 s. The MS2 settings were as follows: microscans 1, resolution 35 k (m/z 200), AGC target 2 × 105, maximum injection time 110 ms, isolation window 2.0 m/z, isolation offset 0.0 m/z, dynamic first mass, and spectrum data type profile.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.4.0.305 software (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Protein identification analysis was performed with the data available in the UniProt protein sequence database for the Sus scrofa Proteome (2019_11) with 49571 entries. The Sequest search node was considered with an ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Missed cleavage tolerance was set to two. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. The following variable modifications were considered: methionine oxidation, protein N-terminus acetylation, loss of methionine and Met-loss+Acetyl. Peptide confidence was set to high. The processing node Percolator was enabled with the following settings: maximum delta Cn 0.05; decoy database search target False Discovery Rate - FDR 1%; validation based on q-value. Protein-label-free quantitation was performed with the Minora feature detector node at the processing step. Precursor ion quantification was performing at the processing step with the following parameters: Peptides: unique plus razor; precursor abundance was based on intensity; normalization mode was based on the total peptide amount; the pairwise protein ratio calculation and hypothesis test were based on a t-test (background based). For determination of differentially abundant proteins between experimental conditions, the following filters were considered following previously published protocols [23,24]: the number of unique peptides was set to 2 (minimum), the p-value set to <0.05 and each protein had to be identified in at least half the samples. The protein fold change was set to >1.5 (high abundance) and <0.67 (low abundance).

### Publication Abstract
Monogastric feeding is dependent on costly conventional feedstuffs. Microalgae such as Chlorella vulgaris are a sustainable alternative; however, its recalcitrant cell wall hinders monogastric digestion. Carbohydrate Active Enzyme (CAZyme) supplementation is a possible solution. The objective of this work was to evaluate the effect of 5% dietary C. vulgaris (CV) and enzymatic supplementation (CV&#x2009;+&#x2009;R-Rovabio&#xae; Excel AP; CV&#x2009;+&#x2009;M-four CAZyme mix) on muscle transcriptome and proteome of finishing pigs, in an integrated approach. Control pigs increased the abundance of contractile apparatus (MYH1, MYH2, MYH4) and energy metabolism (CKMT1, NDUFS3) proteins, demonstrating increased nutrient availability. They had increased expression of SCD, characteristic of increased glucose availability, via the activation of SREBP-1c and ChREBP. CV and CV&#x2009;+&#x2009;R pigs upregulated proteolytic and apoptotic genes (BAX, DDA1), whilst increasing the abundance of glucose (UQCRFS1) and fatty acid catabolism (ACADS) proteins. CV&#x2009;+&#x2009;R pigs upregulated ACOT8 and SIRT3 genes as a response to reduced nutrient availability, maintaining energy homeostasis. The cell wall specific CAZyme mix, CV&#x2009;+&#x2009;M, was able to comparatively reduce Omics alterations in the muscle, thereby reducing endogenous nutrient catabolism compared to the CV&#x2009;+&#x2009;R and CV.

### Keywords
Muscle transcriptome, Fatty acid metabolism, Finishing pigs, Chlorella vulgaris, Cazymes, Muscle proteome, Antioxidant potential

### Affiliations
LEAF Linking Landscape, Environment, Agriculture and Food, Instituto Superior de Agronomia, University of Lisbon, Lisboa, Portugal
CIISA - Centro de Investigação Interdisciplinar em Sanidade Animal, Faculdade de Medicina Veterinária, Universidade de Lisboa, Alto da Ajuda, 1300-477 Lisboa, Portugal.

### Submitter
David Miguel Ribeiro 

### Lab Head
Dr José António Mestre Prates
CIISA - Centro de Investigação Interdisciplinar em Sanidade Animal, Faculdade de Medicina Veterinária, Universidade de Lisboa, Alto da Ajuda, 1300-477 Lisboa, Portugal.


