### Accession
PXD033244

### Title
Calcium-dependent proximal biotinylation via Cal-ID

### Description
Calcium ions serve as key intracellular signals. Local, transient increases in calcium concentrations can activate calcium sensor proteins that in turn trigger downstream effectors. In neurons, such calcium transients trigger pre-synaptic vesicle release and mediate post-synaptic plasticity. It is challenging to capture the molecular events associated with these localized and ephemeral calcium signals, however. Here we report the development of an engineered biotin ligase that combines the power of genetically encoded calcium indicators with protein proximity labeling. The enzyme, Cal-ID, biotinylates nearby proteins in response to elevated local calcium levels. The biotinylated proteins can be visualized by microscopy and identified via mass spectrometry. Cal-ID mass spectrometry applied to HEK293T cells identified cell cycle-dependent calcium signaling microdomains at centrosomes. Our results from mouse primary neurons indicated active calcium signaling near calcium extrusion sites on the plasma membrane. Therefore, we propose Cal-ID as a biochemical recorder of calcium signaling in living cells.

### Sample Protocol
Samples for mass spectrometry were prepared following the previously published protocol for proteomics analysis of TurboID-labled proteins from Alice Ting’s laboratory. Biotinylated proteins were enriched using streptavidin dynabeads and the proteins were on-bead digested with trypsin. Purification was done with C18 StageTips and TMT-labled for mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cal-id

### Affiliations
UC Berkeley

### Submitter
J Wren Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas Ingolia
UC Berkeley


