### Accession
PXD024919

### Title
Allobaculum mucolyticum is a novel mucin degrader

### Description
The human gut microbiota plays a central role in intestinal health and disease. However, many of its bacterial constituents are functionally still largely unexplored. A crucial prerequisite for bacterial survival and proliferation is the creation and/or exploitation of an own niche. For many bacterial species that are linked to human disease, the inner mucus layer was found to be an important niche. Allobaculum mucolyticum, is a novel, IBD-associated species that is thought be closely associated with the host epithelium. To explore how this bacterium is able to effectively colonize this niche, we screened its genome for factors that may contribute to mucosal colonization. We identified multiple secreted Carbohydrate Active Enzymes (CAZymes). These CAZymes are able to degrade mucin O-glycans after which some of the liberated monosaccharides can be utilized for bacterial growth. The enzymatic degradation of the mucin glycans may sensitize the mucus layer for further degradation and bacterial entry. Therefore, these enzymes may play a key role in bacterial colonization of the inner mucus layer, and thus may pose an interesting target for future therapeutic intervention.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell lysates and secreted fractions were processed using Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) (Wiśniewski, Nat. Methods, 2009). In brief, samples were denatured at 95 °C in the presence of DTT, mixed with 8M Urea and loaded onto Centrifugal Filters (Microcon, cat. no MRCF0R030). This was followed by two washes with 8M Urea, treatment with 0.05M iodoacetamide in Urea, and three Urea washes. After washing out the Urea with three washes with 0.05M Ammonium Bicarbonate, samples were digested o/n with Trypsin at 37 °C. The next day, samples were acidified and desalted using Stagetips (Rappsilber, Nature Protocols, 2007). Half of each of the digested samples was injected into an LTQ-Orbitrap QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and measured using a 120-minute gradient.

### Data Protocol
Thermo Raw files were analysed using MaxQuant versions 1.5.1.0 using default parameters, with the inclusion of the match between runs and IBAQ features (Cox, Nat.Biotech, 2008; Cox, Mol. Cell. Proteomics, 2014). Initial analyses were performed in Perseus (Tyanova, Nat. Methods, 2016). Proteins flagged as contaminants, reverse or only identified by site were filtered out. Triplicates were grouped and only proteins reproducibly quantified in at least one of the sets of triplicates were retained. Missing values were imputed using default parameters. Differential proteins were determined using a t-test with adjustment for multiple testing (FDR < 0.05). To call proteins enriched in the secreted fractions, they additionally required at least a 10-fold higher LFQ value compared to the whole cell lysates. Data visualization and downstream processing was performed in R.

### Publication Abstract
The human gut microbiota plays a central role in intestinal health and disease. Yet, many of its bacterial constituents are functionally still largely unexplored. A crucial prerequisite for bacterial survival and proliferation is the creation and/or exploitation of an own niche. For many bacterial species that are linked to human disease, the inner mucus layer was found to be an important niche. <i>Allobaculum mucolyticum</i> is a newly identified, IBD-associated species that is thought be closely associated with the host epithelium. To explore how this bacterium is able to effectively colonize this niche, we screened its genome for factors that may contribute to mucosal colonization. Up to 60 genes encoding putative Carbohydrate Active Enzymes (CAZymes) were identified in the genome of <i>A. mucolyticum</i>. Mass spectrometry revealed 49 CAZymes of which 26 were significantly enriched in its secretome. Functional assays demonstrated the presence of CAZyme activity in <i>A. mucolyticum</i> conditioned medium, degradation of human mucin <i>O</i>-glycans, and utilization of liberated non-terminal monosaccharides for bacterial growth. The results support a model in which sialidases and fucosidases remove terminal <i>O</i>-glycan sugars enabling subsequent degradation and utilization of carbohydrates for <i>A. mucolyticum</i> growth. <i>A. mucolyticum</i> CAZyme secretion may thus facilitate bacterial colonization and degradation of the mucus layer and may pose an interesting target for future therapeutic intervention.

### Keywords
Ibd, Secretome, Allobaculum mucolyticum

### Affiliations
Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Radboud University

### Submitter
Guido van Mierlo

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands


