### Accession
PXD041402

### Title
Short-range interactions between fibrocytes and CD8+ T cells in COPD bronchial inflammatory response

### Description
The peri-bronchial zone of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the site of extensive infiltration of immune cell, allowing persistent contacts between resident cells and immune cells. Tissue fibrocytes interaction with CD8+ T cells and its consequences were investigated. We show that fibrocytes and CD8+ T cells are found in vicinity in distal airways and that potential interactions are more frequent in tissues from COPD patients compared to those of control subjects. Increased proximity and clusterization between CD8+ T cells and fibrocytes are associated with altered lung function. Tissular CD8+ T cells from COPD patients promote fibrocyte chemotaxis via the CXCL8-CXCR1/2 axis. CD8+ T cells establish short-term interactions with fibrocytes, that trigger CD8+ T cell proliferation in a CD54- and CD86-dependent manner, pro-inflammatory cytokines production, CD8+ T cell cytotoxic activity and fibrocyte immunologic signaling. We defined a computational model describing these intercellular interactions and calibrated the parameters based on our experimental measurements. We showed the model’s ability to reproduce histological ex vivo characteristics, and observed major contributions of fibrocyte-mediated CD8+ T cell proliferation and fibrocyte death in COPD development. Using the model to test therapeutic scenarios, we predicted a recovery time of several years, and the failure of targeting independently chemotaxis or interacting processes. Altogether, our study reveals that local interactions between fibrocytes and CD8+ T cells can occur in vivo and could jeopardize the balance between protective immunity and chronic inflammation in bronchi of COPD patients.

### Sample Protocol
4 independent biological replicates on total protein extracts from fibrocytes cultured alone (control condition), or co-cultured with CD8+ T cells that have been previously non-activated or activated during 6 days. 10 µg of proteins were loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel and proteins were visualized by Colloidal Blue staining. Migration was stopped when samples had just entered the resolving gel and the unresolved region of the gel was cut into only one segment. Each SDS-PAGE band was cut into 1 mm x 1 mm gel pieces. Gel pieces were destained in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3), 50% Acetonitrile (ACN) and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were dried at room temperature. Proteins were first reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol, 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 60 min at 56°C then alkylated in 100 mM iodoacetamide, 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 60 min at room temperature and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were rehydrated with 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 10 min at room temperature. Before protein digestion, gel pieces were shrunk in ACN for 10 min and dried at room temperature. Proteins were digested by incubating each gel slice with 10 ng/µl of trypsin (V5111, Promega) in 40 mM NH4HCO3, rehydrated at 4°C for 10 min, and finally incubated overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel by three steps: a first incubation in 40 mM NH4HCO3 for 15 min at room temperature and two incubations in 47.5% ACN, 5% formic acid for 15 min at room temperature. The three collected extractions were pooled with the initial digestion supernatant, dried in a SpeedVac, and resuspended with 0.1% formic acid for a final concentration of 0.02 µg/µL. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, California, USA). Each peptide extracts were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After a 3 min desalting step, peptides were separated on a 50 cm EasySpray column (75 µm ID, 2 µm C18 beads, 100 Å pore size, ES903, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 115 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.9 kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 4.4 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 375-1500) were recorded at a resolution of R = 120000 (@ m/z 200), a standard AGC target and an injection time in automatic mode, followed by a top speed duty cycle of up to 3 seconds for MS/MS acquisition. Precursor ions (2 to 7 charge states) were isolated in the quadrupole with a mass window of 1.6 Th and fragmented with HCD@28% normalized collision energy. MS/MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap cell with a resolution of R=30000 (@m/z 200), an standard AGC target and a maximum injection time in automatic mode. Selected precursors were excluded for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) were done in Proteome Discoverer 2.5. MS Amanda 2.0, Sequest HT and Mascot 2.5 algorithms were used for protein identification in batch mode by searching against a Uniprot Homo sapiens database (81 856 entries, release January 20th, 2023). Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed for the trypsin. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. Oxidation (M) and acetylation (K) were searched as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) as static modification. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% false discovery rate at peptide level. Minora feature detector node (LFQ) was used along with the feature mapper and precursor ions quantifier. The normalization parameters were selected as follows : (1) Unique peptides (2) Precursor abundance based on intensity (3) Normalization mode : total peptide amount (4) Protein abundance calculation : summed abundances (5) Protein ratio calculation : pairwise ratio based (6) Imputation mode : Low abundance resampling and (7) Hypothesis test : t-test (background based). Quantitative data were considered for master proteins, quantified by a minimum of 2 unique peptides, a fold changes above 2 and a statistical p-value adjusted using Benjamini-Hochberg correction for the FDR lower than 0.05

### Publication Abstract
Bronchi of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are the site of extensive cell infiltration, allowing persistent contact between resident cells and immune cells. Tissue fibrocytes interaction with CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells and its consequences were investigated using a combination of <i>in situ</i>, <i>in vitro</i> experiments and mathematical modeling. We show that fibrocytes and CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells are found in the vicinity of distal airways and that potential interactions are more frequent in tissues from COPD patients compared to those of control subjects. Increased proximity and clusterization between CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells and fibrocytes are associated with altered lung function. Tissular CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells from COPD patients promote fibrocyte chemotaxis via the CXCL8-CXCR1/2 axis. Live imaging shows that CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells establish short-term interactions with fibrocytes, that trigger CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell proliferation in a CD54- and CD86-dependent manner, pro-inflammatory cytokines production, CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell cytotoxic activity against bronchial epithelial cells and fibrocyte immunomodulatory properties. We defined a computational model describing these intercellular interactions and calibrated the parameters based on our experimental measurements. We show the model's ability to reproduce histological ex vivo characteristics, and observe an important contribution of fibrocyte-mediated CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell proliferation in COPD development. Using the model to test therapeutic scenarios, we predict a recovery time of several years, and the failure of targeting chemotaxis or interacting processes. Altogether, our study reveals that local interactions between fibrocytes and CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells could jeopardize the balance between protective immunity and chronic inflammation in the bronchi of COPD patients.

### Keywords
Intercellular interactions, Inflammation, Remodeling, Chronic respiratory diseases, Chemotaxis

### Affiliations
Centre de recherche Cardio-Thoracique de Bordeaux, INSERM U1045, PTIB, Hôpital Xavier Arnozan, Avenue du Haut Lévêque, 33604 Pessac Cedex
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Isabelle Dupin
Centre de recherche Cardio-Thoracique de Bordeaux, INSERM U1045, PTIB, Hôpital Xavier Arnozan, Avenue du Haut Lévêque, 33604 Pessac Cedex


