### Accession
PXD010102

### Title
Sample preparation procedure for mass spectrometric analysis of plant histones

### Description
The protocol for preparing samples of plant histones prior to LC-MS/MS analysis was established, using a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) technique to remove natural contaminants and chemical additives incompatible with MS-based procedures. The protocol consists of nuclei isolation, histone extraction into acidic solvent, protein propionylation and on-membrane digestion, then peptide propionylation in solution. Two variants of the derivatization protocol, in-solution propionylation in the vial (PROP-in-SOL) and propionylation on the filter unit (PROP-on-FILTER), were compared by efficiency of the labeling and by abundance of identified histone peptide forms.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material - Arabidopsis thaliana ecotype Columbia 0. Histone extraction from plant material into sulfuric acid. Chemical derivatization of histone proteins: Protocol variant I: In-solution protein propionylation (PROP-in-SOL) / Protocol variant II: On-membrane protein propionylation (PROP-on-FILTER). Protein digestion in the filter unit. Peptide propionylation in solution. LC-MS/MS analysis - Orbitrap Elite hybrid spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The RAW mass spectrometric data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 1.4) with in-house Mascot search engine (Matrixscience, version 2.6) to compare acquired spectra with entries in the UniProtKB Arabidopsis thaliana protein database (version 2017_11; 27567 protein sequences; downloaded from ftp://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/current_release/knowledgebase/reference_proteomes/Eukaryota/UP000006548_3702.fasta.gz), cRAP contaminant database (downloaded from http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) and in-house histone database (version 2017_02; 71 protein sequences). Mass tolerances for peptides and MS/MS fragments were 7 ppm and 0.025 Da, respectively. Semi-Arg-C for enzyme specificity allowing up to two missed cleavages was set. For searches against cRAP and UniProtKB Arabidopsis thaliana databases the variable modification settings were oxidation (M), deamidation (N, Q), acetylation (K, protein N-term) and propionylation (K, N-term), while for histone database searches they were acetylation (K, protein N-term), methylation (K, R), dimethylation (K), trimethylation (K), phosphorylation (S, T), and propionylation (K, N-term, S, T, Y). Only peptides with statistically significant peptide score (p < 0.01) were considered. The peak area corresponding to each precursor ion was calculated from the extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) using the Precursor Ions Area Detector node. Selected histone peptide identifications were manually verified and quantified from the peak areas derived from the XICs using Skyline 3.6 software, including identification alignment across the raw files based on retention time and m/z.

### Publication Abstract
Characterization of histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) is still challenging, and robust histone sample preparation is essential for convincing evaluation of PTMs by mass spectrometry. An effective protocol for extracting plant histone proteins must also avoid excessive co-extraction of the numerous potential interfering compounds, including those related to secondary metabolism. Currently, the co-existence of histone marks is addressed mostly by shotgun proteomic analysis following chemical derivatization of histone lysine residues. Here, we report a straightforward approach for plant histone sample preparation for mass spectrometry, based on filter-aided sample preparation coupled with histone propionylation. The approach offers savings in sample handling and preparation time, enables removal of interfering compounds from the sample, and does not require either precipitation or dialysis of histone extract. We show the comparison of two protocol variants for derivatization of histone proteins, in-solution propionylation in the vial and propionylation on the filter unit. For both protocols, we obtained identical abundances of post-translationally modified histone peptides. Although shorter time is required for histone protein labeling on the filter unit, in-solution derivatization slightly outweighed filter-based variant by lower data variability. Nevertheless, both protocol variants appear to be efficient and convenient approach for preparation of plant histones for mass spectrometric analysis.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Post-translational modifications, Filter-aided sample preparation, Epigenetics, Mass spectrometry, Histone derivatization

### Affiliations
CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic
CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno

### Submitter
Gabriela Lochmanova

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic


