### Accession
PXD036285

### Title
TraB is a component of the ER-Mitochondrial contact site regulating ER-Mitochondrial  interaction and mitophagy

### Description
ER-mitochondria contact sites (EMCSs) are important for  mitochondrial function. Here, we have identified a EMCS complex,  comprising a family of uncharacterised mitochondrial outer- membrane proteins, TraB1, TraB2 and the ER protein, VAP27-1. In  Arabidopsis, there are three TraB isoforms and the trab1a/trab2  double mutant exhibits abnormal mitochondrial morphology, strong  starch accumulation and impaired energy metabolism, indicating  that these proteins are essential for normal mitochondrial  function. Moreover, TraB1 and TraB2 proteins also interact with  ATG8 in order to regulate mitochondrial degradation (mitophagy).  The turnover of depolarised mitochondria is significantly  reduced in both trab1/trab2 and VAP27 mutants (vap27-1,3,4,6)  under mitochondrial stress conditions, with an increased  population of dysfunctional mitochondria present in the  cytoplasm. Consequently, plant recovery after stress is  significantly perturbed, suggesting that TraB1 regulated  mitophagy and ER-mitochondrial interaction are two closely  related processes. Taken together, we ascribe a dual role to  TraB1 which is a component of the EMCS complex in eukaryotes,  regulating both interaction of the mitochondria to the ER and  mitophagy.

### Sample Protocol
Cloning of transgene encoding VAP27-1-GSrhino (Van Leene et al, 2015) fusion under control of the constitutive cauliflower tobacco mosaic virus 35S promoter and transformation of Arabidopsis cell suspension cultures (PSB-D) with direct selection in liquid medium were carried out as previously described (Van Leene et al., 2011). TAP experiments were performed with 100 mg of total protein extract as input as described in Van Leene et al., 2015 with minor modifications. Briefly, for protein extraction prior to the affinity purification, the detergent Nonidet P-40 was replaced by digitonin or Triton-X-100. Crude protein extracts were prepared in extraction buffer without detergent.After the mixing step, digitonin or Triton-X-100 was added to a final concentration of 1% (w/v) and extracts were incubated for 1 h at 4°C under gentle rotation. A soluble protein fraction was obtained by centrifugation at 36,900g for two times 20 min at 4°C. In all further steps, the detergent 0.1% (v/v) Nonidet P-40 was replaced by 0.2% (w/v) digitonin or Triton-X-100.

### Data Protocol
Protein interactors were identified by LC-MS/MS using an LTQ  Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFisher Scientific) as  described in Van Leene et al., 2015. Proteins with at least two matched high confident peptides were  retained. Background proteins were filtered out based on  frequency of occurrence of the co-purified proteins in a large  dataset containing 543 TAP experiments using 115 different baits  (Van Leene et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Trab / vap27 / tap / membrane contact sites / endoplasmic reticulum / mitochondria /  autophagy / mitophagy / arabidopsis

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Ghent, B-9052, Belgium
VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Ghent, B-9052, Belgium

Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Biology (MOE), Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, China Hubei Hongshan Laboratory, Wuhan, 430070, China

### Submitter
Dominique Eeckhout

### Lab Head
Dr Pengwei Wang
Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Biology (MOE), Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, China Hubei Hongshan Laboratory, Wuhan, 430070, China


