### Accession
PXD025028

### Title
Arabidopsis SKD1 Proteom LC-MSMS

### Description
We investigated the heat-dependent in-vivo interactome of Arabidopsis thaliana SKD1 using a transgenic 35S::GFP-SKD1 line. Potential interactors of GFP-SKD1 were co-immunoprecipitated from cell extracts of untreated or heat-treated rosette leaves and analyzed by mass spectrometry. A line overexpressing free YFP (35S::YFP) was used as a negative control. For each genotype and condition, proteins of three biological replicates were analyzed. An in-solution digest was performed on the beads, and peptides were subjected to liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS, Dr. S. Müller, CECAD/CMMC Proteomics Facility Cologne).

### Sample Protocol
Rosette leaves of 2.5 week old soil grown Arabidopsis thaliana plants (not flowering) of the 35S::GFP-SKD1 and the 35S::YFP line were either subjected to heat treatment or kept at RT (control) before harvest (3 replicates each, 12 samples in total). For each sample, leaves of 5 plants were combined. The GFP Isolation kit (Miltenyi Biotec) was used for immunoprecipitation.  To analyze all co-precipitated proteins by liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS/MS analysis), an in-solution/on-bead digest of the proteins was performed. Subsequently, the samples were loaded onto StageTips for removal of salts and other contaminants before MS/MS analysis. The protocols, solutions, chemicals and styrene-divinylbenzene–reversed phase sulfonate discs-containing C18 StageTips were provided by the Proteomics Core Facility Cologne (http://proteomics.cecad-labs.uni-koeln.de).  The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed by the Proteomics Core Facility Cologne. All samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC 1200 UPLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm × 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: 8-40% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 40 min, 95% solvent B within 10 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.  The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300 to 1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 108 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 35,000. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.2.8) using default parameters.Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the Uniprot ARATH.fasta (downloaded at: 16.6.2017) database, including a list of common contaminants.False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR) respectively.The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. The match-between runs option was enabled. LFQ quantification was enabled using default settings.Student´s T-tests were calculated in Perseus (version 1.5.5.1) after removal of decoys and potential contaminants. Data were filtered for at least 3 out of 4 values in at least one condition. Remaining missing values were imputed with random values from the left end of the intensity distribution using Perseus defaults

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteom, Skd1, Lc-msms, Arabidopsis, Heat stress

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
University of Cologne, Botanical Institute

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Hülskamp
University of Cologne, Botanical Institute


