### Accession
PXD011536

### Title
Proteomic analysis of liver tissue from a pig model of mutant INS gene induced diabetes of youth (MIDY)

### Description
To evaluate functional consequences of insulin-deficient diabetes mellitus for the liver, we used a genetically engineered pig model of mutant INS gene induced diabetes of youth (MIDY). Liver samples of MIDY pigs and wild-type (WT) littermate controls were analyzed by label-free proteomics to reveal pathways and key drivers significantly affected by chronic insulin deficiency and hyperglycemia.

### Sample Protocol
Liver samples were taken by systematic random sampling from two-year-old female WT (n = 5) and MIDY (n = 4) pigs (Blutke et al., 2017). The samples were shock-frozen on dry ice and stored at -80 °C until analysis. Tissue pieces were homogenized in a buffer containing 8 M urea/0.4 M NH4HCO3 as previously described (Frohlich et al., 2016). Protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce 660nm Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific) (Antharavally et al., 2009). Protein digestion was performed on 100 µg of protein lysate using consecutive steps with Lys-C (Wako) for 4 h and trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C, respectively, as described earlier (Blutke et al., 2017). Peptide samples were subjected to nano-LC-MS/MS analysis using a Q Exactive HF-X quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with an UltiMate 3000 nano LC system (Thermo Scientific). Briefly, 2.5 µg of peptides dissolved in buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) were transferred to a trap column (PepMap100 C18, 100 μm × 2 cm, 5 μm particles, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 30 μL/min and were separated at 200 nL/min on a 50 cm C18 reverse phase column (PepMap RSLC C18, 75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm particles, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was conducted using consecutive linear gradients from 1% to 5% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) in 10 min, from 5% to 25% B in 115 min and from 25% to 50% B in 20 min. MS data acquisition was done in data dependent mode using one survey scan at a resolution of 120,000 in a scan range from 380 to 2000 m/z followed by MS/MS scans of the 24 most intense peaks at a resolution of 15,000.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed using the MaxQuant software package (v. 1.6.1.0) (Cox and Mann, 2008). Protein identification was performed using the NCBI RefSeq Sus scrofa database (v. 3-13-2018) at a false discovery rate of 1%. Label-free quantification (Cox et al., 2014) was carried out with the match between runs feature enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Animal model, Midy, Biobank, Liver, Lc-ms/ms, Pig model, Diabetes

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis (LAFUGA), Gene Center, LMU Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Florian Flenkenthaler

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis (LAFUGA), Gene Center, LMU Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany


