### Accession
PXD014689

### Title
Stress response and detoxification mechanisms involved in non-target site herbicide resistance in sunflower

### Description
The objective of this study was to evaluate the role of cytochrome P450 monooxygenases (P450s) and other detoxification-related proteins in Imisun sunflower resistance.  Two sunflower inbred lines were used: HA 425 and HA 89, imidazolinone (IMI)-resistant and susceptible, respectively. Growth response to imazethapyr herbicide in combination with P450s inhibitors 1-aminobenzotriazole (ABT) and piperonyl butoxide (PBO) was evaluated in 15-day-old sunflower plantlets. Roots were collected and label-free quantitation (LFQ) proteomic analysis were carried out in order to characterize plant response to IMI. Roots of 15-day-old plants treated with 0 and 3.3 µM imazethapyr were frozen in liquid nitrogen. Protein extraction was performed as described in Wu et al. (2014) from 1 g root tissue per genotype/treatment combination.

### Sample Protocol
Fifty microgram aliquots of each sample were precipitated using trichloroacetic acid (TCA, 100 %) at a final concentration of 2 % W/V, washed in 80 % chilled acetone and air-dried. Pellets were dissolved in 100 µL 6 M urea for protein denaturation and then reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56 ºC during 45 min. Next, the samples were treated with 20 mM iodoacetamide during 45 min at dark to avoid disulfide bonds reformation and finally precipitated in 20 % trichloroacetic acid (TCA, 100 %). Pellets were sent to CEQUIBIEM Proteomics Facility (UBA, Buenos Aires, Argentina) for protein digestion and MS analysis. There, each sample was resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8, overnight digested with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega) and salt-cleaned with Zip-Tip C18 (Merck Millipore). Desalted peptides were analysed by nanoHPLC (EASY-nLC 1000, ThermoScientific, Germany) coupled to an Orbitrap technology mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive, High Collision Dissociation cell and Orbitrap analyzer, ThermoScientific, Germany). Peptide ionization was performed by electrospray.

### Data Protocol
MS-data were analysed by Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (ThermoScientific, Germany) using peptide peak area for identification against the sunflower genome sequencing data (Badouin et al., 2017) and a set of commonly observed contaminants. Relative abundance of peptides across treatments were compared using Perseus Software. Functional categorization was performed using MapMan library generated via the Mercator annotation pipeline. Visualization of protein abundance was performed using MapMan software (version 3.6.0RC1).   Badouin H, Gouzy J, Grassa CJ, Murat F, Staton SE, Cottret L, et al. (2017) The sunflower genome provides insights into oil metabolism, flowering and Asterid evolution. Nature 546(7656):148–52. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature22380

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ntsr, Helianthus annuus, Herbicide resistance, Detoxification, Imidazolinone

### Affiliations
IICAR-CONICET/UNR
IICAR, Instituto de Investigaciones en Ciencias Agrarias, Facultad de Ciencias Agrarias, UNR-CONICET. Campo Experimental “José Villarino”, S2125ZAA Zavalla, ARGENTINA

### Submitter
Tatiana Vega

### Lab Head
Dr Tatiana A. Vega
IICAR, Instituto de Investigaciones en Ciencias Agrarias, Facultad de Ciencias Agrarias, UNR-CONICET. Campo Experimental “José Villarino”, S2125ZAA Zavalla, ARGENTINA


