### Accession
PXD006831

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of DIA1-overexpressing HEK cells and protemics of probable DIA1 interactors

### Description
Many kinases are still “orphans”, i.e. knowledge about their substrates, and often also about the processes they regulate, is lacking. Here, DIA1/C3orf58, a member of a novel predicted kinase-like family is subjected to phosphoproteomics analysis in order to cast light on its signalling pathways. LC MS/MS proteomics approach with Ti phosphopeptide enrichment is applied to membrane fractions of DIA1-overexpressing and control HEK cells, and phosphosites dependent on DIA1 presence are elucidated. Most of The these phosphosites belonged to CK2- and proline-directed kinase types. In parallel, proteomics of proteins immunoprecipitated with DIA1 provided its probable interactors. Intersection of the DIA1-affected phosphoproteins and interactors provides putative DIA1 substrates, including calnexin . This pilot study data, mapped on literature, provides basis for deeper studies of DIA1 signalling.

### Sample Protocol
For protein extraction methanol/chloroform method was used. Pellets were diluted in 6 μl 15% sodium deoxycholate and then 100 mM NH4HCO3 was added to a final volume of 86 μl. TCEP (0.5 M) was added to a sample for a final concentration of 5 mM and incubated at 60ºC for 1h. To block reduced cysteines, 200 mM MMTS at a final concentration of 10 mM was added and the sample was incubated at room temperature for 10 minutes. Trypsin (Promega) was added at a 1:20 vol./vol. ratio and incubated at 37ºC overnight. Finally, trifluoroacetic acid was used to inactivate trypsin and remove sodium deoxycholate. Resulting peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS for peptide identification. For phosphopeptides enrichment, MagReSyn Ti-IMAC was used according to the Ti-IMAC manufacturer’s protocol.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS raw data files were processed to produce peak lists with Mascot Distiller software (version 2.5.1.0, Matrix Science). Resulting ion lists were searched using the Mascot search engine (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science) against SWISS PROT database (547 357 sequences) with the taxonomy restricted to Homo sapiens (20 274 sequences). The initial search parameters were set as follows: enzyme - semitrypsin; fixed modifications – cysteine modification by MMTS; variable modifications – oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. The database search of the data was carried out in a three-step procedure to calculate MS and MS/MS measurements errors and to recalibrate the data for the repeated MASCOT search. The final search against decoy database to obtain the statistical assessment of the identification of each peptide. This procedure provided q-value estimates for each peptide spectrum match (PSM) in the dataset. Mascot search results were further processed with Mscan, a proprietary software tool written in Java programming language (http://proteom.ibb.waw.pl/). Only PSMs with q-values of < 0.01 were regarded as confidently identified. Proteins identified by a subset of peptides from another protein were excluded from analysis, and proteins matching the same set of peptides were clustered into single group.

### Publication Abstract
Many kinases are still 'orphans,' which means knowledge about their substrates, and often also about the processes they regulate, is lacking. Here, DIA1/C3orf58, a member of a novel predicted kinase-like family, is shown to be present in the endoplasmic reticulum and to influence trafficking via the secretory pathway. Subsequently, DIA1 is subjected to phosphoproteomics analysis to cast light on its signalling pathways. A liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry proteomic approach with phosphopeptide enrichment is applied to membrane fractions of DIA1-overexpressing and control HEK293T cells, and phosphosites dependent on the presence of DIA1 are elucidated. Most of these phosphosites belonged to CK2- and proline-directed kinase types. In parallel, the proteomics of proteins immunoprecipitated with DIA1 reported its probable interactors. This pilot study provides the basis for deeper studies of DIA1 signalling.

### Keywords
Novel kinases, Phosphoproteomics, Mass spectrometry, Secretory pathway

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS

### Submitter
Michał Kistowski

### Lab Head
Dr Michał Dadlez
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS


