### Accession
PXD021277

### Title
Cardiac Atrial Compartmentalisation Proteomics: A Modified Density Gradient Method to Analyse Endo-lysosomal Proteins

### Description
Evidence that lysosomes are important in cardiac physiology and pathology is now emerging. We describe a label-free method suitable for small cardiac tissue biopsies based on a density-separated fractionation protocol, which allows us to study endo-lysosomal (EL) proteins in guinea pig atria.  The three most relevant density gradient fractions obtained were analysed using Western Blot, enzyme activity assay and MS/MS peptide analysis (adapted discontinuous Percoll, and sucrose differential density gradient). These fractions comprise whole tissue lysate; sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR), mitochondrial proteins (Mito) (1.3 g/mL); and ‘pure’ EL with negligible contamination from SR or Mito (1.04 g/mL).  Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes, Reactome, Panther and Gene Ontology pathway analysis showed good coverage of RAB proteins, lysosomal cathepsins (including cardiac-specific cathepsin D) in the purified EL fraction. The most significant EL proteins recovered included catalytic activity proteins. We thus present a comprehensive protocol and dataset of guinea-pig atrial EL focussed organelle proteomics

### Sample Protocol
Frozen atrial tissue biopsies were thoroughly cleaned in PBS and weighed. Each atrium was quartered and gently homogenised using a 7 ml Dounce homogeniser in Lysosome isolation buffer (LIB) [Containing 1:500 protease inhibitor cocktail (PIC) and phosphatase inhibitor (PHI) (Bio vision), (PhosSTOP Roche)]. Preparations were further homogenised in 1 ml Dounce homogeniser and transferred to chilled 1.5 ml ultracentrifugation tubes (Beckmann coulter). Sample preparations were mixed at a ratio of 1:1.5 Lysosome enrichment buffer [(LEB) (Biovision, containing 1:500 PIC)] to homogenate by inverting tubes, and were stored on ice for 5 min until the centrifugation.  Isolation of acidic organelles by fractionation:  Samples were centrifuged at 13,000 g for 2 min at 4°C (TLX Beckmann Coulter Ultra Centrifuge) and the resulting supernatant, corresponding to the WTL was collected. Further fractionation was processed using 75% of the collected WTL. 1.5 ml ultracentrifuge tubes were underlaid with 750 µl of 2.5 M sucrose (Fisher Scientific) followed by 250 µl of Percoll (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). 200 µl WTL was layered on top of the percoll layer and centrifuged at 27,000 g X 50 min at 10°C. The supernatant layer just above the turbid white, mitochondrial fraction (Mito fraction) was carefully removed, and the Mito fraction itself was collected separately. The collected supernatant was retained and repeated for a further centrifugation step at 29,000 g X 30 min at 15°C (500 µl of underlaid 2.5 M sucrose with overlaid 500 µl Percoll). The supernatant above the sucrose and Percoll intermediate was collected for further fractionation. Firstly, ultracentrifuge tubes were underlaid with 2.5 M sucrose and overlaid with a series of Percoll dilutions (1.11 g/ml – 1.04 g/ml in ddH2O). The ultracentrifuge tubes were centrifuged at 67,000 g X 30min at 4°C. The fraction at 1.04 g/mL was collected and labelled as the endolysosomal fraction (EL). N = 3 guinea pigs were used for western blots and proteomic analysis.Samples were digested with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Ms/Ms spectra were searched against the 2017 Uniprot protein database (UP000005640_9606 and UP000005447_10141) using PEAKSR 8.5 with the parameters set to minimum two unique peptides and 20 ppm as the maximum mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions. Peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids were chosen. Carbamidomethylation as a ﬁxed modiﬁcation, N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations as the variable modiﬁcations were selected. Enzyme speciﬁcity was set as C-terminal to cleave arginine and lysine using trypsin as protease, and a maximum of two missed cleaves were allowed in the database search. Label-free quantiﬁcation was performed with the MaxLFQ algorithm using a minimum ratio count of 1.

### Publication Abstract
The importance of lysosomes in cardiac physiology and pathology is well established, and evidence for roles in calcium signaling is emerging. We describe a label-free proteomics method suitable for small cardiac tissue biopsies based on density-separated fractionation, which allows study of endolysosomal (EL) proteins. Density gradient fractions corresponding to tissue lysate; sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR), mitochondria (Mito) (1.3 g/mL); and EL with negligible contamination from SR or Mito (1.04 g/mL) were analyzed using Western blot, enzyme activity assay, and liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis (adapted discontinuous Percoll and sucrose differential density gradient). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes, Reactome, Panther, and Gene Ontology pathway analysis showed good coverage of RAB proteins and lysosomal cathepsins (including cardiac-specific cathepsin D) in the purified EL fraction. Significant EL proteins recovered included catalytic activity proteins. We thus present a comprehensive protocol and data set of guinea pig atrial EL organelle proteomics using techniques also applicable for non-cardiac tissue.

### Keywords
Rab proteins, Guinea-pig, Cardiac, Lysosome, Lysosome storage disease, Atria

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
University of Oxford, Department of Pharmacology, OX1 3QT Oxford, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Georgina Berridge

### Lab Head
Dr Rebecca A B Burton
University of Oxford, Department of Pharmacology, OX1 3QT Oxford, United Kingdom


