### Accession
PXD002691

### Title
Autophosphorylation of Entamoeba histolytica atypical kinase EhAK1

### Description
Phagocytosis plays a key role in survival and pathogenicity of Entamoeba histolytica. We have recently demonstrated that an atypical kinase EhAK1 is involved in phagocytosis in this parasite. It is recruited to the phagocytic cups through interaction with EhCaBP1. EhAK1 manipulates actin dynamics by multiple mechanisms including phosphorylation of G-actin. Biochemical analysis showed that EhAK1 is a serine/threonine kinase with broad ion specificity and undergoes multiple trans-autophosphorylation. Multiple autophosphorylation sites were identified by mass spectrometry. Out of these Thr279 appears to be involved in both autophosphorylation as well as substrate phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
The purified SDS-PAGE protein band was subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion. Briefly, the excised gel was sliced to small pieces, transferred to a sterile siliconized Eppendorf and destained by repeated washing with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and 50% acetonitrile. For the reduction, 75 μl of 10 mM stock dithiothreitol was added and incubated for at 55°C for 30 min. The reduction solution was removed and 50 μl of 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) was added and the mixture was incubated at room temperature, in the dark, for 40 min. Enzymatic digestion was carried out by incubating the reaction mixture with trypsin (40 ng/μl of 25 mM NH4HCO3) and incubation was carried out overnight at 37°C. After digestion, peptide mixtures were acidified to pH 2.8 with formic acid and desalted with minispin C18 columns (Nestgrp, USA). Samples were dried under vacuum and resolubilized in 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile before mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer software suite (1.3.0.339 DBVersion: 78). For the search engine SEQUEST, the peptide precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.8 Da. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was used as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation along with phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine was used as variable modifications. Spectra were queried against the E. histolytica UniProt database also containing decoy database using a target false discovery rate of 1% for strict and 5% for relaxed conditions. phosphoRS node was used for automated and confident localization of phosphorylation sites within validated peptide sequences

### Publication Abstract
Phagocytosis plays a key role in survival and pathogenicity of Entamoeba histolytica. We have recently demonstrated that an atypical kinase EhAK1 is involved in phagocytosis in this parasite. It is recruited to the phagocytic cups through interaction with EhCaBP1. EhAK1 manipulates actin dynamics by multiple mechanisms including phosphorylation of G-actin. Biochemical analysis showed that EhAK1 is a serine/threonine kinase with broad ion specificity and undergoes multiple trans-autophosphorylation. Three autophosphorylation sites were identified by mass spectrometry. Out of these Thr279 appears to be involved in both autophosphorylation as well as substrate phosphorylation. Over expression of the mutant Thr279A inhibited erythrophagocytosis showing dominant negative phenotype. Multiple alignments of different kinases including alpha kinases displayed conserved binding sites that are thought to be important for function of the protein. Mutation studies demonstrated the importance of some of these binding sites in kinase activity. Binding studies with fluorescent-ATP analogs supported our prediction regarding ATP binding site based on sequence alignment. In conclusion, EhAK1 has multiple regulatory features and enrichment of EhAK1 at the site of phagocytosis stimulates trans-autophosphorylation reaction that increases kinase activity resulting in enhanced actin dynamics and phagocytosis. Some of the properties of EhAK1 are similar to that seen in alpha kinases.

### Keywords
Kinase, Proteomics, Entamoeba, Phagocytosis

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi-110067
VProteomics

### Submitter
gagan jhingan

### Lab Head
Dr ALOK BHATTACHARYA
School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi-110067


