### Accession
PXD016746

### Title
Coordination and assembly of protein complexes encoded across mitochondrial and nuclear genomes is assisted by mtCLPP in Arabidopsis thaliana.

### Description
Protein homeostasis in eukaryotic organelles and their progenitor prokaryotes is regulated by a series of proteases including the caseinolytic protease (CLPP).  CLPP has essential roles in chloroplast biogenesis and maintenance, but the significance of the plant mitochondrial CLPP remains unknown and factors that aid coordination of nuclear and mitochondrial encoded subunits for complex assembly in mitochondria await discovery.  We generated knock-out lines of the single copy mitochondrial CLP protease subunit, CLPP2, in Arabidopsis thaliana. Mutants have higher abundance of transcripts from mitochondrial genes encoding OXPHOS protein complexes, while transcripts for nuclear genes encoding other subunits of the same complexes showed no change in transcript abundance. In contrast, the protein abundance of specific nuclear-encoded subunits in OXPHOS complexes I and V increased in knockouts, without accumulation of mitochondrial-encoded counterparts in the same complex. Protein complexes mainly or entirely encoded in the nucleus were unaffected. Analysis of protein import, assembly and function of Complex I revealed that while function was retained, protein homeostasis was disrupted through slower assembly, leading to accumulation of soluble subcomplexes of nuclear-encoded subunits. Therefore, CLPP2 contributes to the mitochondrial protein degradation network through supporting coordination and assembly of protein complexes encoded across mitochondrial and nuclear genomes.

### Sample Protocol
The two week old hydroponically grown Arabidopsis seedlings were used for mitochondria isolation (Lee et al., 2008).  The isolated mitochondria were quantified using Bradford method (Bradford, 1976) and the aliquots were stored at -80oC until further analysis.  200 µg mitochondria were lysed using 3x freeze-thaw cycles (20min at -20°C and then 20 mins at 4°C) and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 20 minutes at 4oC.  The supernatant (soluble fraction) and pellet (membrane fraction) were collected and then precipitated with 9x volumes cold acetone for 24h at -20°C.Samples were alkylated and trypsin digested as follows:  The above acetone precipitated pellets were resuspended with 100µl solution containing 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10 mM dithioreithol (pH 8.0) and incubated at 60°C for 30 mins. Samples were cooled to room temperature and alkylated with 100µl 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, 25mM Iodoacetamide for 30 minutes. Samples were trypsin digested by adding digestion solution (1:50 (w/w, trypsin/protein) trypsin, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 1.2mM CaCl2, 0.1M guanidine GuHCl, pH 8.0) and incubated at 37°C for 16 hours in a thermomix at 1000 rpm. Digested samples were desalted and concentrated using C18 macroSpin columns (The Nest Group, USA) following the manufacturer instructions and then eluted with 100µL solution (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Elutes were dried under vacuum, resuspended in 5% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid to a final concentration of ~1µg µL-1 protein. Finally, samples were filtered through Ultrafree-MC Centrifugal Filter (0.22µm, PVDF) following the instructions of the manufacturer (MilliporeSigma, USA).  Quantitative untargeted mass spectrometry  Samples were analysed by LCMS on a Thermo orbitrap fusion mass spectrometer using data dependent acquisition. Analysis consisted of direct injection onto a self-packed 150 mm x 75 µm Dr Maisch Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm column. Water/acetonitrile gradients with 0.1% formic acid were formed by an Ultimate U3000 nano pump running at 250 nL min-1 from 2-27% acetonitrile over 30 minutes. Thermo raw files were database searched and quantified using MaxQuant (v1.6.7.0) (Cox and Mann, 2008) and analysed using the R package DEP (Zhang et al., 2018). Based on PCA analysis sample one WT sample and one clpp2-2 sample were flagged as outliers (high overall variance compared to all other samples) and removed.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw files were processed with Andromeda and MaxQuant, using the preselected standard parameters for thermo orbitrap mass spectrometers and searched against the Tair Arabidopsis protein database. Raw files were quantified using MaxQuant's Label free quantitation feature. The MaxQuant output (proteinGroups.txt) was further analyzed using the R package 'DEP' following their browser vignette (https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/DEP.html).

### Publication Abstract
Protein homeostasis in eukaryotic organelles and their progenitor prokaryotes is regulated by a series of proteases including the caseinolytic protease (CLPP). CLPP has essential roles in chloroplast biogenesis and maintenance, but the significance of the plant mitochondrial CLPP remains unknown and factors that aid coordination of nuclear- and mitochondrial-encoded subunits for complex assembly in mitochondria await discovery. We generated knockout lines of the single gene for the mitochondrial CLP protease subunit, <i>CLPP2,</i> in Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>). Mutants showed a higher abundance of transcripts from mitochondrial genes encoding oxidative phosphorylation protein complexes, whereas nuclear genes encoding other subunits of the same complexes showed no change in transcript abundance. By contrast, the protein abundance of specific nuclear-encoded subunits in oxidative phosphorylation complexes I and V increased in CLPP2 knockouts, without accumulation of mitochondrial-encoded counterparts in the same complex. Complexes with subunits mainly or entirely encoded in the nucleus were unaffected. Analysis of protein import and function of complex I revealed that while function was retained, protein homeostasis was disrupted, leading to accumulation of soluble subcomplexes of nuclear-encoded subunits. Therefore, CLPP2 contributes to the mitochondrial protein degradation network through supporting coordination and homeostasis of protein complexes encoded across mitochondrial and nuclear genomes.

### Keywords
Protease, Mitochondrial genome, Clpp, Complex i, Nuclear genome

### Affiliations
ARC Centre of Excellence in Plant Energy Biology
ARC Centre of Excellence in Plant Energy Biology at The University of Western Australia

### Submitter
Jakob Petereit

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Harvey Millar
ARC Centre of Excellence in Plant Energy Biology at The University of Western Australia


