### Accession
PXD014894

### Title
Proteomic analysis of NK cell-derived extracellular vesicles.

### Description
Natural killer (NK) cells contribute to immunosurveillance and first-line defense in the control of tumor growth and metastasis diffusion. NKEVs are constitutively secreted, are biologically active, reflect the protein and genetic repertoire of their originating cells and exert anti-tumor activity in vitro and in vivo. NKEVs from tumor-conditioned NK cells interact with naïve NK cells promoting their cytotoxic activity. In cancer NK cells exhibit profound defects in degranulation ability, a status probably reflected by their NKEVs. Hence, NKEVs could contribute to improve cancer therapy by interacting with tumor and/or immune cells at the same time sensing the actual NK cell status in cancer patients.  Here we investigated the role of NKEVs in stimulating the immune system and developed an immune enzymatic test (NKExoELISA) to sense the systemic NK cell status by measuring plasma NK-derived exosomes through combined capture of exosomes, expressing typical EV (tsg101) and NK cell (CD56) markers. We analyzed by LC-MS/MS the protein content from NKEVs evaluating  proteins differentially expressed in exosomes (NKExo), vescicles (NKMV)  and total cell extract (Tot extr) from parental NK cells. Proteomic data confirmed the presence of many EV markers and detected several proteins involved in immune response, cell adhesion and complement biological processes.

### Sample Protocol
Activated NK cells were obtained from human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) derived  from blood of healthy donors and prepared  as described in (Lugini et al., 2012). The culture supernatants of activated NK cells were subjected to differential centrifugation: conditioned cell culture medium was centrifuged for 5 min at 300 x g, 20 min at 1,200 x g to remove cells and debris; microvesicles were pelleted 30 min at 10,000 x g and washed in PBS, while exosomes were collected by ultracentrifugation at 100,000 x g for 90 min at 10°C using a Sorvall WX Ultra Series centrifuge in a F50L-2461.5 rotor (Thermo Scientific, Germany). The resulting pellet was washed in PBS and again ultracentrifuged at 100,000 x g for 60 min. Microvesicles or/and exosomes were dissolved in lysis buffer for further analyses.  Exosomes(NKExo), vescicles (NKMV)  and total cell extract (NKTot extr) proteins for proteomic analysis were prepared from 3 pools deriving from 3 different donors each and the protein content from each pool was individually separated on a 1D-gel NuPAGE 4-12% and colored by Coomassie staining. Each gel lane was cut in 6  contiguous slices and in gel digested with trypsin after cysteine reduction with DTT and alkylation with iodoacetamide. The peptide mixtures were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap  Tribrid Fusion (LTQ, Thermo) equipped with an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Dionex). Peptides were desalted on a C18 trap column and separated on a 20 cm long capillary (75m inner diameter) packed in house with C18, 5 m, 100 Å resin (Michrom BioResources) using a gradient of buffer A (95% water, 5%, acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (95% acetonitrile, 5% water, and 0.1% formic acid). The gradient was run as follows: buffer B was at 5% for the first 5min, then was linearly increased to 30% in 60 min and subsequently to 80% in 10 min, the remained at 80% for 5 min and finally decreased at 5% for 10 min. Full scan MS data were acquired in the  350-1550 m/z range in the Orbitrap at  60k resolution.   Data-dependent acquisition was performed using top speed mode (3 sec cycle): the most intense precursors were selected through monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) filter and with charge higher than one, quadrupole-isolated, fragmented by HCD (32 collision energy) and finally analyzed in the Ion trap with rapid scan rate. The AGC target value was set to 4e5 (FT) for MS1 and 2e3 (IT) for MS2; maximum injection times of 50 and 100 ms were used for MS1 and MS2, respectively. Lugini L, Cecchetti S, Huber V, Luciani F, Macchia G, Spadaro F, et al., Immune surveillance properties of human NK cell-derived exosomes. J Immunol. (2012) 189:6.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against  human Swiss-Prot database containing 42253  sequences using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo). Spectra matches were filtered with q-value based FDR of 0.01 using Percolator algorithm. Precursor and fragment ions were considered with 10 ppm and 0.5 Da tolerance, respectively. Specific trypsin cleavages were admitted, with two possible miss cleavages. Proteins were taken into account only if  identified with at least two peptides. Cysteine carbamydomethylation was set as static modification while methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation on protein terminus were set as variable modifications. Quantification was based on precursor intensity using only unique peptides and normalizing abundances on total peptide amount. Protein abundances ratios for each couple of sample groups NKExo/TotExtr and NKMV/TotExtr were calculated as a pairwise protein ratio: no imputation was applied and t-test and p-values corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini– Hochberg procedure were adopted to evaluate significant differences in protein abundances. Proteins with abundance ratio  > 1.5  and p < 0.05 were considered significantly differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
Natural killer (NK) cells contribute to immunosurveillance and first-line defense in the control of tumor growth and metastasis diffusion. NK-cell-derived extracellular vesicles (NKEVs) are constitutively secreted and biologically active. They reflect the protein and genetic repertoire of originating cells, and exert antitumor activity <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i>. Cancer can compromise NK cell functions, a status potentially reflected by their extracellular vesicles. Hence, NKEVs could, on the one hand, contribute to improve cancer therapy by interacting with tumor and/or immune cells and on the other hand, sense the actual NK cell status in cancer patients. Here, we investigated the composition of healthy donors' NKEVs, including NK microvesicles and exosomes, and their interaction with uncompromised cells of the immune system. To sense the systemic NK cell status in cancer patients, we developed an immune enzymatic test (NKExoELISA) that measures plasma NK-cell-derived exosomes, captured as tsg101<sup>+</sup>CD56<sup>+</sup> nanovesicles. NKEV mass spectrometry and cytokine analysis showed the expression of NK cell markers, i.e., NKG2D and CD94, perforin, granzymes, CD40L, and other molecules involved in cytotoxicity, homing, cell adhesion, and immune activation, together with EV markers tsg101, CD81, CD63, and CD9 in both NK-derived exosomes and microvesicles. Data are available via Proteome Xchange with identifier PXD014894. Immunomodulation studies revealed that NKEVs displayed main stimulatory functions in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), inducing the expression of human leukocyte antigen DR isotype (HLA-DR) and costimulatory molecules on monocytes and CD25 expression on T cells, which was maintained in the presence of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and interleukin (IL)-10/transforming growth factor beta (TGF&#x3b2;), respectively. Furthermore, NKEVs increased the CD56<sup>+</sup> NK cell fraction, suggesting that effects mediated by NKEVs might be potentially exploited in support of cancer therapy. The measurement of circulating NK exosomes in the plasma of melanoma patients and healthy donors evidenced lower levels of tsg101<sup>+</sup>CD56<sup>+</sup> exosomes in patients with respect to donors. Likewise, we detected lower frequencies of NK cells in PBMCs of these patients. These data highlight the potential of NKExoELISA to sense alterations of the NK cell immune status.

### Keywords
Proteomics natural killer cells exosomes microvesicles

### Affiliations
Istituto superiore di sanità
Core facilities National Institute of Health Viale Regina Elena 299 00161 Rome Italy

### Submitter
Serena Camerini

### Lab Head
Dr serena camerini
Core facilities National Institute of Health Viale Regina Elena 299 00161 Rome Italy


