### Accession
PXD032203

### Title
Detection of Cell-Cell Interactions via Photocatalytic Cell Tagging

### Description
The growing appreciation of immune cell-cell interactions within disease environments has led to significant efforts to develop highly effective protein- and cell-based immunotherapies.  However, characterizing these complex cell-cell interfaces in high resolution remains challenging.  Thus, technologies that can leverage therapeutic-based modalities to profile intercellular environments offer the opportunity to study cell-cell interactions with molecular-level insight.  To address this, we introduce Photocatalytic Cell Tagging (PhoTag), a platform for profiling cell-cell interactions utilizing a single domain antibody (VHH) conjugated to a photoactivatable flavin-based cofactor.  Upon irradiation with visible light, the tethered flavin photocatalyst generates phenoxy radical tags for targeted labeling within cell-cell contact regions.  Using anti-PD-1 or anti-PD-L1 VHH flavin conjugates, we demonstrate that PhoTag achieves highly selective synaptic labeling in antigen presenting cell-T cell co-culture systems.  By combining the high resolution transcellular biotinylation capability of PhoTag with multi-omics single cell sequencing, we interrogated transient interactions between peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) populations and Raji PD-L1 B cells and discovered that specific T cell subtypes can transiently interact more efficiently than others.   We envision that the spatiotemporal and modular nature of PhoTag will enable its broad utilization for detailed profiling of intercellular interactions across different biological systems.

### Sample Protocol
Purified protein (BSA, Phosphorylase B, Albumin, Carbonic Anhydrase, Chymotyrpsinogen) in PBS (1mg/ml) was incubated with the flavin photocatalyst (5uM), and biotin tyramide (250uM) in PBS and irradiated with blue light.  10μg from each sample was then reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol at 60°C for 30 min, followed by alkylation with 15mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 45 min.  Samples were digested with 0.5μg of either trypsin (Promega: V5111), chymotrypsin (Promega: V1061) or elastase (Promega: V1891) overnight at 37°C.  The samples were then acidified with formic acid and desalted using 3M Empore SD solid phase extraction plates.  The samples were then lyophilized and reconstituted in 0.1% TFA for analysis by nano-UPLC-MS/MS using a Waters NanoAcquity UPLC system interfaced with a Thermo Fisher Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer.  Peptide material (1μg) was loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75μm analytical column at 350nl/min; both columns were packed with Phenomenex Luna C18 resin.  The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with the Orbitrap operating at resolution settings of 70,000 FWHM and 17,500 FWHM for MS and MS/MS, respectively.  The fifteen most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS.  Peptide assignments from the raw data were achieved with the Byonic search engine (Protein Metrics) using a custom database consisting of BSA (P02769), Carbonic Anhydrase II (P00921), Chymotrypsinogen A (P00766), Rabbit Phosphorylase (P00489) and Chicken Ovalbumin (P01012) protein sequences using the following parameters: enzymatic cleavage was set to either trypsin with up to 3 missed cleavages (for tryptic samples) or non-specific (for chymotrypsin and elastase samples), variable modifications included Carbamidomethyl (C), Deamidated (N), Oxidation (C,H,M,P,W,Y), and Biotin tyramide, C18H23N3O3S (Y,C,H,F,W,S,T,D,E), and peptide and fragment mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively.  Sequence coverage maps and annotated peptide spectral matches were generated with Scaffold PTM V3.2 (Proteome Software).  Data were filtered for a minimum localization probability of 50% and putative modified sites were validated manually.  Modifications were considered correctly assigned if ladders of fragment ions spanning both the modified residue and its flanking N- and C-terminal amino acids were identified.

### Data Protocol
Peptide assignments from the raw data were achieved with the Byonic search engine (Protein Metrics) using a custom database consisting of BSA (P02769), Carbonic Anhydrase II (P00921), Chymotrypsinogen A (P00766), Rabbit Phosphorylase (P00489) and Chicken Ovalbumin (P01012) protein sequences using the following parameters: enzymatic cleavage was set to either trypsin with up to 3 missed cleavages (for tryptic samples) or non-specific (for chymotrypsin and elastase samples), variable modifications included Carbamidomethyl (C), Deamidated (N), Oxidation (C,H,M,P,W,Y), and Biotin tyramide, C18H23N3O3S (Y,C,H,F,W,S,T,D,E), and peptide and fragment mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively.  Sequence coverage maps and annotated peptide spectral matches were generated with Scaffold PTM V3.2 (Proteome Software).  Data were filtered for a minimum localization probability of 50% and putative modified sites were validated manually.  Modifications were considered correctly assigned if ladders of fragment ions spanning both the modified residue and its flanking N- and C-terminal amino acids were identified.

### Publication Abstract
The growing appreciation of immune cell-cell interactions within disease environments has led to extensive efforts to develop immunotherapies. However, characterizing complex cell-cell interfaces in high resolution remains challenging. Thus, technologies leveraging therapeutic-based modalities to profile intercellular environments offer opportunities to study cell-cell interactions with molecular-level insight. We introduce photocatalytic cell tagging (PhoTag) for interrogating cell-cell interactions using single-domain antibodies (VHHs) conjugated to photoactivatable flavin-based cofactors. Following irradiation with visible light, the flavin photocatalyst generates phenoxy radical tags for targeted labeling. Using this technology, we demonstrate selective synaptic labeling across the PD-1/PD-L1 axis in antigen-presenting cell-T cell systems. In combination with multiomics single-cell sequencing, we monitored interactions between peripheral blood mononuclear cells and Raji PD-L1 B cells, revealing differences in transient interactions with specific T cell subtypes. The utility of PhoTag in capturing cell-cell interactions will enable detailed profiling of intercellular communication across different biological systems.

### Keywords
Tyrosine labeling, Phenoxy radical generation, Flavin-based photocatalysis

### Affiliations
Merck Exploratory Science Center
PhD

### Submitter
Rob Oslund

### Lab Head
Dr Rob Oslund
PhD


