### Accession
PXD042440

### Title
RIME of EVI-1 in HNT34 and UCSD/AML1 cell lines and one primary sample to identify interactors

### Description
Rapid Immunoprecipitation Mass spectrometry of Endogenous proteins (RIME) of two AML cell lines HNT34 and UCSD/AML1 and one primary sample. EVI-1 is immunoprecipitated and the nearby chromatin-bound proteins are identified.

### Sample Protocol
For chromatin immunoprecipitation, cells were fixed with 1% methanol-free formaldehyde (Cell Signaling Technology, #12606) for 8 min and quenched with 0.125 M glycine (Sigma-Aldrich, #G8898). Chromatin was isolated by adding lysis buffer, followed by disruption with a Dounce homogenizer (ActiveMotif, #40401). The lysates were sonicated and the DNA sheared to an average length of 300-500 bp. Genomic DNA (input) was prepared by treating aliquots of chromatin with RNase, proteinase K, and heat for de-crosslinking, followed by ethanol precipitation. Pellets were resuspended, and the resulting DNA was quantified on an ND-2000 NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Extrapolation to the original chromatin volume allowed quantitation of the total chromatin yield. An aliquot of chromatin (150 µg) was pre-cleared with protein G agarose beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #15920010). Proteins of interest were immunoprecipitated using 15 µg of antibody targeting EVI1 (Cell Signaling Technologies, cat. #2593S) and protein G magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #88847). Protein complexes were trypsinized to release the immunoprecipitate from the beads and digest the protein samples. Protein digests were purified using a C18 spin column (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA, USA, #74-7242). The peptides were vacuum-dried using a SPD130XL SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Digested peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer linked to Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC and a nanospray FlexTM ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded directly onto the separation column BEH C18, 75 µm x 100 mm, 130Å 1.7-µm particle size (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA). Peptides were eluted using a 100-min gradient with a flow rate of 323 nL/min. An MS survey scan was obtained for the m/z range 340-1600, and MS/MS spectra were acquired using a top 15 method, where the top 15 ions in the MS spectra were subjected to high-energy collisional dissociation. An isolation mass window of 1.6 m/z was used for the precursor ion selection and a normalized collision energy of 27% for fragmentation. A 20-second duration was used for the dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted and analyzed by PEAKS Studio version 8 build 20. Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. The database consisted of the Uniprot database (version 180508, 71,771 curated entries) and the cRAP database of common laboratory contaminants (www.thegpm.org/crap; 114 entries). The database was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 parts per million. Post-translational variable modifications consisted of methionine oxidation, asparagine, and glutamine deamidation. Peaks studio built-in decoy sequencing and FDR determination (decoy fused method) with a cutoff set to -10logP > 20 was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and the parsimony rules for protein identifications. A threshold of ≥-10logP of 20 was applied for peptide identifications. The weighted sum of nine parameters for peptide scoring is converted to a P value, representing the probability of false identification. Protein identifications were accepted if they could pass the -10logP of 20 and contained at least one identified unique peptide. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into protein groups. The hit list was generated by taking all proteins (sample vs. IgG control) with a spectral count of five and above from each replicate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rime, Leukaemia

### Affiliations
University of Parma
University of Parma, Department of Medicine and Surgery, Laboratory of Translational Hematology

### Submitter
Andrea Gherli

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Giovanni Roti
University of Parma, Department of Medicine and Surgery, Laboratory of Translational Hematology


