### Accession
PXD023932

### Title
ABHD17 regulation of plasma membrane palmitoylation and N-Ras-dependent cancer growth

### Description
A subset of Ras proteins, including N-Ras, depend on a palmitoylation/depalmitoylation cycle to regulate their subcellular trafficking and oncogenicity. General lipase inhibitors such as Palmostatin M block N-Ras depalmitoylation, but lack specificity and target several enzymes displaying depalmitoylase activity. Here, we describe ABD957, a potent and selective covalent inhibitor of the ABHD17 family of depalmitoylases, and show that this compound impairs N-Ras depalmitoylation in human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells. ABD957 produced partial effects on N-Ras palmitoylation compared to Palmostatin M, but was much more selective across the proteome, reflecting a plasma membrane-delineated action on dynamically palmitoylated proteins. Finally, ABD957 impaired N-Ras signaling and the growth of NRAS-mutant AML cells in a manner that synergizes with MEK inhibition. Our findings uncover a surprisingly restricted role for ABHD17 enzymes as regulators of the N-Ras palmitoylation cycle and suggest that ABHD17 inhibitors may have value as targeted therapies for NRAS-mutant cancers.

### Sample Protocol
OCI-AML3 cells were treated and metabolically labeled in situ and subject to processing as described in the methods section.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were convereted to MS1/MS3/MS3 files as necessary using Integrated Proteomics Pipeline (IP2) and searched using ProLuCID. All downstream processing are described in methods section and available on GitHub.

### Publication Abstract
Multiple Ras proteins, including N-Ras, depend on a palmitoylation/depalmitoylation cycle to regulate their subcellular trafficking and oncogenicity. General lipase inhibitors such as Palmostatin M (Palm M) block N-Ras depalmitoylation, but lack specificity and target several enzymes displaying depalmitoylase activity. Here, we describe ABD957, a potent and selective covalent inhibitor of the ABHD17 family of depalmitoylases, and show that this compound impairs N-Ras depalmitoylation in human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells. ABD957 produced partial effects on N-Ras palmitoylation compared with Palm M, but was much more selective across the proteome, reflecting a plasma membrane-delineated action on dynamically palmitoylated proteins. Finally, ABD957 impaired N-Ras signaling and the growth of NRAS-mutant AML cells in a manner that synergizes with MAP kinase kinase (MEK) inhibition. Our findings uncover a surprisingly restricted role for ABHD17 enzymes as regulators of the N-Ras palmitoylation cycle and suggest that ABHD17 inhibitors may have value as targeted therapies for NRAS-mutant cancers.

### Keywords
Abhd17, N-ras, Palmitoylation, Human acute myeloid leukemia

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA
Scripps Research Institute

### Submitter
Jarrett Remsberg

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin F. Cravatt
Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA


