### Accession
PXD037801

### Title
Bile Salts Enhance the Susceptibility of the Allergenic Lipid Transfer Protein from Peach, Pru p 3 to in vitro gastrointestinal digestion

### Description
Sensitisation to the lipid transfer protein Pru p 3 is associated with severe allergic reactions to peach, the proteins stability being thought to play a role in its allergenicity. Lipid binding increases susceptibility of Pru p 3 to digestion and so the impact of bile salts on the in vitro gastrointestinal digestibility of Pru p 3 was investigated and digestion products mapped by SDS PAGE and mass spectrometry. Bile salts enhanced the digestibility of Prup3 resulting in an ensemble of around 100 peptides spanning the proteins sequence which were linked by disulphide bonds into structures of ~5-6kDa. IgE binding studies with a serum panel from peach allergic subjects showed digestion reduced, but did not abolish, the IgE reactivity of Pru p 3. These data show the importance of including bile salts in in vitro digestion systems and emphasise the need to profile of digestion in a manner that allows identification of immunologically relevant disulphide-linked peptide aggregates.

### Sample Protocol
In vitro gastric digestion was performed using a low pepsin test (G. Mandalari et al., 2009; Wang et al., unpublished work). Briefly, Pru p 3 was dissolved in simulated gastric fluid (SGF,150 mM NaCl, pH 2.5) to a concentration of 1 mg/mL, warmed to 37◦C and the pH was adjusted to 2.5 by addition 0.1 M HCl. An equal volume of prewarmed pepsin in SGF (pH 2.5) was added to give 165 U of pepsin per mg of Pru p 3 in the final digestion mix which comprised 3 mg of Pru p 3 and 0.28 mg of pepsin. The digestion was stopped by placing the sample on ice and raising the pH to 7.5 using 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate after 10 min. The gastric digest was and used immediately for the intestinal digestion and warmed to 37 °C before re-adjusting the pH to either 6.5 or 8.0 using 0.1 M NaOH. One hundred μL of the digest solution was added to each well of a microtitration 170 plate (Corning, Loughborough, UK) and warmed to 37 °C in a shaking water bath (170 rpm) for 10 min. Trypsin (103.5 U/mL or 10.4 U/mL), chymotrypsin (1.2 U/ml or 0.12 U/mL) and bile salts were added to chilled simulated intestinal fluid (SIF, 150 mM NaCl, pH 6.5 or 8.0) immediately prior to use, warmed to 37 °C for 10 min and 20 μL/well added to the microtitration plate. The final concentration of reagents dissolved in 26.1 mM bis-Tris buffer at either pH 6.5 or 8.0 were as follows: (1) High enzyme test: 4 mM sodium taurocholate, 4 mM sodium glycodeoxycholate, 0.4 U/mg of Pru p 3 of bovine α-chymotrypsin, 34.5 U/mg of Pru p 3 of porcine trypsin. (2) Low enzyme test: 1 mM sodium taurocholate, 1 mM sodium glycodeoxycholate, 0.04 U/mg of Pru p 3 of bovine α-chymotrypsin, 3.5 U/mg of Pru p 3 of porcine trypsin. Digestion was quenched by transferring 110 μL/well of the digest into a second microtitration plate containing 10 μL/well of a two-fold excess of Bowman-Birk trypsin chymotrypsin inhibitor from soybean (Sigma) dissolved in 150 mM NaCl pH 6.5 at either 0.5 mg/mL (high enzyme test) or 0.1 mg/mL (low enzyme test). Intestinal undigested control (IU) comprised 0.5 mg/mL Pru p 3 in SIF. Digest samples were either analysed immediately or plates sealed using parafilm (Sigma-Aldrich, Gillingham, UK) and stored at -20 °C until required.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were analysed using Progenesis QI (Waters, Wilmslow, UK) with a database composed Pru p 3 Uniprot accessions P81402, Q5RZZ3, A0A251NXA4 and A0A251NXB7 together with Uniprot sequences of the proteases and proteinase inhibitor. No specific enzymatic cleavage was specified, and the possible modifications searched were serine phosphorylation, methionine oxidation, and deamidation of glutamine or aspartic acid. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as fixed modification for reduced-alkylated samples. Peptides identified with score higher than 5 were retained with an evaluated false discovery rate of less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Sensitisation to the lipid transfer protein Pru p 3 is associated with severe allergic reactions to peach, the proteins stability being thought to play a role in its allergenicity. Lipid binding increases susceptibility of Pru p 3 to digestion and so the impact of bile salts on the in vitro gastrointestinal digestibility of Pru p 3 was investigated and digestion products mapped by SDS-PAGE and mass spectrometry. Bile salts enhanced the digestibility of Pru&#xa0;p&#xa0;3 resulting in an ensemble of around 100 peptides spanning the protein's sequence which were linked by disulphide bonds into structures of&#x2009;~&#x2009;5-6&#xa0;kDa. IgE binding studies with a serum panel from peach allergic subjects showed digestion reduced, but did not abolish, the IgE reactivity of Pru p 3. These data show the importance of including bile salts in vitro digestion systems and emphasise the need to profile of digestion in a manner that allows identification of immunologically relevant disulphide-linked peptide aggregates.

### Keywords
Immunoactivity, Disulphide bonds, Pru p 3, Digestibility, Bile salts

### Affiliations
Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, School of Biological Sciences, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, The University of Manchester, Princess Street, Manchester, M1 7DN, UK
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Matthew Daly

### Lab Head
Dr Clare Mills
Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, School of Biological Sciences, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, The University of Manchester, Princess Street, Manchester, M1 7DN, UK


