### Accession
PXD043396

### Title
IPed-MS results with anti-Strep in VdΔulpb/Strep-SUMO strain.

### Description
To identify SUMO-modified proteins and determine the potential SUMO-specific protease target, we first transformed a Strep-VdSUMO construct into VdΔulpb to create the VdΔulpb/Strep-SUMO strain for immunoprecipitation with anti-Strep. An anti-Strep-IPed sample was used for mass spectrometry (MS).

### Sample Protocol
To identify the SUMOylation sites in VdEno, mass spectrometry was performed. Briefly, SUMOylated VdEno proteins, immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag agarose beads (Sigma, A2220) from the VdEno/SUMO/Δulpb strain, were separated by SDS PAGE gels. The excised gels above 55 kDa were reductively alkylated with IAA, followed by dehydration with 100% acetonitrile. The gel pieces were digested with trypsin at 37ºC for 16 h and then with chymotrypsin for 4 h. The digestion solution was collected in a new tube. The peptide mixture was desalinated and dried with SpeedVac, and then resuspended in 0.1% TFA for MS analysis. The peptide samples were analyzed on Thermo Fisher LTQ Orbitrap ETD mass spectrometry by AIMSMASS Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). The positive-ion mode with automated data-dependent MS/MS analysis was selected. Using full scans (350-1600 m/z) with FTMS at a mass resolution of 30,000, the ten most intense precursor ions were used for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS files were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo). The trypsin and chymotrypsin as the protease with a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. The identified peptides with minimal length of six amino acids and false discovery rate (FDR) = 0.01 as a cutoff were searched against the VdEno protein.

### Publication Abstract
The soil-borne fungus Verticillium dahliae, the most notorious plant pathogen of the Verticillium genus, causes vascular wilts in a wide variety of economically important crops. The molecular mechanism of V. dahliae pathogenesis remains largely elusive. Here, we identify a small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO)-specific protease (VdUlpB) from V. dahliae, and find that VdUlpB facilitates V. dahliae virulence by deconjugating SUMO from V. dahliae enolase (VdEno). We identify five lysine residues (K96, K254, K259, K313 and K434) that mediate VdEno SUMOylation, and SUMOylated VdEno preferentially localized in nucleus where it functions as a transcription repressor to inhibit the expression of an effector VdSCP8. Importantly, VdUlpB mediates deSUMOylation of VdEno facilitates its cytoplasmic distribution, which allows it to function as a glycolytic enzyme. Our study reveals a sophisticated pathogenic mechanism of VdUlpB-mediated enolase deSUMOylation, which fortifies glycolytic pathway for growth and contributes to V. dahliae virulence through derepressing the expression of an effector.

### Keywords
Verticillium dahliae, Sumoylation, Enolase, Vdulpb

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
bosen zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Huishan Guo
Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences


