### Accession
PXD006358

### Title
Csde1 binds transcripts involved in protein homeostasis and controls their expression in erythropoiesis

### Description
The RNA binding protein Csde1 (Cold shock domain protein e1) is strongly upregulated during erythropoiesis, but its expression is reduced in Diamond Blackfan Anemia (DBA). To understand the role of Csde1 in DBA, and the cellular pathways controlled by Csde1 in erythropoiesis, we identified the transcripts that physically associate with Csde1. These mainly encoded proteins involved in ribogenesis, mRNA translation and protein degradation, but also proteins associated with the mitochondrial respiratory chain and mitosis. Crispr/Cas9-mediated deletion of the first cold shock domain of Csde1 affected RNA expression and/or protein expression of Csde1-bound transcripts. Protein expression of ribogenesis factors Rpf2, Nop56 and Ebna1bp2 was reduced in the deletion mutant, while mRNA was unchanged. Protein expression of Pabpc1 was enhanced while Pabpc1 mRNA expression was reduced.  Strikingly, the effect of reduced Csde1 function on mRNA stability and translation of Csde1-bound transcripts was modest. The correlation efficient between protein (iBAQ) and mRNA (RPKM) expression was not different between Csde1-bound and other transcripts. We suggest that Csde1 is involved in feed-back control in protein homeostasis and that it dampens oscillations in gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
Eluted peptides were processed as described by (Gazendam et al., 2016). Samples were subjected to mass spectrometry using label-free quantification.

### Data Protocol
All data was analyzed and processed with MaxQuant for peptide identification and quantification (Cox & Mann, 2008). Downstream statistical analysis was performed with Perseus v1.5.1.6 (Tyanova et al., 2016).  All proteins matching the reverse database , potential contaminants, and those only identified by site were filtered out.  To be considered for analysis, a protein had to be detectable within all triplicates of at least one clone.  Prior to statistical testing, a log2 transformation was performed.  Because failures to detect a given peptide is sometimes due to insufficient depth, missing values were imputed from the normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8.  These values were later de-imputed prior to visualization and production of the final tables. For multi-way ANOVA between CRISPR clones, an artificial within-group variance (S0) threshold of 0.4 was used (Tusher, Tibshirani, & Chu, 2001).  For two-way comparisons between groups, a t-test with a threshold of S0=0.5 was used.  For all analyses, a Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate of < 0.05 was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Erythropoiesis is regulated at many levels, including control of mRNA translation. Changing environmental conditions, such as hypoxia or the availability of nutrients and growth factors, require a rapid response enacted by the enhanced or repressed translation of existing transcripts. Cold shock domain protein e1 (Csde1/Unr) is an RNA-binding protein required for erythropoiesis and strongly upregulated in erythroblasts relative to other hematopoietic progenitors. The aim of this study is to identify the Csde1-containing protein complexes and investigate their role in post-transcriptional expression control of Csde1-bound transcripts. We show that Serine/Threonine kinase receptor-associated protein (Strap/Unrip), was the protein most strongly associated with Csde1 in erythroblasts. Strap is a WD40 protein involved in signaling and RNA splicing, but its role when associated with Csde1 is unknown. Reduced expression of Strap did not alter the pool of transcripts bound by Csde1. Instead, it altered the mRNA and/or protein expression of several Csde1-bound transcripts that encode for proteins essential for translational regulation during hypoxia, such as Hmbs, eIF4g3 and Pabpc4. Also affected by Strap knockdown were Vim, a Gata-1 target crucial for erythrocyte enucleation, and Elavl1, which stabilizes Gata-1 mRNA. The major cellular processes affected by both Csde1 and Strap were ribosome function and cell cycle control.

### Keywords
Erythropoiesis, Label-free qauntification, Translation, Csde1, Proteomics, Rna-binding protein, Ibaq

### Affiliations
Dept. Plasma Proteins, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Dept. Pharmaceutics, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences (UIPS), Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
Sanquin Research

### Submitter
Kat Moore

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander B Meijer
Dept. Plasma Proteins, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Dept. Pharmaceutics, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences (UIPS), Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.


