### Accession
PXD001122

### Title
Specificity profiling of LysargiNase in comparison to trypsin

### Description
Protease cleavage site preferences of LysargiNase (former name: ulilysin) and trypsin were tested using proteome-derived peptide libraries (Schilling et al Nature Protocols 2011)

### Sample Protocol
E.coli proteomes were digested with GluC (EcoG) or Chymotrypsin (EcoC), peptides modified at Cys residues by carbamidomethylation and at N-termini and Lys side chains by reductive dimehtylation and purified by RPC. These digests constitute E.coli proteome-derived peptide libraries that were used for incubation with LysargiNase and trypsin. Peptides cut by these enzymes presented free primary amines and the peptide N-termini that biotinyated using EaszyLink NHS-SS-Biotin, enriched by Streptavidin-Sepharose pullout, C18 omix-tip purified and analyzed using a QStar Pulsar system

### Data Protocol
QStar Pulsar wiff files were converted to mgf and mzXML and used for database seaches with Mascot and XTandem as implemented in the TransProteomicPipeline v4.6. Search parameters included 200 pm precurosr tolerance, 0.2 Da fragment ion tolerance, Cys carbamidomethylation lysine dimethylation and N-term thioacetylation. Peptide ID results were evaluated using Peptide Prophet and combined using iProphet as provided in the TPP v4.6

### Publication Abstract
To improve proteome coverage and protein C-terminal identification, we characterized the Methanosarcina acetivorans thermophilic proteinase LysargiNase, which cleaves before lysine and arginine up to 55 &#xb0;C. Unlike trypsin, LysargiNase-generated peptides had N-terminal lysine or arginine residues and fragmented with b ion-dominated spectra. This improved protein C terminal-peptide identification and several arginine-rich phosphosite assignments. Notably, cleavage also occurred at methylated or dimethylated lysine and arginine, facilitating detection of these epigenetic modifications.

### Keywords
Sequence specificity, Protease, Pics

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Jülich
Centre for Blood Research, Dept. of Oral Biological and Medical Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Pitter Huesgen

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher M Overall
Centre for Blood Research, Dept. of Oral Biological and Medical Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, University of British Columbia


