### Accession
PXD020222

### Title
Affinity purification mass spectrometry analysis of SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV proteins in A549 cells

### Description
To determine the cellular binding partners of SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV, A459 cells were transduced with lentiviruses expressing HA-tagged virus proteins and subjected to affinity purification mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
For the determination of SARS-COV-2, SARS-COV and partial HCoV interactomes, four replicate affinity purifications were performed for each HA-tagged viral protein. A549 cells (6×10^6 cells per 15-cm dish) were transduced with HA-tagged SARS-COV-2, SARS-COV or HCoV protein coding lentivirus and harvested three days post transduction. Cell pellets of two 15-cm dishes were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2% (v/v) NP-40, 5% (v/v) glycerol, cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 0.5% (v/v) 750 U/µl Sm DNAse) and sonicated (5 min, 4°C, 30 sec on, 30 sec off, low settings; Bioruptor, Diagenode SA). Following normalization of protein concentrations of cleared lysates, virus protein-bound host proteins were enriched by adding 50 µl anti-HA-agarose slurry (Sigma-Aldrich, A2095) with constant agitation for 3h at 4°C. Non-specifically bound proteins were removed by four subsequent washes with lysis buffer followed by three detergent-removal steps with washing buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 5% (v/v) glycerol). Enriched proteins were denatured, reduced, alkylated and digested by addition of 200 µl digestion buffer (0.6 M GdmCl, 1 mM TCEP, 4 mM CAA, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 0.5 µg LysC (WAKO Chemicals), 0.5 µg trypsin (Promega) at 30°C overnight. Peptide purification on StageTips with three layers of C18 Empore filter discs (3M) and subsequent mass spectrometry analysis was performed as described previously. Briefly, purified peptides were loaded onto a 20 cm reverse-phase analytical column (75 µm diameter; ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin; Dr. Maisch) and separated using an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 90 min gradient (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; 5% (80% acetonitrile) to 30% for 65 min, 30% to 95% for 10 min, wash out at 95% for 5 min, readjustment to 5% in 10 min) at a flow rate of 300 nl per min. Eluting peptides were directly analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with data-dependent acquisition including repeating cycles of one MS1 full scan followed by 15 MS2 scans of the highest abundant isolated and higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmented peptide precursors.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.14) using the standard settings and label-free quantification enabled (LFQ min ratio count 1, normalization type none, stabilize large LFQ ratios disabled). Spectra were searched against forward and reverse sequences of the reviewed human proteome including isoforms (UniprotKB, release 10.2019) and SARS-COV-2, SARS-COV and HCoV proteins by the built-in Andromeda search engine.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2; sars-cov; apms; a549 cells

### Affiliations
Institute of Virology, Technical University Munich
Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine, Institute of Virology, 81675 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Urban

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pichlmair
Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine, Institute of Virology, 81675 Munich, Germany


