### Accession
PXD025888

### Title
Phosphorylation of Hsp90β on serine residues in the charged linker modulates binding to interacting proteins and has implications for overall Hsp90β conformation (Occupancy and phospho-modulation data)

### Description
Human Hsp90β is constitutively phosphorylated in vivo on two serine residues in the charged linker region, S226 and S255. We developed a targeted method to measure the phosphorylation occupancy (the extent of phosphorylation) of both phosphosites in a range of cultured cell lines and consistently found high occupancy (>90%) in the cytoplasm and nucleus. However, we found decreased phosphorylation, especially for S255, in Hsp90β purified from the conditioned medium of cultured K562 cells. In addition, we investigated if various cell growth conditions known to impact Hsp90β activity had an effect on the phosphorylation status of S226 and S255, but none of the conditions tested (e.g. heat shock, Hsp90β inhibition) resulted in an alteration of S226 and S255 phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
For occupancy samples, Hsp90β was purified by immunoprecipitation from either total extracts, cytosolic extracts, nuclear extracts of K562, OCI-Ly1, MDA-MB-468, AsPC-1, HMEC, or transfected HEK 293T-Hsp90β-KO19 cells, and from the concentrated conditioned medium of K562 cells. Heavy reference Hsp90β was immunopurified from isotopically heavy-labelled K562 cells and dephosphorylated in vitro. Heavy reference sample and samples of interest were mixed 1:1 right before SDS-PAGE. SDS-PAGE: 25uL of eluate of samples of interest mixed with 25uL of reference sample and run on 10% SDS-PAGE at 130V. Staining in 50% ethanol, 10% acetic acid, 0.25% coomassie blue. Gel bands excised from 75kDa to lower 150kDa and destained in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB) in 30% acetonitrile(MeCN). Reduction and alkylation in 40mM chloroacetamide, 10mM TCEP, 50mM AB at 45°C for 1 hour. Gel bands washed in excess 50mM AB, dehydrated in excess MeCN, dried under ventilation. Digestion done in 100uL 50mM AB with 0.5ug trypsin, 0.25ug LysC at 37°C o/n. Peptides extracted by incubating gel bands in 100uL 10% formic acid 20min, and 20min in 200uL MeCN. Peptide extracts are pooled, frozen in liquid nitrogen and dried in speedvac. Dried peptides are resuspended in 30uL 2% MeCN, 0.05% TFA. LC-MS analysis: 5uL of sample was injected on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer operated in parallel reaction monitoring mode controlled by Xcalibur software. List of peptides, masses, ion targets, maximum ion injection times for the monitored peptides is given in PRMList.ods (time windows were continuously adjusted). Normalization peptides selected among unique peptides with retention times higher than CL peptides. Two CL peptides selected for each phosphosite: one without missed cleavage (MC), and one with one or two MC in the vicinity of (potential) phosphosites. Masses are isolated with a window of 1.6m/z, fragmentation in HCD mode with 32% energy, and fragments analyzed in an orbitrap with 30’000 resolution. MS1 full scan were taken every 2s with 120’000 resolution. For heat shock treatment, K562 cells were resuspended in 2 mL medium at 37°C or 43°C at a density of 5 million/mL and incubated for 15 minutes, 1 hour, and 3 hours in a 37°C humidified incubator or 43°C water bath. The cells were then immediately washed with 48 mL cold PBS and frozen with liquid nitrogen. For Hsp90 inhibitors treatment, three 150 cm2 culture flasks with each 30 million K562 cells at 1 million/mL density were supplemented with 160nM Ganetespib, 620nM 17-DMAG, or 1% DMSO as control, and a third of each culture was taken after 15 minutes, 1 hour, and 3 hours of treatment. Cells were then immediately centrifuged and washed with 50 mL cold PBS. For serum starvation, acidosis, and ROS treatment, K562 cells from a 0.5 million/mL density culture were transferred into control RPMI1640 with 10% FBS or into RPMI1640 without FBS for serum starvation, or into RPMI1640 with 10% FBS at pH 6 for acidosis, or into RPMI1640 with 10% FBS and 1 mM hydrogen peroxide for ROS treatment, and incubated for 6 and 24 hours (for ROS treatment, 6 hours only). Treated cells were lysed in 1% sodium deoxycholate, 30 mM Tris pH 8.6, 10 mM DTT and proteins digested with a modified iST digestion protocol. Briefly, samples are boiled at 95°C for 5 minutes, then reduction and alkylation of cysteines is done by adding 32 mM chloroacetamide and incubating for 45 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Samples are then each digested during 2 hours at 37°C with a first addition of trypsin/LysC mix (at the beginning and a second addition of trypsin/LysC mix after one hour of digestion. After digestion, 2 volumes of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in isopropanol are added and the mixture is vortexed 10 seconds before centrifugation at 2’300g for 30 seconds. The peptides are then washed on MCX Oasis columns thrice with 1% TFA in isopropanol and once with 2% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid. A quarter of the digested sample is used as is for input analysis and eluted in 0.25% NH3 in 80% MeCN and is resuspended in “HPLC loading buffer”. The rest of the sample is used for titanium-dioxide phosphopeptide enrichment and eluted with 0.25% NH3 and are immediately acidified with 20% TFA. The peptides are desalted on a Sep-Pak tC18 uElution plate and put into “TiO loading buffer” (80% MeCN, 2.5% TFA, 80 mg/mL glycolic acid. For every 10 ug of digested peptides, 1 uL of a TiO2 beads slurry at 100 mg/mL is added and incubated for 15 minutes on a wheel at 4°C. The beads are then centrifuged and washed as follows, with each wash followed by 5 minutes vortexing and short centrifugation: two washes with “TiO loading buffer”, two washes with 70% MeCN, 0.1% TFA, 80 mg/mL glycolic acid), two washes with 70% MeCN, 0.1% TFA, two washes with 0.1% TFA. Enriched peptides are recovered with two consecutive incubations for 5 minutes in 50 mM Na2HPO4, 5 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM NaF. Eluates are acidified with formic acid and 20% TFA before injection.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification is then carried out with Mascot Daemon with the following parameters: Enzyme: Trypsin/P Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Phospho (ST) Peptide mass tolerance: 10ppm Fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da Max. missed cleavages: 6 Database: UNIPROT Homo sapiens reference proteome 2017  Peptide quantification is done manually in Skyline. For occupancy: occupancy was calculated as described by Olsen et al 2010. Briefly, the H/L ratios of the phosphopeptide (x), the unmodified peptide (y), and the whole protein (z; derived from normalization peptides) are used to compute a and b values according to the following formulas: a=(z-y)/(x-z); b=(x/y)*a. Occupancy is then calculated in the light sample using value a and in the heavy sample using value b according to the following formulas: Occupancylight=a/(a+1); Occupancyheavy=b/(b+1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hsp90, Phosphorylation, Hsp90 inhibitors, Occupancy, Tio, Stress, Heat shock

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Protein Analysis Facility, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Manfredo Quadroni
Protein Analysis Facility, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne, Switzerland


