### Accession
PXD005194

### Title
Comparative secretome analysis after particulate exposure in human lung cell culture models

### Description
2D (A549) and 3D (AIR-606) human lung epithelial cell cultures were mock treated or exposed to 100 ug/ml petroleum coke or urban air particulates (both in the PM10 range) for 16 h. Secretomes were compared for triplicate treatments for each group by isobaric tags and LC/MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from serum-free conditioned media were washed and concentrated with Centricon filters (10 kDa MW cutoff). Proteins were reduced, alkylated, digested with trypsin, and labeled with a unique TMT-10plex tag. Samples were combined, purified, and separated by neutral reverse phase chromatography. Collected fractions were analyzed by LC-MS with an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo). Peptide identification was performed in MS2 with CID, and quantitation was performed in MS3 with HCD.

### Data Protocol
RAW files for each sample were grouped and analyzed by MaxQuant (ver 1.5.2.8). MS2 spectra were searched against the UniProt complete human database (20,159 sequences; downloaded on June 23, 2015) using the Andromeda search engine. Search parameters included up to 2 missed tryptic cleavages; 20 ppm match tolerance for the orbitrap and 0.5 match tolerance for the ion trap; and variable modifications for deamidation (NQ), oxidation (M), and TMT (K and peptide N-termini). An FDR cutoff of 1% was used at the peptide and protein levels for positive identification. Quantitation information was extracted from MS3 scans with a reporter mass tolerance of 0.01 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Petroleum coke (PC) is a coal-like product that is produced during the refinement of crude oil and bituminous sand. Fugitive dust from open storage of PC in urban areas is a potential human health concern. Animal inhalation studies suggest that PC leads to an adverse pulmonary histopathology, including areas of fibrosis and chronic inflammation; however, little is known about its impact on human health. In order to identify biomarkers and cellular pathways that are associated with exposure, we performed two-dimensional liquid chromatography-mass spectrometric analyses on secreted proteins from two human lung culture models. A total of 2795 proteins were identified and relatively quantified from an immortalized cell line and 2406 proteins from primary cultures that were either mock treated or exposed to particulate matter with a diameter of 2.5-10 &#x3bc;m PC or filtered urban air particulates for 16 h. Pathway analysis on secretomes from primary lung cultures indicated that PC exposure suppressed the secretion of proteins involved in the organization of the extracellular matrix and epithelial differentiation. Because these cellular processes could facilitate fibrosis, we performed chronic 12-day exposure studies on three-dimensional human lung cultures consisting of epithelia and stromal fibroblasts. Relative to mock-treated cells, matrix metallopeptidase 9 levels in the conditioned media were lower by 4 days postexposure and remained suppressed for the duration of the experiment. Immunocytochemical staining of collagen III, a marker associated with fibrosis, showed increased accumulation in the epithelial layer and at the air-liquid interface.

### Keywords
Human, Lung, Particulate matter, Petroleum coke, Secretome

### Affiliations
Wayne State University Proteomics Facility Core Detroit, MI, USA
Wayne State University

### Submitter
Joseph Caruso

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Paul Stemmer
Wayne State University Proteomics Facility Core Detroit, MI, USA


