### Accession
PXD012308

### Title
Deep motif deconvolution of HLA-II peptidomes

### Description
CD4 T cells are key for priming and regulating immune recognition of infected and cancer cells, but predictions of class II epitopes have limited accuracy. We profiled over 100’000 HLA-II ligands by Mass Spectrometry and developed a novel motif deconvolution algorithm to analyze these data. Our work demonstrates substantial improvements in the definition of HLA-II binding motifs and enhanced accuracy in HLA-II ligand and class II epitope predictions.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of HLA-II and HLA-DR peptides Cells were lysed in PBS containing 0.25% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.2 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mM EDTA, 1:200 Protease Inhibitors Cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mM Phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), 1% octyl-beta-D glucopyranoside (Sigma-Alrich) at 4°C for 1 hour. The lysis buffer was added to the cells at a concentration of 1 x 108 cells/mL. Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation with a table-top centrifuge (Eppendorf Centrifuge, Hamburg, Germany) at 4°C at 14,200 rpm for 50 min. Meningioma tissues were placed in tubes containing the same lysis buffer and homogenized on ice in 3-5 short intervals of 5 seconds each using an Ultra Turrax homogenizer (IKA, Staufen, Germany) at maximum speed. For one gram of tissue, 10 to 12 mL of lysis buffer was required. Cell lysis was performed at 4°C for 1 hour. Tissue lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 20,000 rpm in a high speed centrifuge (Beckman Coulter, JSS15314, Nyon, Switzerland) at 4°C for 50 minutes. The cells and tissue lysates were loaded on stacked 96-well single-use micro-plates (3µm glass fiber, 10µm polypropylene membranes; ref number 360063, Seahorse Bioscience, North Billerica, Massachusetts). Purification of pan-HLA-II peptides were performed following depletion of HLA-I as previously described (2). For the sequential purification of HLA-DR and HLA-II from tissues, three plates were used. The first plate contained protein-A sepharose 4B (Pro-A) beads (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California) for depletion of antibodies (pre-clear plate), the second plate contained same beads cross-linked to the anti HLA-DR monoclonal antibodies and the third plate contained the beads cross-linked to anti HLA-II monoclonal antibodies. For the sequential purification of HLA-DR and HLA-II from cells, only the last two plates were used. The Waters Positive Pressure-96 Processor (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts) was employed. The second and third plates were washed separately with 4 times 2 mL of 150 mM sodium chloride (NaCl) (Carlo-Erba, Val de Reuil, France) in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 4 times 2 mL of 400 mM NaCl in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8 and again with 4 times 2 mL of 150 mM NaCl in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. Finally, the plates were washed twice with 2 mL of 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. Each affinity plate was stacked on top of a Sep-Pak tC18 100 mg Sorbent 96-well plate (ref number: 186002321, Waters) already equilibrated with 1 mL of 80% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1 % TFA and with 2 mL of 0.1% TFA. The HLA and peptides were eluted with 500 µL 1% TFA into the Sep-Pak plate and then we washed this plate with 2 mL of 0.1 % TFA. Thereafter, HLA-II and HLA-DR peptides were eluted with 500 µL of 32% ACN in 0.1% TFA into a collection plate. Recovered HLA-II and HLA-DR peptides were dried using vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator plus Eppendorf) and stored at -20°C.  LC-MS/MS analyses of HLA-II peptides: Prior to MS analysis HLA-II and HLA-DR peptide samples were re-suspended in 10 µL of 2% ACN in 0.1 % FA and aliquots of 3 uL for each MS run were placed in the Ultra HPLC autosampler. HLA peptides were separated by a nanoflow HPLC (Proxeon Biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense) coupled on-line to a Q Exactive HF or HFX mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems). We packed a 20 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter column with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) in buffer A (0.5% acetic acid). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 2–30% buffer B (80% ACN and 0.5% acetic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min over 90 min. Data was acquired using a data-dependent ‘top 10’ method. Full scan MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z with an Auto gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6 ions. Ten most abundant ions were sequentially isolated, activated by Higher-energy Collisional Dissociation and accumulated to an AGC target value of 1e5 with a maximum injection time of 120 ms. In case of assigned precursor ion charge states of one, and from six and above, no fragmentation was performed. MS/MS resolution was set to 17,500 at 200 m/z. Selected ions from Ions were dynamically excluded for additional fragmentation for 20 seconds. The peptide match option was disabled.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification We employed the MaxQuant platform (5) version 1.5.5.1 to search the peak lists against a fasta file containing the human proteome (Homo_sapiens_UP000005640_9606, the reviewed part of UniProt, with no isoforms, including 21,026 entries downloaded in March 2017) and a  list of 247 frequently observed contaminants. Peptides with a length between 8 and 25 AA were allowed. MaxQuant parameters: The second peptide identification option in Andromeda was enabled. The enzyme specificity was set as unspecific. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was required for peptides and no protein FDR was set. The initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion was set to 6 ppm and the maximum fragment mass deviation was set to 20 ppm. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The Peptide output files summarizing MaxQuant result files are provided as Supplementary Tables 2 and 3.

### Publication Abstract
Predictions of epitopes presented by class II human leukocyte antigen molecules (HLA-II) have limited accuracy, restricting vaccine and therapy design. Here we combined unbiased mass spectrometry with a motif deconvolution algorithm to profile and analyze a total of 99,265 unique peptides eluted from HLA-II molecules. We then trained an epitope prediction algorithm with these data and improved prediction of pathogen and tumor-associated class II neoepitopes.

### Keywords
Neoantigens, Immunopeptidomics, Hla class ii, Ligand predictions, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
UNIL/CHUV
Dr Michal BASSANI-STERNBERG ¬  Group leader Laboratory Hi-TIDe: Immunopeptidomics Head of clinical Mass spectrometry unit Center of experimental therapeutics Department of oncology UNIL CHUV Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Lausanne Biopôle 3 Chemin des Boveresses 155, CH-1066 Lausanne

### Submitter
Michal Bassani-Sternberg

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Bassani-Sternberg
Dr Michal BASSANI-STERNBERG ¬  Group leader Laboratory Hi-TIDe: Immunopeptidomics Head of clinical Mass spectrometry unit Center of experimental therapeutics Department of oncology UNIL CHUV Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Lausanne Biopôle 3 Chemin des Boveresses 155, CH-1066 Lausanne


