### Accession
PXD003978

### Title
Mesenchymal Stromal Cells: What are the secrets of their secretome?

### Description
Multipotent Mesenchymal Stromal Cells (MSCs) are multipotent adult cells that can be isolated from different tissues. The current hypothesis supports that the main MSCs action mechanism relates to its paracrine activity, creating a microenvironment with trophic signals. However, preclinical studies with different sources of MSCs and different animal models have shown conflicting results. Therefore, the evaluation of these cells secretome content is of great interest. Here we analyzed the secreted proteins of MSCs, isolated from 3 different sources (adipose tissue, uterine tubes and skeletal muscle), obtained from 5 different donors. Following MSCs characterization, proteins secreted in serum-free conditions (conditioned media, CM) were analyzed by mass-spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Three tissue specimens from the same donors, namely: adipose tissue, skeletal muscle and fallopian tubes were obtained from total hysterectomy procedures after informed consent of five donors (5 women, 15 samples) according to the protocol presented to the Ethics Committee. Tissues were stored in PBS or DMEM with 4 % antibiotics at 4 °C and processed within 24 hours after harvesting. Tissue digestion was performed as described elsewhere (Valadares, MC, 2014).Cells were characterized according to Zuk et al (2001).  Cell culture and conditioned media production The cells were cultured until they reached passage 6. They were plated in six 225cm2 bottles (Corning) at a concentration of 5000 cells per cm2 and maintained until confluence of approximately 80%. When collecting the conditioned medium, cell viability was assessed by dilution in a solution of trypan blue 0.4% (Life Technologies) and quantification using automated cell counter Countess (Invitrogen). DMEM low glucose with 10%HyClone (Thermo Scientific) and 1% antibiotic was used. The cells were washed 3 times with PBS and then incubated with 32 mL of culture medium per bottle without fetal bovine serum. After 8 hours of conditioning, a new washing was performed for removal of cell lysates and further conditioning was done for 20 hours, which was used for further analysis. After the conditioning period, the culture medium was centrifuged at 500×g for 10 minutes in 50mL tubes to remove cellular debris, and immediately afterwards, filtered on a membrane of 0.22µm (Steritop&Stericup, Millipore). Protein content was concentrated from the conditioned media using AmiconUltracel3K (Millipore) following the manufacture´s protocol to a final volume of 1,5mL. The protein concentration recovered from the conditioned media were quantified by the fluorescence based on the natural tryptophan fluorescence.  Glycoprotein enrichment Four hundred micrograms of total protein from each cell line were subjected to the isolation of glycosylated proteins affinity to concanavalin A(Con A) and wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) (Glycoprotein isolation kit, Thermo Scientific) as indicated by the manufacturer. Afterwards 2ug were subjected to digestion and subsequent analysis by coupled liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS-MS).   Sample digestion and fractionation The samples were digested in solution using RapiGest (Waters) as surfactant agent. In this protocol, proteins were reduced with DTT (dithiothreitol), alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin proteomic level in an enzyme: protein ratio of1:50.  Sample processing and protein profile analysis by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry The samples were processed by a nanoACQUITY system comprising a binary pump,an auxiliary pump and a sampler. Peptides were captured, desalted and concentrated in a capture column Symmetry C18(20 nm ×180mm, 5 um) using a mobile phase composed of water with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid at a flow rate of 15uL/ min for 5 minutes. Then, the peptides were separated on an analytical column HSSC18 (75 μm × 150 mm, 1.7 μm) by eluting with a linear gradient of 2% DMSO in water with 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO in acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. The proportion of the organic solution was increased from 0 to 60% in 80 minutes. The chromatographic system is directly coupled to a hybrid quadrupole orbitrap tandem mass spectrometer Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific), equipped with a Nano Flex source. The acquisition of spectral data were obtained by the data dependent top-15 method in which the spectrometer chooses dynamically the most abundant not-yet sequenced precursor ions from a survey scan from 390 to 1650 m/z (except for the monocharged and those with charges exceeding 7) at 70,000 (at m/z 200) of resolution and AGC target 5 e 6. Sequencing was achieved dissociating the precursor ion with normalized collision energy of 35, resolution equal to 17,500 and AGC target of 5 e 4. Data acquisition and processing of proteomic data Samples of both the full conditioned medium and the isolated glycoproteins were randomized using block randomization method for the acquisition of its technical replicates (repeated acquisitions of the same biological sample). Samples of total conditioned media were acquired in six technical replicates, and the isolated glycoproteins were acquired in three technical replicates. The tandem mass spectrometer type Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific) was calibrated in the positive mode at the beginning of each analytical sequence. The analytical sequence started after a quality control of the number of identified proteins (protein extract from human mantle cell lymphoma).

### Data Protocol
The acquired data were processed by MaxQuant 1.4.0.8 proteomics data analysis workflow. Protein identification was performed by Andromeda search tool using the database of the human proteome UniProtKB (SWISSPROT November 2014). The following criteria were applied to protein identification: allowed maximum of two incomplete cleavages by trypsin, fixed modification by carbamidometilation of cysteines and variable modification by acetylation of the N-terminal portion and methionine oxidation. Quantification was based on two label free methods: LFQ and an adaptation of iBAQ strategy in which UPS standards were replaced by a mixture of 4fmol of yeast enolase and 40 fmol of yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (MassPREPWaters™) added to samples before LC-MS/MS to obtain two points calibration. Cross-validation of protein identification was done through the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline platform (TPP) using the X! Tandem as search tool and applying the same parameters used in the analysis by Andromeda/MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a lethal X-linked disorder caused by null mutations in the dystrophin gene. Although the primary defect is the deficiency of muscle dystrophin, secondary events, including chronic inflammation, fibrosis, and muscle regeneration failure are thought to actively contribute to disease progression. Despite several advances, there is still no effective therapy for DMD. Therefore, the potential regenerative capacities, and immune-privileged properties of mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs), have been the focus of intense investigation in different animal models aiming the treatment of these disorders. However, these studies have shown different outcomes according to the sources from which MSCs were obtained, which raise the question whether stem cells from distinct sources have comparable clinical effects. Here, we analyzed the protein content of the secretome of MSCs, isolated from three different sources (adipose tissue, skeletal muscle, and uterine tubes), obtained from five donors and evaluated their in vitro properties when cocultured with DMD myoblasts. All MSC lineages showed pathways enrichment related to protein metabolic process, oxidation-reduction process, cell proliferation, and regulation of apoptosis. We found that MSCs secretome proteins and their effect in vitro vary significantly according to the tissue and donors, including opposite effects in apoptosis assay, indicating the importance of characterizing MSC secretome profile before its use in animal and clinical trials. Despite the individual differences a pool of conditioned media from all MSCs lineages was able to delay apoptosis and enhance migration when in contact with DMD myoblasts.

### Keywords
Mesenchymal stromal cells, Proteome, Secretome

### Affiliations
USP
IB USP

### Submitter
Amanda Assoni

### Lab Head
Dr Mayana Zatz
IB USP


