### Accession
PXD016456

### Title
Mobilization and cellular distribution of phosphate in the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum

### Description
Unicellular organisms living in a marine environment sometimes have to cope with massive fluctuations in inorganic phosphate (Pi) availability.  We studied phosphatases and phosphate transporters of the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum with respect to the extracellular Pi-concentration depending expression as well as their extra- or intracellular localization. These studies, which add a further level of knowledge to already existing transcriptomic data, highlight the capacity of the diatom to distribute Pi intracellularly and to mobilize Pi from extra- and intracellular resources

### Sample Protocol
After-destaining, samples were reduced, carbamidomethylated and digested "in-gel" by the addition of Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Serva) and incubated at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were desalted and concentrated using Chromabond C18WP spin columns (Macherey-Nagel, Part No. 730522). Finally, Peptides were dissolved in 25 µL of water with 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The mass spectrometric analysis of the samples was performed using an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific). An Ultimate nanoRSLC-HPLC system (Dionex), equipped with a custom end-fritted 50cm x 75µm C18 RP column filled with 2.4 µm beads (Dr. Maisch) was connected online to the mass spectrometer through a Proxeon nanospray source. 1-15 µL (depending on peptide concentration and sample complexity) of the tryptic digest were injected onto a 300µm ID x 1cm C18 PepMap pre-concentration column (Thermo Scientific). Automated trapping and desalting of the sample was performed at a flowrate of 6 µL/min using water/0.05% formic acid as solvent. Separation of the tryptic peptides was achieved with the following gradient of water/0.05% formic acid (solvent A) and 80% acetonitrile/0.045% formic acid (solvent B) at a flow rate of 300nL/min: holding 4% B for five minutes, followed by a linear gradient to 45%B within 30 minutes and linear increase to 95% solvent B in additional 5 minutes. The column was connected to a stainless steel nanoemitter (Proxeon, Denmark) and the eluent was sprayed directly towards the heated capillary of the mass spectrometer using a potential of 2300 V. A survey scan with a resolution of 60000 within the Orbitrap mass analyzer was combined with at least three data-dependent MS/MS scans with dynamic exclusion for 30 s either using CID with the linear ion-trap or using HCD combined with orbitrap detection at a resolution of 7500.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (ThermoScientific) with SEQUEST search engine. Uniprot databases were used. Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm (MS1) and 0.6 Da (MS2). Oxidized methionine and deamidated asparagine and glutamine were set as variable modifications, Carbamidomethylation on Cysteins as fixed modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Unicellular organisms that live in marine environments must cope with considerable fluctuations in the availability of inorganic phosphate (P<sub>i</sub>). Here, we investigated the extracellular P<sub>i</sub> concentration-dependent expression, as well as the intracellular or extracellular localization, of phosphatases and phosphate transporters of the diatom <i>Phaeodactylum tricornutum</i>. We identified P<sub>i</sub>-regulated plasma membrane-localized, ER-localized, and secreted phosphatases, in addition to plasma membrane-localized, vacuolar membrane-localized, and plastid-surrounding membrane-localized phosphate transporters that were also regulated in a P<sub>i</sub> concentration-dependent manner. These studies not only add further knowledge to already existing transcriptomic data, but also highlight the capacity of the diatom to distribute P<sub>i</sub> intracellularly and to mobilize P<sub>i</sub> from extracellular and intracellular resources.

### Keywords
Phaeodactylum tricornutum

### Affiliations
MPI Marburg
University Marburg Dep. of Biology, Cell Biology Karl-von-Frisch Straße 8, 35032 Marburg

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Maier
University Marburg Dep. of Biology, Cell Biology Karl-von-Frisch Straße 8, 35032 Marburg


