### Accession
PXD041721

### Title
The Hidden Culprit of Visceral Fat: Dysfunctional Subcutaneous Adipose Tissue – Adipose tissue proteomics

### Description
To investigate the proteomic profiles of paired subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT) and visceral adipose tissue (VAT) samples, as well as their correlations with clinical traits in severely obese patients, and to identify potential serum protein markers associated with tissue expression or metabolic states.

### Sample Protocol
The frozen AT biopsies were cut into ~100 mg pieces. Visible blood vessels were carefully removed from the biopsies, and the pieces were washed with ice-cold sterilised PBS. To lyse the cells, 400 μl of hot SDT lysis buffer (4 % Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS; Sigma-Aldrich, Cat# 436143), 0.1 M Dithiothreitol (DTT; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# R0862), 0.1 M Tris/HCl (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat# 10812846001), pH = 7.6)) was added to the samples, and they were incubated at 95 °C for 2 hours in a Thermomixer® (Eppendorf) while mixing at high speed. The resulting protein extracts were further processed using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method and trypsin digestion, as previously described (Hruska et al., 2022; Wiśniewski et al., 2009; Wiśniewski and Rakus, 2014). The resulting peptides were extracted into LC-MS vials (Stejskal et al., 2013) and concentrated in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Peptide mixtures were analysed using an LC-MS/MS system comprised of an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (SRD-3400, NCS-3500RS CAP, WPS-3000 TPL RS; Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with the Q Exactive HF-X hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Digital PicoView 550 nanospray ion source. Tryptic digests (~2 µg/injection) were concentrated and desalted online using a cartridge type µPrecolumn trapping column (300 μm × 5 mm, filled with 5 μm PepMap100 C18 sorbent (Thermo Fisher Scientific)) and 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water. The peptides were eluted from the trapping column onto an Acclaim Pepmap100 C18 analytical column (3 µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# 164570) and separated using a 90-minute gradient (mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1 % FA in 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. The separation was performed using a linear 72-minute gradient of 2–35 % of mobile phase B, followed by an increase from 35% to 80 % of mobile phase B within 7 minutes and a 5-minute plateau before recalibration. MS data were acquired using the BoxCar acquisition method (Meier et al., 2018) with parameters set within the MaxQuant.Live (v. 1.2) application (Wichmann et al., 2019) using default parameters unless specified otherwise. The BoxCar method used 3 scans and 12 boxes at the same full scan parameters. Target values for full scan MS spectra were 3 × 106 charges in the m/z range 300–1650 with a maximum injection time of 250 ms and a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200. MS/MS scans of the top 15 precursors after HCD fragmentation with collision energy at 27 were performed at a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200 with an ion target value of 1 × 105 and a maximum injection time of 28 ms. All peptide mixtures were analysed randomly; VAT and SAT samples from each patient were processed sequentially. To create a supporting spectral library for the BoxCar data, we utilised 24 HPLC fractions of a pooled peptide mixture from subcutaneous and visceral adipocytes, which were isolated and digested as described in the previous study (Hruska et al., 2022). The peptide mixture was fractionated using high-pH reverse-phase high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) with a Thermo Fisher Scientific system connected to a fraction collector. Separation was achieved on XBridge C-18 column (3.0 x 150.0 mm, filled with 3.5 µm particles; Waters) and a 58-minute gradient with 10 mM NH4OH as mobile phase A and 10 mM NH4OH in 80% acetonitrile as mobile phase B. We measured the 24 resulting fractions using the same LC-MS setup described above but with a standard data-dependent top20 MS data acquisition method. The target values for full scan MS spectra were set to 3 × 106 charges in the m/z range 350–2,000 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms and a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200. MS/MS scans were performed after fragmentation with normalised collision energy at 27 at a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200 with an ion target value of 5 × 104 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (v. 1.6.10.43) (Cox and Mann, 2008) was used to analyse the BoxCar and spectral library MS raw data. Default settings were applied unless otherwise noted. MS ion searches were performed against the UniProtKB Human FASTA database (Homo sapiens, taxon ID 9606, version 2018-12) and a customised cRAP contaminant database (version 2018-11; thegpm.org/crap) using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). The library data files were defined as a single experiment and used for retention time alignment and spectra matching. The sample data was defined as Boxcar acquisition type within group-specific parameters. The fixed modification was set for carbamidomethylation on cysteine, while variable modifications included N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and asparagine/glutamine deamination. Trypsin/P enzyme with 2 allowed missed cleavages, and minimal peptide length of 6 amino acids were set. The false discovery rate (FDR) for protein and peptide levels was set to 0.01. The feature for protein quantification using only unmodified peptides was turned off. The entire dataset used the match-between-runs algorithm to transfer the spectral library data.  Cox, J., Mann, M., 2008. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nature Biotechnology. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.1511

### Publication Abstract
In this study, we aimed to comprehensively characterize the proteomic landscapes of subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT) and visceral adipose tissue (VAT) in patients with severe obesity, to establish their associations with clinical characteristics, and to identify potential serum protein biomarkers indicative of tissue-specific alterations or metabolic states. We conducted a cross-sectional analysis of 32 patients with severe obesity (16 males and 16 females) of Central European descent who underwent bariatric surgery. Clinical parameters and body composition were assessed using dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) and bioelectrical impedance, with 15 patients diagnosed with type 2 diabetes (T2D) and 17 with hypertension. Paired SAT and VAT samples, along with serum samples, were subjected to state-of-the-art proteomics liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Our analysis identified 7,284 proteins across SAT and VAT, with 1,249 differentially expressed proteins between the tissues and 1,206 proteins identified in serum. Correlation analyses between differential protein expression and clinical traits suggest a significant role of SAT in the pathogenesis of obesity and related metabolic complications. Specifically, the SAT proteomic profile revealed marked alterations in metabolic pathways and processes contributing to tissue fibrosis and inflammation. Although we do not establish a definitive causal relationship, it appears that VAT might respond to SAT metabolic dysfunction by potentially enhancing mitochondrial activity and expanding its capacity. However, when this adaptive response is exceeded, it could possibly contribute to insulin resistance (IR) and in some cases, it may be associated with the progression to T2D. Our findings provide critical insights into the molecular foundations of SAT and VAT in obesity and may inform the development of targeted therapeutic strategies.<b>NEW &amp; NOTEWORTHY</b> This study provides insights into distinct proteomic profiles of subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT), visceral adipose tissue (VAT), and serum in patients with severe obesity and their associations with clinical traits and body composition. It underscores SAT's crucial role in obesity development and related complications, such as insulin resistance (IR) and type 2 diabetes (T2D). Our findings emphasize the importance of understanding the SAT and VAT balance in energy homeostasis, proteostasis, and the potential role of SAT capacity in the development of metabolic disorders.

### Keywords
Adipose tissue; visceral adipose tissue; subcutaneous adipose tissue; obesity; proteomics; type 2 diabetes

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics
CEITEC-MU
Masaryk University
Brno, Czech Republic
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic

### Submitter
David Potesil

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
Proteomics Core Facility and Research Group Proteomics, CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic


