### Accession
PXD031385

### Title
Human serine/threonine protein kinase ATR LC-MS/MS

### Description
ATR is a PI3K-like kinase protein, regulating checkpoint responses to DNA damage and replication stress. Apart from its checkpoint function in the nucleus, ATR actively engage in antiapoptotic role at mitochondria following DNA damage. The different functions of ATR in the nucleus and cytoplasm are carried out by two prolyl isomeric forms of ATR: trans- and cis-ATR, respectively. The isomerization occurs at the Pin1 Ser428-Pro429 motif of ATR. Here we investigated the structural basis of the subcellular location-specific functions of human ATR. Using a mass spectrometry-based footprinting approach, the surface accessibility of ATR lysine residues to sulfo-NHS-LC-biotin modification was monitored and compared between the cis and the trans-isomers. We have identified two biotin-modified lysine residues, K459 and K469, within the BH3-like domain of cis-ATR that were not accessible in trans-ATR, indicating a conformational change around the BH3 domain between cis- and trans-ATR. The conformational alteration also involved the N-terminal domain and the middle HEAT domain. Moreover, experimental results from an array of complementary assays show that cis-ATR with the accessible BH3 domain was able to bind to tBid while trans-ATR could not. In addition, both cis- and trans-ATR can directly form homodimers via their C-terminal domains without ATRIP, while nuclear (trans-ATR) in the presence of ATRIP forms dimer-dimer complexes involving both N- and C-termini of ATR and ATRIP after UV. Structural characteristics around the Ser428-Pro429 motif and the BH3 domain region are also analyzed by molecular modelling and dynamics simulation. In support, cis conformation was found to be significantly more energetically favourable than trans at Ser428-Pro429 bond in a 20-aa wild-type ATR peptide. Taken together, our results suggest that the isomerization-induced structural changes of ATR define both its subcellular location and compartment-specific functions and plays an essential role in promoting cell survival and DNA damage responses.

### Sample Protocol
Purified ATR and mutants were modified with various molar concentrations of sulfo-NHS-LC-biotin. Typically, ATR (2 μM) was modified by adding sulfo-NHS-LC-biotin (2 mM a final concentration) for 30 min incubation at room temperature. Modifications were quenched by the addition of 10 mM lysine, followed by purification of the ATR by SDS-PAGE. The subunit bands on the gel were visualized by coomassie blue staining, excised from the gel, and destained with water. SDS was removed by washing the gel pieces with ammonium bicarbonate, dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile, and vacuum desiccated. In-gel digestion with trypsin was performed using a ProGest robot (DigiLab). After trypsin digestion, the gel slices were washed with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile. Gel pieces then were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 60°C followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide at RT. Thereafter, protein bands were digested overnight at 37°C with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega). Tryptic peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid before loading onto a trapping column and eluted over a 75 µm analytical column at 350 nL/min; both columns were packed with Luna C18 resin (Phenomenex) and eluted over 40 min with a 3–40% acetonitrile gradient. The sample was analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with the Orbitrap operating at 60,000 FWHM and 15,000 FWHM for MS and MS/MS, respectively. The instrument was run with a 3s cycle for MS and MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using a local copy of Mascot (Matrix Science) with the following parameters: Enzyme: Trypsin/P, Database: SwissProt Human appended with the target sequence* (concatenated forward and reverse plus common contaminants), Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (N-term), Deamidation (N/Q), NHS-LC-Biotin (N-term/K), Mass values: Monoisotopic, Peptide Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02 Da, Max Missed Cleavages: 2. Mascot DAT files were parsed into Scaffold (Proteome Software) for validation, filtering and to create a non-redundant list per sample. Data were filtered using 1% protein and peptide FDR and requiring at least two unique peptides per protein. Scaffold results were exported as mzIdentML and imported into Scaffold PTM in order to assign site localization probabilities using Ascore (S.A. Beausoleil et al. A probability-based approach for highthroughput protein phosphorylation analysis and site localization, Nature Biotechnology 2006, 24, 1285- 1292). A minimum localization probability filter of 90% was applied.

### Publication Abstract
ATR is a PI3K-like kinase protein, regulating checkpoint responses to DNA damage and replication stress. Apart from its checkpoint function in the nucleus, ATR actively engages in an antiapoptotic role at mitochondria following DNA damage. The different functions of ATR in the nucleus and cytoplasm are carried out by two prolyl isomeric forms of ATR: <i>trans</i>- and <i>cis</i>-ATR, respectively. The isomerization occurs at the Pin1 Ser428-Pro429 motif of ATR. Here, we investigated the structural basis of the subcellular location-specific functions of human ATR. Using a mass spectrometry-based footprinting approach, the surface accessibility of ATR lysine residues to sulfo-NHS-LC-biotin modification was monitored and compared between the <i>cis</i>- and the <i>trans</i>-isomers. We have identified two biotin-modified lysine residues, K459 and K469, within the BH3-like domain of <i>cis</i>-ATR that were not accessible in <i>trans</i>-ATR, indicating a conformational change around the BH3 domain between <i>cis-</i> and <i>trans</i>-ATR. The conformational alteration also involved the N-terminal domain and the middle HEAT domain. Moreover, experimental results from an array of complementary assays show that <i>cis</i>-ATR with the accessible BH3 domain was able to bind to tBid while <i>trans</i>-ATR could not. In addition, both <i>cis</i>- and <i>trans</i>-ATR can directly form homodimers <i>via</i> their C-terminal domains without ATRIP, while nuclear (<i>trans</i>-ATR) in the presence of ATRIP forms dimer-dimer complexes involving both N- and C-termini of ATR and ATRIP after UV. Structural characteristics around the Ser428-Pro429 motif and the BH3 domain region are also analyzed by molecular modeling and dynamics simulation. In support, <i>cis</i> conformation was found to be significantly more energetically favorable than <i>trans</i> at the Ser428-Pro429 bond in a 20-aa wild-type ATR peptide. Taken together, our results suggest that the isomerization-induced structural changes of ATR define both its subcellular location and compartment-specific functions and play an essential role in promoting cell survival and DNA damage responses.

### Keywords
Mass protein footprinting, Biotin modification, Cis/trans prolyl isomerization, Bh3-like domain, Atr

### Affiliations
University of Toledo
Himadri Biswas, Ph. D. Post-doctoral associate, Dept. of Cancer Biology, University of Toledo, Ohio, 43614,

### Submitter
Himadri Biswas

### Lab Head
Dr Himadri Biswas
Himadri Biswas, Ph. D. Post-doctoral associate, Dept. of Cancer Biology, University of Toledo, Ohio, 43614,


