### Accession
PXD017888

### Title
RNF4 interactome in heatshocked HeLa cells

### Description
Exposure of cells to heat or oxidative stress causes misfolding of proteins. To avoid toxic protein aggregation, cells have evolved nuclear and cytosolic protein quality control (PQC) systems. In response to proteotoxic stress cells also limit protein synthesis by triggering transient storage of mRNAs and RNA binding proteins (RBPs) in cytosolic stress granules (SGs). We demonstrate that the SUMO-targeted ubiquitin ligase (StUbL) pathway, which is part of the nuclear proteostasis network, regulates SG dynamics. We provide evidence that inactivation of SUMO deconjugases under proteotoxic stress initiates SUMO-primed, RNF4-dependent ubiquitylation of RBPs that typically condense into SGs. Impairment of SUMO-primed ubiquitylation drastically delays SG resolution upon stress release. Importantly, the StUbL system regulates compartmentalization of an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)-associated mutant of FUS in SGs. We propose that the StUbL system functions as surveillance pathway for aggregation-prone RBPs in the nucleus thereby linking the nuclear and cytosolic axis of proteotoxic stress response.   To better understand the role of RNF4 in the proteotoxic stress response we aimed to identify RNF4-associated protein complexes in cells exposed to heat stress. To allow immuno-affinity purification of endogenous RNF4 on anti-Flag agarose beads we used CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene editing to integrate a C-terminal 3xFlag epitope tag into the genomic locus of RNF4 in HeLa cells.   For the IP-MS experiment HeLa-RNF4-3xFlag cells or parental untagged control cells were exposed to heat stress for 1 h and RNF4-3xFlag together with associated proteins was captured on anti-Flag affinity beads. Tryptic peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS and data from three replicates were quantified by the Max Quant label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitations from HeLaRNF4-3xFlag and parental HeLa cells were performed in triplicates. Cells were treated with a heatshock (60 min, 43°C) prior to lysis. Immunoprecipitated samples were separated on a 4-20% gel (BioRad) by SDS PAGE and gels were stained with InstantBlue (Expedeon). The gel lanes were cut into four equal pieces and an in-gel digest was performed as described (Shevchenko et al., 2006). Peptides were collected, concentrated and desalted on STAGE tips as described (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Peptides were separated on an easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher) and a 15 cm long, 75µm ID fused-silica column, which has been packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch), and kept at 45°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted by linear gradient from 10-38% acetonitrile over 23 minutes at a flow rate of 400 nl/min and directly sprayed into a QExactive HF mass-spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific) at a spray voltage of 2.3 kV. Full scan MS spectra (300-1650 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 20 ms and an AGC target value of 3 x 10^6 charges. Up to 15 most intense peptides per full scan were isolated using a 1.6 Th window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (normalised collision energy of 27). MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 64 ms and an AGC target value of 1 x 10^5. Ions with charge states of 1 and > 7 as well as ions with unassigned charge states were not considered for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s to minimise repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw files of mass spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant Software version 1.6.0.16 (Cox and Mann, 2008) and the implemented Andromeda database search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Extracted ion spectra were searched against the Uniprot human database (v.2017). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%, the minimal LFQ ratio count was set to 2 and FastLFQ option was enabled for relative label-free quantification of proteins. Match between runs was activated. Oxidation of methionine residues was used as a variable modification. Perseus software (Tyanova et al., 2016) was used for statistical analysis and the data was visualized with RStudio. Proteins, showing at least 2-fold enrichment in IPs from HeLa-RNF4-3xFlag over control cells with a student’s t-test p-value below 0.05 were considered significantly enriched in IPs from HeLa-RNF4-3xFlag cells.

### Publication Abstract
Exposure of cells to heat or oxidative stress causes misfolding of proteins. To avoid toxic protein aggregation, cells have evolved nuclear and cytosolic protein quality control (PQC) systems. In response to proteotoxic stress, cells also limit protein synthesis by triggering transient storage of mRNAs and RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) in cytosolic stress granules (SGs). We demonstrate that the SUMO-targeted ubiquitin ligase (StUbL) pathway, which is part of the nuclear proteostasis network, regulates SG dynamics. We provide evidence that inactivation of SUMO deconjugases under proteotoxic stress initiates SUMO-primed, RNF4-dependent ubiquitylation of RBPs that typically condense into SGs. Impairment of SUMO-primed ubiquitylation drastically delays SG resolution upon stress release. Importantly, the StUbL system regulates compartmentalization of an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)-associated FUS mutant in SGs. We propose that the StUbL system functions as surveillance pathway for aggregation-prone RBPs in the nucleus, thereby linking the nuclear and cytosolic axis of proteotoxic stress response.

### Keywords
Hela rnf4 heatshock interactome

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University, Medical School, Frankfurt, Germany
Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Jan Keiten-Schmitz

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Müller
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University, Medical School, Frankfurt, Germany


