### Accession
PXD017597

### Title
Comparative proteomics of three Giardia lamblia strains: Antigenic variation in the post-genomic era

### Description
Giardia lamblia is a causative agent of persistent diarrhea widespread in regions with low hygienic standards. Laboratory research is based on cloned lines issuing from various patient isolates typed in the late 1980s and 90s using restriction analysis and serology. In the present study, we compared the well characterized strain WBC6 with another clone of the parent WB isolate termed WBA1 and with a clone from another isolate, GS/M-83-H7, using shotgun mass spectrometry proteomics. We identified 398 proteins differentially expressed between the GS and both WB isolates and 97 proteins differentially expressed between both WB isolates. We investigated the expression levels of the predominant variant-specific surface proteins (VSPs) in each clone and matched the previously described major VSPs of each strain to the corresponding open reading frame (ORF) sequences identified by whole-genome sequencing efforts. Furthermore, since the original WB isolate comes from a patient treated with metronidazole, we compared the susceptibilities of the strains to nitro compounds, as well the expression levels of enzymes involved in nitro reduction and on the corresponding enzyme activities and found distinct differences between the three strains.

### Sample Protocol
Trophozoites from G. lamblia WBC6 (C6), WBA1 (A1), and GS/M-83-H7 (H7) were grown under anaerobic conditions in 10 ml culture tubes (Nunc, Roskilde, Denmark) on modified TYI-S-33 medium. In order to ensure growth of the A1 and H7 clones, the components were as close as possible to the isolation medium, in particular heat-inactivated adult bovine serum (Biofluids, Rockville MD) and casein peptone (Becton Dickinson, Cockeysville, MD). Cultures from resistant strains were routinely passaged 5 times in the presence of 50 μM NTZ or MET, respectively. Subcultures were performed by inoculating 20 μl (wild-type) or 100 μl (resistant) of cells from a confluent culture detached by cooling (see below) to a new tube containing 10 ml of the appropriate medium. For all experiments comparing wild-type to resistant trophozoites, the medium from confluent cultures was removed one day before harvest and replaced with fresh medium without nitro compound. Trophozoites were detached by incubation on ice for 15 min followed by centrifugation (300×g, 10 min, 4 °C). Pellets were washed three times with ice-cold PBS, counted, and stored at −80 °C for subsequent proteomic analysis. Cell pellets were lysed in 100 μL 8M urea/100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8/protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostics, Rotkreuz, Switzerland) by incubation for 15 min at room temperature followed by 15 min in an ultrasonic water bath. Proteins were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 37°C and 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 37°C. Proteins were precipitated at -20°C by addition of 5 volumes cold acetone and incubation at -20°C over-night. All liquid was carefully removed and the pellet dried in ambient air for 15 min before reconstitution of proteins in 200 μl of 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay and an aliquot corresponding to 10 μg protein was digested by trypsin (1:50 trypsin/protein ratio) for 6 hours at 37°C after diluted of urea concentration to 1.6M with 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and 2 mM CaCl2. The digests were acidified with TFA (1%) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS (EASY-nLC 1000 coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer, ThermoFisher Scientific) with three repetitive injections of 500 ng protein digest. Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (3μm, 100 Å, 75μm x 2 cm, ThermoFisher Scientific, Reinach, Switzerland) and separated by backflush on a C18 column (3μm, 100 Å, 75μm x 15 cm, Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) by applying a 60 min gradient of 5% acetonitrile to 40% in water, 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 400 nl/min. Peptides of m/z 360-1400 were detected on the QExactive with resolution set at 70’000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1E06 and maximum ion injection time of 250 ms. A top ten data dependent method for precursor ion fragmentation was applied with the following settings: resolution 17’500, AGC of 1E05, maximum ion time of 120 ms, underfill ratio 0.1%, charge exclusion of unassigned and 1+ ions, peptide match on, and dynamic exclusion for 30 sec, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were obtained from three biological replicates, with three technical replicates for each biological replicate, for each strain. All MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.5.4.1) with matching between runs for the same strain activated, but not between different strains, in order to avoid over-interpretation of the data. The sample sets were interpreted separately by MaxQuant. Fragment spectra were interpreted against a recent Giardia protein sequence database including both WB and GS datasets in fasta format (GiardiaDB-5.0_GintestinalisAssemblageA_AnnotatedProteins_v2). The trypsin cleavage rule allowed amide bond cleavage after lysine and arginine but not if a proline follows and up to three missed cleavage sites, fixed carbamidomethylation modification of cysteines, variable oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 and 20 ppm, respectively. Peptide spectrum matches, peptide and protein group identifications were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) based on reversed database sequence matches, and a minimum of two razor or unique peptides were required to accept a protein group identification. Protein identifications considered as contaminations (e.g. trypsin or BSA) as well as proteins identified only by site (considered by MaxQuant developers as very likely false positives) were removed for statistical validation. The normalized label-free quantification (LFQ) protein group intensities as calculated by MaxQuant were used for relative proteome quantifications. First, we imputed missing protein LFQ values for samples in any condition group when there were at least two LFQ intensity in all replicates (downshift of 1.8 S.D. with a width of 0.3 S.D.). This left protein groups without values in one or the other group. For Welch's T-tests, those missing protein intensities were replaced by imputed values from the very low end of intensity distributions (downshift 2.5 S.D., width of 0.3 S.D.). An FDR-controlled Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was used for correction of p-values. A log2-fold change of at least one and a corrected p-value of ≦0.05 were required to be considered as significant. Statistical testing and imputation were made with a home-made R script run under R-Studio. To identify true differentials, orthologues in both WB and GS datasets were removed.

### Publication Abstract
Giardia lamblia is a causative agent of persistent diarrhoea widespread in regions with low hygienic standards. Laboratory research is based on cloned lines issuing from various patient isolates typed in the late 1980s and 90s using restriction analysis and serology. In the present study, we compared the well-characterized strain WBC6 with another clone of the parent WB isolate termed WBA1 and with a clone from another isolate, GS/M-83-H7, using shotgun mass spectrometry proteomics. We identified 398 proteins differentially expressed between the GS and both WB isolates and 97 proteins differentially expressed between the two WB isolates. We investigated the expression levels of the predominant variant-specific surface proteins (VSPs) in each clone and matched the previously described major VSPs of each strain to the corresponding open reading frame sequences identified by whole-genome sequencing efforts. Furthermore, since the original WB isolate comes from a patient treated with metronidazole, we compared the susceptibilities of the strains to nitro compounds, as well the expression levels of enzymes involved in nitro reduction and on the corresponding enzyme activities and found distinct differences between the three strains.

### Keywords
Diversity - drug susceptibility – isolates - parasite-host-interaction

### Affiliations
Institute of Parasitology, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Berne, Länggass-Strasse 122, CH-3012 Berne, Switzerland
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Loachim Müller
Institute of Parasitology, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Berne, Länggass-Strasse 122, CH-3012 Berne, Switzerland


