### Accession
PXD025682

### Title
Mapping the interactome of OCIAD1 in human K562 cells

### Description
Immunoprecipitation of OCIAD1 followed by mass spectrometry analysis to identify binding partners in human cells. To determine the functional significance of OCIAD1 interactors, we also looked for interactions that were modulated by a loss-of-function mutant (F102A).

### Sample Protocol
K562 OCIAD1 knockdown cells, and K562 OCIAD1 knockdown cells rescued with either wildtype or mutated (F102A) OCIAD1 were crosslinked with dithiobis(succinimidyl propionate) (DSP, Life Technologies, cat# 22585) made from a freshly prepared 0.25M stock solution in DMSO. In short, 150ml of confluent (~1x10^6 cells/ml) K562 cells of the indicated OCIAD1 background were harvested by centrifugation (1000g, 5min), washed with warm (37oC) PBS, and crosslinked at room temperature for 30 min with 0.5mM DSP in PBS at ~1x10^6 cells/ml. DSP was then quenched by adding Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) to a final concentration of 100mM. Cells were harvested by centrifugation (1000g, 5 min), washed with cold PBS, harvested again, and solubilized in 2ml of cold RIPA buffer supplemented with 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (MilliporeSigma, Burlington, MA) on ice for 30 min. Samples were centrifuged at 26000g for 30 min at 4oC in a TLA100.4 rotor. The supernatant was collected, protein concentration was measured using a BCA assay kit (Pierce, Waltham, MA), and aliquots were stored at -80oC.  Immunopurification was performed on three independently DSP-crosslinked samples. Each sample was thawed on ice and adjusted to 7.8mg of total protein in 2ml of RIPA buffer containing 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (MilliporeSigma, Burlington, MA). OCIAD1 was immunocaptured overnight at 4oC with 3µg of rabbit anti-OCIAD1 antibody (Thermo Fisher, cat# PA5-20834). Antibodies were captured with 100µl of μMACS protein A beads (Miltenyi Biotec; San Diego, CA). Beads were isolated with μ columns and a μMACS separator (Miltenyi Biotec; San Diego, CA), washed 5 times with 1ml of RIPA buffer and 3 times with 1ml of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0. Bait proteins were eluted with 25µl of elution buffer (2M Urea, 0.67M thiourea in 50mM Ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0) containing LysC/Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, cat# V5071) to a final concentration of 5µg/ml followed by two elution with 50µl of elution buffer without LysC/Trypsin. Samples were reduced with 10mM TCEP (Pierce, Waltham, MA) for 30 min at 37oC, alkylated with 15mM 2-chloroacetamide (MilliporeSigma, Burlington, MA), digested overnight at 37oC, and desalted using ZipTip with 0.6 µL C18 resin (MilliporeSigma, Burlington, MA, cat# ZTC18S096) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis on a Thermo Scientific Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer in Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) mode. Peptides were separated on an Easy-spray 100µm x 25cm C18 column using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nUPLC with 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (solvent B) and the following gradient conditions: 2% to 50% solvent B over 60 minutes, followed by a 50%-99% solvent B in 6 minutes, held for 3 minutes and finally 99% to 2% solvent B in 2 minutes. The total run time was 90 minutes. Mass spectra were acquired using a collision energy of 35, resolution of 30K, maximum inject time of 54 ms and a AGC target of 50K. The analytical samples were run in DIA mode with 8 Da staggered isolation windows covering 400-1000 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with DIA-NN (1.7.12) using the following settings (Protease: Trypsin/P, Missed cleavages: 1, Variable modifications: 1, Peptide length range: 7-30, Precursor m/z range: 300-1800, Fragment ion m/z range: 200-1800, Precursor FDR: 1). The N-term M excision, C carbamidomethylation, M oxidation, and RT profiling options were enabled and all other parameters were set to default. A proteome-scale in silico deep learning-based library was initially generated in DIA-NN from the Uniprot human reference proteome (UP000005640, one protein per gene) with a list of common contaminants. This large spectral library was refined with deep sample specific in-house chromatogram libraries generated from whole cell and mitochondrial lysates using six gas-phase fractionated DIA injections with a total of 52 overlapping 4 m/z-wide windows ranging from 400 to 1000m/z (GPF 1: 400-500 m/z, GPF 2: 500-600 m/z, GPF 3: 600-700 m/z, GPF 4: 700-800 m/z, GPF 5: 800-900 m/z, and GPF 6: 900-1000 m/z). The resulting chromatogram libraries were used together with the proteome-scale predicted deep learning-based spectral library to generate a new highly optimized spectral library. This new spectral library was subsequently used to process our analytical samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Complex iii, Cytochrome c1, Ociad1, Affinity purification, Prohibitin

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, College of Biological Sciences, University of California, Davis, CA, 95616, USA
University of California, Davis

### Submitter
Maxence Le Vasseur

### Lab Head
Dr Jodi Nunnari
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, College of Biological Sciences, University of California, Davis, CA, 95616, USA


