### Accession
PXD000792

### Title
PIA - Yeast Gold Standard Benchmark Dataset

### Description
This Dataset is no actual new study but the Yeast Gold Standard benchmark dataset used in the PIA manuscript.

### Sample Protocol
The sample was processed as described in Ramakrishnan, S. R. et al., Integrating shotgun proteomics and mRNA expression data to improve protein identification. Bioinformatics 2009, 25, (11), 1397-403

### Data Protocol
For these runs the RAW files were converted to mzML using the msConvertGUI and further processed to MGF files using OpenMS. For the identification a precursor tolerance of 25 ppm, a fragment tolerance of 0.5 Da, one missed cleavage and the variable modifications for oxidation of M and protein N-terminal acetylation were allowed.

### Publication Abstract
Protein inference connects the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) obtained from database search engines back to proteins, which are typically at the heart of most proteomics studies. Different search engines yield different PSMs and thus different protein lists. Analysis of results from one or multiple search engines is often hampered by different data exchange formats and lack of convenient and intuitive user interfaces. We present PIA, a flexible software suite for combining PSMs from different search engine runs and turning these into consistent results. PIA can be integrated into proteomics data analysis workflows in several ways. A user-friendly graphical user interface can be run either locally or (e.g., for larger core facilities) from a central server. For automated data processing, stand-alone tools are available. PIA implements several established protein inference algorithms and can combine results from different search engines seamlessly. On several benchmark data sets, we show that PIA can identify a larger number of proteins at the same protein FDR when compared to that using inference based on a single search engine. PIA supports the majority of established search engines and data in the mzIdentML standard format. It is implemented in Java and freely available at https://github.com/mpc-bioinformatics/pia.

### Keywords
Yeast, Benchmark

### Affiliations
Ruhr-Universität Bochum,
Medical Faculty,
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Medical Bioinformatics / Functional Proteomics
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Medizinisches Proteom-Center

### Submitter
Julian Uszkoreit

### Lab Head
Dr Katrin Marcus
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Medizinisches Proteom-Center


### SDRF
- organism: Saccharomyces cerevisiae
- organism part: cell lysate
- cell type: cell culture
- disease: not available
- label: label free sample
- instrument: LTQ Orbitrap
- modification parameters: Oxidation
- modification parameters: Acetyl

