### Accession
PXD019709

### Title
Immunoaffinity targeted mass spectrometry analysis of plasma samples reveals an imbalance of active and inactive CXCL10 in primary Sjögren’s Syndrome disease patients

### Description
One of the most important advantages of mass spectrometry is the ability to quantify proteins and their modifications in parallel to obtain a holistic picture of the protein of interest. Here, we present a hybrid immunoaffinity targeted mass spectrometry (MS) approach that combines efficient pan-antibody enrichment of a specific protein from plasma with the selectivity of targeted MS analysis to quantitate specific protein modifications. In this study, we used this approach to quantify plasma levels of the chemokine CXCL10 that has been associated with many immunological disorders such as systemic lupus erythematosus and primary Sjögren's Syndrome. The hybrid approach enabled sensitive, specific and simultaneous quantification of total, full-length (active) CXCL101-77 and DPP4 truncated (inactive) CXCL103-77 in human plasma. Samples from 30 healthy individuals and 34 primary Sjögren's Syndrome patients were analyzed. The ratio of CXCL101-77 to truncated CXCL103-77 was significantly increased and demonstrated an improved classification of the primary Sjögren's syndrome patients (ROC AUC = 0.74) when compared to total CXCL10 (ROC AUC = 0.66). Furthermore, the ratio of CXCL101-77 to truncated CXCL103-77 correlated best with Sjögren's syndrome disease activity. As this strategy can be readily adapted to other proteins and modifications of interest, we are convinced that it will lead to a more detailed understanding of different proteoforms in physiology and pathology yielding more relevant biomarkers and drug targets.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for LC-MS analysis 100 μl urea lysis buffer (8 M urea (AppliChem), 0.1 M Ammoniumbicarbonate (Sigma), 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Sigma)) was added to each sample and the disulfide bonds reduced at 37°C for 1 hour. Subsequently, free thiols were alkylated with 15 mM chloroacetamide (Sigma) at 37° for 30 minutes. Samples were digested overnight at 37°C with either sequencing-grade endoproteinase Glu-C (Promega) or Lys-C (Wako) at a protein-to-enzyme ratio of 50:1 or 100:1. Subsequently, peptides were desalted using C18 microspin cartridges (Harvard Apparatus, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, dried under vacuum and stored at -80°C until further use.   LC-MS analysis of recombinant CXCL10 To select the most suited proteotypic peptides for monitoring total CXCL10 levels as well as the N-termini before and after degradation, aliquots containing 1 ug of untreated recombinant human CXCL101-77 (full length) and 1 ug recombinant human CXCL10 treated with 0.2 µg/ml recombinant human DPP4 to yield CXCL103-77 (truncated) were subjected to proteolytic cleavage using Lys-C and Glu-C, respectively, and prepared for LC-MS analysis as described above. The peptide samples were re-suspended in 0.1% aqueous formic acid solution at 0.5 pmol/ul concentration. 1 pmol (2 ul) of peptides of each sample were subjected to LC-MS analysis using a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer connected to an electrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) as recently specified (PMID: 27345528) and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. In brief, peptide separation was carried out using an EASY nLC-1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 30cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using a linear gradient from 95% solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and 5% solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 45% solvent B over 60 min at a flow rate of 0.2 μl/min. Each MS1 scan was followed by high-collision-dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most abundant precursor ions with dynamic exclusion for 20 seconds. Total cycle time was approximately 2 s. For MS1, 3e6 ions were accumulated in the Orbitrap cell over a maximum time of 100 ms and scanned at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 1e5 ions, accumulation time of 100 ms and a resolution of 30,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events. The normalized collision energy was set to 27%, the mass isolation window was set to 1.4 m/z, one microscan was acquired for each spectrum and the first mass was fixed to 100 Th.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were converted to the mascot generic file (mgf) format using the msconvert tool (part of ProteoWizard, version 3.0.4624 (2013-6-3)). Using the MASCOT algorithm (Matrix Science, Version 2.4.1), the mgf files were searched against a decoy database containing normal and reverse sequences of the predicted SwissProt entries of Homo sapiens (www.ebi.ac.uk, release date 2015/05/05), full (without signal peptide) and truncated CXCL10 and commonly observed contaminants (in total 41,158 sequences for Homo sapiens) generated using the SequenceReverser tool from the MaxQuant software (Version 1.0.13.13). The precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The search criteria were set as follows: full Lys-C/Glu-C specificity was required (cleavage after lysine/glutamate residues unless followed by proline), 3 missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethylation (C), was set as fixed modification and oxidation (M) as a variable modification. Next, the database search results were imported to the Scaffold Q+ software (version 4.8.6, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) and the protein false identification rate was set to 1% based on the number of decoy hits. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet program (PMID:14632076). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Cxcl10, Targeted ms, Primary sjögren’s syndrome, Prm

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr ALexander Schmidt
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland


