### Accession
PXD007531

### Title
Proteomics based identification and validation of biomarkers for AMD

### Description
Age related macular degeneration (AMD) is one of the leading causes of irreversible central vision loss in the elderly population. According to the WHO estimates, AMD globally ranks third in causing vision impairment with a blindness prevalence of 8.7%.There is no cure for AMD; however,if it is diagnosed at an early stage, its progression can be slowed down by maintaining a healthy life style. Studies have been carried out to identify biomarkers in the plasma or serum of AMD patients. However, a consensus has not been reached with respect to an ideal biomarker which can predict and prognosticate the disease at an earlier stage. This can be attributed to the differences in the ethnicity and other geographical differences, which makes it important to conduct the study in specific regions.The current study aims to findnon-invasive prognostic biomarkers in the urine specimens of the AMD patients. Comparative proteomic analysis of urine samples from Early AMD, Choroidalneovascular membrane(CNVM) , Geographic atrophy(GA) and healthy controls was performed using Tandem mass tags (TMT) followed by mass spectrometry. Out of 751 proteins identified 383 proteins were found to be differentially expressed in various groups of AMD patients. Gene ontology classification of differentially expressed proteins revealed majority of them were involved in catalytic functions and binding activities. Pathway analysis showed, cell adhesion molecule pathways (CAMs), Complement and coagulation cascades, to be significantly deregulated in AMD. Upon validation by ELISA, SERPINA-1, TIMP-1, APOA-1 were significantly over expressed in AMD patients compared to the controls. A logistic model of APOA-1 in combination with CFH and C3 polymorphisms predicted the risk of developing AMD with 82% accuracy. This study gives us a preliminary data on non invasive biomarkers for AMD, which can be further validated in a large cohort and translated  for diagnostic use.

### Sample Protocol
TMT labeling: Midstream urine sample was collected from patients and stored at ice immediately upon collection. Urine sample was centrifuged at 1200 rpm for 10mins at 4ºC and the supernatant is again centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 15 mins at 4ºC to remove cell debris and precipitates. It is then passed on 0.22µm filters to remove bacterial contamination and are concentrated using 3kDa cut off filters and aliquoted and stored in -80ºC until further use.  Protein estimation was carried out using BCA assay (Pierce).  10  patient samples each was taken in every group. Approximately 50 µg of protein was added from each sample and pooled.  Briefly, 200 µg out of the 500 µg pooledsamples were reduced and alkylated by using Dithiothreitol and Iodocetamide, respectively. The samples were digested overnight with trypsin (promega) (1:20) at 37°C. Pre and post digests were loaded on SDS-PAGE for checking digestion efficiency. Peptides from each group were labelled using 8plex tandem mass tags with technical replicates as per manufacturer’s protocol (Catalogue # 90110 Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptides derived from control were labelled by 126 and 127N, Early AMD were labelled by 127C and 128N, CNVM were labelled by 128C and 129N, GA were labelled by 129C and 130N and are pooled.  Basic reversed-phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC) The labelled peptides were subjected to bRPLC fractionation as described previously33 . Briefly, 1 mL of bRPLC solvent A (10 mMTEABC pH 8.4, Sigma Aldrich) was used to resuspend 10mg of lyophilized peptides mixture. This mixture was fractionated by bRPLC chromatography on a XBridge C18, 5 μm, 250 × 4.6 mm column (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) on an Agilent 1100 LC system with a flow rate of 1 mL/min by employing an increasing gradient of bRPLC solvent B (10 mMTEABC in 90% acetonitrile, pH 8.4). A total of 96 fractions were initially collected in 96- well plates with 0.1% formic acid added to each well. The fractions were then concatenated to 12 fractions and dried using speedvac. LC-MS/MS analysis The fractions were analyzed using on Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with Proxeon Easy NanoLC system. The peptide samples were enriched on a trap column (75μm x 2 cm) at a flow rate of 3μL/min and resolved on an analytical column (75μm x 15 cm) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The peptides were eluted in a linear gradient of 10-30% of acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid over 100 mins. Data dependent acquisition with full scans in 400-1600 m/z range was carried out at a mass resolution of 120,000 at 400 m/z. Fifteen most intense precursor ions from a survey scan were selected for MS/MS fragmented using HCD fragmentation with 35% normalized collision energy and detected at a mass resolution of 30,000 at 400 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set for 30 seconds with a 10 ppm mass window.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and database searches were carried out using Mascot and Sequest human protein database NCBI Ref Seq (Version 65, containing 36211 protein entries  along with common contaminants ). Search parameters included maximum of two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation at cysteine, TMT 6-plex (+229.163) modification at N-terminus of peptide and lysine were set as fixed modification while oxidation of methionine as variable modification. For MS2 data, monoisotopic peptide mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to 0.1 Da. False discovery rate of 1% was set at the PSM level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Urine, Biomarkers, Amd

### Affiliations
Vision research foundation, Chennai-06
Dept of pathology, Vision research foundation, Chennai, India

### Submitter
Krishnakumar Subramanian

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. S.Krishnakumar
Dept of pathology, Vision research foundation, Chennai, India


