### Accession
PXD010452

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of rodent exercise models

### Description
Exercise stimulates systemic and tissue-specific adaptations that protect against lifestyle related diseases including obesity and type 2 diabetes. Exercise places high mechanical and energetic demands on contracting skeletal muscle, which require finely-tuned protein post-translational modifications involving signal transduction (e.g. phosphorylation) to elicit appropriate short- and long-term adaptive responses.  To uncover the breadth of protein phosphorylation events underlying the adaptive responses to endurance exercise and skeletal muscle contraction, we performed global, unbiased mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomic analyses of skeletal muscle from two rodent models, in situ muscle contraction in rats and treadmill-based endurance exercise in mice.

### Sample Protocol
Skeletal muscle lysis, isobaric labeling and phosphopeptide enrichment Muscle biopsies were ground under liquid nitrogen and approximately 40 mg of tissue lysed in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 25 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 7.9 containing phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktails (Roche) by tip-probe sonication (2 x 15 s) on ice. The lysates were centrifuged at 17,000 x g, 15 min, 4ºC and the supernatant precipitated with 6 volumes of acetone, overnight, -20ºC. Protein pellets were resuspended in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 25 mM TEAB, pH 7.9 and quantified by Qubit fluorescence (Invitrogen). Concentrations were normalized and 1 mg of protein reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 60 min at 25ºC followed by alkylation with 25 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 25ºC in the dark. The reaction was quenched to a final concentration of 20 mM dithiothreitol and digested with Lys-C (Wako) at 1:50 enzyme to substrate ratio for 2 h at 25ºC. The mixture was diluted 5-fold with 25 mM TEAB and digested with trypsin at 1:50 enzyme to substrate ratio for 12 h at 30ºC. The peptide mixture was acidified to a final concentration of 2% formic acid, 0.1% trifuoroacetic acid (TFA) and centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 15 min. Peptides were desalted using hydrophilic lipophilic balance – solid phase extraction (HLB-SPE) cartridges (Waters) followed by elution with 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were resuspended in 30 µl of 100 mM TEAB, quantified by Qubit fluorescence and normalized to 250 µg / 30 µl (pH 7.5). Peptides were labelled with 10-plex tandem mass tags (TMT) in 50% acetonitrile for 90 min at room temperature and quenched with 0.5% hydroxylamine. The labeled peptides were pooled within the respective experiments and dried to approximately 50 µl by vacuum centrifugation. Phosphopeptides were enriched essentially as described previously and consisted of titanium dioxide followed by sequential elution from immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography and fractionation by hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (TiSH) (Engholm-Keller et al., 2012). Briefly, peptides were resuspended in 1 ml of titanium dioxide loading buffer (1 M glycolic acid, 80% acetonitrile, 5% TFA), and a 20 µg aliquot was saved for total proteomic analysis. Titanium dioxide beads (15 mg in 150 µl acetonitrile) (GL Science, Japan) were added to the peptide mixture and rotated at room temperature for 20 min. The mixture was centrifuged at 10,000 x g, 1 min and the supernatant was applied to a second aliquot of titanium dioxide (7.5 mg in 75 µl acetonitrile) and rotated at room temperature for 20 min. The mixture was centrifuged at 10,000 x g, 1 min and the supernatant was applied to a third aliquot of titanium dioxide (4 mg in 40 µl acetonitrile) and rotated at room temperature for 20 min. The beads were washed with 100 µL titanium dioxide loading buffer followed by 80% acetonitrile, 2% TFA and finally 16% acetonitrile, 0.4% TFA. The beads were dried briefly by vacuum centrifugation and eluted with 50 µL of 1% ammonium hydroxide by shaking at room temperature for 15 min. The titanium dioxide elution slurry was loaded onto a C8-plugged micro-column and eluted with gentle air pressure to trap beads. The beads were eluted with an additional 50 µL 1% ammonium hydroxide and the elution was pooled. Enriched phosphopeptides were acidified to a final concentration of 10% formic acid and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The enriched phosphopeptides were resuspended in 500 µl of 50% acetonitrile, 0.2% TFA and rotated with 50 µl of Fe(III)-IMAC beads (Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature for 45 min. The IMAC slurry was loaded onto a crushed GeLoader microcolumn and eluted with gentle air pressure to trap beads. Mono-phosphorylated peptides were eluted with 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA followed by 20% acetonitrile, 1% TFA; pooled with the flow-through and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Multi-phosphorylated peptides were eluted with 1% ammonium hydroxide, acidified to a final concentration of 10% formic acid, 0.1% TFA and desalted with C18 microcolumns. Enriched mono-phosphorylated peptides were subjected to another round of titanium dioxide as described above. The enriched mono-phosphorylated peptides and non-phosphorylated peptides were fractionated on in-house packed TSK-amide HILIC column as described previously (Palmisano et al., 2010). All isobarically labelled peptides were analyzed by data-dependent acquisition (DDA) as described below.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry Peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto a 50 cm x 75 µm inner diameter column packed in-house with 1.9 µm C18AQ particles (Dr Maisch GmbH HPLC) using an Easy nLC-1000 UHPLC operated in single-column mode with intelligent flow control loading at 950 bar. Peptides were separated using a linear gradient of 5 – 30% Buffer B over 100 min at 250 nl/min (Buffer A = 0.5% acetic acid; Buffer B = 80% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid). The column was maintained at 50ºC using a PRSO-V1 ion-source (Sonation) coupled directly to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (MS). A full-scan MS1 was measured at 70,000 resolution at 200 m/z (300 – 1750 m/z; 100 ms injection time; 3e6 AGC target) followed by isolation of up to 20 most abundant precursor ions for MS/MS (2 m/z isolation; 8.3e5 intensity threshold; 30.0 normalized collision energy; 17,500 resolution at 200 m/z; 60 ms injection time; 5e5 AGC target). Charge state reduction of isobarically labeled peptides was achieved with a 10% ammonium hydroxide vapour underneath the ESI source (Thingholm et al., 2010).   Bioinformatics Mass spectrometry data were process with MaxQuant (v1.5.2.10) and searched with Andromeda against either the mouse or rat UniProt databases [PMID: 19029910 PMID: 21254760]. All settings were default and searched with the following variable modifications; methionine oxidation; serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation; and N-terminus and lysine TMT labeling. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Bioinformatic analysis was performed primarily in the R programming environment [http://www.R-project.org, R Development Core Team (2008). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. ISBN 3-900051-07-0]. All data were normalized to the median of each muscle. Significantly regulated phosphopeptides were determined using a moderated t-test from LIMMA package in R [Smyth, G.K, 2004, Statistical applications in genetic and molecular biology, 3, no.1, article 3]. Linear models were fit to the data and empirical Bayes was used for variance shrinkage in order to determine regulated sites and P-values were corrected for multiple testing controlling for 5% FDR using Benjamini and Hochberg method (Benjamini et al., 2001). Kinase and pathway enrichment were performed using a mean-rank gene set test. The gene sets for kinase enrichment were known substrates from PhosphoSitePlus [PMID: 22135298] and manual curation. Pathway enrichment gene sets were obtained from KEGG [PMID: 9847135] and Reactome [PMID: 29145629], and filtered to present only the 12 most enriched pathways.

### Publication Abstract
Exercise stimulates cellular and physiological adaptations that are associated with widespread health benefits. To uncover conserved protein phosphorylation events underlying this adaptive response, we performed mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomic analyses of skeletal muscle from two widely used rodent models: treadmill running in mice and in&#xa0;situ muscle contraction in rats. We overlaid these phosphoproteomic signatures with cycling in humans to identify common cross-species phosphosite responses, as well as unique model-specific regulation. We identified &gt;&#xa0;22,000 phosphosites, revealing orthologous protein phosphorylation and overlapping signaling pathways regulated by exercise. This included two conserved phosphosites on stromal interaction molecule 1 (STIM1), which we validate as AMPK substrates. Furthermore, we demonstrate that AMPK-mediated phosphorylation of STIM1 negatively regulates store-operated calcium entry, and this is beneficial for exercise in Drosophila. This integrated cross-species resource of exercise-regulated signaling in human, mouse, and rat skeletal muscle has uncovered conserved networks and unraveled crosstalk between AMPK and intracellular calcium flux.

### Keywords
Signal transduction, Exercise, Phosphoproteomics, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Sydney


