### Accession
PXD006994

### Title
24h Lingulodinium Circadian Proteome

### Description
Protein levels measured over a 24 hour period in a light dark cycle

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracted from Lingulodinium cells digested with trypsin

### Data Protocol
raw files processed in Progenesis to yield mgf files then treated in Mascot server to produce an msID

### Publication Abstract
Protein levels were assessed in the dinoflagellate Lingulodinium polyedra over the course of a diurnal cycle using a label-free LC-MS/MS approach. Roughly 1700 proteins were quantitated in a triplicate dataset over a daily period, and 13 were found to show significant rhythmic changes. Included among the proteins found to be most abundant at night were the two bioluminescence proteins, luciferase and luciferin binding protein, as well as a proliferating cell nuclear protein involved in the nightly DNA replication. Aconitase and a pyrophosphate fructose-6-phosphate-1-phosphotransferase were also found to be more abundant at night, suggestive of an increased ability to generate ATP by glucose catabolism when photosynthesis does not occur. Among the proteins more abundant during the day were found a 2-epi-5-epi-valiolone synthase, potentially involved in synthesis of mycosporin-like amino acids that can act as a "microbial sunscreen", and an enzyme synthesizing vitamin B6 which is known to protect against oxidative stress. A lactate oxidoreductase was also found to be more abundant during the day, perhaps to counteract the pH changes due to carbon fixation by facilitating conversion of pyruvate to lactate. This unbiased proteomic approach reveals novel insights into the daily metabolic changes of this dinoflagellate. Furthermore, the observation that only a limited number of proteins vary support a model where metabolic flux through pathways can be controlled by variations in a select few, possibly rate limiting, steps. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006994.

### Keywords
Dinoflagellate, Circadian

### Affiliations
universite de montreal
IRBV, Sciences Biologiques, Universite de Montreal

### Submitter
David Morse

### Lab Head
Dr David Morse
IRBV, Sciences Biologiques, Universite de Montreal


