### Accession
PXD024387

### Title
Mass spectrometry hits for GFP::BBLN-1/bioGFP::BBLN1 pull down

### Description
Epithelial tubes are essential components of metazoan organ systems that control the flow of fluids and the exchange of materials between body compartments and the outside environment. The size and shape of the central lumen confer important characteristics to tubular organs and need to be carefully controlled. Here, we identify the small coiled-coil protein BBLN-1 as a regulator of lumen morphology in the C. elegans intestine. Loss of BBLN-1 causes the formation of bubble-shaped invaginations of the apical membrane into the cytoplasm of intestinal cells, and abnormal aggregation of the subapical intermediate filament (IF) network. BBLN-1 interacts with IF proteins and localizes to the IF network in an IF-dependent manner. The appearance of invaginations is a result of the abnormal IF aggregation, indicating a direct role for the IF network in maintaining lumen homeostasis. Finally, we identify bublin (BBLN) as the mammalian ortholog of BBLN-1. When expressed in the C. elegans intestine, bublin recapitulates the localization pattern of BBLN-1 and can compensate for the loss of BBLN-1. In mouse intestinal organoids, bublin localizes subapically, together with the IF protein keratin 8. Our results therefore may have implications for understanding the role of IFs in regulating epithelial tube morphology in mammals.

### Sample Protocol
GFP pull-down from C. elegans. Animals endogenously expressing GFP-tagged BBLN-1 or control animals expressing an integrated GFP transgene were grown on 6–8 9 cm NGM plates until starvation, to enrich for L1 animals. Animals were then transferred into 250 ml of S-Medium supplemented with 1% Penn/Strep (Life Technologies), 0.1% nystatin (Sigma) and OP50 bacteria obtained from the growth of a 400 ml culture. Animals were grown at 20 °C at low shaking for 96 hours and were harvested and cleaned using a sucrose gradient, as previously described with one exception being the inclusion of MgSO4 in the M9 medium. Worms were distributed into 15 ml TPX tubes (Diagenode) to reach 200–400 µl worm pellet per tube and were washed with lysis buffer (25mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 0.5% IGEPAL CA-630, 1X cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche)). The liquid was removed, and the sample was flash frozen in liquid nitrogen for storage at -80 °C. To lyse the worms, tubes were thawed on ice and ice-cold lysis buffer was added to reach a total volume of 2 ml. Tubes were sonicated for 10 mins (sonication cycle: 30 sec ON, 30 sec OFF) at 4 °C in a Bioruptor ultrasonication bath (Diagenode) at high energy setting. After lysis, lysates were cleared by centrifugation and protein levels were measured using the Bradford BCA assay (Thermo Scientific).  Immunoprecipitation was performed using GFP-Trap Magnetic Agarose beads (Chromotek) according to manufacturer’s protocol, using 25 µl of beads per sample. To prep the beads, they were first equilibrated in wash buffer (10 mM Tris/Cl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.1% IGEPAL CA-630), blocked with 1% BSA for 1 hour, then washed 4 times with wash buffer. Next, lysate was added to the beads and they were incubated for 1 hour tumbling end-over-end. Lysate was then removed, and the beads were washed 4 times in wash buffer. After the final wash step, all liquid was removed, and the beads were flash frozen with liquid nitrogen. The experiment was performed in triplicate (biological replicates) and processed on independent days. Biotin-streptavidin pull-down from cells. HEK293T cells were transfected with overexpression constructs together with BirA. 1 μg/μL PEI (Polyethylenimine HCl MAX Linear MW 40000 (PolySciences, 24765–2)) and 1 μg/μL DNA (3:1) were mixed in Ham’s F10 and incubated for 5 minutes at room temperature. The mixture was added to cells and incubated for 24 hours to allow expression. The cells were harvested in ice-cold PBS and lysed with lysis buffer (150 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100 and cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)). 90% of each cell lysate was centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 5 minutes and the supernatants were transferred and incubated with streptavidin beads (Dynabeads M-280, Invitrogen), which were already blocked by 0.2% Chicken Egg Albumine (Sigma). The remaining cell lysates were denatured with SDS/DTT sample buffer and used as input sample. Beads were incubated for 40 minutes at 4 °C, before washing 5 times with washing buffer (100mM Tris pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton X-100 and 0.5x protease inhibitor cocktail).  Mass spectrometry analysis for BBLN-1/bublin. Streptavidin and anti-GFP beads after affinity purification were resuspended in 15 μl of 4× Laemmli sample buffer (Biorad), boiled at 99 °C for 10 min and supernatants were loaded on 4–12% Criterion XT Bis–Tris precast gel (Biorad). The gel was fixed with 40% methanol and 10% acetic acid and then stained for 1 hour using colloidal coomassie dye G-250 (Gel Code Blue Stain, Thermo Scientific). Each lane from the gel was cut and placed in 1.5 ml tubes. Samples were then washed with 250 μl of water, followed by 15 min dehydration in acetonitrile. Proteins were reduced (10mM DTT, 1 hour at 56 °C), dehydrated and alkylated (55mM iodoacetamide, 1 hour in the dark). After two rounds of dehydration, trypsin was added to the samples and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted with acetonitrile, dried down and reconstituted in 10% formic acid prior to MS analysis. Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Agilent 1290 Infinity LC (Agilent Technologies). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Reprosil pur C18, Dr. Maisch, 100 μm × 2 cm, 3 μm; constructed in-house) with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) at a maximum pressure of 800 bar and chromatographically separated over the analytical column (Poroshell 120 EC C18, Agilent Technologies, 100 μm x 50 cm, 2.7 μm) using 90 min linear gradient from 7% to 30% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 150 nl min−1. The mass spectrometers were used in a data-dependent mode, which automatically switched between MS and MS/MS. After a survey scan from 375 to 1600m/z the 10 most abundant peptides were subjected to HCD fragmentation. MS spectra were acquired with a resolution > 30,000, whereas MS2 with a resolution > 17,500.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to mgf files using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Database search was performed using the C. elegans or the human database and Mascot (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, UK) as the search engine. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was set as cleavage specificity, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. Data filtering was performed using a percolator, resulting in 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Additional filters were search engine rank 1 and mascot ion score > 20. Crapome was used to analyze BBLN-1 interacting proteins in three biological replicas and bublin binding proteins in a single experiment, using proteins identified in the GFP pull downs as control. Significance analysis of interactome (SAINT) score and simpler fold-change (FC) calculations FC-A and FC-B were derived from the Crapome analysis by averaging the spectral counts across the controls. FC-A averages the counts across all controls while the more stringent FC-B takes the average of the top 3 highest spectral counts for the abundance estimate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bbln-1, C. elegans, Hek293t, Bublin, Affinity purification, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Developmental Biology, Institute of Biodynamics and Biocomplexity, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH, Utrecht, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Sanne Remmelzwaal

### Lab Head
Dr Mike Boxem
Developmental Biology, Institute of Biodynamics and Biocomplexity, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH, Utrecht, The Netherlands


