### Accession
PXD027961

### Title
tipNrich, a tip-based N-terminal proteome enrichment method

### Description
Protein N-termini provide valuable information such as half-life of protein, but one of hurdles to study N-terminome is that it requires large amount of sample, but this requirement might be problematic for analyzing the limited samples such as low number of cells of clinical biopsies. In this regard, we developed tip-based N-terminome enrichment method, tipNrich. Our method, the scale-down version of our previously introduced N-terminome enrichment method iNrich, provides simple and fast N-terminone analysis platform even for analyzing small amount of protein. Our method could be utilized either for quality check of protein products or as a diagnostic tool for human diseases related to N-terminal proteoforms. We applied our method to various recombinant single proteins, protein mixture, and plasma samples of wild-type transthyretin amyloidosis (WTTA) patients.

### Sample Protocol
Sigle proteins (beta-galactosidase, catalase, anti-FLAG M2 antibody), protein mixture composing of 6 different proteins, and plasma samples (5 from healthy individuals and 5 from wild-type transthyretin amyloidosis patients) were analyzed.  1 µL of samples (single proteins, protein mixture, or human plasma) were reduced and alkylated using 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM CAM. Then, the amine groups were labeled by adding 0.4 µL of adding 0.4 µL of anhydrous acetic anhydride-d6 and 0.32 L of anhydrous pyridine. After labeling, the leftover labeling agent was quenched by adding 180 µL of 0.2 M EPPS buffer, and the samples were digested with either trypsin or Glu-C. The internal peptides generated by the protease were removed with NHS-activated agarose resin. The enriched N-terminal peptides were desalted via Empore SDB-RPS resin, eluted with 50 µL of 0.1% FA in 50% (v/v) ACN and with 50 µL of 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% (v/v) ACN, and dried. Three different mass spectrometer platforms were used, single proteins with LTQ-XL, protein mixture with LTQ-Orbitrap XL, and human plasma with Q-Exactive.  The human plasma samples were also analyzed with the tandem mass tag (TMT) 10-plex reagent. The plasma samples (5 from healthy individuals and 5 from WTTA patients) were subsequently reduced with 5 mM DTT and alkylated with 10 mM IAA, and then the samples were further diluted 10-fold with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and digested with trypsin. After digestion, the samples were desalted using Oasis HLB SPE cartridges. The eluted peptides were dried within a vacuum concentrator. The dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.1 M TEAB (pH 8.5) adjusting the concentrations to 1 µg/µL. 0.8 mg of TMT10plex tags were dissolved in 41 µL of anhydrous acetonitrile, and each TMT reagent was mixed with 100 µg peptides of each sample. The samples were then incubated at room temperature for 1 hr. The labeling reaction was quenched with 8 µL of 5% hydroxylamine and incubated for 15 min. Differentially labeled peptides were mixed together, and the mixed sample was diluted 10-fold to lower the ACN percentage. After that, the sample was desalted using Oasis HLB SPE cartridges. The eluted peptides were dried within a vacuum concentrator and analyzed with Q-Exactive.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra acquired with tipNrich method were analyzed with Sequest HT module in Proteome Discoverer 2.2. The precursor and fragment tolerances were set to 2.0 Da/0.6 Da (LTQ-XL), 10 ppm/0.6 Da (LTQ-Orbitrap XL), and 10 ppm/0.02 Da (Q-Exactive), respectively. The search database was the protein sequence downloaded from Uniprot for the single protein, the fasta file downloaded from the manufacture homepage for the protein mixture, and Uniprot Human reference database (release data, 2020.06) for the plasma analysis. The search parameters are as follows: The protease specificity was set as semi-Arg-C enzyme specificity for trypsin with up to 2 missed cleavages or semi-Glu-C enzyme specificity (allow both aspartic and glutamic acids) for Glu-C with up to 4 missed cleavages. The static modification settings were carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.0215 Da) and D3-acetylation of lysine (45.0294 Da). The variable modification settings were oxidation of methionine (15.9949 Da), acetylation (42.0106 Da) and D3-acetylation (45.0294 Da), and pyroglutamation (18.0106 Da) at all peptide N-termini.  The mass spectra acquired from TMT experiment using Sequest HT module in Proteome Discoverer 2.2, and it was searched against the Uniprot Human reference database (release date, 2020.06). For the search parameters, the precursor and product ion tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Other search parameter settings included full tryptic specificity with up to two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.0215 Da) and TMT10plex of either peptide N-termini or lysine (229.1629 Da) as static modifications, and oxidation of methionine (15.9949 Da) and acetylation of protein N-termini (42.0106 Da) as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
The mass spectrometry-based analysis of protein post-translational modifications requires large amounts of sample, complicating the analysis of samples with limited amounts of proteins such as clinical biopsies. Here, we present a tip-based N-terminal analysis method, tipNrich. The entire procedure is processed in a single pipette tip to minimize sample loss, which is so highly optimized to analyze small amounts of proteins, even femtomole-scale of a single protein. With tipNrich, we investigated various single proteins purified from different organisms using a low-resolution mass spectrometer and identified several N-terminal peptides with different Nt-modifications such as ragged N-termini. Furthermore, we applied matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry to our method for shortening the analysis time. Moreover, we showed that our method could be utilized in disease diagnosis as exemplified by the characterization of wild-type transthyretin amyloidosis patients compared to the healthy individuals based on N-terminome profiling. In summary, tipNrich will satisfy the need of identifying N-terminal peptides even with highly scarce amounts of proteins and of having faster processing time to check the quality of protein products or to characterize N-terminal proteoform-related diseases.

### Keywords
Human plasma, Protein mixture, Recombinant single proteins, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Korea Institute of Science and Technology
Center for Theragnosis, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul, Korea

### Submitter
Seonjeong  Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Cheolju Lee
Center for Theragnosis, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul, Korea


