### Accession
PXD002908

### Title
Extensive proteomic approaches to identify  glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored proteins in Arabidopsis reveal their diverse responses to cold acclimation

### Description
When plants are exposed to non-freezing low temperatures, they can increase their freezing tolerance (cold acclimation, CA). Changes of plasma membrane (PM) and sterol/sphingolipid-enriched microdomain proteins are thought to be crucial for acquisition of freezing tolerance. Particularly, glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored proteins (GPI-APs), which are lipid-modified proteins and potentially targeted to PM surface and apoplast, are deeply-involved in microdomain functions. However, GPI-AP functions in the CA mechanisms are not yet characterized. In present study, we conducted large-scale proteomics to investigate CA-induced GPI-APs in Arabidopsis leaves.

### Sample Protocol
Leaves from non-acclimated (NA) and cold-acclimated (CA) Arabidopsis were harvested for extraction of plasma membrane (PM), microdomain-enriched detergent-resistant membrane (DRM), apoplast and glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored proteins (GPI-APs)-enriched fractions. PM and DRM fractions were prepared in accordance with Uemura et al. (1995) and Peskan et al. (2000). Apoplastic fluids were extracted vacuum infiltration method based on Boudart et al. (2005) with modifications that mannitol was replaced with sorbitol. GPI-APs-enriched fractions were prepared from PM fraction by the method of Borner et al. (2003) with some modifications. All protein samples were subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion for nano-LC-MS/MS according to the protocol of Li et al. (2012).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were imported into Progenesis LC-MS software (version 4.0, Nonlinear Dynamics). In order to identify proteins, peptide information was exported from Progenesis and searched against the TAIR 10 Arabidopsis protein database (version 20101214, 35,386 entries) with MASCOT server (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science) according to the following parameters: number of missed cleavage, 1; fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation (C); variable modifications, oxidation (M); peptide mass tolerance, 5 ppm; MS/MS tolerance, 0.6 Da; and Peptide charges, +1, +2 and +3. Subsequently, protein information was integrated with Progenesis and protein was quantified as normalized abundance. Sites of GPI modification were predicted by Big-PI Plant Predictor (http://mendel.imp.ac.at/gpi/plant_server.html), GPI-SOM (http://gpi.unibe.ch/), PredGPI (http://gpcr.biocomp.unibo.it/predgpi/pred.htm) FragAnchor (http://navet.ics.hawaii.edu/~fraganchor/NNHMM/NNHMM.html), and the potential GPI-AP protein list in Arabidopsis described in Borner et al. (2003).

### Publication Abstract
Cold acclimation results in changes of the plasma membrane (PM) composition. The PM is considered to contain specific lipid/protein-enriched microdomains which can be extracted as detergent-resistant plasma membrane (DRM). Previous studies in animal cells have demonstrated that glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored proteins (GPI-APs) can be targeted to microdomains and/or the apoplast. However, the functional significance of GPI-APs during cold acclimation in plants is not yet fully understood. In this study, we aimed to investigate the responsiveness of GPI-APs to cold acclimation treatment in Arabidopsis We isolated the PM, DRM, and apoplast fractions separately and, in addition, GPI-AP-enriched fractions were prepared from the PM preparation. Label-free quantitative shotgun proteomics identified a number of GPI-APs (163 proteins). Among them, some GPI-APs such as fasciclin-like arabinogalactan proteins and glycerophosphoryldiester phosphodiesterase-like proteins predominantly increased in PM- and GPI-AP-enriched fractions while the changes of GPI-APs in the DRM and apoplast fractions during cold acclimation were considerably different from those of other fractions. These proteins are thought to be associated with cell wall structure and properties. Therefore, this study demonstrated that each GPI-AP responded to cold acclimation in a different manner, suggesting that these changes during cold acclimation are involved in rearrangement of the extracellular matrix including the cell wall towards acquisition of freezing tolerance.

### Keywords
Detergent-resistant membrane, Freezing tolerance, Arabidopsis, Microdomain, Plasma membrane, Apoplast, Gpi-anchored protein, Cold acclimation

### Affiliations
Cryobiofrontier Research Center, Iwate University, Japan
Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Saitama University

### Submitter
Daisuke Takahashi

### Lab Head
Dr Matsuo Uemura
Cryobiofrontier Research Center, Iwate University, Japan


