### Accession
PXD012469

### Title
Durum Wheat Proteome Changes under Marine and Fungal Biostimulant Treatments

### Description
Durum wheat requires high nitrogen inputs to obtain the high protein concentration necessary to satisfy pasta and semolina quality criteria. Optimizing plant nitrogen use efficiency is therefore of major importance for wheat grain quality. Here, we studied the impact on grain yield, protein concentration, and for the first time on protein composition of a marine (DPI4913) and a fungal (AF086) biostimulants applied to plant leaves. Plants were grown in a greenhouse and sampled at maturity for grain analysis. The protein concentration and quantity in grains per plant were determined, as well as water-use efficiency. A large-scale quantitative proteomics study of wheat flour samples was performed to determine the effect of biostimulant treatment on grain protein composition. Grain dry biomass and protein quantity were increased by 23.9% and 24.8% respectively with DPI4913, and by 27.4% and 25.9%, respectively, with AF086. A total of 1471 proteins were identified and 1391 were quantified. Quantitative proteomics analysis revealed 26 and 38 proteins with a significantly varying abundance after DPI4913 and AF086 treatment, respectively. Among these, 14 proteins were affected by both DPI4913 and AF086 treatments. The highest variations in proteins abundances were found for proteins involved in grain technological properties such as grain hardness, in storage functions with the substantial over-representation of the gluten protein gamma-gliadin, in regulation processes with the over-representation of proteins that play a transcription regulator role, and in stress responses with the over-representation of proteins implied in biotic and abiotic stress defense. The involvement of biostimulants in the abiotic stress response is suggested by the increase in water-use efficiency for DPI4913 treatment (15.4%) and for AF086 treatment (9.9%). In conclusion, our work, performed in greenhouse, has shown that DPI4913 and AF086 treatments promote grain yield while maintaining protein concentration in grains, and positively affect protein composition in term of grain quality. This study suggests that these biostimulants could be used to optimize durum wheat production and quality in field conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomics analysis Wheat flour samples were obtained by finely grinding wheat grains. Flour samples from replicate experiments were pooled to average biological variability. A quantity of 50 mg flour was mixed with 1.5 ml lysis buffer (SDS 2%, 80 mM TrisHCL pH 8.5) and vortexed for 2 h at room temperature. After centrifugation (8000 g, 4°C, 15 min) the supernatant was collected. Protein concentration was determined by DC protein assay (Biorad). A total of 100 µg of proteins was reduced in Laemmli buffer containing 25 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 95°C for 5 min, and cysteines were alkylated by the addition of 90 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature. Protein samples were loaded onto a 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gel and subjected to short electrophoresis. After Instant Blue (Invitrogen) staining of the gel, one gel band was excised, washed twice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate-acetonitrile (1:1, v:v) and then washed once with acetonitrile. Proteins were in-gel digested by the addition of 50 µL of a solution of modified sequencing grade trypsin in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (30 ng/µL, sequence grade, Promega, Charbonnières, France). The mixture was incubated at 37 °C overnight. The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel by one round of incubation (15 min, 37°C) in 1% formic acid–acetonitrile (40%) and two rounds of incubation (15 min each, 37°C) in 1% formic acid–acetonitrile (1:1). The three extracted fractions were pooled and air-dried. Tryptic peptides were resuspended in 100 µl of 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid for further MS analysis. A mix of standard synthetic peptides (iRT Kit; Biognosys, 0.2X) was spiked in all of the samples to monitor the stability of the nanoLC-MS/MS system during the analytical sequence. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis Peptide mixtures at 1 µg/µl were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using a nanoRS UHPLC system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Each sample was analyzed in triplicate injections. Two microliters of each sample (2 µg) were loaded on a C18 pre-column (5 mm × 300 µm; Dionex) at 20 µL/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid. After 5 min of desalting, the pre-column was switched online with the analytical C18 column (50 cm × 75 µm inner diameter; in-house packed with Reprosil C18) equilibrated in 95% of solvent A (5% acetonitrile + 0.2% formic acid in water) and 5% of solvent B (80% acetonitrile + 0.2% formic acid in water). Peptides were eluted using a 5-50% gradient of B for 105 min at a 300 nL/min flow rate. The LTQ-Orbitrap was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with Xcalibur software. Survey scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 300-2000 m/z range with the resolution set to a value of 60000. The 20 most intense ion survey scans were selected for CID (collision-induced dissociation) fragmentation, and the resulting fragments were analyzed in the linear trap (LTQ). Dynamic exclusion was used within 60 s to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics analysis of nanoLC-MS/MS data Acquired MS and MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3). Derived peak lists were submitted to the Andromeda search engine and data were searched against the UNIPROT protein repository release 2017_03 (http://uniprot.org) with a mixed database composed of annotations for T. aestivum and T. Durum (146, 782 sequences; 65, 059, 445 residues; 20170323) and a list of potential contaminant sequences. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for initial searches and 6 ppm for main Andromeda database searches. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.8 Da. Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were defined as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as a fixed modification. The minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids. The minimum number of unique peptides was set to one. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR), calculated by employing a reverse database strategy, was set to 1% for peptides and proteins.  For label-free relative quantification of the samples, the “match between runs” option of MaxQuant was enabled to allow cross-assignment of MS features detected in the different runs. The minimal ratio count was set to 1 for calculation of LFQ intensities. The LFQ metric was used to perform relative quantification between proteins identified in different biological conditions (reflecting a normalized protein quantity deduced from all peptide intensity values). Protein entries identified as potential contaminants by MaxQuant were eliminated from the analysis. Missing values were replaced by a constant noise value determined independently for each analytical run as the 1% percentile of the total protein population. Statistical and functional data analysis For each comparison of quantitative proteomics data, only proteins quantified in a minimum of three replicate experiments in at least one of the biological conditions were subjected to statistical analysis. A p-value and a ratio of the average normalized area were calculated. Proteins are considered variants when the p-value < 0.05 and the ratio < 0.5 or > 2. Volcano plots were drawn to visualize significant protein abundance variations between two conditions. They represent log10 (p-value) according to the log2 ratio. Functional data analysis was performed using Gene Ontology (GO) annotations referring to biological processes and cellular components in Uniprot (https://www.uniprot.org/uploadlists/).

### Publication Abstract
Durum wheat requires high nitrogen inputs to obtain the high protein concentration necessary to satisfy pasta and semolina quality criteria. Optimizing plant nitrogen use efficiency is therefore of major importance for wheat grain quality. Here, we studied the impact on grain yield, protein concentration, and for the first time on protein composition of a marine (DPI4913) and a fungal (AF086) biostimulants applied to plant leaves. A large-scale quantitative proteomics analysis of wheat flour samples led to a dataset of 1471 identified proteins. Quantitative analysis of 1391 proteins revealed 26 and 38 proteins with a significantly varying abundance after DPI4913 and AF086 treatment, respectively, with 14 proteins in common. Major effects affected proteins involved in grain technological properties like grain hardness, in storage functions with the gluten protein gamma-gliadin, in regulation processes with transcription regulator proteins, and in stress responses with biotic and abiotic stress defense proteins. The involvement of biostimulants in the abiotic stress response was further suggested by an increase in water-use efficiency for both DPI4913 (15.4%) and AF086 (9.9%) treatments. Overall, our work performed in controlled conditions showed that DPI4913 and AF086 treatments promoted grain yield while maintaining protein concentration, and positively affected protein composition for grain quality. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD012469.

### Keywords
Protein composition, Durum wheat, Proteomics, Biostimulant, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
CNRS
CNRS, Institut de Pharmacologie et Biologie Structurale (IPBS), France

### Submitter
Carole Pichereaux

### Lab Head
Dr Odile Schiltz
CNRS, Institut de Pharmacologie et Biologie Structurale (IPBS), France


