### Accession
PXD043767

### Title
Proteome plasticity during Physcomitrium patens spore germination – from desiccation tolerance to heterotrophic growth and reconstitution of photoautotrophy

### Description
The establishment of seeds is considered a milestone in plant evolution. A major proportion of the protein networks underpinning desiccation tolerance, the accumulation of storage compounds, and the regulation of dormancy have probably evolved much earlier, however. The same is likely to be the case for the molecular program that drives the transition from heterotrophic offspring to the autotrophic plant. We hypothesized that a comparison with a bryophyte representing a distinct evolutionary lineage to seed plants may reveal the origin of components of the “seed program”. Therefore, we investigated the proteome of five timepoints of moss (P. patens) spore germination as well as protonemata and gametophores, and compared it to Arabidopsis proteome data during seedling establishment. This quantitative comparison showed that not only spores are functionally related to seeds but also the functional similarity of germinating spores and young seedlings. We observed remarkable similarities with regard to desiccation tolerance, lipid droplet proteome composition, control of dormancy, and the metabolic pathways that transform fatty acids into sugars. However, there were also striking differences. For example, the spores of P. patens did not harbor any obvious storage proteins. Furthermore, we did not detect homologs to the main triacylglycerol lipase in Arabidopsis, SUGAR DEPENDENT1. Instead, we discovered a triacylglycerol lipase of the oil body lipase family and a lipoxygenase as being the overall most abundant proteins in spores. This finding indicates an alternative pathway for triacylglycerol degradation via oxylipin intermediates in the moss.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of protein fractions from moss. Frozen spores were ground in a liquid nitrogen-cooled shaking mill (Retsch, Haan, Germany) with three 2.5 mm steel beads at 30 Hz for 2 minutes. Subsequently, 30-50 µL protein solubilization buffer (6 M Urea, 5% SDS, 2 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride) was added, followed by flash freezing in liquid nitrogen. Protonema and gametophore material was ground in a liquid nitrogen-cooled mortar. Following, 40 mg material was added into 100 µL protein solubilization buffer and thawed on ice before flash freezing in liquid nitrogen again. All samples were then treated in an ice-cooled ultrasonic bath for 15 minutes and centrifuged at 4°C for 10 min at 19.000 g. The supernatant was collected and used for further processing.   Preparation of peptide samples and LC-MS/MS. All proteomic metadata can be found in Table S1. For the determination of protein concentration, the Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was used according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In the following, 20 µg (germinating spores) or 30 µg (protonema/gametophores) of protein per replicate were subjected to electrophoresis on an SDS-acrylamide gel, with the run being halted once the proteins had entered the separation gel by approximately 3-5 mm. Individually excised gel pieces were processed and tryptically digested as previously described (Shevchenko et al., 2006). Subsequently, the resulting peptides were desalted via a custom EmporeTM Octadecyl C18 47 mm extraction disks 2215 (Supelco, St. Paul, MN, USA) filled columns as described elsewhere (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Purified peptides were suspended in 20 µL LC-MS sample buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) prior to applying it to reverse phase LC-based peptide separation on an RSLCnano Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded with 0.07% trifluoroacetic acid onto a C18 Acclaim PepMap 100 pre-column (100 µm x 2 cm, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific) set to a flow rate of 20 µL/min for 3 min. The peptides were then separated analytically using a C18 Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The solvent composition underwent a gradient change, initiating at 96% solvent A containing 0.1% formic acid and 4% solvent B consisting of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Over a period of 94 min, the proportion of solvent B increased progressively to 10% within 2 min, followed by a further increase to 30% within the subsequent 58 min. This was followed by an additional rise to 45% solvent B within the following 22 minutes, culminating in a peak of 90% solvent B in the last 12 minutes of the gradient. Optima-grade (Thermo Fisher Scientific) solvents and acids were used for all LC-MS experiments. Eluting peptides were ionized on-line by nano-electrospray (nESI) using a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 1.5 kV (liquid junction) and transferred to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full scans were recorded in a mass range of 300-1650 m/z at a resolution of 30,000, followed by data-dependent top 10 HCD fragmentation at a resolution of 15,000 (dynamic exclusion enabled). XCalibur 4.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for the LC-MS method programming and data acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic RAW data were processed in MaxQuant 2.0.3.1 software (Cox and Mann, 2008; Tyanova et al., 2016a) on default settings except enabling ‘Label free quantification - LFQ’, ‘iBAQ’, ‘FTMS recalibration’, ‘Match between runs’, and set ‘Intensity determination’ to ‘Total sum’. The P. patens primary transcript protein file (v3.3, DOE-JGI; https://phytozome-next.jgi.doe.gov/; Goodstein et al., 2012; Lang et al., 2018) was used as reference library.

### Publication Abstract
The establishment of moss spores is considered a milestone in plant evolution. They harbor protein networks underpinning desiccation tolerance and accumulation of storage compounds that can be found already in algae and that are also utilized in seeds and pollen. Furthermore, germinating spores must produce proteins that drive the transition through heterotrophic growth to the autotrophic plant. To get insight into the plasticity of this proteome, we investigated it at five timepoints of moss (Physcomitrium patens) spore germination and in protonemata and gametophores. The comparison to previously published Arabidopsis proteome data of seedling establishment showed that not only the proteomes of spores and seeds are functionally related, but also the proteomes of germinating spores and young seedlings. We observed similarities with regard to desiccation tolerance, lipid droplet proteome composition, control of dormancy, and &#x3b2;-oxidation and the glyoxylate cycle. However, there were also striking differences. For example, spores lacked any obvious storage proteins. Furthermore, we did not detect homologs to the main triacylglycerol lipase in Arabidopsis seeds, SUGAR DEPENDENT1. Instead, we discovered a triacylglycerol lipase of the oil body lipase family and a lipoxygenase as being the overall most abundant proteins in spores. This finding indicates an alternative pathway for triacylglycerol degradation via oxylipin intermediates in the moss. The comparison of spores to Nicotiana tabacum pollen indicated similarities for example in regards to resistance to desiccation and hypoxia, but the overall developmental pattern did not align as in the case of seedling establishment and spore germination.

### Keywords
Germinated spores, Physcomitrium patens, Protonem, Gametophores, Spores

### Affiliations
University of Münster, Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology (IBBP), Green Biotechnology, 48143 Münster, Germany
University of Münster

### Submitter
Till Ischebeck

### Lab Head
Dr Till Ischebeck
University of Münster, Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology (IBBP), Green Biotechnology, 48143 Münster, Germany


