### Accession
PXD002345

### Title
Changes in the ascending aorta proteome of cholesterol-fed rabbits

### Description
Here we undertook a proteomic investigation of ascending aorta from New Zealand White rabbits after 10 weeks on a high (2% w/w) cholesterol diet (HCD, n=5) or control diet (n=5) in order to profile the proteomic changes in response to the HCD. Histology confirmed intimal thickening in the HCD group and LC-MS/MS analysis of individually obtained ascending aorta extracts labelled with isobaric (iTRAQ) tags led to identification and quantitation of 453 unique proteins above the 1% false discovery rate threshold. Of 67 proteins showing significant differences in relative abundance (p<0.05), 62 were elevated and five decreased in ascending aorta from HCD-fed rabbits compared to controls. Six proteins were selected for validation using Multiple Reaction Monitoring which confirmed the iTRAQ results.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen samples were ground in liquid nitrogen, supplemented with 400 µL extraction buffer (7 mol/L urea, 2 mol/L thiourea, 0.8% Surfact-Amps X-100, 10mmol/L DTT, 5 mmol/L EDTA, 10%v/v glycerol, 8 mmol/L pepstatin A and 16 mmol/L bestatin hydrochloride  in 15 mmol/L phosphate buffer, pH 8.3). Samples were subjected to three freeze/thaw cycles followed by sonication 3-5 x 15 sec at 15 Amps. Supernatants collected after centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 20 min were alkylated with iodoacetamide at 75 mmol/L for 1 hr in the dark and then supplemented with additional DTT to prevent excess alkylation. Samples were diluted 10-fold for protein concentration determination using the Bio-Rad protein assay and portions corresponding to 50 µg of protein were incubated with sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin for 5 hr at 37oC at a 1:25 trypsin-to-protein ratio. Digests were acidified and desalted on 10 mg Oasis HLB SPE cartridges, eluted with 250 µL 70% acetonitrile and dried in a vacuum concentrator.  A total of twelve samples (ten individual samples and two identical reference samples containing an equal portion of protein from all ten samples) were analyzed over two 2D LC-MS/MS runs. Each sample destined for the same LC-MS/MS run was labelled with a different 8-plex iTRAQ label according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The iTRAQ labelling process was randomized to make sure that each run contained a mixture of samples from both experimental groups. The labeling reaction was quenched by addition of 5 μL 50% formic acid prior to pooling of the samples to be analyzed in parallel. Finally, the pooled sample was centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 3 min and subjected to a second round of SPE followed by vacuum concentration to remove acetonitrile. The labelled digest was fractionated on a 0.3 x 35 mm Zorbax Bio-SCX II column in an on-line fashion using 10 μL aliquots of KCl in 0.1% formic acid (15, 25, 40, 60, 80, 100, 120, 150, 200, 600 mM). Peptides were captured on a 0.3 x 5 mm C18 PepMap cartridge before separation on a 0.3 x 100 mm Zorbax 300SB- C18 column. An HPLC gradient between Buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and Buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) was formed at 6 uL/min as follows: 10% B for the first 3min, increasing to 35% B by 85min, increasing to 98% B by 90min, held at 98% until 93min, back to 10% B at 95min and held at 10% until 100min. The LC effluent was directed into a QSTAR XL Quadrupole Time-of-Flight mass spectrometer scanning from 320-1600 m/z. The top three most abundant multiply-charged species were selected for MS/MS analysis (75-1600 m/z) with the Enhance All feature enabled.

### Data Protocol
The two LC-MS/MS datasets obtained were searched both individually and in combination against the rabbit subset of NCBI’s protein database (51,902 sequences, March 2013) using ProteinPilot v 4.0 with the following settings: Sample Type: iTRAQ 8plex (Peptide Labelled), Cys. Alkylation: Iodoacetamide, Digestion: Trypsin, Instrument: QSTAR or QSTAR XL ESI, Search Effort: Thorough, FDR Analysis: Yes. Discordant peptides allowed: carbamidomethyl (C), deamidated(N),  deamidated(Q), formyl@N-term, Gln->pyro-Glu@N-term, iTRAQ8plex(Y), oxidation(M), oxidation(P) and Pro->pyro-Glu(P).

### Publication Abstract
The cholesterol-fed rabbit is commonly used as a model to study the vascular effects of hypercholesterolemia and resulting atherosclerotic lesions. Here we undertook a proteomic case-control investigation of ascending aortas from male New Zealand White rabbits after 10 weeks on a high-cholesterol (2% w/w) diet (HCD, n = 5) or control diet (n = 5), in order to determine the changes in response to the HCD. Histology confirmed intimal thickening in the HCD group consistent with atherosclerosis, and LC-MS/MS analysis of individually-obtained ascending aortic extracts labelled with isobaric (iTRAQ) tags enabled the identification and quantitation of 453 unique proteins above the 1% false discovery rate threshold. Of 67 proteins showing significant differences in relative abundance (p &lt; 0.05), 62 were elevated and five decreased in ascending aortas from HCD-fed rabbits compared to controls. Six proteins were selected for validation using Multiple Reaction Monitoring, which confirmed the iTRAQ results. Many of the observed protein changes are consistent with known molecular perturbations in the ascending aorta that occur in response to hypercholesterolemia, e.g. elevation of tissue levels of apolipoproteins, extracellular matrix adhesion proteins, glycolytic enzymes, heat shock proteins and proteins involved in immune defense. We also made a number of novel observations, including a 15-fold elevation of glycoprotein (trans-membrane) nmb-like (Gpnmb) in response to HCD. Gpnmb has previously been linked to angiogenesis but not to atherosclerosis. This and additional novel observations merit further investigation as these perturbations may play important and as yet undiscovered roles in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis in rabbits as well as humans.

### Keywords
Ascending aorta rabbit cholesterol itraq atherosclerosis

### Affiliations
University of Auckland

### Submitter
Martin Middleditch

### Lab Head
Dr Garth J.S. Cooper
University of Auckland


