### Accession
PXD001442

### Title
Hepatic dysregulation of glyoxalase 1 in preclinical models and patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease

### Description
Background & Aims:   Although non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most common liver disease worldwide, aspects of its molecular pathogenesis are unknown and clinical biomarkers for early diagnosis and accurate disease staging remain scarce. The aims of these experiments were to identify and characterize liver protein alterations in an animal model of NAFLD and explore the utility of novel candidate biomarkers in NAFLD patients. Methods:    Liver protein fractions were analyzed in a relative quantitative proteomic approach utilizing isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) labeling combined with nano-liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS). Differential expression was confirmed independently by western blotting and immunohistochemistry, first in mouse sections and then in biopsies from paediatric NAFLD patients. Candidate serum biomarkers were analyzed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in serum from adult NAFLD patients. Results:   Through proteomic profiling we identified decreased expression of hepatic glyoxalase 1 (GLO1) in an animal model of NAFLD.  GLO1 protein levels were also found reduced in tissue biopsies from pediatric NAFLD patients. In vitro experiments demonstrated that, in response to lipid-loading in hepatocytes, GLO1 is first hyper-acetylated then ubiquitinylated and degraded, leading to an increase in reactive methylglyoxal. In a cohort of 62 biopsy-confirmed adult NAFLD patients serum levels of the primary methylglyoxal-derived advanced glycated endproduct, hydroimidazolone (MG-H1) were found strongly correlated with body mass index (r=0.619, p<0.0001).  Conclusions:   We characterize, for the first time, the post-translational modification and regulation of GLO1 expression in response to hepatic lipid loading with functional consequences in NAFLD patients.

### Sample Protocol
Animals  Mice were fed for up to 16 weeks, with animals sacrificed at 4, 8, 12 and 16 week time points (n=3 from each strain for each time point). Blood was collected from the lateral tail veins, every 4 weeks from the initiation of the diet. The animals were euthanized by intraperitoneal injection of sodium pentobarbital (10 µl/g). Hearts and livers were perfused with phosphate-buffered saline until the majority of the blood was cleared. The right liver lobe and hearts were then immersed in phosphate-buffered formalin for histological examination while the remaining liver lobes were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80oC for subsequent use in proteomic-related studies. On the day of termination blood was collected from the hepatic portal vein.   Proteomics Protein extraction: Liver tissue was homogenised in ice-cold buffer containing 20mM Hepes, 1mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, 300 mM mannitol and protease inhibitors (HEM buffer), then samples were centrifuged at 2000 x g for 10 min at 4oC.  Supernatants were then centrifuged at 100,000 x g for 30 min.  The membrane-enriched pellet was resuspended in fresh HEM buffer, while the cytosolic-enriched supernatant was concentrated by centrifuging for 1 h at 4000 x g through an Amicon ultra-15 centrifugal filter device (Millipore, UK).  Sample concentrations were first estimated by the Bradford assay (Sigma, UK) then samples were desalted using Zeba columns (7MWKO)(Pierce, UK) and then concentration was measured by BCA assay (Pierce UK). iTRAQ labelling and nano-liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS): 100 µg of cytosolic and membrane-enriched liver protein samples from each animal, were digested using trypsin gold(1:10 trypsin:protein), mass spectrometry grade (Promega, UK) and the resultant peptides were labelled with iTRAQ reagents (AB Sciex, UK) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, with 114, 115, 116, and 117 tags corresponding to WT ND, WT HFD, ApoE-/- ND and ApoE-/- HFD groups (n=3 biological replicates) respectively.  Labelled peptides were prefractionated, (24 fractions) by isoelectric point using the 3100 OFFGEL fractionator (Agilent Technologies, UK) following the manufacturer’s instructions, then dried under vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator 5301 – Eppendorf, UK) and resuspended in  0.1% (v/v) formic acid. All LC/MS experiments were performed on a 1200 Series HPLC-Chip interfaced to a 6520 accurate-mass quadrupole time-of-flight LC/MS (Agilent Technologies, UK).  The HPLC-Chip configuration consisted of a 160 nL enrichment column and a 150 mm x 75 μm analytical column (Zorbax 300SBC18). Mobile phases were: buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in LC/MS grade water and buffer B:  95% acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in LC/MS grade water.  Sample loading onto the enrichment column was done at 4% B. The gradient used for the analytical column began at 4% B, was raised to 25% B at 21 min, 45% B at 22.8 min, 65% at 28.8 min, 90% at 29.6 min, maintained at 90% B until 30.4 min and then brought back to 4% B at 31.8 min. The column was equilibrated for 10 min before subsequent runs. Samples were loaded at 2.7 μL/min flow rate and eluted at 320 nL/min. The LC/MS was operated in high resolution (4 GHz) positive ion mode and the MS source conditions were: source temperature: 325°C; capillary voltage: 1,850 V; fragmentor voltage: 170 V drying gas flow rate: 3 L/min. Data was acquired between m/z 50–3,200 at a scan rate of 1 spectra/sec for all samples in the profiling experiments. In the targeted MS/MS experiment, data was acquired from 50–3,200 m/z with an acquisition rate of 4 spectra/sec in MS mode and m/z region 50–3,200 with an acquisition rate of 5 spectra/sec in MS/MS mode. Complete system control was achieved using Agilent MassHunter data acquisition software (B.03.00).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis: Tandem mass spectra were extracted and charge state deconvoluted by Mass Hunter version B.03.00 (Agilent Technologies, USA), while Spectrum Mill and X!Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version 2007.01.01.1) were used for protein identification. Deisotoping was not performed in the iTRAQ reporter region. Both Spectrum Mill and X!Tandem were set up to search a subset of the Swiss-Prot database (Release-2011_07) (UniProtKB, Swiss-Prot) selected for Mus musculus and assuming digestion with trypsin. The search was performed with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 50ppm and a parent ion tolerance of 20ppm. Oxidation of methionine, methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) of cysteine and ABSciex iTRAQ™ (0.5M Triethylammonium bicarbonate, 2%SDS, 50mM Tris2-carboxyethyl-phosphine hydrochloride and 200mM MMTS] multiplexed quantitation chemistry of lysine and the N-terminus were specified in X!Tandem as variable modifications. Scaffold Q+ (version Scaffold_3.6.2, Proteome Software Inc., USA) was used for final protein identification and iTRAQ quantitation. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm [3].  Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified unique peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm[4]. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.  Acquired intensities in the experiment were globally normalized across all acquisition runs. Individual quantitative samples were normalized within each acquisition run. Intensities for each peptide identification were normalized within the assigned protein. The reference channels were normalized to produce a 1:1 fold change. All normalization calculations were performed using averages to multiplicatively normalize data. Differentially expressed proteins were determined using both randomised permutation and ANOVA tests. GO annotations were assigned by Scaffold Q+.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Mouse, Q-tof, Glyoxalase, Liver, Nlc-ms/ms, Itraq

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences University of Surrey

### Submitter
Christos Spanos 

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Bernadette Moore
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences University of Surrey


