### Accession
PXD038615

### Title
LINE-1 ORF2p Structure. BS3 crosslinks

### Description
ORF2p was cross-linked using BS3 in order to gather experimental data that could help elucidate its structure.

### Sample Protocol
Human ORF2p from L1RP (238-1061) was expressed in E. Coli as an N-terminal MBP-3C fusion protein and purified by Ni-NTA and heparin affinity, tag cleaved, and polished on heparin and gel filtration. ORF2p from L1RP (1-1275) was expressed in SF9 insect cells and purified by flag and heparin affinity and polished on gel filtration. Monodisperse protein was used for analysis.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra were searched using pLink 2.3.9 {PMC6667459} and a FASTA file containing the relevant protein sequence of ORF2p that accords to the recombinant protein used in the experiment (included). A maximum of 3 missed cleavages were allowed and a static modification on cysteines, corresponding to thiomethylation by MMTS, was specified. The FDR was set to 1%. Resulting candidate crosslinks were manually validated before inclusion in structural modeling by checking the MS2 spectra: (i) 50 % of expected b and y fragments for the candidate crosslinked peptides were detected or (ii) at least one of the fragments had a mass that can explain the presence of the crosslinker between the peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Orf2 orf2p line-1 bs3 structural proteomics

### Affiliations
ERIBA - UMCG (lab head)
ERIBA - UMCG

### Submitter
Luciano Di Stefano

### Lab Head
Dr John LaCava
ERIBA - UMCG (lab head)


