### Accession
PXD033502

### Title
Taxon-specific toxicity and composition of venom produced by araneophagous white-tailed spiders (Lamponidae: Lampona sp.)

### Description
Prey-specialised spiders are adapted to capture specific prey items, including dangerous prey such as ants, termites or other spiders. It has been observed that the venoms of specialists are often prey-specific and less complex than those of generalists, but venom composition has not been studied in detail in prey-specialised spiders. Here, we investigated the venom of the prey-specialised white-tailed spider (Lamponidae: Lampona sp.), which utilises specialised morphological and behavioural adaptations to capture spider prey. We hypothesised Lampona spiders also possess venomic adaptations, specifically, its venom is more effective to focal spider prey due to the presence of prey-specific toxins. We analysed the venom composition using proteo-transcriptomics and taxon-specific toxicity using venom bioassays. Our analysis identified 208 putative toxin sequences, comprising 103 peptides <10 kDa and 105 proteins >10 kDa. Most peptides belonged to one of two families characterised by scaffolds containing eight or ten cysteine residues. Protein toxins showed similarity to galectins, leucine-rich repeat proteins, trypsins and neprilysins. The venom of Lampona was shown to be spider-specific, as it was more potent against the preferred spider prey than against alternative prey represented by a cricket. In contrast, the venom of a related generalist (Gnaphosidae: Gnaphosa sp.) was similarly potent against both prey types. Prey-specific Lampona toxins were found to form part of the protein (>10 kDa) fraction of the venom. These data provide insights into the molecular adaptations of venoms produced by prey-specialised spiders.

### Sample Protocol
Lampona spp. spiders (Lamponidae) were collected on the Macquarie University campus, North Ryde, Sydney, Australia. Gnaphosa sp. spiders (Gnaphosidae) were collected in Mohelno Serpentine Steppe in the Czech Republic. Spiders were kept singly in glass tubes (height: 6 cm, diameter: 1.5 cm) with moisturised gypsum on the bottom, and stored in a chamber at room temperature (22 °C) and L:D = 16:8. Spiders were fed regularly with other spiders or crickets. Water was provided every three days. Venom was obtained from six Lampona spiders and five Gnaphosa spiders using an electrical milking technique (e.g. Kuhn-Nentwig et al. 1994, Friedel and Nentwig 1989, Eggs et al. 2015). A spider was anesthetised with CO2 for 2 min, placed on a stub, covered with a mesh and the venom collected into a glass microcapillary (volume 0.5 or 1 µl) that was slid onto one of the fangs of the spider’s chelicerae. The spider was stimulated with an electric impulse to release venom into the capillary. Individual spiders were milked several times in approximately three-week intervals. Microcapillaries containing the venom were stored in the freezer at –80°C before further processing. Crude Lampona venom (2.25 µl) was loaded onto a Vivacon 500 centrifugal filtration device with MWCO 10 kDa (Sartorius Stedim Biotech). The filter was washed with 50 μL of 50 mM NaHCO3, and the flow-through (peptidome fraction) was collected. The peptidome fraction was split into halves. One of them was reduced and alkylated by using the same amounts of the same reagents as for protein concentrate (please see below) with one additional reduction step (for iodoacetamide (IAA) inactivation) and the second half was analysed without any treatment. The protein concentrate retained in the Vivacon 500 device was mixed with 100 μL of 50 mM dithiothreitol and incubated for 30 min. After additional centrifugation, 100 μL of 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) were added and the filter was incubated in the dark for 30 min. After the next centrifugation step, the filter was washed with 200 μL of 50 mM NaHCO3. Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) was added onto the filter and the mixture was incubated for 14 h at 37°C. The tryptic peptides were finally eluted by centrifugation followed by two additional elutions with 50 μL of 50 mM NaHCO3. The peptides were extracted from the vials by using 25% formic acid/acetonitrile (1:1 v/v mixture) in presence of 0.001% poly(ethylene glycol) and vacuum concentrated.  The peptide mixtures were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis by using an RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to an Impact II Qq-Time-Of-Flight mass spectrometer (Bruker, Bremen, Germany). Prior to LC separation, peptides were online concentrated on a trap column (100 μm × 30 mm) filled with 3.5-μm X-Bridge BEH 130 C18 sorbent (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The peptides were separated using an Acclaim Pepmap100 C18 column (3 µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the following solvent gradient (mobile phase A: 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% acetonitrile; 300 nl/min): the gradient elution started at 1% mobile phase B and increased to 56% during the first 50 min, then increased linearly to 80% mobile phase B over the next 5 min, followed by isocratic elution with 80% mobile phase B for 10 min. Equilibration of the trapping column and the column was done prior to sample injection. The analytical column outlet was directly connected to the CaptiveSpray nanoBooster ion source (Bruker, Bremen, Germany). MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired using a data-dependent strategy with a 3 s long cycle time. Mass range was set to m/z range of 150–2200 and precursors were selected from m/z range of 300–2000. The acquisition speed of MS and MS/MS scans was 2 Hz and 4–16 Hz, respectively. Speed of MS/MS spectra acquisition was based on precursor intensity. The pre-processing of the mass spectrometric data including recalibration, compound detection, and charge deconvolution was carried out using DataAnalysis software (version 4.2 SR1; Bruker).

### Data Protocol
To identify venom peptides and proteins, mass spectral data were searched against the database of possible amino acid sequences obtained from the venom-gland transcriptome using the Paragon and ProtGroup algorithms in ProteinPilot software (SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) with a cut-off of 95% confidence at the protein level. cDNA sequences encoding the identified toxins were re-mapped to correct errors and identify variants and missing termini using Geneious software v.x.x.? (Biomatters, Auckland, New Zealand). Precursor sequences were then annotated using SignalP (Petersen et al., 2011), BLAST searches against the SwissProt database (Altschul et al., 1997; UniProt Consortium, 2021), and HMMER searches against the Pfam database (Eddy, 2008; Finn et al., 2014). Because of the larger size of many of the toxins (>5 kDa), the mature structures of very few were resolved from the native and reduced/alkylated datasets and for this reason we generated predicted mature forms for the remainder using the hidden Markov model of the SpiderP algorithm (Wong et al., 2013). These 'best mature' sequences (Table S1, column AE) were then used as a database for a new search of the mass spectral data using the Paragon and Protgroup algorithms, and redundant or undetected toxins were removed from the proteome. Toxins were named according to rational nomenclature guidelines (King et al., 2008).

### Publication Abstract
Prey-specialised spiders are adapted to capture specific prey items, including dangerous prey. The venoms of specialists are often prey-specific and less complex than those of generalists, but their venom composition has not been studied in detail. Here, we investigated the venom of the prey-specialised white-tailed spiders (Lamponidae: Lampona), which utilise specialised morphological and behavioural adaptations to capture spider prey. We analysed the venom composition using proteo-transcriptomics and taxon-specific toxicity using venom bioassays. Our analysis identified 208 putative toxin sequences, comprising 103 peptides&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;10&#xa0;kDa and 105 proteins&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;10&#xa0;kDa. Most peptides belonged to one of two families characterised by scaffolds containing eight or ten cysteine residues. Toxin-like proteins showed similarity to galectins, leucine-rich repeat proteins, trypsins and neprilysins. The venom of Lampona was shown to be more potent against the preferred spider prey than against alternative cricket prey. In contrast, the venom of a related generalist was similarly potent against both prey types. These data provide insights into the molecular adaptations of venoms produced by prey-specialised spiders.

### Keywords
Venom; peptide toxin; spider

### Affiliations
Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia
University of Queensland

### Submitter
Andrew Walker

### Lab Head
Dr Glenn F. King
Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia


