### Accession
PXD004875

### Title
Quantitative Chemical Proteomic Profiling of Ubiquitin Specific Proteases in Intact Cancer Cells

### Description
Deubiquitinating enzymes play an important role in a plethora of therapeutically relevant processes, and are emerging as pioneering drug targets. Herein, we present a novel Ubiquitin Specific Protease (USP) inhibitor, alongside an alkyne-tagged activity-based probe analogue. Activity-based proteome profiling identified 12 USPs, including USP4, USP16, and USP33, as inhibitor targets using nanomolar probe concentrations. This represents the first intact cell activity-based profiling of deubiquitinating enzymes. Further analysis demonstrated functional inhibition of USP33 and identified a synergistic relationship in combination with ATR inhibition, consistent with USP4 inhibition.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC Cell Culture and Spike-in SILAC quantification  U2OS cells were cultured at 37°C in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere in: DMEM containing 10% FBS, or in 15N413C6-arginine and 15N213C6-lysine (R10K8) containing DMEM media (Dundee Cell) with 10% v/v dialysed FBS until approximately 80% confluent. Cells grown in unlabelled media were treated in triplicate for 1 h with 125 nM of 2 after a 30 min pre-incubation with a fixed concentration of 1 (0, 0.125 µM, 0.625 µM, 5 µM, 10 µM) or 5 µM 3. Samples were lysed in buffer (1% v/v Triton X-100, 0.1% w/v SDS, 1x EDTA-free complete protease inhibitor (Roche Diagnostis) in PBS), protein concentration determined, and stored at -80°C until use. In parallel, 15N413C6-arginine and 15N213C6-lysine (R10K8) incorporated U2OS cells were treated with 125 nM of 2 for 1 h to generate the ‘spike-in’ standard. The cells were lysed in buffer, the lysate pooled, its protein concentration determined, and aliquots stored at -80°C until use.  Sample Preparation for Proteomic analysis  400 µg of each competition condition was mixed with 200 µg of spike, the protein concentration adjusted to 2 mg/ml, and a premixed click cocktail (100 µM AzTb, 10 mM CuSO4, 10 mM TCEP and 100 µM TBTA, final concentrations) was added. The samples were vortexed for 1 h at room temperature before being quenched by addition of 5 mM EDTA. Protein was precipitated by sequential addition of MeOH (2× volumes), CHCl3 (0.5 × volume) and H2O (1× volume). Protein was pelleted by centrifugation at 17,000 × g for 5 minutes and then further washed in methanol and re-pelleted. Pellets were air dried for 10 minutes and resuspended in PBS buffer containing 2% w/v SDS and 10 mM Dithiothreitol to 10 mg/ml before being diluted with PBS to give a final protein concentration of 1 mg/ml.  Samples were enriched on NetrAvidin agarose resin (30 µL, pre-washed three times in 0.2% w/v SDS in PBS) by incubation with gentle shaking for 2 hours at room temperature. The supernatant was then removed, and the beads washed consecutively with: 3 × 1% w/v SDS in PBS, 2 × 4M Urea in PBS, 5 × 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC). The washed beads were resuspended in 50 µL of 50 mM AMBIC and reduced with 10 mM Dithiothreitol at 55°C for 30 minutes. The samples were washed twice and resuspended in 50 µL of 50 mM AMBIC, and cysteines were alkylated by 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 minutes. The samples were washed twice and resuspended in 50 µL of 50 mM AMBIC, treated with trypsin (5ul, 0.2 mg / ml, Promega) and digested overnight at 37°C. The supernatant was retained and the beads washed with 80 µL AMBIC followed by 80 µL 0.1% v/v TFA in H2O (80 µL). The combined supernatants were desalted by stage tipping using SDB-XC (Styrene Divinyl Benzene) extraction disks, eluted with 79% v/v MeCN in H2O and dried in vacuo.2 Dried peptides were stored at -80°C, and resuspended in 0.5 % v/v TFA, 2% v/v MEOH in H2O (20 µL)for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data acquisition  LC-MS/MS runs were performed on an Easy nLC-1000 system coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer via an easy-spray source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). 3 µL injections of peptide sample were separated on a reverse phase Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (50 cm x 75 μm inner diameter, Thermo Fisher Scientific) across a 2 h acetonitrile gradient containing 0.1 % v/v formic acid, using a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The instrument was operated in a data-dependent cycling mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 75,000 at m/z 200 (transient time 256 ms). The top 10 most abundant isotope patterns with charge +2 from this survey scan were then selected with an isolation window of 3.0 m/z and subjected to MS/MS fragmentation by HCD with normalized collision energies of 25. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 250 and 80 ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 106 and for MS/MS to 105, and the intensity threshold was set to 8.3 × 102. Data analysis The raw data was processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.25) and the reference complete human proteome FASTA file (Uniprot, accessed 09/02/16). ‘Arg10’ and ‘Lys8’ were selected as heavy labels, cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. Default settings for identification and quantification were used. Specifically a minimum peptide length of 7, a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites, and a maximum of 3 labelled amino acids per peptide were employed. Peptides and proteins were identified utilising a 0.01 false discovery rate, with “Unique and razor peptides” mode selected for both identification and quantification of proteins (razor peptides are uniquely assigned to protein groups and not to individual proteins). At least 2 razor + unique peptides were required for valid quantification. Processed data was further analysed using Perseus (Version 1.5.0.9) and Microsoft Excel 2010. Peptides categorised by MaxQuant as ‘potential contaminants’, ‘only identified by site’ or ‘reverse’ were filtered, and the processed H/L ratios transformed in Log2(L/H) ratios. The ratios for each experimental condition were normalised relative to their median, and biological triplicates grouped. The detection of at least 2 unique peptides was used as a threshold for protein identification and 2 valid ratio values were required in at least one experimental group for quantification. Statistically significant competition was determined through the application of a P2 test, using a permutation-based FDR of 0.01 and an S0 of 0.1. To determine the relative response to inhibition, the average fold change was calculated for each protein under each inhibitor condition, by normalising all mean ratios relative to the condition lacking inhibitor (0 µM 1).

### Publication Abstract
Deubiquitinating enzymes play an important role in a plethora of therapeutically relevant processes and are emerging as pioneering drug targets. Herein, we present a novel probe, Ubiquitin Specific Protease (USP) inhibitor, alongside an alkyne-tagged activity-based probe analogue. Activity-based proteome profiling identified 12 USPs, including USP4, USP16, and USP33, as inhibitor targets using submicromolar probe concentrations. This represents the first intact cell activity-based profiling of deubiquitinating enzymes. Further analysis demonstrated functional inhibition of USP33 and identified a synergistic relationship in combination with ATR inhibition, consistent with USP4 inhibition.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Lc-msms, Abpp, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom.
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Jenny Ward

### Lab Head
Dr Edward W Tate
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom.


