### Accession
PXD009891

### Title
Profiling the proteomic inflammatory state of human astrocytes using DIA mass spectrometry

### Description
In the present study we used DIA MS to characterize the profile of over 4,000 proteins in immortalized human astrocytes exposed to TNF, IL-1β, and LPS, as well as in primary human astrocytes cocultured with brain endothelial cells and exposed to LPS. For both immortalized and primary astrocytes, DIA MS data were matched against a spectral library generated by merging DDA MS runs from both unfractionated and fractionated cell lysates.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were resuspended in 0.1% Rapigest (Waters) 100 mM TEAB (Sigma-Aldrich), sonicated (5 cycles of 20 s with breaks on ice), and incubated for 10 min at 80°C. Samples were then spun down (14,000 g, 10 min, 4°C), the supernatant was recovered, and the protein content was measured using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). For each sample, 20 ug of proteins were reduced using TCEP (final concentration 5 mM, 60 min, 37°C) (Sigma-Aldrich), alkylated using iodoacetamide (final concentration 15 mM, 60 min, RT, in dark conditions) (Sigma-Aldrich), and digested overnight using trypsin (w/w ratio 1:50) (Promega). Rapigest surfactant was cleaved by incubating samples with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) (45 min, 37°C). Samples were desalted on C18 reverse phase columns (Harvard Apparatus), peptides were dried under vacuum and subsequently resuspended in 5% ACN 0.1% FA, and iRT peptides (Biognosys) were added (1:20). For the spectral library preparation, peptides were separated into 12 fractions according to their pI using a 3100 OFFGEL Fractionator (Agilent Technologies). Peptides digested from 120 μg of proteins were solubilized in OGE buffer and subsequently focused using an immobilized pH gradient (IPG) strip of 13 cm (pH 3–10) (GE Healthcare). After recovering the fractions, samples were desalted on C18 reverse phase columns (Harvard Apparatus), dried under vacuum, re-solubilized in 5% ACN 0.1% FA, and iRT peptides (Biognosys) were added (1:20). Peptides were analyzed using Liquid Chromatography–Electrospray Ionization–MS/MS (LC-ESI-MS/MS) on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Thermo EASY-nLC. Peptides were trapped on a 2 cm x 75 µm i.d. PepMap C18 precolumn packed with 3 µm particles and 100 Å pore size. Separation was performed using a 50 cm x 75 µm i.d. PepMap C18 column packed with 2 µm, 100 Å particles and heated at 50°C. Peptides were separated using a 125 min segmented gradient of 0.1% FA (solvent A) and 80% ACN 0.1% FA (solvent B) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min as follow: 8 to 28 %B in 105 min, 28 to 42 %B in 20 min, 42 to 95 %B in 10 min, 25 min at 95 %B. The column was conditioned prior to each sample injection. For spectral library generation, the instrument was operated in Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode. Full-scan MS were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 (FWHM) at m/z 200, scan range of 400–1,250 m/z, AGC target of 400,000, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The top 20 most intense ions were quadrupole-isolated (isolation window 1.4 m/z), fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (collision energy 30%), and detected in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 15,000 (FWHM) at m/z 200, AGC target 500,000, and a maximum injection time 50 ms. Full-scan MS were acquired in profile mode, whereas MS/MS spectra were acquired in centroid mode. Immortalized astrocytes were analyzed by Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA) as follow: a full-scan MS was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 (FWHM) at m/z 200, scan range of 400–1250 m/z, a maximum injection time 100 ms, and AGC target 106. Then, 40 DIA variable windows (Additional file 2, Method A) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 15,000 (FWHM) at m/z 200, AGC target 5x105, and maximum injection time 50 ms. Primary astrocytes were analyzed as follow: a full-scan MS was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 (FWHM) at m/z 200, scan range of 400–1250 m/z, a maximum injection time 100 ms, and AGC target 106. Then, 30 DIA variable windows (Additional file 2, Method B) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 (FWHM) at m/z 200, AGC target 2x106, and maximum injection time 80 ms. The sizes of variable windows were optimized using the swathTUNER software.

### Data Protocol
The spectral library was generated using Spectronaut software (Biognosys) by combining the output from the 42 DDA MS runs analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo Scientific) and the Mascot search engine. The search parameters used included 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance, and trypsin miscleavage setting of two. Static modification settings included carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) on cysteine, whereas dynamic modifications were set to include oxidation (+15.995 Da) on methionine. Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were verified, based on q-values set to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR), using the Percolator module. Spectronaut software was subsequently used to match raw DIA MS data against the spectral library, using the default settings with slight modifications. Data filtering was set to Qvalue complete. Cross Run Normalization was performed by using the Qvalue complete setting in Row Selection.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dia ms human astrocytes inflammation

### Affiliations
University of Geneva
Department of Internal Medicine Specialties, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva

### Submitter
Vito Dozio

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Charles Sanchez
Department of Internal Medicine Specialties, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva


