### Accession
PXD047585

### Title
Application of SWATH Mass Spectrometry and Machine Learning in Diagnosis of Inflammatory Bowel Disease Based on Stool Proteome

### Description
Our hypothesis was that conducting proteomic analysis on clinical laboratory samples which are intended for the fecal calprotectin test would enable the develop-ment of a highly sensitive and specific non-invasive stool test based on mass spec-trometry. To investigate this hypothesis, we combined and applied our expertise in basic research, clinical practice, and bioinformatics to develop a precise ma-chine-learning model for the accurate diagnosis of active IBD from symptomatic non-IBDpatients.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation was implemented as previously described[17]. Briefly,100 mg of frozen stool specimens were solubilized in 1 ml of lysis buffer (25mM Tris, SDS 1%, pH 7.5) and centrifuged. Then the aqueous phase between the pellet and the floating residuals was recovered and stored at −80 °C until preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis. The concentration of solubilized proteins in the individual samples was measured us-ing a BCA test. For reduction, the samples were treated with 10 mM of dithiothreitol (DTT) and for alkylation, the samples were exposed to 15 mM iodoacetamide. Subse-quently, the quenching step was implemented using 10 mM DTT. The proteins were precipitated with cold acetone and methanol and digested by Trypsin/Lys-C. The cleaning and recovery of the peptides were done with a reverse-phase Strata-X poly-meric SPE sorbent column (Phenomenex) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The recovered peptides were dried under nitrogen flow at 37 °C for 45 min and stored at 4 °C until being resuspended in 20 µL of mobile phase solvent A (0.2% v/v formic acid and 3% DMSO v/v in water) before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
To initiate the analysis, we first eliminated contaminants and proteins with less than 70% valid values in each batch. Following this step, we were left with a total of 250 proteins for further investigation. Subsequently, a logarithm transformation (log2) was applied to the intensity values, a common practice for normalizing skewed data and approximating a normal distribution. To assess the initial data structure, we utilized a box plot to observe differences in variance and mean. In order to eliminate unwanted non-biological variability, we employed quantile normalization. To mitigate batch effects, we applied the ComBat algorithm. We then imputed missing values using the KNN method (N=5). For the identification of differentially expressed proteins, we applied two criteria: a fold change (FC) ratio of at least 1.6 (i.e., |Log2(FC)| ≥ 0.70) and a p-value less than 0.05 (i.e., Log10(p-value) ≥ 1.3). Subsequently, we utilized a correlation-based feature selection method to reduce the number of features without compromising performance. To identify the most appropriate predictive classifier based on the data's nature, we evaluated five popular machine learning methods, including support vector machines (SVM), random forests (RF), logistic regression (LR), k-nearest neighbors (kNN), and naive Bayes (NB). Among them, the SVM classifier demonstrated superior performance in terms of various criteria. We optimized the SVM through hyperparameter tuning and then applied the final developed model to a blind set of data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Stool, Inflammatory bowel disease.

### Affiliations
PhD candidate
Dep. immunology and cell biology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, Canada.

### Submitter
Elmira Shajari

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Francois Beaulieu
Dep. immunology and cell biology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, Canada.


