### Accession
PXD015106

### Title
Quorum sensing elicits functionally distinct subpopulations of infectious Legionella

### Description
Clonal bacterial populations respond to unfavorable conditions with growth arrest and 20 persistence. Here we show that quorum sensing (QS) determines functionally distinct subpopulations of non-growing, virulent Legionella. QS increases the fraction of bacteria re- initiating growth in microcolonies, while it restricts the ratio of bacteria resuming growth in free- living protozoan predators. QS continues to govern the population heterogeneity throughout growth. Intracellular non-growers and growing bacteria are characterized by distinct proteomes 25 reflecting different stress and drug tolerance as well as alternative metabolic pathways. Strikingly, individual intracellular non-growers are persisters, which endure host killing mechanisms, produce virulence factors, form a replication-permissive compartment, and are highly infectious. Thus, QS underlies a bet-hedging strategy of non-growing intracellular bacterial pathogens to resume growth and to fine-tune virulence.

### Sample Protocol
60×106 A. castellanii were infected for 24 h, yielding 15×106 sorted bacteria per sunset and replicate. Lysates and sorted bacteria were kept in ice-cold PBS supplemented with 180 M Cam to prevent protein degradation and synthesis. Sorted bacteria were lysed in 50 L of lysis buffer (1% Sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 10mM TCEP, 100mM Tris, pH=8.5) using twenty cycles of sonication (one cycle is 30 s on, 30 s off, Bioruptor, Dianode). Then, proteins were reduced at 95°C for 10 min and, after cooling to room temperature, the proteins were then alkylated in 15 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at 37°C. Proteins were digested 3         using sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w, trypsin/protein; Promega, USA) overnight at 37 °C. After digestion, the samples were supplemented with TFA to a final concentration of 1%. Peptides were cleaned up using PreOmics Cartridges (PreOmics, Martinsried, Germany) following the manufactures instructions. After drying the samples under vacuum, the peptides were re- suspended in 0.1% aqueous formic acid solution at a concentration of 0.5 mg/ml. 0.5 μg of peptides of each sample were subjected to LC-MS analysis using a dual pressure LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer connected to an electrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) as recently specified (41) and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. Peptide separation was carried out using an EASY nLC-1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 30cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using a linear gradient from 95% solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 99.9% water) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, 19.9% water) to 35% solvent B over 50 min to 50% solvent B over 10min to 95% solvent B over 2 min and 95% solvent B over 18 min at a flow rate of 0.2 μl/min. The data acquisition mode was set to obtain one high resolution MS scan in the FT part of the mass spectrometer at a resolution of 240,000 full width at half maximum (at 400 m/z, MS1) followed by MS/MS (MS2) scans in the linear ion trap of the 20 most intense MS signals. The charged state screening modus was enabled to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions and the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30s. The ion accumulation time was set to 300 ms (MS1) and 25 ms (MS2). MS1 and MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 106 ions and 10,000 ions, respectively. The collision energy was set to 35%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification. In our LFQ workflow MS raw files were imported into the Progenesis QI (Nonlinear Dynamics, v2.0) and analyzed using the default parameter settings. MS/MS data were exported directly from Progenesis in mgf format and analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.4.1), against a concatenated target-decoy database containing normal and reverse sequences of the predicted SwissProt entries of Legionella pneumophila (ATCC_33152/DSM_7513, www.uniprot.org, release date 9/05/2017), and commonly observed contaminants (in total 10,006 protein sequences) generated using the SequenceReverser tool from the MaxQuant software (Version 1.0.13.13). The Mascot search criteria were set as follow: 10 ppm precursor ion mass tolerance, 0.6 Da fragment ion mass tolerance, full tryptic specificity required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues unless followed by proline), maximum of three missed cleavages, fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation (C); variable modification, oxidation (M) and Acetyl (protein N-term). Results from the database search were imported into Progenesis and a list with all quantified peptides exported. The quantitative data were further processed and statically analyzed using the SafeQuant software tool (42). In brief, the false-discovery rate (FDR) of identifications on the peptide and protein level were set to 1% based on the number of decoy hits obtained from reversed protein sequence entries. For quantification, the analysis included global data normalization by equalizing the total peak areas across all LC-MS runs, summation of peak areas per protein and LC-MS/MS run, followed by calculation of protein abundance ratios. Only isoform specific peptide ion signals were considered for quantification. The summarized protein expression values were used for statistical testing of between condition differentially abundant proteins. Here, empirical Bayes moderated t-Tests were applied, as implemented in the R/Bioconductor limma package (http://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/limma.html). The resulting per protein and condition comparison p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
The facultative intracellular bacterium Legionella pneumophila replicates in environmental amoebae and in lung macrophages, and causes Legionnaires' disease. Here we show that L. pneumophila reversibly forms replicating and nonreplicating subpopulations of similar size within amoebae. The nonreplicating bacteria are viable and metabolically active, display increased antibiotic tolerance and a distinct proteome, and show high virulence as well as the capacity to form a degradation-resistant compartment. Upon infection of na&#xef;ve or interferon-&#x3b3;-activated macrophages, the nonreplicating subpopulation comprises ca. 10% or 50%, respectively, of the total intracellular bacteria; hence, the nonreplicating subpopulation is of similar size in amoebae and activated macrophages. The numbers of nonreplicating bacteria within amoebae are reduced in the absence of the autoinducer synthase LqsA or other components of the Lqs quorum-sensing system. Our results indicate that virulent, antibiotic-tolerant subpopulations of L. pneumophila are formed during infection of evolutionarily distant phagocytes, in a process controlled by the Lqs system.

### Keywords
Lfq, Legionella

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland


