### Accession
PXD025123

### Title
Dual roles of HSP70 chaperone HSPA1 in quality control of nascent and newly synthesized proteins

### Description
Exposure to heat stress triggers a well-defined acute response marked by HSF1-dependent transcriptional upregulation of heat shock proteins. Cells allowed to recover acquire thermotolerance, but this adaptation is poorly understood. By quantitative proteomics, we discovered selective upregulation of HSP70-family chaperone HSPA1 and its co-factors, HSPH1 and DNAJB1, in MCF7 breast cancer cells acquiring thermotolerance. HSPA1 was found to have dual function during heat stress response: (i) during acute stress, it promotes the recruitment of the 26S proteasome to translating ribosomes, thus poising cells for rapid protein degradation and resumption of protein synthesis upon recovery; (ii) during thermotolerance, HSPA1 together with HSPH1 maintains ubiquitylated nascent/newly synthesized proteins in a soluble state required for their efficient proteasomal clearance. Consistently, deletion of HSPH1 impedes thermotolerance and esophageal tumor growth in mice, thus providing a potential explanation for the poor prognosis of digestive tract cancers with low HSPH1, and nominating HSPH1 as a cancer drug target. We propose dual roles of HSPA1 either alone or in complex with HSPH1 and DNAJB1 in promoting quality control of nascent/newly synthesized proteins and cellular thermotolerance.

### Sample Protocol
MCF7 cells were grown in DMEM containing heavy (13C, 15N) or light (12C, 14N) lysine and arginine supplemented with 5% dialyzed FBS for 2 weeks. Cells labeled with heavy amino acids were subjected to the heat shock and recovery treatments indicated in the results. Control cells were maintained in standard (light) media. Cells were collected and lysed in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.25% SDS, 1 mM EDTA, and 1 x Pierce™ protease inhibitor cocktail). Protein concentrations were determined by BCA assay, and experimental samples (“heavy”) were mixed with the untreated control sample (“light”) at a ratio of 1:1. 200 μg of protein samples were applied for LC-MS/MS. Filter aided sample preparation (FASP) of LC-MS/MS samples were done as described (Nature Methods: doi:10.1038/nmeth.1322). The digested peptide mixtures were re-dissolved in 0.1% formic acid in ultrapure water prior to LC-MS/MS, and the LC-MS/MS procedures performed as described (Lin et al, 2020, Mol Cell. 2020 Jun 19:S1097-2765(20)30388-9. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2020.06.003.). Mass spectrometry for the SILAC analysis was carried out by the analyzing and testing center, school of pharmaceutical sciences Xiamen University

### Data Protocol
After we got the spectrum files, search method and quantitative analysis was performed in this software (Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.1.1.21). The main search parameters are showed in following: Protein Database: uniport human fasta Max missed Cleavage Sites to 2. Min peptide length: 6. Max peptide Length: 144. Precursor Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02 Da Dynamic Modification Label: 13C(6)15N(4)/+10.008 Da(R) Dynamic Modification Label: 13C(6)15N(2)/+8.014 Da(K) Main Parameters of Quantitative analysis was showed as follows: Validation setting: Target FDR (strict) for PSMs is 0.01, Target FDR (relaxed) for PSMs is 0.05. Peptides to Use: unique + Razor Maximum Allowed Fold change: 100 Replace Missing Values with Minimum Value： False Reject Quan Result with Missing Channels: False Top N peptides Used for Area Calculation: 3 Normalized Mode: Total peptide Amount

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heat shock protein 70, Ubiquitin proteasome system (ups), Stress response, Esophageal cancer

### Affiliations
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Innovative Drug Target Research and Center for Stress Signaling Networks, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian 361102, China
State key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology,School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Xiamen University,China

### Submitter
Guiyou Tian

### Lab Head
Dr Dieter A. Wolf
State key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology,School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Xiamen University,China


