### Accession
PXD011677

### Title
Protein aggregation capture on microparticles enables multi-purpose proteomics sample preparation

### Description
Universal proteomics sample preparation is challenging due to the high heterogeneity of biological samples. Here we describe a novel mechanism that exploits the inherent instability of denatured proteins for non-specific immobilization on microparticles by protein aggregation capture. To demonstrate the general applicability of this mechanism, we analyzed phosphoproteomes, tissue proteomes, and interaction proteomes as well as dilute secretomes. The findings presents a practical, sensitive and cost-effective proteomics sample preparation method.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed using different lysis buffers and preparation methods. In all cases proteins were reduced and alkylated with the 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 11 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA). Lys-c and trypsin were utilized in all cases for generation of tryptic peptides. Peptide mixtures were clarified with solid phase extraction on hydrophobic C18 material.

### Data Protocol
Raw files generated from LC/MS/MS experiments were analyzed using MaxQuant (1.6.1.1) software20. Samples generated from human cell lines were searched against the reviewed Swiss-Prot human proteome (proteome ID: UP000005640, release date March 2018). Samples generated from mouse cell lines and tissue were searched against the mus musculus reviewed Swiss-Prot proteome (proteome ID: UP000000589, release date October 2018). All searches were performed with carbamidomethyl of cysteines as a fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein n-terminus acetylation were set as variable. Phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were set as variable modification for analysis of phosphopeptide enriched samples using Ti-IMAC. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was utilized for peptide spectral matches, peptides, and proteins. Match between runs feature was utilized only for the analysis of phosphopeptide enriched samples.

### Publication Abstract
Universal proteomics sample preparation is challenging because of the high heterogeneity of biological samples. Here we describe a novel mechanism that exploits the inherent instability of denatured proteins for nonspecific immobilization on microparticles by protein aggregation capture. To demonstrate the general applicability of this mechanism, we analyzed phosphoproteomes, tissue proteomes, and interaction proteomes as well as dilute secretomes. The findings present a practical, sensitive and cost-effective proteomics sample preparation method.

### Keywords
Sample preparation, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Secretomics, Magnetic beads, Mass spectrometry, Microparticles

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Tanveer Batth

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, Denmark


