### Accession
PXD001387

### Title
Proteomics of Skin Proteins in Psoriasis

### Description
Herein we demonstrate the efficacy of an unbiased proteomics screening approach for studying protein expression changes in the KC-Tie2 psoriasis mouse model, identifying multiple protein expression changes in the mouse and validating these changes in human psoriasis.  KC-Tie2 mouse skin samples (n=3) were compared with littermate controls (n=3) using gel-based fractionation followed by label-free protein expression analysis. 5482 peptides mapping to 1281 proteins were identified and quantitated: 105 proteins exhibited fold-changes ≥2.0 including: stefin A1 (average fold change of 342.4 and an average P = 0.0082; cystatin A, human orthologue); slc25a5 (average fold change of 46.2 and an average P = 0.0318); serpinb3b (average fold change of 35.6 and an average P = 0.0345; serpinB1, human orthologue); and kallikrein related peptidase 6 (average fold change of 4.7 and an average P = 0.2474; KLK6).   We independently confirmed mouse gene expression-based increases of selected genes including serpinb3b (17.4-fold, P < 0.0001), KLK6 (9.0-fold, P = 0.002), stefin A1 (7.3-fold; P < 0.001) and slc25A5 (1.5-fold; P = 0.05) using qRT-PCR on a second cohort of animals (n=8). Parallel LC/MS/MS analyses on these same samples verified protein-level increases of 1.3-fold (slc25a5; P < 0.05), 29,000-fold (stefinA1; P < 0.01), 322-fold (KLK6; P < 0.0001) between KC-Tie2 and control mice. To underscore the utility and translatability of our combined approach, we analyzed gene and protein expression levels in psoriasis patient skin and primary keratinocytes vs. healthy controls. Increases in gene expression for slc25a5 (1.8-fold), cystatin A (3.0-fold), KLK6 (5.8-fold) and serpinB1 (76-fold; all P < 0.05) were observed between healthy controls and involved lesional psoriasis skin and primary psoriasis keratinocytes.  Moreover slc25a5, cystatin A, KLK6 and serpinB1 protein were all increased in lesional psoriasis skin compared to normal skin. These results highlight the usefulness of preclinical disease models using readily-available mouse skin and demonstrate the utility of proteomic approaches for identifying novel peptides/proteins that are differentially regulated in psoriasis that could serve as sources of auto-antigens or provide novel therapeutic targets for the development of new anti-psoriatic treatments.

### Sample Protocol
Mice. Adult KC-Tie2 mice (C57Bl/6) and littermate controls (n=3 each) were euthanized and dorsal skin harvested as previously described for use in the label-free expression discovery experiments (7).  A second distinct group of mice (n=8 each) was used for validation at the RNA and protein levels.  All animal protocols were approved by the Case Western Reserve University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and conformed to the American Association for Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care guidelines.   Sample preparation for gel-based label-free expression discovery. Tissue protein samples which had been isolated and prepared as previously described (7) were thawed and total protein concentrations were determined using a Bio-Rad Protein Assay as described by the manufacturer. Samples were reduced for 15 minutes at 80°C using DTT with a final concentration of 10 mM.  The samples were then cooled to room temperature and alkylated with iodacetamide for 30 minutes with a final concentration of 25 mM.  Figure 1 summarizes the gel-based workflow used.  Briefly, 30 µg of each sample were loaded per well of a 1D- SDS-PAGE gel (4-20% Tris-HCl). The gel was stained using Bio-Rad Biosafe Coomassie (BioRad Laboratories, Hercules, CA) and then cut into 8 distinct regions based on apparent protein molecular weight (Supplemental Figure 1). Isolated gel regions were washed using 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC; Fisher Scientific, Fairlawn, NJ) followed by 50% acetonitrile (ACN; Burdick and Jackson, Morristown, NJ) twice.  Then the gel regions were crushed and proteolytic digestion was performed using bovine trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) with a final enzyme concentration of 100 ng for 18 hours at 37°C.  Digests were then removed and stored at -80°C until needed. The remaining gel pieces were washed with 25 mM ABC followed by 50% ACN 3 times to extract any remaining peptides.  These supernatants were combined with the original digests and dried completely via speed vac.  Resulting peptides were then stored at -80°C for LC-MS/MS analysis and resolubilized in 11 µL of 0.1% formic acid (Acros, Belgium) for LC/MS/MS analysis. Quantitative (q)RT-PCR verification on mouse skin.   RNA was isolated from the second, independent group of KC-Tie2 and control littermates (n=8 each) and qRT-PCR performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions and as described previously (Johnston et al., 2013) using the following primer-probe sets Rab18 (Mm00441057_m1), Serpinb3b (Mm03032256_uH), Stefin A1 (Mm01973758_gH), KLK6 (Mm00478322_m1) and Slc25a5 ADP/ATP translocase 2 (Mm00846873_g1; Applied Biosystems, Grand Island, NY).  Sample preparation for solution-based label-free expression verification.  Skin adjacent to that used for RNA isolation and analyses described above was collected and used to perform a second solution-based label free expression assay.  KC-Tie2 and control mouse skin (n=4 each) was placed into ice-cold 25 mM Tris pH 8.5 containing protease cocktail inhibitor (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and thoroughly rinsed to remove any remaining blood from the tissue.  Each sample was rinsed with ice-cold 25 mM Tris pH 8.5 containing a cocktail of protease inhibitors.  Figure 1 highlights the solution-based workflow.  The tissue was transferred to a cryo bag (Covaris, Woburn, MA), capped and frozen in liquid nitrogen prior to being pulverized.  Once pulverized, each sample was again frozen in liquid nitrogen and subjected to an additional round of pulverization.  From each sample approximately 10 mg was transferred to a 1.5 mL tube and 300 µL of 3% SDS was added.  Pulverized tissue was then incubated on ice for 30 minutes. Aliquots were sonicated at 50% amplitude followed by vortexing; this cycle was repeated 4 times with samples sitting on ice between each round.  SDS detergent removal and reduction and alkylation was performed using the Filter Assisted Sample Preparation method (FASP) (8).  Total protein concentration was determined using a modified Bradford assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories), and 10 μg of protein was digested as previously described (9).

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry for discovery and verification. LC/MS/MS was performed using a Waters ultra high-pressure liquid chromatography NanoAcquity (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) an LTQ Orbitrap Velos and an Orbitrap Elite (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).  The order of sample injections was randomized across all samples. The instrument was mass calibrated immediately before the analysis using the instrument protocol. Mobile phase A (aqueous) contained 0.1% formic acid in 5% ACN and mobile phase B (organic) contained 0.1% formic acid in 85% ACN.   Samples were trapped and desalted on-line in mobile phase A at10 µL/min for 10 minutes using a Waters UPLC PST C18 nanoACQUITY 300 (75 µm x 25 cm) reversed phase column with 5% mobile phase B.  Gel based discovery separation was obtained by employing a gradient of 6% to 28% mobile B at 0.300 µL/min over 150 minutes. The column was washed at 99% mobile phase B for 10 minutes, followed by a re-equilibration at 100% A for 15 minutes.  Positive mode electrospray was conducted using a nanospray source and the mass spectrometer was operated at a resolution of 60,000.  Quantitative and qualitative data were acquired using alternating full MS scan and MS/MS scans in normal mode.  Survey data were acquired from m/z of 400 to 1600 and up to 20 precursors based on intensity were interrogated by MS/MS per switch.  Two micro scans were acquired for every precursor interrogated and MS/MS was acquired as centroid data.  All mass spectrometry analytical parameters for the verification samples were the same as the discovery samples with exception of the LC/MS/MS analytical run time which was extended to 240 minutes. For the gel based discovery study, excised gel regions for each animal were processed and analyzed as a separate LC/MS/MS for total of 48 individual LC/MS/MS runs.  One LC/MS/MS run was acquired for each animal in the verification set for a total of 8 LC/MS/MS runs.  The discovery set was processed via Rosetta Elucidator (Rosetta Biosoftware, Seattle, WA) (Version 3.3.01 SP4 25).  The MS/MS peak lists were subsequently searched by Mascot (version 2.2.0, IPI_mouse_06_2010) (Matrix Science, London, UK).  The database used was mouse International Protein Index (IPI) (56957 sequences).  Search settings were as follows: trypsin enzyme specificity; mass accuracy window for precursor ion, 10 ppm; mass accuracy window for fragment ions, 0.8Da; variable modifications including carbamidomethlylation of cysteins, 1 missed cleavage and oxidation of methoinine. The false discovery rate for these settings was calculated to be 1.13% for the discovery set.  Automated differential quantification of peptides was performed with Rosetta Elucidator as previously described (10, 11).  The processing workflow that was used for differential quantification in the discovery set is shown in Supplemental Figure 2.  LC/MS/MS raw data was imported and for each MS spectrum profile of each LC/MS/MS run, chromatographic peaks and monoisotopic masses were extracted and aligned.  Specifically, chromatographic peaks were first aligned by retention time and monoisotopic mass across each sample by gel region.  Next, intensities of monoisotopic masses found in multiple gel regions (within a RT tolerance) of a sample were summed.  Peaklists with the monoisotopic mass and corresponding MS/MS data were then generated for each sample and searched using Mascot.  Resultant peptide identifications were imported into Elucidator and monoisotopic masses annotated with peptide identifications.  Statistical analysis of the dataset was performed using a Student’s t-test and peptides from the same protein were summed together to provide fold changes for each protein identified. The verification dataset was searched using the same database and search engine parameters as described above with a false discovery rate of 3.7% for the verification set.  Peak areas from peptides of targets that were identified via the Mascot database search were subsequently determined by manual extraction and integration using the Qual browser in the Xcalibur software (version 2.2) (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Trangenic mouse, Psoriasis, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Mark R. Chance, Ph.D. Vice Dean for Research  Charles W. and Iona A. Mathias Professor of Cancer Research Director, Center for Proteomics and Bioinformatics School of Medicine Case Western Reserve University 930 BRB, 10900 Euclid Ave. Cleveland OH 44106
Case Western Reserve University

### Submitter
Kathleen Lundberg

### Lab Head
Dr Mark R. Chance
Mark R. Chance, Ph.D. Vice Dean for Research  Charles W. and Iona A. Mathias Professor of Cancer Research Director, Center for Proteomics and Bioinformatics School of Medicine Case Western Reserve University 930 BRB, 10900 Euclid Ave. Cleveland OH 44106


