### Accession
PXD019661

### Title
New insights into the role of peptide from Allomyrina dichotoma larvae in ameliorating lipid metabolism in vitro and in vivo

### Description
The aim of this study was to identify anti-obesity peptide from Allomyrina dichotoma (A. dichotoma) and investigate the biochemical signaling pathway. For that, A. dichotoma larvae was hydrolyzed enzymatically, and further purified by using tangential flow filtration and consecutive chromatographic method. Finally, anti-obesity peptide was obtained, and their sequences identified as Gln-Ile-Ala-Gln-Asp-Phe-Lys-Thr-Asp-Leu (EIA10). EIA10 prevented adipocyte differentiation in vitro and was further investigated the mechanism underlying the effects in vivo. Our results indicated that EIA10 reduced body weight gain, organ weight and adipose tissue volume. Glucose tolerance and insulin resistance in high fat diet-fed obese mice significantly improved after EIA10 administration for four weeks. In addition, EIA10 significantly decreased TC and LDL, increased HDL, improved lipid metabolism, and downregulated mRNA and protein expression of transcription factors implicated in lipid adipogenesis. Taken together our results suggest that EIA10 from possessed potential for the treatment and prevention of obesity.

### Sample Protocol
A. dichotoma larvae was hydrolyzed enzymatically, and further purified by using tangential flow filtration and consecutive chromatographic method.For LC-MS/MS analyses, peptide digests were separated by online reversed-phase chromatography using a Thermo Scientific Eazy nano LC 1200 UHPLC equipped with an autosampler using a reversed-phase peptide trap Acclaim PepMapTM 100 (75 μm inner diameter, 2 cm length) and a reversed-phase analytical column PepMapTM RSLC C18 (75 μm inner diameter, 15 cm length, 3 μm particle size), both from Thermo Scientific, followed by electrospray ionization at a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. Samples were eluted using a split gradient of 3-50% solution B (80% ACN with 0.1% FA) in 60 min and 50-80% solution B in 10 min followed column wash at 100% solution B for 10 min. The chromatography system was coupled in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific TM). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode with the 120,000 resolution MS1 scan (375-1500 m/z), AGC target of 5e5 and max injection time of 50ms. Peptides above threshold 5e3 and charges 2-7 were selected for fragmentation with dynamic exclusion after 1 time for 15 s and 10 ppm tolerance. Spectra were searched against the uniprot-allomyrina+dichotoma db using the Proteome Dsciverer Sorcerer 2.2 with SEQUEST-based search algorithm, and comparative analysis of proteins identified in this study was performed using Scaffold 4 Q+S.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (XCorr Only) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version IseNode in Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)). Sequest (XCorr Only) was set up to search uniprot-allomyrina+dichotoma.fasta assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. X! Tandem was set up to search a reverse concatenated subset of the uniprot-allomyrina+dichotoma database also assuming trypsin and a reverse concatenated subset of the uniprot-allomyrina+dichotoma database also assuming trypsin. Sequest (XCorr Only) and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.80 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, oxidation of methionine, acetyl of lysine and the n-terminus, phospho of serine and dicarbamidomethyl of lysine were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications. Oxidation of methionine, acetyl of lysine and the n-terminus, phospho of serine and GG of lysine were specified in Sequest (XCorr Only) as variable modifications. CRITERIA FOR PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION-- Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.11.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 11.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 0.1%. Peptide Probabilities from X! Tandem (sample Mudpit_A4_2: A4_2) were assigned by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Peptide Probabilities from Sequest (XCorr Only) and X! Tandem were assigned by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
The aim of this study was to identify an anti-obesity peptide from <i>Allomyrina dichotoma</i> and investigate the lipid metabolic mechanism. Enzymatically hydrolyzed <i>A. dichotoma</i> larvae were further separated using tangential flow filtration and consecutive chromatographic processes. Finally, an anti-obesity peptide that showed the highest inhibitory effect on lipid accumulation was obtained, and the sequence was Glu-Ile-Ala-Gln-Asp-Phe-Lys-Thr-Asp-Leu (EIA10). EIA10 decreased lipid aggregation in vitro and significantly reduced the accumulation of body weight gain, liver weight, and adipose tissue weight in high-fat-fed mice. Compared with the control group, the levels of total cholesterol (TC), triglyceride (TG), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL), insulin, and homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) in the high-fat diet (HFD) group increased significantly, and the content of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL) in the serum decreased significantly. On the contrary, the levels of TC, TG, and insulin in the EIA10 group decreased significantly, and the HDL content increased significantly compared with the HFD group. Additionally, EIA10 dramatically decreased mRNA and protein levels of transcription factors involved in lipid adipogenesis. Taken together, our results suggest that EIA10 could be a promising agent for the treatment and prevention of obesity.

### Keywords
Allomyrina dichotoma larva; insulin resistance; lipid metabolism, Lc-msms, Peptides

### Affiliations
Center for genomic integrity (CGI), Institute of basic science (IBS), UNIST, Ulsan, 44919, Republic of Korea
Division of Food and Bioscience College of Biomedical and Health Science Konkuk University Glocal Campus, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Byung-gyu kim

### Lab Head
Dr Eun-Kyung Kim
Division of Food and Bioscience College of Biomedical and Health Science Konkuk University Glocal Campus, Republic of Korea


