### Accession
PXD021688

### Title
Licorice Ameliorates Cisplatin-Induced Hepatotoxicity through Anti-apoptosis, Anti-oxidative Stress, Anti-inflammation, and Acceleration of Metabolism

### Description
Cisplatin (CP) is one of the most effective antitumor drugs in the clinic, but has serious adverse reactions, and its hepatotoxicity has not been fully investigated. Licorice (GC), a traditional herbal medicine, has been commonly used as a detoxifier for poisons and drugs, and may be an effective drug for CP-induced hepatotoxicity. However, its mechanism and the effector molecules remain ambiguous. Therefore, in this study, a network pharmacology and proteomics-based approach was established, and a panoramic view of the detoxification of GC on CP-induced hepatotoxicity was provided. The experimental results indicated that GC can recover functional indices and pathological liver injury, inhibit hepatocyte apoptosis, upregulate B-cell lymphoma/leukemia 2 (Bcl-2) and superoxide dismutase (SOD) levels, and downregulate cellular tumor antigen p53 (p53), caspase-3, malondialdehyde (MDA), high mobility group protein B1 (HMGB1), tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), and interleukin 1β (IL-1β) levels. Proteomics indicated that GC regulates phosphatidylcholine translocator ABCB1 (ABCB1B), canalicular multispecific organic anion transporter 1 (ABCC2), cytochrome P450 4A2 (CYP4A2), cytochrome P450 1A1 (CYP1A1), cytochrome P450 1A2 (CYP1A2), estrogen receptor (ESR1), and DNA topoisomerase 2-alpha (TOP2A), inhibits oxidative stress, apoptosis, and inflammatory responses, and accelerates drug metabolism. In this study, we provide the investigation of the efficacy of GC against CP-induced hepatotoxicity, and offers a promising alternative for the clinic.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid chromatography (LC) (Bruker Nano-Elute) was coupled online to a hybrid TIMS quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (Bruker timsTOF Pro) via a CaptiveSpray nano-electrospray ion source. LC was performed at 140 °F and with a constant flow of 600 nL/min using a reversed-phase column (25 cm, 150 m i.d.) with a pulled emitter tip, packed with 1.9 m C18-coated porous silica beads (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) . Mobile phases A and B were water with 0.1% formic acid (v/v) and ACN with 0.1% formic acid (v/v), respectively. Peptides were separated linearly gradient from 3 to 15% B within 30 min, 24% B within 40 min, 35% within 30 min, and by a washing step at 95% B and re-equilibration. The dual TIMS analyzer was operated at a fixed duty cycle close to 100% via equal accumulation and ramp times of 130 ms each. Data-dependent data acquisition was performed in PASEF mode with 5 PASEF scans per topN acquisition cycle. Singly charged precursors were excluded by their position in the m/z-ion mobility plane, and precursors that reached a ‘target value’ of 5,000 a.u. were dynamically excluded for 18s. The quadrupole isolation width was set to 2 Th for m/z<700 and 3 Th for m/z >700.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were managed by MaxQuant software (version 1.6.6.0), and its andromeda search engine was used to identified MS/MS-based peptide, which uses a target-decoy approach to identify proteins at an FDR <1%. The rat ref-sequence protein database (updated at 2019/05/20, 66858 proteins ID in total) was used as a forward database and the reverse database of decoy search was auto-generated by MaxQuant. ‘Trypsin’ was set for enzyme specificity, and and at least seven amino acids were required to identified peptides. Default settings were used for variable and fixed modifications (variable modification: acetylation (Protein-N terminus) and oxidation methionine (M)), fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (C). A MaxQuant label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used to quantitate the MS signals, and the intensities of proteins were represented in intensity based absolute protein quantification (iBAQ). The iBAQ of each sample was transferred into a fraction of total protein iBAQ amount per experiment (FOT).

### Publication Abstract
Cisplatin (CP) is one of the most effective antitumor drugs in the clinic, but has serious adverse reactions, and its hepatotoxicity has not been fully investigated. Licorice (GC), a traditional herbal medicine, has been commonly used as a detoxifier for poisons and drugs, and may be an effective drug for CP-induced hepatotoxicity. However, its mechanism and the effector molecules remain ambiguous. Therefore, in this study, a network pharmacology and proteomics-based approach was established, and a panoramic view of the detoxification of GC on CP-induced hepatotoxicity was provided. The experimental results indicated that GC can recover functional indices and pathological liver injury, inhibit hepatocyte apoptosis, upregulate B-cell lymphoma/leukemia 2 (Bcl-2) and superoxide dismutase (SOD) levels, and downregulate cellular tumor antigen p53 (p53), caspase-3, malondialdehyde high mobility group protein B1 (HMGB1), tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-&#x3b1;), and interleukin 1&#x3b2; (IL-1&#x3b2;) levels. Proteomics indicated that GC regulates phosphatidylcholine translocator ABCB1 (ABCB1B), canalicular multispecific organic anion transporter 1 (ABCC2), cytochrome P450 4A2 (CYP4A2), cytochrome P450 1A1 (CYP1A1), cytochrome P450 1A2 (CYP1A2), estrogen receptor (ESR1), and DNA topoisomerase 2-alpha (TOP2A), inhibits oxidative stress, apoptosis, and inflammatory responses, and accelerates drug metabolism. In this study, we provide the investigation of the efficacy of GC against CP-induced hepatotoxicity, and offer a promising alternative for the clinic.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Detoxification, Licorice, Hepatotoxicity, Cisplatin

### Affiliations
College of Pharmacy, Gansu University of Chinese Medicine
College of Pharmacy, Gansu University of Chinese Medicine, Lanzhou, China

### Submitter
Man Qiong

### Lab Head
Dr Yi Deng
College of Pharmacy, Gansu University of Chinese Medicine, Lanzhou, China


