### Accession
PXD006778

### Title
First Comprehensive Proteome Analyses of Lysine Succinylation in Physalis angulata, a medicinal plant with a high pharmaceutical value

### Description
Physalis angulata is a medicinal plant with a high pharmaceutical value that is widely cultivated in East Asia. Lysine succinylation, a newly identified post-translational modification, is associated with various cellular processes. However, the regulatory mechanism underlying the metabolism of P. angulata is largely unknown. Here, liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry combined with a high-efficiency succinyl-lysine antibody was used to identify the succinylated peptides in P. angulata. In total, 422 lysine succinylation sites in 242 proteins were identified.

### Sample Protocol
Three independent fruit samples from P. angulata L. were surface sterilized with 5% (v/v) hypochlorite for 10 min and washed with sterile water three times. They were then placed in liquid nitrogen and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (type number JY92-IIN, Scientz, Ningbo, China) in lysis buffer [8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol and 0.1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail IV, 3 μM trichostatin A, 50 mM nicotinamide, 2 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)].

### Data Protocol
Protein and succinylation sites were identified by MaxQuant and the integrated Andromeda search engine (v. 1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were compared against the Physalis database concatenated with a reverse decoy database 25. Trypsin/P was determined as a cleavage enzyme, and the search has a maximum four missing cleavage sites allowance per peptide. Mass error was set to 20 and 5 ppm for the first round and main searches, respectively, and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Succinylation on the N-terminal of a selected protein was identified as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
Pyricularia oryzae is the pathogen for rice blast disease, which is a devastating threat to rice production worldwide. Lysine succinylation, a newly identified post-translational modification, is associated with various cellular processes. Here, liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry combined with a high-efficiency succinyl-lysine antibody was used to identify the succinylated peptides in P. oryzae. In total, 2109 lysine succinylation sites in 714 proteins were identified. Ten conserved succinylation sequence patterns were identified, among which, K*******K<sup>suc</sup>, and K**K<sup>suc</sup>, were two most preferred ones. The frequency of lysine succinylation sites, however, greatly varied among organisms, including plants, animals, and microbes. Interestingly, the numbers of succinylation site in each protein of P. oryzae were significantly greater than that of most previous published organisms. Gene ontology and KEGG analysis showed that these succinylated peptides are associated with a wide range of cellular functions, from metabolic processes to stimuli responses. Further analyses determined that lysine succinylation occurs on several key enzymes of the tricarboxylic acid cycle and glycolysis pathway, indicating that succinylation may play important roles in the regulation of basal metabolism in P. oryzae. Furthermore, more than 40 pathogenicity-related proteins were identified as succinylated proteins, suggesting an involvement of succinylation in pathogenicity. Our results provide the first comprehensive view of the P. oryzae succinylome and may aid to find potential pathogenicity-related proteins to control the rice blast disease. Significance Plant pathogens represent a great threat to world food security, and enormous reduction in the global yield of rice was caused by P. oryzae infection. Here, the succinylated proteins in P. oryzae were identified. Furthermore, comparison of succinylation sites among various species, indicating that different degrees of succinylation may be involved in the regulation of basal metabolism. This data facilitates our understanding of the metabolic pathways and proteins that are associated with pathogenicity.

### Keywords
Physalis angulata, Proteome, Succinylation

### Affiliations
College of Life and Environmental Sciences, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310036, China.
ptm-biolab

### Submitter
zhou lianqi

### Lab Head
Dr Huizhong Wang
College of Life and Environmental Sciences, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310036, China.


