### Accession
PXD018709

### Title
Nuclear Estrogen Receptor alpha (ERα) interactome following estrogen and antiestrogen treatment.

### Description
The Estrogen Receptor alpha (ERα) controls key cellular functions in hormone responsive breast cancer by assembling in large functional multiprotein complexes. ERα ligands are classified as agonists and antagonist, according to the response they elicit, thus the molecular characterization of the of ERα nuclear iteractome composition following estrogen and antiestrogen stimulation whose is needed to understand their effects on estrogen target tissues, in particular breast cancer. To this aim interaction proteomics coupled to mass spectrometry (MS) was applied to map the ERα nuclear interacting partners in MCF7 breast cancer cell nuclei following estrogen and antiestrogen stimuli.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear extracts obtained, from MCF7cell expressing or not ERα and subjected to estrogenic stimulation and antiestrogen treatment, were used for interaction proteomics experiments. Three biological replicates of each samples and control were analyzed. For mass spectrometry analyses, three biological replicates of TEV-eluted samples from control and ERα expressing cells following estrogen and antiestrogen treatment were analyzed. Protein extracts were precipitated with 10% TCA in acetone solution and and the proteins were reduced, alkylated and in-solution digested with trypsin (Promega) with the ProteaseMAX™ Surfactant (Promega) protocol according to manufacturers’ instructions. The resulting peptides were desalted and concentrated before mass spectrometry by the STAGE-TIP method using a C18 resin disk (3 M Empore). The peptides were eluted with 0.1% TFA/50% ACN, dried and solubilized in 7 μL 0.1% FA for mass spectrometry analysis. Each peptide mixture was analyzed on an Easy nLC1000 nano-LC system connected to a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive, ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (EasySpray/Thermo). For the liquid chromatography separation of the peptides an EasySpray column capillary of 25 cm bed length was employed. The flow rate was 300 nL/min, and the peptides were eluted with a 2–30% gradient of solvent B in 60 minutes. Solvent A was aqueous 0.1% formic acid and solvent B 100% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. The data-dependent acquisition automatically switched between MS and MS/MS mode. Survey full scan MS spectra were acquired from a mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) of 400 to 1,200 with the resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200 after accumulation to a target of 3,000,000 ions in the C-trap. For MS/MS, the ten most abundant multiple-charged ions were selected for fragmentation in the high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) cell at a target value of 100,000 charges or maximum acquisition time of 100 ms. The MS/MS scans were collected at a resolution of 17,500. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS raw files files were submitted to the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.10) for protein identification and quantitation using the Andromeda search engine. MaxQuant search was done against the UniProt Human database (September 2018). Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and protein N-acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. First search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and main search error 4.5 ppm were used. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. The minimal unique+razor peptides number was set to 1, and the allowed FDR was 0.01 (1 %) for peptide and protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Estrogen receptor alpha (ER&#x3b1;) is a ligand-inducible transcription factor which mediates estrogen actions in hormone-responsive tumors and is targeted by effective anticancer therapies based on the ER&#x3b1; antagonist ligands, selective estrogen receptor modulators (such as Tamoxifen/TAM) or disruptors (such as Fulvestrant/ICI). Despite its importance for cancer therapy, including acquired resistance to endocrine therapy, the molecular basis of ER&#x3b1; response to different ligands is not fully known to date. Interaction proteomics shows great potential to identify and characterize molecular mechanisms of disease based on physical and functional protein-protein interaction networks. Tandem affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry is applied here for mapping in hormone-responsive breast cancer cells nuclei, the ER&#x3b1; interactomes, induced by each of the two classes of antiestrogens. The results provide new insights on the molecular bases for antiestrogen-mediated control of ER&#x3b1; function and reveal new potential ways to overcome endocrine therapy resistance in cancer.

### Keywords
Interaction proteomics, Estrogen and antiestrogen signaling, Estrogen receptor alpha (erα)

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


