### Accession
PXD015756

### Title
Development of a method for quantitative analysis of in vivo interactions of pluripotency transcription factors Sox2, Oct4, Nanog by mass spectrometry

### Description
Protein-protein proximity of core pluripotency transcription factors plays an important role during cell reprogramming. Pluripotent embryonic stem (ES) cell identity is controlled by a trio of transcription factors: Sox2, Oct4, and Nanog. These proteins often bind to closely localized genomic sites. The precise mode by which Sox2, Oct4, and Nanog interact with DNA is likely to make a crucial contribution to their function. Here, a detailed protocol for in vivo detection and quantitative analysis of protein-protein proximity of Sox2 and Oct4 using Proximity Utilizing Biotinylation (PUB) method based on the use of the BAP/BirA (target/enzyme) system is described. The method includes design and cloning of DNA plasmid construct, transient transfection of HEK293T cells, Western blot analysis of nuclei fraction and LC-MS/MS analysis. Experiments with coexpression of BAP-X+BirA-Y (X, Y=Sox2, Oct4 and GFP as control) revealed strong biotinylation level of target proteins when X and Y were pluripotency transcription factors compared with control when X=GFP. Since mass spectrometry provides both high sensitivity and more accurate quantification of data a modified workflow was used, in which SDS-PAGE step was eliminated and His-tagged BAP-fused proteins from cell lysate were purified in 6M guanidine HCl buffer, washed, propionylated, digested directly on the Ni sepharose beads using trypsin and analysed on Q-TOF Impact II instrument. Using mass spectrometry allows making quantitative estimation of in vivo interaction of BAP-Sox2 and BirA-Oct4 which was demonstrated by measuring ratios of biotinylation levels of BAP fused either with Sox2 or GFP at different biotin pulse times. After vector preparation this protocol can be completed in seven working days.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected by two plasmids pcDNA3-BAP-Sox2 and pOz-BirA-Oct4 using calcium phosphate protocol. Before harvesting (3h or 9h biotin pulses) cells were labeled by adding biotin to DMEM medium to a final concentration 5 g/ml. The cells were subsequently lysed in CSK buffer with 0.5% Triton X-100, centrifuged and nuclear fraction was sonicated. 1/10 of aliquot of the sample was used for Western blotting analysis. Recombinant proteins were enriched in chaotropic buffer with Ni sepharose resin by means of the His tag on the BAP-Sox2 construct. In order to label nonbiotinylated proteins BAP-Sox2 the beads were treated by propionic anhydride. The Ni-bound proteins were digested directly on the beads using trypsin. After desalting on Ziptip the peptide mixture, containing biotinylated and nonbiotinylated BAP peptides was analyzed by LC-MS/MS and using Bruker Compass DataAnalysis software.

### Data Protocol
The raw data obtained from the MS was examined using DataAnalysis program by performing an extracted ion chromatograms (XIC) of the precursor ions at 563.2001 m/z (propionylated BAP) and 648.4190 m/z (biotinylated BAP) and calculation of the areas for fragment ions y8, y7, y6, y5 and y4 (Figures 4 and 5). To predict the values of m/z of fragment ions, we used an accessible online program that allows us to calculate these values for y and b ions for both propionylated and biotinylated BAP peptides (http://db.systemsbiology.net/proteomicsToolkit/FragIonServlet.html). Shotgun analysis. The raw data were processed by DataAnalysis program by performing “protein analysis” function on menu to generate mgf file. The mgf file was used to perform “target-decoy” search on Mascot server with application of the 1% false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) above homology threshold

### Publication Abstract
Protein-protein interactions of core pluripotency transcription factors play an important role during cell reprogramming. Cell identity is controlled by a trio of transcription factors: Sox2, Oct4, and Nanog. Thus, methods that help to quantify protein-protein interactions may be useful for understanding the mechanisms of pluripotency at the molecular level. Here, a detailed protocol for the detection and quantitative analysis of in vivo protein-protein proximity of Sox2 and Oct4 using the proximity-utilizing biotinylation (PUB) method is described. The method is based on the coexpression of two proteins of interest fused to a biotin acceptor peptide (BAP)in one case and a biotin ligase enzyme (BirA) in the other. The proximity between the two proteins leads to more efficient biotinylation of the BAP, which can be either detected by Western blotting or quantified using proteomics approaches, such as a multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) analysis. Coexpression of the fusion proteins BAP-X and BirA-Y revealed strong biotinylation of the target proteins when X and Y were, alternatively, the pluripotency transcription factors Sox2 and Oct4, compared with the negative control where X or Y was green fluorescent protein (GFP), which strongly suggests that Sox2 and Oct4 come in close proximity to each other and interact.

### Keywords
Oct4, Sox2, Transcription factors, Proximity utilizing biotinylation, Mass spectrometry, Pluripotency

### Affiliations
National Center for Biotechnology

### Submitter
Arman Kulyyassov

### Lab Head
Dr Arman Kulyyassov
National Center for Biotechnology


