### Accession
PXD013085

### Title
Dishevelled-3 protein conformation dynamics analyzed by FRET-based biosensors reveals a key role of casein kinase 1

### Description
Dishevelled (DVL) is the key component of the Wnt signaling pathway. Currently, DVL conformational dynamics under native conditions is unknown. To overcome this limitation, we developed the Fluorescein Arsenical Hairpin Binder- (FlAsH-) based FRET in vivo approach to study DVL conformation in living cells. Using this single-cell FRET approach, we demonstrate that (i) Wnt ligands induce open DVL conformation, (ii) DVL variants that are predominantly open, show more even subcellular localization and more efficient membrane recruitment by Frizzled (FZD) and (iii) Casein Kinase 1 ɛ (CK1ɛ) has a key regulatory function in DVL conformational dynamics. In silico modeling and in vitro biophysical methods explain how CK1ɛ-specific phosphorylation events control DVL conformations via modulation of the PDZ domain and its interaction with DVL C-terminus. In summary, our study describes an experimental tool for DVL conformational sampling in living cells and elucidates the essential regulatory role of CK1ɛ in DVL conformational dynamics.

### Sample Protocol
FLAG-DVL3 was overexpressed in HEK293 cells, with or without the studied kinase, immunoprecipitated and separated on SDS-PAGE. Bands corresponding to DVL3 were excised and after TrypChymo digestion 1/10 of the sample was directly analyzed. The rest of sample was used for phosphopeptide analysis. Sample was diluted with acidified acetonitrile solution. Phosphopeptides were enriched using Pierce Magnetic Titanium Dioxide Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit according to manufacturer protocol and eluted into LC-MS vial. LC-MS/MS analyses of peptide mixture were done using RSLCnano system connected to Orbitrap Elite hybrid spectrometer with ABIRD (Active Background Ion Reduction Device; ESI Source Solutions) and Digital PicoView 550 (New Objective) ion source installed. Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted using trapping column (100 μm × 30 mm) filled with 3.5-μm X-Bridge BEH 130 C18 sorbent. The peptides were eluted from the trapping column onto Acclaim Pepmap100 C18 column (3 µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm) by 65 min long gradient. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy selecting up to top 6 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (350-2000 m/z). The resolution of the survey scan was 60 000 (400 m/z) with a target value of 1×106 ions, one micro scan and maximum injection time of 200 ms. High resolution (resolution 15 000 at 400 m/z) HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 50 000. Normalized collision energy was 32% for HCD spectra. The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 500 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition and early expiration was disabled. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 2 m/z.  Part of LC-MS/MS analyses were done using RSLCnano system connected to Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid with ABIRD (Active Background Ion Reduction Device; ESI Source Solutions) and Digital PicoView 550 (New Objective) ion source installed. Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted using trapping column (100 μm × 30 mm) filled with 3.5-μm X-Bridge BEH 130 C18 sorbent. The peptides were eluted from the trapping column onto Acclaim Pepmap100 C18 column (3 µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm) by 65 min long gradient. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy. The resolution of the survey scan (350-2000 m/z) was 60 000 (400 m/z), and a target value of 4×105 ions, one microscan and maximum injection time of 50 ms. High resolution (resolution 30 000 at 400 m/z) HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 50 000. Normalized collision energy was 30% for HCD spectra. The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 500 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 60 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 1.6 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The analysis of the mass spectrometric RAW data files was carried out using the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 1.4) with in-house Mascot (Matrixscience; version 2.4.1) search engine utilization. MS/MS ion searches were done against in-house database containing expected protein of interest with additional sequences from cRAP database (downloaded from http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). Mass tolerance for peptides and MS/MS fragments were 7 ppm and 0.03 Da, respectively. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation (N, Q), carbamidomethylation of C and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) as optional modification were set for all searches. The phosphoRS feature was used for phosphorylation localization. Quantitative information was assessed and manually validated in Skyline software (Skyline daily 3.1.1.8884).

### Publication Abstract
Dishevelled (DVL) is the key component of the Wnt signaling pathway. Currently, DVL conformational dynamics under native conditions is unknown. To overcome this limitation, we develop the Fluorescein Arsenical Hairpin Binder- (FlAsH-) based FRET in vivo approach to study DVL conformation in living cells. Using this single-cell FRET approach, we demonstrate that (i) Wnt ligands induce open DVL conformation, (ii) DVL variants that are predominantly open, show more even subcellular localization and more efficient membrane recruitment by Frizzled (FZD) and (iii) Casein kinase 1 &#x25b; (CK1&#x25b;) has a key regulatory function in DVL conformational dynamics. In silico modeling and in vitro biophysical methods explain how CK1&#x25b;-specific phosphorylation events control DVL conformations via modulation of the PDZ domain and its interaction with DVL C-terminus. In summary, our study describes an experimental tool for DVL conformational sampling in living cells and elucidates the essential regulatory role of CK1&#x25b; in DVL conformational dynamics.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Dishevelled, Flash-based fret approach, Casein kinase 1 ɛ, Conformation

### Affiliations
CEITEC MU
National Centre for Biomolecular Research, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic; Proteomics Core facility, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Katerina Hanakova

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
National Centre for Biomolecular Research, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic; Proteomics Core facility, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic


