### Accession
PXD034866

### Title
Mechano‐covalent protection 1 of procoagulant factor VIII by von Willebrand factor

### Description
von Willebrand factor (VWF) is the protective carrier of procoagulant factor VIII (FVIII) in the shear forces of the circulation, prolonging its half‐life and delivering it to the developing thrombus. VWF∙FVIII complex formation is characterized by catch‐bond behavior  in which force first decelerates then accelerates bond dissociation. Patients with        mutations in VWF at the FVIII binding site phenocopies hemophilia A and the most common   mutations involve cysteine residues of multiple disulfides. Thirteen VWF disulfide bonds at the FVIII binding site exist in formed and unformed states, and binding of FVIII results in partial formation of 12 of the VWF bonds. The VWF∙FVIII bond stiffens in response to  force and this property is ablated when VWF disulfide bonds are prevented from forming,   resulting in slip‐bond behavior. These findings demonstrate that FVIII binding to VWF involves dynamic changes in the covalent states of several VWF disulfides that are required   for productive interaction.

### Sample Protocol
VWF was immunoprecipitated from plasma and the free Cysteines labeled with IPA-C12. Following reduction with DTT, the Cysteines that were involved in the disulfide bonds were alkylated with IPA-C13. Samples were digested with trypsin and submited for mass spec

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified by Mascot and the reduced ratio was calculated with Xcalibur qualbrowser by comparing the area of the peptide labeled with IPA-C12 with the one labeled with IPA-C13.

### Publication Abstract
von Willebrand factor (VWF) is the protective carrier of procoagulant factor VIII (FVIII) in the shear forces of the circulation, prolonging its half-life and delivering it to the developing thrombus. Using force spectroscopy, VWF-FVIII complex formation is characterized by catch-bond behavior in which force first decelerates then accelerates bond dissociation. Patients with mutations in VWF at the FVIII binding site phenocopies hemophilia A and the most common mutations are of cysteine residues involving multiple disulfide bonds. From differential cysteine alkylation and mass spectrometry experiments, 13 VWF disulfide bonds at the FVIII binding site were found to exist in formed and unformed states, and binding of FVIII results in partial formation of 12 of the VWF bonds. Force spectroscopy studies indicate that the VWF-FVIII bond stiffens in response to force and this feature of the interaction is ablated when VWF disulfide bonds are prevented from forming, resulting in slip-only bond behavior. Exposure of VWF to pathological fluid shear forces ex&#xa0;vivo and in&#xa0;vivo causes partial cleavage of all 13 disulfide bonds, further supporting their malleable nature. These findings demonstrate that FVIII binding to VWF involves dynamic changes in the covalent states of several VWF disulfides that are required for productive interaction in physiological shear forces.

### Keywords
Von willebrand factor, Factor fviii, Cysteines, Disulphide bonds

### Affiliations
ACRF Centenary Cancer Research Centre
The Centenary Institute, University of Sydney,         Camperdown NSW 2050, Australia Charles Perkins Centre, The University of Sydney,      Camperdown NSW 2050, Australia.

### Submitter
Diego Butera

### Lab Head
Dr Philip John Hogg
The Centenary Institute, University of Sydney,         Camperdown NSW 2050, Australia Charles Perkins Centre, The University of Sydney,      Camperdown NSW 2050, Australia.


