### Accession
PXD018099

### Title
Arabidopsis resistance to the Fungal Pathogen Drecslera gigantea in WT and bzip28 bzip60 mutant plants: the role of the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) mechanism

### Description
Quantitative proteomic experiments were performed on tryptic digests of proteins purified from the leaves of Arabidopsis thaliana. Wild type plants were compared to bzip28 bzip60 mutant plants. WT and  bzip28 bzip60 mutant plants were infected with Drecslera gigantea and compared to non¬-infected control plants

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana wild type (Columbia-0) and bzip28 bzip 60 mutant plants were grown on soil at 22 °C, at 80% humidity, with a 16/8 h light/dark cycle, and kept growing for 3 weeks. For infection of A. thaliana leaves, fungal conidia suspensions were obtained by filtration of mycelia and a suspension containing 500,000 conidia/ml in deionized water containing 0.05% w/v Tween 20 was sprayed on plants. Control plants were treated with the same solution not containing D. gigantea conidia. Proteins were quantified and an aliquot of 100ug of each sample was treated following the instructions of mass tagging with the TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent. Samples were labeled according to the scheme: WTContr-128N, WTinfected- 129N, bzip28 bzip60 Contr-126 and bzip28 bzip60 infected- 127N. Pooled TMT-labeled peptide mixture was fractionated by High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide fractionation kit and peptide fractions were analysed by NanoLC-ESI-Q-Orbitrap-MS/MS on a Q-ExactivePlus mass spectrometer in DDA mode. NanoLC-ESI-Q-Orbitrap-MS/MS analysis of the eight peptide fractions was performed in triplicate

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed using Proteome Discoverer suite v2.4 and Mascot v2.6.1 as searching algorithm against the TAIR10 database of A. thaliana protein sequences (www.arabidopsis.org). Mass threshold values of 10ppm and 0.02Da were used for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Peptide identification data were filtered using a Mascot ion score. threshold ≥30, and at least two sequenced peptides were required to confirm protein identification. Only high-confidence protein identifications (corresponding to FDR 1%) were retained

### Publication Abstract
<i>Drechslera gigantea</i> Heald &amp; Wolf is a worldwide-spread necrotrophic fungus closely related to the <i>Bipolaris</i> genus, well-known because many member species provoke severe diseases in cereal crops and studied because they produce sesterpenoid phytoxins named ophiobolins which possess interesting biological properties. The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a conserved mechanism protecting eukaryotic cells from the accumulation of unfolded/misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). In plants, consolidated evidence supports the role of UPR in the tolerance to abiotic stress, whereas much less information is available concerning the induction of ER stress by pathogen infection and consequent UPR elicitation as part of the defense response. In this study, the infection process of <i>D. gigantea</i> in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> wild type and UPR-defective <i>bzip28 bzip60</i> double mutant plants was comparatively investigated, with the aim to address the role of UPR in the expression of resistance to the fungal pathogen. The results of confocal microscopy, as well as of qRT-PCR transcript level analysis of UPR genes, proteomics, microRNAs expression profile and HPLC-based hormone analyses demonstrated that ophiobolin produced by the fungus during infection compromised ER integrity and that impairment of the IRE1/bZIP60 pathway of UPR hampered the full expression of resistance, thereby enhancing plant susceptibility to the pathogen.

### Keywords
Unfolded protein response (upr); bzip mutants; fungal infection; drecslera gigantea infection

### Affiliations
CNR ISPAAM
Institute for the Animal Production System in the Mediterranean Environment (ISPAAM), National Research Council, Naples ITALY

### Submitter
anna maria salzano

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Scaloni
Institute for the Animal Production System in the Mediterranean Environment (ISPAAM), National Research Council, Naples ITALY


