### Accession
PXD013400

### Title
Arabidopsis Hrd1 complex -  PAWH1 and PAWH2 are plant-specific components of an Arabidopsis endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation complex

### Description
We are using the immunoprecipitation coupled with mass spectrometry to identify additional components of the Arabidopsis Hrd1-containing ERAD complex

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted from antibody-conjugated beads with 0.2 M Glycine (pH 2.5), dried, and solubilized in 8 M urea containing 50 mM iodoacetamide. The alkylated proteins were digested by sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) in 25 mM NH4HCO3 at an enzyme: substrate ratio of 1: 100 (w/w) in a 37°C shaking incubator for 18 h. The tryptic peptides were collected after centrifugation at 13,523 x g and freeze-dried with a refrigerated CentriVap concentrator (Labconco). Protein samples were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and analyzed by online nanoAcquity ultraperformance LC (Waters) coupled with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Nanospray was controlled by a PicoView Nanospray Source (PV550; New Objective) at a spray voltage of 1.9 kV. The peptides were trapped by a 2G-V/MT Trap symmetry C18 column (5 μm particles, 180 μm inner diameter × 20 mm length) at a flow rate of 3 μL/min for 3 min, and separated on a BEH130 C18 analytical column (1.7 μm particles, 100 μm inner diameter × 250 mm length) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Peptides were eluted using mobile phases consisting of solvent A (0.1% FA in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) through a linear gradient, and then 85% of solvent B at a duration of 90 min. Data-dependent MS/MS acquisition was performed following a full MS survey scan by Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000 over the m/z range of 350–1800, and MS/MS measurements of the top 20 most intense precursor ions. The MS raw data from the LC-MS/MS analyses were separately converted to mascot generic format (MGF) files using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then searched against inhouse databases using Mascot Daemon 2.4 (MatrixSciences). The search parameter for tryptic digestion was restricted to a maximum of two missed cleavages of proteins. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was designated as a fixed modification. Mass tolerances were set up to 20 ppm for the Orbitrap-MS ions, and 0.2 or 1Da for ion-trap MS/MS fragment ions.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were searched from The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR10) or the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) nonredundant database. The MS raw data from the LC-MS/MS analyses of the biological duplicate and three technical repeats were separately converted to MGF files using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) and then searched against the in-house databases using Mascot Daemon 2.4 (Matrix Science, London, UK).  Mass tolerances were set up to 20 ppm for the Orbitrap-MS ions, and 0.8 Da for ion-trap MS/MS fragment ions. Peptide assignments were filtered by an ion score cutoff of 20, and the significance threshold was adjusted to 0.001 to achieve a false discovery rate (FDR) of < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) is a unique mechanism to degrade misfolded proteins via complexes containing&#xa0;several highly-conserved ER-anchored ubiquitin ligases such as HMG-CoA reductase degradation1 (Hrd1). Arabidopsis has a similar Hrd1-containing ERAD machinery; however, our knowledge of this complex is limited. Here we report two closely-related Arabidopsis proteins, Protein Associated With Hrd1-1 (PAWH1) and PAWH2, which share a conserved domain with yeast Altered Inheritance of Mitochondria24. PAWH1 and PAWH2 localize to the ER membrane and associate with Hrd1 via EMS-mutagenized Bri1 Suppressor7 (EBS7), a plant-specific component of the Hrd1 complex. Simultaneously elimination of two PAWHs constitutively activates the unfolded protein response and compromises stress tolerance. Importantly, the pawh1 pawh2 double mutation reduces the protein abundance of EBS7 and Hrd1 and inhibits degradation of several ERAD substrates. Our study not only discovers additional plant-specific components of the Arabidopsis Hrd1 complex but also reveals a distinct mechanism for regulating the Hrd1 stability.

### Keywords
Erad, Ebs7, Er stress, Pawh2, Hrd1, Upr, Pawh1

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Shanghai Center for Plant Stress Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai,201602, China

### Submitter
Jianming Li

### Lab Head
Dr Jianming LI
Shanghai Center for Plant Stress Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai,201602, China


