### Accession
PXD017283

### Title
A unique and divergent cyclin/cyclin-dependent kinase complex controls DNA replication during atypical cell-cycles of Plasmodium berghei gametogonyA unique and divergent cyclin/cyclin-dependent kinase complex controls DNA replication during atypical cell-cycles of Plasmodium berghei gametogony

### Description
Cell-cycle transitions are generally triggered by variations in the activity of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) bound to cyclins. Malaria parasites express ancestral CDKs and cyclins, whose functions and interdependency remain elusive. Here, we show that the unique Plasmodium berghei CDK-related kinase 5 (CRK5), is a critical cell-cycle regulator of gametogony required for transmission to the mosquito. It is essential for DNA replication and phosphorylates canonical S/TPxK CDK motifs on components of the pre-replicative complex otherwise regulated by distinct kinases in other eukaryotes. Over a replicative cycle, CRK5 stably interacts with a single Haemosporidia-specific cyclin (SOC2) with no evidence of SOC2 degradation. Regulation of CRK5 activity relies instead on dynamic phosphorylation of a C-terminus extension that mediates its interaction with SOC2. Our results present evidence that during the atypical cell cycles of Plasmodium gametogony, a unique and divergent cyclin/CDK pair fulfils the functional space of multiple eukaryotic cell-cycle kinases to initiate DNA replication.

### Sample Protocol
Plasmodium cells were lysed and proteins were digested using a FASP approach. Peptides were labelled with TMT10 plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and phsophopetides were enriched using the High-Selec Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions. Flow through fraction of each TMT10 experiment was then fractionated into 13 fractions using  the Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. LC-ESI-MS/MS was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data-Dependant Aquisition (DDA) was performed with MS1 full scan at a resolution of 120’000 FWHM followed by as many subsequent MS2 scans on selected precursors as possible within 3 second maximum cycle time. MS1 was performed in the Orbitrap with an AGC target of 4x105, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a scan range from 375 to 1500 m/z. MS2 was performed in the Orbitrap using higher-energy collisional dissociation HCD at 38% NCE. Isolation windows was at 0.7 u with an AGC target of 5x104 and a maximum injection time of 86 ms. A dynamic exclusion of parent ions of 60 s. with 10 ppm mass tolerance was applied.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.3 software (Thermo Fisher). Briefly, spectrum were extracted and searched against the plasmodium berghei ANKA database (PlasmoDB.org, release 38, 5076 entries) combined with an in-house database of common contaminant using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with one potential missed cleavage. Precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine (+57.021) as well as TMT10plex (+229.163) on lysine residues and on peptide N-termini were specified as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine (+15.995) as well as phosphorylated serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. The search results were validated with a Target Decoy PSM validator. PSM and peptides were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%, and then grouped to proteins with again a FDR of 1% and using only peptides with high confidence level. Both unique and razor peptides were used for quantitation and protein and peptides abundances values were based on S/N values of reporter ions. The abundances were normalised on “Total Peptide Amount” and then scaled with “On Controls Average” (i.e. using the reference sample channel). All the protein ratio were calculated from the medians of the summed abundances of replicate groups and associated p-values were calculated with an ANOVA test based on individual protein or peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Cell cycle transitions are generally triggered by variation in the activity of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) bound to cyclins. Malaria-causing parasites have a life cycle with unique cell-division cycles, and a repertoire of divergent CDKs and cyclins of poorly understood function and interdependency. We show that <i>Plasmodium berghei</i> CDK-related kinase 5 (CRK5), is a critical regulator of atypical mitosis in the gametogony and is required for mosquito transmission. It phosphorylates canonical CDK motifs of components in the pre-replicative complex and is essential for DNA replication. During a replicative cycle, CRK5 stably interacts with a single <i>Plasmodium</i>-specific cyclin (SOC2), although we obtained no evidence of SOC2 cycling by transcription, translation or degradation. Our results provide evidence that during <i>Plasmodium</i> male gametogony, this divergent cyclin/CDK pair fills the functional space of other eukaryotic cell-cycle kinases controlling DNA replication.

### Keywords
Cyclin-dependent kinase, Phosphorylation, Lc-msms, Plasmodium berhei, Tmt10

### Affiliations
University of Geneva, Faculty of Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland
University of Geneva

### Submitter
alexandre Hainard

### Lab Head
Dr Mathieu Brochet
University of Geneva, Faculty of Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland


