### Accession
PXD030297

### Title
Structural mechanism for inhibition of PP2A-B56 and oncogenicity by CIP2A

### Description
Abstract  The protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) heterotrimer PP2A-B56 is a human tumor suppressor. However, the molecular mechanisms inhibiting PP2A-B56in cancer are poorly understood. Here, we report molecular level details and structural mechanism of PP2A-B56inhibition by an oncoprotein CIP2A. Upon direct binding to PP2A-B56 trimer, CIP2A replaces PP2A-A subunit and thereby hijacks both the B56 and the catalytic PP2Ac subunit to form a CIP2A-B56-PP2Ac pseudotrimer. Further, CIP2A competes with B56 substrate binding by blocking the LxxIxE-motif substrate binding pocket on B56. Relevant to oncogenic activity of CIP2A across human cancers, the N-terminal head domain-mediated interaction with B56 stabilizes CIP2A protein. Functionally, CRISPR/Cas9-mediated single amino acid mutagenesis of the head domain blunted MYC expression and MEK phosphorylation, and abrogated triple-negative breast cancer in vivo tumor growth. Collectively, we discover a unique multi-step “hijack and mute” mechanism of protein complex regulation inhibiting tumor suppressor PP2A-B56. Further, the results unfold single structural determinant for CIP2A´s oncogenic activity, potentially facilitating therapeutic modulation of CIP2A in cancer and other diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Analysis of B56α interactome affected by CIP2A over-expression, by affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry (AP-MS) Murine NIH3T3 cells, stably expressing V5-tagged CIP2A WT or empty vector control, were transfected with YFP-B56α.  Cells were plated on a 15 cm scale, with five dishes set for each condition, per experiment. Cells were transiently transfected with YFP-B56α-encoding plasmid using JetPrime, according to manufacturer´s instructions. Per 15 cm dish, 12 µg of DNA was used, and JetPrime was used at 2:1 ratio (24 µL per 15 cm dish). 24H post-transfection, the media was removed and the cells were rinsed twice with cold PBS, scraped on 500 µL PBS, transferred to a clean Eppendorf tube and centrifuged for 20 s at 13,200 rpm at 4°Ct. For AP-MS, the cell pellets were lysed in 200 µL NET buffer (50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 15 mM EDTA, and 1 % Nonidet P-40) supplemented with a protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche Applied Science), followed by a 15 min centrifugation at 13,000xg.  For pull-down, the cell lysates were incubated with 60 µL GFP-trapping beads (ChromoTek) and 3 mL NENT100 buffer (20 mM Tris HCl pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1 % Nonidet P-40, 25% glycerol, and 100 mM NaCl) containing 1 mg/mL bovine serum albumin (BSA) on a rotating wheel for 1H at 4°C. Then, the beads were washed twice with 500 µL NENT100 and twice with 500 µL NENT300 containing 300 mM NaCl. The B56α-GFP-trapped complexes were washed three times with 500 µl 50 mM Tris (pH 7.7) containing 50 mM NaCl, followed by three washes with 500 µl 200 mM NH4HCO3.  The traps were subsequently subjected to an overnight on-bead trypsin digestion at 37°C in the presence of 200 mM NH4HCO3, 5% CH3CN, 0.01 % ProteaseMax (Promega) and 0.5 µg of trypsin (Pierce).  The resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTip pipette tips (Millipore) and subjected to high-resolution LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 Nano Ultra High Pressure Chromatography (UPLC) system interfaced with an Orbitrap Elite Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer via an EASY-spray (C-18, 15 cm) column (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified by MASCOT (Matrix Science) using UniProt Mus musculus (91781 sequences) followed by UniProt Homo sapiens (173330 sequences) as databases. The following MASCOT search parameters were used: Trypsin/P, oxidation (M) as variable modification, two missed cleavages, peptide tolerance 10 ppm for MS and 0.5 Da for MS/MS.  Progenesis software (Nonlinear Dynamics) was used for relative quantification of peptides, and Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for peptide validation using the Percolator node.  Only peptides with a q value < 0.01 were taken into account.  Qlucore software was used for statistical data analysis using log2 of protein abundances, normalised to the protein abundance of B56α in the CTRL_1 sample, as input.

### Publication Abstract
The protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) heterotrimer PP2A-B56&#x3b1; is a human tumour suppressor. However, the molecular mechanisms inhibiting PP2A-B56&#x3b1; in cancer are poorly understood. Here, we report molecular level details and structural mechanisms of PP2A-B56&#x3b1; inhibition by an oncoprotein CIP2A. Upon direct binding to PP2A-B56&#x3b1; trimer, CIP2A displaces the PP2A-A subunit and thereby hijacks both the B56&#x3b1;, and the catalytic PP2Ac subunit to form a CIP2A-B56&#x3b1;-PP2Ac pseudotrimer. Further, CIP2A competes with B56&#x3b1; substrate binding by blocking the LxxIxE-motif substrate binding pocket on B56&#x3b1;. Relevant to oncogenic activity of CIP2A across human cancers, the N-terminal head domain-mediated interaction with B56&#x3b1; stabilizes CIP2A protein. Functionally, CRISPR/Cas9-mediated single amino acid mutagenesis of the head domain blunted MYC expression and MEK phosphorylation, and abrogated triple-negative breast cancer in vivo tumour growth. Collectively, we discover a unique multi-step hijack and mute protein complex regulation mechanism resulting in tumour suppressor PP2A-B56&#x3b1; inhibition. Further, the results unfold a structural determinant for the oncogenic activity of CIP2A, potentially facilitating therapeutic modulation of CIP2A in cancer and other diseases.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Mouse, Interactome, Oncogene, Protein phosphatase

### Affiliations
KU Leuven
Turku Bioscience Centre, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, 20520 Turku, Finland Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku, 20520 Turku, Finland

### Submitter
Rita Derua

### Lab Head
Dr Jukka Westermarck
Turku Bioscience Centre, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, 20520 Turku, Finland Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku, 20520 Turku, Finland


