### Accession
PXD008541

### Title
Human primary brown and white fat cell secretome

### Description
Secreted proteins from adipose tissue play a role in metabolic cross-talk and homeostasis. We performed high sensitivity mass spectrometry-based proteomics on the cell media of human adipocytes derived from the supraclavicular brown adipose and from the subcutaneous white adipose depots of adult humans. We identified 471 potentially secreted proteins covering interesting protein categories such as hormones, growth factors, extracellular matrix proteins and proteins of the complement system, which were differentially regulated in brown and white adipocytes. A total of 101 proteins were exclusively quantified in brown adipocytes and among these were ependymin-related protein 1 (EPDR1). Functional studies suggested a role for EPDR1 in thermogenic adipogenesis. In conclusion, we report substantial differences between the secretomes of brown and white human adipocytes and identify novel candidate batokines that can be important regulators of metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from the conditioned media from brown and white fat cells were denatured with 2M urea, acetone precipitated overnight and digested using LysC and Trypsin enzymes. For the cellular proteome, samples were preapred according to iST protocol (Kulak et al 2014). The peptides were analyzed using LC-MS instrumentation consisting of an Easy nanoflow UHPLC (Thermo Fischer Scientific) coupled via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fischer Scientific) to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer.Peptides were separated on a 50 cm column with 75 µm inner diameter packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-aq 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). Peptides were loaded in buffer containing 0.5% formic acid and eluted with a 160 min linear gradient with buffer containing 80% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid (v/v) at 250 nL/min. Chromatography and column oven (Sonation GmbH) temperature were controlled and monitored in real time using SprayQC.

### Data Protocol
The raw files for secretome and cellular proteome were analyzed in the MaxQuant environment (Tyanova et al., 2016). The initial maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 6 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 20 ppm for MS/MS peaks. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, defined as C-terminal to arginine and lysine excluding proline, and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. A minimal peptide length of six amino acids was required. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as a fixed modification, while N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modification. The spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the human UniProt sequence database with 248 common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications. The peptide identifications across different LC-MS runs were matched by enabling the ‘match between runs’ feature in MaxQuant with a retention time window of 30 s. If the identified peptides were shared between two or more proteins, these were combined and reported in protein group. Contaminants and reverse identifications were removed from further data analysis. Protein quantification was based on the Max LFQ algorithm integrated into the MaxQuant software (Cox et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brown fat, Secretomics, White fat, Lcms, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Copenhagen University
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

### Submitter
atul shahaji deshmukh

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.


