### Accession
PXD030569

### Title
Enhancer RNAs stimulate Pol II pause release by harnessing multivalent interactions to NELF

### Description
UV-light-induced protein-RNA cross-linking followed by MS analysis was used to identify RNA-binding regions of enhancer RNAs (eRNAs) to the negative elongation factor (NELF) complex, and NELF as part of the paused elongation complex (PEC) of human RNA polymerase II.

### Sample Protocol
Samples contained either the NELF complex alone or the paused elongation complex (PEC) consisting of Pol II, NELF, DSIF and an eRNA (Arc or Nr4a1-(a)). eRNA was either unlabeled (containing only native bases) or labeled with 4-thiouridine (4SU).  Samples containing unlabeled RNA were cross-linked by 254-nm UV light in a Spectrolinker device (3.2 J cm-2). Samples containing 4SU-RNA were cross-linked by 365-nm UV light using a handheld lamp (Herolab UV-8 SL). Cross-linked protein-RNA complexes were ethanol precipitated and digested with RNases (T1 and A) and trypsin. Peptide-RNA adducts were enriched from the digested samples by titanium dioxide metal affinity chromatography and analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instrument with 120000 and 30000 resolution for MS and MS/MS data, respectively. Further information can be found in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.5, with adaptations for protein-RNA cross-linking searches as described in Dorn et al., Nat. Methods, 2017. The target sequence databases contained the NELF or PEC subunits and contaminant proteins. The decoy databases contained the respective reversed sequences. RNA adducts with up to three nucleotides in length were considered, along with neutral losses. Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance = 10 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 20 ppm. Results were filtered with the following settings: minions ≥7, TIC subscore ≥0.15, xQuest ID score ≥20. The result tables show all assigned identifications from target and decoy sequences. A file list document connects the individual result tables to the raw files, sample types and acquisition conditions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Paused elongation complex (pec), Protein-rna cross-linking, Protein-rna complexes, Uv cross-linking, Negative elongation factor (nelf), Rna polymerase ii

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland


