### Accession
PXD026941

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the role of the quality control protease LONP1 in mitochondrial protein aggregation

### Description
The mitochondrial matrix protease LONP1 is an essential part of the organellar protein quality control system. LONP1 has been shown to be involved in respiration control and apoptosis. Furthermore, a reduction in LONP1 level correlates with ageing processes. Up to now, the effects of a LONP1 defect were mostly studied by utilizing transient, siRNA-mediated knockdown approaches. We generated a new cellular model system for studying the impact of LONP1 on mitochondrial protein homeostasis by a CRISPR/Cas-mediated genetic knockdown (gKD). These cells show a stable reduction of LONP1 along with a mild phenotype characterized by absent morphological differences and only small negative effects on mitochondrial functions under normal culture conditions. To assess the consequences of a permanent LONP1 depletion on the mitochondrial proteome, we analyzed the alterations of protein levels by quantitative mass spectrometry, demonstrating small adaptive changes, in particular concerning mitochondrial protein biogenesis. In an additional proteomic analysis, we determined the temperature-dependent aggregation behavior of mitochondrial proteins and its dependence on a reduction of LONP1 activity, demonstrating the important role of the protease for mitochondrial protein homeostasis in mammalian cells. We identified a significant number of mitochondrial proteins that are affected by LONP1 activity concerning their stressinduced solubility. Taken together, our results suggest a very good applicability of the LONP1 gKD cell line as a model system for human ageing processes.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide preparation Gel slices were subjected to tryptic in gel digestion (29). In brief, slices were washed consecutively with water, 50% acetonitrile (ACN), and 100% ACN. Proteins were reduced with 20 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and alkylated with 40 mM acrylamide (in 50 mM bicarbonate). The slices were washed again and dehydrated with ACN. Dried slices were incubated with 330 ng sequencing grade trypsin (Promega)at 37°C overnight. The peptide extract was separated and remaining peptides extracted with 50% ACN. Peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator and stored at -20°C. LC-MS measurements of peptides Peptides were dissolved in 10 μl 0.1% formic acid (FA) and 3 μl were injected onto a C18 trap column (20 mm length, 100 μm inner diameter, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) made inhouse. Bound peptides were eluted onto a C18 analytical column (200 mm length, 75 μm inner diameter, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, with 0.1% formic acid as solvent A). Peptides were separated during a linear gradient from 5% to 35% solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) within 90 min at 300 nl/min. The nano HPLC was coupled online to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptide ions between 330 and 1600 m/z were scanned in the Orbitrap detector with a resolution of 60,000 (maximum fill time 400 ms, AGC target 106). The 22 most intense precursor ions (threshold intensity 3000, isolation width 1.0 Da) were subjected to collision induced dissociation (CID, normalized energy 35) and analyzed in the linear ion trap. Fragmented peptide ions were excluded from repeat analysis for 15 s.

### Data Protocol
For peptide analysis, raw data processing and database searches were performed with Proteome Discoverer software 2.3.0.523 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide identifications were done with an in-house Mascot server version 2.6.1 (Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK). MS2 data were searched against human sequences in SwissProt (release 2017_10). Precursor Ion m/z tolerance was 9 ppm, fragment ion tolerance 0.5 Da (CID). Tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavages were searched. Propionamide on cysteines was set as a static modification. Oxidation of methionine and 13C6 label on lysine were allowed as dynamic modifications. Mascot results were assigned q-values by the percolator algorithm version 3.02.1 as implemented in Proteome Discoverer. Spectra with identifications below 1% q-value were sent to a second round of database search with semitryptic enzyme specificity (one missed cleavage allowed) and 10 ppm MS1 mass tolerance (propionamide dynamic on Cys). Proteins were included if at least two peptides were identified with <1% FDR. Only unique peptides were included in protein quantification. Precursor ion quantification was based on precursor intensities of light and heavy SILAC pairs (unlabeled or 13C(6)-lysine). At least two isotopes were required for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
The mitochondrial matrix protease LONP1 is an essential part of the organellar protein quality control system. LONP1 has been shown to be involved in respiration control and apoptosis. Furthermore, a reduction in LONP1 level correlates with aging. Up to now, the effects of a LONP1 defect were mostly studied by utilizing transient, siRNA-mediated knockdown approaches. We generated a new cellular model system for studying the impact of LONP1 on mitochondrial protein homeostasis by a CRISPR/Cas-mediated genetic knockdown (gKD). These cells showed a stable reduction of LONP1 along with a mild phenotype characterized by absent morphological differences and only small negative effects on mitochondrial functions under normal culture conditions. To assess the consequences of a permanent LONP1 depletion on the mitochondrial proteome, we analyzed the alterations of protein levels by quantitative mass spectrometry, demonstrating small adaptive changes, in particular with respect to mitochondrial protein biogenesis. In an additional proteomic analysis, we determined the temperature-dependent aggregation behavior of mitochondrial proteins and its dependence on a reduction of LONP1 activity, demonstrating the important role of the protease for mitochondrial protein homeostasis in mammalian cells. We identified a significant number of mitochondrial proteins that are affected by a reduced LONP1 activity especially with respect to their stress-induced solubility. Taken together, our results suggest a very good applicability of the LONP1 gKD cell line as a model system for human aging processes.

### Keywords
Human, Protein aggregation, Mitochondria, Protein degradation, Genetic alteration via crispr/cas, Heat stress, Lonp1 atp-dependent protease

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn
University of Bonn, Germany

### Submitter
Marc Sylvester

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Voos
University of Bonn, Germany


