### Accession
PXD011962

### Title
Metabolism as an early predictor of DPSCs aging

### Description
Tissue resident adult stem cells are known to participate in tissue regeneration and repair that follows cell turnover, or injury. It has been well established that aging impedes the regeneration capabilities at the cellular level, but it is not clear if the different onset of stem cell aging between individuals can be predicted or prevented at an earlier stage. Here we studied the dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs), a population of adult stem cells that is known to participate in the repair of an injured tooth, and its properties can be affected by aging. The dental pulp from third molars of a diverse patient group were surgically extracted, generating cells that had a high percentage of mesenchymal stem cell markers CD29, CD44, CD146 and Stro1 and had the ability to differentiate into osteo/odontogenic and adipogenic lineages. Through RNA seq and qPCR analysis we identified homeobox protein, Barx1, as a marker for DPSCs. Furthermore, using high throughput transcriptomic and proteomic analysis we identified markers for DPSC populations with accelerated replicative senescence. In particular, we show that the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β) pathway and the cytoskeletal proteins are upregulated in rapid aging DPSCs, indicating a loss of stem cell characteristics and spontaneous initiation of terminal differentiation. Importantly, using metabolic flux analysis, we identified a metabolic signature for the rapid aging DPSCs, prior to manifestation of senescence phenotypes. This metabolic signature therefore can be used to predict the onset of replicative senescence. Hence, the present study identifies Barx1 as a DPSCs marker and dissects the first predictive metabolic signature for DPSCs aging.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in 1M urea, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.8, and extracted proteins were quantified with a BCA (Bicinchoninic Acid) assay. Proteins were reduced with 2mM DTT, alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide, and digested overnight with trypsin. The resulting peptides were desalted on Waters Sep-Pak C18 cartridges. Peptides were analysed by nano-LC-MS/MS on a Fusion Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated online by reverse phase chromatography using a heated 50°C 30cm C18 columns (75mm ID packed with Magic C18 AQ 3μM /100Α beads) in a 280min gradient (1% to 45% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) separated at 250nL/min. The Fusion was operated in data-dependent mode with the following settings: 60000 resolutions, 350-1500 m/z full scan, Top Speed 2 seconds, and a 1.8 m/z isolation window.

### Data Protocol
Identification and label free quantification of peptides were done with MaxQuant 1.5.7.4 using a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) against the human Swiss-Prot/TrEMB database downloaded from Uniprot on June 2nd, 2016. The databases contained forward and reverse human sequences as well as common contaminants. Peptides were searched using a 5ppm mass error and a match between run window of 2min.

### Publication Abstract
Tissue resident adult stem cells are known to participate in tissue regeneration and repair that follows cell turnover, or injury. It has been well established that aging impedes the regeneration capabilities at the cellular level, but it is not clear if the different onset of stem cell aging between individuals can be predicted or prevented at an earlier stage. Here we studied the dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs), a population of adult stem cells that is known to participate in the repair of an injured tooth, and its properties can be affected by aging. The dental pulp from third molars of a diverse patient group were surgically extracted, generating cells that had a high percentage of mesenchymal stem cell markers CD29, CD44, CD146 and Stro1 and had the ability to differentiate into osteo/odontogenic and adipogenic lineages. Through RNA seq and qPCR analysis we identified homeobox protein, Barx1, as a marker for DPSCs. Furthermore, using high throughput transcriptomic and proteomic analysis we identified markers for DPSC populations with accelerated replicative senescence. In particular, we show that the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-&#x3b2;) pathway and the cytoskeletal proteins are upregulated in rapid aging DPSCs, indicating a loss of stem cell characteristics and spontaneous initiation of terminal differentiation. Importantly, using metabolic flux analysis, we identified a metabolic signature for the rapid aging DPSCs, prior to manifestation of senescence phenotypes. This metabolic signature therefore can be used to predict the onset of replicative senescence. Hence, the present study identifies Barx1 as a DPSCs marker and dissects the first predictive metabolic signature for DPSCs aging.

### Keywords
Aging stem cell

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98109, USA

### Submitter
Aaron Robitaille

### Lab Head
Dr Hannele Ruohola-Baker
Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98109, USA


