### Accession
PXD030453

### Title
Identification of Setdb1 interaction proteins in neural stem cells

### Description
Setdb1 is an epigenetic factors catalyzing modification of H3K9me3. Expression of its gene is localized to embryonic neural cells during vertebrate embryogenesis, suggesting its role in regulating neural stemness. The project is to identify the interaction partners of Setdb1, by which Setdb1 regulates neural stemness in neural stem cells.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were precipitated with an anti-Setdb1 antibody (Cell Signaling Technology, #2196) from neural stem cell line NE-4C cells. Meanwhile, Co-IP was performed using IgG as a negative control. Immunoprecipitates were separated by SDS-PAGE (stacking 4% and separating 10% acrylamide) followed by Coomassie blue staining, and gel bands containing protein of interest were cut. For in gel digestion, cysteine residues were reduced by addition of 25 mM final of dithiothreitol (DTT) for 60 min at 70°C, and alkylated by addition of iodoacetamide (IAA) at a final concentration of 90 mM for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The proteins were then digested overnight at 37°C with 0.2 μg of modified sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel by incubation in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate: acetonitrile (1:1) for three times of 15 min at 37°C. The resulting peptides were dried in a SpeedVac, and resuspended with 10 μl of 3% acetonitrile, 2% FA before being subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For database searching, the original ‘.wiff’ and ‘.wiff.scan’ files obtained by the AB SCIEX Triple TOF 5600 were submitted to ProteinPilot Software (version 4.5, AB Sciex) for data analysis. LC-MS/MS data were searched against Mus musculus in UniProt database (April 9, 2016, containing 50,943 sequences, http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000589). The search parameters were listed as follow: TripleTOF 5600, trypsin digestion, thorough ID. All other parameters were set as default in ProteinPilot Software. An automatic decoy database search treatment was employed to estimate FDR (false discovery rate) by the PSPEP (Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline Software) algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Neural stemness is suggested to be the ground state of tumorigenicity and pluripotent differentiation potential. However, the relationship between these cell properties is unclear. Here, by disrupting the neural regulatory network in neural stem and cancer cells and by serial transplantation of cancer cells, we show that tumorigenicity and pluripotent differentiation potential are coupled cell properties unified by neural stemness. We show that loss of neural stemness via&#xa0;inhibition of SETDB1, an oncoprotein with enriched expression in embryonic neural cells during vertebrate embryogenesis, led to neuronal differentiation with reduced tumorigenicity and pluripotent differentiation potential in neural stem and cancer cells, whereas enhancement of neural stemness by SETDB1 overexpression caused the opposite effects. SETDB1 maintains a regulatory network comprising proteins involved in developmental programs and basic cellular functional machineries, including epigenetic modifications (EZH2), ribosome biogenesis (RPS3), translation initiation (EIF4G), and spliceosome assembly (SF3B1); all of these proteins are enriched in embryonic neural cells and play active roles in cancers. In addition, SETDB1 represses the transcription of genes promoting differentiation and cell cycle and growth arrest. Serial transplantation of cancer cells showed that neural stemness, tumorigenicity, and pluripotent differentiation potential were simultaneously enhanced; these effects were accompanied by increased expression of proteins involved in developmental programs and basic machineries, including SETDB1 and the abovementioned proteins, as well as by increased alternative splicing events. These results indicate that basic machineries work together to define a highly proliferative state with pluripotent differentiation potential and also suggest that neural stemness unifies tumorigenicity and differentiation potential.

### Keywords
Setdb1, Neural stem cell, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Model Animal Research Center of Medical School, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
Nanjing University

### Submitter
Ying Cao

### Lab Head
Dr Ying Cao
Model Animal Research Center of Medical School, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China


