### Accession
PXD025510

### Title
Huntingtin polyglutamine expansion modulates protein interaction dynamics in the striatum

### Description
Huntington’s disease is a monogenic disorder, with only one known causative gene, huntingtin (HTT). Expansion of a trinucleotide (CAG) repeat within the HTT gene results in a mutant protein containing polyglutamine (polyQ) stretches. While mutant HTT is the primary driver of cellular degeneration in the brain, the molecular and cellular mechanisms are incompletely understood. To further understand the role of polyQ in disease pathogenesis, we studied the dynamics of HTT protein-protein interactions (PPIs) in the striatum of mice with wild-type (Q20) and mutant (Q140) HTT at pre-symptomatic and manifest HD ages using label-free and isotope-labeled IP-MS approaches. Combining these approaches, we demonstrated that HTT PPI dynamics are distinct in early and later disease phases. Computational analysis pointed to early protein interaction changes involving synaptic transmission and vesicle fusion functions, while later interactions underlie changes in synapse morphogenesis and impact the actin cytoskeletal network.

### Sample Protocol
Whole brains and dissected striata were isolated from Hdh3xFLAG20Q/+ and Hdh3xFLAG140Q/+ mice at 8 and 40 weeks of age and flash frozen. Tissues were homogenized, the soluble fractions recovered, and HTT was immunoisolated using anti-FLAG antibodies or non-specific IgG as a control.  For isotope labeling experiments, prior to IP, an equal amount of heavy (13C6-Lys) labeled mouse whole brain lysates was spiked into the soluble fractions containing endogenous FLAG-HTT protein complexes and FLAG-HTT was immunoisolated.  Immunoisolated proteins were reduced, alkylated, digested in-solution with trypsin using filter-aided sample preparation, then desalted and fractionated over SDB-RPS StageTips. Peptides fractions were separated by reverse phase chromatography with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoLC coupled directly to a Thermoflex nanospray source and LTQ Orbitrap Velos ETD mass spectrometeroperated in data-dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Label-free (LFQ) and isotope-labeled raw data were processed in Proteome Discover 2.2.0.388.3 using the Minora precursor ion label-free quantification node and SILAC quantification workflows, respectively. Interaction specificity was determined using the SAINT algorithm using spectral counts, while interaction abundances were calculated using precursor ion-based quantification. Interaction relative stabilities were determined from the isotope-labeled using SILAC (precursor ion) quantification. Additional processing of identified proteins and associated measurements was performed in Microsoft Excel and Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Huntington disease (HD) is a monogenic neurodegenerative disorder with one causative gene, huntingtin (HTT). Yet, HD pathobiology is multifactorial, suggesting that cellular factors influence disease progression. Here, we define HTT protein-protein interactions (PPIs) perturbed by the mutant protein with expanded polyglutamine in the mouse striatum, a brain region with selective HD vulnerability. Using metabolically labeled tissues and immunoaffinity purification-mass spectrometry, we establish that polyglutamine-dependent modulation of HTT PPI abundances and relative stability starts at an early stage of pathogenesis in a Q140 HD mouse model. We identify direct and indirect PPIs that are also genetic disease modifiers using in-cell two-hybrid and behavioral assays in HD human cell and Drosophila models, respectively. Validated, disease-relevant mHTT-dependent interactions encompass mediators of synaptic neurotransmission (SNAREs and glutamate receptors) and lysosomal acidification (V-ATPase). Our study provides a resource for understanding mHTT-dependent dysfunction in cortico-striatal cellular networks, partly through impaired synaptic communication and endosomal-lysosomal system. A record of this paper's Transparent Peer Review process is included in the supplemental information.

### Keywords
Idirt, Ip-ms, Orbitrap velos, Lfq, Htt

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton NJ, USA
Molecular Biology, Princeton University

### Submitter
Todd Greco

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana Cristea
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton NJ, USA


