### Accession
PXD026465

### Title
Inositol signaling in the basidiomycete fungus Schizophyllum commune

### Description
Intracellular signaling is conserved in eukaryotes to allow for response to extracellular signals and to regulate development and cellular functions. In fungi, inositol phosphate signaling has been shown to be involved in growth, sexual reproduction, and metabolic adaptation lacking, however, reports of mushroom forming fungi so far. In Schizophyllum commune, an inositol monophosphatase has been found up-regulated during sexual development. The enzyme is crucial for inositol cycling where it catalyzes the last step of inositol phosphate metabolism restoring the inositol pool from the monophosphorylated inositol monophosphate. We overexpressed the gene in this model basidiomycete and verified its involvement in cell wall integrity and intracellular trafficking. Strong phenotypes in mushroom formation and cell metabolism were evidenced by proteome analyses. In addition, altered inositol signaling was shown to be involved in tolerance towards cesium and zinc, and increased metal tolerance towards cadmium, associated with induced expression of kinases and repression of phosphatases within the inositol cycle. The presence of the heavy metals Sr, Cs, Cd, and Zn lowered intracellular calcium levels. We could develop a model integrating inositol signaling in the known signal transduction pathways governed by Ras, G-protein coupled receptors, cAMP and elucidate different roles in development.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins of the empty vector control (EVC1) and imp1 overexpressing S. commune OEIMP4 were enriched for membrane associated proteins, extracted (ReadyPrep Protein Extraction Kit Signal, Bio-Rad, Munich, Germany) based on manufacturer’s protocol after grinding mycelia with liquid nitrogen. A sonication step (VCX 130 PB, Sonics and Material, Newtown, USA) was performed, and concentrations of isolated proteins were determined (Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany)[36]. To purify the protein, 50 µM protein were loaded onto 10% polyacrylamide gels. After electrophoresis, gels were washed two times with ultrapure water, protein bands cut and cubes of approx. 1 mm3 and transferred to 1.5 ml tubes. In-gel digestion was performed [37] using 50 ng/µl trypsin-LysC (mass spec grade, Promega, Mannheim, Germany) in 50 mM NH4HCO3. Peptides were extracted with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and increasing concentrations of acetonitrile (50, 70, and 90%), purified with 10 kDa MWCO filters (VWR, Langenfeld, Germany), and dried peptides solubilized in MS buffer (0.05% TFA in 2% acetonitrile–98% H2O) before being subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis (Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC, QExactive HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Initial peptide trapping for 5 min on an Acclaim Pep Map 100 column (2 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm) at 5 µl/min was followed by separation on an analytical Acclaim Pep Map RSLC nano column (50 cm x 75 µm, 2 µm). Mobile phase gradient elution of eluent A (0.1% v/v formic acid in water) mixed with eluent B (0.1% v/v formic acid in 90/10 acetonitrile/water) was performed (buffer B for 0 min 4%, 5 min 5%, 15 min 6%, 100 min 8%, 150 min 12%, 250 min 23%, 300 min 34%, 320 min 41%, 340 min 52%, 350 min 60%, 360 min 75%, 365-375 min 96%, 375.1-400 min 4%). Positively charged ions were generated at a spray voltage of 2.2 kV using a stainless-steel emitter attached to the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). The quadrupole/orbitrap instrument was operated in Full MS / data-dependent MS2 (top10) mode. Precursor ions were monitored at m/z 300-1500 at a resolution of 120k FWHM using a maximum injection time of 100 msec and an automatic gain control target of 1e6. HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy generated MS2 ions, which were scanned at 15 k FWHM (ITmax=100 ms, AGC= 2e5). Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 35 sec. The LC-MS/MS instrument was controlled by Chromeleon 7.2, QExactive HF Tune 2.8, and Xcalibur 4.0 software.

### Data Protocol
The obtained tandem mass spectra were searched against the JGI (Joint Genome Institute) database of S. commune H4-8 v3.0 (https://mycocosm.jgi.doe.gov/Schco3/Schco3.home.html) using Proteome Discoverer PD 2.1 and the algorithms of Mascot 2.4, Sequest HT, and MS Amanda. Two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin digestion. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Modifications were defined as dynamic Met oxidation and static Cys carbamidomethylation. At least two peptides per protein and a strict false discovery rate < 1% (reverse decoy) were required. Label-free quantification of the Top 3 unique peptides per protein was based on the precursor ion area detector approach implemented in PD 2.1. For quantification, data were normalized using the total peptide amount approach.

### Publication Abstract
Intracellular signaling is conserved in eukaryotes to allow for response to extracellular signals and to regulate development and cellular functions. In fungi, inositol phosphate signaling has been shown to be involved in growth, sexual reproduction, and metabolic adaptation. However, reports on mushroom-forming fungi are lacking so far. In <i>Schizophyllum commune</i>, an inositol monophosphatase has been found up-regulated during sexual development. The enzyme is crucial for inositol cycling, where it catalyzes the last step of inositol phosphate metabolism, restoring the inositol pool from the monophosphorylated inositol monophosphate. We overexpressed the gene in this model basidiomycete and verified its involvement in cell wall integrity and intracellular trafficking. Strong phenotypes in mushroom formation and cell metabolism were evidenced by proteome analyses. In addition, altered inositol signaling was shown to be involved in tolerance towards cesium and zinc, and increased metal tolerance towards cadmium, associated with induced expression of kinases and repression of phosphatases within the inositol cycle. The presence of the heavy metals Sr, Cs, Cd, and Zn lowered intracellular calcium levels. We could develop a model integrating inositol signaling in the known signal transduction pathways governed by Ras, G-protein coupled receptors, and cAMP, and elucidate their different roles in development.

### Keywords
Sexual development, Intracellular trafficking, Inositol monophosphatase, Cell wall integrity, Inositol phosphate signaling, Heavy metals

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Jena, Germany


