### Accession
PXD042556

### Title
Schwann cell condition medium MS

### Description
The effects of Schwann cells on the neuro-stroma niche in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) remain to be explored. Here, single-cell RNA-sequencing and spatial transcriptome analysis of PDAC tissues reveals that Schwann cells induce malignant subtypes of tumour cells and cancer-associated fibroblasts. Mass Spectrometry (MS) were performed to detected the potential functional factors secreted by Schwann cells.

### Sample Protocol
RSC96 and sNF96.2 cells were cultured in 10% FBS/DMEM until reaching 80–90% confluence. Thereafter, the medium was replaced with DMEM without FBS or phenol red and cultured for 24 h. Then, the cell culture medium was harvested and concentrated using an Amicon Ultra-4 centrifugal filter device (3000 MWCO cutoff) (Millipore) at 3,000g for 1 h. Protein concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The concentrated CM was collected. RSC96 and sNF96.2 CM were denatured, alkylated, and digested in situ with trypsin. Tryptic peptides were analyzed using a Orbitrap Fusion LUMOS mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 via an Easy Spray (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
We used the default parameter to get the peptides information. Further, overlap analysis was performed to find the functional candidate in Schwann cell CM.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rsc96, Cm, Snf96.2

### Affiliations
Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine
Department of General Surgery, Pancreatic Disease Center, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

### Submitter
Meilin Xue

### Lab Head
Dr Hao Chen
Department of General Surgery, Pancreatic Disease Center, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.


