### Accession
PXD028477

### Title
Mycobacterium tuberculosis fingerprint in human lungs

### Description
Tuberculosis (TB) is one of the top ten causes of death worldwide and the leading cause of death from a single infectious agent. Globally, an estimated of 10 million people developed TB in 2018 according to WHO report. An estimated one third of all TB cases are not diagnosed or notified, partly due to the major limitations of current diagnostic tools. To achieve the goals of the WHO’s End TB Strategy, which targets for 2030 a 90% reduction in the number of TB deaths and an 80% reduction in the TB incidence rate compared with levels in 2015, diagnostic tools are critically important. Among the three diagnostic priorities identified by the WHO and the TB community is the development of a point-of-care biomarker-based non-sputum-based test to diagnose pulmonary TB, and ideally also extrapulmonary TB. To be successfully implemented at point-of-cares, a new test should use an easily accessible sample, such as urine, blood or breath condensate. Here, we explored whether bacilli-derived molecules released in the extracellular milieu during infection could be detected in the exhaled breath condensate, allowing a specific diagnosis of TB. Interestingly, we detected by proteomic analysis a set of Mycobacterium tuberculosis proteins in all smear-positive and smear-negative adult patients, as well as of children with TB

### Sample Protocol
For each sample 35 µg of dried protein extracts were solubilized with 25µl of 5% SDS. Proteins were submitted to reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues by addition of TCEP and chloroacetamide to a final concentration respectively of 10mM and 40mM. Protein samples were then processed for trypsin digestion on S-trap Micro devices (Protifi) according to manufacturer’s protocol, with the following modifications: precipitation was performed using 216µl S-Trap buffer; 1.5µg Trypsin was added per sample for digestion, in 25µl TEAB 50mM pH8.  Tryptic peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid and analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography (LC) coupled to tandem MS, using an UltiMate 3000 system (NCS-3500RS Nano/Cap System; Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Q-HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Around 5µg of each sample was loaded on a C18 precolumn (300 µm inner diameter × 5 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a solvent made of 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, at a flow rate of 20 µl/min. After 5 min of desalting, the precolumn was switched online with the analytical C18 column (75 µm inner diameter × 50 cm, Acclaim PepMap 2µm C18 Thermo Fisher Scientific) equilibrated in 95% solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid). Peptides were eluted using a 10%-45% gradient of solvent B over 60 min at a flow rate of 350 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the Xcalibur software. MS survey scans were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 and an AGC target of 3e6. The 12 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation by high-energy collision induced dissociation, and the resulting fragments were analyzed at a resolution of 30000, using an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum fill time of 54ms. Dynamic exclusion was used within 30 s to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with the Mascot software (version 2.7.0) for database search and Proline (Bouyssie et al, Bioinformatics 2020) for label-free quantitative analysis (version 2.1.2). Data were searched against MTB_H37Rv_native and Human entries of the UniProtKB protein database (release Swiss-Prot+TrEMBL 2020_10, 4,080 entries and release Swiss-Prot 2020_10, 20,385 entries, respectively). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine was set as variable modifications. Specificity of trypsin/P digestion was set for cleavage after K or R, and two missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for the precursor and to 20 mmu in tandem MS mode. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and identification results were further validated in Proline by the target decoy approach using a reverse database at both a PSM and protein false-discovery rate of 1%. For label-free relative quantification of the proteins across biological replicates and conditions, cross-assignment of peptide ions peaks was enabled inside group with a match time window of 1 min, after alignment of the runs with a tolerance of +/- 600s

### Publication Abstract
An estimated one-third of tuberculosis (TB) cases go undiagnosed or unreported. Sputum samples, widely used for TB diagnosis, are inefficient at detecting infection in children and paucibacillary patients. Indeed, developing point-of-care biomarker-based diagnostics that are not sputum-based is a major priority for the WHO. Here, in a proof-of-concept study, we tested whether pulmonary TB can be detected by analyzing patient exhaled breath condensate (EBC) samples. We find that the presence of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb)-specific lipids, lipoarabinomannan lipoglycan, and proteins in EBCs can efficiently differentiate baseline TB patients from controls. We used EBCs to track the longitudinal effects of antibiotic treatment in pediatric TB patients. In addition, Mtb lipoarabinomannan and lipids were structurally distinct in EBCs compared to ex vivo cultured bacteria, revealing specific metabolic and biochemical states of Mtb in the human lung. This provides essential information for the rational development or improvement of diagnostic antibodies, vaccines and therapeutic drugs. Our data collectively indicate that EBC analysis can potentially facilitate clinical diagnosis of TB across patient populations and monitor treatment efficacy. This affordable, rapid and non-invasive approach seems superior to sputum assays and has the potential to be implemented at point-of-care.

### Keywords
Tuberculosis, Diagnosis, Exhaled breath condensate, Lipid, Protein, Lipoarabinomannan

### Affiliations
CNRS
UMR5089 CNRS  Universite de Toulouse IPBS France

### Submitter
Alexandre STELLA

### Lab Head
Dr Jerome Nigou
UMR5089 CNRS  Universite de Toulouse IPBS France


