### Accession
PXD002377

### Title
The response of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii to nitrogen deprivation: a systems biology analysis

### Description
Drastic alteration in macronutrients causes large changes in gene expression in the photosynthetic unicellular alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Preliminary data suggested that cells follow a biphasic response to this change hinging on the initiation of lipid accumulation, and we hypothesized that drastic repatterning of metabolism also followed this biphasic modality. To test this hypothesis, transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolite changes that occur under nitrogen (N) deprivation were analyzed. Eight sampling times were selected covering the progressive slowing of growth and induction of oil synthesis between 4 and 6 h after N deprivation. Results of the combined, systems-level investigation indicated that C. reinhardtii cells sense and respond on a large scale within 30 min to a switch to N-deprived conditions turning on a largely gluconeogenic metabolic state, which then transitions to a glycolytic stage between 4 and 6 h after N depletion. This nitrogen-sensing system is transduced to carbon- and nitrogen-responsive pathways, leading to down-regulation of carbon assimilation and chlorophyll biosynthesis, and an increase in nitrogen metabolism and lipid biosynthesis. For example, the expression of nearly all the enzymes for assimilating nitrogen from ammonium, nitrate, nitrite, urea, formamide/acetamide, purines, pyrimidines, polyamines, amino acids and proteins increased significantly. Although arginine biosynthesis enzymes were also rapidly up-regulated, arginine pool size changes and isotopic labeling results indicated no increased flux through this pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates were performed for proteomic study. To accommodate to our 4plex iTRAQ experiment design (Supplemental Figure 1), 0.5h sample were omitted due to slow protein change. Proteins extraction, in-solution trypsin digestion and iTRAQ labeling were performed as described previously with some modification (Wang et al. 2012). Briefly, after digestion, 100 µg of each sample was used for labeling using 4-plex iTRAQ reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions (AB Sciex, Foster City, USA). To accommodate the seven time points (0h, 1h, 2h, 4h, 6h, 12h and 24h) in this study, two 4-plex iTRAQ experiments were performed for each biological replicate. The samples from 0h (N-free) were labeled with reagent with 114 as reporter ion in both experiments as control. The samples from 1h, 2h and 4h were labeled with reagents with 115,116 and 117 as reporter ions in the first iTRAQ experiment, respectively. For the second iTRAQ experiment, the samples from 6h, 12h, and 24h were labeled with reagents 115,116, and 117 as reporter ions, too. After labeling, samples from each separate experiment containing iTRAQ labels 114-117 were mixed and fractionated via SCX as described previously (Alvarez et al. 2011). Fractions from 5 to 24 min were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific,Rockford, USA) coupled with a nanoLC Ultra (Eksigent, Dublin, USA). Each sample (5 µL) was loaded onto a trap column (C18 PepMap100, 300µm x 1mm, 5µm, 100 Å, Dionex, Sunnyvale, USA) at a flow rate of 4 µL/min for 5 min. Peptide separation was carried out on a C18 column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 15 cm × 75 μm × 3 μm, 100 Å, Dionex) at a flow rate of 0.26 µL/min. Peptides were separated using a 145 min linear gradient ranging from 5% to 50% B (mobile phase A, 0.1% FA; mobile phase B, 0.1% FA in ACN). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode. The MS survey scan was performed in the FT cell from a mass range of 300 to 1,700 m/z. The resolution was set to 60,000 @ 400 m/z and the automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 500,000 ions. HCD fragmentation was used for MS/MS and the 10 most intense signals in the survey scan were fragmented. A resolution of 7,500 was used in the Orbitrap with an isolation window of 2 m/z, a target value of 100,000 ions, and with a maximum accumulation time of 1 s. Fragmentation was performed with normalized collision energies of 45% and activation times of 0.1 ms.  Dynamic exclusion was performed with a repeat count of 1 and exclusion duration of 75 s, and a minimum MS signal for triggering MS/MS was set to 5,000 counts.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using Mascot Distiller v2.4 and searched using Mascot Daemon (Matrix Science, London, UK). For data processing, the MS/MS settings include single peak window selection from m/z 113.5 to m/z 117.5. All searches were performed against the Chlamydomonas protein database from Phytozome 9 combined with Chlamydomonas chloroplast and mitochondria database from NCBInr (19,603 sequences) and the common contaminants database (120 sequences, including trypsin, keratins, bovine serum albumin etc.) using the following settings: trypsin as cleavage enzyme; two missed cleavages; carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ (N terminal), iTRAQ (K) were fixed modifications; and oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term), deamidated (N, Q), and iTRAQ (Y) were selected as variable modifications. The mass error tolerance for precursor ions was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Automatic isotope correction was carried out using the values supplied with the AB Sciex reagents. The following settings were used to process the quantification results: the protein ratio type was the ‘weighted’ geometric mean,  normalization was ‘summed intensity’, outlier removal was ‘automatic’ (Dixon's method up to 25 data points, Rosner's method above 25 data points), the peptide threshold was ‘at least homology’ (i.e., peptide score does not exceed absolute threshold but is an outlier from the quasi-normal distribution of random scores), the minimum number of peptides was two and the Mascot score is >= 24, and the peptides were required to be the top ranking peptide matches (“red”). Protein ratio was calculated by Mascot using at least 2 peptide ratios (based on reporter ion intensity) and only those with significant ratio were considered. For each protein in each time point, only significant ratios were observed in more than two replicates were shown in average and the ratio of <= 0.8 or >= 1.2 were used as cutoffs. An automatic decoy database search was also performed to assess the false positive rate (FDR) of protein identification and the results were filtered by significance threshold to FDR < 1%. Identified proteins were grouped based on 98% homology with Scaffold v3.1 (Proteome Software, Portland, USA).

### Publication Abstract
Drastic alteration in macronutrients causes large changes in gene expression in the photosynthetic unicellular alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Preliminary data suggested that cells follow a biphasic response to this change hinging on the initiation of lipid accumulation, and we hypothesized that drastic repatterning of metabolism also followed this biphasic modality. To test this hypothesis, transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolite changes that occur under nitrogen (N) deprivation were analyzed. Eight sampling times were selected covering the progressive slowing of growth and induction of oil synthesis between 4 and 6 h after N deprivation. Results of the combined, systems-level investigation indicated that C. reinhardtii cells sense and respond on a large scale within 30 min to a switch to N-deprived conditions turning on a largely gluconeogenic metabolic state, which then transitions to a glycolytic stage between 4 and 6 h after N depletion. This nitrogen-sensing system is transduced to carbon- and nitrogen-responsive pathways, leading to down-regulation of carbon assimilation and chlorophyll biosynthesis, and an increase in nitrogen metabolism and lipid biosynthesis. For example, the expression of nearly all the enzymes for assimilating nitrogen from ammonium, nitrate, nitrite, urea, formamide/acetamide, purines, pyrimidines, polyamines, amino acids and proteins increased significantly. Although arginine biosynthesis enzymes were also rapidly up-regulated, arginine pool size changes and isotopic labeling results indicated no increased flux through this pathway.

### Keywords
Technical advance, Systems biology, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Proteomics, Nitrogen deprivation

### Affiliations
Assistant Professor, Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 USA
Graduate Research Assistant

### Submitter
Evan McConnell

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie M. Hicks
Assistant Professor, Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 USA


