### Accession
PXD011061

### Title
Bi-directional signaling by membrane-bound KitL induces proliferation and co-ordinates thymic endothelial cell and thymocyte expansion

### Description
The ligand for the c-Kit receptor, KitL, exists as a membrane-associated (mKitL) and a soluble form (sKitL). KitL functions outside c-Kit activation have not been identified. We show that co-culture of c-Kit– and mKitL–expressing NIH3T3 cells results in signaling through mKitL: c-Kit–bound mKitL recruits calcium-modulating cyclophilin ligand (CAML) to selectively activate Akt, leading to CREB phosphorylation, mTOR pathway activation, and increased cell proliferation. Activation of mKitL in thymic vascular endothelial cells (VECs) induces mKitL- and Akt-dependent proliferation, and genetic ablation of mKitL in thymic VECs blocks their c-Kit responsiveness and proliferation during neonatal thymic expansion. Therefore, mKitL–c-Kit form a bi-directional signaling complex that acts in the developing thymus to coordinate thymic VEC and early thymic progenitor (ETP) expansion by simultaneously promoting ETP survival and VEC proliferation. This mechanism may be relevant to both normal tissues and malignant tumors that depend on KitL–c-Kit signaling for their proliferation.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were stimulated with Kit-Fc or IgG-Fc in 3 up-scaled (3x) replicates each as described above. The obtained lysates were reduced with 200mM TCEP for 1 hour at 55°C and alkylated with 375mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were precipitated with chloroform and methanol33 twice to remove detergents, before re-suspension in 50mM TEAB and digest with 30ug of Trypsin per sample overnight at 37°C. Samples were dried and re-suspended in 200µl 50mM TEAB for TMT labeling. Peptide concentrations were quantified using the Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric peptide assay following manufacturer instructions (Thermo Fisher). Equal amounts of each sample (465g) were labeled with TMT6 reagents (Thermo Fisher) for 1 hour according to the manufacturer’s instructions before the labeling reaction was quenched with 5% hydroxylamine. The 6 samples were pooled and desalted using a C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters): The cartridge was conditioned with 5ml buffer B (0.1% TFA in 65% CH3CN), equilibrated with 10ml of buffer A (0.1% TFA in 2% CH3CN). The tryptic peptides were added to bind to the cartridge and then washed with 10ml buffer A. The peptides were eluted in 1.2ml of buffer B and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Peptides were solubilised in 120µl of 80% CH3CN / 0.1% TFA solution.   Phospho-peptide enrichment was performed based on a refinement34 of the 2-step enrichment procedure published by McNulty et al.35. Fractionation was performed on a Dionex HPLC using a TSKgel Amide-80 column (5µm, 4.6mm ID x 25cm, TOSOH) for hydrophilic interaction. The peptides were eluted at a 500µl/minute flow rate using the following gradient: 10 minuntes with 80% buffer B (98 % CH3CN with 0.1 % TFA), then from 10 to 55 minutes 80 to 60% of buffer B. The column was then washed for 10 minutes with 98% buffer A (98% water with 0.1% TFA) and the column was re-equilibrated for another 10 minutes with 80% buffer B. The collection was performed from 10 to 70 minutes each fraction was collected for 4 minutes. A total of 15 fractions were collected. Neighboring fractions were combined into 6 pools and 100µl of PHOS-Select™ Iron affinity beads (Sigma) were added to each pool. The samples were incubated 1 hour at 4°C and filtered at 8200g for 1 minutes over a 0.22m nylon Spin-X cartridge (Sigma) to remove un-phosphorylated peptides. The beads were successively washed with 500µl of 250mM of acetic acid with 30% CH3CN and 500µl of water and centrifuged for 2 minutes at 2000rpm after each wash. Phospho-peptides were eluted by incubation of the beads in 500µl of 1% ammonium hydroxide for 10 minutes, followed by a centrifugation at 8200g for 2 minutes. Samples were dried down and re-suspended in 10µl of 1% CH3CN 0.1% TFA prior to mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were imported into Proteome Discoverer (2.1) and analysed using the standard workflow for TMT-6plex and synchronous precursor selection: MS2 spectra were searched with SequestHT using 10ppm as precursor and 0.5Da as fragment error tolerance against the Uniprot/Swissprot database of Mus musculus (retrieved 17.07.2015). Variable modifications were methionine oxidation, phosphorylation on serine, threonine or tyrosine and N-terminal protein acetylation. Static modifications were cabamidomethylation on cysteine and TMT-6plex modification of the peptide N-terminus and lysine. Identifications were re-processed with Percolator to match a FDR of 1%. Quantitative data were analysed and visualized with Perseus. Canonical Pathway analysis was performed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Qiagen).

### Publication Abstract
The ligand for the c-Kit receptor, KitL, exists as a membrane-associated (mKitL) and a soluble form (sKitL). KitL functions outside c-Kit activation have not been identified. We show that co-culture of c-Kit- and mKitL-expressing NIH3T3 cells results in signaling through mKitL: c-Kit-bound mKitL recruits calcium-modulating cyclophilin ligand (CAML) to selectively activate Akt, leading to CREB phosphorylation, mTOR pathway activation, and increased cell proliferation. Activation of mKitL in thymic vascular endothelial cells (VECs) induces mKitL- and Akt-dependent proliferation, and genetic ablation of mKitL in thymic VECs blocks their c-Kit responsiveness and proliferation during neonatal thymic expansion. Therefore, mKitL-c-Kit form a bi-directional signaling complex that acts in the developing thymus to coordinate thymic VEC and early thymic progenitor (ETP) expansion by simultaneously promoting ETP survival and VEC proliferation. This mechanism may be relevant to both normal tissues and malignant tumors that depend on KitL-c-Kit signaling for their proliferation.

### Keywords
Thymocyte expansion, Bi-directional signalling, Kit ligand

### Affiliations
Discovery Proteomics Facility
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Discovery Proteomics Facility


