### Accession
PXD002929

### Title
Global Membrane Protein Interactome Analysis using In vivo Crosslinking and MS-based Protein Correlation Profiling

### Description
We present a methodology using in vivo crosslinking combined with HPLC-MS for the global analysis of endogenous protein complexes by protein correlation profiling. Formaldehyde crosslinked protein complexes were extracted with high yield using denaturing buffers that maintained complex solubility during chromatographic separation.  We show this efficiently detects both integral membrane and membrane-associated protein complexes, in addition to soluble complexes, allowing identification and analysis of complexes not previously accessible in native extracts. Using this approach, we demonstrate how these data may be applied to the analysis of membrane protein complexes and to discriminate between interactions of different protein isoforms. The entire proteome-wide dataset of in vivo crosslinked protein complexes from U2OS cells is available via a searchable online database (www.peptracker.com/epd).

### Sample Protocol
Denaturing size exclusion chromatography, protein digestion and peptide clean-up - Using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 Bio-RS UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific), lysates were injected (100 μL per injection) onto a BioBasic SEC1000 column (300 x 7.8 mm, 5 m particles, 1000Å pores) equilibrated with 0.2% SDS, 100 mM NaCl and 10 mM NaPO4 pH 6.0 at 30oC. The flow rate was 0.2 ml min-1 and for each sample two injections were performed. For each injection 48 × 125 μL fractions were collected separately using a 96-well thin-walled PCR plate (Eppendorf). To break all crosslinks the plate containing fractions was heated to 95oC for 30 min in a PCR machine using a heated lid. Samples were transferred to a 96-well low protein binding deepwell plate (Eppendorf) and Tris-HCl (1 M pH 8.0) was added to each fraction to a final concentration of 0.1 M to adjust the pH to 8.0. Proteins in each fraction were digested to peptides using either LysC alone (injection 1), or LysC and trypsin (injection 2), which were diluted in 0.1 M Tris-HCl and added at a ratio of 1:50 by weight, based upon an EZQ protein assay of the fractions, then incubated for 18 h at 37°C.  Peptide clean-up and quantitation – SDS in peptide samples was removed using 96-well detergent removal plates (Thermo Scientific) and centrifugation according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, the resin in each well was washed three times with 300 L of room temperature PBS, with centrifugation at 1,000 g to remove the solution after each wash. Peptide samples were applied to the resin in each well and incubated for 2 min at room temperature before collecting the filtrate (containing clean peptides) by centrifugation for 2 min at 1,000 g at room temperature into a 96-well low protein binding deepwell plate (Eppendorf). Peptides were then desalted after trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to 1% (vol/vol) final concentration and peptides were purified using a Sep-Pak tC18 96-well u-elution plate (Waters). Peptides were eluted in 200 uL of 50 % (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% TFA and evaporated to dryness in a rotary evaporator prior to re-suspension in 5 % (vol/vol) formic acid. Peptide concentrations were determined using the CBQCA assay (Thermo Scientific) and peptide standards derived from a BSA digest, after 25-fold dilution of peptide samples in 0.1 M borate buffer pH 9.3. LC-MS/MS and analysis of spectra – Using a Thermo Fisher Scientific Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano UHPLC, peptides in 5% (vol/vol) formic acid (final volume ~10 μL) were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column. After washing with 2% (vol/vol) acetonitrile, 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid, peptides were resolved on a 50 cm × 75 μm C18 EasySpray reverse phase analytical column with integrated emitter over a gradient from 2% acetonitrile to 35% acetonitrile over 220 min with a flow rate of 200 nL min−1. The peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization at +2.0 kV. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using HCD fragmentation. The data-dependent acquisition method used acquired MS/MS spectra on the top 30 most abundant ions at any one point during the gradient.

### Data Protocol
The RAW data produced by the mass spectrometer were analysed using the quantitative proteomics software MaxQuant (21) (http://www.maxquant.org, version 1.5.1.3) and the entire MaxQuant output has also been uploaded to the ProteomeXchange Consortium under the same identifier given above. This version of MaxQuant includes an integrated search engine, Andromeda (22). Peptide and Protein level identification were both set to a false discovery rate of 1% using a target-decoy based strategy. The database supplied to the search engine for peptide identifications was the Human Swissprot database downloaded on the 17th April 2015, containing 20,197 protein sequence entries. The mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and MS/MS mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm. Enzyme was set to either LysC (cleavage C-terminal to lysine) or trypsin (cleavage C-terminal to lysine and arginine) with up to 2 missed cleavages. Deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met, pyro-Glu (with peptide N-term Gln), phosphorylation of Ser/Thr/Tyr, and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. N-ethylmaleimide on Cys was searched as a fixed modification. The output from MaxQuant provided peptide level data as well as protein level data, grouped by protein isoforms. We define a protein group as a set of unique peptides that are either shared between multiple protein isoforms, or belong to a single protein isoform. While this may lead to higher redundancy it enables us to quantify changes in individual protein isoforms. Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale – Three biological replicates were performed for the in vivo crosslinking and denaturing SEC analysis and this level of replication was chosen based upon the variance detected in previous experiments using SEC-based analysis (6). To create an elution profile for an individual protein isoform in each of the three biological replicates, the number of peptides observed in each fraction was summed, to generate a count of peptides per fraction (spectral counts). The resulting spectral count profile minima and maxima were normalised within the limits 0 and 1 respectively. The average of the three elution profiles was based on the normalised spectral peptide counts for each fraction. Further downstream data interpretation for this study was performed primarily using the R language (version 2.15.1). From the three biological replicates, it was required that a protein be identified in all three replicates with a minimum of two peptides in each. Proteins labelled as either contaminants, or reverse hits, were removed from the analysis. To analyze reproducibility the Pearson correlation was used to compare the profile for each protein between replicates. The biological replicates were collapsed by averaging to obtain a resultant mean peptide count profile describing the behaviour of each protein across the 48 fractions. The standard deviation for the three biological replicates per fraction was also calculated to provide ribbon error bars on the protein profile graphs. The protein profiles across the three biological replicates and 48 fractions were normalised using the maximum peptide count for that protein and then hierarchically clustered based on Euclidean distance measurement and a ‘complete’ agglomeration method. The output of the clustering has been presented in a heatmap using the RColorBrewer library.

### Publication Abstract
We present a methodology using in vivo crosslinking combined with HPLC-MS for the global analysis of endogenous protein complexes by protein correlation profiling. Formaldehyde crosslinked protein complexes were extracted with high yield using denaturing buffers that maintained complex solubility during chromatographic separation. We show this efficiently detects both integral membrane and membrane-associated protein complexes,in addition to soluble complexes, allowing identification and analysis of complexes not accessible in native extracts. We compare the protein complexes detected by HPLC-MS protein correlation profiling in both native and formaldehyde crosslinked U2OS cell extracts. These proteome-wide data sets of both in vivo crosslinked and native protein complexes from U2OS cells are freely available via a searchable online database (www.peptracker.com/epd). Raw data are also available via ProteomeXchange (identifier PXD003754).

### Keywords
Crosslinking, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences
Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression, University of Dundee

### Submitter
Vackar Afzal

### Lab Head
Dr Angus I Lamond
Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression, University of Dundee


