### Accession
PXD007056

### Title
Discovery proteomics studies for the identification of a protein panel associated with the response to pemetrexed in platinum drug resistant cancer

### Description
Pemetrexed is a drug largely used in lung cancer, mesothelioma and proposed in some cases of ovarian cancers, a particularly severe cancer type. In this latest tumor type, therapy relies on debulking surgery and platinum-based chemotherapy. Despite the initial high response rates to platinum drugs, most patients relapse and die from the disease. Considering the high levels of thymidylate synthase, dhydrofolate reductase and other folate related proteins in platinum drug resistant patients, pemetrexed was proposed as a second line drugs due to its known mechanism of action that engage the mentioned proteins. However a successful outcome could only be expected on the basis of patients’ stratifications. In the present study, a discovery proteomics approach was applied to tissue samples collected beforepemetrexed treatment from platinum resistant patients who relapsed after the first-line carboplatin-based chemotherapy but responded differently to the pemetrexed treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from 20 µg of biopsy and digested using FASP protocol (Wiśniewski, J. R., Zougman, A., Nagaraj, N., and Mann, M. (2009) Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat. Methods 6, 359–362). Digests were loaded onto a pre-column (Dionex, Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm) and then separated using a 50 cm column (Dionex, ID 0.075mm, Acclaim PepMap100, C18) at 40°C using a 360 minutes multistep gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, as already reported (Chinello, C., Cazzaniga, M., De Sio, G., Smith, A. J., Grasso, A., Rocco, B., Signorini, S., Grasso, M., Bosari, S., Zoppis, I., Mauri, G., and Magni, F. (2015) Tumor size, stage and grade alterations of urinary peptidome in RCC. J. Transl. Med. 13, 332). Eluted peptides were ionized using nanoBoosterCaptiveSpray™ (Bruker Daltonics) source. MS acquisition was carried out using data-dependent-acquisition mode. CID fragmentation was promoted by N2 as collisional gas. Precursors of preferred charge state ranging from +2 to +5, with at least 1575 counts were selected using a fixed cycle time of 5 sec over the 300-2000 Th window (excluding 1221.5–1224 m/z) using IDAS (Intensity Dependent Acquisition Speed) and RT2 (RealTime Re-Think) options. To improve mass accuracy, in addition to a specific lock mass (1221.9906 m/z) a calibration segment using 10 mM sodium formate cluster solution before the begin of the gradient for each single run was used (Liu, X., Chinello, C., Musante, L., Cazzaniga, M., Tataruch, D., Calzaferri, G., James Smith, A., De Sio, G., Magni, F., Zou, H., and Holthofer, H. (2015) Intraluminal proteome and peptidome of human urinary extracellular vesicles. Proteomics Clin. Appl. 9, 568–573).

### Data Protocol
Exported MS2 data from DataAnalysisTM v.4.0 SP4 (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) were submitted to an in-house Mascot Server (Matrix Science, UK; v. 2.4.1), through Mascot Daemon. Database searching was restricted to human Swissprot (accessed Feb 2017, 553,655 sequences; 198,177,566 residues). Trypsin as enzyme and carbamidomethyl as fixed modifications were set in search parameters. One missed cleavage was allowed. Mass tolerances for all identified hits were set at 20 ppm for the precursor ions and 0.05 Da for the product ions. Automatic decoy database search was used to estimate the false discovery rate; peptide-to-spectrum matches were rescored thorough a built-in Percolator algorithm. Only proteins with at least one significant peptide with a score above 13 (p-value < 0.05) were considered. Progenesis QI for proteomics v.2.0.5556.29015 (Non-linear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK) was used as label-free quantification platform (Raimondo, F., Corbetta, S., Savoia, A., Chinello, C., Cazzaniga, M., Rocco, F., Bosari, S., Grasso, M., Bovo, G., Magni, F., and Pitto, M. (2015) Comparative membrane proteomics: a technical advancement in the search of renal cell carcinoma biomarkers. Mol. Biosyst. 11, 1708–1716)

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics and bioinformatics are a useful combined technology for the characterization of protein expression level and modulation associated with the response to a drug and with its mechanism of action. The folate pathway represents an important target in the anticancer drugs therapy. In the present study, a discovery proteomics approach was applied to tissue samples collected from ovarian cancer patients who relapsed after the first-line carboplatin-based chemotherapy and were treated with pemetrexed (PMX), a known folate pathway targeting drug. The aim of the work is to identify the proteomic profile that can be associated to the response to the PMX treatment in pre-treatement tissue. Statistical metrics of the experimental Mass Spectrometry (MS) data were combined with a knowledge-based approach that included bioinformatics and a literature review through ProteinQuest&#x2122; tool, to design a protein set of reference (PSR). The PSR provides feedback for the consistency of MS proteomic data because it includes known validated proteins. A panel of 24 proteins with levels that were significantly different in pre-treatment samples of patients who responded to the therapy vs. the non-responder ones, was identified. The differences of the identified proteins were explained for the patients with different outcomes and the known PMX targets were further validated. The protein panel herein identified is ready for further validation in retrospective clinical trials using a targeted proteomic approach. This study may have a general relevant impact on biomarker application for cancer patients therapy selection.

### Keywords
Lc ms/ms, Discovery proteomics, Platinum drug resistance, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia
Department of Life Sciences, University of Mdoena and Reggio Emilia

### Submitter
Stefania Ferrari

### Lab Head
Dr Stefania Ferrari
Department of Life Sciences, University of Mdoena and Reggio Emilia


