### Accession
PXD041356

### Title
Identification of candidate protein biomarkers associated with domoic acid toxicosis in cerebrospinal fluid of California sea lions (Zalophus californianus)

### Description
Since 1998, California sea lion stranding events associated with domoic acid toxicosis (DAT) have consistently increased and there are no practical non-lethal clinical tests for the diagnosis of domoic acid toxicosis that can be utilized in a large-scale rehabilitation facility. Proteomic analysis was conducted to discover candidate protein markers of DAT using cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from stranded sea lions with acute DAT, chronic DAT, or without DAT. A total of 2005 protein families were identified across 40 CSF samples (FDR<0.01) using the annotated California sea lion genome. Of these proteins, 83 were significantly different in abundance across the three groups (p<0.05). Comparisons between all sea lions with DAT versus those without DAT indicated that 119 proteins were significantly different between both groups (p<0.05); whereas, 47 proteins were significantly different between acute DAT and chronic DAT (p<0.05). Significant proteins were assessed as classifiers using ROC curves. Compared to sea lions with non-DAT, those with either acute or chronic DAT displayed higher levels of 14-3-3 proteins and malate dehydrogenase, and lower levels of 5’-3’ exonuclease PLD3, neurosecretory protein VGF, disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain-containing protein, and calsyntenin-1. When comparing acute DAT versus chronic DAT, 4 proteins were identified as good classifiers. Elevated levels of beta-synuclein was detected in acute DAT, and was identified as a high classifier for both comparisons. Many of these proteins have been implicated in a variety of neurodegenerative diseases. These proteins should be considered potential markers for DAT in California sea lions, as well as markers to discriminate between acute or chronic DAT, and should be considered priority for future validation studies as biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
The CSF samples were digested in random batches to minimize investigator bias, and the key is included here. CSF (100 µg) was mixed with an equal volume of 2 x Lysis Buffer (10% SDS, 100 µM TEAB, pH 7.55), and vortexed. Samples were reduced in a final concentration of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), heated at 60℃ for 30 minutes, and alkylated with a final concentration of 20 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) for 30 minutes in the dark prior to digesting with 5 µg of PierceTM trypsin protease, using S-Trap digestion columns (Protofi). Solid phase extraction was conducted using C18 spin columns (AffinisepTM). The samples were then eluted using 0.5% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile to assist with recovery, and dried on the SpeedVac for three hours, after which the samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Tryptic peptides were quantified prior to analysis by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The peptide samples were randomized prior to analysis by tandem mass spectrometry to minimize investigator bias. Peptide mixtures in 0.1% formic acid (volume fraction) were analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 Nano LC coupled to a Fusion Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Using the original sample randomization yielded a randomized sample order, and samples were prediluted such that injection volumes were all 5 μL  for X μg loading. Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a PepMap 100 C18 trap column (75 µm id x 2 cm length; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 3 µL/min for 10 min with 2 % acetonitrile (volume fraction) and 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid (volume fraction) followed by separation on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 2 µm C18 column (75µm id x 25 cm length; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 40 °C.  Peptides were separated along a 65 min two-step gradient of 5 % to 30 % mobile phase B (80 % acetonitrile volume fraction, 0.08 % formic acid volume fraction) over 50 min followed by a ramp to 45 % mobile phase B over 10 min and lastly to 95% mobile phase B over 5 min, and held at 95 % mobile phase B for 5 min, all at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The Fusion Lumos was operated in positive polarity with 30 % RF lens, data-dependent mode (topN, 3 sec cycle time) with a dynamic exclusion of 60 s (with 10 ppm error). Full scan resolution using the orbitrap was set at 60 000, the mass range was m/z 375 to 1500. Full scan ion target value was 4.0e5 allowing a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Monoisotopic peak determination was used, specifying peptides and an intensity threshold of 2.5e4 was used for precursor selection, including charge states 2 to 6. Data-dependent fragmentation was performed using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 32 with quadrupole isolation at m/z 1.3 width. The fragment scan resolution using the orbitrap was set at 15 000, m/z 100 as the first mass, ion target value of 2.0e5 and 30 ms maximum injection time. The MS1 data was collected as profile data, the MS2 data was collected as centroid data and inject all ions for parallelizable time was not used. The LC-MS/MS method file is included here.   For the submission to PRIDE, data were searched using Mascot (2.6.2), the RefSeq 101 release for the California sea lion, and the common repository of advantageous contaminants (both fasta are included here). The search parameter file is included, but briefly carbamidomethyl (C) was fixed, and the following variable mods: oxidation (M), acetyl (protein n-term), pyroGlu (peptide n-term Q) and deamidation (NQ). Trypsin was specified as the enzyme with two mis-cleavages, and the precursor and fragmentation ion mass tolerance were both set to 10 ppm. Again, these searches on Mascot were used for this PRIDE submission, not the paper. Glad you are reading this.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
California sea lion, Lc-msms, Cerebrospinal fluid, Domoic acid toxicosis

### Affiliations
National Institute of Standards and Technology
National Instiute of Standards and Technology, Charleston, SC, USA

### Submitter
Benjamin Neely

### Lab Head
Dr Gautam Ghosh, Alison M. Bland, Michael G. Janech, Benjamin A. Neely
National Instiute of Standards and Technology, Charleston, SC, USA


