### Accession
PXD024220

### Title
The structure of a virus-encoded nucleosome

### Description
Eukaryotes and prokaryotes encode proteins with the histone-fold domain, but only eukaryotes are known to encode "core histones" from four distinct families that heterodimerize selectively and uniquely to form nucleosome particles. Some large DNA viruses, including those in Marseilleviridae family encode histones. The presence of histone proteins in viral particles suggests their role in compacting viral genomes but it is not known whether these histones can form higher-order structures like those found in eukaryotes. Here we show that fused histone pairs Hβ-Hα and Hδ-Hγ from Marseillevirus are structurally analogous to the eukaryotic histone pairs H2B-H2A and H3-H4. We further show that they form “forced” heterodimers and that a heterotetramer of four such heterodimers assembles DNA to form structures virtually identical to those of canonical eukaryotic nucleosomes. We characterize these viral structures using cryo-EM to reveal their unprecedented conservation with the nucleosome—one of the most important and conserved features of eukaryotic chromosomes. The structure and properties of these viral nucleosomes hold clues to understanding the origins of eukaryotic chromatin.

### Sample Protocol
Amine-specific crosslinking of histones within the nucleosome complex was done with bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate (BS3, ThermoFisher Scientific). 20-μl reactions containing 0.75 mg/ml nucleosomes (in 20 mM Hepes pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA and 1 mM DTT) and 0.5–2 mM BS3 were incubated on ice for 2 hours before they were quenched with Tris-HCl pH 7.5 added to 50 mM from 0.5 M stock. After 10-min incubation with Tris, proteins were precipitated with acetone: 4 vol of acetone (cooled at –20 °C) were added followed by 1-hour incubation at –20 °C. Protein precipitates were collected by 10-min centrifugation at 16,000g at room temperature. Pellets were rinsed with 80% acetone, air dried, and dissolved in 9 μl of buffer containing 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10 mM DTT, and 8 M urea. After 10-min incubation at room temperature, samples were mixed with 1 μl 0.5 M idoacetamide and incubated for 30 min in dark. For digestion, 10-μl samples were diluted with 100 μl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5 mM DTT containing 10 ng/μl trypsin/LysC mixture (Promega), and incubated overnight at 25 °C. Digestion reactions were stopped by mixing with 10 μl 20% heptafluorobutyric acid and clarified by 10-min centrifugation at 16,000g. Finally, peptides were desalted using C18 OMIX tips (Agilent) according to manufacturer's protocol, dried under vacuum, and dissolved in 15 μl 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to Dionex UltiMate 3000 (Thermo Scientific) liquid chromatography system. Peptides were resolved on 50-cm long EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column using 120-min linear gradient from 96% buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 40% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) followed by 98% buffer B over 5 min with a flow rate of 150 nl/min. Each full MS scan (orbitrap analyzer, resolution 60,000) was followed by data-dependent MS/MS scans (orbitrap, resolution 15,000) for 20 top most abundant peptides after HCD fragmentation. Quadrupole isolation window was set to 2 m/z, precursors with charge state 4 to 6 were selected for fragmentation with collision energy set to 35. Monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled, and a dynamic exclusion window was set to 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with pLink2 using database of concatenated sequences of proteins constituting nucleosome and common contaminants. For peptides identification up to 3 missed trypsin cleavages were allowed, variable modification with oxidation at methionine residue and carbamidomethyl at cysteine residue, cross-linker was set to BS3, FDR level was set to 1%, precursor and fragment tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 50 ppm, respectively. Other parameters were left unchanged. List of identified crosslinked peptides was imported into R environment for statistical computing and filtered to include only those with reported Q-value below 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Certain large DNA viruses, including those in the Marseilleviridae family, encode histones. Here we show that fused histone pairs H&#x3b2;-H&#x3b1; and H&#x3b4;-H&#x3b3; from Marseillevirus are structurally analogous to the eukaryotic histone pairs H2B-H2A and H4-H3. These viral histones form 'forced' heterodimers, and a heterotetramer of four such heterodimers assembles DNA to form structures virtually identical to canonical eukaryotic nucleosomes.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Marseillevirus, Cryo-em, Histones, Nucleosomes, Evolution

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York, US
NYU School of Medicine

### Submitter
Nikita Vasilyev

### Lab Head
Dr Evgeny Nudler
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York, US


