### Accession
PXD036699

### Title
Unannotated microprotein EMBOW switches WDR5 between epigenetic and mitotic roles during cell cycle

### Description
The highly conserved WD40-repeat protein WDR5 is part of multiple functional complexes both inside and outside the nucleus, interacting with the MLL/SET1 histone methyltransferases that catalyze histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4) di- and tri-methylation (me2,3), and KIF2A, a member of the Kinesin-13 family of microtubule depolymerase. It is currently unclear whether, and how, the distribution of WDR5 between complexes is regulated. Here, we show that an unannotated microprotein dually encoded in the human SCRIB gene regulates the association of WDR5 with epigenetic and KIF2A complexes. We propose to name this alt-protein EMBOW, or microprotein that is the epigenetic to mitotic binder of WDR5. Loss of EMBOW decreases WDR5 interaction with KIF2A, displaces WDR5 from the spindle pole during G2/M phase, and shortens the spindle length, hence prolonging G2/M phase and delaying cell proliferation. On the other hand, loss of EMBOW increases WDR5 interaction with epigenetic complexes, including KMT2A/MLL1, and promotes WDR5 association with chromatin and binding to the target genes, hence increasing H3K4me3 levels of target genes. Together, these results implicate EMBOW as a regulator of WDR5 that switches it between epigenetic and mitotic regulatory roles during cell cycle, explaining how mammalian cells can temporally control the multifunctionality of WDR5.

### Sample Protocol
Gel slices containing entire lanes were digested with trypsin at 37℃ for 14-16 h. The resulting peptide mixtures were extracted from the gel, dried, subjected to ethyl acetate extraction to remove residual detergent, de-salted with peptide cleanup C18 spin column (Agilent Technologies, 5188-2750), then resuspended in 35 µL 0.1% formic acid (FA), followed by centrifugation at 21,130 g, 4℃, 30 min. A 5 μL aliquot of each sample was injected onto a pre-packed column attached to a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters) in-line with a Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive™ Plus Hybrid QuadrupoleOrbitrap™ mass spectrometer  (Thermo Scientific) and a 130-min gradient was used to further separate the peptide mixtures as follows (solvent A: 0.1% FA; solvent B: acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% FA): Isocratic flow was maintained at 0.1 μL/min at 1% B for 40 min, followed by linear gradients from 1% B to 6% B over 2 min, 6% B to 24% B over 48 min, 24% B to 48% B over 5 min, 48% B to 80% B over 5 min. Isocratic flow at 80% B was maintained for 5 min, followed by a gradient from 80% B to 1% B over 5 min, and isocratic flow at 1% B was maintained for 10 min. The full MS was collected over the mass range of 300-1,700 m/z with a resolution of 70,000 and the automatic gain control (AGC) target was set as 3 x 106. MS/MS data was collected using a top 10 high-collisional energy dissociation method in data-dependent mode with a normalized collision energy of 27.0 eV and a 1.6 m/z isolation window. MS/MS resolution was 17,500 and dynamic exclusion was 90 seconds.

### Data Protocol
For identification of alt- and microproteins, ProteoWizard MS Convert was used for peak picking and files were analyzed using Mascot Daemon (version 2.5.0.1). Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, and a previously reported three-frame translation of assembled transcripts from HEK 293T mRNA-seq was used as the database exactly as previously described (Slavoff et al., 2013). For co-IP proteomics searches and quantitative analysis, files were analyzed using MaxQuant, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, and human UniProt plus EMBOW was used as the database for searching. For all analysis, a mass deviation of 20 p.p.m. was set for MS1 peaks, and 0.02 Da was set as maximum allowed MS/MS peaks with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Maximum false discovery rates (FDR) were set to 1% both on peptide and protein levels. Minimum required peptide length was five amino acids. Protein quantitation was accomplished by calculating the LFQ intensity ratio of EMBOW-FLAG or WDR5-FLAG pulldown to corresponding negative control samples using MaxQuant (version 1.6.8.0) with standard parameters.

### Publication Abstract
The conserved WD40-repeat protein WDR5 interacts with multiple proteins both inside and outside the nucleus. However, it is currently unclear whether and how the distribution of WDR5 between complexes is regulated. Here, we show that an unannotated microprotein EMBOW (endogenous microprotein binder of WDR5) dually encoded in the human SCRIB gene interacts with WDR5 and regulates its binding to multiple interaction partners, including KMT2A and KIF2A. EMBOW is cell cycle regulated, with two expression maxima at late G1 phase and G2/M phase. Loss of EMBOW decreases WDR5 interaction with KIF2A, aberrantly shortens mitotic spindle length, prolongs G2/M phase, and delays cell proliferation. In contrast, loss of EMBOW increases WDR5 interaction with KMT2A, leading to WDR5 binding to off-target genes, erroneously increasing H3K4me3 levels, and activating transcription of these genes. Together, these results implicate EMBOW as a regulator of WDR5 that regulates its interactions and prevents its off-target binding in multiple contexts.

### Keywords
Human, Hek 293t cells, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Yale University, Chemical Biology Institute
Department of Chemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA

### Submitter
xiongwen cao

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah A. Slavoff
Department of Chemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA


