### Accession
PXD030296

### Title
Mammalian CDC14 control differentiation from pluripotent cells by modulating UTF1 activity on bivalent promoters

### Description
CDC14 phosphatases are critical components of the cell cycle machinery that drives exit from mitosis in yeast. However, the two mammalian paralogs, CDC14A and CDC14B, are dispensable for cell cycle progression or exit, and their function remains unclear. By generating a double Cdc14a; Cdc14b-null mouse model, we report here that CDC14 phosphatases control cell differentiation in pluripotent cells and their absence results in deficient development of the neural system. Lack of CDC14 impairs neural differentiation from embryonic stem cells (ESCs) accompanied by deficient induction of genes controlled by bivalent promoters. During ESC differentiation, CDC14 directly dephosphorylates and destabilizes Undifferentiated embryonic Transcription Factor 1 (UTF1), a critical regulator of stemness. In the absence of CDC14, increased UTF1 levels prevent the firing of bivalent promoters, resulting in defective induction of the transcriptional programs required for differentiation. These results suggest that mammalian CDC14 phosphatases function during the terminal exit from the cell cycle by modulating the transition from the pluripotent to the differentiated chromatin state, at least partially by controlling chromatin dynamics and transcription in a UTF1-dependent manner.

### Sample Protocol
Phospho-TMT: Digestion: Cells were lysed during 10 minutes at 95 °C in 5% SDS, 50 mM TEAB pH 7.55. After cooling, DNA was sheared by 10 min of sonication. Protein concentration was determined by micro BCA using BSA as standard. Then, 200 µg of each sample were digested by means of the Protifi™ S-Trap™ Mini Spin Column Digestion Protocol. Briefly, proteins were reduced and alkylated (15 mM TCEP, 30 mM CAA) 1h at 45 °C in the dark. SDS was removed from samples in the S-Trap column using 90% methanol in 100 mM TEAB and proteins were digested with 125 µl of trypsin in 50 mM TEAB pH 7.55 (promega, protein:enzyme ratio 1:100, 1 h at  47°C). Resulting peptides were eluted from S-Trap columns and speed-vac dried.TMT-Labeling: Samples (200 µg) were labeled using TMT® reagent 11-plex following manufacturer’s instructions. Labeling scheme was as follows: T0 wt cl1 techrep1 (126), T0 wt cl3 (127N), T0 cdc14 KO cl1 techrep1 (127C), T0 cdc14 KO cl3 (128N), T3 wt cl1 techrep1 (128C), T3 wt cl3 (129N), T3 cdc14 KO cl1 (129C), T3 cdc14 KO cl3 (130N), T0 wt cl1 techrep2 (130C), T0 cdc14 KO cl1 techrep2 (131), T3 wt cl1 techrep2 (131C). Samples were mixed in 1:1 ratios based on total peptide amount, which was determined from an aliquot by comparing overall signal intensities on a regular LC-MS/MS run. The final mixture was finally desalted using a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters) and dried prior high pH reverse phase HPLC pre-fractionation. High pH reverse phase chromatography: Peptides were pre-fractionated offline by means of high pH reverse phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system equipped with a sample collector. 60 fractions of 100 µL were collected. 5µl of each fraction were transferred to new vials and speed-vac dried. 37 of this fractions were re-dissolved in 5% formic acid and used for total protein analysis. Remaining volume was concatenated into 6 tubes and dried prior to phosphopeptide enrichment. Phosphopeptide enrichment: Phosphopeptides were enriched using home-made TiO2 micro-columns. Briefly, peptides were resuspended in 6% TFA and 80% CH3CN and incubated for 20 min with TiO2 beads (10 µm particle size) (GL-Science) using a sample:TiO2 ratio of 1:2. Prior to incubation, TiO2 beads were pre-condition with a solution of 20 mg/mL DHB in 80% CH3CN 6% TFA for 20 min. Then, beads were sequentially washed with 100 µL of 6% TFA and 10% CH3CN, 100 µL of 6% TFA and 100 µL of 40% CH3CN and 6% TFA and 60% CH3CN. Finally, phosphopeptides were eluted first with 20 µL of 5% NH4OH and then with 20 µL 5% NH4OH in 10% CH3CN in the same vial.UTF1 immunoprecipitation:Proteins were eluted twice, using 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. Then, samples were digested by means of the standard FASP protocol. Briefly, proteins were reduced and alkylated (15 mM TCEP, 50 mM CAA, 30 min in the dark, RT) and sequentially digested with Lys-C (Wako) (200ng of Lys-C per sample, o/n at RT) and trypsin (Promega) (200ng of trypsin per sample, 6 h at 37 °C). Resulting peptides were desalted using C18 stage-tips, speed-vac dried and re-dissolved in 21 µl of 0.5% formic acid.In vitro phosphorylation assay:On-bead digestion was performed using trypsin (Promega) (200ng of trypsin per sample, 4 h at 37 °C). LC-MS/MS was done by coupling an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system to either a Q Exactive HF-X (Phospho-TMT), Q Exactive Plus (UTF1 IP) or Q Exactive HF (In vitro phosphorylation assay) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded into a trap column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 LC Columns 5 µm, 20 mm length) for 3 min at a flow rate of 10 µl/min in 0.1% FA. Then, peptides were transferred to an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (Thermo) (2 µm, 75 µm x 50 cm) operated at 45 °C and separated using a 60 min effective gradient (buffer A: 0.1% FA; buffer B: 100% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The gradient used was, from 2% to 6% of buffer B in 2 min, from 6% to 33% B in 58 minutes, from 33% to 45% in 2 minutes, plus 10 additional minutes at 98% B. Peptides were sprayed at 1.5 kV into the mass spectrometer via the EASY-Spray source and the capillary temperature was set to 300 °C. Q Exactive HF-X: The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS scans using a top 12 method. (Intensity threshold ≥ 9.3e4, dynamic exclusion of 20 sec and excluding charges unsassigned, +1 and ≥ +6). MS spectra were acquired from 350 to 1500 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 (200 m/z). Ion peptides were isolated using a 1 Th window and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 35. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a fixed first mass of 110 m/z  and a resolution of 45,000 (200 m/z). The ion target values were 3e6 for MS (maximum IT of 25 ms) and 1e5 for MS/MS (maximum IT of 86 msec)

### Data Protocol
Phospho-TMT: Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.6.0.16) using the standard settings against a mouse protein database (UniProtKB/TrEMBL, 53,449 sequences) supplemented with contaminants. Reporter ion MS2-based quantification was enabled for TMT 11-plex. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionines, protein N-term acetylation and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine as variable modifications. Phosphorylation of serines, threnonines and tyrosines was also set as variable modification for the phosphopeptide enrichment raw files. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two tryptic missed-cleavages were allowed. Results were filtered at 1% FDR (peptide and protein level). Afterwards, the “Phospho (STY)Sites.txt” was loaded in Prostar (Wieczorek et al, Bioinformatics 2017) for the phosphosite analysis and the “proteinGroups.txt” file was loaded for the total protein analysis. The reporter intensity values were used for further statistical analysis. Briefly, a global normalization of log2-transformed intensities across samples was performed using the LOESS function. Differential analysis was done using the empirical Bayes statistics Limma. Sites or proteins with a p.value < 0.05 and a log2 ratio >0.3 or <-0.3 were defined as regulated. The FDR was estimated to be below 5%. UTF1 IP/ In vitro phosphorylation assay: Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.6.0.16) using the standard settings against either a human protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, 20,373 sequences) (UTF1 IP) or an Ecoli database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, 4,300 sequences) (in vitro phosphorylation assay).  Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionines  protein N-term acetylation and phosphorylation of serines, threnonines and tyrosines were set as variable modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two tryptic missed-cleavages were allowed. Results were filtered at 0.01 FDR (peptide and protein level). Raw data were imported into Skyline. Label free quantification of identified phosphopeptides was performed using the extracted ion chromatogram of the isotopic distribution. Only peaks without interference were used for quantification. Normalization was performed using the intensity of identified UTF1 non modified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Utf1, Mescs, Cdc14

### Affiliations
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO)
Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas

### Submitter
Eduardo Zarzuela

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz Peralta
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO)


