### Accession
PXD018112

### Title
The Aspergillus fumigatus secretome alters the proteome of Pseudomonas aeruginosa to stimulate bacterial growth: implications for co-infection

### Description
Individuals with cystic fibrosis are susceptible to co-infection by Aspergillus fumigatus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, however P. aeruginosa eventually predominates as the primary pathogen. Several factors are likely to facilitate P. aeruginosa colonization in the airways, including alterations to the microbial environment. In this study, significant growth proliferation was observed in P. aeruginosa when the bacteria were exposed to culture filtrates produced by A. fumigatus in a nitrate-rich, nutrient-poor liquid broth, Czapek-Dox. Proteomic analysis of the A. fumigatus culture filtrate identified a significant number of environment-altering proteases and peptidases, which may contribute to the growth promoting effect observed when P. aeruginosa is exposed to this culture filtrate. These findings offer insights into the determinants that contribute to P. aeruginosa proliferation in the presence of A. fumigatus.

### Sample Protocol
Aspergillus fumigatus ATCC 26933 (5 x 105 conidia/ml) was cultured in Czapek-Dox liquid media for 48 hours. The culture filtrate was separated from the hyphae and filter sterilized through 0.2 µm filtropur S filters (Sarstedt). The filtrate was concentrated using centrifugal concentrators with a molecular weight cut-off of 3 kDa (Vivaspin 20, 3kDa MWCO PES, Sartorius). Protein concentration was determined by the Bradford Dye assay (50 µg) and precipitated with acetone overnight. proteins were pelleted by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 14,500 g. The acetone was removed and the protein pellet was re-suspended in 25µl sample resuspension buffer (8M urea, 2M thiourea, 0.1M tris-HCl (pH 8.0) dissolved in HPLC grade dH2O). An aliquot (2 µl) was removed from each sample and quantified using the QubitTM quantification system (Invitrogen), following the manufacturer’s instructions. Ammonium bicarbonate (125 µl, 50 mM) was added to the remaining 20 µl of each sample. The protein sample was reduced by adding 1 μl 0.5M dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubated at 56°C for 20 minutes, followed by alkylation with 0.55M iodoacetamide at room temperature, in the dark for 15 minutes. Protease Max Surfactant Trypsin Enhancer (Promega) (1 µl, 1 % w/v) and Sequence Grade Trypsin (Promega) (0.5 µg/µl) was added to the proteins and incubated at 37°C for 18 hours. Digestion was terminated by adding Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (1 µl, 100 %) to each tryptic digest sample, and incubated at room temperature for 5 minutes. Samples were centrifuged for 10 minutes at 13000 rpm and purified for mass spectrometry C18 Spin Columns (Pierce), following the manufacturer’s instructions. The eluted peptides were dried using a SpeedyVac concentrator (Thermo Scientific Savant DNA120) and resuspended in 2% v/v acetonitrile and 0.05% v/v TFA to give a final peptide concentration of 1 µg/µl. The samples were sonicated for five minutes to aid peptide resuspension, followed by centrifugation for 5 minutes at 14,500 g. The supernatant was removed and used for mass spectrometry. Digested proteins (500 ng) were loaded onto a QExactive (ThermoFisher Scientific) high-resolution accurate mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient on a BioBasic™ C18 Picofrit™ column (100 mm length, 75 mm inner diameter), using a 65 minutes reverse phase gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min-1. All data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in an automatic dependent switching mode. A full MS scan at 70,000 resolution and a range of 400 – 1600 m/z, was followed by an MS/MS scan at 17,500 resolution, with a range of 200-2000 m/z to select the 15 most intense ions prior to MS/MS. Qualitative analysis of the proteome arising from the A. fumigatus CuF was investigated using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 and Sequest HT (SEQUEST HT algorithm, Thermo Scientific). Identified proteins were searched against the UniProtKB database which was downloaded on the 18/05/2018 (taxonomy: Neosartorya fumigata).  Search parameters applied for protein identification were as follows: (i) enzyme name – trypsin, (ii) an allowance of up to two missed cleavages, (iii) peptide mass tolerance set to 10 ppm, (iv) MS/MS mass tolerance set to 0.02 Da, (v) carbamidomethylation set as a fixed modification and (vi) methionine oxidation set as a variable modification. Peptide probability was set to high confidence and peptides with minimum score of two and fewer than three unique peptides were excluded from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Individuals with cystic fibrosis are susceptible to co-infection by <i>Aspergillus fumigatus</i> and <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> Despite the persistence of <i>A. fumigatus</i> in the cystic fibrosis lung <i>P. aeruginosa</i> eventually predominates as the primary pathogen. Several factors are likely to facilitate <i>P. aeruginosa</i> colonization in the airways, including alterations to the microbial environment. The cystic fibrosis airways are hypoxic, nitrate-rich environments, and the sputum has higher amino acid concentrations than normal. In this study, significant growth proliferation was observed in <i>P. aeruginosa</i> when the bacteria were exposed to <i>A. fumigatus</i> culture filtrates (CuF) containing a high nitrate content. Proteomic analysis of the <i>A. fumigatus</i> CuF identified a significant number of environment-altering proteases and peptidases. The molecular mechanisms promoting bacterial growth were investigated using label-free quantitative (LFQ) proteomics to compare the proteome of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> grown in the <i>A. fumigatus</i> CuF and in CuF produced by a <i>P. aeruginosa-A. fumigatus</i> co-culture, to that cultured in <i>P. aeruginosa</i> CuF. LFQ proteomics revealed distinct changes in the proteome of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> when cultured in the different CuFs, including increases in the levels of proteins involved in denitrification, stress response, replication, amino acid metabolism and efflux pumps, and a down-regulation of pathways involving ABC transporters. These findings offer novel insights into the complex dynamics that exist between <i>P. aeruginosa</i> and <i>A. fumigatus</i> Understanding the molecular strategies that enable <i>P. aeruginosa</i> to predominate in an environment where <i>A. fumigatus</i> exists is important in the context of therapeutic development to target this pathogen.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Culture filtrate, Shotgun proteomics, Aspergillus fumigatus

### Affiliations
Applied Proteomics Lab, Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Co. Kildare, Ireland
Biology

### Submitter
James Carolan

### Lab Head
Dr Jim Carolan
Applied Proteomics Lab, Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Co. Kildare, Ireland


