### Accession
PXD017893

### Title
NAD capping of mRNAs is abundant but strongly guarded against in yeast

### Description
The ubiquitous redox coenzyme nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) acts as a non-canonical cap structure on prokaryotic and eukaryotic ribonucleic acids. Here we find that in budding yeast, NAD-RNAs are abundant (>1400 species), short (<170 nt), and mostly correspond to mRNA 5'-ends. The modification percentage is low (<5%). NAD is incorporated during the initiation step by RNA polymerase II, which uses distinct promoters with a YAAG motif for this purpose. Most NAD-RNAs are 3'-truncated. At least three decapping enzymes, Rai1, Dxo1, and Npy1, guard against NAD-RNA at different cellular locations, targeting overlapping transcript populations. NAD-mRNAs do not support translation in vitro. Our work indicates that in budding yeast, most of the NAD incorporation into RNA seems to be accidental and undesirable to the cell, which has evolved a diverse surveillance machinery to prematurely terminate, decap and reject NAD-RNAs.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cells were cultured in 100 mL YPD medium and collected at OD600 0.8. The cells (biological triplicates) were washed twice by ice-cold dH2O and PBS. The cell pelleted were lysed in 2 mL Protein lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, 1 µg/mL leupeptin, 1µg/mL pepstatin A) by twice French press (~0.69 kbar). Centrifuged 25,000 g, 4 °C, 20 min. Supernatant was collected then fast frozen by liquid nitrogen and stored in - 80 °C until all samples ready. Protein concentration was nuclease treated and measured by BCA assay (Thermo Scientific). Reduction of disulphide bridges in cysteine containing proteins was performed with dithiothreitol (56°C, 30 min, 10 mM in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5). Reduced cysteines were alkylated with 2-chloroacetamide (room temperature, in the dark, 30 min, 20 mM in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5). Samples were prepared using the SP3 protocol (Hughes et al., 2014)and trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) was added in an enzyme to protein ratio 1:50 for overnight digestion at 37°C. Peptides were labelled with TMT10plex (Werner et al., 2014) Isobaric Label Reagent (Thermo Scientific) according the manufacturer’s instructions. For further sample clean up an OASIS® HLB µElution Plate (Waters) was used. Offline high pH reverse phase fractionation was carried out on an Agilent 1200 Infinity high-performance liquid chromatography system, equipped with a Gemini C18 column (3 μm, 110 Å, 100 x 1.0 mm, Phenomenex) (Reichel et al., 2016).

### Data Protocol
An UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system (Dionex) fitted with a trapping cartridge (µ-Precolumn C18 PepMap 100, 5µm, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, 100 Å) and an analytical column (nanoEase™ M/Z HSS T3 column 75 µm x 250 mm C18, 1.8 µm, 100 Å, Waters). Trapping was carried out with a constant flow of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) at 30 µL/min onto the trapping column for 6 minutes. Subsequently, peptides were eluted via the analytical column with a constant flow of 0.3 µL/min with increasing percentage of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) from 2% to 4% in 4 min, from 4% to 8% in 2 min, then 8% to 28% for a further 96 min, and finally from 28% to 40% in another 10 min. The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to a QExactive plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer using the proxeon nanoflow source in positive ion mode. The peptides were introduced into the QExactive plus via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective) and an applied spray voltage of 2.3 kV. The capillary temperature was set at 320°C. Full mass scan was acquired with mass range 350-1400 m/z in profile mode in the FT with resolution of 70000. The filling time was set at maximum of 100 ms with a limitation of 3x106 ions. Data dependent acquisition (DDA) was performed with the resolution of the Orbitrap set to 35000, with a fill time of 120 ms and a limitation of 2x105 ions. A normalized collision energy of 32 was applied. A loop count of 10 with count 1 was used and a minimum AGC trigger of 2e2 was set. Dynamic exclusion time of 30 s was used. The peptide match algorithm was set to ‘preferred’ and charge exclusion ‘unassigned’, charge states 1, 5 - 8 were excluded. MS2 data was acquired in profile mode.  IsobarQuant (Franken et al., 2015) and Mascot (v2.2.07) were used to process the acquired data, which was searched against a Uniprot Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome database (UP000002311) containing common contaminants and reversed sequences. The following modifications were included into the search parameters: Carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT10 (K) (fixed modification), Acetyl (N-term), Oxidation (M) and TMT10 (N-term) (variable modifications). For the full scan (MS1) a mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and for MS/MS (MS2) spectra of 0.02 Da was set. Further parameters were set: Trypsin as protease with an allowance of maximum two missed cleavages: a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids; at least two unique peptides were required for a protein identification. The false discovery rate on peptide and protein level was set to 0.01. The protein.txt – output file of IsobarQuant was analyzed using R script. As a quality filter, only proteins which were quantified with at least 2 unique peptides were used (2256 proteins remained). The signal_sum columns were annotated to the experimental conditions. Batch-effects were removed with the limma (v3.38.3) package and subsequently data were normalized using the vsn (v3.50.0) . limma was used again to test for differentially expressed genes between wild-type and npy1 knock-out. Proteins were annotated as a hit with a fold-change bigger 50 % and a false discovery rate smaller 5 % and as a candidate with a fold-change bigger 40 % and a false discovery rate smaller 20 %.

### Publication Abstract
The ubiquitous redox coenzyme nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) acts as a non-canonical cap structure on prokaryotic and eukaryotic ribonucleic acids. Here we find that in budding yeast, NAD-RNAs are abundant (&gt;1400 species), short (&lt;170&#x2009;nt), and mostly correspond to mRNA 5'-ends. The modification percentage of transcripts is low (&lt;5%). NAD incorporation occurs mainly during transcription initiation by RNA polymerase II, which uses distinct promoters with a YAAG core motif for this purpose. Most NAD-RNAs are 3'-truncated. At least three decapping enzymes, Rai1, Dxo1, and Npy1, guard against NAD-RNA at different cellular locations, targeting overlapping transcript populations. NAD-mRNAs are not translatable in vitro. Our work indicates that in budding yeast, most of the NAD incorporation into RNA seems to be disadvantageous to the cell, which has evolved a diverse surveillance machinery to prematurely terminate, decap and reject NAD-RNAs.

### Keywords
Decapping, S.cerevisiae, Rna surveillance, Nad-rna, Npy1

### Affiliations
Institute of Pharmacy and Molecular Biotechnology (IPMB), Heidelberg University
Institute of Pharmacy and Molecular Biotechnology, Heidelberg University

### Submitter
Yaqing Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Andres Jäschke
Institute of Pharmacy and Molecular Biotechnology (IPMB), Heidelberg University


