### Accession
PXD039682

### Title
Role of Complementarity-Determining Regions 1 and 3 in Pathologic Amyloid Formation by Human Immunoglobulin κ1 Light Chains

### Description
Immunoglobulin light chain (LC) amyloidosis is a life-threatening disease whose understanding and treatment is complicated by vast numbers of patient-specific mutations. To address molecular origins of the disease, we explored 14 patient-derived and engineered proteins related to κ1-family germline genes IGKVLD-33*01 and IGKVLD-39*01. Hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry analysis of local conformational dynamics in full-length recombinant LCs and their fragments was integrated with studies of thermal stability, proteolytic susceptibility, amyloid formation, and amyloidogenic sequence propensities using spectroscopic, electron microscopic and bioinformatics tools. The results were mapped on the atomic structures of native and fibrillary proteins. Proteins from two κ1 subfamilies showed unexpected differences. Compared to their germline counterparts, amyloid LC related to IGKVLD-33*01 was less stable and formed amyloid faster, whereas amyloid LC related to IGKVLD-39*01 had similar stability and formed amyloid slower. These and other differences suggest different major factors influencing amyloid formation. In 33*01-related amyloid LC, these factors involved mutation-induced destabilization of the native structure and probable stabilization of amyloid. The atypical behavior of 39*01-related amyloid LC tracked back to increased dynamics/exposure of amyloidogenic segments in βC’V and βEV that could initiate aggregation, combined with decreased dynamics/exposure near the C23-Cys88 disulfide whose rearrangement is rate-limiting to amyloidogenesis. The results suggest distinct amyloidogenic pathways for closely related LCs and point to the antigen-binding regions CDR1 and CDR3, which are linked via the conserved internal disulfide, as key factors in amyloid formation by various LCs.

### Sample Protocol
Deuterium labeling: κ1 IgG LC aliquots at 30 μM (stock concentration) were freshly prepared in biological replicates prior to HDX MS analysis in 10 mM sodium phosphate, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.5, H2O.  The starting stock solution of protein was 30 μM, of which 1 μL was mixed with 18 μL of labeling buffer (10 mM sodium phosphate, 150 mM NaCl, pD 7.5, 99.9% D2O) to initiate labeling at 20 °C.  After each labeling time (10 seconds, 1 minute, 10 minutes, 1 hour, 4 hours), the labeling reaction was quenched with the addition of 30 μL of ice-cold quenching buffer (7 M GdnHCl. 0.6 M TCEP, 0.8% formic acid, pH 2.4, H2O). Each quenched solution was kept in an ice bath for 30 seconds before being diluted with 50 μL of 0.8% formic acid (final volume 99 μL) and then injected into the LC MS system.  Maximally deuterated samples (maxD) for back-exchange correction were prepared as described in [Peterle et al., 2022. Anal. Chem. 94(28), 10142]. Briefly, protein solutions (15 μL, 30 μM) were speed vac’d to dryness, resuspended in 7 M Gdn·HCl containing 50 mM DTT (15 μL), and heated at 90 °C for 5 min. After cooling to 20 °C, 18 μL of labeling buffer were added to 1 μL of denatured protein solution, and the exchange reaction was allowed to proceed at 50 °C for 10 min.  The sample was cooled to 0 °C, quenched with the addition of 30 μL of ice-cold quenching buffer, kept at 0 °C for 30 seconds, diluted with 50 μL of 0.8% formic acid, and analyzed immediately by LC MS.  LC/MS: All LC steps were performed with a Waters HDX system containing an HDX unit and two Acquity I-class UPLC pumps.  Deuterated and control samples were digested online in the HDX cooling unit, where the digestion chamber was held at 15 °C, using an Affipro Nepenthesin-2 column (2.1 mm × 20 mm). Peptides were trapped and desalted on a VanGuard Pre-Column trap [2.1 mm × 5 mm, ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 1.7 μm, (Waters, 186002346)] for 3 minutes at 100 μL/min.  Peptides were eluted from the trap using a 5%–35% gradient of acetonitrile over 6 minutes at a flow rate of 100 μL/min using an ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3, 1.8 μm, 1.0 mm × 50 mm column (Waters, 186003535).  The main cooling chamber of the Waters HDX unit, which housed all the chromatographic elements, was held at 0.0 ± 0.1 °C for the entire time of the measurements.  The back pressure averaged ~9,000 psi at 0 °C and 5% acetonitrile 95% water.  To eliminate peptide carryover, a wash solution [1.5 M guanidinium chloride, 0.8% formic acid and 4% acetonitrile] was injected into the Nepenthesin-2 column during each analytical run.  Mass spectra were acquired using a Waters Synapt XS HDMSE mass spectrometer in ion mobility mode.  The mass spectrometer was calibrated with direct infusion of a solution of glu-fibrinopeptide (Sigma, F3261) at 200 femtomole/μL at a flow rate of 5 μL/min prior to data collection.  A conventional electrospray source was used, and the instrument was scanned over the range 50 to 2000 m/z.  The instrument configuration was: capillary voltage 2.5 kV, trap collision energy at 4 V, sampling cone at 35 V, source temperature of 80 °C, and desolvation temperature of 175 °C. The error of determining the deuterium levels was ± 0.20 Da in this experimental setup.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from replicate HDMSE analyses (see Supplemental Datafile 1) of undeuterated control samples using PLGS 3.0.1 (Waters, 720001408EN).  Peptide masses were identified from searches using non-specific cleavage of a custom database containing the sequence of κ1 GL1 VL (IGKVLD-33*01), GL2 VL (IGKVLD-39*01), and CL (IGKCLD) (UniProt: P01593, P01597, and P01834, respectively), no missed cleavages, no PTMs, a low energy threshold of 135, an elevated energy threshold of 20 and an intensity threshold of 500. No false discovery rate (FDR) control was performed.  The peptides identified in PLGS (excluding all neutral loss and in-source fragmentation identifications) were then filtered in DynamX 3.0.1 (Waters, 720005145EN) implementing a minimum products per amino acid cut-off of 0.25, at least 2 consecutive product ions.  Those peptides meeting the filtering criteria were further processed automatically by DynamX followed by manual inspection of all spectra and data processing steps.  The relative amount of deuterium in each peptide was determined by subtracting the centroid mass of the undeuterated form of each peptide from the centroid mass of the deuterated form, at each time point, for each condition.  Correction for back exchange to report percent deuteration (%D) was done as described [Peterle et al., 2022. Anal. Chem. 94(28), 10142] according to the equation %D = [(mt – m0) / (mmaxD – m0)], where mt is the observed peptide centroid mass at a given labeling time-point t, m0 is the undeuterated peptide centroid mass, and mmaxD is the maximally deuterated peptide centroid mass.  Percent deuteration values were used to generate %D uptake graphs and skyline plots.  Accordingly, all data plotted on tertiary structures was likewise back exchange corrected.  All measured and processed values can be found in Supplemental Data file 1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Light chain amyloidosis; misfolded states; protein stability; protein dynamics; hdx ms; hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University
Northeastern University

### Submitter
John R. Engen

### Lab Head
Dr John R. Engen
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University


