### Accession
PXD011125

### Title
The interactome of a family of potential methyltransferases

### Description
Human methytransferase like proteins (METTL) are part of a large protein family characterized by the presence of binding domains for S-adenosyl methionine, a co-substrate in most methylation reactions. Despite the fact that members of this protein family were shown or predicted to be DNA, RNA or protein methyltransferases, most METTL proteins are still poorly characterized. Identification of the complexes in which these potential enzymes act could help to understand their function(s) and substrate specificities. Here we systematically studied interacting partners of METTL protein family members using label-free quantitative mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa-FRT cells inducibly expressing GFP-METTL constructs were cultured in high glucose DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin−streptomycin (Life Technologies, Inc.).  Cells, at a confluency of 80%, were treated with doxycycline at a final concentration of 1 μg/ml dox for 16h to induce expression of the GFP fusion proteins.  Cells were then harvested, extensively washed with PBS and lysed by adding 5 cell pellet volumes of lysis buffer (1% NP40, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10% Glycerol, 0.5 mM DTT and 1 × Complete Protease Inhibitors (Roche)). Cells were vortexed for 30 s and then incubated for 1.5 h at 4°C on a rotation wheel. Samples were then transferred to 2ml Eppendorf tubes and centrifuged at 21000 x g   for 15 min, after which soluble whole cell extracts (WCEs) were aliquoted and snap frozen until further usage. The protein concentration of the lysates was determined using the Bradford assay. For each label free affinity purification, 3 mg of WCE was incubated with 7,5 ul GFP nanobody sepharose beads (Chromotek) in a total volume of 600μl RIPA buffer (150 mM NaCL, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 0.5 mM DTT and 1X Complete Protease Inhibitor cocktail) supplemented with 50 μg/ml ethidium bromide for 1.5 h at 4°C on a rotation wheel. Pull-downs from GFP-METTL and WT cells were performed in triplicate from one batch of extract to facilitate ANOVA based statistics. After incubation, beads were washed twice with 1 ml of RIPA buffer containing 300mM NaCl, twice with 1 ml PBS with 1% NP40 and finally three times with 1 ml PBS. After the last wash, all liquid was carefully removed from the beads using a 30 G syringe. GFP-METTL and WT control samples were prepared on the same day and analysed by LC-MS/MS sequentially. Affinity purifications with nuclear extracts were done essentially as described. Purified proteins on beads were denatured and eluted in elution buffer (2 M Urea, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5 and 10 mM DTT) for 20 min at RT in a shaking incubator (1000 rpm). Iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 50 mM, and samples were then incubated in the dark for 10 min with shaking at 1000 rpm. 0.35 μg of trypsin (Promega) was then added and samples were digested overnight at RT. Digested peptides were acidified with 10% TFA and then desalted and stored on C18 StageTips prior to mass spectrometry analyses. Samples were measured on an Easy-nLC1000 (Thermo) connected online to an LTQ-Orbitrap-Fusion mass spectrometer from Thermo, using a 114 min gradient of acetonitrile (7-32%) followed by brief washes at 50% and then 90% acetonitrile, for 140 min of total data collection.  Scans were recorded in data-dependent top-speed mode (HCD fragmentation) of a 3-s cycle with dynamic exclusion set at 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were searched against the curated UniProt human proteome database (release December 2015) with MaxQuant version 1.5.1.0 and its integrated search engine Andromeda. Cysteine carbamidomethyl was used as a fixed modification, and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were used as variable modifications. Mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm, and mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 0.5 Da. Additional options Match between runs, LFQ and iBAQ were also selected. The generated “proteingroups.txt” table was filtered for contaminants, reverse hits, number of unique peptides (>0) in Perseus 1.5.0.15 (from MaxQuant package). For interactor identification, the logarithm (log2) of the LFQ values were taken, resulting in a Gaussian distribution of the data. This allowed imputation of missing values by normal distribution (width=0.3, shift=1.8), assuming these proteins were close to the detection limit. Statistical outliers for the GFP pull-down of the METTLgfpHeLa compared to HeLa WT were then determined using two-tailed t-test. Multiple testing correction was applied by using a permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR) method in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Human methytransferase like proteins (METTL) are part of a large protein family characterized by the presence of binding domains for S-adenosyl methionine, a co-substrate for methylation reactions. Despite the fact that members of this protein family were shown or predicted to be DNA, RNA or protein methyltransferases, most METTL proteins are still poorly characterized. Identification of complexes in which these potential enzymes act could help to understand their function(s) and substrate specificities. Here we systematically studied interacting partners of METTL protein family members in HeLa cells using label-free quantitative mass spectrometry. We found that, surprisingly, many of the METTL proteins appear to function outside of stable complexes whereas others including METTL7B, METTL8 and METTL9 have high-confidence interaction partners. Our study is the first systematic and comprehensive overview of the interactome of METTL protein family that can provide a crucial resource for further studies of these potential novel methyltransferases.

### Keywords
Interaction proteomics, Mettl, Gfp affinity purifications, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Deutsches Forschungszentrum fuer Gesundheit und Umwelt (GmbH) Ingolstaedter Landstr. 1, 85764, Neuherberg, Germany
Radboud University

### Submitter
Pascal Jansen

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Schneider
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Deutsches Forschungszentrum fuer Gesundheit und Umwelt (GmbH) Ingolstaedter Landstr. 1, 85764, Neuherberg, Germany


