### Accession
PXD043651

### Title
o Differential temporal release and lipoprotein loading in B. thetaiotaomicron bacterial extracellular vesicles

### Description
o Bacterial extracellular vesicles (BEVs) contribute to stress responses, quorum sensing, biofilm formation, and interspecies and interkingdom communication. However, the factors that regulate their release and heterogeneity are not well understood. We set out to investigate these factors in the common gut commensal Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron by studying BEV release throughout their growth cycle. Utilising a range of methods, we demonstrate that vesicles released at different stages of growth have significantly different composition, with early vesicles enriched in specifically released outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) containing a larger proportion of lipoproteins, while late phase BEVs primarily contain lytic vesicles with enrichment of cytoplasmic proteins. Furthermore, we demonstrate that lipoproteins containing a negatively charged signal peptide are preferentially incorporated in OMVs. We use this observation to predict all Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron OMV enriched lipoproteins and analyse their function. Overall, our findings highlight the need to understand media composition and BEV release dynamics prior to functional characterisation and define the theoretical functional capacity of Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron OMVs.

### Sample Protocol
Cell cultures were centrifuged at 6,600 g for 1 h at ambient temperature. Immediately, the supernatant was vacuum filtered using a 0.22 μm filter to ensure cell removal. The BEV containing supernatants were concentrated approximately 100-fold using crossflow filtration (Vivaflow 50R; 100 kDa) followed by washing 5 times with 100 mL PBS, concentrating to the same volume between washes. The vesicles were then filter sterilized using a 0.22 μm syringe filter and concentrated using centrifugal concentrator (Vivaspin 20; 100 kDa; PES (Sartorius)). Vesicles were further purified using qEVsingle 35 nm column (Izon Science) as per manufacturers guidelines confirming that all particles were eluted in the expected fractions. These fractions were then pooled, concentrated using centrifugal concentrator (Vivaspin 6; 100 kDa; PES (Sartorius)) and filter sterilised using a 0.22 μm syringe filter. Vesicles in PBS were precipitated with acetone. Protein pellets were resuspended in 100 µl of 2.5% SDC in 0.2 M EPPS-buffer. Protein concentration was estimated using a BCA assay and approx. 100 µg of protein per sample was reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin in the SDC buffer. After the digest, the SDC was precipitated and the clear supernatant subjected to C18 SPE. Isobaric labelling was performed using a TMT™16plex kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions with slight modifications; approx. 100 µg of the dried peptides were dissolved in 90 µl of 0.2 M EPPS buffer (Merck)/10% acetonitrile, and 250 µg TMT reagent dissolved in 22 µl of acetonitrile was added. After 2 h incubation, aliquots of 1 µl from each sample were combined in 400 µl 0.2% TFA, desalted, and analysed on the mass spectrometer (same method as for TMT, see below, but without RTS) to check labelling efficiency and estimate total sample abundances. The main sample aliquots were quenched by adding 8 µl of 5% hydroxylamine and then combined to roughly level abundances and desalted using a C18 Sep-Pak cartridge (200 mg, Waters). The eluted peptides were dissolved in 500 µl of 25 mM NH4HCO3 and fractionated by high pH reversed phase HPLC. Using an ACQUITY Arc Bio System (Waters), the samples were loaded to an XBridge® 5 µm BEH C18 130 Å column (250 x 4.6 mm, Waters). Fractionation was performed with the following gradient of solvents A (water), B (acetonitrile), and C (25 mM NH4HCO3  in water) at a flow rate of 1 ml/min: solvent C was kept at 10% throughout the gradient; solvent B: 0-5 min: 5%, 5-10 min: 5-10%, 10-80 min: 10-45%, 80-90 min: 45-80%, followed by 5 min at 80% B and re-equilibration to 5% for 24 min. Fractions of 1 ml were collected and concatenated by combining fractions of similar peptide concentration to produce 17 final fractions for MS analysis. Aliquots were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Eclipse™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMS Pro Duo interphase coupled to an UltiMate® 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were loaded onto a trap cartridge (Pepmap Neo, C18, 5um, 0.3x5mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 0.1% TFA at 15 µl min-1 for 3 min. The trap column was then switched in-line with the analytical column (nanoEase M/Z column, HSS C18 T3, 1.8 µm, 100 Å, 250 mm x 0.75 µm, Waters) for separation using the following gradient of solvents A (water, 0.1% formic acid) and B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 0.2 µl min-1 : 0-3 min 3% B (parallel to trapping); 3-10 min linear increase B to 8 %; 10-108 min increase B to 50% (curve 4);  108-113 min linear increase B to 99 %; keeping at 99% B for 3 min and re-equilibration to 3% B. Data were acquired with the following parameters in positive ion mode with the FAIMS device set to three compensation voltages (-35V, -50V, -65V) for 1 s each: MS1/OT: resolution 120K, profile mode, mass range m/z 400-1600, AGC target 4e5, max inject time 50 ms; MS2/IT: data dependent analysis with the following parameters: 1 s cycle time Rapid mode, centroid mode, quadrupole isolation window 0.7 Da, charge states 2-5, threshold 1.9e4, CID CE = 30, AGC target 1e4, max. inject time 50 ms, dynamic exclusion 1 count for 15 s  mass tolerance of 7 ppm; MS3 synchronous precursor selection (SPS): 10 SPS precursors, isolation window 0.7 Da, HCD fragmentation with CE=50, Orbitrap Turbo TMT and TMTpro resolution 30k, AGC target 1e5, max inject time 100 ms, Real Time Search (RTS): protein database B. thetaiotaomicron (uniprot.org, March 2022, 7482 entries), enzyme trypsin, 1 missed cleavage, oxidation (M) as variable, carbamidomethyl (C) and TMTpro as fixed modifications, precursor tolerance 10 ppm, Xcorr = 1.4, dCn = 0.1.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw data were processed and quantified in Proteome Discoverer 3.0 SP1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific); all mentioned tools of the following workflow are nodes of the proprietary Proteome Discoverer (PD) software.  A protein fasta database for Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (uninprot.org, May 2023, 4782 entries) was imported into PD adding a reversed sequence database for decoy searches; a database for common contaminants (maxquant.org, 245 entries) was also included. The database search was performed using the incorporated search engines Comet and CHIMERYS (MSAID, Munich, Germany). The processing workflow for both engines included recalibration of MS1 spectra (RC), reporter ion quantification by most confident centroid (20 ppm). For CHIMERYS the Top N Peak Filter was used with 20 peaks per 100 Da and the inferys_2.1_fragmentation prediction model was used with fragment tolerance of 0.6 Da, enzyme trypsin with 1 missed cleavage, variable modification oxidation (M), fixed modifications carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT16plex on N-terminus and K. For Comet the version 2019.01 rev. 0 parameter file was used with default settings except precursor tolerance set to 6 ppm and trypsin missed cleavages set to 1. Modifications were the same as for CHIMERYS. Evaluation of the search results was performed using the Percolator node based on the q -values. Identifications were calculated for False Discovery Rate (FDR) 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed). 
The consensus workflow in the PD software included the following parameters: assigning the 4 replicates/channels as described above per condition, only unique peptides (protein groups) for quantification, intensity-based abundance, TMT channel correction values applied (WB314804), co-isolation/SPS matches thresholds 50%/70%, normalised CHIMERYS Coefficient Threshold 0.8, normalisation on total peptide abundances, protein abundance-based ratio calculation, missing values imputation by low abundance resampling, hypothesis testing by protein abundance based ANOVA; the adjusted p-value is calculated in PD using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. The results were exported into a Microsoft Excel table including data for normalised and un-normalised abundances, ratios for conditions 2/3/4 versus condition 1, the corresponding p-values and adjusted p-values, number of unique peptides, q-values and PEP-values from Percolator, CHIMERYS and Comet identification scores, FDR confidence combined for both search engines filtered for high confidence (strict FDR 0.01) only. Further filtering included removal of contaminants and single unique peptide matches.


### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
O outer membrane vesicles; omv; bacterial extracellular vesicles; bev; bacteroides

### Affiliations
Quadram Institute Rosalind Franklin Road, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, NR4 7UQ, United Kingdom
Biological Chemistry

### Submitter
Gerhard Saalbach

### Lab Head
Dr Simon Carding
Quadram Institute Rosalind Franklin Road, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, NR4 7UQ, United Kingdom


