### Accession
PXD004951

### Title
Maternal nutrition modulates fetal development through inducing placental efficiency changes in gilts

### Description
Intra-uterine growth restriction (IUGR) and fetal overgrowth increase the risk of postnatal health. Maternal nutrition is the major intrauterine environmental factor that alters fetal weight. However, the mechanisms underlying maternal nutrition affect fetal development is not entirely clear. We developed a pig model and used isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) to investigate alterations in the placental proteome were obtained from gilts in normal-energy-intake (Con) and high-energy-intake (HE) group, respectively.At 90 d of gestation, the heavy fetuses were found at the tubal ends and light fetuses at the cervical ends of the uterus in Con group and the heavy fetuses had higher glucose concentration than the light fetuses. However, a higher uniformity was noted in HE group. Placental promote between these two positions indicated that a total of 78 and 50 differentially expressed proteins were detected in Con and HE group, respectively. In Con group, these proteins related to lipid metabolism (HADHA, AACS, CAD), nutrient transport (GLUT, SLC27A1) and energy metabolism (NDUFV1, NDUFV2, ATP5C1). However, the differentially expressed proteins in HE group were mainly participation in transcriptional and translational regulation and intracellular vesicular transport.

### Sample Protocol
On day 90 of gestation, these placenta tissue samples which surrounding toward the cervix and utero-tubal junction were frozen rapidly in liquid nitrogen after rinsing with cold sterile saline for later experiments.The placental samples were obtained from 4 groups on day 90 of gestation: the point toward the cervix of HE group, the point toward the utero-tubal junction of HE group, the point toward the cervix of Con group, the point toward the utero-tubal junction of Con group. Then,  performed Protein sample preparation, Placenta proteomics assays, LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis based on Triple TOF 5600 and MRM assay.

### Data Protocol
For protein quantitation results, a protein contains at least two unique spectra was considered. The quantitative protein ratios were weighted and normalized by the median ratio in Mascot. Proteins with a 1.2-fold change or greater and ratios with p < 0.05 were considered as significant. For MRM analysis, We use MSstats with the linear mixed-effects model the P values were adjusted to control the FDR at a cutoff of 0.05. All proteins with a P-value below 0.05 and a fold change larger than 1.5 are considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gilts, Fetal weight, Placenta, Itraq, Energy level

### Affiliations
Institute of Animal Nutrition, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu, China

### Submitter
Che Long

### Lab Head
Dr De Wu
Institute of Animal Nutrition, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu, China


