### Accession
PXD006465

### Title
Human Testis LC-MS/MS -  Multi-Protease Strategy Identifies Three PE2 Missing Proteins in Human Testis Tissue

### Description
Missing proteins(MPs) investigation is one of the critical missions of Chromosome-based Human Proteome Project(C-HPP). Through analyzing sequence of MPs from neXtProt database, we found that there are no detectable tryptic peptides for some MPs. Here, we attmept a multi-enzymes strategy to cover this problem. Lys-C, Glu-C and LysargiNase are used to produce more unique and detectable peptides of MPs.

### Sample Protocol
The testis samples(IRB approval number:BGI-IRB 15076) used in this study were obtained from Ping Xu’s lab. Nine testis tissue samples (50 mg, each sample type has three sets) were ground in liquid nitrogen and sonicated in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM IAA, 50 mM NH4HCO3, 1×protease cocktail) on ice. The cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 13,300g in 4℃ for 15 min. Purified samples were reduced with 5mM DTT at 42℃ for 30min and alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide in dark at room temperature for 30min. Proteins were then resolved by SDS-PAGE(10%), and stained with Coomassie Blue G250. Each gel lane was excised into 7 fractions. Samples from differrent patient were digested with there enzymes(GluC, LysC, LysArgiNase)respectively. The peptide mixtures were extracted from the gel bands with 50% acetonitrile (AcN) and 5% formic acid. Then, the peptide mixtures were dried and dissolved with sample loading buffer (1% formic acid, 1% acetonitrile) for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were searched by the Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (v2.1.1.21, Matrix Science Mascot 2.3.1) against the Swiss-Prot reviewed database (version released in 2017.02 for human) and the neXtProt database (version released in 2017.02).Parameters set for database searching as follows: Cysteine carbamidomethyl was specified as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine was specified as variable modifications. The precursor mass tolerance for protein identification on MS was 15 ppm, and the product ion tolerance for MS/MS was 20mmu. Full cleavage by LysArgiNase,GluC and LysC were used, with two missed cleavages permitted.

### Publication Abstract
Although 5 years of the missing proteins (MPs) study have been completed, searching for MPs remains one of the core missions of the Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP). Following the next-50-MPs challenge of the C-HPP, we have focused on the testis-enriched MPs by various strategies since 2015. On the basis of the theoretical analysis of MPs (2017-01, neXtProt) using multiprotease digestion, we found that nonconventional proteases (e.g. LysargiNase, GluC) could improve the peptide diversity and sequence coverage compared with Trypsin. Therefore, a multiprotease strategy was used for searching more MPs in the same human testis tissues separated by 10% SDS-PAGE, followed by high resolution LC-MS/MS system (Q Exactive HF). A total of 7838 proteins were identified. Among them, three PE2 MPs in neXtProt 2017-01 have been identified: beta-defensin 123 ( Q8N688 , chr 20q), cancer/testis antigen family 45 member A10 ( P0DMU9 , chr Xq), and Histone H2A-Bbd type 2/3 ( P0C5Z0 , chr Xq). However, because only one unique peptide of &#x2265;9 AA was identified in beta-defensin 123 and Histone H2A-Bbd type 2/3, respectively, further analysis indicates that each falls under the exceptions clause of the HPP Guidelines v2.1. After a spectrum quality check, isobaric PTM and single amino acid variant (SAAV) filtering, and verification with a synthesized peptide, and based on overlapping peptides from different proteases, these three MPs should be considered as exemplary examples of MPs found by exceptional criteria. Other MPs were considered as candidates but need further validation. All MS data sets have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006465.

### Keywords
Testis, Multi-enzymes, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
NCPSB
Secretary General of CNHUPO Professor, Director Department of Genomics and Proteomics, State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Center for Protein Sciences Beijing Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine， 38 Life Science Park Road, Beijing 102206, P.R. China.

### Submitter
Yihao Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Xu
Secretary General of CNHUPO Professor, Director Department of Genomics and Proteomics, State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Center for Protein Sciences Beijing Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine， 38 Life Science Park Road, Beijing 102206, P.R. China.


