### Accession
PXD025138

### Title
Prognostic accuracy of MALDI-TOF mass spectrometric analysis of plasma in COVID-19

### Description
SARS-CoV-2 infection poses a global health crisis. In parallel with the ongoing world effort to identify therapeutic solutions, there is a critical need for improvement in the prognosis of COVID-19. Here, we report plasma proteome finger print that predict high (hospitalized)and low risk(outpatients) cases of COVID-19 identified by a platform that combines machine learning with matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) analysis. Sample preparation, MS and data analysis parameters were optimized to achieve an overall accuracy of 92%, sensitivity of 93%, and specificity of 92% in dataset without feature selection. Further on, we identified two distinct regions in the MALDI-TOF profile belonging to the same proteoforms. Unbiased discrimination of high and low-risk COVID-19patients employing a technology that is currently in clinical use may have a prompt application in the noninvasive prognosis of COVID-19. Further validation will consolidate its clinical utility.

### Sample Protocol
Venous punctures from the patients were performed. After the samples were collected into tubes containing EDTA anticoagulant, these were centrifuged in a refrigerated unit at 5000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C. Then, samples were carefully removed from the centrifuge not to resuspend cells, and the plasma fraction was collected and aliquoted at -80 °C until further analyses.  Different sample preparation strategies were evaluated for profiling the plasma proteome of COVID-19 patients. 1) Thawed plasma samples were diluted 1:100 in water. Matrix solution (sinapinic acid (SA), dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) and alpha-cyano-hydroxycinnamic acid (HCCA)) were prepared by dissolving in acetonitrile/water 50:50 v/v containing 0.1% or 2.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) at 10 mg/mL and was mixed with one microliter of diluted serum and directly spotted in duplicate onto a stainless steel MALDI target plate (Bruker Daltonics). 2) C18-based plasma protein extraction. C18 polymeric disks were inserted into p200 pipette tips to produce a microcolumn. The disks were activated with 100 µl 100% methanol and conditioned with 0.1% TFA. One microliter of plasma samples was diluted 1:10 in 0.1% TFA and further acidified to achieve 1% TFA. After acidification samples were spun down at 10000 g for 10 min and the supernatant loaded into the microcolumn. The column was further washed with 100ul of 0.1% TFA and proteins eluted with a matrix directly onto the MALDI plate. All steps except the elution were performed in a bench centrifuge at 1000 g for 2 min to improve sample processing and reproducibility of the entire strategy.    Samples were analyzed in a MALDI-TOF Autoflex speed smartbeam mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) using FlexControl software (version 3.3, Bruker Daltonics). Spectra were recorded in the positive linear mode (laser frequency, 500 Hz; extraction delay time, 390 ns; ion source 1 voltage, 19.5 kV; ion source 2 voltage, 18.4 kV; lens voltage, 8.5 kV; mass range, 2400 to 20000 Da). Spectra were acquired using the automatic run mode to avoid subjective interference with the data acquisition. For each sample, 2500 shots, in 500-shot steps, were summed. All spectra were calibrated by using Protein Calibration Standard I (Insulin [M+H]+ = 5734.52, Cytochrome C [M+ 2H]2+ = 6181.05, Myoglobin [M+ 2H]2+= 8476.66, Ubiquitin I [M+H]+ = 8565.76, Cytochrome C [M+H]+ = 12 360.97, Myoglobin [M+H]+ = 16 952.31) (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
The data preprocessing was performed using the ClinProTools, FlexAnalysis 4.0 (Bruker Daltonics) and R-packages. The ClinProTools software was used for MS spectra visualization and R-packages for data processing. The pipeline for processing the raw files and applying the models was adapted from. Fid files were converted to mzML using the MSconvert function from the ProteoWizard suit (version: 3.0.20220). Then, the files were preprocessed using MALDIquant and MALDIquantForeign packages. The spectra range were trimmed (2.5 to 15 kDa). The resulting files were transformed (square root method) and smoothed (Savitzky-Golay method), and the baseline correction was done by the TopHat algorithm. Intensities of all files were normalized (total ion current calibration method), and the peaks were detected with a signal-to-ratio noise of 2 and a halfWindowSize of 10.16 For each group, peaks were binned with a tolerance of 0.003, keeping the ones present in 80% of the samples; next, the peaks of both groups were binned together. Sample normality was accessed by a Shapiro-Wilk test and a two-tailed Wilcoxon rank sum test corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg was performed. A significant difference was considered for p values < 0.05. To evaluate If the observed differences were simply by chance, we permuted the dataset 100 times and calculated the global FDR. The resultant dataset was used for the PCA analysis and the machine learning analysis. Additionally, peaks were filtered using the information gain (Ig) function of the FSelector package to search for the most relevant features, this method was used because it is classifier independent and is faster than wrapper methods, which is desirable when comparing multiple machine learning algorithms. Features with a weight higher than 0 were used for PCA and machine learning analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Plasma, Biomarker, Prognosis, Covid-19, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Sao Paulo
GlycoProteomics Laboratory, Avenida Lineu Prestes 1374, sala 9, Butanta, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil

### Submitter
Giuseppe Palmisano

### Lab Head
Dr Giuseppe Palmisano
GlycoProteomics Laboratory, Avenida Lineu Prestes 1374, sala 9, Butanta, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil


