### Accession
PXD030182

### Title
Multi-omics analysis into the molecular mechanisms underlying the up-regulation of HBG1/2 expression induced by HBB deletion

### Description
A multi-omics study examining chromatin accessibility, transcriptome, proteome and phosphorylation patterns in the HBB homozygous knockout of the HUDEP2 cell line (HBB-KO)

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were digested with trypsin utilizing the FASP method. Peptide mixtures were labeled with 6-plex TMT reagents according to the manufacturer's protocol. Labelled peptides were separated by HPLC. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed as previously described. Briefly, peptide fractionations were mixed, lyophilized and enriched by TiO2 affinity chromatography.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer coupled with a nanoflow EASY-nLC 1000 system. A two-column system was adopted for all analyses. The mobile phases were 0.1% formic acid in H2O (Solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in ACN (Solvent B). The peptide separation was performed as follows: 2-5% B in 2 min, 5-28% B in 98 min, 28-35% B in 5 min, 35-90% B in 2 min, and 90% B for 13 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Data-dependent analysis was employed in MS analysis. The 15 most abundant ions in each MS scan were automatically selected and fragmented in the HCD mode. Raw data were processed by Proteome Discover (Version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) and matched against the Homo sapiens database (UP000005640) scoring through the Mascot server (Version 2.3, Matrix Science, London, UK). Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were analyzed using fold changes (FDR ≤ 0.05, Fold change ≥ 2 or Fold change ≤ 0.5). PCA was performed using factoextra in R packages. Heat maps were analyzed using pheatmap in R packages. Gene Ontology and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis was performed using clusterprofiler in R packages. Analysis of kinase activity was carried out using the KSEA website[35]. Protein subcellular localization was analyzed by WoLF PSORT.

### Publication Abstract
&#x3b2;-thalassemia is a hematologic disease that may be associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Increased expression of <i>HBG1/2</i> can ameliorate the severity of &#x3b2;-thalassemia. Compared to the unaffected population, some &#x3b2;-thalassemia patients display elevated <i>HBG1/2</i> expression levels in their red blood cells. However, the magnitude of up-regulation does not reach the threshold of self-healing, and thus, the molecular mechanism underlying <i>HBG1/2</i> expression in the context of <i>HBB</i>-deficiency requires further elucidation. Here, we performed a multi-omics study examining chromatin accessibility, transcriptome, proteome, and phosphorylation patterns in the <i>HBB</i> homozygous knockout of the HUDEP2 cell line (HBB-KO). We found that up-regulation of <i>HBG1/2</i> in HBB-KO cells was not induced by the H3K4me3-mediated genetic compensation response. Deletion of <i>HBB</i> in human erythroid progenitor cells resulted in increased ROS levels and production of oxidative stress, which led to an increased rate of apoptosis. Furthermore, in response to oxidative stress, slower cell cycle progression and proliferation were observed. In addition, stress erythropoiesis was initiated leading to increased intracellular <i>HBG1/2</i> expression. This molecular model was also validated in the single-cell transcriptome of hematopoietic stem cells from &#x3b2;-hemoglobinopathy patients. These findings further the understanding of <i>HBG1/2</i> gene regulatory networks and provide novel clinical insights into &#x3b2;-thalassemia phenotypic diversity.

### Keywords
Omics-study; hbb; hbg1/2; hif1 pathway; stress erythropoiesis

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200438, China
Fudan University 

### Submitter
Guoqiang  Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Daru Lu
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200438, China


