### Accession
PXD039755

### Title
Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) based quantification workflow for proteome analysis of GASH/Sal and Control hamster

### Description
The GASH/Sal hamster (Genetic audiogenic seizure, Salamanca) is a model of audiogenic seizures with the epileptogenic focus localized in the inferior colliculus (IC). The sound-induced seizures exhibit a short latency (7-9 seconds), which implies innate protein disturbances in the IC as a basis for seizure susceptibility and generation. Here, we aim to study the protein profile in the GASH/Sal IC in comparison to controls. Protein samples from the IC were processed for enzymatic digestion and then analyzed by mass spectrometry in Data-Independent Acquisition mode. After identifying the proteins using the UniProt database, we selected those with differential expression. We identified 5254 proteins, of which 184 were differentially expressed, 126 upregulated and 58 downregulated. Moreover, a small number of proteins were uniquely found in the GASH/Sal or the control. The resuls indicated a protein profile alteration in the epileptogenic nucleus that might underlie the innate occuring audiogenic seizures in the GASH/Sal model.

### Sample Protocol
First steps in sample processing protocol include protein extration (tissue dissociation, centrifugation, and protein solubilization) and protein extration quality control with Bradford quantification method. After that, SDS-PAGE protein separation was conducted using electrophoresis in a 12% polyacrilamide gel, applying 120V constant pressure for 120 minutes. Additionally. proteins were digested with Trypsin enzime for 4 hours at 37ºC. Full chromatography separation and mass spectrometry protocols are mentioned below. -High pH RP separation Equal amount of peptides were extracted from all samples to mix, and the mixture was diluted with mobile phase A (5% ACN pH 9.8) and injected. The Shimadzu LC-20AB HPLC system coupled with a Gemini high pH C18 column (5μm, 4.6 x 250mm) was used. The sample was subjected to the column and then eluted at a flow rate of 1mL/min by gradient: 5% mobile phase B (95% ACN, pH 9.8) for 10 minutes, 5% to 35% mobile phase B for 40 minutes, 35% to 95% mobile phase B for 1 minute, flow Phase B lasted 3 minutes and 5% mobile phase B equilibrated for 10 minutes. The elution peak was monitored at a wavelength of 214nm and component was collected every minute. Components were combined into a total of 10 fractions, which were then freeze-dried. -DDA and DIA analysis by nano-LC-MS/MS The dried peptide samples were reconstituted with mobile phase A (2% ACN, 0.1% FA), centrifuge at 20,000g for 10 minutes,and the supernatant was taken for injection. Separation was carried out by a Thermo UltiMate 3000 UHPLC liquid chromatograph. The sample was first enriched in the trap column and desalted, and then entered a tandem self-packed C18 column (150μm internal diameter, 1.8μm column size, 35cm column length), and separated at a flow rate of500nL/min by the following effective gradient: 0~5 minutes, 5% mobile phase B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA); 5~120 minutes, mobile phase B linearly increased from 5% to 25%; 120~160 minutes, mobile phase B rose from 25% to 35%; 160~170 minutes, mobile phase B rose from 35% to 80%; 170~175 minutes, 80% mobile phase B; 175~180 minutes, 5% mobile phase B. The nanoliter liquid phase separation end was directly connected to the mass spectrometer as the following settings. For DDA analysis, LC separated peptides were ionized by nanoESI and injected to tandem mass spectrometer Q-Exactive HF X (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) with DDA (data-dependent acquisiton) detection mode. The main settings were: ion source voltage 1.9kV; MS scan range 350~1,500m/z; MS resolution 120,000, maximal injection time (MIT) 100ms; MS/MS collision type HCD, collision energy NCE 28; MS/MS resolution 30,000, MIT 100ms, dynamic exclusion duration 30 seconds. The start m/z for MS/MS was fixed to 100. Precursor for MS/MS scan satisfied: charge range 2+ to 6+, top 20 precursors with intensity over 5E4. AGC was: MS 3E6, MS/MS 1E5. For DIA analysis, LC separated peptides were ionized by nanoESI and injected to tandem mass spectrometer Q-Exactive HF X (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) with DIA (data-independent acquisiton) detection mode. The main settings were: ion source voltage 1.9kV; MS scan range 400~1,250m/z; MS resolution 120,000, MIT 50ms; 400~1,250m/z was eqaully divided to 45 continuous windows MS/MS scan. MS/MS collision type HCD, MIT was auto mode. Fragment ions were scanned in Orbitrap, MS/MS resolution 30,000, collision energy was distributed mode: 22.5, 25, 27.5, AGC was 1E6.

### Data Protocol
This process is based on the sample data generated from a high-resolution mass spectrometer. DDA data was identified by Andromeda search engine within MaxQuant, and identification results were used for spectral library construction. For large-scale DIA data, mProphet algorithm was used to complete analytical quality control, thus obtaining a large number of reliable quantitative results. This pipeline also performed GO, COG, Pathway functional annotation analysis and time series analysis. Based on the quantitative results, the differential proteins between comparison groups were found, and finally function enrichment analysis, protein-protein interaction (PPI) and subcellular localization analysis of the differential proteins were performed. - Database selection The selection of database is an important step in MS based protein identification, and the final identified protein sequences are from the selected database. The selection comprises data from protein database from reference sequence (RefSeq) of NCBI and UniProt database. - DIA data analysis The DIA data was analyzed using the iRT peptides for retention time calibration. Then, based on the target-decoy model applicable to SWATH-MS, false positive control was performed with FDR 1%, therefore obtaining significant quantitative results. - MSstats differential analysis MSstats is an R package from the Bioconductor repository. It can be used for statistical evaluation of significant differences in proteins or peptides from different samples, and is widely used in targeted proteomics MRM, label free quantitation, and SWATH quantitative experiments. The core algorithm is linear mixed effect model. The process preprocessed the data according to the predefined comparison group, and then performed the significance test based on the model. Thereafter, differential protein screening was performed based on the fold change >2 and Pvalue<0.05 as the criterion for the significant difference. At the same time, the enrichment analysis is performed on the differential proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The GASH/Sal (Genetic Audiogenic Seizure Hamster, Salamanca) is a model of audiogenic seizures with the epileptogenic focus localized in the inferior colliculus (IC). The sound-induced seizures exhibit a short latency (7-9 s), which implies innate protein disturbances in the IC as a basis for seizure susceptibility and generation. Here, we aim to study the protein profile in the GASH/Sal IC in comparison to controls. Protein samples from the IC were processed for enzymatic digestion and then analyzed by mass spectrometry in Data-Independent Acquisition mode. After identifying the proteins using the UniProt database, we selected those with differential expression and performed ontological analyses, as well as gene-protein interaction studies using bioinformatics tools. We identified 5254 proteins; among them, 184 were differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), with 126 upregulated and 58 downregulated proteins, and 10 of the DEPs directly related to epilepsy. Moreover, 12 and 7 proteins were uniquely found in the GASH/Sal or the control. The results indicated a protein profile alteration in the epileptogenic nucleus that might underlie the inborn occurring audiogenic seizures in the GASH/Sal model. In summary, this study supports the use of bioinformatics methods in proteomics to delve into the relationship between molecular-level protein mechanisms and the pathobiology of rodent models of audiogenic seizures.

### Keywords
Dda, Maxquant, Mprophet, Dia, Msstats

### Affiliations
USAL (INCYL), Salamanca
Department of Cellular Biology and Pathology, Instituto de Neurociencias de Castilla y León (INCyL), Laboratory Nº12

### Submitter
Carlos García

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Dolores Estilita López García
Department of Cellular Biology and Pathology, Instituto de Neurociencias de Castilla y León (INCyL), Laboratory Nº12


