### Accession
PXD013088

### Title
Systems analyses reveal the remarkable resilience of Escherichia coli physiology during accumulation and export of the non-native organic acid citramalate

### Description
Proteomics part of multi-omic analyses of the citramalate fermentation were undertaken to uncover the reasons for remarkable citramalate productivity in an engineered strain of E. coli.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and peptide sample preparation Fermentation samples (500 µl) were harvested by centrifugation (16,000 x g, 2.5 min, 4°C). The supernatant was discarded and the pellet stored (-80°C). Cells were  embedded in a 20% polyacryamide gel matrix and digested and washed following the Gel-Aided Sample Preparation (GASP) protocol with three minor changes (Fischer and Kessler, 2015). Firstly, samples were reduced using 10 mM Tris(2- carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP); secondly, they were desalted after gel extraction on Sola C18 catridges following the manufacturer’s instructions; thirdly, after the samples were dried to near-dryness, they were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for injection into the mass spectrometer liquid chromatography system. Injections were normalised by quantitative colourimetric assay (Thermo) that uses a modified bicinchoninic acid (BCA) chemistry for sensitive and accurate peptide sample quantification to keep samples comparable and to optimize signal intensity. Buffers used for the GASP method were as follows: lysis was performed on ice (30 min) in a buffer containing urea (6 M), thiourea (1.5 M), SDS (4%), TCEP (10 mM), 20 mM Tris (20 mM; pH 8.0). Alkylation was achieved on ice (30 min) using an equal volume of monomeric acrylamide mix solution (40%, 37.5:1 acrylamide:bisacrylamide solution). Polymerisation was initiated at room temperature by addition of N,N,N′,N′- tetramethylethylenediamine (TEMED, 5 l) and ammonium persulfate (APS, 10%) followed by rapid mixing by vortexing. After polymerisation was complete (~30 min),  gel plugs were cut by centrifugation through a membrane-less SpinX centrifugation filter support device (Costar) to achieve identical sizes of gel pieces. Gel pieces were fixed by addition of fixation buffer (1 ml) containing methanol/acetic acid/water (50:40:10) and overhead rotation (10 min). After brief pulse centrifugation, the supernatant was discarded and gel pieces were rehydrated with urea (6 M, 0.5 ml, 10 min). Acetonitrile (1 ml) was used to dehydrate gel pieces. Following removal of the supernatant using a gel loading pipette tip (200 l volume pipette tip with a long narrow end to avoid loss of gel pieces), two more rounds of urea and acetonitrile washes were performed to minimize carry-over of SDS and other contaminants. After these washes, the gel pieces were pH adjusted using triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, 500 µl, 50 mM, pH 8.0) and rotation (10 min). Gel pieces were dehydrated once more using acetonitrile (1 ml), supernatant was removed and acetonitrile (0.5 ml) used for more thorough dehydration of the gel pieces. Dried out gel pieces were soaked with trypsin solution (1/50 enzyme: substrate ratio based on expected protein content from known cell mass in Tris buffer (20 mM, pH 8.0). Digestion was performed overnight with shaking (1000 rpm, 37°C). Elutions were performed using one gel volume: (1) acetonitrile, (2) formic acid (5%) and (3) acetonitrile; elutions (2) and (3) were combined.

### Data Protocol
Peptides (1 µg) from each label-free sample were injected and separated via 1D UHPLC using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA) system and masses analysed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA). Separation of peptides was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 300 nl min-1 on a Thermo Scientific reverse-phase nano Easy-spray column (Thermo Scientific PepMap C18, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 µm i.d. x 50 cm length). Peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 autosampler with formic acid (0.1%) for 3 min at a flow rate of 10 µl min-1. After this period, the column valve was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Solvent A was H2O containing formic acid (0.1%) and solvent B was acetonitrile (80%), H2O (20%) and formic acid (0.1%). The linear  10 gradient employed was 2-45% B in 90 min. The total run time was 120 min including a high organic wash step and re-equilibration step. Peptides were transferred to the gaseous phase with positive ion electrospray ionization at 2.1 kV. In DDA the top 20 precursors were acquired between 380 and 1500 m/z with a 1.5 Th (Thomson) selection window, dynamic exclusion of 45 s, normalised collision energy (NCE) of 25 and resolutions of 70,000 for MS and 17,500 for MS2; AGC target: 500,000. The .raw files were analysed with MaxQuant version 1.5.5.1 using default settings. The minimal peptide length was set to 6. Trypsin/P was used as digestion enzyme. Search criteria included propionamidation of cysteine (PAM-Cys, +71.0371 Da) as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and acetyl (protein N terminus) as variable modifications. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance for the precursor was 20 and 4.5 ppm for the first and the main searches respectively, and for the fragment ions was 20 ppm. The files were searched against the E. coli K-12 reference UniProt fasta database (July 2017, 4,306 sequences). The identifications were filtered to obtain a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% at the peptide and the protein levels. No filter was applied to the number of peptides per protein. Log2 transformed quantification results were tested for differential abundance using moderated t statistics using the LIMMA R package. 309 310 Lipidomics 311 Fermentation samples (500 µl) were harvested by centrifugation (16

### Publication Abstract
Productivity of bacterial cell factories is frequently compromised by stresses imposed by recombinant protein synthesis and carbon-to-product conversion, but little is known about these bioprocesses at a systems level. Production of the unnatural metabolite citramalate in <i>Escherichia coli</i> requires the expression of a single gene coding for citramalate synthase. Multiomic analyses of a fermentation producing 25&#x2009; g liter<sup>-1</sup> citramalate were undertaken to uncover the reasons for its productivity. Metabolite, transcript, protein, and lipid profiles of high-cell-density, fed-batch fermentations of <i>E. coli</i> expressing either citramalate synthase or an inactivated enzyme were similar. Both fermentations showed downregulation of flagellar genes and upregulation of chaperones IbpA and IbpB, indicating that these responses were due to recombinant protein synthesis and not citramalate production. Citramalate production did not perturb metabolite pools, except for an increased intracellular pyruvate pool. Gene expression changes in response to citramalate were limited; none of the general stress response regulons were activated. Modeling of transcription factor activities suggested that citramalate invoked a GadW-mediated acid response, and changes in GadY and RprA regulatory small RNA (sRNA) expression supported this. Although changes in membrane lipid composition were observed, none were unique to citramalate production. This systems analysis of the citramalate fermentation shows that <i>E. coli</i> has capacity to readily adjust to the redirection of resources toward recombinant protein and citramalate production, suggesting that it is an excellent chassis choice for manufacturing organic acids.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Citramalate is an attractive biotechnology target because it is a precursor of methylmethacrylate, which is used to manufacture Perspex and other high-value products. Engineered <i>E. coli</i> strains are able to produce high titers of citramalate, despite having to express a foreign enzyme and tolerate the presence of a nonnative biochemical. A systems analysis of the citramalate fermentation was undertaken to uncover the reasons underpinning its productivity. This showed that <i>E. coli</i> readily adjusts to the redirection of metabolic resources toward recombinant protein and citramalate production and suggests that <i>E. coli</i> is an excellent chassis for manufacturing similar small, polar, foreign molecules.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Bioproduction of chemicals, Transcriptomics, Escherichia coli, Proteomics, Fed-batch fermentation, Lipidomics, Citramalic acid, Citramalate

### Affiliations
CPC
1 Cambridge Systems Biology Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 2 Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 3 Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK

### Submitter
David-Paul Minde

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Kathryn S Lilley
1 Cambridge Systems Biology Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 2 Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 3 Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK


