### Accession
PXD025062

### Title
Detection of Cas9 post-translational modifications by mass spectrometry

### Description
We aimed to detect potential ubiquitylation of Cas9 expressed in human cells by mass spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
All reagents were prepared in 50 mM HEPES buffer (pH 8.5). Cysteines were reduced using dithiothreitol (56Â°C, 30 minutes, 10 mM). Samples were cooled to 24Â°C and alkylated with 2-chloroacetamide (24Â°C, in the dark, 30 minutes, 20 mM). Subsequently, the samples were prepared for LC-MS/MS using the SP3 protocol [66] and digested with trypsin, and the peptides were cleaned up using OASIS HLB ÂµElution Plates (Waters).  An UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system (Dionex) was fitted with a trapping cartridge (Âµ-Precolumn C18 PepMap 100, 5Âµm, 300 Âµm i.d. x 5 mm, 100 Ã…) and an analytical column (nanoEaseâ„¢ M/Z HSS T3 column 75 Âµm x 250 mm C18, 1.8 Âµm, 100 Ã…, Waters). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to a Fusion Lumos (Thermo) mass spectrometer using the nanoFlex source in positive ion mode.  The peptides were introduced into the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 Âµm OD x 20 Âµm ID; 10 Âµm tip (New Objective) and applied a spray voltage of 2.4 kV, instrument was operated in positive mode. The capillary temperature was set at 275Â°C. Fullmass scans were acquired for a mass range 375-1200 m/z in profile mode in the orbitrap with a resolution of 120000. The filling time was set to a maximum of 50 ms with a limitation of 4e5 ions. The instrument was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode and MSMS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30000, with a fill time of up to 86 ms and a limitation of 2e5 ions (AGC target). A normalized collision energy of 34 was applied. MS2 data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were processed by IsobarQuant (PMID: 26379230), as search engine Mascot (v2.2.07) was used. Data was search against Uniprot Homo sapiens proteome database (UP000005640) containing common contaminants, reversed sequences and the sequences of the proteins of interest. The data were searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C; fixed modification), Acetyl (N-term), Oxidation (M) and Gly-Gly (K).  The mass error tolerance for the full scan MS spectra was set to 10 ppm and for the MS/MS spectra to0.02 Da. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. For protein identification a minimum of 2 unique peptides with a peptide length of at least seven amino acids and a false discovery rate below 0.01 were required on the peptide and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Ubiquitin, Cas9

### Affiliations
EMBL
Boğaziçi University

### Submitter
Frank Stein

### Lab Head
Dr Umut Şahin
Boğaziçi University


