### Accession
PXD042918

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of MCM3 in ThinPrep samples of patients with cervical preinvasive cancer

### Description
Triage methods for cervical cancer detection show moderate accuracy and present considerable false-negative and false-positive result rates. A complementary diagnostic parameter could help improve the accuracy of identifying patients who need treatment. A pilot study was performed using a targeted proteomics approach with opportunistic ThinPrep samples obtained from women collected at the hospital’s outpatient clinic to determine the concentration levels of minichromosome maintenance-3 (MCM3) and envoplakin (EVPL) proteins. Forty samples with ’negative for intraepithelial lesion or malignancy’ (NILM), 21 samples with ’atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance’ (ASC-US), and 33 samples with ’low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion and worse’ (≥LSIL) were analyzed, using cytology and the patients’ histology reports. Highly accurate concordance was obtained for gold standard-confirmed samples, demonstrating that the MCM3/EVPL ratio can discriminate between non-dysplastic and dysplastic samples. On that account, we propose that MCM3 and EVPL are promising candidate protein biomarkers for population-based cervical cancer screening.

### Sample Protocol
In this study conducted in the Netherlands, ThinPrep samples from gynecological patients were collected and analyzed to assess the clinical discriminative power of MCM3 and EVPL proteins. The samples were obtained from patients during routine check-ups or when Pap-smear testing was indicated due to abnormal cytology or histology reports, surgical treatment, or specific symptoms. The samples were anonymized to maintain confidentiality. A total of 189 samples were collected and measured over a period of five months. Some patients were released with negative diagnosis reports, while others were diagnosed with low or high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions or worse, and underwent further procedures for diagnosis and staging. HPV-negative samples were excluded from the analysis but were subjected to shotgun analysis. The samples were processed, and the protein concentration was determined using a BCA protein assay. Tryptic digestion was performed, and the resulting peptides were subjected to mass spectrometry analysis parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) modes. The PRM mode was used to target specific peptides for quantitative analysis. The PRM data were analyzed using Skyline software, and the expression levels of the proteins were evaluated between different precancerous stages.

### Data Protocol
We used the non-parametric mean difference Kruskal-Wallis test and Dunn's multiple comparison tests to assess differences between independent variables, calculating p-values. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was conducted to determine the MCM3/EVPL ratio cut-off value. Correlation analysis was performed to explore the relationships between different parameters. The statistical tests and figures were generated using SPSS and GraphPad Prism software. Additionally, unsupervised hierarchical cluster heatmap analysis was carried out to evaluate the relationship of dependent variables using PRM data.

### Publication Abstract
Triage methods for cervical cancer detection show moderate accuracy and present considerable false-negative and false-positive result rates. A complementary diagnostic parameter could help improve the accuracy of identifying patients who need treatment. A pilot study was performed using a targeted proteomics approach with opportunistic ThinPrep samples obtained from women collected at the hospital's outpatient clinic to determine the concentration levels of minichromosome maintenance-3 (MCM3) and envoplakin (EVPL) proteins. Forty samples with 'negative for intraepithelial lesion or malignancy' (NILM), 21 samples with 'atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance' (ASC-US), and 33 samples with 'low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion and worse' (&#x2265;LSIL) were analyzed, using cytology and the patients' histology reports. Highly accurate concordance was obtained for gold-standard-confirmed samples, demonstrating that the MCM3/EVPL ratio can discriminate between non-dysplastic and dysplastic samples. On that account, we propose that MCM3 and EVPL are promising candidate protein biomarkers for population-based cervical cancer screening.

### Keywords
Human, Mcm3, Prm, Cervical cancer

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC
Head of Laboratory Neuro-Oncology, Clinical and Cancer Proteomics, Neurology

### Submitter
Coskun Guzel

### Lab Head
Dr Theo Luider
Head of Laboratory Neuro-Oncology, Clinical and Cancer Proteomics, Neurology


