### Accession
PXD030765

### Title
RACK1 associates with RNA-binding proteins Vigilin and SERBP1 to influence dengue virus replication

### Description
Dengue virus (DENV), a re-emerging virus transmitted by Aedes mosquitoes, causes severe pathogenesis in humans. No effective treatment is available against this virus. We recently identified the scaffold protein RACK1 as a component of the DENV replication complex, a macromolecular complex essential for viral genome amplification. Here, we show that RACK1 is important for DENV infection. RACK1 mediates DENV replication through binding to the 40S ribosomal subunit. Mass spectrometry analysis of RACK1 partners coupled to a loss-of-function screen identified the RNA binding proteins Vigilin and SERBP1 as DENV host dependency factors. Vigilin and SERBP1 interact with DENV viral RNA (vRNA), forming a ternary complex with RACK1 to mediate viral replication. Overall, our results indicate that RACK1 recruits Vigilin and SERBP1, linking the DENV vRNA to the translation machinery for optimal translation and replication.

### Sample Protocol
293T cells (5 x 108), expressing either the WT or the HA-tagged RACK1 proteins, were lysed in Pierce IP lysis buffer (Thermo Scientific) in the presence of Halt protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific) for 30 min at 4°C and then cleared by centrifugation for 30 min at 6,000  g. Supernatants were incubated overnight at 4°C with anti-HA magnetic beads. Beads were washed three times with B015 buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.05% Triton, 0.1% Tween-20) and immune complexes were eluted twice with HA peptide (400 mg/mL) 30 min at room temperature (RT). Eluates were concentrated on a Pierce Concentrator, PES 10K, and stored at - 20°C until used. A total of three co-affinity purifications and MS analysis experiments were performed with the HA-tagged RACK1 protein or the untagged RACK1 protein as a control in 293T cells. Samples were analyzed at Taplin Biological Mass Spectrometry Facility (Harvard Medical School). Briefly, concentrated eluates issued from immunopurification of endogenous and RACK1-HA-tagged protein are separated on 10% Tris-glycine SDS-PAGE gels (Invitrogen), and stained with Imperial Protein Stain (Thermo Fisher). Individual regions of the gel were cut into 1 mm3 pieces and subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure. Peptides were desalted and subjected to a nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC. Eluted peptides were then subjected to electrospray ionization and then MS/MS analysis into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide. Peptide sequences were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the Sequest software program (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences, and the data were filtered to < 2% peptide false discovery rate.

### Data Protocol
The AP-MS dataset was analyzed with SAINTexpress and MIST software. Of the 1671 proteins selected in our pipeline, 193/1671 showed a probability score > 0.80 with SAINTexpress and 135/193 showed an AveragePeptide Count > 10. This list of 135 host proteins was analyzed with DAVID 6.8 to identify statistical enrichments for specific GO terms from the ‘‘cellular component’’ (CC) annotation. The interaction network was built using Cytoscape 3.4.0, and proteins were clustered into functional modules using enriched GO terms as a guideline and manual curation of literature.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cellular factors, Translation optimization, Rna stability, Serbp1, Proteomics, Denv, Rack1, Sirna screen, Vigilin, Rna binding protein

### Affiliations
INSERM

### Submitter
Alexis Brugier

### Lab Head
Dr Ali Amara
INSERM


