### Accession
PXD007155

### Title
INA complex liaises the F1Fo-ATP synthase membrane motor modules - Ina22-Flag pulldown experiments

### Description
The F1Fo-ATP synthase translates a proton flux across the inner mitochondrial membrane into a mechanical rotation, driving anhydride bond formation in the catalytic portion. The complex's membrane-embedded motor section forms a proteinaceous channel at the interface between Atp9 ring and Atp6. To prevent unrestricted proton flow dissipating the H+-gradient, channel formation is a critical and tightly controlled step during ATP synthase assembly. Here we show that the INA complex (INAC) acts at this decisive step promoting Atp9 ring association with Atp6. INAC binds initially to newly synthesized mitochondrial-encoded Atp6 and Atp8 in complex with maturation factors. INAC association is retained until the F1-portion is built on Atp6/8 and loss of INAC causes accumulation of the free F1. An independent complex is formed between INAC and the Atp9 ring. We conclude that INAC maintains assembly intermediates of the F1Fo-ATP synthase in a primed state for the terminal assembly step – channel and motor module formation.

### Sample Protocol
Ina22FLAG-containing protein complexes purified from Ina22FLAG and wild type mitochondria, proteins were visualized using colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue and individual gel lanes were cut into 14 slices. Gel slices were washed and destained by alternating incubation steps in solution A (10 mM NH4HCO3) and B (10 mM NH4HCO3/50% acetonitrile [ACN]) for 10 min at RT. Thiol moieties were reduced by incubation in solution A containing 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at RT in the dark. Protein digestion was performed in solution A containing 60 ng of trypsin per slice at 37°C overnight. Peptides were eluted with 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)/50% (v/v) ACN and subsequently dried in vacuo. For MS analysis, peptides were resuspended 15 µl 0.1% TFA.Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) directly coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were washed and preconcentrated on a PepMapTM C18 precolumn (5 mm x 300 µm inner diameter; Thermo Scientific). For peptide separation, an AcclaimPepMapTM RSLC column (50 cm x 75 µm inner diameter; pore size, 100 Å; particle size, 2 µm) was used at a flow rate of 250 nl/min and at 43°C with a binary mobile phase consisting of 0.1% formic acid/4% DMSO (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid/4% DMSO/48% methanol/30% ACN (solvent B). Peptides were eluted using an 80 min gradient (solvent B: 1% from 0-20 min, 1-65% from 20-54 min, 65-95% from 54-59 min, 95% for 5 min followed by a 16 min equilibration phase). The Orbitrap Elite was equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source with DirectJunction and a fused silica emitter (Thermo Scientific). The spray voltage was 1.5 kV and the capillary temperature 200°C. The mass spectrometer was externally calibrated using standard compounds. The following parameters were used for MS analysis: MS survey scans (m/z 370 - 1,700) were acquired in the orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 400). Automatic gain control was set to 1 x 106 ions and the maximum injection time to 200 ms. Top n spacing was set to 15 for low energy collision-induced dissociation of multiply charged precursor peptides in the linear ion trap applying a normalized collision energy of 35%, an activation q of 0.25, an activation time of 10 ms, an AGC of 5 x 103, and a max. ion time of 150 ms. The dynamic exclusion time for previously fragmented precursors was set to 45 s.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and label-free quantification, raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.12) and Andromeda. The Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD; www.yeastgenome.org) was used for the database search. Database searches were performed with mass tolerances of 4.5 ppm for precursors and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. 'trypsin/P' was set as enzyme specificity and 'Max. missed cleavages' was set to 3. Acetylation of protein N-termini and oxidation of methionine were considered as variable and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification. The options 'requantify', 'match between runs' (match from and to), 'iBAQ' and 'LFQ' were enabled. 'LFQ min. ratio count' was set to 1, 'LFQ min. number of neighbors' and 'LFQ average number of neighbors' were set to 3 and 6, respectively. Proteins were identified based on at least one unique peptide with a length of seven amino acids and a maximum mass of 4,600 Da. For protein quantification, only unique peptides were considered and 'Min. ratio count' was set to 1. False discovery rates on protein level and for peptide spectrum matching were set to 0.01. For analysis of output tables, Perseus (version 1.5.6.0) was used.

### Publication Abstract
The F<sub>1</sub>F<sub>0</sub>-ATP synthase translates a proton flux across the inner mitochondrial membrane into a mechanical rotation, driving anhydride bond formation in the catalytic portion. The complex's membrane-embedded motor forms a proteinaceous channel at the interface between Atp9 ring and Atp6. To prevent unrestricted proton flow dissipating the H<sup>+</sup>-gradient, channel formation is a critical and tightly controlled step during ATP synthase assembly. Here we show that the INA complex (INAC) acts at this decisive step promoting Atp9-ring association with Atp6. INAC binds to newly synthesized mitochondrial-encoded Atp6 and Atp8 in complex with maturation factors. INAC association is retained until the F<sub>1</sub>-portion is built on Atp6/8 and loss of INAC causes accumulation of the free F<sub>1</sub>. An independent complex is formed between INAC and the Atp9 ring. We conclude that INAC maintains assembly intermediates of the F<sub>1</sub> F<sub>0</sub>-ATP synthase in a primed state for the terminal assembly step-motor module formation.

### Keywords
Interaction proteomics, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


