### Accession
PXD012706

### Title
Changes in S-nitroslyaion in a mouse model of preeclampsia

### Description
SNO modifications were quantified in placentas (n=5, each group) from control, -/-GSNOR, +ascorbate and -/-GSNOR+ascorbate.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen placentas were individual minced in 0.9ml of cold homogenization buffer (PEN: PBS pH 8.0, 1mM ETDA, 0.1mM Neocupine; supplemented with 20 mM n-ethylmaleimide (NEM)). The tissue was then disrupted in 1ml mixer mill for 5 min and then subjected to probe sonication. Samples were adjusted to 2.5% SDS and clarified by centrifugation for 5 mins at 2000xg. The resulting supernant was incubated for 10 mins at 50oC to completing the blocking step. The unreacted NEM was removed using a Zeba sin column (ThermoFisher Scientific) equilibrated with PEN buffer supplemented with 0.5% SDS. Each sample was divided and labeled with either 1 mM biotin-HPDP (ThermoFisher Scientific) or 0.3 mM iodoTMT6 (ThermoFisher Scientific) in the presence of 5 mM sodium ascorbate. As a labeling control, five pooled samples consisting of one replicate from each of the biological samples were prepared and reacted with each label in the absence of ascorbate. Samples were incubated for 1 hr (HPDP) or 2 hr (iodoTMT6) at 37oC. Excess label was removed from the HPDP treated samples by adding 2 volumes of cold acetone and incubating for 20 min at -20oC. Precipitated protein was pelleted by centrifugation and washed with 2 additional volumes of cold acetone. The pellets were resuspend 200 ul of PBS containing 1% (w/v) SDS aided by sonication. The excess iodoTMT6 label was removed by adding 5 volumes of cold acetone and precipitating as above. Samples were resuspened in 600 ul of PBS containing 1% (w/v) SDS aided by sonication. IodoTMT6 samples were then further reduced and alkylated using DTT and iodacetamide. Residual reagents were removed by Zeba spin column equilibrated with PBS. The protein concentration of each labeled sample was determined by BCA assay.  For HPDP labeled samples, 500 ug was digested overnight using 0.02 ug trypsin/ug of protein (Promega). iodoTMT6 labeled samples were combined according to the label’s isotope. Five-plexes were prepared containing 350 ug of each of the different biological samples and the pooled control. An additional set of six-plexes was prepared containing 250 ug of each biological replicates and a pooled control. The mixtures were digested overnight with 0.02 ug trypsin/ug of protein. Digestions were halted with 0.25 mM PMSF. The resulting peptides were captured using either streptavidin (HPDP) or TMT affinity resin (iodoTMT6). Peptides were enriched, washed and eluted according to the manufacture’s protocol or as described here (PMID: 21036925). In the case of HPDP, eluted peptides were further alkylated with iodoacetamide.  Sample key HPDP labeling Control (1H-5H); -/-GSNOR (6H-10H); Control+Ascorbate (11H-15H); -/-GSOR+Ascorbate (16H-20H); A-E are pooled controls  TMT labeling  reporter ion Plex 126 127 128 129 130 131 A 1 6 11 16  pool B  2 7 12 17 pool C 18  3 8 13 pool D 14 19  4 9 pool E 10 15 20  5 pool F 1 2 3 4 5 pool G 6 7 8 9 10 pool H 11 12 13 14 15 pool I 16 17 18 19 20 pool

### Data Protocol
Raw data was searched using a uniprot reviewed mouse database (09/18) with the X!Tandem (PMID: 14976030) algorithm version 2013.06.15.1 and Comet (PMID:23148064) algorithm version 2014.02 rev.2 search engines with the following parameters: Full Trypsin cleavage allowing for up to 2 missed cleavages, variable modifications +16 Da on Methionine (Oxidation), +57 Da, +125 Da and, in the case of IodoTMT6 labeled samples, +329 on Cysteine (Carbamidomethylation, NEM, TMT). Mass tolerance of MS1 error of 10 ppm, MS2 error of 1 Da were used.   Differences SNO modification for HPDP labeled samples were determined by label-free quantitation using MS1 extracted ion chromatograms in Skyline (version 4.1) using a dot product cut off of 0.8 (PMID: 22454539). Signal for each modified cysteine was summed within a replicate and normalized against the average of the pooled controls for that site. For iodoTMT6 labeled samples, only peptides with an iprofit score greater than 0.95 were considered. Reporter ion intensities were determined using the Libra module of the trans-proteomic pipeline (PMID: 20101611).  Replicates were normalized against the pooled control present in the 5 or 6 plex.  For all analysis, replicates need to be at least 1.5 fold greater than control and present in at least 40% of the replicates per group.

### Publication Abstract
Background Preeclampsia, a leading cause of maternal and fetal mortality and morbidity, is characterized by an increase in S-nitrosylated proteins and reactive oxygen species, suggesting a pathophysiologic role for dysregulation in nitrosylation and nitrosative stress. Methods and Results Here, we show that mice lacking S-nitrosoglutathione reductase (<i>GSNOR<sup>-&#x2044;-</sup></i>), a denitrosylase regulating protein S-nitrosylation, exhibit a preeclampsia phenotype, including hypertension, proteinuria, renal pathology, cardiac concentric hypertrophy, decreased placental vascularization, and fetal growth retardation. Reactive oxygen species, NO, and peroxynitrite levels are elevated. Importantly, mass spectrometry reveals elevated placental S-nitrosylated amino acid residues in <i>GSNOR<sup>-&#x2044;-</sup></i> mice. Ascorbate reverses the phenotype except for fetal weight, reduces the difference in the S-nitrosoproteome, and identifies a unique set of S-nitrosylated proteins in <i>GSNOR<sup>-&#x2044;-</sup></i> mice. Importantly, human preeclamptic placentas exhibit decreased GSNOR activity and increased nitrosative stress. Conclusions Therefore, deficiency of GSNOR creates dysregulation of placental S-nitrosylation and preeclampsia in mice, which can be rescued by ascorbate. Coupled with similar findings in human placentas, these findings offer valuable insights and therapeutic implications for preeclampsia.

### Keywords
Placenta, Preeclampsia, S-nitrosylation, Biotin switch

### Affiliations
Cedars Sinai Medical Center
Cedars-Sinai Heart Institute

### Submitter
Niveda Sundararaman

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Van Eyk
Cedars-Sinai Heart Institute


