### Accession
PXD013140

### Title
The Glycosylation Design Space for Recombinant Lysosomal Replacement Enzymes Produced in CHO Cells

### Description
Lysosomal storage diseases are rare life-threatening disorders caused by deficiency of a lysosomal enzyme, and delivery of a recombinant replacement enzyme is the primary therapy for several of these diseases. The structures of N-glycans on recombinant replacement enzymes are important for their therapeutic efficacy, biodistribution and circulation time. Here we use alpha-galactosidase A (GLA) and beta-glucoscerebrosidase (GBA) as representative replacement enzymes, and present a panel of genetically engineered CHO cells that enable production of lysosomal replacement enzymes with different N-glycan features. We also tested several GLA variants with distinct glycoforms in a Fabry mouse model and present evidence that GLA glycoforms capped with alpha 2-3 linked sialic acids may represent a new strategy to overcome the most critical problems of rapid clearance in liver and poor biodistribution found with current ERTs.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 10 μg of purified GLA or GBA in 50 mM Ammoniumbicarbonate buffer (pH 7.4) was reduced with dithiothreitol (10mM) for 30 min and alkylated with iodoacetamide (20 mM) for 30 min in dark at room temperature. Chymotrypsin digestion was performed at a 1:25 enzyme: substrate ratio. The proteolytic digest was desalted by custom made modified StageTip columns containing 2 layers of C18 and 1 layer of C8 membrane (3M Empore disks, Sigma-Aldrich). Samples were eluted with 50% methanol in 0.1% formic acid, and then dried in SpeedVac and re-solubilized in 0.1% formic acid. LC MS/MS analysis was performed with an EASY-nLC 1000 LC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) interfaced via nanoSpray Flex ion source to an Orbitrap Fusion MS (ThermoFisher Scientific). Briefly, the nLC was operated in a single analytical column set up using PicoFrit Emitters (New Objectives, 75 μm inner diameter) custom packed with Reprosil-Pure-AQ C18 phase (Dr. Maisch, 1.9-μm particle size, 19-21 cm column length). Each sample was injected onto the column and eluted in a gradient from 2 to 25% B in 45 min at 200 nL/min (Solvent A, 100% H2O; Solvent B, 100% acetonitrile; both containing 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid). A precursor MS1 scan (m/z 350–2,000) of intact peptides was acquired in the Orbitrap Fusion at the nominal resolution setting of 120,000, followed by Orbitrap HCD-MS2 and at the nominal resolution setting of 60,000 of the five most abundant multiply charged precursors in the MS1 spectrum; a minimum MS1 signal threshold of 50,000 was used for triggering data-dependent fragmentation events. Targeted MS/MS analysis was performed by setting up a targeted MSn (tMSn) Scan Properties pane.

### Data Protocol
Glycopeptide compositional analysis was performed from m/z features using in-house written SysBioWare software. For m/z feature recognition from full MS scans LFQ Profiler Node of the Proteome discoverer 2.1 (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used. A list of precursor ions (m/z, charge and retention time) was imported as ASCII data into SysBioWare and compositional assignment within 5 ppm mass tolerance was performed. The main building blocks used for the compositional analysis were: NeuAc, Hex, HexNAc, dHex and phosphate. The most prominent peptides corresponding to each potential glycosites were added as an additional building block for cmpositional assignment. The most prominent peptide sequence related to each N-glycosite was determined experimentally by comparing the yield of deamidated peptides before and after PNGase F treatment. A list of potential glycopeptides and glycoforms for each glycosite was generated and the top 10 of the most abundant candidates for each glycosite were selected for targeted MS/MS analysis to confirm the proposed structure. Each targeted MS/MS spectrum was subjected to manual interpretation. Same N-glycan composition may represent isobaric structures, so the listed glycan structure were assisted by and in agreement with literature data, predicted enzyme functions of the targeted genes together with useful information in MS/MS fragments.

### Publication Abstract
Lysosomal replacement enzymes are essential therapeutic options for rare congenital lysosomal enzyme deficiencies, but enzymes in clinical use are only partially effective due to short circulatory half-life and inefficient biodistribution. Replacement enzymes are primarily taken up by cell surface glycan receptors, and glycan structures influence uptake, biodistribution, and circulation time. It has not been possible to design and systematically study effects of different glycan features. Here we present a comprehensive gene engineering screen in Chinese hamster ovary cells that enables production of lysosomal enzymes with N-glycans custom designed to affect key glycan features guiding cellular uptake and circulation. We demonstrate distinct circulation time and organ distribution of selected glycoforms of &#x3b1;-galactosidase A in a Fabry disease mouse model, and find that an &#x3b1;2-3 sialylated glycoform designed to eliminate uptake by the mannose 6-phosphate and mannose receptors exhibits improved circulation time and targeting to hard-to-reach organs such as heart. The developed design matrix and engineered CHO cell lines enables systematic studies towards improving enzyme replacement therapeutics.

### Keywords
Enzyme replacement therapy, Glycoengineering, N-glycoproteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics (CCG), Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Sergey Vakhrushev

### Lab Head
Dr Henrik Clausen
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics (CCG), Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen


