### Accession
PXD020243

### Title
Proteomics of poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation uncovers a role for HIRA in the chromatin adaptation at ALT telomeres

### Description
The synthesis of poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) reconfigures the local environment and recruits repair complexes to damaged chromatin. The degradation of PAR by PARG is essential for progression and completion of DNA repair.  Here, we show that inhibition of PARG disrupts homology-directed repair (HDR) mechanisms that underpin alternative telomere lengthening (ALT). By proteomics, we uncovered a novel role for PARylation in regulating the chromatin assembly factor, HIRA in ALT cancer cells. We show that HIRA is enriched at telomeres during G2 phase and is indispensable for histone H3.3 deposition and telomere DNA synthesis. Depletion of HIRA elicits systemic death of ALT cancer cells was mitigated by re-expression of ATRX protein that is frequently inactivated in ALT tumors. We propose that PARylation enables HIRA to fulfill its essential role in the adaptive response due to ATRX deficiency that pervades ALT cancers.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry was conducted at MS Bioworks (Ann Arbor, MI.). Immuno-precipitated samples stored in 4X LDS buffer were separated ~1.5cm on a 10% Bis-Tris Novex mini-gel (Invitrogen) using the MES buffer system. The gel was stained with coomassie and each lane was excised into ten equally sized segments. Gel pieces were processed using a robot (ProGest, DigiLab) as follow: First washes were with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile. Then, reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol at 60°C followed by alkylation with 50mM iodoacetamide at RT. Samples were digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 4hrs, and then quenched with formic acid. Samples supernatants were analyzed directly without further processing using a nano LC/MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Q Exactive. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75m analytical column at 350nL/min; both columns were packed with Jupiter Proteo resin (Phenomenex). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with MS and MS/MS performed in the Orbitrap at 70,000 FWHM resolution and 17,500 FWHM resolution, respectively. The fifteen most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry files were converted into open mzML format using msconvert utility of Proteowizard software suite. MS/MS spectra were searched using the MSFragger database search tool (version 20180316) against a UniProt/SwissProt Homo sapiens protein sequence database downloaded in May 21, 2019, appended with TRF1_FokI and Y1521_ARCFU fusion proteins and its respective mutated versions. MS/MS spectra were searched using a precursor-ion mass tolerance of 20 p.p.m., fragment mass tolerance of 20 p.p.m., and allowing C12/C13 isotope errors (-1/0/1/2/3). Cysteine carbamylation (+57.0215) was specified as fixed modifications, and Methionine oxidation (+15.9949), N-terminal protein acetylation (+42.0106) were specified as variable modifications. The search was restricted to fully tryptic peptides, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. The search results were further processed using the Philosopher toolkit (https://philosopher.nesvilab.org/) as follows. MSFragger output files (in pepXML format) were processed using PeptideProphet (with the high–mass accuracy binning and semi-parametric mixture modeling options) to compute the posterior probability of correct identification for each peptide to spectrum match (PSM). ProteinProphet was executed on all resulting pepXML files from PeptideProphet resulting in a list of proteins groups (in protXML format). This combined protXML file, as well as the pepXML for each individual experiment, were then processed using Philosopher’s filter and abacus functions to generate a combined spectral count matrix. The combined protXML file was filtered using the Philosopher filter function to 1% protein-level False Discovery Rate (FDR) using the target-decoy strategy. The PSM lists in each experiment were filtered using a sequential FDR strategy, keeping only PSMs passing 1% PSM-level FDR and mapped to proteins that also passed the global 1% protein-level FDR filter. Each peptide was assigned either as a unique peptide to a particular protein or (if shared) assigned as a razor peptide to a single protein that had the most peptide evidence. The combined filtered protein list, as well as the filtered PSM lists for each individual experiment, were then processed using Philosopher's abacus function to generate a combined spectral count matrix.  Each row in the resulting table represented a protein (with a single accession number selected among indistinguishable protein entries) and its abundance (unique plus razor PSM counts) across all experiments. The resulting quantification matrix was loaded into reprint-apms.org online resource to calculate abundance Fold Change (FC) scores comparing WT vs MUT experiment. A final cut-off of FC≥2 was arbitrarily set. This produced a final listing of 117 proteins that was used for in silico functional annotation in DAVID (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/) and downstream functional validation by experimentation.

### Publication Abstract
The synthesis of poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) reconfigures the local chromatin environment and recruits DNA-repair complexes to damaged chromatin. PAR degradation by poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase (PARG) is essential for progression and completion of DNA repair. Here, we show that inhibition of PARG disrupts homology-directed repair (HDR) mechanisms that underpin alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT). Proteomic analyses uncover a new role for poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation (PARylation) in regulating the chromatin-assembly factor HIRA in ALT cancer cells. We show that HIRA is enriched at telomeres during the G2 phase and is required for histone H3.3 deposition and telomere DNA synthesis. Depletion of HIRA elicits systemic death of ALT cancer cells that is mitigated by re-expression of ATRX, a protein that is frequently inactivated in ALT tumors. We propose that PARylation enables HIRA to fulfill its essential role in the adaptive response to ATRX deficiency that pervades ALT cancers.

### Keywords
Parps, Chromatin, Histone, Telomere, Cancer

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Roderick O’Sullivan Ph.D., Dept. Pharmacology & Chemical Biology, University of Pittsburgh, UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, 5115 Centre Avenue Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

### Submitter
Felipe da Vega Leprevost

### Lab Head
Dr Roderick J. O’Sullivan
Roderick O’Sullivan Ph.D., Dept. Pharmacology & Chemical Biology, University of Pittsburgh, UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, 5115 Centre Avenue Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA


