### Accession
PXD045446

### Title
Structure of transcribing RNA polymerase II-Elongin complex

### Description
Elongin is a hetero-trimeric elongation factor for RNA polymerase (Pol) II transcription that is conserved among metazoa. We solved three structures of human Elongin bound to transcribing Pol II using cryo-EM assisted by crosslinking mass spectrometry. The structures show that Elongin subunit ELOA binds the RPB2 side of Pol II and anchors the ELOB-8 ELOC subunit heterodimer. ELOA contains an N-terminal ‘latch’ that binds between the end of the RPB1 bridge helix and the funnel helices, thereby inducing a conformational change near the Pol II active center. The latch is strictly required for the elongation-stimulatory activity of Elongin, but not for its binding to Pol II, indicating that Elongin functions by allosterically influencing the conformational mobility of the active center. Structural comparisons show that Elongin binding to Pol II is incompatible with association of super elongation complex, the PAF1 complex, and RTF1, which also contains a latch element that stimulates Pol II.

### Sample Protocol
Pol II-SPT6-Elongin complex was assembled by mixing Elongin and SPT6 with pre-assembled Pol II-scaffold elongation complex and phosphorylated with P-TEFb. The resulting complex  (90 pmol) was cross-linked in batch by incubating with 3 mM bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate (BS3, Thermo Scientific) at 5 °C for 1 hr and quenched with 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6. The cross-linked sample was purified by ultracentrifugation using a linear 10-30% glycerol gradient (buffer: 20mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2 , 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)) at 36 000 rpm for 18 hrs at 4 °C using SW Ti60 rotor (Beckmann). The gradient was harvested in 200 µl fractions and checked on Native PAGE (Invitrogen). Fractions #14-19 containing the target complex were pelleted using an S150AT rotor (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Cross-linked complexes were solubilized with 4 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0, reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide. After diluting urea to 1M with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, cross-linked complexes were digested with trypsin (Promega) in a 1:20 enzyme-to-protein ratio (w/w) at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were reverse-phase extracted using SepPak Vac tC18 1cc/50mg (Waters) and eluted with 50% acetonitrile (ACN) / 0.1 % TFA. The eluate was lyophilized. Lyophilized peptides were dissolved in 40 µl 2% ACN / 20 mM ammonium hydroxide and separated by reverse phase chromatography at basic pH (bRP) using an xBridge C18 3.5µm 1x150mm column (Waters) with a 4-36% ACN gradient over 45 min at a flow rate of 60 µl/min. One-minute fractions of 60 µl were collected, pooled in a step of 12 minutes (resulting in 12 pooled fractions total), vacuum dried and dissolved in 5% ACN / 0.1% TFA for subsequent uHPLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis.   bRP fractionated peptides were measured in triplicate on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 uHPLC system (Thermo Scientific) with a custom 35 cm C18 column (75 µm inner diameter packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ beads, 3 µm pore size, Dr. Maisch GmbH). MS1 and MS2 resolution were set to 120000 and 30000, respectively. Only precursors with a charge state of 3-8 were selected for MS2.

### Data Protocol
BS3-mediated protein-protein cross-links were identified by pLink2.3.11 search engine (pfind.org/software/pLink) using either a data base containing only sequences of 17 complex-specific proteins and trypsin or additionally a set of common contaminants found in MS samples. The search results were filtered by FDR (1 and 5% at PSM/CSM level). The cross-links were mapped onto Pol II-SPT6-Elongin model with UCSF Chimera (https://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/) and XlinkAnalyzer(https://www.embl-hamburg.de/XlinkAnalyzer/XlinkAnalyzer.html).

### Publication Abstract
Elongin is a heterotrimeric elongation factor for RNA polymerase (Pol) II transcription that is conserved among metazoa. Here, we report three cryo-EM structures of human Elongin bound to transcribing Pol II. The structures show that Elongin subunit ELOA binds the RPB2 side of Pol II and anchors the ELOB-ELOC subunit heterodimer. ELOA contains a 'latch' that binds between the end of the Pol II bridge helix and funnel helices, thereby inducing a conformational change near the polymerase active center. The latch is required for the elongation-stimulatory activity of Elongin, but not for Pol II binding, indicating that Elongin functions by allosterically regulating the conformational mobility of the polymerase active center. Elongin binding to Pol II is incompatible with association of the super elongation complex, PAF1 complex and RTF1, which also contain an elongation-stimulatory latch element.

### Keywords
Cryo-em analysis, Transcription elongation, Cross-linking mass spectrometry, Spt6, Rna pol ii, Elongin

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Göttingen, Germany University Medical Center Göttingen, Institute of Clinical Chemistry, Bioanalytics Group, Göttingen, Germany Cluster of Excellence "Multiscale Bioimaging: from Molecular Machines to Networks of Excitable Cells" (MBExC), University of Göttingen, Germany

### Submitter
Olexandr Dybkov

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Göttingen, Germany University Medical Center Göttingen, Institute of Clinical Chemistry, Bioanalytics Group, Göttingen, Germany Cluster of Excellence "Multiscale Bioimaging: from Molecular Machines to Networks of Excitable Cells" (MBExC), University of Göttingen, Germany


