### Accession
PXD040751

### Title
Effect of Edurans secretome of human microbiome

### Description
A rapid ex vivo microbiome assay and metaproteomics approach was used for evaluating the impacts of E. durans derived secretome on a human gut microbiome cultured in vitro.

### Sample Protocol
Microbiome cells were harvested from culture samples and subjected for protein extraction using 4%SDS/9M urea buffer, precipitation using acetone and in-solution trypsin digestion to generate peptides for bottum-up metaproteomics.

### Data Protocol
Peptide/protein identification and quantification were performed using MetaLab software tool, a comprehensive platform for metaproteomic data analysis. Human gut microbial gene catalog database (IGC, ~9.9 million proteins) were used for database search and FDR threshold of 0.01 at PSM level was used for filtering the identification results.

### Publication Abstract
The gut microbiome plays a critical role to all animals and humans health. Methods based on ex vivo cultures are time and cost-effective solutions for rapid evaluation of probiotic effects on microbiomes. In this study, we assessed whether the protein secretome from the potential probiotic Enterococcus durans LAB18S grown on fructoligosaccharides (FOS) and galactoligosaccharides (GOS) had specific effects on ex vivo cultured intestinal microbiome obtained from a healthy individual. Metaproteomics was used to evaluate changes in microbial communities of the human intestinal microbiome. Hierarchical clustering analysis revealed 654 differentially abundant proteins from the metaproteome samples, showing that gut microbial protein expression varied on the presence of different E. durans secretomes. Increased amount of Bacteroidetes phylum was observed in treatments with secretomes from E. durans cultures on FOS, GOS and albumin, resulting in a decrease of the Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes (F/B) ratio. The most functionally abundant bacterial taxa were Roseburia, Bacteroides, Alistipes and Faecalibacterium. The results suggest that the secretome of E. durans may have favorable effects on the intestinal microbial composition, stimulating growth and different protein expression of beneficial bacteria. These findings suggest that proteins secreted by E. durans growing on FOS and GOS have different effects on the modulation of gut microbiota functional activities during cultivation.

### Keywords
Probiotics, Metaproteomics, Microbiome

### Affiliations
Health Canada
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Xu Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
University of Ottawa


