### Accession
PXD011756

### Title
Proteome and Modification of Stat3 and Malt1 dependent on Hectd3

### Description
We transfected HEK293T cells with HA-Ub, Flag-Stat3 or Flag-Malt1A, with or without Xpress-Hectd3. We performed Flag immunoprecipitation then conducted LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
ANTI-FLAG M2 Affinity Gel was used on protein extract samples form HEK293T cells co-transfected with HA-Ub and Flag-Malt1A vectors, or HA-Ub, Flag-Malt1A, and Xpress-Hectd3 vectors, or with HA-Ub and Flag-Stat3 vectors, or HA-Ub, Flag-Stat3 and Xpress-Hectd3 vectors. For tandem mass spectrometry, samples were prepared with 1 mM dithiothreitol in 40mM NH4HCO3 at 25°C for 30 minutes, followed by 5 mM iodoacetamide at 25°C for 30 minutes in the dark. Digestion was performed with 1:100 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase at 25°C for 2 hours and further digested overnight with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin at 25°C. Following digestion, with a Sep-Pak C18 column was used to desalt peptides and vacuum was used to dry the peptides. 10 µL of loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 0.03% trifluoroacetic acid, 1% acetonitrile) was used to resuspend peptides. Peptide mixtures (2 µL) were separated on a self-packed C18 (1.9 um) fused silica column (25 cm x 75 µM internal diameter) by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCNano and monitored on a Fusion mass spectrometer. Elution was performed over a 120 minute gradient at a rate of 300nl/min with buffer B ranging from 3% to 80% (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water, buffer B: 0.1 % formic in acetonitrile). The mass spectrometer cycle was programmed to collect at the top speed for 3 second cycles. The MS scans (400-1500 m/z range, 200,000 AGC, 50 ms maximum ion time) were collected at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 in profile mode and the HCD MS/MS spectra (2 m/z isolation width, 30% collision energy, 10,000 AGC target, 35 ms maximum ion time) were detected in the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previous sequenced precursor ions for 30 seconds within a 10 ppm window. Precursor ions with +1, and +8 or higher charge states were excluded from sequencing.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.0 was used for spectra search. Searching parameters: fully tryptic restriction and a parent ion mass tolerance (± 20 ppm). Methionine oxidation (+15.99492 Da), asparagine and glutamine deamidation (+0.98402 Da), lysine ubiquitination (+114.04293 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.03670) were variable modifications (up to 3 allowed per peptide); cysteine was assigned a fixed carbamidomethyl modification (+57.021465 Da). Percolator was used to filter the peptide spectrum matches to a false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Multiple sclerosis, Hectd3, Eae, Neuroinflammation, Pstat3 y705, Ubiquitination, Stat3 activation, K27-linked polyubiquitin chain, Stat3 phosphorylation, K29-lniked polyubiquitin chain, Stat3, Th17 cells, Malt1

### Affiliations
University of Florida
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL, 32610, USA.

### Submitter
Eric Helm

### Lab Head
Dr Dorina Avram
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL, 32610, USA.


