### Accession
PXD002227

### Title
An effective plasma membrane proteomics approach for small tissue samples

### Description
Advancing the quest for new drug targets demands the development of innovative plasma membrane proteome research strategies applicable to small, functionally defined tissue samples. Biotinylation of acute tissue slices and streptavidin pull-down followed by shotgun proteomics allowed the selective extraction and identification of ? 1600 proteins of which > 60% are known to be associated to the plasma membrane according to GO annotations, including (G-protein coupled) receptors, ion channels and transporters, and this from mm3-scale tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Acute slice biotinylation assay (ASBA). Mice were killed by cervical dislocation. Brains were rapidly dissected in ice-cold (4 °C) artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF; 124mM NaCl, 4.9 mM KCl, 2mM MgSO4, 2mM CaCl2, 1.2 mM KH2PO4, 25.6 mM NaHCO3, and 10 mM D-glucose; pH 7.4) saturated with 95% O2 and 5% CO2. Subsequently, each brain was separated along the longitudinal fissure and the left hemisphere was cut into 300 µm-thick coronal slices using a Vibratome (HM 650 V, Prosan). A thickness of tissue slices between 300 and 400 µm is essential to biotinylate an amount of functionally healthy and intact cells that will outnumber the sliced ones28,29. Four slices between Bregma level –2.70 and –4.16 of each hemisphere were placed in an incubation chamber (65-0076/BSC-PC, Harvard Apparatus by Warner Instruments) filled with aCSF and provided with a continuous flow of 95% O2 and 5% CO2 for 90 min in order to recover.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. Proteome Discoverer 1.3.0.339 (Thermo Scientific) was used as a workflow manager to handle the data. The tandem MS data were searched using both SEQUEST and Mascot (Matrix science) against the Swissprot database (v 09/2012, 538010 sequences) for Mus musculus taxonomy. All tandem mass spectra in the range of 300 Da to 8,000 Da were interpreted.

### Publication Abstract
Advancing the quest for new drug targets demands the development of innovative plasma membrane proteome research strategies applicable to small, functionally defined tissue samples. Biotinylation of acute tissue slices and streptavidin pull-down followed by shotgun proteomics allowed the selective extraction and identification of &gt;1,600 proteins of which &gt;60% are associated with the plasma membrane, including (G-protein coupled) receptors, ion channels and transporters, and this from mm(3)-scale tissue.

### Keywords
Acute slice biotinylation assay, Membrane proteomics, Orbitrap velos, Mice, Shotgun proteomics, Affinity-purification

### Affiliations
VITO
Center for Proteomics, University of Antwerp, Belgium Applied Bio & molecular Systems, VITO, Belgium.

### Submitter
Dirk Valkenborg

### Lab Head
Dr Dirk Valkenborg
Center for Proteomics, University of Antwerp, Belgium Applied Bio & molecular Systems, VITO, Belgium.


