### Accession
PXD025297

### Title
Small protein enrichment improves proteomics detection of sORF encoded peptides.

### Description
With the rapid growth in the number of sequenced genomes, genome annotation efforts became almost exclusively reliant on automated pipelines. Despite their unquestionable utility, these methods have been shown to underestimate the true complexity of the studied genomes, with small open reading frames (sORFs; ORFs shorter than 300 nucleotides) and, in consequence, their protein products (sORF encoded polypeptides or SEPs) being the primary example of a poorly annotated and highly underexplored class of genomic elements. With the advent of advanced translatomics such as ribosome profiling, reannotation efforts have progressed a great deal in providing translation evidence for numerous, previously unannotated sORFs. However, proteomics validation of these riboproteogenomics discoveries remains challenging due to their short length and often highly variable physiochemical properties.  In this work we evaluate and compare tailored, yet easily adaptable, protein extraction methodologies for their efficacy in facilitating the extraction and concomitantly proteomics detection of SEPs expressed in the prokaryotic model organism Salmonella Typhimurium. An optimized protocol for the enrichment and efficient detection of SEPs making use of the of amphipathic polymer amphipol A8-35 relying on the differential peptide versus protein solubility is suggested and compared with global extraction methods making use of chaotropic agents. Given the versatile biological functions the SEPs have been shown to exert, this work provides an accessible protocol for proteomics exploration of this fascinating class of small proteins.

### Sample Protocol
In total 3  experimental setups have been investigated- urea facilitated protein extraction (Urea), guanidine hydrochloride facilitated protein extraction (GuHC l) and amphipol A8-35 aided protein extraction (amphipol). Further, an enrichment strategy utilizing acidification of amphipol A8-35 solubilized samples has been performed yielding two additional sample types; amphipol  enriched low MW protein fraction (Amphi+) and amphipol insoluble high MW protein fraction containing pelleted proteins (Amphi+pellet). By acidifying the samples, the protein solubility decreases and high molecular weight proteins co-precipitate with the protonated amphipols, while stabilized short proteins remain in solution.  Finally, a commonly used procedure based on boiling the proteins in water has been employed by boiling the proteins for 10 min in preheated H2O. 9 M urea and 4 M GuHCl buffers were prepared in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3) (pH 7.9). Amphipol buffer was made by dissolving 1mg/mL A8-35amphipol  in 50 mM NH4HCO3. Bacterial pellets were resuspended in 600 µL of respective resuspension buffers. In case of amphipol, the samples were vortexed and incubated for 10 minutes at room temperature (RT) before further processing. Mechanical disruption was performed by 3 repetitive freeze-thaw cycles using liquid nitrogen followed by 2 minutes sonication on ice (Branson probe sonifier output level 4 with 40 % duty cycle; 3x 30s; 1sec pulses). Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm16000 g  for 10 minutes at 4°C and the supernatant was transferred to a clean Eppendorf. In case of the amphipol A38-5 samples, the samples were acidified with 5% formic acid (FA) until the pH reached 3.0, centrifuged for 10 minutes at 1316,000 rpm g  and 4°C and both supernatants and pellets recovered for further analysis. The pellets were redissolved in 200 µl 50 mM NH4HCO3.   Protein concentrations were measured using BCA   (Pierce). The samples were precipitated overnight with 4x volumes (1.6 mL)   of -20 °C acetone. The precipitated protein was collected by centrifuging for 15 minutes at 3500 g (4°C), pellets were washed twice with -20°C 80% acetone and air dried upside down for approximately 10 minutes at room temperature until no acetone odor remained. The dried pellets were resuspended in 200 µL TFE (2,2,2-trifluoroethanol) digestion buffer (10% TFE, 100 mM NH4HCO3ammonium bicarbonate ) with sonication using a Branson probe sonifier (output 10-15, 0.5 second pulses) until a homogenous suspension was formed. All samples were digested overnight at 37°C using mass spec grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) (enzyme/substrate of 1:100 w/w) while mixing (550 rpm). Samples were further acidified with TFA to a final concentration of 0.5 %. The amphipol pellets were reacidified with 5 % FA for amphipol removal. Samples were cleared from insoluble particulates by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 16,100 g (4°C) and 100 µL of the supernatant was transferred to clean tubes. Subsequently, uniform methionine oxidation to methionine sulfoxide was performed by the addition of H2O2 to a final concentration of 0.5% for 30 minutes at 30 °C. Subsequently, pipette tip solid phase extraction (SPE) of peptides was performed (Bond Elut OMIX 100 µL C18 tips (Agilent)) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, the pipette tips were conditioned by aspirating the maximum pipette tip volume (100 µL) of H2O:ACN (50:50, v/v) and the solvent discarded. After equilibration with 3 maximum pipette tip volume of 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water, 100 µL of the acidified samples were dispensed and aspirated for 10 cycles for maximum binding efficiency. The tips were washed 3 times with the maximum pipette volume of 0.1% TFA in H2O:ACN (98:2, v/v) and the bound peptides eluted in LC-MS/MS vials with the maximum pipette tip volume of 0.1% TFA in H2O:ACN (30:70, v/v) by aspirating and dispensing the buffer twice. The peptide samples were vacuum-dried in a SpeedVac concentrator and dissolved in 20 µL of 2 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TCEP) in H2O:ACN (98:2, v/v). Samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano HPLC (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) in-line connected to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Bremen, Germany). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode.

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS-data was searched using MaxQuant software  (version 1.6.10.43) using the most recent SL1344 S. Typhimurium genome annotation and assembly (ASM21085v2). The methionine oxidation was set as fixed modification and decoy database of reversed protein sequences was used to estimate FDR, 1% FDR threshold was used. Minimum peptide length of 7 and a mass window between 100-4600 Da was considered. Trypsin P was selected as the digestion enzyme.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Salmonella, Seps, Peptidomics

### Affiliations
iRIP Unit, Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Ghent University, Gent, Belgium
Ugent

### Submitter
Igor Fijalkowski

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Van Damme
iRIP Unit, Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Ghent University, Gent, Belgium


