### Accession
PXD013456

### Title
Candida auris whole cell proteomics

### Description
Whole cell proteomics of Candida auris MMC1 and MMC2 strains.

### Sample Protocol
Three independently cell cultures were submitted to metabolite, protein and lipid extraction (MPLEx) according to the protocol by Nakayasu et al. (DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.00043-16). Extracted proteins were digested with trypsin and resulting peptides were extracted with 1 mL Discovery C18 SPE columns (Supelco, Bellefonte, PA) as previously described (DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00085-15). Digested peptides were suspended in water, quantified by BCA assay and 0.5 μg of peptides were loaded into trap column (4 cm x 100 μm ID packed in-house with 5 μm C18, Jupiter). Peptide separation was carried out an analytical column (70 cm x 75 µm ID packed with C18, 3 μm particles) using a gradient of acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (solvent B) in water/0.1% formic acid (solvent A). The flow was set to 300 nL/min with 1% solvent B and kept for 15 min. Then concentration of solvent B was increased linearly as following: 19 min, 8% B; 60 min, 12% B; 155 min, 35% B; 203 min, 60% B; 210 min, 75% B; 215 min, 95% B; 220 min, 95% B.  Eluting peptides were directly analyzed by electrospray in an orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific) by scanning a window of 400-2000 m/z with resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. Tandem mass spectra were collected using HCD (32% NCE) on the 12 most intense multiple-charged parent ions at a resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was analyzed using MaxQuant software (v.1.5.5.1) (DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2016.136). Peptide identification was performed by searching against the C. auris sequences from Uniprot Knowledge Base (downloaded December 6, 2017). Searching parameters included the variable modifications protein N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine, in addition to carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues. Parent and fragment mass tolerance were kept as the default setting of the software. Only fully tryptic digested peptides were considered, allowing up to two missed cleaved sites per peptide.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Candida auris</i> is a recently described pathogenic fungus that is causing invasive outbreaks on all continents. The fungus is of high concern given the numbers of multidrug-resistant strains that have been isolated in distinct sites across the globe. The fact that its diagnosis is still problematic suggests that the spreading of the pathogen remains underestimated. Notably, the molecular mechanisms of virulence and antifungal resistance employed by this new species are largely unknown. In the present work, we compared two clinical isolates of <i>C. auris</i> with distinct drug susceptibility profiles and a <i>Candida albicans</i> reference strain using a multi-omics approach. Our results show that, despite the distinct drug resistance profile, both <i>C. auris</i> isolates appear to be very similar, albeit with a few notable differences. However, compared to <i>C. albicans</i> both <i>C. auris</i> isolates have major differences regarding their carbon utilization and downstream lipid and protein content, suggesting a multifactorial mechanism of drug resistance. The molecular profile displayed by <i>C. auris</i> helps to explain the antifungal resistance and virulence phenotypes of this new emerging pathogen.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> <i>Candida auris</i> was first described in Japan in 2009 and has now been the cause of significant outbreaks across the globe. The high number of isolates that are resistant to one or more antifungals, as well as the high mortality rates from patients with bloodstream infections, has attracted the attention of the medical mycology, infectious disease, and public health communities to this pathogenic fungus. In the current work, we performed a broad multi-omics approach on two clinical isolates isolated in New York, the most affected area in the United States and found that the omic profile of <i>C. auris</i> differs significantly from <i>C. albicans</i> In addition to our insights into <i>C. auris</i> carbon utilization and lipid and protein content, we believe that the availability of these data will enhance our ability to combat this rapidly emerging pathogenic yeast.

### Keywords
Candida auris, Proteomics, Drug resistance

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Ernesto Nakayasu

### Lab Head
Dr Ernesto Nakayasu
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


