### Accession
PXD027721

### Title
We applied an iodoacetyl tandem mass tags (iodoTMT)-based proteomic approach to analyze the redox proteome of Brassica napus seedlings under control and salt-stressed conditions. We identified 1,821 sulfenylated sites in 912 proteins from all samples.

### Description
By means of large-scale redox proteomics, we studied reversible cysteine modification during the response to short-term salt stress in Brassica napus. We applied an iodoacetyl tandem mass tags (iodoTMT)-based proteomic approach to analyze the redox proteome of Brassica napus seedlings under control and salt-stressed conditions. We identified 1,821 sulfenylated sites in 912 proteins from all samples. A great number of sulfenylated proteins were predicted to localize to chloroplasts and cytoplasm and GO enrichment analysis of differentially sulfenylated proteins revealed that metabolic processes such as photosynthesis and glycolysis are enriched and enzymes are overrepresented. Redox-sensitive sites in two enzymes were validated in vitro on recombinant proteins and they might affect the enzyme activity. This targeted approach contributes to the identification of the sulfenylated sites and proteins in Brassica napus subjected to salt stress and our study will improve our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying the redox regulation in response to salt stress.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins were extracted with 50 mM MMTS blocking added, followed by iodoTMT labeling on reduced cysteines. Then, the labeled proteins were digest by trypsin and the peptides were enriched by anti-TMT antibody. After that, the peptides were characterized and quantified by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were searched against B. napus database (http://www.genoscope.cns.fr/brassicanapus/) using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) (Tyanova et al., 2016). The intensity data obtained from mass spectrometer were normalized by ‘mean normalization’ method first. Then the abundance of total cysteines and sulfenylated cysteins can be analyzed.

### Publication Abstract
Deregulation of reduction-oxidation (redox) metabolism under environmental stresses results in enhanced production of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS), which ultimately leads to post-translational modifications (PTMs) of responsive proteins. Redox PTMs play an important role in regulation of protein function and cellular signalling. By means of large-scale redox proteomics, we studied reversible cysteine modification during the response to short-term salt stress in Brassica napus (B. napus). We applied an iodoacetyl tandem mass tags (iodoTMT)-based proteomic approach to analyse the redox proteome of B. napus seedlings under control and salt-stressed conditions. We identified 1,821 sulphenylated sites in 912 proteins from all samples. A great number of sulphenylated proteins were predicted to localize to chloroplasts and cytoplasm and GO enrichment analysis of differentially sulphenylated proteins revealed that metabolic processes such as photosynthesis and glycolysis are enriched and enzymes are overrepresented. Redox-sensitive sites in two enzymes were validated in vitro on recombinant proteins and they might affect the enzyme activity. This targeted approach contributes to the identification of the sulphenylated sites and proteins in B. napus subjected to salt stress and our study will improve our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying the redox regulation in response to salt stress.

### Keywords
Brassica napus, Lc-ms/ms, Leaf

### Affiliations
1534447256@qq.com
National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
Liangqian Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Liang Guo
National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Huazhong Agricultural University


