### Accession
PXD012803

### Title
Label-Free Quantification of Yeast Cellular Proteome

### Description
Precursor ion intensity quantification and  intensity-based absolute quantity estimation (IBAQ) was used  to on the mixture of yeast cell lysates in order to estimate the absolute concentrations of the proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets  were homogenized using a FastPrep®-24 instrument (Matrix-C (red) FAST tubes MP Biomedicals, OH, USA) for 5 repeated 40 seconds cycles at 6.5 m/s, with 30-60 seconds pause between in the lysis buffer containing 50 mM triethylammoinium bicarbonate (TEAB), 2 % sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). Samples were centrifuged at 400 x g for 2 min and the supernatants were transferred to new tubes. The supernatants were centrifuged at 21100 x g for 10 min to remove cell debris and the supernatants were transferred to new tubes. Protein concentration was determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific) and the Benchmark Plus microplate reader (BIO-RAD) with BSA solutions as standards. Reference pool of mitochondrial samples for quantification was prepared by combining equal amounts of all mitochondrial samples.  The reference pool was prepared from the aliquots of the lysates of S. cerevisiae CEN.PK 113-7D cells from the J. Nielsen Lab (Chalmers, Gothenburg, Sweden). An aliquot of 50 ug of the pooled sample was spiked with 10.6 ug of the UPS2 Proteomics Dynamic Range Standard (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint-Louis, MO). Samples were reduced by addition of 2M DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 100 mM and incubated at 56C for 30 min. The samples were trypsin digested using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method modified from (Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May;6(5):359-62). In short, reduced samples diluted to 300 ul by addition of 8M urea were applied on Nanosep 30k Omega filters (Pall Life Sciences) and 200 ul 8M urea were used to repeatedly wash away the SDS. Alkylation was performed with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) diluted in digestion buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 50 mM TEAB) for 30 min at room temperature and the filters were then repeatedly washed with digestion buffer. Trypsin (Pierce Trypsin Protease, MS Grade, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in digestion buffer was added in a ratio of 1:100 relative to protein amount and the samples were incubated in 37°C overnight. Another portion of trypsin was added and incubated for 3 hours on the following morning. The peptides were collected by centrifugation and SDC was removed by acidification with 10% TFA. The peptides were fractionated into 40 primary fractions with basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptide separations were performed using a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation) and a linear gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B over 17 min followed by an increase to 100% B over 5 min. Solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.00 and solvent B was 90% acetonitrile, 10% 10 mM ammonium formate at pH 10.00. The primary fractions were concatenated into final 10 fractions (1+11+21+31, 2+12+22+32, … 10+20+30+40), dried and reconstituted in 15μl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for nLC MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Saccharomyces cerevisiae ATCC 204508 / S288c reference proteome database was downloaded from Uniprot (February 2018, 6049 sequences) and supplemented with the sequences of the 48 UPS protein sequences. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance to 0.6 Da; 1 missed cleavage was allowed; methionine oxidation was set as variable modification and methylthiolation on cysteine was set as fixed. Percolator was used for PSM validation with the strict FDR threshold of 1%. The identified PSMs and proteins were subsequently filtered with the target FDR of 1%. Quantification was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.2. Minora feature detection node was used for precursor ion quantification, with the maximum intensity values used for quantification; retention time alignment and peptide identification transfer were enabled in Proteome Discoverer 2.2; abundance values for all unique and shared peptides were used for the IBAQ calculation. Abundances from the 3 technical replicates were averaged and divided by a number of theoretically observable peptides for a protein to yield the IBAQ intensity. The number of the observable peptides was calculated using an in-house Python script. The known absolute amount values of the UPS2 standard proteins were used to scale the Log-transformed IBAQ intensity values versus Log-transformed protein concentrationt. Only the UPS proteins with at least 2 unique identified peptides were used for scaling.

### Publication Abstract
Several recent studies have shown that the concept of proteome constraint, i.e., the need for the cell to balance allocation of its proteome between different cellular processes, is essential for ensuring proper cell function. However, there have been no attempts to elucidate how cells' maximum capacity to grow depends on protein availability for different cellular processes. To experimentally address this, we cultivated <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> in bioreactors with or without amino acid supplementation and performed quantitative proteomics to analyze global changes in proteome allocation, during both anaerobic and aerobic growth on glucose. Analysis of the proteomic data implies that proteome mass is mainly reallocated from amino acid biosynthetic processes into translation, which enables an increased growth rate during supplementation. Similar findings were obtained from both aerobic and anaerobic cultivations. Our findings show that cells can increase their growth rate through increasing its proteome allocation toward the protein translational machinery.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Intensity-based absolute quantification, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Professor. Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Wallenberg Center for Protein Research, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Egor Vorontsov

### Lab Head
Dr Jens Nielsen
Professor. Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Wallenberg Center for Protein Research, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark


