### Accession
PXD003272

### Title
Growth-phase regulated acetylation in B. subtilis

### Description
To  uncover  potential  regulatory  roles  for acetylation, we analyzed  how  acetylation  patterns  and  abundances  change  between  logarithmic and  stationary  phase growth in Bacillus subtilis. Using acetyllysine peptide enrichment followed by label-free mass spectrometry-based proteomics, we identified over 2,300 unique acetylation sites on proteins that function in many essential pathways. By comparing the changes in acetylation with total cell protein abundances, we discover a subset of specific acetylation events that are stoichiometrically regulated under different growth conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type B. subtilis was grown in glucose minimal media to log or stat phase. Cells were harvested, frozen as pellets in liquid nitrogen, and subjected to cryogenic cell lysis. The frozen cell powder was resuspended in an SDS-containing buffer, sonicated and cell debris removed. Recovered soluble proteins were reduced with TCEP (1 mM) and alkylated with chloroacetamide (10 mM), then precipitated with acetone. The protein pellets were resuspended  in  50  mM  ammonium  bicarbonate,  0.1% RapiGest   surfactant, and 1 mM calcium chloride. Proteins were digested with 50 micrograms of sequencing grade modified trypsin for 4 hours at 37 degrees C, then a fresh aliquot of 50 micrograms of trypsin for overnight digestion. Trypsin was inactivated by incubation for 5 minutes at 95 degrees C. An aliquot of peptides was reserved for total cell protein analysis, and the remaining fraction was incubated with a mixture of acetyllysine antibody conjugated to agarose beads. Peptides from acetyllysine enrichments and total cell experiments were analyzed by nano liquid chromatography (nLC) coupled online an LTQ Orbitrap Velos or XL mass spectrometer, respectively.  Each biological replicate of the acetyllysine enrichment samples was analyzed in technical replicates using separate CID and HCD fragmentation methods.

### Data Protocol
Instrument RAW files from three biological replicates of acetyllysine enrichment and whole cell protein experiments were processed in a single MaxQuant analysis session (software version 1.5.2.8).  The LFQ algorithm and Match between Runs was enabled with the default settings, but were separated applied to acetyllysine enrichment and whole cell protein data files by defining different parameter groups. Details of the experimental groups and associated RAW filenames are in the summary.txt file provided in the Search Results. The Acetyl (K)sites.txt and proteinGroups.txt files were imported into Perseus (version 1.5.1.6) for data processing, including data filtering, imputation of missing values, and determination of differentially regulated abundances. Protein copy numbers were estimated based on 0.25 pg of protein per cell and using LFQ values normalized by the theoretical number of tryptic peptides. Detailed search parameters are in the parameters.txt file provided in Search Results.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lfq, Bacillus, Acetyllysine

### Affiliations
Molecular Biology, Princeton University
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, USA

### Submitter
Todd Greco

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana Cristea
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, USA


