### Accession
PXD013791

### Title
Adaptation of Dinoroseobacter shibae to different kinds of oxidative stress

### Description
The Gram-negative photoheterotrophic bacterium Dinoroseobacter shibae is a member of the high abundant marine Roseobacter group. Living in the photic zone environment of marine ecosystems D. shibae is frequently exposed to oxygen. Oxic environments are hazardous and therefore effective defense mechanisms are required.  In the present study, the adaptation of D. shibae to different kinds of oxidative stresses was investigated. Hydrogen peroxide, diamide and paraquat were used as agents to trigger peroxide, thiol and superoxide stress. To define and compare the peroxide, superoxide and thiol stress stimulons in D. shibae, GeLC-MS/MS based proteomic data of cytosolic and surface associated proteins were used. Furthermore, a strain deficient in the rhizobial iron regulator (RirA) was used to study the global impact of RirA on peroxide dependent protein expression.

### Sample Protocol
To study the influence of hydrogen peroxide, diamide and paraquat on the proteome pattern of D. shibae, exponentially growing wild type cells were treated with 10 mM H2O2 , 15 µM paraquat  or 0.5 mM diamide. In addition, exponentially growing rirA mutant cells were exposed to 10 mM H2O2.  Cells were harvested before and at different time points after exposure to the respective oxidants and mechanically disrupted using a FastPrep. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation.  20 µg of crude protein extract were separated via one dimensional SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. In gel digestion of proteins was carried out by dividing each lane into eight fractions with similar protein amounts which were densitometrically determined using AIDA software (Raytest Isotopenmeßgeräte GmbH). Extraction and desalting of the resulting peptides was done according to Boedeker et al., 2017. For liquid chromatography coupled tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analyses a nanoAQUITY Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography System (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) was combined with an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc). Peptides from each fraction were solved in 3 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid, centrifuged for 20 min at 109,000 x g and loaded onto a BEH C18 column, 130 Å, 1.7 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm at a flow rate of 0.35 μl min-1 (Waters Corporation). Elution of peptides from the column was performed using a 222 min gradient starting with 3.7 % buffer B (80 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid) and 96.3 % buffer A (0.1 % formic acid in Ultra-LC-MS-water): 0-30 min 3.7 % B; 30-65 min 3.7 %-22.1 % B; 65-70 min 22.1 %- 23.9 % B; 70-97 min 23.9%-29.3% B; 97-134min 29.3%- 37.8% B; 134-167 min 37.8 %-48.3 % B; 167-194 min 48.3-62.5% B; 194-211 min 62.5-99% B; 211-213 min 99% B; 213-218 min 99%-3.7% B, 218-222 min 3.7% B. MS scans were performed in the Fourier transformation mode scanning an m/z of 400-2000 with a resolution (full width at half maximum at m/z 400) of 60,000 and a lock mass of 445.12003. Primary ions were fragmented in a data-dependent collision induced dissociation mode for the 20 most abundant precursor ions with an exclusion time of 13 s and analyzed by the LTQ ion trap. The following ionization parameters were applied: normalized collision energy: 35, activation Q: 0.25, activation time: 10 ms, isolation width: 2 m/z, charge state: > +2. The signal to noise threshold was set to 2000. Boedeker C, Schüler M, Reintjes G, Jeske O, van Teeseling MC, Jogler M, Rast P, Borchert D, Devos DP, Kucklick M, Schaffer M, Kolter R, van Niftrik L, Engelmann S, Amann R, Rohde M, Engelhardt H, Jogler C. Determining the bacterial cell biology of Planctomycetes. Nat Commun. 2017 Apr 10;8:14853. doi: 10.1038/ncomms14853

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant (Max Plack Institute of Biochemistry, www.maxquant.org, version 1.5.2.8) and the following parameters: peptide tolerance 5 ppm; a tolerance for fragment ions of 0.6 Da; variable modification: methionine oxidation, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation; a maximum of three modifications per peptide was allowed; a minimum of 2 unique peptides per protein; fixed false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % for proteins, peptides and site decoy fraction.  All samples were searched against a database containing all protein sequences of D. shibae DFL 12 (DSM 16493) extracted from NCBI at September 2016 with a decoy mode of reverted sequences and common contaminants supplied by MaxQuant. Quantification was done using the labelfree modus based on unique peptides only. Using the software tool Perseus (Version 1.5.0.15, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, www.maxquant.org) contaminants and reverse identifications were removed from the dataset. After Z-score standardization with the log transformed data ANOVA and a pairwise t-test have been performed (based on a p-Value of 0.05) to receive proteins which are significantly different in amount. A protein was considerably reliable identified when it was detected in two biological samples with two unique peptides and when two MS/MS scans have been performed. For protein quantification, the obtained raw intensities of each protein for three biological replicates were added and in case they are lower than 500,000 they were set zero.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Gelc-ms/ms, Hydrogen peroxide, Diamide, Paraquat, Dinoroseobacter shibae, Rhizobial iron regulator

### Affiliations
TU Braunschweig
Institut für Mikrobiologie
Spielmannstr. 7
Germany
Mikrobielle Proteomik, Helmholtzzentrum für Infektionsforschung, Braunschweig, Germany Institut für Mikrobiologie, Technische Universität  Braunschweig, Germany

### Submitter
Martin Kucklick

### Lab Head
Dr Susanne Engelmann
Mikrobielle Proteomik, Helmholtzzentrum für Infektionsforschung, Braunschweig, Germany Institut für Mikrobiologie, Technische Universität  Braunschweig, Germany


