### Accession
PXD014009

### Title
Lamin A molecular compression and sliding as mechanisms behind nucleoskeleton elasticity (complementary data of PXD008337)

### Description
Lamin A is a nuclear intermediate filament protein critical for nuclear architecture and mechanics and mutated in a wide range of human diseases. Yet little is known about the molecular architecture of lamins and mechanisms of their assembly. Here we use cross-linking SILAC mass spectrometry to determine interactions within lamin dimers and between dimers in higher-order polymers. We find evidence for a compression mechanism where coiled coils in the lamin A rod can slide onto each other to contract rod length, likely driven by a wide range of electrostatic interactions with the flexible linkers between coiled coils. Similar interactions occur with unstructured regions flanking the rod domain during oligomeric assembly. Mutations linked to human disease block these interactions, suggesting that this spring-like contraction can explain in part the dynamic mechanical stretch and flexibility properties of the lamin polymer and other intermediate filament networks.

### Sample Protocol
In preparation for MS analysis, EDC cross-linked nuclear envelopes were washed in 1 M NaCl and lamina was solubilised in 0.1 M Tris 8.5, 4 M urea, 20 mM MgCl2. Around 10% of total nuclear envelope protein was recovered this way and then processed for mass spectrometry by means of sequential overnight digestion with endoproteinase Lys-C (Roche, # 11058533103) dilution to 2 M urea and overnight digested with trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Urea-non soluble material was solubilised in SDS and gel digestion was used. LC‐MS/MS analysis of peptides was performed using an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) applying a “high‐high” acquisition strategy. Peptides were separated on a 75 μm x 50 cm PepMap EASY‐Spray column (Thermo Scientific) fitted into an EASY‐Spray source (Thermo Scientific), operated at 50 °C column temperature. The eluted peptides were directly introduced into the mass spectrometer. MS data were acquired in the data‐dependent mode with the top‐speed option. For each three‐second acquisition cycle, the survey level spectrum was recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000. The ions with a precursor charge state between 3+ and 8+ were isolated and fragmented using high energy collision dissociation (HCD) of 30% normalized collision energy. The fragmentation spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 15,000, isolation window of 1.6 m/z, maxium injection time of 60 ms and AGC target of 5e4. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with single repeat count and 60 second exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric raw data were processed to generate peak lists by MSCovert (ProteoWizard 3.0.11417) and cross-linked peptides were matched to spectra using Xi software (version 1.6.745) with in-search assignment of monoisotopic peaks. The parameters: database of rat lamin A; cross-linker: EDC; MS accuracy, 6 ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 20 ppm; enzyme: trypsin; missed cleavages, 4; missing mono-isotopic peaks: 4; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications: oxidation on methionine. The data were auto-validated by Xi software.

### Publication Abstract
Lamin A is a nuclear intermediate filament protein critical for nuclear architecture and mechanics and mutated in a wide range of human diseases. Yet little is known about the molecular architecture of lamins and mechanisms of their assembly. Here we use SILAC cross-linking mass spectrometry to determine interactions within lamin dimers and between dimers in higher-order polymers. We find evidence for a compression mechanism where coiled coils in the lamin A rod can slide onto each other to contract rod length, likely driven by a wide range of electrostatic interactions with the flexible linkers between coiled coils. Similar interactions occur with unstructured regions flanking the rod domain during oligomeric assembly. Mutations linked to human disease block these interactions, suggesting that this spring-like contraction can explain in part the dynamic mechanical stretch and flexibility properties of the lamin polymer and other intermediate filament networks.

### Keywords
Compression, Disordered linker, Lamin a, Coiled coil

### Affiliations
The University of Edinburgh
Room 4.18a Michael Swann Building Max Born Crescent Edinburgh EH9 3BF UK

### Submitter
Juan Zou

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Room 4.18a Michael Swann Building Max Born Crescent Edinburgh EH9 3BF UK


