### Accession
PXD015643

### Title
Translatome Hypoxia-Acidosis, TMT-pulse SILAC

### Description
Cells were grown in light (R0K0) SILAC media (AthenaES) for 7 days, they were then incubated in light media for 24 hours in respective condition (normoxia neutral (NN) pH: 7.4; hypoxia neutral (HN)1% O2, pH: 7.4; hypoxia acidosis (HA), 1% O2, pH=6) and pulsed with heavy (R10K8) SILAC media (AthenaES) for 16 hr (TMT-pSILAC) following treatment.

### Sample Protocol
TMT labelling and fractionation. MS sample preparation and runs were performed by the SPARC Biocentre, The Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto, Canada). Samples were reduced, alkylated, digested, and TMT labeled using the TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set (ThermoFisher Scientific, #90110) according to manufacturer’s directions. Labeled peptides from all samples were combined and lyophilized. Peptides were then resuspended in 20 μl of ddH2O and subjected to high pH reversed-phase HPLC fractionation using a Waters XBridge C18 column. A 90 min gradient using buffer A (ddH2O, adjusted to pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile, adjusted to pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide) was run as follows:  0-3 min 1-12% B; 3-60 min 12-30% B; 60-65 min 30-60% B; 65-70 min 60-99% B, 70-75 min 99-1% B, 75-90 min 1% B.  Ultra violet (UV) absorbance was measured throughout the gradient at 214 nm and 280 nm using a Waters 2489 UV/Visible detector.  Fractions were collected from the beginning of the gradient in 1.2 min intervals for 60 fractions.

### Data Protocol
MS analysis. Fractionated samples were concatenated from 60 samples to 15 samples by mixing early, middle, and late fractions together.  Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap FusionTM LumosTM TribridTM Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific)  outfitted with a nanospray and Evosep One LC system (Evosep). Lyophilized peptide mixtures were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto a C18 Evotip (Evosep). Samples were eluted and loaded onto a 15-C18 analytical column (100 μm ID, 3 μm beads) by Easy nLC1200 LC system (Thermo Scientific).  A linear gradient of 0-42% Buffer A (0.1% Formic Acid in water) to Buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic Acid) was used with a 90 min run time. Data was acquired using the MultiNotch MS3 acquisition with synchronous precursor selection (SPS) with a cycle time of 5 sec. MS1 acquisition was performed with a scan range of 550 m/z - 1800 m/z with resolution set to 120 000, maximum injection time of 50 ms and AGC target set to 4e5. Isolation for MS2 scans was performed in the quadrupole, with an isolation window of 0.6. MS2 scans were done in the linear ion trap with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a normalized collision energy of 35%. For MS3 scans, HCD was used, with a collision energy of 30% and scans were measured in the orbitrap with a resolution of 50000, a scan range of 100 m/z - 500 m/z, an AGC Target of 3e4, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was applied using a maximum exclusion list of 500 with one repeat count with an exclusion duration of 20 sec. MS data analysis. MS raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The MS data was searched against the Human Uniprot Database (downloaded April 10 2017) consisting of only reviewed entries using the Sequest HT and MS Amanda 2.0 search engines.  For both search algorithms, the parent and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Methionine oxidation was considered as a variable modification, as was N-terminal acetylation at the protein terminus. Static modifications of TMT at the peptide N-terminus, and carbidomethylation of cysteines were also considered. When looking for all “heavy” labelled proteins, fixed modifications of Heavy TMT (237.177 Da) on Lysine and Heavy 13C(6)15N(4) label on arginine were set. For all identifications, TMT and Heavy TMT were considered as dynamic modifications on lysine residues, as were heavy arginine. In each case, 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Search engine results were also processed through Percolator with q-values set to 0.01 for strict and 0.05 for relaxed. TMT reporter ions were quantified using the Proteome Discoverer 2.2 reporter ions quantifier node with an integration tolerance of 20 ppm, on the MS order of MS3.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
U87-mg, Tmt-pulse silac

### Affiliations
Professor, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Miami, Miller School of Medecine
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine

### Submitter
Nathan Balukoff

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen Lee
Professor, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Miami, Miller School of Medecine


