### Accession
PXD015039

### Title
Immunopeptidome of an acute myeloid leukemia cell line THP1

### Description
We report the use of complementary peptide antigen enrichment and comprehensive mass spectrometric acquisition strategies to provide in-depth immunopeptidome data for AML cell line THP1

### Sample Protocol
THP1 cells expressing HLA-A*02:01, B*15:11 and C*03:03 were lysed. Following lysis, peptide-HLA complexes were affinity purified by anti-A2 (BB7.2) and anti-Pan HLA Class I antibody (w6/32). Affinity purified HLA molecules and their peptide cargo were separated using reversed-phase chromatography and peptides were subsequently analysed using mass spectrometry Tribrid Fusion.

### Data Protocol
Raw data (.RAW from Thermo Tribrid Fusion) was searched using Peaks (v8.5, Bioinformatics Solutions) using following parameters: database: Human proteins from UniProt/SwissProt 15/06/2017; 20,182 entries. Instrument defaults for orbitrap instruments with error tolerance of 10ppm for parent mass and 0.02 Da for fragment mass, Enzyme specificity set to none, following variable modifications: oxidation at Met, deamidation at Asp and Gln and phosphorylation at Ser, Thr and Tyr. Max variable PTM per peptide 3.

### Publication Abstract
The identification of T cell epitopes derived from tumour specific antigens remains a significant challenge for the development of peptide-based vaccines and immunotherapies. The use of mass spectrometry-based approaches (immunopeptidomics) can provide powerful new avenues for the identification of such epitopes. In this study we report the use of complementary peptide antigen enrichment methods and a comprehensive mass spectrometric acquisition strategy to provide in-depth immunopeptidome data for the THP-1 cell line, a cell line used widely as a model of human leukaemia. To accomplish this, we combined robust experimental workflows that incorporated ultrafiltration or off-line reversed phase chromatography to enrich peptide ligand as well as a multifaceted data acquisition strategy using an Orbitrap Fusion LC-MS instrument. Using the combined datasets from the two ligand enrichment methods we gained significant depth in immunopeptidome coverage by identifying a total of 41,816 HLA class I peptides from THP-1 cells, including a significant number of peptides derived from different oncogenes or over expressed proteins associated with cancer. The physicochemical properties of the HLA-bound peptides dictated their recovery using the two ligand enrichment approaches and their distribution across the different precursor charge states considered in the data acquisition strategy. The data highlight the complementarity of the two enrichment procedures, and in cases where sample is not limiting, suggest that the combination of both approaches will yield the most comprehensive immunopeptidome information.

### Keywords
Aml, Immunopeptidome, Ptm, Hla class i, Cancer

### Affiliations
Monash University
Deputy Head (Research), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Infection and Immunity Program Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia

### Submitter
Kirti Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Wayne Purcell
Deputy Head (Research), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Infection and Immunity Program Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia


