### Accession
PXD015694

### Title
p300 and CBP are essential for skeletal muscle homeostasis, contractile function and survival

### Description
Reversible epsilon-amino acetylation of lysine residues regulates transcription as well as metabolic flux; however, roles for specific lysine acetyltransferases in skeletal muscle physiology and function remain enigmatic. In this study, we investigated the role of the homologous acetyltransferases p300 and CBP in skeletal muscle transcriptional homeostasis and physiology in adult mice. Mice with skeletal muscle-specific and inducible knockout of p300 and/or CBP were generated by crossing mice with a tamoxifen-inducible Cre recombinase expressed under the human alpha-skeletal actin (HSA) promoter with mice harboring LoxP sites flanking exon 9 of both the Ep300 and Crebbp genes. Knockout was induced at 13-15 weeks of age via oral gavage of tamoxifen. We demonstrate that loss of both p300 and CBP in adult mouse skeletal muscle severely impairs contractile function and results in lethality within one week – a phenotype that is reversed by the presence of a single allele of either p300 or CBP. The loss of muscle function in p300/CBP double knockout mice is paralleled by substantial transcriptional alterations in gene networks central to skeletal muscle contraction and structural integrity. Changes in protein expression patterns, determined by 10-plex TMT labeling, were linked to impaired muscle function also manifest within days (WT mice were compared to day 3 and day 5 knock out mice). Together, these data reveal the requirement of p300 and CBP for the control and maintenance of contractile function and transcriptional homeostasis in skeletal muscle, and ultimately, organism survival. By extension, modulating p300/CBP function holds promise for the treatment of disorders characterized by impaired contractile function in humans.

### Sample Protocol
50 milligram muscle tissue samples (3 biological replicates of WT, D3 KO, and D5 KO) were homogenized in ice cold 50 millimolar ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) using stainless steel beads (Omni International, Kennesaw GA). Protein concentrations were determined using the PierceTM BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL). Samples were digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin using the protease max protocol (Promega, Madison, WI). TFA was added to a final concentration of 1% to quench the samples. Peptides were purified by solid phase extraction using BioPureSPN MIDI cartridges (Nest Group, Inc., Southborough, MA). Peptide concentrations were determined using the PierceTM Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL). The peptide samples were dried by speed vacuum in preparation for TMT labeling (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. 2 microliter aliquots of each of the 9 labeled digests were mixed and analyzed in a 2-hour method using an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) instrument to determine overall labeling efficacy and determine final mixing ratios.   TMT-labeled samples in 10 millimolar ammonium formate pH 9 were separated by 2D reverse-phase liquid chromatography using a Dionex NCS-3500RS UltiMate RSLCnano UPLC system. A 60-microgram sample was injected onto a NanoEase 5-micron XBridge BEH130 C18 300-micron x 50 mm column (Waters) at 3 microliters/min in a 10 mm ammonium formate (pH 9) mobile phase. Peptides were eluted by sequential injection of 20 microliter volumes of 14, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50 and 90% ACN in 10 mm ammonium formate (pH 9) at 3 microliter/min. Peptides were trapped (Acclaim PepMap 100 micron x 2 cm NanoViper C18, 5 micron trap) and diluted with mobile phase. After 10 min of loading, the trap column was switched on-line to a PepMap RSLC C18, 2-micron, 75-micron x 25 cm EasySpray column (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were then separated using a 7.5– 30% ACN gradient over 90 min in mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at 300 nanoliter/min flow rate. Tandem mass spectrometry data was collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument configured with an EasySpray NanoSource (Thermo Scientific). Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution = 120,000), and data-dependent MS2 scans performed in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation (NCE = 35) following isolation with the instrument's quadrupole. Reporter ion detection was performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution = 60,000) using MS3 scans following synchronous precursor isolation of the top 10 ions in the quadrupole, and higher-energy collisional dissociation in the ion-routing multipole (NCE = 65).

### Data Protocol
RAW instrument files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) version 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Scientific). For each of the TMT experiments, raw files from the 18 fractions were merged and searched with the SEQUEST HT search engine with a Mus musculus canonical UniProt protein database downloaded January 2018 (22,276 entries) along with 179 common contaminant sequences. Searches were configured with static modifications for the TMT reagents (+229.163 Da) on lysines and N termini, carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da) on cysteines, dynamic modifications for oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da), parent ion tolerance of 1.25 Da, fragment mass tolerance of 1.0005 Da, monoisotopic masses, and trypsin cleavage (max 2 missed cleavages). Searches used a reversed sequence decoy strategy to control peptide false discovery and identifications were validated by Percolator software.  Only peptides with q scores less than 0.05 were accepted, and at least one unique peptide was required for matching a protein entry for its identification. Search results and TMT reporter ion intensities were exported as text files and processed with Python scripts (https://github.com/pwilmart/PAW_pipeline). A median reporter ion intensity peak height cutoff of 750 was used, along with an additional cutoff of 20 ppm parent ion tolerance and all reporter ion intensities for unique peptides matched to each respective protein were summed to create total protein intensities. Zero values were substituted with an intensity of 150, which is approximately half of the minimum observed reporter ion intensity in any given channel. Proteins where quantitation was based on a single spectrum or where the average reporter ion intensity was below 4000 were excluded from further analysis. Normalizations, differential protein abundance between groups, and multiple testing corrections was determined using the Bioconductor package edgeR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Acetylation, Muscle contraction, Acetyltransferases

### Affiliations
OHSU
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery School of Medicine  University of California San Diego  9500 Gilman Drive MC0863  La Jolla, CA, USA

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Simon Schenk
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery School of Medicine  University of California San Diego  9500 Gilman Drive MC0863  La Jolla, CA, USA


