### Accession
PXD026545

### Title
RBBP9 interactors in Fanconi Anaemia

### Description
The Fanconi Anaemia (FA) pathway resolves replication fork-stalling inter-strand crosslinks (ICLs) and is mutated in Fanconi anaemia. FA is a rare recessive chromosomal instability syndrome, resulting in hypersensitivity to DNA-crosslinkers, and particularly disadvantageous for stem cell growth and maintenance. FA individuals have an increased risk to haematological malignancies (AML) and head-and-neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC), often very aggressive. Systemic intolerance due to somatic cell hypersensitivity to standard chemo-radio-therapy in patients limits treatment options in FA-HNSCC underscoring an urgent, unmet need to develop novel therapeutic strategies. Here, we performed unbiased functional genomic siRNA screens to unveil genetic interactions that are synthetic lethal with FA pathway deficiency, in a panel of patient-derived, FA-core-complex mutated HNSCC cell lines. We identified RBBP9, LAMTOR2, PSMB2 and PSMC1, among others, as potential FA-HNSCC-specific hits. We demonstrate that RBBP9, a poorly characterized serine hydrolase is synthetically lethal in FA-defective HNSCC and crucial for FA-HNSCC survival. RBBP9 interaction partners are identified in a RBBP9-FLAG IP-MS experiment.

### Sample Protocol
2E6 HEK293T cells were seeded one day before transfection with 2 – 5 ug of the constructs pCMV3-RBBP9-FLAG (Sino Biological, # HG-16910-CF) and pIRES-Neo-FLAG-FANCC (cloned in-house, previously described). Plasmid DNA constructs were mixed with FuGENE reagent (Promega, Cat#E2311) in a 1:3 (ug:ul) ratio in low-serum OptiMEM medium (GIBCO, Cat# 31985047) as per the manufacturer’s instructions, allowed to complex for 15 minutes, gently layered drop-wise on cells and grown under standard cell culture conditions. After 48h, transfected HEK293T cells were scraped in 1 ml of cold lysis buffer (1% Nonidet P-40 substitute; 10% glycerol; 50 mM MgCl2, 200mM NaCl, Protease and phosphatase inhibitors) and cleared by centrifugation at 4°C, 10000 rpm. Cleared lysates were incubated with 40ul anti FLAG M2®™ beads (SIGMA, Cat# M8823) overnight at 4 ̊C while rotating. By placing Eppendorf tubes on a magnetic rack, beads were washed three times with lysis buffer and bound proteins were eluted using 100µl of 150 ng/µl of 3x FLAG-peptide (SIGMA, Cat# F4799), as per manufacturer’s instructions and boiled in LDS sample buffer (NuPAGE, Cat# NP0007) FLAG IP samples  were lysed in 1X NuPage LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen, #NP0007) and 50 µM DTT. Lysates were sonicated for 3x 20 seconds and equal volumes were loaded on a 12.5% acrylamide/bis-acrylamide gel. Electrophoresis was performed at 200V. Gels were fixed for 15 minutes in 50% ethanol containing 3% phosphoric acid and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 in 34% methanol and 3% phosphoric acid. Each sample was processed for in-gel digestion. Proteins were in-gel reduced and alkylated with 10 mM DTT and 54 mM Iodoacetamide (Sigma, Missouri, USA), and each lane was cut in five bands. Each band was cut into 1 mm3 cubes. Proteins were digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (6.25 ng/ml) (Promega, WI, USA) overnight and extracted from the gel with 1%  formic acid and 2x with 5% formic acid in 50% ACN. Peptide extracts were pooled and concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge, dissolved in 50 µl loading solvent (4% ACN +0.5% TFA), and filtered through a 0.45 µm membrane (Millipore). 5µl peptides were injected per sample into an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 50 cm × 75 μm ID Pepmap Acclaim C18 (1.9 μm, 120 Å )column (Thermo, Bremen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 3 μl/min on a 10 mm × 75 μm ID Pepmap Acclaim C18 trap column in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% gradient (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) in 90 min (120 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the Orbitrap analyser using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 15.000 (at m/z 200) in the Orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a maxIT of 60 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swissprot Human FASTA file (release April 2020, 42347  entries, canonical and isoforms) using MaxQuant 1.6.10.43. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. Proteins were quantified by spectral counting. Spectral counts were normalized on the sum of the counts per sample. Alternatively, the LFQ intensity was used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fanconi anaemia, Ip-ms, Hnscc, Rbbp9, Sirna screen, Label-free, Flag

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Amsterdam UMC

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


