### Accession
PXD032717

### Title
Lyve-1 deficiency plasma proteomics

### Description
Hyaluronan receptor LYVE-1 is expressed by liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (LSEC), lymphatic endothelial cells and specialized macrophages. Besides binding hyaluronan, LYVE-1 mediates adhesion of leukocytes and cancer cells to endothelial cells. Here, we analyzed the impact of LYVE-1 on physiological liver functions and metastasis.  Mice with deficiency of Lyve-1 (Lyve-1 KO) were analyzed using histology, immunofluorescence, RNA sequencing, plasma proteomics and flow cytometry. Liver metastasis was studied by intrasplenic/intravenous injection of melanoma (B16F10luc2, WT31) or colorectal carcinoma (MC38) cell lines. Results: Hepatic architecture, liver size, endothelial differentiation and angiocrine functions were unaltered in Lyve-1 KO mice. Hyaluronan plasma levels were significantly increased in Lyve-1-KO mice; besides, plasma proteomics revealed increased carbonic anhydrase-2 and decreased FXIIIA, potential modulators of metastatis. Furthermore, gene expression analysis of LSEC indicated regulation of immunological pathways. Therefore, liver metastasis of a highly and of a weekly immunogenic tumor, i.e. melanoma and colorectal carcinoma (CRC), was analyzed in Lyve-1 KO mice. Hepatic metastasis of B16F10 luc2 and WT31 melanoma cells, but not MC38 CRC cells, was significantly reduced in Lyve-1 KO mice. While short-term adhesion assays with B16F10 luc2 cells in vivo did not show differences between Lyve-1 KO and wild-type mice, increased numbers of resident hepatic CD4+, CD8+ and regulatory T cells were detected in Lyve-1 KO livers. In addition, iron deposition was detected in F4/80+ liver macrophages known to exert pro-inflammatory effects. Conclusions: LYVE-1 deficiency controlled hepatic metastasis in a tumor cell-specific manner reducing hepatic metastasis of melanoma, but not CRC. Anti-tumorigenic effects are likely due to enhancement of the resident hepatic immune microenvironment.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma Proteomics Protein Digestion Plasma samples were lysed in 4% SDS and reduced (TCEP, 10 mM) and alkylated (CAA, 20 mM) for 60 min at 45°C and digested using the SP3 digestion technique using a one to one mixture of two different magnet beads (Sera-Mag(TM) Magnetic Carboxylate Modified Particles (Hydrophobic) # GE44152105050250,  Sera-Mag(TM) Magnetic Carboxylate Modified Particles (Hydrophylic) # GE24152105050250). 3 µL of washed bead mixture (3 x PBS wash) was added to 20 µg of protein lysate and acetonitrile was added to a final concentration of 50%. The lysate was incubated for 8 min on a magnet and the liquid was removed. Proteins bound to the beads, were washed twice with 160 µL acetonitrile using the CyBio Flex liquid handler system (Analytic Jena, Germany). Beads were dried for 5 minutes and 20 µL of a digestion solution containing 0.1 µg Trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) and 0.1 µg Lys-C (Wako) in 20 mM HEPES pH=8.5 was added for overnight incubation at 37°C. The solution was incubated for 5 min in an ultrasonic batch to dissolve beads. Peptides were cleaned-up by 2 wash steps using 200 µL acetonitrile. Beads were incubated in 2% freshly prepared DMSO (Sigma Aldrich) and dried to complete dryness in a speed vac concentrator (Eppendorf) and further processed using the StageTip technique. Prior to LC-MS/MS measurements, peptides were re-suspended in 10 µL 2% acetonitrile and 2% formic acid.   Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry.  LC–MS/MS instrumentation consisted out of an Easy nLC-1200 (Thermo Fisher) coupled via a nanospray-ionization source to a Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher)  mass spectrometer. A binary buffer system consisting out of solvent A and B (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid and buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) was utilized for peptide separation. The in-house packed column length was 40 cm (ID = 75 µm). The column was filled with PoroShell C18 2.7-µm (Agilent Technologies) beads and a column oven controlled the temperate at 50 °C (PRSO-V2, Sonation). The buffer B percentage was linearly raised from 5% to 27% within 69 min and further increased to 65% within 10 min. Buffer B content was then increased to 95% within 6 min. The column was washed at 95% B for 10 min. The total method time was 95 min per samples but the acquisition stopped after 90 min followed by 5 min column washing at 95% B. All samples were measured in random order. The mass spectrometer operated in data independent acquisition mode. MS1 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 and an AGC target of 1 × 106. In total, 48 DIA windows were acquired at an isolation m/z range of 15 Th and the isolation windows overlapped by 2 Th, covering a mass range from 320 to 1040 m/z. Resolution of MS2 spectra was set to 15,000 at 200 m/z using a maximal injection time of 22 ms and stepped normalized collision energies (NCE) of 26, 28, 30. The samples were measured using the FAIMS interface at compensation value of -50 using the following temperature settings to decrease the FAIMS resolution: Inner electrode temperature: 99.5°C. and the outer electrode temperature was set to 85°C. The FAIMS gas was set to 0 L/min (off) for single

### Data Protocol
Proteomics Data Analysis and Data Processing. Raw files were acquired using DIA (Data independent acquisition) mode. We utilized DIA-NN version 1.8. First a library was generated using plasma proteomic samples acquired raw files using the Mus Musculus Uniport (downloaded december 2020) reference proteome fasta file (available within the PRIDE repository). The options ‘Fasta digest for library-free search / library generation’ and ‘Deep learning-based spectra, RTs and IMs prediction’ were enabled. A single miss cleavage was allowed and N-term M excision and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues were enabled as fixed modification. ‘Mass accuracy’, ‘MS1 accuracy’, and ‘Scan window’ options were set to 0 (automatic interference). The neuronal network classifier was to ‘Double-pass mode’. The Precursor m/z range was defined to 300 – 1200. Further settings were ‘Protein interence’ = Isoform IDs and the quantification strategy was set to ‘Robust LC (high accuracy)’. The generated library containing 5216 potentially precursors was then used to re-analyze the project specific raw files . Quantities matrices were exported and the protein group specific output was used in the downstream analysis. To identify significantly different proteins, a two-sided t-test was applied using log2 transformed MaxLFQ intensities calculated within the DIA-NN software. The FDR was controlled to 5% using a permutation-based approach in the Perseus software. Results were visualized using the Instant Clue software. The library is also used in project PXD029342.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lyve-1, Hepatic immune microenvironment, Plasma, Liver homeostasis, Liver metastasis

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, 50931 Cologne, Germany
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Hendrik Nolte
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne, Germany


