### Accession
PXD037684

### Title
Mass spectrometry-based proteomics analysis of human substantia nigra from Parkinson's disease patients identifies multiple pathways potentially involved in the disease

### Description
Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most prevalent neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra (SN) of the brain. Despite decades of studies, the precise pathogenic mechanism of PD is still elusive. An unbiased proteomic analysis of PD patients’ brains allows the identification of critical proteins and molecular pathways that lead to dopamine cell death and α-synuclein deposition and the resulting devastating clinical symptoms. In this study, we conducted an in-depth proteome analysis of human SN tissues from 15 PD patients and 15 healthy control (HC) individuals combining Orbitrap mass spectrometry with the isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT)-based multiplexing technology. We identified 10,040 proteins with 1,140 differentially expressed proteins in the SN of PD patients. Pathway analysis showed that the ribosome pathway was the most enriched one, followed by GABAergic synapse, retrograde endocannabinoid signaling, cell adhesion molecules (CAMs), morphine addiction, Prion disease, and Parkinson's disease pathways. Strikingly, the majority of the proteins enriched in the ribosome pathway were mitochondrial ribosomal proteins (mitoribosomes; MRPs). The subsequent protein-protein interaction (PPI) analysis and the weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) confirmed that the mitoribosome is the most enriched protein cluster. Furthermore, the mitoribosome was also identified in our analysis of a replication set of 10 PD and 9 HC SN tissues. This study provides potential disease pathways involved in PD and paves the way to study further the pathogenic mechanism of PD.

### Sample Protocol
The SN samples were lysed by sonication in 8 M urea/50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate. The amount of protein in the samples was quantified using a bicinchoninic acid assay kit. To analyze 30 samples using 11-plex TMT method, three batches of 11-plex TMT experiments were conducted including a reference master pool (MP) in each set. The MP was used for the normalization of the quantification values from the three sets. Proteins were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM tris (2-Carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride and 40 mM chloroacetamide at room temperature for 1 h. The proteins were then digested with Lys-C in a ratio of 1:100 at 37° C for 3 h. Subsequently, trypsin digestion was conducted by diluting the urea concentration to 2 M by adding the 3 volume of 50 mM TEAB followed by adding trypsin in a ratio of 1:50 and incubating at 37° C overnight. The resulting peptides were desalted with C18 StageTips and labeled with 11-plex TMT reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The peptides were pooled and pre-fractionated by basic pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography into 96 fractions, followed by concatenating into 24 fractions by combining every 24th fraction. The Agilent 1260 offline LC system was used for bRPLC fractionation. In brief, the dried samples were reconstituted in solvent A (10 mM TEAB in water, pH 8.5) and loaded onto a column (Agilent 300 Extend-C18 column, 5 µm, 4.6 mm × 25 cm). Peptides were resolved using an increasing gradient of solvent B (10 mM TEAB in 90% acetonitrile (ACN), pH 8.5) at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min. The total run time was 150 min. Subsequently, the concatenated 24 samples were vacuum dried using a SpeedVac and then stored at -80° C until use. The preparation of samples used for the validation was conducted in the same way as described above except for the preparation of the MP and the employment of the 10 plex of TMT. The peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano nanoflow liquid chromatography system. The peptides from each fraction were reconstituted in 0.5% formic acid (FA) and the reconstituted peptides solution was loaded on a trap column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100, LC C18, 5 μm, 100 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper) at a flow rate of 8 μl/min. The peptides were resolved at 0.3 μl/min flow rate using an increasing gradient of solvent B (0.1% FA in 95% ACN) on an analytical column (Easy-Spray™ PepMap™ RSLC C18, 2 μm, 75 μm × 50 cm), which was fitted with an EASY-Spray ion source that was operated at a voltage of about 2.0 kV. The total run time was 120 min. Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out in data-dependent acquisition mode with a full scan in the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) range of 300 to 1,800 in the “Top Speed” mode with 3 sec per cycle. MS1 and MS2 were acquired for the precursor ions and the peptide fragmentation ions, respectively. MS1 scans were measured at a resolution of 120,000 at an m/z of 200. MS2 scans were acquired by fragmenting precursor ions using the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) method, which was set to 35% of collision energy, and detected at a mass resolution of 50,000 at an m/z of 200. Automatic gain control targets were set to one million ions for MS1 and 0.05 million ions for MS2. The maximum ion injection time was set to 50 ms for MS1 and 100 ms for MS2. The precursor isolation window was set to 1.6 m/z with 0.4 m/z of offset. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 sec, and singly-charged ions were rejected. Internal calibration was carried out using the lock mass option (m/z 445.12002) from ambient air. The peptides for the validation experiment were analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer coupled with an EASY-nano liquid chromatography II system. The peptides from each fraction were reconstituted in 0.5% FA and the reconstituted peptides solution was loaded on the trap column at a flow rate of 10 μl/min. The peptides were resolved at 0.25 μl/min flow rate using an increasing gradient of solvent B (0.1% FA in 95% ACN) on an analytical column (75 μm × 50 cm) that packed in a house for the LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out in the DDA with a full scan in the m/z range of 300 to 1,700 in top N mode setting to 8 most intense ions. Full MS scans were measured at a resolution of 120,000 at an m/z of 400. MS2 scans were acquired by fragmenting precursor ions using the HCD method and detected at a mass resolution of 30,000 at an m/z of 400. AGC targets were set to one million ions for MS1 and 0.2 million ions for MS2. The maximum ion injection time was set to 100 ms for MS1 and 300 ms for MS2. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 sec, and singly-charged ions were rejected. Internal calibration was carried out using the lock mass option (m/z 371.101236 and 445.12002) from ambient air.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2.0.388; Thermo Fisher Scientific) suite was used for quantitation and identification. During MS2 preprocessing, the top 10 peaks in each window of 100 Da were selected for database search. The tandem mass spectrometry data were then searched using SEQUEST HT algorithms against a human UniProt database (released in May 2018) with common contaminant proteins. The search parameters used were as follows: a) trypsin as a proteolytic enzyme (with up to 2 missed cleavages); b) peptide precursor mass error tolerance of 10 ppm; c) fragment mass error tolerance of 0.02 Da; and d) carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146 Da) and TMT tags (+229.16293 Da) on lysine and peptide N-termini as fixed modifications; d) oxidation (+15.99492 Da) of methionine as a variable modification. The minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids and the minimum number of peptides per protein was set to 1. Peptides and proteins were filtered at a 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) at the PSM level using a percolator node and at the protein level using protein FDR validator node, respectively. The protein quantification was performed with the following parameters and methods. The most confident centroid option was used for the integration mode while the reporter ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm. The MS order was set to MS2 and the activation type was set to HCD. Both unique and razor peptides were used for peptide quantification, while protein groups were considered for peptide uniqueness. Co-isolation threshold was set to 50%. Reporter ion abundance was computed based on signal-to-noise ratios (S/N) and the missing intensity values were replaced with the minimum value. The average reporter S/N threshold set to 50. The quantification value corrections for isobaric tags and data normalization were disabled. Protein grouping was performed with a strict parsimony principle to generate the final protein groups. All proteins sharing the same set or subset of identified peptides were grouped, while protein groups with no unique peptides were filtered out. Proteome Discoverer iterated through all spectra and selected PSM with the highest number of unambiguous and unique peptides, and then final protein groups were generated. The Proteome Discoverer summed all the reporter ion abundances of PSMs for the corresponding proteins in the TMT run. The number of SN samples used in this study was 15 PD samples and 15 HC samples for the main experiment and 10 PD samples and 9 HC samples for the validation experiment. The statistical analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.0.7). The reporter ion intensity values were divided by the MP included in each set followed by dividing by median values of each protein. The relative abundance values for each sample were z-score transformed after log2 transformation. We removed proteins with one or more missing values before conducting statistical analysis. To remove batch effects, further normalization was conducted with the ComBat package. Proteins with q-values < 0.05 were considered differentially expressed in PD compared to HC groups. The fold changes between the two groups were calculated by dividing the average abundance values of each protein of PD patients by the ones of HC individuals. The P-values between the two groups were calculated by the Student's two-sample t-test. The q-values for the volcano plot were calculated by significance analysis of microarrays (SAM) and a permutation-based false discovery rate estimation. Bootstrap receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis was carried out using fbroc package in R. The sampling for the Bootstrap ROC was conducted with replacement. The area under the curve (AUC) of a bootstrap ROC of two groups in each sampling was computed. Mean and SD values of AUCs from 1,000 bootstrap ROC were then calculated. The q-values of bootstrap AUCs analysis data were calculated as follows; 1) The mean AUC values for non-permutated and permuted data were sorted in descending order for proteins with mean AUCs > 0.5 and in ascending order for proteins with mean AUCs < 0.5, 2) The ratios of the protein numbers for the non-permuted data to the protein numbers for the permuted data were calculated as lowering the cut-off threshold, and the ratios were used as q-values.

### Publication Abstract
Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most prevalent neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra (SN) of the brain. Despite decades of studies, the precise pathogenic mechanism of PD is still elusive. An unbiased proteomic analysis of PD patient's brain allows the identification of critical proteins and molecular pathways that lead to dopamine cell death and &#x3b1;-synuclein deposition and the resulting devastating clinical symptoms. In this study, we conducted an in-depth proteome analysis of human SN tissues from 15 PD patients and 15 healthy control individuals combining Orbitrap mass spectrometry with the isobaric tandem mass tag-based multiplexing technology. We identified 10,040 proteins with 1140 differentially expressed proteins in the SN of PD patients. Pathway analysis showed that the ribosome pathway was the most enriched one, followed by gamma-aminobutyric acidergic synapse, retrograde endocannabinoid signaling, cell adhesion molecules, morphine addiction, Prion disease, and PD pathways. Strikingly, the majority of the proteins enriched in the ribosome pathway were mitochondrial ribosomal proteins (mitoribosomes). The subsequent protein-protein interaction analysis and the weighted gene coexpression network analysis confirmed that the mitoribosome is the most enriched protein cluster. Furthermore, the mitoribosome was also identified in our analysis of a replication set of ten PD and nine healthy control SN tissues. This study provides potential disease pathways involved in PD and paves the way to study further the pathogenic mechanism of PD.

### Keywords
Parkinson's disease, Substantia nigra, Proteomics, Mitoribosomes, Mass spectrometry, Human brain tissue

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Neuroregeneration and Stem Cell Programs, Institute for Cell Engineering, Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University

### Submitter
chanhyun na

### Lab Head
Dr Chan Hyun Na
Neuroregeneration and Stem Cell Programs, Institute for Cell Engineering, Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University


