### Accession
PXD018013

### Title
NAA15 haploinsufficiency can cause congenital heart disease and perturbs protein levels in induced pluripotent stem cells

### Description
NAA15 is a component of the NatA complex that acetylates amino terminal (Nt) protein residues and influences protein synthesis. We identified multiple damaging NAA15 variants in congenital heart disease patients, including four loss-of-function (LoF) variants, one missense (R276W) de novo variant and 15 rare inherited missense variants. To understand the effects of these variants on NatA complex activity, we introduced heterozygous LoF, compound heterozygous and missense residues iPS cells using CRISPR/Cas9. Haploinsufficient NAA15 iPS cells differentiate into cardiomyocytes, unlike NAA15-null iPS cells, presumably due to alterations in the amount and composition of the NatA complex. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based N-terminomics analyses showed that nearly 80% of iPS cell proteins displayed partial or complete Nt-acetylation. Between null and haploinsufficient NAA15 cells, 32 and 9 NatA-specific targeted proteins differed in their Nt-acetylation degree, respectively. In addition, the steady-state protein levels of more than 560 proteins were altered in mutant compared to wild type cells. While most NatA-specific Nt-acetylated proteins were fully acetylated, ~19 proteins were partially acetylated. NAA15-haploinsufficiency abrogated Nt-acetylation of 4 of these proteins but did not affect the acetylation of the other 15 proteins. Similar patterns of acetylation loss in few proteins were observed in both NAA15 haploinsufficient and NAA15 R276W iPS cells. These studies define human proteins that appear to require the full NAA15 complex for normal acetylation and imply that deficiencies in one or more of these NAA15 target proteins contribute to normal cardiac development. The current dataset contains all N-terminomics data related to this study.

### Sample Protocol
Pellets from 1.10^7 iPSCs were lysed for 30 min on ice in 1.5 ml of 50 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 0.8% (wt/vol) CHAPS lysis buffer containing protease inhibitor cocktail. The lysates were centrifuged at 16,000 g at 4°C and the supernatant was collected. Sample volumes were adjusted to 2 ml of 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 7.9 containing 4 M of guanidinium hydrochloride. Cysteines were reduced and S-alkylated for 15 min at 37°C in the dark using 15 mM TCEP and 30 mM iodoacetamide respectively. This step was followed by desalting on a NAP-10 gel filtration column to remove reagents and lower the guanidinium hydrochloride concentration to 2 M, also in 50 mM Sodium phosphate buffer. Then, all α- and ɛ-amines of the proteins were acetylated using 5 mM of an N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) ester of 13CD3-acetate (Acetyl + 4 Da) for 1 h at 30°C. This step was once repeated and allows to distinguish in vivo from in vitro acetylation. The NHS-ester was quenched with 40 mM of glycine and possible O-acetylation of the side-chains of serine, threonine and tyrosine was reversed with 100mM of hydroxylamine. This was followed by a desalting step over a NAP-10 column and overnight digestion with trypsin in a trypsin/protein ratio of 1/50 (w/w) – which now only cleaved after Arg residues as since Lys residues were acetylated – in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH7.6. Following digestion, N-terminal pyroglutamates were removed prior to the Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) step which enriches for N-terminal peptides. Note that this step was performed to prevent pyroglutamate-starting peptides from running through the SCX-column and thereby being enriched. In this step, 25 µl purified pGAPase (625 mU) was incubated at 37°C for 10 minutes with 1 µl of 800 mM NaCl, 1 µl of 50 mM EDTA (pH 8.0) and 11 µl of freshly prepared 50 mM cysteamine for activation. The peptide sample was resuspended in 212 µl of freshly made pyro-glu buffer containing 16 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 3 mM cysteamine and 50 µM aprotinin. The activated pGAPase (625 mU) was added to each sample together with 25 μl of Q-cyclase (1250 mU) and incubated for 1 h at 37 °C. Next, N-terminally blocked peptides were enriched by SCX (mixed mode SCX cartridge, Bond Elut certify 200 mg, 3 ml, 40 µm) in 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 3 (SCX buffer A) as such peptides will not bind to the SCX resin at this pH. The SCX run-through fractions that were collected in 6 ml of 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 3 with 70% acetonitrile (SCX buffer B) were vacuum-dried. Methionine residues were oxidized to their sulfoxide forms in 0.6% hydrogen peroxide for 30 min at 30°C and the peptides were then purified on OMIX C18 pipette tips (Agilent). These peptides were vacuum-dried and re-suspended in loading solvent (0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile, 98/2 (v/v)) and about 3 µg was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). The peptides were first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and, after flushing from the trapping column, the peptides were separated on an analytical column in the needle (made in-house, 75 μm I.D. × 400 mm, 1.9 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch) using a non-linear 150 min gradient from 2 to 56% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile, 20/80 (v/v)) at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min and at a constant temperature of 50°C (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation). Following a 10 min wash reaching 99% solvent B, the column was re-equilibrated with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water).  The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was set to 2.5 kV and the capillary temperature was 250°C. One MS1 scan (m/z 375-1500, AGC target 3E6 ions, maximum ion injection time of 60 ms), acquired at a resolution of  60,000 (at 200 m/z) was followed by up to 16 tandem MS scans, acquired at a resolution of 15,000 (at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria: AGC target 1E5 ions, maximum ion injection time of 80 ms, isolation window of 1.5 m/z, fixed first mass of 145 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, under fill ratio 2%, intensity threshold 1.3E4, exclusion of unassigned and singly charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time of 12 s. The normalized collision energy was set to 28% and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.12003 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
Recorded MS/MS spectra were searched against the human proteins in the Swiss-Prot database by the Mascot algorithm (version 2.5.1). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, oxidation of methionine residues and 13CD3-acetylation on lysine residues (Acetyl +4 Da) were set as fixed modifications.  Acetylation (Ace) and 13CD3-acetylation on the peptide N-terminus (Acetyl +4 Da) were used for quantitation. The enzyme was set to semiArgC/P. A second, similar search was done in parallel to identify the unlabeled peptides, allowing no modification/label on the peptide N-terminus. In this search internal peptides can be identified. The same settings as above were used, supplemented with pyro-glutamine on N-terminal glutamine residues as a variable modification. Only peptides that were ranked first and scored above the threshold score set at 99% confidence were withheld. Identified peptides were quantified automatically by the Mascot Distiller software. This software tries to fit an ideal isotopic distribution on the experimental data based on the peptide average amino acid composition. This is followed by extraction of the XIC signal (extracted ion current) of both peptide components (light and heavy) from the raw data. Ratios are calculated by integrating the area below the light and heavy isotopic envelope of the corresponding peptide. If the software was able to perform a high-quality isotopic pattern match leading to reliable ratio calculation, this ratio is flagged valid = ‘TRUE’. ‘FALSE’ ratios were not used for further data analysis. If required, manual ratio validation can be performed for selected peptides. The degree of acetylation was calculated using the following equation: Ac % = (ratio (L/H) / ratio (L/H) + 1)x100 In some cases, peptides were identified and quantified multiple times. In these cases, the mean of the acetylation degree was taken and, additionally, the standard deviation on this mean value was calculated.  A list containing all identified and successfully quantified acetylated N-terminal sequences was created. Acetylation degrees were calculated separately for all samples. Only N-termini (n=989) which were semi-tryptic and start at amino acid position 1 or 2 (considering iMet-cleavage) were considered.

### Publication Abstract
[Figure: see text].

### Keywords
Ipsc, N-terminal acetylation, N-terminomics

### Affiliations
Medical Protein Chemistry
1 Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115

### Submitter
An Staes

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan Seidman
1 Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115


