### Accession
PXD025925

### Title
Comprehensive spectral  library generation for identification and quantification of endometrial cancer protein biomarkers in cervico-vaginal fluid

### Description
This study focuses on the potential of detecting endometrial cancer based on the proteins and peptides expressed in cervico-vaginal fluid.Sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH-MS), an accurate and reproducible platform for analysing biological samples, offers a technological advance for biomarker discovery due to its reproducibility, sensitivity and potential for data re-interrogation. SWATH-MS requires a spectral library in order to identify and quantify peptides from multiplexed mass spectrometry data.Here, we present a spectral library of thousands of proteins in the cervico-vaginal fluid of women with or at risk of endometrial cancer. Pooled cervico-vaginal fluid samples from 19 women, comprising of 9 endometial cancer cases(both endometriod and non-endometriod), 3 atypical hyperplasias and 7 controls (symptomatic post-menopausal women with no evidence of endometrial cancer) were used for library generation. We have combined these data with a library of over 6,000 proteins generated based on mass spectrometric analysis of two endometrial cancer cell lines This important resource will enable the identification of endometrial cancer biomarkers in cervico-vaginal fluid and advances our knowledge of the role of proteomics in endometrial cancer detection.

### Sample Protocol
Cervico-vaginal samples were obtained using a Delphi screener. Cervicovaginal fluid samples were seperated into supernatant and pellets. Pellets from both cervico-vaginal fluid and EC cell lines were subjected to lysis and protein extraction. All samples were subjected to proteolytic digestion with trypsin, peptide fractionation using high-pH reverse phase liquid chromatography and LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All LC-MS/MS data obtained from the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Data Citation 1) were converted into an mzXML format, centroided and searched using X!Tandem (version PILEDRIVER – 2015/04/01) against the full 20,271 non-redundant canonical sequences (without isoforms) of the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (December 17th 2015) appended with iRT peptides and decoy sequences. The datasets (cervico-vaginal and cell lines) were searched individually using the default X!Tandem search parameters with few modifications as follows: a maximum valid expectation value of 10; fixed residue mass modification of +57.022 for carbamidomethylated cysteine; variable residue mass modification of +16.0 for oxidized methionine; enzyme specificity = trypsin; spectrum parameters including a fragment monoisotopic mass error of 40 ppm and a parent mono-isotopic mass error of ± 15 ppm; spectrum conditioning parameters of 100.0 spectrum dynamic range, total spectrum peaks 50, a minimum parent (M + H)+ of 400.0, and a minimum fragment m/z of 150. SpectraST, operating in a library generation mode, was used for consensus library generation while the TargetedFileConverter tool from the OpenSWATH workflow was used to convert TSV files to TraML format. Decoys were subsequently appended to the TraML assay using the OpenSwathDecoyGenerator tool operating in a reverse mode with an identity threshold of 1 and a similarity threshold of 0.05Da. The consensus assay library was subsequently converted into a Transitions Markup Language (TraML) file format for downstream analysis.The library was subsequently validated using swath ms data obtained from swath ms analysis of vaginalsamples from an indepdent ccohort.

### Publication Abstract
Endometrial cancer is the most common gynaecological malignancy in high-income countries and its incidence is rising. Early detection, aided by highly sensitive and specific biomarkers, has the potential to improve outcomes as treatment can be provided when it is most likely to effect a cure. Sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH-MS), an accurate and reproducible platform for analysing biological samples, offers a technological advance for biomarker discovery due to its reproducibility, sensitivity and potential for data re-interrogation. SWATH-MS requires a spectral library in order to identify and quantify peptides from multiplexed mass spectrometry data. Here we present a bespoke spectral library of 154,206 transitions identifying 19,394 peptides and 2425 proteins in the cervico-vaginal fluid of postmenopausal women with, or at risk of, endometrial cancer. We have combined these data with a library of over 6000 proteins generated based on mass spectrometric analysis of two endometrial cancer cell lines. This unique resource enables the study of protein biomarkers for endometrial cancer detection in cervico-vaginal fluid. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with unique identifier PXD025925.

### Keywords
Endemetrial cancer, Spectral library, Proteomics, Biomarkers, Cervico-vaginal fluid

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Division of Cancer Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, 5th Floor Research, St Mary’s Hospital, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9WL, UK

### Submitter
Kelechi Njoku

### Lab Head
Dr Emma J Crosbie
Division of Cancer Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, 5th Floor Research, St Mary’s Hospital, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9WL, UK


