### Accession
PXD003285

### Title
Structural elucidation of a novel mechanism for  bacteriophage-based inhibition of the RNA degradosome

### Description
In all domains of life, the catalysed degradation of RNA facilitates rapid adaption to changing environmental conditions. We identified a virus-encoded protein that directly binds and inhibits the RNA degradation machinery of its bacterial host, allowing efficient accumulation of viral RNA in the infected cell. Encoded by the giant phage фKZ, KZ37/Dip associates with two RNA binding sites of the RNase E component of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa RNA degradosome. Thereby, KZ37/Dip competes with the binding of RNA substrates, resulting in effective inhibition of RNA degradation. The crystal structure of KZ37/Dip (2.2 Å) reveals an unprecedented fold for which there are no identified structural homologues. The protein forms a homo-dimer that resembles a partially opened scroll and binds RNase E through exposed acidic patches on its convex outer surface. Through the activity of KZ37/Dip, фKZ has evolved a unique mechanism to down regulate a key process of its host.

### Sample Protocol
Protein expression and purification The RNA degradosome of P. aeruginosa was purified using the PAO1 Rne::StrepII strain. A 2 l culture was grown until OD600nm 0.6, after which the cells were collected and resuspended in 20 ml resuspension buffer (10 mM Tris pH 8,0, 150 mM NaCl, 0,1 % (v/v) NP-40, 2,5 mM Pefabloc® SC) supplied with 50 mg HEWL. After one freeze-thaw cycle, the mixture was supplemented with 1 ml 10x BugBuster® Protein extraction reagent (Novagen) and 20 µl Benzonase nuclease (Novagen) and incubated at room temperature for 25 min while gently agitation. After centrifugation, the RNA degradosome was purified from the supernatant using 1 ml pre-washed Strep-Tactin® Sepharose beads (IBA) using the manufacturer’s protocol and dialysed to 50 mM Tris pH 8.0 and 150 mM NaCl. KZ37 of phage φKZ was fused to a His-tag using the pEXP5-TOPO vector (Life Technologies), which was transformed into E. coli BL21 (DE3) pLysS cells. The protein was expressed and purified using a HisTrap HP column followed by size exclusion chromatography using a superdex 200 16/600 column (GE life sciences) according the manufacturer’s protocol. Purified proteins were either used directly for crystallization experiments or supplemented with 10 % glycerol and stored at -80°C.  The RNA degradosome of E. coli and fragment of the CTD were expressed and purified as described previously (Tsai YC et al– NAR 2012).  Fragments of the P. aeruginosa RNA degradosome were N-terminally fused to a GST-tag by cloning them into a pGEX-6p1 vector using the BamHI and XhoI restriction sites (GE life sciences). The proteins were purified by Glutathione affinity chromatography followed by Heparin affinity chromatography (for RNase E constructs 583-607, 583-636, 756-775, 756-835 and 756-901) and finally size exclusion chromatography using a superdex 75 16/600 column (GE life sciences).

### Data Protocol
The engineered rne::StrepII strain was used for affinity purifications, after infection by one of the seven phages as described in Van den Bossche et al., 2014. Eluted protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE gel, after which the gel was cut into slices and subjected to a tryptic digest. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed by an Easy-nLC 1000 liquid chromatograph (Thermo Scientific) which was on-line coupled to a mass calibrated LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific) (Van den Bossche et al., 2014; Ceyssens et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
In all domains of life, the catalysed degradation of RNA facilitates rapid adaptation to changing environmental conditions, while destruction of foreign RNA is an important mechanism to prevent host infection. We have identified a virus-encoded protein termed gp37/Dip, which directly binds and inhibits the RNA degradation machinery of its bacterial host. Encoded by giant phage &#x444;KZ, this protein associates with two RNA binding sites of the RNase E component of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa RNA degradosome, occluding them from substrates and resulting in effective inhibition of RNA degradation and processing. The 2.2 &#xc5; crystal structure reveals that this novel homo-dimeric protein has no identifiable structural homologues. Our biochemical data indicate that acidic patches on the convex outer surface bind RNase E. Through the activity of Dip, &#x444;KZ has evolved a unique mechanism to down regulate a key metabolic process of its host to allow accumulation of viral RNA in infected cells.

### Keywords
X-ray crystallography, Escherichia coli, Φkz, Rna degradosome, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Protein-rna interactions, Protein-protein interactions, Phage

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Gene Technology   Kasteelpark Arenberg 21   3001 Leuven (Heverlee)   Belgium
FBI

### Submitter
Jean-Paul Noben

### Lab Head
Dr Lavigne Rob
Laboratory of Gene Technology   Kasteelpark Arenberg 21   3001 Leuven (Heverlee)   Belgium


