### Accession
PXD003823

### Title
A combined transcriptomic and proteomic approach to identify toxicity pathways in early-life stages of Japanese medaka (Oryzias latipes) exposed to 1,2,5,6- tetrabromocyclooctane (TBCO)

### Description
Currently, the novel brominated flame retardant, 1,2,5,6-tetrabromocyclooctane (TBCO), is considered as a potential replacement for hexabromocyclododecane (HBCD). As such, use of TBCO could increase significantly in the near future. Therefore, this study investigated the toxicity of TBCO in order to assess its potential toxicological risks to aquatic organisms. Embryos of Japanese medaka (Oryzias latipes) were exposed to 10, 100 and 1,000 μg/L TBCO, and molecular responses were characterized by use of transcriptomics (RNAseq) and proteomics in embryos exposed to 100 μg/L TBCO that were collected on the day of hatch. TBCO was accumulated in embryos by 0.43-1.3×104 30 fold and the rate of accumulation was 1.7-1.8 day-131 . Number of days to hatch and success of hatching of embryos exposed to the two greatest concentrations of TBCO were impaired. Consistent with effects on hatching, proteins that were less abundant were enriched in pathways of embryo development and hatching. Responses of the transcriptome and proteome to TBCO also were used to predict adverse effects of TBCO. Functionally grouped gene ontology terms indicated that TBCO might impair contraction of cardiac muscle and vision, and these effects were confirmed by use of targeted bioassays designed to evaluate cardiac and visual performance. Results of this study provided a comprehensive understanding of effects of TBCO on medaka at early-life stages. Also, the study illustrated the power of “omics” approaches to explain and predict phenotypic responses to the exposure with chemicals.

### Sample Protocol
Pools of 50 embryos per exposure were homogenized on ice in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 100 mM KCl, 420 mM NaCl, 20% Glycerol, and protease inhibitor cocktail, pH=7.4) by use of a model-100 sonic dismembrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). After centrifugation at 15,000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C, the supernatant was recovered and total concentration of proteins were quantified by use of the Bradford protein assay with bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a standard.5 Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) was used for protein digestion by use of a 30 kDa molecular weight cutoff spin ultrafiltration filter. Briefly, an aliquot of each lysate, containing approximately 100 μg of protein, was transferred to a YM-30 microcon filter unit (Cat No. MRCF0R030, Millipore, Etobicoke, ON, Canada). After centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 30 min, salt and other interferences in the buffer were removed from samples by washing three times with 0.1 M Tris-HCl. Proteins were reduced with 50 μL of 5 mM DTT for 60 min at 37 oC, and then carboxymethylated for 30 min in the dark, with 15 mM of iodoacetamide. Samples were further digested overnight with 5 μg trypsin and gentle shaking. Digestion was terminated by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 1% (v/v). The final sample was collected by centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 30 min.  Each sample was loaded onto a 75 mm inner diameter fused silica microcapillary column (Polymicron Technologies, Phoenix, AZ, USA) packed with 10 cm of Luna 3-mC18 100 Å, reversed phase particles (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) and placed in-line with a nano-LC-electrospray ion source (Proxeon, Mississauga, ON, USA) interfaced to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at the University of Toronto (Toronto, ON, Canada). The organic gradient was driven by the EASY-nLC system at 300 nL/min. Mobile phases were (A) 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid and (B) 5% acetonitrile. Initially, 2% of B was increased to 6% in 2 min, then increased to 24% in 62 min, followed by an increase to 90% in 26 min and held static for 5 min, and then decreased to initial conditions of 2% of B and held for 8 min for equilibration. Positive precursor ions (400 - 2000 m/z) were subjected to data-dependent collision-induced dissociation as the instrument cycled through one full mass scan at 60,000 full-width at half maximum followed by 17 successive MS / MS scans targeting the most intense precursors with dynamic exclusion and +2 / +3 charge state selection enabled.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed by use of MaxQuant software (v1.5.1.2).6 MS/MS spectra were searched against the database for medaka protein (UniProt) containing forward and reversed (decoy) sequences, allowing for variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation and fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation. Parent mass and fragment ions were matched using a maximal initial mass deviation of 7 p.p.m and 0.5 Th, respectively. The false discovery rate for proteins was set to 0.01. Spectral count was used for label-free quantification of proteins and only proteins with spectral counts greater than 4 were used for data analysis. Proteins were defined as being differentially expressed if the fold-change in abundance was ±1.5 fold, and if the p-value was less than 0.05; as conducted previously.

### Publication Abstract
Currently, the novel brominated flame retardant 1,2,5,6-tetrabromocyclooctane (TBCO) is considered a potential replacement for hexabromocyclododecane (HBCD). Therefore, use of TBCO could increase in the near future. To assess potential toxicological risks to aquatic organisms, embryos of Japanese medaka (Oryzias latipes) were exposed to 10, 100, or 1000 &#x3bc;g/L TBCO from 2 h postfertilization until 1 day post-hatch. TBCO accumulated in embryos in the order of 0.43-1.3 &#xd7; 10(4)-fold, and the rate constant of accumulation was 1.7-1.8 per day. The number of days to hatch and the hatching success of embryos exposed to the medium and the greatest concentrations of TBCO were impaired. Responses of the transcriptome (RNA-seq) and proteome were characterized in embryos exposed to 100 &#x3bc;g/L TBCO because this was the least concentration of TBCO that caused an effect on hatching. Consistent with effects on hatching, proteins whose abundances were reduced by exposure to TBCO were enriched in embryo development and hatching pathways. Also, on the basis of the responses of transcriptome and proteome, it was predicted that TBCO might impair vision and contraction of cardiac muscle, respectively, and these effects were confirmed by targeted bioassays. This study provided a comprehensive understanding of effects of TBCO on medaka at early life stages and illustrated the power of "omics" to explain and predict phenotypic responses to chemicals.

### Keywords
Novel brominated flame retardant; rna-seq; eye development; gene ontology; pathway enrichment

### Affiliations
University of Saskatchewan
Toxicology Centre, University of Saskatchewan

### Submitter
Jon Doering

### Lab Head
Dr Jon A Doering
Toxicology Centre, University of Saskatchewan


