### Accession
PXD000520

### Title
Lysine Methylation Promotes VEGFR-2 Activation and Angiogenesis

### Description
We have used a chimeric VEGFR-2 in which the extracellular domain of mouse VEGFR-2 was replaced with the extracellular domain of human CSF-1 receptor. VEGFR-2 was immunoprecipitated with anti-VEGFR-2 antibody from PAE cells ectopically expressing VEGFR-2. The  immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted and separated on SDS-PAGE, followed by in-gel chymotrypsin or trypsin digestion.  The digested samples were analyzed by nano LC/MS/MS on a Thermo Fisher LTQ Orbitrap XL. The LC-MS/MS data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Version 1.3.0.339). MS/MS search was carried out using Sequest search algorithm against the sequence of target mouse protein from the UniProtKB database. Search parameters included chymotrypsin as the enzyme with four missed cleavage allowed; methylation at lysine and arginine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine, alkylation at cysteine, and oxidation of methionine were set as dynamic modifications. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 5 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. The false discovery rate was calculated by enabling the peptide sequence analysis using a decoy database. High confidence peptide identifications were obtained by setting a target false discovery rate threshold of 1% at the peptide level.

### Sample Protocol
We investigated methylation of VEGFR-2 in human primary umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). VEGFR-2 was methylated on both Lys and Arg residues in HUVECs (Fig. 1A), as detected by anti–methyl-lysine and arginine antibodies (fig. S1, A and B). We used a chimeric VEGFR-2 called CKR [in which the extracellular domain of VEGFR-2 was replaced with the extracellular domain of human colony-stimulating factor 1 (CSF-1) receptor (16)] to establish that the cytoplasmic domain of VEGFR-2 is directly methylated and also to avoid possible crosstalk and dimerization between VEGFR-2 and other VEGFR isoforms. Metabolic labeling of human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 or porcine aortic endothelial (PAE) cells expressing CKR with the methyl donor SAM showed that VEGFR-2 was methylated in cells (Fig. 1B). Both immature and mature (fully glycosylated and cell surface–localized) CKRs were detected, suggesting that methylation of VEGFR-2 occurs before ligand-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of VEGFR-2 (Fig. 1B). Methylation of CKR was not altered by stimulation with CSF-1 and was not detected in control vector-transfected PAE cells.

### Data Protocol
To identify the methylated Arg and Lys residues on VEGFR-2, we analyzed VEGFR-2 immunoprecipitated from PAE cells expressing VEGFR-2 by liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The MS analysis identified five methylated residues on VEGFR-2: Arg817, Lys856, Lys861, Lys1041, and Arg1115 (fig. S2A). Lys856, Lys861, Lys1041, and Arg1115 are located in the kinase domain of VEGFR-2 (22) and are surface-exposed, suggesting that they could be posttranslationally modified (fig. S2B). Lys856 and Lys861 are located in the C-loop of the kinase domain (22) upstream of the ATP binding site Lys866 (fig. S2, B and C). Lys1041 is located in the unstructured and flexible linker region between the two β sheets of the kinase domain, and Arg1115 is located at the N-terminal end of the kinase domain, distal to the key tyrosine autophosphorylation sites (Tyr1052 and Tyr1057) and Lys866 in the ATP binding site (fig. S2B). In vitro methylation assays of synthesized peptides corresponding to Lys856, Lys861, Lys1041, and Arg1115 showed that Lys856, Lys861, Lys1041, and Arg1115 were methylated, thus demonstrating that VEGFR-2 can be directly methylated (fig. S2D). Further MS analysis showed that the stoichiometry of methylation of Lys1041 was similar to that of tyrosine phosphorylation of VEGFR-2 (fig. S3), suggesting that methylation of Lys1041 could be as prevalent as phosphorylation of Tyr1057, a phosphorylation event that is required to stimulate the kinase activity of VEGFR-2 (20).

### Publication Abstract
Activation of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR-2), an endothelial cell receptor tyrosine kinase, promotes tumor angiogenesis and ocular neovascularization. We report the methylation of VEGFR-2 at multiple Lys and Arg residues, including Lys(1041), a residue that is proximal to the activation loop of the kinase domain. Methylation of VEGFR-2 was independent of ligand binding and was not regulated by ligand stimulation. Methylation of Lys(1041) enhanced tyrosine phosphorylation and kinase activity in response to ligands. Additionally, interfering with the methylation of VEGFR-2 by pharmacological inhibition or by site-directed mutagenesis revealed that methylation of Lys(1041) was required for VEGFR-2-mediated angiogenesis in zebrafish and tumor growth in mice. We propose that methylation of Lys(1041) promotes the activation of VEGFR-2 and that similar posttranslational modification could also regulate the activity of other receptor tyrosine kinases.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, In-gel digestion

### Affiliations
Lysine Methylation Promotes VEGFR-2 Activation and Angiogenesis
Department of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Yan Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Nader Rahimi
Lysine Methylation Promotes VEGFR-2 Activation and Angiogenesis


