### Accession
PXD014746

### Title
Multiplexed quantitative proteomic analysis of Human Embryonic Kidney 293 (HEK293)

### Description
Study of the changes in the HEK293 proteome when growing without transfection, when transfected with an empty plasmid and when transfected with Gagcoding gene to produce Gag VLPs,

### Sample Protocol
The cell line used in this work is a serum-free suspension-adapted HEK 293 cell line (HEK293SF-3F6). Transfections were carried out using a plasmid containing a gene coding for HIV-Gag protein fused to eGFP (Gag::eGFP). Protein extraction was performed using extraction buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH=8.8, 2mM EDTA, 4% SDS,100mM DTT). roteins were digested using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and the filter-assisted sample preparation technology (FASP,Expedeon, San Diego, CA, USA)and the resulting peptides were subjected to TMT-10 plex labelling (ABSciex, Framingham, MA, USA). TMT-labeled mix was fractionated using High pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). The tryptic peptide mixtures were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis on a ano-HPLC Easy nLC 1000 liquid chromatograph (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer(Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using the SEQUEST HT algorithm integrated in the Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Finnigan). MS/MS scans were matched against a human database(UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot 2017_10 Release). Sequence of Gag::eGFP protein was added to the selecteddatabase to enable identification.For database searching, parameters were selected as follows: trypsin digestion with 2 maximum missed cleavage allowed, precursor mass tolerance of 800 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. TMT-10 plex labeling at N-terminal and lysine as well as cysteine carbamidomethylatiowere chosen as static modifications whereas methionine oxidation was chosen as dynamicmodification. The same MS/MS spectra collections were searched against inverted database constructedfrom the same target database. SEQUEST results were analyzed by the probability ratio method. False discovery rate (FDR) for identified peptides was calculated in the inverted database search results using therefinedmethod.Quantitative information of TMT reporter ions was extracted from MS/MS spectra.For the comparative analysis of the protein abundance changes we applied Weighted Scan- Peptide-Protein(WSPP) statistical workflow, using SanXoT package.

### Publication Abstract
The production of virus-like particles (VLPs) has gained importance over the last few years owing to the benefits they provide compared to conventional vaccines. The biopharmaceutical industry is currently searching for safer candidates based on VLPs for new and existing vaccines and implementing new methods of manufacturing, thus allowing a more sustainable, effective, and species-specific production. Despite achieving lower yields compared to traditional platforms, the use of mammalian cells provides the right post-translational modifications, and consequently, the intensification of bioprocesses using mammalian cell platforms has become a matter of pressing concern. One of the methods subjected to intensification is transient gene expression, which has been proven to be highly effective regarding VLP production for preclinical or even clinical trials. In this work, a multiplexed quantitative proteomic approach has been applied to study the molecular characteristics of HEK293 cell cultures when growing at cell densities higher than 4 &#xd7; 10<sup>6</sup> cells/mL and to study the effects related to cell transfection and VLP production. The obtained results revealed a set of functional and metabolic profiles of HEK293 under these three different conditions that allowed the identification of physiological bottlenecks regarding VLP production. Regarding the cell density effect, molecular alterations in the cell biology were proposed to help explain the difficulty for the cells to be transfected at higher densities. In addition, an overall disruption of cellular homeostasis after transfection was observed based on altered biological processes, and after identifying potential pathways liable to be optimized via metabolic engineering, different solutions were proposed to improve VLP production.

### Keywords
Human, Hek293, Multiplexed, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Cardiovascular Proteomics, Centro Nacional Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), C/ Melchor Fdz Almagro 3, Madrid 28029, Spain Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Enfermedades Cardiovasculares (CIBERCV), Madrid, Spain
Vascular Biology and Inflammation

### Submitter
Inmaculada Jorge

### Lab Head
Dr Jesús Vázquez Cobos
Laboratory of Cardiovascular Proteomics, Centro Nacional Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), C/ Melchor Fdz Almagro 3, Madrid 28029, Spain Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Enfermedades Cardiovasculares (CIBERCV), Madrid, Spain


