### Accession
PXD036011

### Title
Dual-omics reveals the different roles of α1 and β-adrenergic receptors in acute sympathetic stress-induced cardiac inflammation

### Description
Sympathetic overactivation under strong acute stresses triggers acute cardiovascular events including myocardial infarction (MI), sudden cardiac death, and stress cardiomyopathy. α1-ARs and β-ARs, two dominant subtypes of adrenergic receptors in the heart, play a significant role in the physiological and pathologic regulation of these processes. However, little is known about the functional similarities and differences between α1- and β-ARs activated temporal responses in stress-induced cardiac pathology. In this work, we systematically compared the cardiac temporal genome-wide profiles of acute α1-AR and β-AR activation in the mice model by integrating transcriptome and proteome. We found that α1- and β-AR activations induced sustained and transient inflammatory gene expression, respectively. Particularly, the overactivation of α1-AR but not β-AR led to neutrophil infiltration at 1 day, which was closely associated with the up-regulation of chemokines, activation of NF-κB pathway, and sustained inflammatory response. Furthermore, there are more metabolic disorders under α1-AR overactivation compared with β-AR overactivation. These findings provide a new therapeutic strategy that besides using β-blocker as soon as possible, blocking α1-AR within one day should also be considered in the treatment of acute stress associated cardiovascular diseases.

### Sample Protocol
The sample was ground individually in liquid nitrogen and lysed with lysis buffer containing 100 mM NH4HCO3(pH 8), 6 M urea, and 0.2% SDS, followed by 5 min of ultrasonication on ice. The lysate was centrifuged at 12000 g for 15 min at 4°C and the supernatant was transferred to a clean tube. Extracts from each sample were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56°C and subsequently alkylated with sufficient iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Then samples were completely mixed with 4 times volume of precooled acetone by vortexing and incubated at -20°C for at least 2 h. Samples were then centrifuged and the precipitation was collected. After washing twice with cold acetone, the pellet was dissolved by dissolution buffer, which contained 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 8.5) and 6 M urea. Then 120 μg of each protein sample was taken and the volume was made up to 100 μL with lysis buffer. 3 μL of 1 μg/μL trypsin and 500 μL of 50 mM TEAB buffer were added. The sample was mixed and digested at 37°C overnight. An equal volume of 1% formic acid was mixed with the digested sample and centrifuged at 12000 g for 5 min at room temperature. The supernatant was slowly loaded to the C18 desalting column, washed with 1 mL of washing solution (0.1% formic acid, 4% acetonitrile) 3 times, and eluted twice by 0.4 mL of elution buffer (0.1% formic acid, 75% acetonitrile). Then the eluents were combined. All samples were mixed with equal volume and lyophilized, and the remaining eluent of each sample was lyophilized respectively. For transition library construction, shotgun proteomics analyses were performed using an  EASY-nLCTM 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher) coupled with a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) operating in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. The separated peptides were analyzed by Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), with ion source of Nanospray Flex™ (ESI), spray voltage of 2.5 kV, and ion transport capillary temperature of 320°C. Full scan ranged from m/z 350 to 1500 with resolution of 60000 (at m/z 200), an automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 3×106 and a maximum ion injection time was 20 ms. The top 40 precursors of the highest abundant in the full scan were selected and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and analyzed in MS/MS, where resolution was 15000 (at m/z 200), the automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 1×105, the maximum ion injection time was 45 ms, normalized collision energy of 27%, and intensity threshold of 2.2×104, and the dynamic exclusion parameter of 40 s. The raw data of MS detection was used to construct the DDA spectrum library. The lyophilized powder of each sample was dissolved in 12 μL of A solution (0.1% FA in H2O), centrifuged at 15000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C, and each supernatant was added to 0.4 μL of the standard peptide. Then 1 μg of the sample was injected into the EASY-nLCTM 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher) coupled with an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) operating in the data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode with spray voltage of 2.5 kV, Nanospray Flex™ (ESI) and capillary temperature of 320°C. For DIA acquisition, the m/z range covered from 350 to 1500. MS1 resolution was set to 60000 (at m/z 200). The full scan AGC target value was 3×106. The maximum ion injection time was 50 ms. Then peptides were fragmented by HCD in MS2, in which resolution was set to 30000 (at 200 m/z), AGC target value was 1×106, normalized collision energy of 27%.

### Data Protocol
DDA and DIA data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (PD 2.2, Thermo) platform, Biognosys Spectronaut version 9.0, and R statistical framework. DDA MS raw files were analyzed by PD software (version 2.2) and peak lists were searched against the protein database. MS1-based label-free quantification (LFQ) was done using the maxLFQ algorithm(54). MS2-based-label-free quantification was carried out by analyzing DIA raw data using Biognosys Spectronaut (version 9.0) software. Data analysis was carried out as described in Bruder et al. with minor modifications(55). After protein quantitation, proteins with zero expression in all samples were filtered out, leaving 2036 proteins under ISO treatment and 3255 proteins under PE treatment. Differential expression analysis of protein MS between conditions was performed using the DESeq2 R package.

### Publication Abstract
Sympathetic stress is prevalent in cardiovascular diseases. Sympathetic overactivation under strong acute stresses triggers acute cardiovascular events including myocardial infarction (MI), sudden cardiac death, and stress cardiomyopathy. &#x3b1;<sub>1</sub>-ARs and &#x3b2;-ARs, two dominant subtypes of adrenergic receptors in the heart, play a significant role in the physiological and pathologic regulation of these processes. However, little is known about the functional similarities and differences between &#x3b1;<sub>1</sub>- and &#x3b2;-ARs activated temporal responses in stress-induced cardiac pathology. In this work, we systematically compared the cardiac temporal genome-wide profiles of acute &#x3b1;<sub>1</sub>-AR and &#x3b2;-AR activation in the mice model by integrating transcriptome and proteome. We found that &#x3b1;<sub>1</sub>- and &#x3b2;-AR activations induced sustained and transient inflammatory gene expression, respectively. Particularly, the overactivation of &#x3b1;<sub>1</sub>-AR but not &#x3b2;-AR led to neutrophil infiltration at one day, which was closely associated with the up-regulation of chemokines, activation of NF-&#x3ba;B pathway, and sustained inflammatory response. Furthermore, there are more metabolic disorders under &#x3b1;<sub>1</sub>-AR overactivation compared with &#x3b2;-AR overactivation. These findings provide a new therapeutic strategy that, besides using &#x3b2;-blocker as soon as possible, blocking &#x3b1;<sub>1</sub>-AR within one day should also be considered in the treatment of acute stress-associated cardiovascular diseases.

### Keywords
Acute sympathetic stress, Cardiac inflammation, Adrenergic receptor, Dual-omics

### Affiliations
Peking University
Department of Cardiology and Institute of Vascular Medicine, Peking University Third Hospital; NHC Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Molecular Biology and Regulatory Peptides; Key Laboratory of Molecular Cardiovascular Science, Ministry of Education; Beijing Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Receptors Research; Haihe Laboratory of Cell Ecosystem. Beijing 100191, China.

### Submitter
Di Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Han Xiao
Department of Cardiology and Institute of Vascular Medicine, Peking University Third Hospital; NHC Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Molecular Biology and Regulatory Peptides; Key Laboratory of Molecular Cardiovascular Science, Ministry of Education; Beijing Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Receptors Research; Haihe Laboratory of Cell Ecosystem. Beijing 100191, China.


