### Accession
PXD029105

### Title
Identification of new amniotic fluid prognostic biomarkers of congenital cytomegalovirus infection severity

### Description
Background: Congenital cytomegalovirus (cCMV) is a common intrauterine infection, leading to neurodevelopmental disabilities. Early prognostic assessment of the severity of cCMV has remained an ongoing challenge. We aimed to identify amniotic fluid biomarkers of the severity of cCMV-related fetal brain injury.  Methods: Global proteome analysis was performed in mid-gestation amniotic fluid samples, comparing fetuses with severe cCMV to asymptomatic CMV-infected fetuses (the discovery cohort). The levels of selected differentially-excreted proteins were further determined by specific immunoassays, and evaluated in an independent validation cohort, including clinically-blinded amniotic fluid of CMV-infected fetuses from unrelated centers.  Findings: Proteome analysis identified 29 amniotic fluid proteins with distinct abundance in fetuses with severe-, compared to asymptomatic, cCMV. Pathway analysis of the differentially-excreted proteins revealed enriched pathways of inflammatory response, cellular compromise, immunological disease, organismal injury, and neurological disease, underlining a link between excessive inflammation at the maternal-fetal interface and the development of cCMV-related fetal brain damage. Importantly, the levels of two of these proteins, chemerin and galectin-3-binding protein (Gal-3BP), selected for validation, demonstrated 88.2% sensitivity (each), 100-96.2% specificity, 100-93.8% positive predictive value, and 92.9-92.6% negative predictive value, with 0.98-0.97 area under the curve (for chemerin - Gal-3BP, respectively) in differentiating 17 fetuses with severe cCMV from 26 asymptomatic CMV-infected fetuses.   Interpretation: These results identify the immunomodulatory proteins chemerin and Gal-3BP as new highly predictive amniotic fluid biomarkers of cCMV severity, which could guide early prognostic stratification and potential personalized treatment of cCMV-infected fetuses.  Funding: Israel Science Foundation; Research Fund of the Hadassah Medical Organization

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation 150 μL of amniotic fluid were concentrated to 50 μL using a 3 kDa MWCO filter (Amicon Ultracel-3K, Merck Millipore, Cork, Ireland). The fluid was loaded onto a serum depletion column (Multiple affinity removal column, 4.6x100 mm, Hu-14, Agilent) connected to a HPLC (1260 Infinity II Bio-Inert LC System, Agilent). After purging the system with buffers A and B, the depletion column was equilibrated in buffer A for 10 min at a flow rate of 1 mL/min at room temperature. The sample was loaded onto the column and the system was kept at 100% buffer A at a flow rate of 0.125 mL/min for 8 min, then increased to 1 mL/min for another 2 min. The buffer was changed to 100% B at the same flow rate and kept for 18 min. The depleted fraction was collected at 5 to 15 min and underwent buffer exchange to 50 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at a 1mg/ml concentration. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma) for 1 hr at room temperature, and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) in the dark for 45 min at room temperature. Samples were diluted to 2 M urea with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were then subjected to digestion with trypsin (Promega; Madison, WI, USA) overnight at 37°C at 50:1 protein:trypsin ratio, followed by a second trypsin digestion for 4 hr. The digestions were stopped by addition of trifluroacetic acid (1% final concentration). Following digestion, peptides were desalted using Oasis HLB, μElution format (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The samples were vacuum dried and stored in -80˚C until further analysis. Liquid chromatography  ULC/MS grade solvents were used for all chromatographic steps. Each sample was loaded using split-less nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (10 kpsi nanoAcquity; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile phase was: A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and B) acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Desalting of the samples was performed online using a reversed-phase Symmetry C18 trapping column (180 µm internal diameter, 20 mm length, 5 µm particle size; Waters). The peptides were then separated using a T3 HSS nano-column (75 µm internal diameter, 250 mm length, 1.8 µm particle size; Waters) at 0.35 µL/min. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 4% to 25%B in 155 min, 25% to 90%B in 5 min, maintained at 90% for 5 min and then back to initial conditions.  Mass Spectrometry The nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nanoESI emitter (10 μm tip; New Objective; Woburn, MA, USA) to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HFX, Thermo Scientific) using a FlexIon nanospray apparatus (Proxeon). Data was acquired in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, using a Top10 method. MS1 resolution was set to 120,000 (at 400m/z), mass range of 375-1650 m/z, AGC of 3e6 and maximum injection time was set to 60 msec. MS2 resolution was set to 15,000, quadrupole isolation 1.7m/z, AGC of 1e5, dynamic exclusion of 40 sec and maximum injection time of 60 msec.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant v1.6.0.16. The data was searched with the Andromeda search engine against the human and HCMV proteome databases appended with common lab protein contaminants and the following modifications: Carbamidomethylation of C as a fixed modification and oxidation of M, deamidation of N and Q and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable ones. MBR was enabled and LFQ min. ratio count was set to 1. The rest of the parameters were kept as default. The LFQ (Label-Free Quantification) intensities were extracted and used for further calculations using Perseus v1.6.0.7. Decoy hits were filtered out, as well as proteins that were identified on the basis of a modified peptide only and GO annotations added. The LFQ intensities were log transformed and only proteins that had at least 3 valid values in at least one experimental group were kept. The remaining missing values were randomly imputed. ANOVA test was performed to identify the significant proteins between the groups using a 0.05 FDR.

### Publication Abstract
BACKGROUNDCytomegalovirus (CMV) is the most common intrauterine infection, leading to infant brain damage. Prognostic assessment of CMV-infected fetuses has remained an ongoing challenge in prenatal care, in the absence of established prenatal biomarkers of congenital CMV (cCMV) infection severity. We aimed to identify prognostic biomarkers of cCMV-related fetal brain injury.METHODSWe performed global proteome analysis of mid-gestation amniotic fluid samples, comparing amniotic fluid of fetuses with severe cCMV with that of asymptomatic CMV-infected fetuses. The levels of selected differentially excreted proteins were further determined by specific immunoassays.RESULTSUsing unbiased proteome analysis in a discovery cohort, we identified amniotic fluid proteins related to inflammation and neurological disease pathways, which demonstrated distinct abundance in fetuses with severe cCMV. Amniotic fluid levels of 2 of these proteins - the immunomodulatory proteins retinoic acid receptor responder 2 (chemerin) and galectin-3-binding protein (Gal-3BP) - were highly predictive of the severity of cCMV in an independent validation cohort, differentiating between fetuses with severe (n = 17) and asymptomatic (n = 26) cCMV, with 100%-93.8% positive predictive value, and 92.9%-92.6% negative predictive value (for chemerin and Gal-3BP, respectively). CONCLUSIONAnalysis of chemerin and Gal-3BP levels in mid-gestation amniotic fluids could be used in the clinical setting to profoundly improve the prognostic assessment of CMV-infected fetuses.FUNDINGIsrael Science Foundation (530/18 and IPMP 3432/19); Research Fund - Hadassah Medical Organization.

### Keywords
Cytomegalovirus; congenital cytomegalovirus infection; amniotic fluid biomarkers

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Ted and Frances Chanock Chair in Virology Head, Clinical Virology Unit Dept. of clinical Microbiology & Infectious Diseases Hadassah University Hospital Jerusalem, Israel 91120

### Submitter
Meital Kupervaser

### Lab Head
Dr Dana Wolf
Ted and Frances Chanock Chair in Virology Head, Clinical Virology Unit Dept. of clinical Microbiology & Infectious Diseases Hadassah University Hospital Jerusalem, Israel 91120


