### Accession
PXD015127

### Title
6-Shogaol Inhibits Oxidative Stress-induced Rat Vascular Smooth Muscle Cell Apoptosis by Regulating OXR1-p53 axis

### Description
Apoptosis of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) is closely related to the pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease, and oxidative stress is an important cause for VSMCs death. Inhibiting VSMCs apoptosis is an effective preventive strategy in slowing down the development of cardiovascular disease, especially for atherosclerosis. In this study, we found OXR1 (oxidation resistance protein 1), a crucial participator for responding for oxidative stress, could modulate the expression of p53, a key regulator of apoptosis. Our results revealed that oxidative stress promoted VSMCs apoptosis by overexpression of OXR1-p53 axis, and 6-shogaol (6S), a major biologically active compound present in ginger, could effectively attenuate cell death by preventing the up-regulated expression of OXR1-p53 axis. Quantitative proteomics analysis revealed that the degradation of p53 mediated by OXR1 might related with the enhanced assembly of SCF ubiquitin ligase complexes, which is reported to closely relate with the modification of ubiquitination or neddylation, and subsequent degradation of p53.

### Sample Protocol
The protein extracts were precipitated with 5 volumes of ice-cold acetone/ethanol/acetic acid (v/v/v = 50/50/0.1) at -20 °C overnight. The precipitated protein was collected by centrifuging at 15000 g for 30 min and washing with acetone and 75% ethanol in turn. Then, the protein sample was re-dissolved with 8 M urea/100 mM TEAB (pH 8.0) solution and the protein concentration was determined by BCA assay. After reduction by 10 mM DTT at 60 °C for 1 h and alkylation by 20 mM IAA in the darkness at room temperature for 30 min, the protein was diluted to 1 mg/mL with 100 mM TEAB buffer and digested by trypsin (enzyme/substrate, 1/25 (w/w)) overnight at 37 °C. For the protective mechanism of 6-shogaol, VSMCs of control group was L labeled, H2O2 injuried cells was M labeled and Cells with 6-shogaol pre-treatment was H labeled. For siRNA experiment, VSMCs of control group was L labeled while cells with OXR1 silencing was M labeled. Stable isotope dimethyl labeling and phosphopeptides enrichment were performed in solution as described previously (J. Liu, B. Xu, Z.Y. Liu,et al., Anal. Chim. Acta, 2017, 950: 129-137).

### Data Protocol
All the samples were analyzed by LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo, San Jose, CA) with Accela 600 HPLC system (Thermo, San Jose, CA) as described previously (J. Liu, B. Xu, Z.Y. Liu,et al., Anal. Chim. Acta, 2017, 950: 129-137) with minor modifications that the gradient from 5 to 35% (v/v) ACN was performed in 150 min.  The obtained raw files were searched using MaxQuant (Version 1.3.0.5) with a Uniprot protein fasta database of Rat (Rattus norvegicus) as described previously (J. Liu, B. Xu, Z.Y. Liu,et al., Anal. Chim. Acta, 2017, 950: 129-137). The results were imported into the MaxQuant associated software suite Perseus for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Apoptosis of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) is closely related to the pathogenesis of cardiovascular diseases, and oxidative stress is an important cause of VSMCs' death. Inhibiting VSMCs apoptosis is an effective preventive strategy in slowing down the development of cardiovascular disease, especially for atherosclerosis. In this study, we found that oxidation resistance protein 1 (OXR1), a crucial participator for responding to oxidative stress, could modulate the expression of p53, the key regulator of cell apoptosis. Our results revealed that oxidative stress promoted VSMCs apoptosis by overexpression of the OXR1-p53 axis, and 6-shogaol (6S), a major biologically active compound in ginger, could effectively attenuate cell death by preventing the upregulated expression of the OXR1-p53 axis. Quantitative proteomics analysis revealed that the degradation of p53 mediated by OXR1 might be related to the enhanced assembly of SCF ubiquitin ligase complexes, which is reported to closely relate to the modification of ubiquitination or neddylation and subsequent degradation of p53.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Rat, Vascular smooth muscle cell, 6-shogaol

### Affiliations
College of Pharmacy, College of Integrative Medicine, Dalian Medical University
Dalian Medical University

### Submitter
Jing Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Liu
College of Pharmacy, College of Integrative Medicine, Dalian Medical University


