### Accession
PXD028270

### Title
A Paal-Knorr agent for chemoproteomic profiling of targets of isoketals in cells

### Description
Natural systems produce various γ-dicarbonyl-bearing compounds that can covalently modify lysine in protein targets via the classic Paal-Knorr reaction. Among them is a unique class of lipid-derived electrophiles - isoketals that exhibit high chemical reactivity and critical biological functions. However, it remains unknown about their target selectivity and profiles in complex proteomes. Here we report a Paal-Knorr agent, 4-oxonon-8-ynal (herein termed ONAyne), for a proteome-wide selectivity survey and quantitative reactivity profiling of the γ-dicarbonyl warhead. Furthermore, combined with quantitative chemoproteomics in a competitive format, ONAyne permitted global, in situ, and site-specific profiling of targeted lysine residues of two specific isomers of isoketals, levuglandin (LG) D2 and E2. The functional analyses reveal that LGs-derived adduction drives inhibition of malate dehydrogenase MDH2 and exhibits a crosstalk with two epigenetic marks on histone H2B in macrophages. Our approach should be broadly useful for target profiling of bioactive γ-dicarbonyls in diverse biological contexts.

### Sample Protocol
Cells or cell lysates were incubated with ONAyne. The ONAyne-labeled proteome was harvested and then processed into tryptic peptides. The resulting probe-labeled peptides were aliquoted equally and conjugated with light and heavy azido-UV-cleavable-biotin (Az-UV-biotin) reagents (1:1) via CuAAC reaction. The light and heavy ‘Click’ reaction mixtures were mixed equally in amount, and cleaned with SCX. The biotinylated peptides were captured with streptavidin and photoreleased for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were searched against Mus musculus or Homo sapiens. Uniprot canonical database using pFind studio (http://pfind.ict.ac.cn/software/pFind/index.html). Precursor ion mass and fragmentation tolerance were set as 10 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. For all analyses, mass shifts of common modifications and ONAyne-derived modifications were searched as variable modifications. An isotopic mass difference of 6.020132 Da (12C6/13C6) on probe-derived modifications was used for quantification. The FDRs were estimated by the program from the number and quality of spectral matches to the decoy database. The FDRs at spectrum, peptide, and protein level were < 1%. Quantitative analyses were performed using pQuant. The median values of probe-modified peptide ratios with σ less than or equal 0.5 were considered to calculate site-level ratios. For peptides exhibiting a ≥ 90% reduction in MS1 peak intensity, a maximal ratio of 10 was assigned.

### Publication Abstract
Natural systems produce various &#x3b3;-dicarbonyl-bearing compounds that can covalently modify lysine in protein targets <i>via</i> the classic Paal-Knorr reaction. Among them is a unique class of lipid-derived electrophiles - isoketals that exhibit high chemical reactivity and critical biological functions. However, their target selectivity and profiles in complex proteomes remain unknown. Here we report a Paal-Knorr agent, 4-oxonon-8-ynal (herein termed ONAyne), for surveying the reactivity and selectivity of the &#x3b3;-dicarbonyl warhead in biological systems. Using an unbiased open-search strategy, we demonstrated the lysine specificity of ONAyne on a proteome-wide scale and characterized six probe-derived modifications, including the initial pyrrole adduct and its oxidative products (<i>i.e.</i>, lactam and hydroxylactam adducts), an enlactam adduct from dehydration of hydroxylactam, and two chemotypes formed in the presence of endogenous formaldehyde (<i>i.e.</i>, fulvene and aldehyde adducts). Furthermore, combined with quantitative chemoproteomics in a competitive format, ONAyne permitted global, <i>in situ</i>, and site-specific profiling of targeted lysine residues of two specific isomers of isoketals, levuglandin (LG) D2 and E2. The functional analyses reveal that LG-derived adduction drives inhibition of malate dehydrogenase MDH2 and exhibits a crosstalk with two epigenetic marks on histone H2B in macrophages. Our approach should be broadly useful for target profiling of bioactive &#x3b3;-dicarbonyls in diverse biological contexts.

### Keywords
Chemoproteomics, Onayne, Paal-knorr reaction, Isoketals

### Affiliations
National Center for Protein Sciences • Beijing
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Center for Protein Sciences • Beijing, Beijing Institute of Lifeomics, Beijing, China

### Submitter
Wang Min-ran

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Yang
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Center for Protein Sciences • Beijing, Beijing Institute of Lifeomics, Beijing, China


