### Accession
PXD004703

### Title
Elongation factors E. coli -  Site-Specific Cleavage of Ribosomal RNA in Escherichia coli-Based Cell-Free Protein Synthesis Systems

### Description
Monitoring of elongation factors during processing of cell-free extract and during in vitro translation reaction.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction by chlorform/methanol extraction. Sample alkylation and digestion by trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the Mass Hunter Workstation Software (Ver.B.05.519.0, Agilent Technologies). The acquired MS/MS spectra were searched against an E. coli K12 database (4042 sequences) using PEAKS Studio 7 search engine (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada) with the following parameters: enzyme: trypsin; parent mass error tolerance: 10 ppm; fragment mass error tolerance: 0.01 Da; max. missed cleavages: 100.

### Publication Abstract
Cell-free protein synthesis, which mimics the biological protein production system, allows rapid expression of proteins without the need to maintain a viable cell. Nevertheless, cell-free protein expression relies on active in vivo translation machinery including ribosomes and translation factors. Here, we examined the integrity of the protein synthesis machinery, namely the functionality of ribosomes, during (i) the cell-free extract preparation and (ii) the performance of in vitro protein synthesis by analyzing crucial components involved in translation. Monitoring the 16S rRNA, 23S rRNA, elongation factors and ribosomal protein S1, we show that processing of a cell-free extract results in no substantial alteration of the translation machinery. Moreover, we reveal that the 16S rRNA is specifically cleaved at helix 44 during in vitro translation reactions, resulting in the removal of the anti-Shine-Dalgarno sequence. These defective ribosomes accumulate in the cell-free system. We demonstrate that the specific cleavage of the 16S rRNA is triggered by the decreased concentrations of Mg2+. In addition, we provide evidence that helix 44 of the 30S ribosomal subunit serves as a point-of-entry for ribosome degradation in Escherichia coli. Our results suggest that Mg2+ homeostasis is fundamental to preserving functional ribosomes in cell-free protein synthesis systems, which is of major importance for cell-free protein synthesis at preparative scale, in order to create highly efficient technical in vitro systems.

### Keywords
Ribosomal protein s1, Elongation factors

### Affiliations
Principal investigator
Institute of Biochemical Engineering

### Submitter
Jurek Failmezger

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Siemann-Herzberg
Principal investigator


