### Accession
PXD009361

### Title
The platelet releasate (PR) in human pregnancy

### Description
Healthy pregnancy is characterized by an increase in platelet activation and a decrease in the number of circulating platelets with gestation. Despite this recognised importance, proteomic studies investigating platelets in healthy pregnancy have not been performed.  As platelet cargo can be altered in different conditions, we hypothesised that platelets may store a relevant and bespoke collection of molecules during pregnancy.  To examine this, we performed comparative label-free quantitative proteomic profiling of platelet releasates from healthy pregnant and non-pregnant women using a tandem mass spectrometry approach. Of the 723 proteins identified, 69 PR proteins were found to be differentially released from platelets in pregnancy, including proteins only expressed during pregnancy such as pregnancy-specific glycoproteins and human placental lactogen.

### Sample Protocol
Human platelets were obtained from healthy pregnant and matched non-pregnant female volunteers free from medication, in accordance with approved guidelines from University College Dublin and the Rotunda Hospital, Dublin. Washed platelets were isolated and 1U/ml thrombin PR was carefully prepared. PR was solubilised and proteins precipitated overnight (95% acetone/–20°C).  Following sequential digestion [Lys-C (1:100;Promega, Madison, WI) and trypsin (1:100;Promega)], peptides were purified, resuspended in 1% formic acid and analysed using a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed by MaxQuant version 1.5.0.30. MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against human FASTA (August 2016) obtained from UniProt. MaxQuant analysis included an initial search with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm the results of which were used for mass recalibration. In the main Andromeda search precursor mass and fragment mass had an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The search included fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids and a maximum of two miscleavages was allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.05 for peptide and protein identifications. For quantitative comparison between samples we used label-free quantification (LFQ) with a minimum of two ratio counts to determine the normalized protein intensity. LFQ intensities were assigned to identified proteins by comparing the area under the curve of the signal intensity for any given peptide. Protein IDs were filtered to eliminate the identifications from the reverse database, and common contaminants. The total protein approach (TPA) was used for quantitative comparison, to determine protein abundance as a fraction of total protein. TPA values were Log2 transformed.  A protein was included if it was identified in at least 50% of samples in at least one (pregnancy or control) group. Additionally, any protein with 1 peptide identification and <10% sequence coverage was removed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pregnancy, Label-free quantitation, Platelet releasate, Platelets, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University College Dublin,  SBBS,  Conway Institute,  Dublin
University College Dublin

### Submitter
Paulina Szklanna

### Lab Head
Dr Patricia B. Maguire
University College Dublin,  SBBS,  Conway Institute,  Dublin


