### Accession
PXD009343

### Title
ZIKV-infected human NPCs LC-MS

### Description
In this study, proteomic analysis on ZIKV-infected primary human fetal neural progenitor cells (NPCs) revealed that virus infection altered levels of cellular proteins involved in NPC proliferation, differentiation and migration.

### Sample Protocol
For quantitative proteomic analysis, NPCs were infected with ZIKV at an MOI of 3 or mock-infected (culture medium was used as mock). At 1 dpi, cells were harvested and washed with prechilled PBS. Cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM DTT, pH 7.6), subjected to sonication and then boiled for 15 min. After centrifugation at 14000g for 40 min, the supernatant was quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA). A total of 200 μg of proteins from each sample were reduced with 100 mM iodoaceamide for 30 min in the dark. The proteins were digested with 4 μg trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. A total of 100 μg peptide mixture from each sample was labeled using TMT reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Pierce high pH reversed-phase fractionation kit (Thermo scientific) was used to fractionate TMT-labeled digest samples into 15 fractions by an increasing acetonitrile step-gradient elution according to manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
For nanoLC-MS/MS analysis, the peptide mixture was loaded onto a reverse phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm×2 cm, nanoViper C18) connected to a C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Easy nLC nano-flow UHPLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 90 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top 10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3×106, and maximum injection time was 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s.

### Publication Abstract
Zika virus (ZIKV) infection is associated with severe neurological defects in fetuses and newborns, such as microcephaly. However, the underlying mechanisms remain to be elucidated. In this study, proteomic analysis on ZIKV-infected primary human fetal neural progenitor cells (NPCs) revealed that virus infection altered levels of cellular proteins involved in NPC proliferation, differentiation and migration. The transcriptional levels of some of the altered targets were also confirmed by qRT-PCR. Among the altered proteins, doublecortin (DCX) plays an important role in NPC differentiation and migration. Results showed that ZIKV infection downregulated DCX, at both mRNA and protein levels, as early as 1 day post infection (1 dpi), and lasted throughout the virus replication cycle (4 days). The downregulation of DCX was also observed in a ZIKV-infected fetal mouse brain model, which displayed decreased body weight, brain size and weight, as well as defective cortex structure. By screening the ten viral proteins of ZIKV, we found that both the expression of NS4A and NS5 were correlated with the downregulation of both mRNA and protein levels of DCX in NPCs. These data suggest that DCX is modulated following infection of the brain by ZIKV. How these observed changes of DCX expression translate in the pathological consequences of ZIKV infection and if other cellular proteins are equally involved remains to be investigated.

### Keywords
Human npcs, Zikv infection

### Affiliations
Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciecnes
Neurovirology group, Wuhan institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Xuan Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Luo Min-Hua
Neurovirology group, Wuhan institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences


