### Accession
PXD018644

### Title
Activity-based protein profiling of the mouse gut microbiome in response to high or low fiber diets

### Description
Gastrointestinal content of mice fed high or low fiber diets was labeled with the GH2c-ABP. 3x replicates of each diet, 2x littermates per diet. 12 total mice.

### Sample Protocol
GH2c-ABP was conjugated to an alkyne-agarose resin via click chemistry in addition to no probe controls. Samples were then labeled with the resin-bound GH2c-ABP, washed, digested with trypsin, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. 3x replicates of each diet, 2x littermates per diet. 12 total mice.

### Data Protocol
Data was initially searched with MS-GF+ against predicted coding sequences from assembled metagenomes originating from matching samples. Protein sequences containing any peptide found with a SpecEvalue less than 1E-8 were isolated to make a reduced fasta file, which was in turn used for a second MS-GF+ search on the same spectral data using PNNL's DMS processing pipeline.

### Publication Abstract
While deprivation of dietary fiber has been associated with adverse health outcomes, investigations concerning the effect of dietary fiber on the gut microbiome have been largely limited to compositional sequence-based analyses or utilize a defined microbiota not native to the host. To extend understanding of the microbiome's functional response to dietary fiber deprivation beyond correlative evidence from sequence-based analyses, approaches capable of measuring functional enzymatic activity are needed. In this study, we use an activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) approach to identify sugar metabolizing and transport proteins in native mouse gut microbiomes that respond with differential activity to the deprivation or supplementation of the soluble dietary fibers inulin and pectin. We found that the microbiome of mice subjected to a high fiber diet high in soluble fiber had increased functional activity of multiple proteins, including glycoside hydrolases, polysaccharide lyases, and sugar transport proteins from diverse taxa. The results point to an increase in activity of the Bifidobacterium shunt metabolic pathway in the microbiome of mice fed high fiber diets. In those subjected to a low fiber diet, we identified a shift from the degradation of dietary fibers to that of gut mucins, in particular by the recently isolated taxon "Musculibacterium intestinale", which experienced dramatic growth in response to fiber deprivation. When combined with metabolomics and shotgun metagenomics analyses, our findings provide a functional investigation of dietary fiber metabolism in the gut microbiome and demonstrates the power of a combined ABPP-multiomics approach for characterizing the response of the gut microbiome to perturbations.

### Keywords
Mouse, Fiber, Abpp

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, USA
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Aaron Wright
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, USA


