### Accession
PXD048380

### Title
Activity guided profiling of yeast proteasome - protein extraction test

### Description
This experiment compared the impact of protein extraction conditions on the identification and quantification of proteasome subunits in WT yeast. It involved comparing proteins extracted from identical WT yeast samples under two different conditions: native and denaturing (in the presence of SDS and TCA).

### Sample Protocol
WT strain cultures were grown in YPD media until an OD600 of 1.5 was reached. The cells were harvested by centrifugation, washed with ddH2O, and then divided into two equal-volume aliquots. For the first aliquot, proteins were extracted under denaturing conditions. After centrifugation at 4000 rpm for 5 min at room temperature, the cell pellet was resuspended in 100µl of 20% (v/v) TCA. Glass beads were added, and the mixture was vortexed vigorously for 4 min. The supernatant was collected, and the beads were washed twice with 7% TCA to retrieve remaining proteins. The pooled supernatants were placed on ice for 45 min, then centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C for TCA precipitation, and the supernatant was discarded. The pellets were washed twice with ice-cold 0.1% TCA and then resuspended in Laemmli loading buffer. For the second aliquot, proteins were extracted under native conditions. The cell pellet was dissolved in 200µl of 25mM Tris pH 7.4, and 150µl of glass beads were added. The samples were vortexed vigorously for 1 min and then placed on ice for 1 min, repeating this cycle a total of 8 times. After lysis, the supernatants were collected using a gel loading tip and centrifuged at 14000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. The clear supernatants were then collected and mixed with Laemmli loading buffer. Equal amounts of protein from each sample were briefly separated on a 12% SDS-PAGE, followed by Coomassie staining. Each lane of the gel was subsequently subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. samples were analyzed using Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to EvoSep One HPLC (Evosep). Samples were introduced onto the EvoTip, which was then washed twice with 20 μl of 0.1% formic acid. The washed peptides remained wet, maintained by applying 150 μl of 0.1% formic acid atop of the EvoTip until the MS analysis. The samples loaded on the EvoTips underwent chromatographic separation on a 15 cm × 150 μm analytical column, filled with 1.9-μm C18 beads (EV1106). Peptides were separated over an 88-minute gradient according to the manufacturer standard method and with all other parameters consistent with the prior described procedure. The MS analysis of of these samples were performed by Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo) in a positive mode (m/z 350–1200, resolution 120,000 for MS1 and 15,000 for MS2) using repetitively full MS scan followed by collision-induced dissociation (HCD, at 27 normalized collision energy) of the 20 most dominant ions (charges +2 to +6) selected from the first MS scan with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z. A dynamic exclusion list was enabled with an exclusion duration of 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis and label-free quantification of the proteasome active complexes were carried out using MaxQuant (Version 2.1.3.0). In all searches the raw files were searched against the Uniprot Saccharomyces cerevisiae searches of Jan 2020 (that include 6060 protein sequences). MaxQuant searches were performed using tryptic digestion mode with a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids. Search criteria included oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. All other parameters were set as the default. Candidates were filtered to obtain FDR of 1% at the peptide and the protein levels. No filter was applied to the number of peptides per protein. For quantification, the match between runs modules of MaxQuant was used, and the label-free quantification (LFQ) normalization method was enabled with default settings using LFQ quantification and match-between-runs options.

### Publication Abstract
Proteasomes are multi-subunit, multi-catalytic protein complexes present in eukaryotic cells that degrade misfolded, damaged, or unstructured proteins. In this study, we used an activity-guided proteomic methodology based on a fluorogenic peptide substrate to characterize the composition of proteasome complexes in WT yeast and the changes these complexes undergo upon the deletion of Pre9 (&#x394;&#x3b1;3) or of Sem1 (&#x394;Sem1). A comparison of whole-cell proteomic analysis to activity-guided proteasome profiling indicates that the amounts of proteasomal proteins and proteasome interacting proteins in the assembled active proteasomes differ significantly from their total amounts in the cell as a whole. Using this activity-guided profiling approach, we characterized the changes in the abundance of subunits of various active proteasome species in different strains, quantified the relative abundance of active proteasomes across these strains, and charted the overall distribution of different proteasome species within each strain. The distributions obtained by our mass spectrometry-based quantification were markedly higher for some proteasome species than those obtained by activity-based quantification alone, suggesting that the activity of some of these species is impaired. The impaired activity appeared mostly among 20S<sup>Blm10</sup> proteasome species which account for 20% of the active proteasomes in WT. To identify the factors behind this impaired activity, we mapped and quantified known proteasome-interacting proteins. Our results suggested that some of the reduced activity might be due to the association of the proteasome inhibitor Fub1. Additionally, we provide novel evidence for the presence of non-mature and therefore inactive proteasomal protease subunits &#x3b2;2 and &#x3b2;5 in the fully assembled proteasomes.

### Keywords
Yeast lfq, Native extraction, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Technion
Faculty of Biology Technion-Israel Institute of Technology Rooms 433-4, Biology Building Technion City, Haifa 3200003, Israel

### Submitter
Oded Kleifeld

### Lab Head
Dr Oded Kleifeld
Faculty of Biology Technion-Israel Institute of Technology Rooms 433-4, Biology Building Technion City, Haifa 3200003, Israel


