### Accession
PXD007784

### Title
Musa spp, LC-MSMS -  Early Cold-Induced Peroxidases and Aquaporins Are Associated With High Cold Tolerance in Dajiao (Musa spp

### Description
Banana is an important tropical fruit with high value. One main specie (cultivar Cavendish) is susceptible to low temperature, another close relative specie (Dajiao), considerably higher cold tolerance than Cavendish. Our previous global proteomics results suggested that some membrane proteins be likely involved in cold tolerance of Dajiao via antioxidation mechanism. To further investigate early cold stress response of Dajiao, we applied comparative membrane proteomics analysis for both cold-sensitive Cavendish and cold-tolerant Dajiao subjected to 10 °C for 0, 3 and 6 h.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction, Digestion, and iTRAQ Labeling Two-step method was conducted for the extraction of membrane proteins from leaves (three biological replicates of Cavendish and Dajiao seedlings at 10 °C for 0, 3 and 6 h) according to Vertommen et al. (A. Vertommen et al., 2011) with minor modifications. For the first step, leaf tissues were ground in liquid nitrogen using a prechilled mortar and pestle before sodium phosphate buffer (100 mM, pH 7.5) containing 1 mM EDTA, 100 μg/ml phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), and moderatepoly(vinylpolypyrrolidone) (PVPP) was added to the ground tissues (4 mL buffer/g tissues). The homogenate was centrifuged at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. The supernatant was removed, and an equal volume of sodium phosphate buffer was added to the resuspended protein pellet. After vortexed on the ice for 3 min, the homogenate was centrifuged at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min and the resulting supernatant was removed. Finally, the collected proteins in pellet were repeated with the above steps twice. For the second step, the protein pellet from the first step were ground using an ice cold mortar and pestle with the Tris-HCl buffer according to Sadowski et al. (Sadowski et al., 2006) with minor modifications (0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.3, 5 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 2% w/v 3-(3-Cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio -propanesulfonic acid (CHAPS), 50 mM DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT), 0.1% w/v SDS, 0.5% v/v Pharmalytes 3-10, 100 μg/ml PMSF). The homogenate was centrifuged at 12,000 g for 15 min and the supernatant was collected for subsequent protein quantitation analysis. Protein concentration for each sample was determined by Bradford assay using BSA as a standard, and further quantified by running on a precast NOVEX 12% Tris/Glycine mini-gel (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) along with a series of amounts of E. coli lysates (2, 5, 10, 20 µg/lane). The SDS gel was visualized with colloidal Coomassie blue stain (Invitrogen), imaged by Typhoon 9400 scanner followed by Image Quant Software version TL 8.1 (GE Healthcare). A total of 50 µg protein of each sample was reduced with 9.5 Mm tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine for 1 h at 37°C, Cys blocked with methyl-methyl-thiomethyl sulfoxide (MMTS) for 1 h in the dark. The proteins were precipitated by adding 6 volumes of ice-cold acetone and incubating at −20°C overnight, and reconstituted in 100 µL of 100 Mm triethylammonium bicarbonate. The proteins were digested with 5μg trypsin for each sample at 36°C overnight.  Labeling was performed according to the iTRAQ kit protocol (AB Sciex). The Dajiao samples were labeled with iTRAQ114, iTRAQ115 and iTRAQ116 for cold treated at 0, 3 and 6 h, respectively; and Cavendish samples were labeled in the same design. iTRAQ labeling efficiency was assessed using 4000 Q Trap (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) after mixing 1 µL aliquots from each sample and desalting with SCX ziptip (Millipore, Billerica, MA). After labeling check, the three samples in each of the 6setswere combined and subjected to high pH reverse phase (hpRP) fractionation as described below.

### Data Protocol
In this study, 2,333 and 1,834 proteins were identified in Cavendish and Dajiao respectively under cold stress, by iTRAQ-based comparative membrane proteomic analysis. Subsequent bioinformatics analyses show that 692 Cavendish proteins and 524 Dajiao proteins were predicted to be membrane proteins, in which 82 and 137 differentially expressed membrane proteins (DEMPs) were found in Cavendish and Dajiao, respectively. Interestingly, the number of DEMPs up-regulated at 3 h under cold treatment in Dajiao (80) more than seven times that in Cavendish (11), and no differences in other periods. GO molecular function analysis of DEMPs for Cavendish and Dajiao indicates that they both belong to seven categories including hydrolase activity, binding, transporter activity, antioxidant activity, etc.,

### Publication Abstract
Banana is an important tropical fruit with high economic value. One of the main cultivars ('Cavendish') is susceptible to low temperatures, while another closely related specie ('Dajiao') has considerably higher cold tolerance. We previously reported that some membrane proteins appear to be involved in the cold tolerance of Dajiao bananas via an antioxidation mechanism. To investigate the early cold stress response of Dajiao, here we applied comparative membrane proteomics analysis for both cold-sensitive Cavendish and cold-tolerant Dajiao bananas subjected to cold stress at 10&#xb0;C for 0, 3, and 6 h. A total of 2,333 and 1,834 proteins were identified in Cavendish and Dajiao, respectively. Subsequent bioinformatics analyses showed that 692 Cavendish proteins and 524 Dajiao proteins were predicted to be membrane proteins, of which 82 and 137 differentially abundant membrane proteins (DAMPs) were found in Cavendish and Dajiao, respectively. Interestingly, the number of DAMPs with increased abundance following 3 h of cold treatment in Dajiao (80) was seven times more than that in Cavendish (11). Gene ontology molecular function analysis of DAMPs for Cavendish and Dajiao indicated that they belong to eight categories including hydrolase activity, binding, transporter activity, antioxidant activity, etc., but the number in Dajiao is twice that in Cavendish. Strikingly, we found peroxidases (PODs) and aquaporins among the protein groups whose abundance was significantly increased after 3 h of cold treatment in Dajiao. Some of the PODs and aquaporins were verified by reverse-transcription PCR, multiple reaction monitoring, and green fluorescent protein-based subcellular localization analysis, demonstrating that the global membrane proteomics data are reliable. By combining the physiological and biochemical data, we found that membrane-bound Peroxidase 52 and Peroxidase P7, and aquaporins (MaPIP1;1, MaPIP1;2, MaPIP2;4, MaPIP2;6, MaTIP1;3) are mainly involved in decreased lipid peroxidation and maintaining leaf cell water potential, which appear to be the key cellular adaptations contributing to the cold tolerance of Dajiao. This membrane proteomics study provides new insights into cold stress tolerance mechanisms of banana, toward potential applications for ultimate genetic improvement of cold tolerance in banana.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics; cold tolerance; peroxidase; aquaporin

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of South Subtropical Fruit Biology and Genetic Resource Utilization, Ministry of Agriculture, Guangzhou, China.
18122431189

### Submitter
he weidi

### Lab Head
Dr Gan-Jun Yi
Key Laboratory of South Subtropical Fruit Biology and Genetic Resource Utilization, Ministry of Agriculture, Guangzhou, China.


