### Accession
PXD006588

### Title
Proteogenomic of Blastocystis sp. subtype 4 isolate WR1

### Description
description Blastocystis sp. is a highly prevalent anaerobic eukaryotic parasite of humans and animals. The genome of several representatives has been sequenced revealing specific traits such as an intriguing 3’-end processing of primary transcripts. We have acquired a first high-throughput proteomics dataset on the difficult to cultivate ST4 isolate WR1 and detected 2,761 proteins. We evidenced for the first time by proteogenomics a functional termination codon derived from transcript polyadenylation for seven different key cellular components.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed with a Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometer, incorporating an ultra-high-field Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT with standard parameters (trypsin and semi-trypsin searches).

### Publication Abstract
Blastocystis sp. is known for years as a highly prevalent anaerobic eukaryotic parasite of humans and animals. Several monophyletic clades have been delineated based on molecular data, and the occurrence of each subtype in humans and/or animal hosts has been documented. The genome of several representatives has been sequenced revealing specific traits such as an intriguing 3'-end processing of primary transcripts. Here, a first high-throughput proteomics dataset acquired on this difficult-to-cultivate parasite is presented for the zoonotic subtype T4 isolate WR1. Amongst the 2766 detected proteins, we highlighted the role of a small ADP ribosylation factor GTP-binding protein involved in intracellular traffic as major regulator of vesicle biogenesis and a voltage-dependent anion-selective channel protein because both were unexpectedly highly abundant. We show how these data may be used for gaining proteogenomics insights into Blastocystis sp. specific molecular mechanisms. We evidenced for the first time by proteogenomics a functional termination codon derived from transcript polyadenylation for seven different key cellular components.

### Keywords
Intestinal anaerobe, Proteogenomics, High resolution ms/ms datasets, Functional termination codon, Parasites

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, DRF-Li2D, 30200 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, DRF-Li2D, 30200 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


