### Accession
PXD041652

### Title
E-selectin-mediated rapid NLRP3 inflammasome activation regulates S100A8/A9 release from neutrophils via transient gasdermin D pore formation

### Description
S100A8/A9 is a proinflammatory mediator released by myeloid cells during many acute and chronic inflammatory disorders. However, the precise mechanism of its release from the cytosolic compartment of neutrophils is still elusive. We report here that E-selectin-induced rapid S100A8/A9 release during inflammation occurs in a NLRP3 inflammasome-dependent fashion. Mechanistically, E-selectin engagement triggers Bruton?s tyrosine kinase dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of NLRP3. Concomitant potassium efflux via the voltage-gated potassium channel KV1.3 mediates ASC oligomerization. This is followed by caspase-1 cleavage and downstream activation of pore forming gasdermin D, enabling cytosolic S100A8/A9 to be released. Strikingly, E-selectin-mediated gasdermin D pore formation does not result in cell death, but is a transient process involving activation of the ESCRT-III membrane repair machinery. These findings do not only elucidate the molecular mechanisms of controlled S100A8/A9 release but also identify the NLRP3/gasdermin D axis as a rapid and reversible activation system in neutrophils during inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry   Supernatants were collected from e-Selectin- or PBS-treated human-derived neutrophils. Proteins were precipitated from the supernatant (350 ul each) with 100 % (v/v) acetone (1:4 sample:acetone) and incubated at -20 °C overnight. After overnight incubation samples were spun at 3000 g for 1h at 4 °C, and protein pellets were washed two times with ice-cold 80 % acetone. Protein pellets were dried at room temperature and resuspended in 50 ul 8 M urea in 50 mM Tris pH 8 for protein denaturation. Proteins were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM Bond-Breaker TCEP solution (77720, Thermo) and 30 mM chloroacetamide (Merck) for 30 min at RT. Samples were diluted to 2 M urea using 50 mM TRIS pH 8 and proteins were digested with LysC/Tripsin mixture (1:50 enzyme:protein ratio, V5072, Promega) at RT overnight. Protein digestion was stopped with 1 % (v/v) formic acid before peptide desalting on in-house-produced SDB-RPS StageTips with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and 80 % (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid. Subsequently, peptides were eluted from StageTips with 60 ul 80% (v/v) acetonitrile in 5% (v/v) ammonia. After drying in a SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific), peptides were resuspended in 10 ul 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and stored at -20°C until mass spectrometric analysis.   LC-MS/MS measurements  Samples were measured by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). For each sample 300 ng tryptic peptides were loaded on an in-house packed analytical column (length: 50 cm, inner diameter: 75 um) filled with a C18 stationary phase (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 mm resin, r119.aq, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were separated on a nanoflow UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1200, Thermo Scientific) using a 120 min non-linear gradient. Using a binary buffer system (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water, B: 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in LC-MS grade water) the amount of B was increased from 5 ? 30% over 95 min at a flow rate of 250 nl/min followed by an increase to 60% B over 5 min. The column was washed for 10 min at 95% B and equilibrated at 5% B for 10 min. Eluting peptides were transferred on-line to the quadrupole orbitrap tandem mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Exploris 480, Thermo Scientific) by a nanoelectrospray ionization source (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent acquisition mode. Full MS spectra were recorded with a scan range of 300 ? 1,650 m/z and a resolution of 120,000. The AGC target was set to 3e6 ions and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. MS2 DIA scans were acquired at a resolution of 30,000, an AGC target of 1e6, and a maximum injection time of 54 ms. DIA isolation windows were of variable sizes ranging from 16 ? 524 m/z and were fragmented with a HCD collisional energy of 27%.

### Data Protocol
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  Peptide/protein identification and quantification were performed in library-free mode using DIA-NN 1.8.1 (Citation: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0638-x). DIA MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot SWISSPROT human proteome (downloaded 2023/02/15) and filtered on peptide level at a false discovery rate of 1%. Trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme with peptide lengths set from 7 ? 30 amino acids, fixed modification of cysteines (carbamidomethylation), and a maximum of 1 missed cleavage. The scan window radius was set to 9 and mass accuracies were fixed to 1e-05 (MS2) and 1.1e-05 (MS1). The match-between-runs option was enabled. Using the DIA-NN main output table, identified precursors were filtered for Lib.Q.Value and Lib.PG.Value smaller 1%. Label-free quantification was performed with the R plugin diann using the maxLFQ algorithm (https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M113.031591) with a minimum ratio count of 1 and for proteotypic peptides only.  The statistical analysis was performed with the Perseus computational platform (version 1.6.15, https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3901), and maxLFQ normalized protein intensities were taken for statistical analysis. After log2 transformation of protein LFQ intensities protein groups were filtered for at least 3 valid values in at least one condition. Missing values were imputed sample-wise by random value drawing of 1.8 standard deviations downshifted and 0.3 standard deviations broad normal distributions. Significantly released proteins were identified by two-sample t-tests. False discovery rates were determined by permutation-based FDR correction (FDR = 0.05, S0 = 0.1). Secretory signatures were functionally characterized by 1D annotation enrichment analysis (Benjamin-Hochberg FDR = 0.02) using annotations from the UniProt Keywords databases (Finn et al., 2016), gene ontology annotations (https://doi.org/10.1038/75556), and custom annotations. The following annotations were manually added: alarmins, granules, cytosolic small alarmins, cytosolic big alarmins, azurophilic granules, gelatinase, and specific granules.

### Publication Abstract
S100A8/S100A9 is a proinflammatory mediator released by myeloid cells during many acute and chronic inflammatory disorders. However, the precise mechanism of its release from the cytosolic compartment of neutrophils is unclear. Here, we show that E-selectin-induced rapid S100A8/S100A9 release during inflammation occurs in an NLRP3 inflammasome-dependent fashion. Mechanistically, E-selectin engagement triggers Bruton's tyrosine kinase-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of NLRP3. Concomitant potassium efflux via the voltage-gated potassium channel K<sub>V</sub>1.3 mediates ASC oligomerization. This is followed by caspase 1 cleavage and downstream activation of pore-forming gasdermin D, enabling cytosolic release of S100A8/S100A9. Strikingly, E-selectin-mediated gasdermin D pore formation does not result in cell death but is a transient process involving activation of the ESCRT III membrane repair machinery. These data clarify molecular mechanisms of controlled S100A8/S100A9 release from neutrophils and identify the NLRP3/gasdermin D axis as a rapid and reversible activation system in neutrophils during inflammation.

### Keywords
Neutrophile, Transient pore formation, Inflammation, Gasdermin d

### Affiliations
Department for Systems Immunology & Proteomics
Institute of Innate Immunity
University Hospital Bonn
Venusberg - Campus 1
53127 Bonn Germany
Walter Brendel Center of Experimental Medicine Institute of Cardiovascular Physiology and Pathophysiology Biomedizinisches Centrum München Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Großhaderner Str. 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried GERMANY

### Submitter
Sebastian Kallabis

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr.
Walter Brendel Center of Experimental Medicine Institute of Cardiovascular Physiology and Pathophysiology Biomedizinisches Centrum München Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Großhaderner Str. 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried GERMANY


