### Accession
PXD032924

### Title
Simple and Fast Maximally Deuterated Control (maxD) preparation for HDX MS Experiments

### Description
During the analysis steps of hydrogen deuterium exchange (HDX) mass spectrometry (MS) there is an unavoidable loss of deuterons, or back-exchange. Understanding back-exchange is necessary to correct for loss during analysis, to calculate the absolute amount of exchange, and to ensure that deuterium recovery is as high as possible during LC-MS. Back-exchange can be measured and corrected for using a maximally deuterated species (here called maxD) in which the protein is deuterated at all backbone amide positions and analyzed with the same buffer components, %D2O, quenching conditions, and LC-MS parameters used during the analysis of other labeled samples. Here we describe a robust and broadly applicable protocol, using denaturation followed by deuteration, to prepare a maxD control sample in ~40 minutes.  The protocol was evaluated with a number of proteins that varied in both size and folded structure.  The relative fractional uptake and level of back-exchange with this protocol were both equivalent to those obtained with a previous protocol that requires much more time or one requiring isolation of peptic peptides prior to deuteration. Placing strong denaturation first in the protocol allowed maximum deuteration in a short time (~10 mins) with equal or more deuteration found in other methods. The absence of high temperatures and low pH during the deuteration step limited protein aggregation.  This high-performance, fast, and easy to perform protocol should enhance routine preparation of maxD controls for both beginners and for challenging proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Protein solutions (15 μL, 20 μM) were SpeedVac concentrated (15 min) and resuspended in 7 M GdnHCl for 1 minute. 50 mM DTT was added to the GdnHCl solution if the protein has disulfide bonds (e.g., Immunoglobulin G). After a brief vortex and spin (3000g, 1 min), protein samples were heated at 90 °C for 5 minutes and then cooled back to 20 °C over the course of 2 minutes. 27 μL of labeling buffer (10 mM sodium phosphate, D2O, pD 7.5, 150 mM NaCl) were then added to 3 μL of denatured protein solution (1:10 dilution, duration 1 min) and the exchange reaction was allowed to proceed at 50 °C for 10 minutes. The now maximally deuterated protein samples were cooled progressively to 20 °C over 2 minutes and then to 0 °C over 2 minutes using an ice bath. Exchange was quenched with the addition of 30 μL of ice-cold quenching buffer (150 mM potassium phosphate, H2O, pH 2.49) and analyzed immediately by LC-MS. An alternative to direct injection is to flash freeze protein samples in liquid nitrogen for future analysis. The entire procedure takes about 40 minutes.  For IgG, the quenching buffer was 200 mM sodium phosphate, pH 2.37, 4 M GdnHCl. 0.72 M TCEP, H2O. For comparison experiments, fully deuterated myoglobin and hemoglobin were also made under acidic conditions (acid induced method), using a previously published protocol (Sowole and Konermann, 2014) with minor modification. Briefly, protein samples (15 μL, 20 μM) in 150 mM potassium phosphate buffer, pH 2.4, were diluted ten times with D2O-DCl (final pH, 2.4) and incubated for 48 h at 20 °C. After this time, 30 μL of protein sample were diluted with 30 μL of quenching buffer and immediately analyzed by LC-MS. To prepare peptic peptides for deuteration after digestion (free peptide method), proteins were digested using pepsin beads (5 μL of pepsin beads for 50 pmol of protein) in 0.1% formic acid for 10 min at 15 °C. After digestion, beads were removed with 0.45 μm centrifuge filters (Spin-X, Costar), peptides were SpeedVac concentrated, and then labeled using the same procedure described above for our maxD protocol.  LC-MS: Myoglobin, hemoglobin, cytochrome C, and carbonic anhydrase were analyzed using a nanoAcquity UPLC system coupled to a Waters Xevo G2-S QTof, and phosphorylase B and immunoglobulin G using an Acquity M-Class system coupled to a Waters Synapt G2-Si. Both instruments were equipped with a Waters HDX system [based on (Wales et al., 2008)]. Maximally deuterated and undeuterated control samples were digested online in the HDX cooling unit, where the digestion chamber was held at 15 °C, using a porcine pepsin column packed in-house (POROS 20AL beads, 2.1 mm × 50 mm). Peptides were trapped and desalted on a VanGuard Pre-Column trap [2.1 mm × 5 mm, ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 1.7 μm, (Waters, 186002346)] for 3 minutes at 100 μL/min. Peptides were then eluted from the trap using a 5%–35% gradient of acetonitrile over 6 minutes at a flow rate of 55 μL/min (nanoAcquity System) or over 10 minutes at a flow rate of 100 μl/min (Acquity M-Class system), and separated using an ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3, 1.8 μm, 1.0 mm × 50 mm column (Waters, 186003535). The main cooling chamber of the Waters HDX unit, which housed all the chromatographic elements, was held at 0.0 ± 0.1 °C for the entire time of the measurements. To eliminate peptide carryover, a wash solution [1.5 M guanidinium chloride, 0.8% formic acid and 4% acetonitrile] was injected over the pepsin column during each analytical run. Both the mass spectrometers were calibrated with direct infusion of a solution of glu-fibrinopeptide (Sigma, F3261) at 200 femtomole/μL at a flow rate of 5 μL/min prior to data collection. Conventional electrospray sources were used, and the instruments were scanned over the range 50 to 2000 m/z. For Waters Xevo G2-S, the instrument configuration was: capillary voltage 3.2 kV, trap collision energy at 4 V, sampling cone at 40 V, source temperature of 80 °C, and desolvation temperature of 150°C. For Waters Synapt G2-Si, the instrument configuration was: capillary voltage 3.2 kV, trap collision energy at 4 V, sampling cone at 40 V, source temperature of 80 °C, and desolvation temperature of 175 °C. All experiments were done under identical experimental conditions. The error of determining the deuterium levels in peptides was ± 0.20 Da in this experimental setup based on analysis of deuterated peptide standards.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using PLGS 3.0.1 (Waters, 720001408EN) using replicates of undeuterated control samples. Raw MS data were imported into DynamX 3.0 (Waters, 720005145EN) and filtered with minimum consecutive products of 1 and minimum number of products per amino acid of 0.20. Those peptides meeting the filtering criteria were further processed automatically by DynamX followed by manual inspection of all spectra and data processing. The amount of deuterium in each peptide was determined by subtracting the centroid mass of the undeuterated form of each peptide from the maximally deuterated form. All measured and processed values can be found in the SI Excel.   All maxD measurements were conducted in triplicate, with the exception of fully deuterated free peptides, which were analyzed in duplicate.  Data are reported as relative fractional uptake (RFU) with standard deviations, as per output from DynamX (Waters), which is obtained by making the ratio between experimental deuteration level (D) and theoretical maximum uptake, according to the formula: RFU = D / (N-P-1), where N is the number of amino acids in a given peptide and P is the number of prolines. The average back-exchange (BE) was calculated taking into account the percentage of deuterium used (in this paper, 90%) and applying the following formula: BE = (1 – RFU / 0.90) * 100.

### Publication Abstract
During the analysis steps of hydrogen-deuterium exchange (HDX) mass spectrometry (MS), there is an unavoidable loss of deuterons, or back-exchange. Understanding back-exchange is necessary to correct for loss during analysis, to calculate the absolute amount of exchange, and to ensure that deuterium recovery is as high as possible during liquid chromatography (LC)-MS. Back-exchange can be measured and corrected for using a maximally deuterated species (here called maxD), in which the protein is deuterated at positions and analyzed with the same buffer components, %D<sub>2</sub>O, quenching conditions, and LC-MS parameters used during the analysis of other labeled samples. Here, we describe a robust and broadly applicable protocol, using denaturation followed by deuteration, to prepare a maxD control sample in &#x223c;40 min for nonmembrane proteins. The protocol was evaluated with a number of proteins that varied in both size and folded structure. The relative fractional uptake and level of back-exchange with this protocol were both equivalent to those obtained with earlier protocols that either require much more time or require isolation of peptic peptides prior to deuteration. Placing strong denaturation first in the protocol allowed for maximum deuteration in a short time (&#x223c;10 min) with equal or more deuteration found in other methods. The absence of high temperatures and low pH during the deuteration step limited protein aggregation. This high-performance, fast, and easy-to-perform protocol should enhance routine preparation of maxD controls.

### Keywords
Back-exchange, Maximally deuterated samples, Hydrogen deuterium exchange, Mass spectrometry, Hdx ms

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University
Northeastern University

### Submitter
John R. Engen

### Lab Head
Dr John R. Engen
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University


