### Accession
PXD032731

### Title
Development of functional anti-Gn nanobodies specific for SFTSV based on next generation sequencing and proteomics

### Description
Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome (SFTS) is an acute infectious disease caused by novel bunyavirus (SFTSV), with a mortality rate of 6.3% ~ 30%. To date, there is no specific treatment for SFTS. Previously, our studies demonstrate that SFTSV surface glycoprotein (Glycoprotein N, Gn) is a potential target for the development of SFTS vaccine or therapeutic antibodies, and anti-Gn neutralizing antibodies play a protective role in SFTS infection. Compared with traditional antibodies, nanobodies from camelids have various advantages including small molecular weight, high affinity, low immunogenicity and convenient production by gene engineering, etc. In this study, we combined next generation sequencing (NGS) with proteomics technology and bioinformatics analysis to high-throughput screen monoclonal anti-Gn nanobodies from camel immunized with Gn protein. We identified 19 anti-Gn monoclonal nanobody sequences, and selected 6 of them for recombinant protein expression and purification. Among these 6 anti-Gn nanobodies, nanobody 57493 was validated to be highly specific for Gn.

### Sample Protocol
Camel was immunized with recombinant sGn (20 ~ 452 aa) protein with a fusion rFc tag.The IgG subgroup was isolated from the serum collected from the fourth immunization of camel using Protein A resins and Protein G resins. One mL anti-serum from immunized camel was loaded onto 1 mL HiTrap Protein G HP column (17-0404-03, GE Healthcare Life Sciences) and washed with 10 mL phosphate buffer solution (20 mM, pH 7.0). IgG3 (MW 100,000 Da) was eluted with 0.15 M NaCl and 0.58% acetic acid (pH 3.5), and the eluent was neutralized with 1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) at a ratio of 1/10 (v/v) and the pH was adjusted to 7.4. IgG1 (MW 170,000 Da) was then eluted with 0.1 M glycine-HCl (pH 2.7) and neutralized with 1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) at a ratio of 1/5 (v/v), adjusted to pH 7.4. The solution flowed through the HiTrap Protein G HP column was collected and placed on 1 mL HiTrap Protein A HP column (17-0402-03, GE Healthcare Life Sciences) and washed with 10 mL phosphate buffer solution (20 mM, pH 7.0). IgG2 (MW 100,000 Da) was then eluted with 0.15 M NaCl and 0.58 % acetic acid (pH 4.5) and neutralized at 1/12 (v/v) with 1 M Tris-HCI (pH 8.5) to adjust pH to 7.4. BCA kit (23225, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to determine the concentrations of IgG1, IgG2 and IgG3 after purification. After collecting polyclonal nanobodies in 1.5 mL tubes, 2 μL reduction reagent tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) (77712, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added to each tube. After oscillated and mixed, the samples were centrifuged and incubated at 60℃ water bath for 1 h. Then, after cooling down to room temperature, 1 μL alkylation reagent S-Methyl methanethiol sulfonate (MMTS) (23011, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added to each tube, and the samples were shaken and mixed, centrifuged, and incubated at room temperature for 10 min. Glutamate C-endonuclease (Glu-C) (V1651, Promega), lysine C-endonuclease (Lys-C) (V107A, Promega), lysine N-endonuclease (Lys-N) (1863014, Pierce) and Trypsin (V5280, Promega) were dissolved in 25 mM NH4HCO3, and Chymotrypsin (90056, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was dissolved in 500 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0)/10 mM CaCl2. The enzyme and substrate were mixed at a ratio of 1:20, and incubated in a water bath at 37℃ overnight. After enzymatic hydrolysis, the enzymatic peptides of samples were centrifuged to the bottom of each tube. The C18 desalting tips were used to desalt the peptides of nanobody. Then the peptides were separated by a liquid chromatograph system (nanoLC) and injected into an ESI ion source for ionization and analyzed by TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometry system (AB SCIEX).

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were searched using ProteinPilot software. The parameters were set as follows: the Unigene library (27,700 sequences) obtained by transcriptome sequencing without reference was used as the database, and the reverse library was added to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR) caused by random matching, and the quality of sequencing library was ensured by the randomness test of mRNA fragmentation and the inserted fragment length test. The digestion method was set as Glu-C, Lys-C, Lys-N, Trypsin or Chymotrypsin, respectively, for the database searching of each specific enzyme. The minimum length of peptide segment was set as 7 amino acid residues. The number of missed cuts was set as 2, and the maximum number of peptide modifications was set as 5. The mass error tolerance of primary parent ions for first search and main search was set as 20 ppm and 5 ppm, respectively, and the mass error tolerance of secondary fragment ions was 0.02 Da. The quantitative method was set as Protein ID, and the FDR of protein identification was set as 1%. After the database searching, the search results from multi-enzyme digestion were combined, and a total of 56 distinct nanobodies were identified when setting total peptide count ≥ 1. BLAST+(2.90) software provided by NCBI was used to compare the identified nanobody sequences with the conserved nanobody frame sequences. The successful alignment nanobody sequences were remapped into the conserved nanobody frame sequences by V-QUEST software provided by IMGT. The representative MS/MS spectra of selected peptides containing complementary determinant regions (CDRs) were retrieved from ProteinPilot software. The cDNA sequences of successfully mapped nanobodies were retrieved from Unigene library.

### Publication Abstract
Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome (SFTS) is an acute infectious disease caused by novel bunyavirus (SFTSV), with a mortality rate of 6.3%&#x2009;~&#x2009;30%. To date, there is no specific treatment for SFTS. Previously, we demonstrated that SFTSV surface glycoprotein (Glycoprotein N, Gn) was a potential target for the development of SFTS vaccine or therapeutic antibodies, and anti-Gn neutralizing antibodies played a protective role in SFTS infection. Compared with traditional antibodies, nanobodies from camelids have various advantages, including small molecular weight, high affinity, low immunogenicity, convenient production by gene engineering, etc. In this study, we combined next-generation sequencing (NGS) with proteomics technology based on affinity purification-mass spectrometry (AP-MS) and bioinformatics analysis to high-throughput screen monoclonal anti-Gn nanobodies from camel immunized with Gn protein. We identified 19 anti-Gn monoclonal nanobody sequences, of which six sequences were selected for recombinant protein expression and purification. Among these six anti-Gn nanobodies, nanobody 57,493 was validated to be highly specific for Gn. The innovative high-throughput technical route developed in this study could also be expanded to the production of nanobodies specific for other viruses like SARS-CoV-2.

### Keywords
Nanobody, Lc ms/ms, Camel

### Affiliations
Medical School of Nanjing University, China
Nanjing University Medical School

### Submitter
Lei Fang

### Lab Head
Dr Lei Fang
Medical School of Nanjing University, China


