### Accession
PXD044225

### Title
TMT analysis of phosphorylated proteomics of human osteosarcoma cell 143B treated with BEA

### Description
Phosphorylated proteomics was used to detect the changes of phosphotalin after administration.

### Sample Protocol
143B cells (5 × 107) after treatment with vehicle or BEA were washed twice with precooled PBS. SDT buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 4% SDS, and 1 mM DTT) was then added to the dishes placed on ice, and the cells were quickly harvest by scraping, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, followed by storage at -80℃. The protein concentration was quantified using a Pierce™ BCA protein assay kit (23227, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Protein was digested by trypsin, which was performed according to the Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) procedure that was previously described by Matthias Mann. Next, the digested peptides in each sample were desalted on C18 cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18, standard density, bed I.D. 7 mm, Volume 3 mL, Sigma), concentrated by vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 40 µL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Enrichment of phosphopeptides was carried out using a High-SelectTM Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (A32992, Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After lyophilization, the phosphopeptides were resuspended in 20 µL of loading buffer (0.1% formic acid). Finally, the samples were analyzed by LC/MS.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data of each sample were combined, followed by identification and quantitative analysis using MaxQuant software.

### Publication Abstract
Osteosarcoma (OS) patients, particularly those with distant metastasis, experience rapid progression and derive poor survival benefits from traditional therapies. Currently, effective drugs for treating patients with metastatic OS remain scarce. Here, we found that the cyclic hexadepsipeptide beauvericin (BEA) functioned as a new selective TGFBR2 inhibitor with potent antiproliferative and antimetastatic activities against OS cells<i>.</i> Functionally, BEA inhibited TGF-&#x3b2; signaling-mediated proliferation, invasiveness, mesenchymal phenotype, and extracellular matrix remodeling of OS cells, and suppressed tumor growth and reduced pulmonary metastasis <i>in vivo</i>. Mechanistic investigation revealed that BEA selectively and directly bound to Asn 332 of TGFBR2 and inhibited its kinase activity, thereby suppressing the aggressive progression of OS cells. Together, our study identifies an innovative and natural selective TGFBR2 inhibitor with effective antineoplastic activity against metastatic OS and demonstrates that targeting TGFBR2 could be a potential therapeutic strategy for metastatic OS.

### Keywords
Osteosarcoma, Bea

### Affiliations
Jinan University

### Submitter
Ye Geni

### Lab Head
Dr Geni Ye
Jinan University


