### Accession
PXD043557

### Title
Microglia polarization and anti-glioma effects fostered by dual cell membrane-coated doxorubicin-loaded hexagonal boron nitride nanoplatelets

### Description
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a highly malignant brain cancer, and microglial cells play a critical role in its progression. Activation of microglia can either promote or inhibit GBM growth depending on the stage of tumour development and on the microenvironment. As current treatments for GBM have limited efficacy, there is an urgent need to develop novel strategies based on nanoplatforms for drug delivery and efficient targeting. This study investigated the microglial response and the therapeutic efficacy of dual cell membrane-coated and doxorubicin-loaded hexagonal boron nitride nanoplatelets, tested on human microglia and GBM cells. The results showed promising therapeutic effects on glioma cells and an M2 microglia polarization, highlighted through proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
HMC3 cells were seeded (1•104 cells/cm2) and left overnight to attach; thereafter, cultures have been treated for 24 h with Dox (0.6 µg/mL), CMC-hBNs (25 µg/mL), or Dox-CMC-hBNs (25 µg/mL); untreated cultures have been considered as well, as control. Samples were lysed, reduced, and alkylated in 50 mL LYSE buffer (Preomics) at 95°C for 10 min and sonicated with an Ultrasonic Processor UP200St (Hielscher), 3 cycles of 30 s. 50 mg of lysates samples were digested by adding trypsin and LysC at a 1:50 and 1:100 ratio of enzyme:protein content, respectively, and incubated at 37°C overnight. Digested samples were processed by iST protocol.23 The resulting peptides were analysed by a nano-UHPLC-MS/MS system using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Instrument). Elution was performed with an EASY spray column (75 μm × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min using a linear gradient of 2-30% solution B (80% CAN and 20% H2O, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA) in 46 min. MS analysis was performed in DIA mode. Orbitrap detection was used for MS1 measurements at a resolving power of 120 K in a range between 375 and 1500 m/z, 300% AGC target, and 50 ms maximum injection time. Advanced Peack Determination was enabled for MS1 measurements. FAIMS CV was set to -50 at standard resolution and with a total carrier gas flow of 1.5 L/min. Precursors were selected for data-independent fragmentation with an isolation window width of 25 m/z in 24 windows ranging from 380 to 980 m/z, 2 m/z overlap. HCD collision energy was set to 30% and MS2 scans were acquired at a resolution of 15 k, 1000 % AGC target, and 22 ms max. IT.

### Data Protocol
All DIA raw files were processed with Spectronaut version 1624 using a library-free approach (directDIA) under default settings. Library was generated against Uniprot Human database (release UP000005640_9606 February 2022). Carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications. FDRs of PSMs and peptide/protein groups were set to 0.01. For quantification, Precursor Filtering was set to Identified (Qvalue) and MS2 was chosen as quantity MS-level.

### Publication Abstract
Microglial cells play a critical role in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) progression, which is considered a highly malignant brain cancer. The activation of microglia can either promote or inhibit GBM growth depending on the stage of the tumor development and on the microenvironment conditions. The current treatments for GBM have limited efficacy; therefore, there is an urgent need to develop novel and efficient strategies for drug delivery and targeting: in this context, a promising strategy consists of using nanoplatforms. This study investigates the microglial response and the therapeutic efficacy of dual-cell membrane-coated and doxorubicin-loaded hexagonal boron nitride nanoflakes tested on human microglia and GBM cells. Obtained results show promising therapeutic effects on glioma cells and an M2 microglia polarization, which refers to a specific phenotype or activation state that is associated with anti-inflammatory and tissue repair functions, highlighted through proteomic analysis.

### Keywords
Glioblastoma multiforme; microglia; m2 polarization; hexagonal boron nitride nanoplatelets; homotypic targeting; doxorubicin

### Affiliations
IRCCS Istituto G Gaslini
IRCCS Gaslini

### Submitter
Martina Bartolucci

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
IRCCS Istituto G Gaslini


