### Accession
PXD013176

### Title
Tracking genome-editing and associated molecular perturbations by SWATH mass spectrometry

### Description
Advances in gene editing now allow reverse genetics to be applied to a broad range of biological systems. Ultimately, any modification to coding sequences requires confirmation at the protein level, although immunoblotting is often hampered by antibody quality or availability especially in non-mammalian species. Here, we show that Sequential Window Acquisition of All Theoretical Spectra (SWATH) - Mass Spectrometry (MS) is a robust antibody-independent alternative for monitoring gene editing at the protein level and concomitantly defines proteome responses which may provide pertinent biological insights.

### Sample Protocol
Equal amounts of total protein from wild type and mutant samples were reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide. The proteins were digested using lysyl endopeptidase followed by trypsin. The peptide digests were then cleaned-up using a C18 column.

### Data Protocol
Each sample-specific reference spectral library was generated by a combined search of the three technical replicates using the ProteinPilot 5.0 software (SCIEX) against their respective species-specific database. FDR analysis was performed against decoy reversed protein sequences generated from the respective databases.  SWATH raw files were analysed against the reference spectral library using the OneOmics workflow hosted on SCIEX CloudOS platform. For every detected protein, a maximum of ten peptides with six transitions each were automatically selected for peak area extraction. The following parameters for peak area extraction were used: 75 ppm ion library tolerance, 5 min extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) extraction window, considering only peptides with at least 99% confidence and less than 1% FDR, and excluding shared peptides. Retention time calibration was automatically performed using the endogenous peptides. Data normalisation (most likely ratio normalisation, MLR), and determination of fold change values and confidences were performed by the algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Advances in gene editing now allow reverse genetics to be applied to a broad range of biological systems. Ultimately, any modification to coding sequences requires confirmation at the protein level, although immunoblotting is often hampered by antibody quality or availability especially in non-model species. Sequential Window Acquisition of All Theoretical Spectra (SWATH), a mass spectrometry (MS) technology with exceptional quantitative reproducibility and accuracy, offers an ideal alternative for protein-based confirmation. Here, using genome edits in mouse, zebrafish and Bicyclus anynana butterflies produced using either homologous recombination or targeted nucleases, we demonstrate absence of the targeted proteins using SWATH, thus confirming successful editing. We show that SWATH is a robust antibody-independent alternative for monitoring gene editing at the protein level and broadly applicable across diverse organisms and targeted genome manipulation techniques. Moreover, SWATH concomitantly defines the global proteome response in the edited organism, which may provide pertinent biological insights.

### Keywords
Gene editing, Crispr, Swath

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR)
Institute of Molecular & Cell Biology (IMCB), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR)

### Submitter
Qifeng Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Jayantha Gunaratne
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR)


