### Accession
PXD006113

### Title
Label free comparative proteome analysis of Arabidopsis lipid droplets from 6 week old leaves

### Description
Lipid droplets from 6 week old Arabidopsis leaves were purified on sucrose gradient. The abundance of the proteins in the lipid droplet fraction was established by label free and compared to soluble, membrane and plastoglobule fractions, and total leaf extract in order to identify the proteins specifically enriched in lipid droplets. Three independent biological replicates, from three independent cultures were performed. For each biological replicates, three preparations of lipid droplets (and other fractions) within each of the three independent cultures were obtained.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana ecotype Columbia (Col-0) were grown for six weeks at high density on soil in a phytotron in long day conditions (16h light /8h dark), 100 µmol of photon.m-2.s-1 at 20-22°C and 65% humidity. Around 150 g of leaves were homogenized in cold G-20 buffer [100 mM Tricine (pH7.5), 10 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, plant protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma), and 20 % sucrose] using a Waring blender. The homogenized plant material was filtered through two layers of cheese cloth and one layer of Miracloth (Calbiochem), separated into three equal aliquots that were  processed in parallel to obtain three technical replicates. Each aliquot of the filtrate was centrifuged for 30 min at 10 000 rpm, the floating lipid pad kept, and the soluble fraction centrifuged again at 100 000 g for 30 min. The floating lipid pad was collected and pooled with the previous one. The pellet and the soluble fraction above the floating lipid pad were used for isolation of membrane and soluble proteins respectively. The floating lipid pads were resuspended in 10 mL G-20 buffer using a Potter homogenizer, distributed in 2 centrifuge tubes, covered with 2 mL of G-15 buffer (G-buffer with 15% sucrose) and 5 mL of G-5 buffer (G buffer with 5 % sucrose), and centrifuged 50 min at 150 000 g. The 2 floating lipid pads were pooled, resuspended in 5 mL G-20 buffer, and centrifuged similarly with G-15 and G-5 buffers. Finally, the floating lipid pad was resuspended in 5 mL G-20 buffer with a Potter homogenizer, covered with 7 mL G-0 buffer (without sucrose), and centrifuged  50 min at 150 000 g. The resulting floating pad was stored at -80°C. Plastoglobules were purified according to the protocol described by Besagni et al. (2011). Proteins from each fraction were concentrated by chloroforme-methanol precipitation (Wessel and Flugge, 1984). Proteins from total leaf were extracted according to Rensink et al. (Rensink et al., 1998). Proteins were quantified according to the instructions of the QuantiPro BCA assay kit manual (Sigma).

### Data Protocol
Data were searched by SEQUEST through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) against the TAIR protein database (32785 entries). Spectra from peptides higher than 5000 Da or lower than 350 Da were rejected. The search parameters were as follows: mass accuracy of the monoisotopic peptide precursor and peptide fragments was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Only b- and y-ions were considered for mass calculation. Oxidation of methionine (+16 Da), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (+1 Da), propionamide (+71 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57 Da) were considered as variable modifications. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% false positive rate at peptide level.. Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Progenesis LC-MS 4.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, Newcastle, UK). Noticeably, only non-conflicting features and unique peptides were considered for calculation at protein level. Quantitative data were considered for proteins quantified by a minimum of 2 peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Lipid droplets (LDs) are cell compartments specialized for oil storage. Although their role and biogenesis are relatively well documented in seeds, little is known about their composition, structure and function in senescing leaves where they also accumulate. Here, we used a label free quantitative mass spectrometry approach to define the LD proteome of aging Arabidopsis leaves. We found that its composition is highly different from that of seed/cotyledon and identified 28 proteins including 9 enzymes of the secondary metabolism pathways involved in plant defense response. With the exception of the TRIGALACTOSYLDIACYLGLYCEROL2 protein, we did not identify enzymes implicated in lipid metabolism, suggesting that growth of leaf LDs does not occur by local lipid synthesis but rather through contact sites with the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) or other membranes. The two most abundant proteins of the leaf LDs are the CALEOSIN3 and the SMALL RUBBER PARTICLE1 (AtSRP1); both proteins have structural functions and participate in plant response to stress. CALEOSIN3 and AtSRP1 are part of larger protein families, yet no other members were enriched in the LD proteome suggesting a specific role of both proteins in aging leaves. We thus examined the function of AtSRP1 at this developmental stage and found that <i>AtSRP1</i> modulates the expression of <i>CALEOSIN3</i> in aging leaves. Furthermore, AtSRP1 overexpression induces the accumulation of triacylglycerol with an unusual composition compared to wild-type. We demonstrate that, although <i>AtSRP1</i> expression is naturally increased in wild type senescing leaves, its overexpression in senescent transgenic lines induces an over-accumulation of LDs organized in clusters at restricted sites of the ER. Conversely, <i>atsrp1</i> knock-down mutants displayed fewer but larger LDs. Together our results reveal that the abundancy of AtSRP1 regulates the neo-formation of LDs during senescence. Using electron tomography, we further provide evidence that LDs in leaves share tenuous physical continuity as well as numerous contact sites with the ER membrane. Thus, our data suggest that leaf LDs are functionally distinct from seed LDs and that their biogenesis is strictly controlled by AtSRP1 at restricted sites of the ER.

### Keywords
Lipid droplet, Arabidopsis, Oil bodies, Leaf, Label free

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Membrane Biogenesis, University of Bordeaux, France
Plateforme Proteome

### Submitter
Stephane Claverol

### Lab Head
Dr Claire Brehelin
Laboratory of Membrane Biogenesis, University of Bordeaux, France


