### Accession
PXD047766

### Title
O-GlcNAcome analysis in human placenta

### Description
In this study, we expand on this major advancement in O-GlcNAc enrichment protocols by adapting this approach to human-banked samples, which often presents their significant challenges. Indeed, patient samples are often banked without proper washing, thus contaminating cells with abundant O-glycosylated blood protein. These glycoproteins, such as human serum albumin, antibodies, and hemoglobin, pollute MS acquisition, masking the less abundant intracellular proteins and, even more, their O-GlcNAcylated forms. Thus, using freshly banked placentas, we present an adapted method to prepare human placental samples with naturally high blood content (13). We then enriched for O-GlcNAcylated protein using the PTMscan antibodies previously mentioned (12). However, our adapted protocol yielded over 60% of HexNAc peptide on total peptides. Per sample, we obtained up to 2,600 HexNAc-containing PSMs, 1,090 unique HexNAc peptides, and more than 1,000 unique HexNAc proteins using 45mg of starting placenta. Furthermore, we present a bioinformatic workflow to sort these HexNAc PSMs and extract the most confident O-GlcNAcylated proteins and sites. Thus, we confidentially identified 641 O-GlcNAcylated proteins, including up to 146 new proteins and 730 new sites within the 2 placental samples analyzed. Furthermore, we enriched for over 50 placenta-enriched O-GlcNAcylated proteins, such as RPA4, representing a new biomarker of the placental O-GlcNAcylation.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen human placenta: Placenta samples were obtained from the Medical College of Wisconsin Maternal Research and Placenta and Cord Blood Bank (MCW MRPCB) under IRB approval. Written informed consent was received before participation. Healthy placentas without gestational complications were chosen for this pilot study (n=2). Placentas are routinely flash-frozen within the hour of delivery. Samples for this study are recovered from frozen samples and shaved using a cryostat. Placental shaves, when recovered, yield a total of 175 microns, equivalent to 45 mg of tissue.  Tissue lysis: Samples were lysed for 1 hour at 4°C in 200 µL of radioimmunoprecipitation assay lysis buffer (RIPA) (10-mM Tris-HCl, 150-mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100 [v/v], 0.5% NaDOC [w/v], 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate [w/v], 10 µM PUGNAc, and protease inhibitors; pH 7.5), sonicated for 3, 5-second pulses, and centrifuged 15 minutes at 18,000 x g at 4°C; the supernatant was collected.  Blood protein cleanup: Samples were cleaned up of major blood proteins using either the HSA/Immunoglobulins or Top14 Abundant Protein Depletion Midi Spin Columns (Thermofisher). According to the manufacturer protocol, 100 µL of lysate was loaded, and proteins were recovered in about 800 µL of recovery buffer.  O-GlcNAcylated protein enrichment: The O-GlcNAc PTMscan kit (PTMScan O-GlcNAc [GlcNAc-S/T] Motif Kit #95220, Cell Signaling Technology, Inc) was used to enrich protein lysate for O-GlcNAc according to the original manufacturer protocol. For the adapted protocol, the following experimental details were followed. Proteins were reduced and alkylated as per protocol, but then were not digested. Instead, we pursued with denatured but undigested protein for the rest of the protocol. Instead of using C18 columns for in-between clean-up steps, we performed methanol-chloroform protein precipitation as described above. Samples were then dried using a speed vac and resuspended for further processing.  Mass spectrometry: Samples were suspended in 100 µl of 40% Invitrosol, 20% acetonitrile, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. 2 µg of trypsin was added, and the digest was allowed to proceed overnight at 37°C. Following cleanup using the SP2 method, sample concentrations were measured using the Pierce Fluorometric Peptide Assay and were diluted to 100 ng/µl. Thermo Scientific Pierce Peptide Retention Time Calibration Mixture added at 4 nM concentration during dilution of the samples to 25 ng/µl. Each sample was analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS via two technical replicate injections in each method, one using HCD and product ion triggered EThcD, the other HCD and EThcD for all MS2 spectra.

### Data Protocol
All MS data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo) platform.

### Publication Abstract
O-GlcNAcylation is a dynamic modulator of signaling pathways, equal in magnitude to the widely studied phosphorylation. With the rapid development of tools for its detection at the single protein level, the O-GlcNAc modification rapidly emerged as a novel diagnostic and therapeutic target in human diseases. Yet, mapping the human O-GlcNAcome in various tissues is essential for generating relevant biomarkers. In this study, we used human banked tissue as a sample source to identify O-GlcNAcylated protein targets relevant to human diseases. Using human term placentas, we propose (1) a method to clean frozen banked tissue of blood proteins; (2) an optimized protocol for the enrichment of O-GlcNAcylated proteins using immunoaffinity purification; and (3) a bioinformatic workflow to identify the most promising O-GlcNAc targets. As a proof-of-concept, we used 45&#xa0;mg of banked placental samples from two pregnancies to generate intracellular protein extracts depleted of blood protein. Then, antibody-based O-GlcNAc enrichment on denatured samples yielded over 2000 unique HexNAc PSMs and 900 unique sites using 300&#xa0;&#x3bc;g of protein lysate. Due to efficient sample cleanup, we also captured 82 HexNAc proteins with high placental expression. Finally, we provide a bioinformatic tool (CytOVS) to sort the HexNAc proteins based on their cellular localization and extract the most promising O-GlcNAc targets to explore further. To conclude, we provide a simple 3-step workflow to generate a manageable list of O-GlcNAc proteins from human tissue and improve our understanding of O-GlcNAcylation's role in health and diseases.

### Keywords
Placenta, Ethcd, O-glcnac

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin Department of OBGYN, Medical College of Wisconsin
Medical College of Wisconsin

### Submitter
Stephanie Olivier-Van Stichelen

### Lab Head
Dr Stephanie Olivier-Van Stichelen
Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin Department of OBGYN, Medical College of Wisconsin


