### Accession
PXD046468

### Title
Target of Dleu2-17aa in CD4+ T cells

### Description
To identify Dleu2-17aa micropeptide interacting proteins in CD4+ T cells, we performed pull-down assays fllowed by LC-MS using biotin-labeled Dleu2-17aa. As controls, we included the unlabeled free Dleu2-17aa and a biotin-only group. Pull-downs were carried out in both primary mouse CD4+ T cells and the EL4 T cell line.

### Sample Protocol
For each sample, 1 million Mouse CD4+ T cells or EL4 cells were collected and sonicated then lysed on ice with RIPA lysis buffer (Beyotime) with a protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (1:100; Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 20 min and centrifuged for another 20 min at 12,000g at 4°C, and cleared lysates were harvested. Samples were incubated with 2 μM of Biotin, Biotin-Dleu2-17aa, or Biotin-Dleu2-17aa and free Dleu2-17aa for 2 hours at 4°C with rotation. The streptavidin-agarose from Streptomyces avidin (20 μl per sample; Sigma-Aldrich) was washed six times with 0.1% Triton TBS and coincubated with protein lysates for 4 hours at 4°C with rotation. The coincubated beads were washed six times with lysis buffer and resuspended with 20 μl of lysis buffer and 5 μl of loading buffer. The mixture was boiled for 5 min at 100°C and harvested by centrifugation. To detect the interaction protein with Biotin-Dleu2-17aa, samples were separated by SDS-PAGE, and visualized by silver staining. The protein-containing bands in the gel were excised, followed by in-gel digestion and analysis by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
All MS was performed using Easy-nLC-QE-Plus mass spectrometry systems. The raw mass spectrometry data was analyzed using PEAKS 8.0 software. MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt database for protein identification through de novo sequencing and database searching. Identified proteins were filtered based on statistical parameters to achieve less than 1% false discovery rate at the peptide-spectrum match level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cd4+ t cells, Micropeptide

### Affiliations
Precision Research Center for Refractory Diseases, Shanghai General Hospital,Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine
Miss Sibei TANG,  Precision Research Center for Refractory Diseases, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.
Dr Honglin WANG, Precision Research Center for Refractory Diseases, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China. (lab head)

### Submitter
Sibei Tang

### Lab Head
Dr Honglin WANG
Precision Research Center for Refractory Diseases, Shanghai General Hospital,Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine


