### Accession
PXD017271

### Title
Assessing the Effects of Redox Modifier MnTnBuOE-2-PyP 5+ on Cognition and Hippocampal Physiology Following Doxorubicin, Cyclophosphamide, and Paclitaxel Treatment

### Description
Chemotherapy treatment for breast cancer can induce cognitive impairments often involving oxidative stress. The brain, as a whole, is susceptible to oxidative stress due to its high-energy requirements, limited anaerobic respiration capacities, and limited antioxidant defenses. The goal of the current study was to determine if the manganese porphyrin SOD mimetic MnTnBuOE-2-PyP (MnBuOE) could ameliorate the effects of doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, and paclitaxel (AC-T) on mature dendrite morphology and cognitive function. Four-month-old female C57BL/6 mice received intraperitoneal injections of chemotherapy followed by subcutaneous injections of MnBuOE. Four weeks following chemotherapy treatment, mice were tested for hippocampus-dependent cognitive performance in the Morris water maze. After testing, brains were collected for Golgi staining and molecular analyses. MnBuOE treatment preserved spatial memory during the Morris water-maze. MnBuOE/AC-T showed spatial memory retention during all probe trials. AC-T treatment significantly impaired spatial memory retention in the first and third probe trial (no platform). AC-T treatment decreased dendritic length in the Cornu Ammonis 1 (CA1) and dentate gyrus (DG) areas of the hippocampus while AC-T/MnBuOE maintained dendritic length. Comparative proteomic analysis revealed affected protein networks associated with cell morphology and behavior functions in both the AC-T and AC-T/MnBuOE treatment groups

### Sample Protocol
One day after the last MnBuOE injection, a small cohort (n = 4 per) were sacrificed for immediate protein analysis. The hippocampus was removed and placed in 400 µl of RIPA lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-Cl pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 M EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 140 mM NaCl). The tissue was homogenized on ice, incubated for 30 min on ice, and then centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was transferred to a new microcentrifuge tube and stored at -80 °C until processing. The Compat-AbleTM Protein Assay Preparation Reagent Kit (Thermo Scientific ™) was used to eliminate EGTA as an interfering substance for the BCA Pierce TM BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific ™). Protein was separated by SDS-PAGE using the 4-15% Criterion™ TGX™ Precast Midi Protein Gel, 18-well, 30 uL (Bio-Rad) ran at 120V for 75 min. The gel was stained using Coomassie Blue staining (Bio-Rad). The samples were then sent to the UAMS Proteomics Core for further processing for mass spectrometry. GeLC-MS/MS Analysis Each SDS-PAGE gel lane was sectioned into 12 segments of equal volume. Each segment was subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion as follows. Gel slices were destained in 50% methanol (Fisher), 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich), followed by reduction in 10 mM Tris[2-carboxyethyl]phosphine (Pierce) and alkylation in 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich). Gel slices were then dehydrated in acetonitrile (Fisher), followed by addition of 100 ng porcine sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubation at 37oC for 12-16 hours. Peptide products were then acidified in 0.1% formic acid (Pierce). Tryptic peptides were separated by reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 um resin (Waters) on an in-line 150 x 0.075 mm column using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters). Peptides were eluted using a 30 min gradient from 97:3 to 67:33 buffer A: B ratio.  [Buffer A = 0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile; buffer B = 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile.] Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.15 kV) followed by MS/MS analysis using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) in top-speed data-dependent mode. MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 240,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z. Following HCD activation, MS/MS data were acquired using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range with precursor mass-dependent normalized collision energy between 28.0 and 31.0.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and quantified by searching the UniprotKB database restricted to Mus musculus using MaxQuant (version 1.6.5.0, Max Planck Institute). The database search parameters included selecting the MS1 reporter type, trypsin digestion with up to two missed cleavages, fixed modifications for carbamidomethyl of cysteine, variable modifications for oxidation on methionine and acetyl on N-terminus, the precursor ion tolerance of 5 ppm for the first search and 3 ppm for the main search, and label-free quantitation with iBAQ normalized intensities. Peptide and protein identifications were accepted using the 1.0% false discovery rate identification threshold. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al. 2003).  MaxQuant iBAQ intensities for each sample were median-normalized so the medians were equal to the sample with the maximum median. Median-normalized iBAQ intensities were then imported into Perseus (version 1.6.1.3, Max Planck Institute) to perform log2 transformation and impute the missing values using a normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 2 standard deviations. The Linear Models for Microarray Data (limma) Bioconductor package was used to calculate differential expression among the experimental conditions using the lmFit and eBayes functions (Nesvizhskii et al. 2003; Ritchie et al. 2015). Proteins were considered to be significantly different with a fold change > 2 and an FDR adjusted p-value < 0.05. Differentially expressed proteins were analyzed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, QIAGEN Redwood City, www.qiagen.com/ingenuity) to identify pathways and networks.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mntnbuoe-2-pyp, Cyclophosphamide, Paclitaxel, Cognition, Doxorubicin, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
UAMS
Division of Radiation Health, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Neurobiology & Developmental Sciences, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Stephanie Byrum

### Lab Head
Dr Antino Allen
Division of Radiation Health, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Neurobiology & Developmental Sciences, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences


