### Accession
PXD003521

### Title
Identification of Cypermethrin Induced Proteins Changes in Green Algae by iTRAQ Quantitative Proteomics

### Description
Cypermethrin (CYP) is one of the most widely used pesticides in large scale for agricultural and domestic purpose and the residue often seriously affects aquatic system.  Environmental pollutants induced protein changes in organisms could be detected by proteomics, leading to discovery of potential biomarkers and understanding of mode of action. While proteomics investigations of CYP stress in some animal models have been well studied, few reports about the effects of exposure to CYP on algae proteome were published. To determine CYP effect in algae, the impact of various dosages (0.001 µg/L, 0.01 µg/L and 1 µg/L) of CYP on green algae Chlorella Vulgaris for 24h and 96h were investigated by using iTRAQ quantitative proteomics technique. A total of 162 and 198 proteins were significantly altered after CYP exposure for 24h and 96h, respectively. Overview of iTRAQ results indicated that the influence of CYP on algae protein might be dosage-dependent. Functional analysis of differentially expressed proteins showed that CYP could induce protein alterations related to photosynthesis, stress responses and carbohydrates metabolism. This study provides a comprehensive view of complex mode of action of algae under CYP stress and highlights several potential biomarkers for further investigation of pesticides exposed plant and algae.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction of green algae was performed using phenol/TCA-acetone method based on Wang et al [11] with modifications. Briefly, 100 mg algae sample was suspended in 1 ml pre-chilled extraction buffer I and sonicated on ice for 30 min. After centrifugation at 16 000 × g for 5 min under 4 ◦C, the supernatant was removed and the pellet was rinsed with 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 80% methanol and acetone with 0.07% 2-mercaptoethanol(2-ME), respectively. Equal volumes of Tris-buffered phenol solution and extraction buffer II were added and the mixture was votexed followed by 5 min incubation. The sample was centrifuged at 16 000 × g for 5 min under 4 ◦C and the upper phenolic phase was collected. This step was repeated on the residual pellet for two more times and the phenolic phases collected were combined. Then the solution was precipitated with about five volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 80% methanol at -20 ◦C overnight. The mixture was centrifuged and the resulting pellet was rinsed with methanol and acetone. The pellet was re-suspended in appropriate volume of lysis buffer and incubated at room temperature for 60 min. After centrifugation at 18 000 × g for 60 min, the supernatant was collected and kept at -80 ◦C until use. Final protein concentrations were determined using BCA kits (Bio-Rad, Singapore) according to manufacturer’s instruction.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were searched against a protein sequence database derived from the transcriptome sequencing of Chlorella Vulgaris (total 43410 entries) using PorteinPilot™  software  4.2 (SCIEX) for peptide identification and quantification. The Paragon Algorithm (SCIEX) and ProGroup (SCIEX) were used to eliminate any redundant hits because of sharing peptides between proteins. The MS/MS spectra obtained were searched using the following user-defined search parameters: Sample Type: iTRAQ 8 plex (Peptide Labeled); Cysteine Alkylation: MMTS; Digestion: Trypsin; Instrument: TripleTOF5600; Special Factors: None; Species: None; ID Focus: Biological Modification; Database: Algae Transcriptome.fasta; Search Effort: Thorough; FDR Analysis: Yes; User Modified Parameter Files: Yes.  The estimation of false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was performed using a reverse database search strategy.  For iTRAQ studies, an unused confidence score ≥1.3 (95% protein confidence level) was used as the quantification criterium

### Publication Abstract
Cypermethrin (CYP) is one of the most widely used pesticides in large scale for agricultural and domestic purpose and the residue often seriously affects aquatic system. Environmental pollutant-induced protein changes in organisms could be detected by proteomics, leading to discovery of potential biomarkers and understanding of mode of action. While proteomics investigations of CYP stress in some animal models have been well studied, few reports about the effects of exposure to CYP on algae proteome were published. To determine CYP effect in algae, the impact of various dosages (0.001&#x3bc;g/L, 0.01&#x3bc;g/L and 1&#x3bc;g/L) of CYP on green algae Chlorella vulgaris for 24h and 96h was investigated by using iTRAQ quantitative proteomics technique. A total of 162 and 198 proteins were significantly altered after CYP exposure for 24h and 96h, respectively. Overview of iTRAQ results indicated that the influence of CYP on algae protein might be dosage-dependent. Functional analysis of differentially expressed proteins showed that CYP could induce protein alterations related to photosynthesis, stress responses and carbohydrate metabolism. This study provides a comprehensive view of complex mode of action of algae under CYP stress and highlights several potential biomarkers for further investigation of pesticide-exposed plant and algae.

### Keywords
Stress responsive, Cypermethrin, Algae, Carbohydrate metabolism, Photosynthesis, Itraq

### Affiliations
National University of Singapore
Department of Chemistry, National University of Singapore, Singpaore

### Submitter
Yan Gao

### Lab Head
Dr LI Fong Yau Sam
Department of Chemistry, National University of Singapore, Singpaore


