### Accession
PXD022767

### Title
A microenvironment-inspired synthetic 3D model for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma organoids - PDA Matrisome

### Description
LFQ analysis of matrisome fractions enriched from 12 murine PDA or PanIN samples (samples 1 - 12) and a normal pancreas pool (samples 13) pooled from 10 pancreata of C57-Bl6 animals. Three independent enrichments have been conducted for each sample with each having had four injections.

### Sample Protocol
Tumours were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen upon excision from diseased animals histologically verified PDA/PanIN and stored at -80ºC untill preparation. For normal pancreata, the organs were excised from 10 healthy C57-Bl/6 animals and immediately flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Care was taken that access fat was removed from the pancreas prior to preparation. Frozen samples were then weighed, minced using a mortar and pestle in the presence of liquid nitrogen and re-suspended in lysis buffer (buffer C (Merck Millipore) supplemented with 1x protease inhibitor(Merck Millipore)) to a final concentration of 10 mg/100 µL lysis buffer. ECM proteins were enriched from 50 mg of the sample (500 µL buffer homogenate) material using the compartmental protein extraction kit (Merck Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, cytosolic, nuclear, membranous and cytoskeletal proteins were extracted and ECM proteins were washed twice in buffer W and three times in PBS before transferring to MS preparation. All buffers were supplemented with 1x protease inhibitor (Merck Millipore) and for buffer N, 3.5 µL Benzonase (ThermoFisher Scientific) were supplemented to digest genomic DNA and RNA. Extractions were conducted at least three times on individual days for all tumour samples unless otherwise stated. For the derivation of a normal pancreas matrisome atlas and to verify the consistency of the method, 10 pancreata were combined, minced, and obtained as homogenate. Individual 10 extractions were performed in batches of 5 on two consecutive days to control for intra- and inter-extraction variability.     S-trap based tryptic digestion of ECM enriched fractions and LC-MS/MS. ECM proteins were prepared for LC-MS/MS using S-Trap midi-columns (Protifi). Samples were pulverized with frozen urea and re-suspended in 8M urea supplemented with 5% w/w SDS, 20 mM HEPES and 50 mM TEAB and harshly sonicated. Samples were then reduced in 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Sigma Aldrich) for 2h at 37ºC, 1400 rpm (Thermomix) and alkylated using 15 mM MMTS (S-Methyl methanethiosulfonate, Sigma Aldirch) for 30 minutes at RT. Urea was then diluted to 2M by adding 50 mM TEAB and proteins were deglycosylated using PNGaseF (New England Biolabs) for 2h at 37ºC, 1400 rpm. Following sonication samples were acidified to a final concentration of 1.2% (v/v) phosphoric acid (Fisher) and dissolved in S-Trap binding buffer (STBB: 90% v/v aqueous methanol, 0.1 M TEAB, pH 7.1) at a volumetric ratio of 1:7 lysate:STBB. The acidified SDS-containing lysate in STBB was then spun into the S-Trap midi spin columns (Protifi) at 4000 x g for 30 sec to trap the proteins until the entire protein-containing lysate was passed through the columns. Trapped proteins were then washed with STBB four times and proteins were digested overnight at 37ºC in 50 mM TEAB using sequencing grade trypsin at a ratio of 1:10 in a humidified incubator. Following digestion, peptides were eluted in 500 µL 50 mM TEAB followed by 500 µL 0.2% FA in LC-grade water and 500 µL 50% acetonitrile supplemented with 0.2% FA in LC-grade water at 4000 x g for 60 seconds each. Peptides were then dried down and desalted using Sep-Pak Vac 3cc tC18-cartridges (Waters, WAT036820) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, following equilibration of the C18-cartridges with 100% ACN supplemented with 0.1% FA and 0.05% TFA in LC-grade water, samples were loaded in 0.05% TFA in LC-grade water and washed with 0.05% TFA in LC-grade water followed by washing with 0.1% FA in LC-grade water. Peptides were then eluted in 30% acetonitrile in LC-grade water and following drying in a speedvac at 60ºC for 2h, peptides were re-suspended in 0.05% v/v TFA for LC-MS/MS. 5.55 ng worth peptide in 10 µL of 0.05% TFA were trapped on an PepMap 300 (C18, 300 µm x 5 mm, ThermoFisher Scienfitic) column and separated on an Easy spray RSLC C18 columns (75  µm x 500 mm, ThermoFisher Scienfic, ES803) at 220 µL/min using the following gradient profile (minutes:%B);  0:3.0, 45:33, 46:45, 47:80, 49:80, 50:3.0, 70:3.0. The buffers used were: buffer A: 0.1% FA in LC-grade water and B: 100% Acetonitrile. The eluent was directed into an Easy-Spray source (Thermo Scientific) with temperature set at 60˚C and a source voltage of 1.9 kV. Data was acquired on QExactive HFX (ThermoFisher Scientific) with precursor scan ranging from 375 to 1200 m/z at 120,000 resolution and automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6. The isolation window was set to 1.5 m/z. dd-MS2 scans were conducted at 30,000 resolution and automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1e5 and normalized collision energy (NCE) set to 29%. At least four injections of the identical sample were conducted for each analyzed tumour. For normal pancreas samples, at least five injections were conducted.

### Data Protocol
The resulting data was analysed in Progenesis (Nonlinear Dynamics) using a Hi3 approach for each individual replicate and searched against the SwissProt database with species set to Mus musculus on an in house Mascot server (Matrix Science; 2016) using Mascot Daemon (V 2.6, Matrix Science). Search parameters included peptide modifications for methylthio (C) as static modifications and oxidation (M) as well as deamination (N, Q) as dynamic modifications. Only 2+, 3+, and 4+ charged peptide-ions with a peptide tolerance of 10 ppm were included in the search. A 1% peptide FDR threshold was applied, and peptides were filtered for high peptide confidence, minimum peptide length of 6, and finally peptides without protein reference were removed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pdac, Ecm, Cancer, Syntheticmatrix

### Affiliations
CRUK Manchester Institute
Lab head Systems Oncology group at CRUK Manchester Institute

### Submitter
Christopher  Below

### Lab Head
Dr Claus Jorgensen
Lab head Systems Oncology group at CRUK Manchester Institute


