### Accession
PXD009104

### Title
Proteomes of Floral and Extrafloral Nectar from the Castor Plant (Ricinus communis)

### Description
Label-free quantitative proteome analysis of extrafloral (EFN) and floral nectar (FN) from castor (Ricinus communis) plants.

### Sample Protocol
Collected FN and EFN were submitted to protein precipitation using cold acetone with 10 % TCA, precipitated proteins from both FN and EFN were solubilized in 7M urea, 2M thiourea, 50 µg of proteins of each sample were reduced with DTT at a final concentration of 10 mM for 1 h at 30 ºC, followed by iodoacetamide alkylation at 40 mM final concentration for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Peptides resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid and MS analysis was performed in triplicates for FN and EFN samples (four and three biologicalreplicates for FN and EFN, respectively) in a nano-LC EASY-II coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) using SequestTM algorithm against Ricinus communis database downloaded from Uniprot database March 2017. The searches were performed with the following parameters: MS accuracy 10 ppm, MS/MS accuracy 0.1 Da, trypsin digestion with two missed cleavage allowed, fixed carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine and variable modification of oxidized methionine and acetyl at protein N-terminus. Protein groups and, numbers of peptides were estimated using Proteome Discoverer using false discovery rates around 1% at protein and peptide level and peptide rank.

### Publication Abstract
Label-free quantitative proteome analysis of extrafloral (EFN) and floral nectar (FN) from castor (<i>Ricinus communis</i>) plants resulted in the identification of 72 and 37 proteins, respectively. Thirty proteins were differentially accumulated between EFN and FN, and 24 of these were more abundant in the EFN. In addition to proteins involved in maintaining the nectar pathogen free such as chitinases and glucan 1,3-beta-glucosidase, both proteomes share an array of peptidases, lipases, carbohydrases, and nucleases. A total of 39 of the identified proteins, comprising different classes of hydrolases, were found to have biochemical matching partners in the exudates of at least five genera of carnivorous plants, indicating the EFN and FN possess a potential to digest biological material from microbial, animal or plant origin equivalent to the exudates of carnivorous plants.

### Keywords
Nectar, Plant proteomics, Ricinus communis

### Affiliations
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
UFRJ

### Submitter
Proteomics Unit

### Lab Head
Dr Fabio Nogueira
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro


