### Accession
PXD024380

### Title
Aging-induced isoDGR-modified fibronectin activates monocytic and endothelial cells to promote atherosclerosis

### Description
Background and Aims Aging is the primary risk factor for cardiovascular disease (CVD), but the mechanisms underlying age-linked atherosclerosis remain unclear. We previously observed that long-lived vascular matrix proteins can acquire ‘gain-of-function’ isoDGR motifs that might play a role in atherosclerotic pathology.  Methods: IsoDGR-specific mAb were generated and used for ELISA-based measurement of motif levels in plasma samples from patients with coronary artery diseases (CAD) and non-CAD controls. Functional consequences of isoDGR accumulation in age-damaged fibronectin were determined by bioassay for capacity to activate monocytes, macrophages, and endothelial cells (signalling activity, pro-inflammatory cytokine expression, and recruitment/adhesion potential). Mice deficient in the isoDGR repair enzyme PCMT1 were used to assess motif distribution and macrophage localisation in vivo.  Results: IsoDGR-modified fibronectin and fibrinogen levels in patient plasma were significantly enhanced in CAD and further associated with smoking status. Functional assays demonstrated that isoDGR-modified fibronectin activated both monocytes and macrophages via integrin receptor ‘outside in’ signalling, triggering an ERK:AP-1 cascade and expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines MCP-1 and TNF to drive additional recruitment of circulating leukocytes. IsoDGR-modified fibronectin also induced endothelial cell expression of integrin 1 to further enhance cellular adhesion and matrix deposition. Analysis of murine aortic tissues confirmed accumulation of isoDGR-modified proteins co-localised with CD68+ macrophages in vivo.    Conclusions: Age-damaged fibronectin features isoDGR motifs that increase binding to integrins on the surface of monocytes, macrophages, and endothelial cells. Subsequent activation of ‘outside-in’ signalling elicits a range of potent cytokines and chemokines that drive additional leukocyte recruitment to the developing atherosclerotic matrix.

### Sample Protocol
Two forms of plasma FN (native and deamidated) were used in the experiments. Native FN was dissolved in ammonium acetate buffer at pH 6.5, while deamidated FN was prepared by incubating FN in 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.0) for 48h at 37°C before adjusting to pH 6.5 by addition of 1% acetic acid. Native and deamidated FN structures were confirmed by LC-MS/MS and then used for cell treatment or plate coating. A 20μg mass of FN in solution (pH 6.5) was reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol for 2h at RT, then alkylated using 55mM iodoacetamide for 1h at RT in the dark. The sample was then incubated at 37°C for overnight trypsin digestion (trypsin 1:50 protein w/w ratio; Promega, Madison, WI). The digestion reaction was quenched by adding formic acid (FA) until the final acid concentration reached 0.5%. Tryptic peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator (Concentrator Plus, Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany). The FN tryptic peptides were analysed by RPLC-MS/MS using C18 column and ERLIC-MS/MS using WAX column as described previously 1-3. In RPLC-MS/MS experiment, the peptide samples were reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% FA buffer,  and then injected into a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Peptide separation was performed on a Dionex EASY-Spray 75 μm x 10 cm column packed with PepMap C18 3μm, 100 Å (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc). Separation of peptides was performed with mobile phase solvent A (0.1% FA in HPLC water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in 90% ACN) at flow rate of 300nl/min with a 60min gradient. The sample was sprayed with an EASY nanospray source (ThermoFisher Scientific, Inc.) at an electrospray potential of 1.5 kV.  In ERLIC-MS/MS run, the peptide samples were dissolved in 90% ACN, 0.1% acetic acid (AA) buffer, and injected into an in-house packed 200 μm x 10 cm WAX column (Bulk material: PolyWAX 3 μm, 300 Å particles) using a Vanquish HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.).  ERLIC separation of peptides was performed with mobile phase solvent A (90% ACN, 0.1%AA) and solvent B (0.1% FA in HPLC water) at flow rate of 3μl/min with a 60min gradient. Peptide ionization was through a ESI source (ThermoFisher Scientific, Inc.) at an electrospray voltage of 3.5 kV. Both RPLC- and ERLIC- separation were coupled to a Q Exactive MS instrument for LC-MS/MS analysis. The Q Exactive was set to perform data acquisition in positive ion mode and a full MS scan (350-1,600 m/z range) was acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. The 10 most intense ions were selected for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation using 28% normalized collision energy. The AGC setting was 1E6 for the full MS scan and 2E5 for the MS2 scan. Single and unassigned charged ions were excluded from MS2.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted into the mascot generic file format (MGF) using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) with the MS2 spectrum processor for de-isotoping and de-convoluting MS/MS spectra. Label-free raw data file searches were carried out using an in-house Mascot server (version 2.6.02, Matrix Science, MA) with precursor ion tolerance of 5ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 30ppm 3. The UniProt human database was used for protein database searches (downloaded on June 23, 2015, including 180,822 sequences and 71,773,890 residues). Variable modifications were set as deamidation of N and Q, as well as oxidation of M, while carbamidomethylation of C was set as a fixed modification. Two missed trypsin cleavage sites per peptide were tolerated. The area under the extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) curve is used to determine the peptide abundance in the samples. The XIC was integrated over the calculated m/z of the precursor ions with +/- 3ppm tolerance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Integrin, Atherosclerosis, Deamidation, Vascular inflammation, Fibronectin, Isodgr motif

### Affiliations
Nanyang Technological University

### Submitter
SoFong Cam Ngan

### Lab Head
Dr newman sze
Nanyang Technological University


