### Accession
PXD023756

### Title
Comparative Proteomic Analysis of Fucosylated Glycoproteins in Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron under Different Polysaccharide Nutrition Conditions

### Description
Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, one of the most eminent representative gut commensal Bacteroides species, is able to use the L-fucose in host-derived and dietary polysaccharides to modify its capsular polysaccharides and glycoproteins through a mammalian-like salvage metabolic pathway. This process is essential for the colonization of the bacteria and for symbiosis with the host. However, despite the importance of fucosylated proteins (FGPs) in Bacteroide thetaiotaomicron, their types, distribution, and functions remain unclear. In this project, the effects of different saccharide (glucose, corn starch, mucin, and fucoidan) nutrition conditions on FGP expressions and fucosylation are investigated using a chemical biological method based on metabolic labeling and bioorthogonal reaction. According to the results of label-free quantification, 559 FGPs (205 downregulated and 354 upregulated) are affected by the dietary conditions. Of these differentially expressed proteins, 65 proteins show extremely sensitive fucosylation levels. Specifically, the fucosylation of the chondroitin sulfate ABC enzyme, Sus proteins, and cationic efflux system proteins varies significantly upon the addition of mucin, corn starch, or fucoidan. Moreover, these polysaccharides can trigger an appreciable increase in the fucosylation level of the two-component system and ammonium transport proteins. These results highlight the efficiency of the combined metabolic glycan labeling and bio-orthogonal reaction in enriching the intestinal Bacteroide glycoproteins. Moreover, it emphasize the sensitivity of Bacteroides fucosylation to polysaccharide nutrition conditions, which allows for the regulation of bacterial growth.

### Sample Protocol
B. thetaiotaomicron VPI-5482 was incubated in AMM in anaerobic conditions at 37 °C for about 24 h and grew to the middle logarithmic growth phase (OD600nm=0.5). The bacterial culture medium is divided into four groups: G group (with glucose), M group (with mucin), S group (with starch), F group (with fucoidan). And there were three replicates for each group. Corresponding carbohydrates were added to each group to a final concentration of 0.25% respectively. 200 μM FucAl was added at the same time. After incubated under anaerobic conditions at 37 °C for 3 h, cells were harvested and lysed in lysis buffer (1% NP-40, 150 mM NaCl, protease inhibitor, 100 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.5). The soluble protein were collected and reacted with 100 μM biotin-picolyl-azide, premixed BTTAA-CuSO4 (CuSO4=500 μM, [BTTAA]:[CuSO4] = 2:1) and 2.5 mM freshly prepared sodium ascorbate for 1.5 h with agitation (25 °C, 1200 rpm).  The biotin-labeled lysates were precipitated by methanol at -40 °C overnight. The precipitated proteins were collected by centrifugation at 5,000 g for 15 min at -10 °C, washed with cold methanol for three times and solubilized with 1.2% SDS/ PBS. The solubilized proteins were incubated with streptavidin beads (100 μL of slurry) in 0.2% SDS/PBS at RT for 3 h with rotation. After washing the beads with 0.2% SDS/PBS (10 mL, 1X), PBS (10 mL, 3X), and ddH2O (10 mL, 3X) sequentially, biotinylated proteins were released from the beads by treating with 50 μL 2 x SDS PAGE loading buffer and heating for 10 min at 95 °C.  Then the glycoproteins were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 30 min at 37 °C, and alkylated with 15 mM IAA for 30 min in the dark at RT. Each sample was trypsinized by the filter aided proteome preparation (FASP) method. The peptides were desalted by C18 Cartridge, lyophilized and reconstituted by 40 μL of 0.1% formic acid solution. Peptides were submitted to label-free differential proteomic analysis. Each sample was separated with a nanoliter flow rate HPLC liquid system Easy nLC. The mobile phases consisted of a 0.1% (v/v) formic acid aqueous solution (A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile/water (84% acetonitrile) (B). The column was equilibrated with 95% solution A. Samples were loaded from the autosampler to the loading column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm * 2cm, nanoViper C18), and passed through the analytical column (Thermo scientific EASY column, 10 cm, ID75 μm, 3 μm, C18-A2), with a flow rate of 300 nL / min. Samples were chromatographed and analyzed by Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Detection parameters were used as follows: detection method (positive ion); scanning range of the precursor ion (300-1800 m/z); resolution of the first-order mass spectrum (70,000 at 200 m/z); automatic gain control target (1e6); maximum IT (50 ms); dynamic exclusion time (60.0 s). Mass-to-charge ratios of peptides and peptide fragments were collected according to the following methods: fragment maps taken after each full scan (20); MS2 activation type (HCD); isolation window (2 m/z); MS2 resolution (17,500 at 200 m/z); normalized collision energy (30 eV); underfill (0.1%).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.17) was used to the database searching against UniProt -Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (strain ATCC 29148 / DSM 2079 / NCTC 10582 / E50 / VPI-5482) and FASTA database (2019_07 release, 4783 reviewed entries). Searching parameters were used as follows: max missed cleavages (2); fixed modification, carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications, oxidation (M); MS/MS tolerance (20 ppm); protein and peptide FDR (≤0.01); peptides used for protein quantification (razor and unique peptides); time window (2 min); protein quantification (LFQ/iBAQ). Groups M, S, and F were compared with group G (control), and the statistical analysis of T test and FDR (Benjamini-Hochberg) was performed. Specific proteins in each group and proteins with ratio > 2 and p value < 0.05 between the two groups were regarded as differential proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, Fucosylated glycoprotein, Click chemistry, Polysaccharide

### Affiliations
School of Pharrmacy and Medicine, Ocean University of China
Ocean University of China

### Submitter
Hao Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Hao Jiang
Ocean University of China


