### Accession
PXD037246

### Title
Protein content of blood-derived extracellular vesicles. An approach to the pathophysiology of cerebral hemorrhage

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) participate in cell-to-cell paracrine signaling and can be biomarkers of the pathophysiological processes underlying disease. In intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH), the study of the number and molecular content of circulating EVs may help elucidate the biological mechanisms involved in damage and repair, contributing valuable information to the identification of new therapeutic targets. The objective of this study was to describe the number and protein content of blood-derived EVs following an ICH in an animal model in rats. The protein content in the EVs was analyzed by mass spectrometric data-dependent acquisition; protein quantification was obtained by sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra data and compared at pre-defined time points.

### Sample Protocol
EVs were isolated from serum samples using the ExoQuick ULTRA EV isolation kit (System Biosciences, USA) following manufacturer instructions. Isolated EVs were stored at -80 °C until analysis.A mass spectrometric data-dependent acquisition (DDA) qualitative analysis and protein quantification by sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH) data independent acquisition (DIA) was performed to determine the specific protein content of EVs at the predefined study time points. Qualitative and quantitative protein identification was performed by processing a total amount of 100 µg protein. Four µg peptides were digested and separated using reverse phase chromatography. The gradient was created using the NanoLC 400 microflow chromatography system (SCIEX, USA) coupled to a high-speed Triple TOF 6600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX, USA) with a microflow source using a data-dependent acquisition method and 90-minute gradient for qualitative analysis and 40-minute gradient for library creation and grouping each EV type in a pool for SWATH quantification. For qualitative analysis or SWATH library validation, only those proteins with a false discovery rate of <1 % (99% protein confidence) were selected. Once the library was prepared, the SWATH DIA method was created and 4 µg of each sample and its technical replicates [three pooled samples (healthy 24h, ICH 24h and ICH 28d], each run in triplicate) were analyzed in the TripleTOF 6600. The total ion chromatogram profile for each individual sample was then used in the qualitative DDA method and quantitative SWATH analysis.

### Data Protocol
The results from the proteomic studies were then analyzed using SWATH principal component analysis (PCA) and cluster analysis, R 3.5.3 (R Core Team, Austria) with “base,” “stats,” “gplots,” “Hmisc,” “dplyr,” and “car” packages. The PCA was applied considering the correlation matrix due to its pairwise two-sided p-values being 0 for the entire matrix, all of them therefore being statistically significant, which could account for the successful application of the PCA. The total variability of the data was 87.70% and is explained with the first two principal components. For the cluster analysis, a Student’s t-test for means comparison between samples and Euclidean distance suitable for quantitative variables and complete linkage as cluster criteria were applied. For differentially expressed protein selection, p-values were adjusted using a Benjamini-Hochberg correction, selecting proteins with a FC of >2 or <0.5 and an adjusted p-value of <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Introduction:</b> Extracellular vesicles (EVs) participate in cell-to-cell paracrine signaling and can be biomarkers of the pathophysiological processes underlying disease. In intracerebral hemorrhage, the study of the number and molecular content of circulating EVs may help elucidate the biological mechanisms involved in damage and repair, contributing valuable information to the identification of new therapeutic targets. <b>Methods:</b> The objective of this study was to describe the number and protein content of blood-derived EVs following an intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH). For this purpose, an experimental ICH was induced in the striatum of Sprague-Dawley rats and EVs were isolated and characterized from blood at baseline, 24 h and 28 days. The protein content in the EVs was analyzed by mass spectrometric data-dependent acquisition; protein quantification was obtained by sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra data and compared at pre-defined time points. <b>Results:</b> Although no differences were found in the number of EVs, the proteomic study revealed that proteins related to the response to cellular damage such as deubiquitination, regulation of MAP kinase activity (UCHL1) and signal transduction (NDGR3), were up-expressed at 24 h compared to baseline; and that at 28 days, the protein expression profile was characterized by a higher content of the proteins involved in healing and repair processes such as cytoskeleton organization and response to growth factors (COR1B) and the regulation of autophagy (PI42B). <b>Discussion:</b> The protein content of circulating EVs at different time points following an ICH may reflect evolutionary changes in the pathophysiology of the disease.

### Keywords
Rat, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Intracerebral hemorrhage, Blood

### Affiliations
FIDIS
Instituto de Investigaciones Sanitarias de Santiago de Compostela

### Submitter
Susana Bravo

### Lab Head
Dr Susana Bravo
Instituto de Investigaciones Sanitarias de Santiago de Compostela


