### Accession
PXD026071

### Title
PRMT5-mediated arginine methylation activates AKT kinase  to govern tumorigenesis

### Description
AKT is involved in a number of key cellular processes including cell proliferation, apoptosis and metabolism. Hyperactivation of AKT is associated with many pathological conditions, particularly cancers. Emerging evidence indicates that arginine methylation is involved in modulating AKT signaling pathway. However, whether and how arginine methylation directly regulates AKT kinase activity remain unknown. Here we report that protein arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5), but not other PRMTs, promotes AKT activation by catalyzing symmetric dimethylation of AKT1 at arginine 391 (R391). Mechanistically, AKT1-R391 methylation cooperates with phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5 trisphosphate (PIP3) to relieve the pleckstrin homology (PH)-in conformation, leading to AKT1 membrane translocation and subsequent activation by phosphoinositide-dependent kinase-1 (PDK1) and the mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 2 (mTORC2). As a result, deficiency in AKT1-R391 methylation significantly suppresses AKT1 kinase activity and tumorigenesis. Lastly, we show that PRMT5 inhibitor synergizes with AKT inhibitor or chemotherapeutic drugs to enhance cell death. Altogether, our study suggests that R391 methylation is an important step for AKT activation and its oncogenic function.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with HA-AKT1. Forty-eight hours post transfection, the cells were lysed in Triton buffer, following HA immunoprecipitation. The immunoprecipitates were resolved by SDS-PAGE and visualized using GelCode blue staining reagent. The protein band containing HA-AKT1 was excised and digested with trypsin. Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific).  Peptides were pressure loaded at 800 bar and separated on a C18 reversed phase column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 µm x 50 cm (C18, 2 µm, 100 Å)) (ThermoFisher) using a gradient of 2% to 35% B in 180 min (Solvent A: 0.1% FA; Solvent B: 80% ACN/ 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min at 45 °C. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode with a high resolution (60,000) FTMS survey scan followed by tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) of the most intense precursors with a cycle time of 3 s. The automatic gain control target value was 4.0e5 for the survey MS scan. Fragmentation was performed with a precursor isolation window of 1.6 m/z, a maximum injection time of 50 ms, and HCD collision energy of 35%; the fragment ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a 15,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched against a custom database containing human AKT1 and a database of common contaminants using MaxQuant. The false discovery rate (FDR), determined using a reversed database strategy, was set at 1% at the peptide and modification site levels. Fully tryptic peptides with a minimum of 7 residues were required including cleavage between lysine and proline. Two missed cleavages were permitted. Sites of modification were manually verified.

### Publication Abstract
AKT is involved in a number of key cellular processes including cell proliferation, apoptosis and metabolism. Hyperactivation of AKT is associated with many pathological conditions, particularly cancers. Emerging evidence indicates that arginine methylation is involved in modulating AKT signaling pathway. However, whether and how arginine methylation directly regulates AKT kinase activity remain unknown. Here we report that protein arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5), but not other PRMTs, promotes AKT activation by catalyzing symmetric dimethylation of AKT1 at arginine 391 (R391). Mechanistically, AKT1-R391 methylation cooperates with phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5 trisphosphate (PIP3) to relieve the pleckstrin homology (PH)-in conformation, leading to AKT1 membrane translocation and subsequent activation by phosphoinositide-dependent kinase-1 (PDK1) and the mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 2 (mTORC2). As a result, deficiency in AKT1-R391 methylation significantly suppresses AKT1 kinase activity and tumorigenesis. Lastly, we show that PRMT5 inhibitor synergizes with AKT inhibitor or chemotherapeutic drugs to enhance cell death. Altogether, our study suggests that R391 methylation is an important step for AKT activation and its oncogenic function.

### Keywords
Prmt5, Tumorigenesis, Akt, Arginine methylation

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Medical University of South Carolina
Medical University of SC

### Submitter
Jennifer Bethard

### Lab Head
Dr Wenjian Gan, Ph.D.
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Medical University of South Carolina


