### Accession
PXD009017

### Title
Myristic acid induces proteomic changes in primary murine hepatocytes

### Description
Myristic acid, the 14-carbon saturated fatty acid (C14:0), is usually associated with negative consequences for human health, and in particular its consumption is correlated to an increased cardiovascular disease risk. Since it is a little abundant into the cells, its specific properties and functional roles have not been fully described. The aim of this study was to explore the cell response to this fatty acid to help explaining clinical findings on the relationship between C14:0 and cardiovascular disease. Primary murine hepatocytes  were used as a model to investigate the hepatic response to C14:0 in a proteomic approach. C14:0 treatment (250 µM) of primary murine hepatocytes confirmed that myristic acid induces lipid droplet accumulation as shown by cellular imaging and elevated perilipin 2 levels on cellular proteome level. The functionally enriched pathways were involved in protein synthesis, transport and degradation, protein depalmitoylation, unfolded protein response, lipid and cholesterol metabolism, mitophagy in response to depolarization, and cell cell adhesion. Our data provide for the first time quantitative proteomic data regarding C14:0 in primary murine hepatocytes (M1 in present dataset) and contribute to the elucidation of the molecular mechanisms through which this fatty acid can cause adverse health effects.

### Sample Protocol
To obtain whole lysate samples, cells were harvested after treatment by centrifugation at 1400g for 5 min at 4°C. After two washes with cold PBS, cells were lysed in PBS by sonication, using an ultrasonic probe with an amplitude of 70% until 1.5 kJ were reached on ice. Cell debris were removed by centrifugation as above.  Protein concentrations were determined using Bradford Protein assay (Bio-Rad). Samples were diluted with  Tris-HCl 50 mM buffer pH 8.5 and 25% trifluoroethanol(final concentration), reduced and alkylated with TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 10 mM final concentration) and CAA (chloroacetamide, 40 mM final concentration). After 10 minutes at 95°C, in continuous shaking, each sample was diluted to 10% TFE with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin digestion (1:50 trypsin:protein mass) was performed overnight at 37 °C. Obtained peptides were then diluted in solvent A (0.3% FA, 5% ACN) and stored at -20 °C until further LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data from primary murine hepatocytes were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.0.16 against the murine public SwissProt database with taxonomy mus musculus (downloaded on 19.02.2018) and common contaminants (17095 sequences). Carbamidomethylation on Cys was entered as fixed modification, oxidation on methionine as variable modification. Detailed search criteria were used as follows: trypsin, max. missed cleavage sites: 2; search mode: MS/MS ion search with decoy database search included; precursor mass tolerance +/- 4.5 ppm; product mass tolerance +/- 0.5 Da; acceptance parameters for identification: 1 % PSM FDR; 1 % protein FDR, minimum 2 identified peptides. In addition, a label free quantitation including the Match match between runs feature of MaxQuant was performed requiring a minimum of 2 ratio counts of quantified razor and unique peptides. Data processing was performed using Perseus software version 1.6.0.7.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Primary murine hepatocytes, Mouse, Myristic acid, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Omics Center Graz
Austrian Centre of Industrial Biotechnology (ACIB), Petersgasse 14, 8010 Graz, Austria; Medical University of Graz, Institute of Pathology, Research Unit Functional Proteomics and Metabolic Pathways, Stiftingtalstrasse 24, 8010 Graz, Austria; Omics Center Graz, BioTechMed-Graz, Stiftingtalstrasse 24, 8010 Graz, Austria.

### Submitter
Barbara Darnhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Austrian Centre of Industrial Biotechnology (ACIB), Petersgasse 14, 8010 Graz, Austria; Medical University of Graz, Institute of Pathology, Research Unit Functional Proteomics and Metabolic Pathways, Stiftingtalstrasse 24, 8010 Graz, Austria; Omics Center Graz, BioTechMed-Graz, Stiftingtalstrasse 24, 8010 Graz, Austria.


