### Accession
PXD034185

### Title
Mouse，oocyte ，LC-MS/MS-mRBPome capture of oocytes identifies the RNA-binding protein LSM14B,an essential regulator of meiosis in mouse oocytes

### Description
proteins from immunoprecipitation (IP) of LSM14B indentified by mass spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
ocytes were harvested and lysed using the lysis buffer that comes with the PierceTM Crosslink Immunoprecipitation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #26147). Immunoprecipitation (IP) was then carried out on these oocytes lysates using the LSM14B antibodies. The IP products were then subjected to WB validation followed by Mass Spectrometry analysis. For Mass Spectrometry analysis, the IP products from two independent experiments were resolved simultaneously on 10% SDS-PAGE and visualized with Coomassie blue. The lanes corresponding to each IP product were sliced out and sent to the proteomics core facility of the Analysis and Testing Center at Nanjing Medical University (Nan Jing, China) for Mass Spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry analysis was carried out using the same exact protocols as detailed in the previous studies. Briefly, the gel slices were cut into 1 mm3 particles, destained, reduced, and alkylated, followed by the overnight Trypsin in-gel digestion at 37°C. LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis was performed using a nanoflow EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Bremen, Germany). The raw data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an in-house Mascot Server (version 2.3, Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom)). Data were searched using the following parameters: trypsin/P as the enzyme; up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed; 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS fragment ions; propionamidation on cysteine as fixed modification; oxidation on methionine as variable modification. The incorporated Target Decoy PSM Validator in Proteome Discoverer and the Mascot expectation value was used to validate the search results and only the hits with FDR ≤ 0.01 and MASCOT expected value ≤ 0.05 were accepted for discussion.

### Publication Abstract
Mammalian oogenesis features reliance on the mRNAs produced and stored during early growth phase. These are essential for producing an oocyte competent to undergo meiotic maturation and embryogenesis later when oocytes are transcriptionally silent. The fate of maternal mRNAs hence ensures the success of oogenesis and the quality of the resulting eggs. Nevertheless, how the fate of maternal mRNAs is determined remains largely elusive. RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are crucial regulators of oogenesis, yet the identity of the full complement of RBPs expressed in oocytes is unknown. Here, a global view of oocyte-expressed RBPs is presented: mRNA-interactome capture identifies 1396 RBPs in mouse oocytes. An analysis of one of these RBPs, LSM family member 14 (LSM14B), demonstrates that this RBP is specific to oocytes and associated with many networks essential for oogenesis. Deletion of Lsm14b results in female-specific infertility and a phenotype characterized by oocytes incompetent to complete meiosis and early embryogenesis. LSM14B serves as an interaction hub for proteins and mRNAs throughout oocyte development and regulates translation of a subset of its bound mRNAs. Therefore, RNP complexes tethered by LSM14B are found exclusively in oocytes and are essential for the control of maternal mRNA fate and oocyte development.

### Keywords
Mouse, Ip, Oocyte, Lsm14b

### Affiliations
Shang dong university
shang dong university

### Submitter
Li Hui

### Lab Head
Dr SU you qiang
Shang dong university


