### Accession
PXD010624

### Title
Heterotrophic carbon metabolism and energy acquisition in Candidatus Thioglobus singularis strain PS1, a member of the SUP05 clade of marine Gammaproteobacteria

### Description
The balance between autotrophy and heterotrophy regulates the size of the ocean’s carbon sink. The contribution of a particular bacterial or archaeal lineage to carbon flux is determined by its metabolism, which may vary within lineages and may depend on environmental conditions.  Members of the SUP05 clade are often described as a single lineage of chemoautotrophic gammaproteobacterial sulfur-oxidizers (GSOs). Like other SUP05, the Arctic96BD-19 subclade contains the genetic potential for carbon fixation through the Calvin cycle yet differs from other strictly chemoautotrophic SUP05 in its potential to also consume exogenous organic matter from surrounding seawater. The balance between organic carbon production and consumption in Arctic96BD-19 is not well understood and could have global implications to carbon cycling in the world’s oceans. Here we used genomic reconstructions, physiological growth experiments, and proteomics to characterize central carbon and energy processing of Ca. Thioglobus singularis strain PS1, a representative of the Arctic96BD-19 subclade of SUP05 that was isolated from Puget Sound, WA, USA. The addition of either complex organic matter from phytoplankton lysate or individual phytoplankton-derived organic compounds significantly enhanced the growth of PS1. Proteins involved in methylotrophic pathways for carbon assimilation and energy generation were significantly upregulated when lysate was added to the growth media, suggesting that PS1 uses methylated compounds derived from marine organisms. Although sulfur oxidation and carbon fixation are defining characteristics of the GSO clade, strain PS1 did not require reduced inorganic sulfur for growth and there was little evidence of carbon fixation. These data indicate that strain PS1 functions primarily as an organic carbon consumer, suggesting that the role of widespread Arctic96BD-19 may be largely heterotrophic.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, two sets of Ca. Thioglobus singularis strain PS1 cultures were grown containing either artificial seawater supplemented with only thiosulfate (nutrient-deplete) or with diatom lysate and thiosulfate (nutrient-replete). Cell biomass from each condition was collected onto filters (separately) and filters were extracted using bead-beating to lyse cells. Lysed cells were subjected to in-solution proteolytic digestion. RapiGest SF (Waters), an acid labile surfactant, was added to help facilitate protein solubilization (0.06% w/v). Next, disulfide bonds were reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP; to a final concentration of 10 mM) for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Reduced samples were then alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAM; to a final concentration of 30 mM) for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Excess IAM was quenched by the addition of dithiolthreitol (DTT; to final concentration of 5 mM) for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. All protein extracts were proteolytically digested with mass spectrometry-grade trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega) at an estimated substrate-to-enzyme ratio of 25 for 19 hours at 37 °C containing a final concentration of 0.05% w/v RapiGest, 50 mM AMBIC and 5 mM EDTA (pH 8).  Following trypsin/Lys-C digestion, RapiGest was hydrolyzed by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (0.5% final v/v, pH < 2; concurrently terminating trypsin/Lys-C activity), heated for 45 minutes at 37 °C and centrifuged at 15,000 rpm (21,130 rcf) at 4 °C for 15 minutes to precipitate the water immiscible decomposition product, dodeca-2-one. The supernatant was removed, transferred to a new protein LoBind eppendorf tube and samples were dried to near-dryness using a centrivap concentrator (Thermo Savant SPD2010 SpeedVac). Digested samples were desalted using a MacroSpin C18 column (NestGroup) following an established manufacturer protocol. Samples were eluted from the MacroSpin columns using two times 200 µL of 80% LCMS-grade acetonitrile with 20% LCMS-grade water containing 0.1% LCMS-grade formic acid. Desalted samples were concentrated using the centrivap to near dryness and were immediately resuspended in 95% LCMS-grade water with 5% LCMS-grade acetonitrile containing 0.1% LCMS-grade formic acid. See SI of manuscript for more detailed information.

### Data Protocol
Samples were injected onto the column of a Waters ACQUITY M-class UPLC with an injection volume of 2 µL in triplicate injections; the PS1 culture with only thiosulfate supplemented media was only injected in duplicates due to limited sample volume. On-column cell count estimates were 1) 2.92 × 107 cells (0.3 µg) and 2) 1.19 × 108 cells (1.2 µg).  Peptide separation was performed by reversed-phase chromatography using a nanoACQUITY HSS T3 C18 column (1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm; 45 °C) with an ACQUITY UPLC M-class Symmetry C18 trapping column (180 µm x 20 mm). The peptides were trapped at a flow rate of 5 µL/min at 99% A for 3 minutes. A flow rate of 0.3 µL/min was used over a gradient between LCMS-grade water (A) and LCMS-grade acetonitrile (B), both modified with 0.1% LCMS-grade formic acid. The total 145 minute gradient method for the separation of the peptides started at 95% A and ramped to 60% A over the course of 120 minutes. The gradient then switched to 15% A at 122 -127 minutes followed by a ramp back to starting conditions 95% A at 128-145 minutes.  The ACQUITY M-class was coupled to a Thermo QExactive HF Orbitrap high-resolution mass spectrometer (HRMS) equipped with a nano-electrospray (NSI) source made in-house following the University of Washington Proteomic Resource (UWPR) design. Using a MicroTee (PEEK, 0.025” OD), the commercial analytical column was connected to a commercial emitter (PicoTip, Waters) and the liquid path was applied a high voltage through a platinum wire (adapted from UWPR design). All analyses were carried out in positive mode and a NSI spray voltage of 2.0 kV. Data was collected using data dependent acquisition (DDA) using Xcalibur 4.0 data acquisition software (Thermo Fisher). The MS1 scan range was 400-2000 m/z at 60,000 resolution with a maximum injection time of 30 ms and automated gain control of 1e6.  Following each MS1 scan, data-dependent MS2 (dd-MS2) was set to perform on the top 10 ions in a data-dependent manner at 15,000 resolution with a normalized collision energy of 27 eV. Additional selection criteria for dd-MS2 were as follows: maximum injection time of 50 ms with an automated gain control of 5e4, the isolation window was 1.5 Da and dynamic exclusion was set at 20 sec.  Data processing was conducted using the software from the trans-proteomic pipeline (TPP v.4.8.1). Briefly, raw data was converted to mzML and searched using COMET against a FASTA protein database consisting of either PS1 (Uniprot 9GAMMA 1,682 proteins accessed July 2016; KEGG estimated protein genes 1,682) or PS1 combined with Thalassiosira pseudonana (Uniprot THAPS 12,041 proteins accessed September 2016; KEGG estimated protein genes 11,672). Each FASTA database also contained the E.coli chaperone protein (Hi3 standard; P63284) and was concatenated with a set of randomized sequences. Additional COMET parameters included trypsin enzyme specificity, one allowed non-tryptic termini, up to two missed cleavage sites, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as a fixed modification (+57.02146 Da), and oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) and clipping of N-terminal methionine as variable modifications. The COMET pep.xml files from each technical triplicate mzML file (or duplicate for PS1 with only thiosulfate treatment) were then grouped and searched in PeptideProphet followed by iProphet and ProteinProphet within the TPP. The set of randomized sequences were decoy peptides used for the purpose of calculating peptide spectrum matching (PSM) and protein false discovery rates (FDR).  Results from each of the combined datasets searched against the PS1 database only, PeptideProphet probabilities greater than 95% for 1) PS1 grown with only thiosulfate, resulted in 1,159 peptides and 3,752 PSM out of a total of 28,601 MS/MS spectra, with a corresponding FDR of 0.2% (PSM level 9/3,752) and for 2) PS1 grown with diatom lysate, resulted in 7,618 peptides and 46,834 PSM out of a total of 120,040 MS/MS spectra, with a corresponding FDR of <0.05% (PSM level 14/46,834). The list of protein identifications was filtered using a 95% or greater protein probability as calculated from ProteinProphet corresponding to a FDR < 0.5%; where 292 and 1,125 proteins were identified in 1) PS1 proteome grown with only thiosulfate and 2) the PS1 proteome grown with diatom lysate, respectively. This represented approximately 17% and 67% of all the predicted proteins encoded in the PS1 genome, respectively. See SI of manuscript for additional information.

### Publication Abstract
A hallmark of the SUP05 clade of marine Gammaproteobacteria is the ability to use energy obtained from reduced inorganic sulfur to fuel autotrophic fixation of carbon using RuBisCo. However, some SUP05 also have the genetic potential for heterotrophic growth, raising questions about the roles of SUP05 in the marine carbon cycle. We used genomic reconstructions, physiological growth experiments and proteomics to characterize central carbon and energy metabolism in Candidatus Thioglobus singularis strain PS1, a representative from the SUP05 clade that has the genetic potential for autotrophy and heterotrophy. Here, we show that the addition of individual organic compounds and 0.2 &#x3bc;m filtered diatom lysate significantly enhanced the growth of this bacterium. This positive growth response to organic substrates, combined with expression of a complete TCA cycle, heterotrophic pathways for carbon assimilation, and methylotrophic pathways for energy conversion demonstrate strain PS1's capacity for heterotrophic growth. Further, our inability to verify the expression of RuBisCO suggests that carbon fixation was not critical for growth. These results highlight the metabolic diversity of the SUP05 clade that harbours both primary producers and consumers of organic carbon in the oceans and expand our understanding of specific pathways of organic matter oxidation by the heterotrophic SUP05.

### Keywords
Candidatus thioglobus singularis strain ps1, Arctic96bd-19, Marine gammaproteobacteria, Sup05

### Affiliations
University of Washington

### Submitter
Rachel Lundeen

### Lab Head
Dr Anitra Ingalls
University of Washington


