### Accession
PXD035421

### Title
Peptide ligand-mediated trade-off between plant growth and stress response

### Description
The decision of whether to grow or to divert energy to stress response is a major physiological trade-off for plants in surviving under fluctuating environments. Here we show that three leucine-rich repeat receptor kinases (LRR-RKs) act as direct ligand-perceiving receptors for PLANT PEPTIDE CONTAINING SULFATED TYROSINE (PSY) -family peptides and mediate local switching between two opposing pathways. In contrast to the known LRR-RKs, PSY receptors (PSYRs) activate the expression of various genes encoding stress response transcription factors upon depletion of the ligands. Loss of PSYRs resulted in defects in the plant’s tolerance to both biotic and abiotic stresses. This ligand-deprivation-dependent activation system enables plants to exert tuned regulation of stress responses in the tissues proximal to metabolically dysfunctional damaged sites where ligand production is impaired.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis seeds harboring the estradiol-inducible gene were sown directly in 100 ml of B5 liquid medium containing 1.0% sucrose and incubated without shaking under continuous light at 22°C. After 14 days of culture, overexpression of the transgene was induced by addition of 75 µM estradiol for 24 h.Induced culture medium were concentrated 10-fold by rotary evaporation. Then, N-ethylmorpholine (NEM) (final concentration, 1.0%) and 20 ml of o-chlorophenol saturated with 1% NEM was added to each concentrated sample. After shaking for 1 min at room temperature (25°C) each sample was centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 min. The phenolic phase was collected, and peptides were precipitated with 20 volumes of acetone at −20°C overnight. After centrifugation at 10,000 g for 10 min, the pellet was rinsed once with acetone, followed by drying in vacuo.Fractions containing total secreted peptide were dissolved in 500 µl of 0.1% TFA.Nano LC-MS analysis was performed using a DiNa-M splitless nano HPLC system (KYA Technologies, Japan) connected to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Aliquots of peptide fractions (5 µl) were loaded onto a C18 trap column (0.5 mm i.d. × 1 mm cartridge; KYA Technologies) and washed with 10 µl of 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were subsequently eluted from the precolumn and separated on a MonoCap C18 Fast-flow nano-column (100 µm i.d. × 150 mm; GL Sciences) using a gradient of 2-35% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid for 30 min at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. Tandem mass spectra were obtained by scanning the mass range from m/z 350 to m/z 1,500 using data-dependent acquisition methods with HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 30 for PSY3, 32.5 for PSY2, 35 for PSY6 and 40 for PSY5 and PSY8.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.5) and searched against the corresponding precursor peptide sequence using SEQUEST-HT. The following parameters were used: no enzyme, precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da, dynamic modification of proline oxidation (+15.995 Da) and tyrosine sulfation (+79.957 Da).

### Publication Abstract
Deciding whether to grow or to divert energy to stress responses is a major physiological trade-off for plants surviving in fluctuating environments. We show that three leucine-rich repeat receptor kinases (LRR-RKs) act as direct ligand-perceiving receptors for PLANT PEPTIDE CONTAINING SULFATED TYROSINE (PSY)-family peptides and mediate switching between two opposing pathways. By contrast to known LRR-RKs, which activate signaling upon ligand binding, PSY receptors (PSYRs) activate the expression of various genes encoding stress response transcription factors upon depletion of the ligands. Loss of PSYRs results in defects in plant tolerance to both biotic and abiotic stresses. This ligand-deprivation-dependent activation system potentially enables plants to exert tuned regulation of stress responses in the tissues proximal to metabolically dysfunctional damaged sites where ligand production is impaired.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Ltq orbitrap xl

### Affiliations
Division of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University
Nagoya University

### Submitter
Mari Ogawa-Ohnishi

### Lab Head
Dr Yoshikatsu Matsubayashi
Division of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University


