### Accession
PXD009248

### Title
Proteome of Arabidopsis thaliana pux10-1 mutant lipid droplets

### Description
The analysis of proteins isolated from whole seedling homogenate allowed insight into the abundance of lipid droplet proteins in different lines and time points. In order to gain more detailed insight into the protein composition of LDs of the different mutant lines and to increase the chances for the detection of post-translationally modified peptides, LD-enriched fractions were analyzed in a second proteomic approach. The LD fraction was isolated from homogenized seedlings of qrt PUX10, qrt pux10-1, C#1, and C#2 at 2 dai.

### Sample Protocol
200 mg of Arabidopsis seeds per replicate were sterilized and stratified for 3 days in the dark at 4°C. Then, seedlings were grown for 2 days in 16 h light/8 h dark cycles at 22°C on half strength MS media plates without sucrose. Seedlings were taken up in 3 mL grinding buffer (10 mM sodium phosphate buffer [pH 7.4], 0.5 mM Lohman’s reagent, and 10 mM N-ethylmaleimide), ground with sand for 3 min with a mortar and pestle. The resulting homogenate was spun for 10 s at 100 g and a 200 µL aliquot of the supernatant (‘total extract’ sample) was taken. The remaining homogenate was centrifuged at 20,000 g for 20 min at 4°C and the resulting fat pad was washed twice with grinding buffer, using the same centrifugation step. All steps were performed on ice or at 4 °C. All protein fractions were precipitated and defatted with a final concentration of 80 % ethanol and washed with 96 % ethanol. The protein pellets were redissolved in 6 M urea and 5 % (w/v) SDS. Protein concentrations were determined with a Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific‎). 10 or 20 µg of protein was run on a 10 or 12% SDS-PAGE (for total extracts and LD samples, respectively) gel until they entered into the separation gel. A single gel piece per sample containing all proteins was excised, tryptic digested and derivatised as described {Shevchenko, 2006 #33843}. Peptides were desalted over a Supelco C18 column (Sigma-Aldrich) according to {Rappsilber et al., 2007} and then subjected to LC-MS/MS {Schmitt et al., 2017}.

### Data Protocol
Protein abundance was quantified using LFQ label-free quantification algorithm implemented in the MaxQuant software {Schaab et al., 2012} using the settings as described in the meta data files (tables S38-43). The values were calculated as permille of all values in one sample.

### Publication Abstract
The number of known proteins associated with plant lipid droplets (LDs) is small compared with other organelles. Many aspects of LD biosynthesis and degradation are unknown, and identifying and characterizing candidate LD proteins could help elucidate these processes. Here, we analyzed the proteome of LD-enriched fractions isolated from tobacco (<i>Nicotiana tabacum</i>) pollen tubes. Proteins that were highly enriched in comparison with the total or cytosolic fraction were further tested for LD localization via transient expression in pollen tubes. One of these proteins, PLANT UBX DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN10 (PUX10), is a member of the plant UBX domain-containing (PUX) protein family. This protein localizes to LDs via a unique hydrophobic polypeptide sequence and can recruit the AAA-type ATPase CELL DIVISION CYCLE48 (CDC48) protein via its UBX domain. PUX10 is conserved in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> and expressed in embryos, pollen tubes, and seedlings. In <i>pux10</i> knockout mutants in Arabidopsis, LD size is significantly increased. Proteomic analysis of <i>pux10</i> mutants revealed a delayed degradation of known LD proteins, some of which possessed ubiquitination sites. We propose that PUX10 is involved in a protein degradation pathway at LDs, mediating an interaction between polyubiquitinated proteins targeted for degradation and downstream effectors such as CDC48.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Seedling, Lipid droplets, Pux10

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Biochemistry Georg-August-Universität Göttingen Justus-von-Liebig Weg 11 37077 Göttingen Germany   Tel. +49-551-39-14430
University of Münster

### Submitter
Till Ischebeck

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Till Ischebeck
Department of Plant Biochemistry Georg-August-Universität Göttingen Justus-von-Liebig Weg 11 37077 Göttingen Germany   Tel. +49-551-39-14430


