### Accession
PXD007594

### Title
Homo-PROTACs: bivalent small-molecule dimerizers of the VHL E3 ubiquitin ligase to induce self-degradation

### Description
E3 ubiquitin ligases are key enzymes within the ubiquitin proteasome system which catalyze the ubiquitination of proteins, targeting them for proteasomal degradation. E3 ligases are gaining importance as targets to small molecules, both for direct inhibition and to be hijacked to induce the degradation of non-native neo-substrates using bivalent compounds known as PROTACs (for ‘proteolysis-targeting chimeras’). We describe Homo-PROTACs as an approach to dimerize an E3 ligase to trigger its suicide-type chemical knockdown inside cells. We provide proof-of-concept of Homo-PROTACs using diverse molecules composed of two instances of a ligand for the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) E3 ligase. The most active compound, CM11, dimerizes VHL with high avidity in vitro and induces potent, rapid and proteasome-dependent self-degradation of VHL in different cell lines, in a highly isoform-selective fashion and without triggering a hypoxic response. This approach offers a novel chemical probe for selective VHL knockdown, and demonstrates the potential for a new modality of chemical intervention on E3 ligases.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were quantified using a micro BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 200 microgram of each sample was processed and digested using the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method. The samples were then desalted using a 7-mm, 3-ml C18 SPE cartridge column (Empore, 3M) and labeled with TMT 10plex Isobaric Label Reagent Set (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as per manufacturer’s instructions. After labeling, the peptides from the 10 samples were pooled together in equal proportion. The pooled sample was fractionated into 20 discrete fractions using high pH reverse-phase chromatography on a XBridge peptide BEH column (130 Å, 3.5 micrometers, 2.1 × 150 mm, Waters) using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific/Dionex). Column temperature was set to 20 °C. The peptides were separated using a mix of buffers A (10 mM ammonium formate in water, pH 10) and B (10 mM ammonium formate in 90% CH3CN, pH 10). The peptides were eluted from the column using a flow rate of 200 microlitres/min and a linear gradient from 5% to 60% buffer B over 60 min. The peptides eluted from the column were separated into 40 fractions   before concatenation into 20 fractions by noncontiguous pooling based on the UV signal of each fraction. All the fractions were dried in a SpeedVac concentrator and resuspended in 10 microlitres of 5% formic acid and were then diluted to 1% before MS analysis. The TMT 10plex fractions were first analysed as described in a previous paper (Nature Chemical Biology, 2017, No 13, Vol 5, p514-521, doi:10.1038/nchembio.2329). Briefly, the TMT 10plex fractions were analyzed sequentially on a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific) and EasySpray column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific).   The MS2 isolation window was set to 0.4 Da and the resolution set at 120,000. MS2 resolution was set at 60,000. The AGC targets for MS1 and MS2 were set at 3e6 ions and 1e5 ions, respectively. The normalized collision energy was set at 32%. The maximum ion injection times for MS1 and MS2 were set at 50 ms and 200 ms, respectively. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 45s. After the first analysis, the TMT labelled fractions were then re-analysed on the Q-Exactive HF using the same instrument settings and a target list generated from a theoretical trypsin digest of VHL. In this case only precursor ions that matched peptide ions from the target list were selected for ms/ms. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 30s. After the second analysis, three fractions (8/12/13) were further analysed using a targeted SIM/ddMS2 method on the Q-Exactive HF. The targeted list for this run was generated from previous theoretical TMT labelled VHL protein digest.   The method was as follows, one SIM scan was followed by 5 targeted dd-MS2 scans. The SIM and MS2 isolation windows were set to 6 Da and 0.4Da respectively and the SIM scan and MS2 resolution set at 120,000 and 60,000 respectively. The AGC targets for MS1 and MS2 were set at 1e5 ions and 2e5 ions, respectively. The normalized collision energy was set at 32%. The maximum ion injection times for MS1 and MS2 were set at 200 ms and 300 ms, respectively. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 3s.

### Data Protocol
All the raw MS data files from the 3 analyses were merged and searched against the Uniprot-sprot-Trembl-Human-Canonical database by Maxquant software 1.5.3.30 for protein identification and TMT reporter ion quantitation. The maxquant parameters were set as follow: enzyme is Trypsin/P; maximum number of missed cleavages equal to 2; precursor mass tolerance equal to 10 ppm; frag¬ment mass tolerance equal to 20ppm; variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (N-term); Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C). The data was filtered by applying a 1% FDR followed by exclusion of proteins with less than 2 peptides.

### Publication Abstract
E3 ubiquitin ligases are key enzymes within the ubiquitin proteasome system which catalyze the ubiquitination of proteins, targeting them for proteasomal degradation. E3 ligases are gaining importance as targets to small molecules, both for direct inhibition and to be hijacked to induce the degradation of non-native neo-substrates using bivalent compounds known as PROTACs (for 'proteolysis-targeting chimeras'). We describe Homo-PROTACs as an approach to dimerize an E3 ligase to trigger its suicide-type chemical knockdown inside cells. We provide proof-of-concept of Homo-PROTACs using diverse molecules composed of two instances of a ligand for the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) E3 ligase. The most active compound, CM11, dimerizes VHL with high avidity in vitro and induces potent, rapid and proteasome-dependent self-degradation of VHL in different cell lines, in a highly isoform-selective fashion and without triggering a hypoxic response. This approach offers a novel chemical probe for selective VHL knockdown, and demonstrates the potential for a new modality of chemical intervention on E3 ligases.Targeting the ubiquitin proteasome system to modulate protein homeostasis using small molecules has promising therapeutic potential. Here the authors describe Homo-PROTACS: small molecules that can induce the homo-dimerization of E3 ubiquitin ligases and cause their proteasome-dependent degradation.

### Keywords
E3 ligases; protacs; von hippel-lindau protein; protein degradation; chemical dimerizers.

### Affiliations
FingerPrints Proteomics Facility, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK
School of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Douglas Lamont

### Lab Head
Dr Douglas Lamont
FingerPrints Proteomics Facility, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK


