### Accession
PXD022488

### Title
POLR2M-mediated paused transcription silences tumor suppressor MIR139 in MLL-AF9 AML

### Description
MIR139 is a critical tumor suppressor and commonly silenced in human cancer, including acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Here, we found that depletion of identified MIR139 targets affects AML outgrowth. We unraveled the mechanism of MIR139 gene inactivation in AML expressing the Mixed-Lineage Leukemia (MLL)-AF9 oncogene. Epigenetic analyses revealed two well-conserved putative enhancer regions in close proximity of transcriptional start sites (TSS) of MIR139. These regions were silenced by the Polycomb-Repressive Complex-2 (PRC2) downstream of MLL-AF9. Genomic deletion of these regions abolished MIR139 transcriptional regulation in normal and oncogenic conditions. Genome-wide knockout screens revealed the transcriptional pausing factor of RNA Polymerase-II, POLR2M, as a critical MIR139-silencing factor. Furthermore, direct POLR2M binding to the MIR139 TSS induced paused transcription, which was abrogated upon PRC2 inhibition. We present evidence for an oncogenic POLR2M-mediated MIR139 silencing mechanism, downstream of MLL-AF9 and PRC2. Together, our findings highlight the importance of POLR2M-mediated paused transcription in AML.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis, digestion and TMT labeling was performed as described (Paulo and Gygi, 2017). In short, one million mouse MLL-AF9 cells or HSPCs were lysed in SDS lysis buffer (SDS [5%], Tris-HCl [100 mM, pH 7.6]) at 95°C for 4 minutes. The protein concentration per sample was determined by Pierce BCA protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 100 µg of protein was used for subsequent reduction with TCEP (5 mM), alkylation with iodoacetamide (15 mM) and quenching with DTT (10mM). Protein lysates were purified by methanol-chloroform precipitation. The resulting protein pellets were resuspended in Hepes (40 mM, pH 8.4) and digested with Trypsin (10 µg) at 37°C O/N. Peptide concentration was measured with Pierce BCA assay.   10 µg of each of the 8 peptide preparations was dissolved in 25 ul of Hepes (40 mM, pH 8.4) and incubated with 40 µg of one of the 8 amino reactive TMT10plex Label Reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at RT for 1h. Excess TMT label was quenched by incubation with 6 μL hydroxylamine (5%) at RT for 15. The 8 labelled peptide samples were then mixed, freeze-dried and measured using multinotch MS3.

### Data Protocol
In a post-analysis process, raw data were first converted to peak lists using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Electron), and submitted to the Uniprot database (Mus musculus, 52015 entries), using Mascot v. 2.2.07 (www.matrixscience.com) for protein identification. Mascot searches were with 10 ppm and 0.02 Da deviation for precursor and fragment mass, respectively, and trypsin as enzyme. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed, and methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification; carbamidomethyl on Cys, TMT6plex on N-term and Lys were set as a fixed modification. The protein FDR was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sp3, Tmt, Lumos

### Affiliations
Head Proteomics Group  Leiden University Medical Center Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics
Leiden University Medical Center

### Submitter
G Janssen

### Lab Head
Dr Peter A. van Veelen
Head Proteomics Group  Leiden University Medical Center Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics


