### Accession
PXD028325

### Title
Identification of splicing legumain from Momordica cochinchinesis

### Description
Analyzse the seed extract of Momordica cochinchinesis displaying legumain activity to identify the coeluted lectin by MALDI-TOF MS/MS

### Sample Protocol
Fresh M. cochinchinensis seeds (100 g) were homogenized in 500 mL of the abovementioned extraction buffer. Large cellular debris was removed with cheesecloth, and small particles and insoluble materials were removed by centrifugation at 15,000 g, 4 °C for 20 min. The extraction was conducted at 4 °C to minimize protein degradation. After centrifugation, the supernatant was applied to a flash column containing a 100 mL slurry of SP-Sepharose Fast Flow cation-exchange resin (GE Healthcare). The column was washed with buffer A (50 mM citrate buffer, 1 mM EDTA and 5 mM β-ME, pH 5.0) and eluted with buffer B (50 mM citrate buffer, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM β-ME and 100 mM NaCl, pH 5.0). The eluent was placed in 10-kDa cutoff dialysis tubing and dialyzed overnight against 12 L of buffer A. The dialyzed sample was filtered and loaded onto four 5 mL HiTrap SP Sepharose high-performance columns connected in series (GE Healthcare) using an ÄKTA FPLC platform with a linear gradient of 0–1 M sodium chloride at a flow rate of 5 mL/min (buffer A: 50 mM citrate buffer, 1 mM EDTA and 5 mM β-ME, pH 5.0; buffer B: 50 mM citrate buffer, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM β-ME and 1 M NaCl, pH 5.0) over 120 min. Fractions with peptide cyclase activity were pooled and further subjected to size exclusion chromatography with a HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 75 prep grade column at a flow rate of 0.8 mL/min. Isolated SDS-PAGE gel bands containing McPAL1 was reduced with 5 mM DTT and alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide at pH 7.0 at 37 °C. In-gel digestion of the intact proteins was performed with 10 µg/mL trypsin (Pierce, MS grade, Thermo Scientific) at pH 7.8 at 30 °C overnight or 15 µg/mL chymotrypsin (Pierce, MS grade, Thermo Scientific) at pH 7.8 at 37 °C overnight. Digested peptides were extracted from gel pieces with 50% acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid). Solvents were completely removed using Speedvac and peptides were redissolved in 0.1% formic acid in milli-Q water. MS/MS sequencing was performed on MALDI-TOF-TOF mass spectrometry (Applied Biosystems, 5800). Fragmentation of peptides were by CID.

### Data Protocol
Resultant spectra from both trypsin and chymotrypsin digested samples were processed and analyzed by MASCOT (version 2.4.1) with 0.8 Da MS and 0.6 Da MS/MS tolerances. ORFs extracted from M. cochinchinesis transcriptome (NCBI accession number PRJNA655570) were used as template for database search. Carbamidomethyl (C), and oxidation (M) were set as PTM.

### Publication Abstract
Legumains, also known as asparaginyl endopeptidases (AEPs), cleave peptide bonds after Asn/Asp (Asx) residues. In plants, certain legumains also have ligase activity that catalyzes biosynthesis of Asx-containing cyclic peptides. An example is the biosynthesis of MCoTI-I/II, a squash family-derived cyclic trypsin inhibitor, which involves splicing to remove the N-terminal prodomain and then N-to-C-terminal cyclization of the mature domain. To identify plant legumains responsible for the maturation of these cyclic peptides, we have isolated and characterized a legumain involved in splicing, McPAL1, from Momordica cochinchinensis (Cucurbitaceae) seeds. Functional studies show that recombinantly expressed McPAL1 displays a pH-dependent, trimodal enzymatic profile. At pH 4 to 6, McPAL1 selectively catalyzed Asp-ligation and Asn-cleavage, but at pH 6.5 to 8, Asn-ligation predominated. With peptide substrates containing N-terminal Asn and C-terminal Asp, such as is found in precursors of MCoTI-I/II, McPAL1 mediates proteolysis at the Asn site and then ligation at the Asp site at pH 5 to 6. Also, McPAL1 is an unusually stable legumain that is tolerant of heat and high pH. Together, our results support that McPAL1 is a splicing legumain at acidic pH that can mediate biosynthesis of MCoTI-I/II. We purport that the high thermal and pH stability of McPAL1 could have applications for protein engineering.

### Keywords
Legumain, Asparginyl endopeptidase, Vacuolar processing enzyme

### Affiliations
School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University
School of biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 637551

### Submitter
Xinya Hemu

### Lab Head
Dr James P. Tam
School of biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 637551


