### Accession
PXD020943

### Title
NIK expression stimulated G6PD phosphorylation

### Description
Our findings establish NIK as a pivotal regulator of T cell metabolism in anti-tumor immunity and highlight a posttranslational mechanism of metabolic regulation involving the G6PD-NADPH redox system. CoIP assays revealed a strong physical interaction between NIK and G6PD in both T cells and transiently transfected 293 cells, suggesting G6PD to be a direct target of NIK. Using a phosphoprotein gel analysis approach, we demonstrated that NIK expression stimulated G6PD phosphorylation. To further study the mechanism, we performed mass spectrometry identify phosphorylation sites of G6PD stimulated by NIK

### Sample Protocol
We prepared the samples by in vitro kinase assay, it was carried out in 20 ul of reaction mixture containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 2 mM ATP, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.1uM OA, 500 ng recombinant human G6PD (Novus Biologicals) as the substrate, and different doses (200 ng and 400 ng) of recombinant human NIK protein (ThermoFisher Scientific). The mixture was incubated at 30°C for 30 min and analyzed by immunoblot analysis with SDS Page. The gel was subjected for LC-MS/MS analysis in Proteomics Core Facility of the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center. Then,Coomassie-stained gel pieces were washed, destained and digested in-gel with 200 ng modified trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) and Rapigest (TM, Waters Corp.) for 18 hrs at 37°C. Resulting peptides were extracted and analyzed by high-sensitivity LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham MA)

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by database searching of the fragment spectra against the SwissProt (EBI) protein database using Mascot (v 2.6, Matrix Science, London, UK) or Sequest HT and Proteome Discoverer (v 2.2, Thermo Scientific).  Typical search settings were:  mass tolerances, 10 ppm precursor, 0.8d fragments; variable modifications, methionine sulfoxide, pyro-glutamate formation, for phosphorylation detection – phospho-Ser, -Thr and -Tyr; enzyme, trypsin, up to 2 missed cleavages.  Peptides were subject to 1% FDR using reverse-database searching

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nik, G6pd, Phosphoralytion

### Affiliations
U.T. MD Anderson Cancer Center Department of Systems Biology,Proteomics Facility, Unit 950 Room 2SCR3.3123 The UT-M.D. Anderson Proteomics Facility would like to thank the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, and the NIH High-End Instrumentation program grant 1S10OD012304-01 for generous support.
MD Anderson Cancer Center

### Submitter
Meidi Gu

### Lab Head
Dr David H. Hawke, Ph.D.
U.T. MD Anderson Cancer Center Department of Systems Biology,Proteomics Facility, Unit 950 Room 2SCR3.3123 The UT-M.D. Anderson Proteomics Facility would like to thank the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, and the NIH High-End Instrumentation program grant 1S10OD012304-01 for generous support.


