### Accession
PXD015233

### Title
Lysine fatty-acyl H3 peptide pulldown with HeLa SILAC nuclear extract

### Description
Histone H3 peptides with acyl modification on either K9 or K27 were used for peptide pull-down with stable isotope (light: K0R0, heavy: K8R10) labeled Hela nuclear extract. The acyl modifications are: acetyl (Ac), propionyl (Pro), Butanoyl (But), crotonyl (Cr), 3-hydroxy butanoyl (bHB), succinyl (Su), Pentanoyl (Vl), Hexanoyl (Xho) and Myristoyl (Myr). Each modified peptide is compared with an unmodified peptide with the same amino acid sequence. Both forward (unmodified-light, acyl-heavy) and reverse (unmodified-heavy, acyl-light) labeling and pull-down experiments were performed.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were separated from the bait peptide by SDS-PAGE and digested with Trypsin. Peptides were identified using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer running high resolution MS1 followed by top 20 CID fragmentation for MS2 with dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8. The human proteome database was Uniprot data 2015-01-09.

### Publication Abstract
Covalent post-translational modification (PTM) of proteins with acyl groups of various carbon chain-lengths regulates diverse biological processes ranging from chromatin dynamics to subcellular localization. While the YEATS domain has been found to be a prominent reader of acetylation and other short acyl modifications, whether additional acyl-lysine reader domains exist, particularly for longer carbon chains, is unclear. Here, we employed a quantitative proteomic approach using various modified peptide baits to identify reader proteins of various acyl modifications. We discovered that proteins harboring HEAT and ARM repeats bind to lysine myristoylated peptides. Recombinant HEAT and ARM repeats bind to myristoylated peptides independent of the peptide sequence or the position of the myristoyl group. Indeed, HEAT and ARM repeats bind directly to medium- and long-chain free fatty acids (MCFA and LCFA). Lipidomic experiments suggest that MCFAs and LCFAs interact with HEAT and ARM repeat proteins in mammalian cells. Finally, treatment of cells with exogenous MCFAs and inhibitors of MCFA-CoA synthases increase the transactivation activity of the ARM repeat protein &#x3b2;-catenin. Taken together, our results suggest an unappreciated role for fatty acids in the regulation of proteins harboring HEAT or ARM repeats.

### Keywords
Orbitrap elite, Homo sapiens

### Affiliations
1Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
Stanford University

### Submitter
John Coan

### Lab Head
Dr Katrin Chua
1Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA


