### Accession
PXD023246

### Title
Proteomic profiling reveals the molecular changes of insomnia patients

### Description
Insomnia is an economic burden and public health problem. This study aimed to explore potential biological pathways and protein networks for insomnia characterized by wakefulness after sleep. Proteomics analysis was performed in the insomnia group with wakefulness and the control group. The differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were enriched, then hub proteins were identified by protein-protein interaction (PPI) network and verified by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). Compared with the control group, the sleep time and efficiency of insomnia patients were decreased, awakening time and numbers after sleep onset were significantly increased (P < 0.001). The results of proteomic sequencing found 68 DEPs in serum under 1.2-fold changed standard. These DEPs were significantly enriched in humoral immune response, complement and coagulation cascades, cholesterol metabolism. Through PPI network, we identified 10 proteins with the highest connectivity as hub proteins. Among them, differential expression of 9 proteins was verified by PRM.We identified the hub proteins and molecular mechanisms of insomnia patients characterized by wakefulness after sleep. It provided potential molecular targets for the clinical diagnosis and treatment of these patients, and indicated the immune and metabolic systems may be closely related to insomnia characterized by wakefulness after sleep.

### Sample Protocol
Participants were from a prospective survey conducted by the Traditional Chinese Medicine hospital affiliated to Xinjiang Medical University. Among the participants, 94 patients aged 20 to 50 years who met the criteria of wakefulness after sleep and 80 patients with good sleep were collected. The demographic, clinical characteristics, and sleep quality of the subjects were evaluated by effective research methods. To eliminate mental and medical disorders, all participants received questionnaires and interviews from certified clinicians and were assessed by nocturnal polysomnography (PSG) and Pittsburgh sleep quality index (PSQI). Serum samples of 9 patients of insomnia patients with wakefulness (D group) and 9 patients with good sleep (F group) were randomly selected. In the presence of protease inhibitors, the samples were lysed and the total protein was extracted. For insomnia or control, every three samples were mixed into one group, and the fourth group was mixed with all samples. The protein concentration was determined by bicinchonininc acid (BCA) (Beyotime, Shanghai, China) kit, and the protein quality was detected by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE).

### Data Protocol
The qualified protein was hydrolyzed by enzyme. After trypsin digestion, the peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum -dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according with the manufacturer’s protocol for tandem mass tag (TMT) kit (Thermo, Bremen, Germany). Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Nine samples from each group were randomly divided into three groups and a fourth group with all nine samples mixed. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and combined and vacuum -dried. For liquid chromatograph mass spectrometry / mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore, Massachusetts, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase analytical column. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExubtiveTM Plus (Thermo, Bremen, Germany) coupled online to the UPLC. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissProt Human database concatenated with the reverse decoy database. The multiple of protein expression between insomnia group and control group was greater than or equal to 1.2, and P < 0.05, then differentially expressed proteins were obtained.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Insomnia; wakefulness; proteomics; immune response; metabolism; prm

### Affiliations
Traditional Chinese Medicine Hospital Affiliated to Xinjiang Medical University

### Submitter
Guanying Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Guanying Wang
Traditional Chinese Medicine Hospital Affiliated to Xinjiang Medical University


