### Accession
PXD038653

### Title
Posttranslation modification of NF-kB inducing kinase

### Description
2 This project is to identify the potential neddylation sites in human NF-kB inducing kinase (A.k.a. Map3K14). NIK-HA or NIK-HA in combination with FLAG-NEDD8 were co-expressed in HEK293T cells. NIK-HA were pulled down via denaturing immunoprecipitation protocol, subject to SDS-PAGE, in-gel trypsin digestion, and Nano LC-MS/MS Analysis. The potential peptides containing K-GG sites were identified.

### Sample Protocol
1 Sample preparation 1) Transfect 293T cells with a) NIK-HA b) NIK-HA+FLAG-NEDD8 2) 48h after transfection, harvest cells in denaturing buffer. 5 mg proteins were used for denaturing IP using anti-HA magnetic beads. After 5x wash, elute samples in 2xSDS gel loading buffer. 3) Run SDS-PAGE to cut the bands at and above NIK-HA sizes.   2 In-gel Digestion  4) Cut the gel slice from each gel into 1 mm3 cubes and transfer the gel cubes to a 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube. Centrifuge the tube for 1-2 sec to spin the gel slice to the bottom of the tube. Add 1 mL 50 mM NH4HCO3/ACN (1:1, v/v) standing 30 min and remove the supernatant. Repeat the operation until the discoloration is complete.  5) Add 500 μL of ACN and incubate for 30 min. The gel pieces should become opaque and stick together.  6) Remove the ACN and rehydrate the gel slice in 10 mM DTT. Add enough solution to completely cover the gel slice. Incubate at 56℃ for 1 h.  7) Carefully remove the DTT and add 500 μL of ACN. Incubate for 10 min at room temperature.  8) Remove the ACN and add the 50 mM IAA to cover the gel slice. Incubate for 30 min at room temperature in the dark.  9) Remove the IAA and add 500 μL of ACN to the gel slices. Incubates for 10 min at room temperature. Carefully remove the ACN solution.  10) Add enough trypsin digestion solution to cover the gel slices. Incubate the gel pieces on ice for 45 min. Add more digestion solution if all the initial solution is absorbed by the gel pieces.  11) Remove the excess digestion solution and add 5-20 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 to keep the gel pieces wet during enzymatic digestion. Incubate overnight at 37°C.  12) Recover the supernatant and transfer into a fresh 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube. Add 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile solution (1:2, v/v) to cover gel slices. Incubate for 1 hour at 37℃. Transfer and extraction the solution to the 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube.  13) Lyophilize the extracted peptides to near dryness.  14) Resuspend peptides in 20 μL of 0.1% formic acid before LC-MS/MS analysis.   3 Nano LC-MS/MS Analysis   3.1 nanoLC  Nanoflow UPLC: Ultimate 3000 nano UHPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA);  Nanocolumn: trapping column (PepMap C18, 100Å , 100 μm × 2 cm, 5 μm) and an analytical column (PepMap C18, 100Å, 75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm);  Loaded sample: 1 μg  Mobile phase: A: 0.1% formic acid in water; B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile.  Total flow rate: 250 nL/min  LC linear gradient: from 2 to 8% buffer B in 3 min, from 8% to 20% buffer B in 50 min, from 20% to 40% buffer B in 43 min, then from 40% to 90% buffer B in 4 min.   3.2 Mass Spectrometry  The full scan was performed between 300-1,650 m/z at the resolution 60,000 at 200 m/z, the automatic gain control target for the full scan was set to 3e6. The MS/MS scan was operated in Top 20 mode using the following settings: resolution 15,000 at 200 m/z; automatic gain control target 1e5; maximum injection time 19ms; normalized collision energy at 28%; isolation window of 1.4 Th; charge sate exclusion: unassigned, 1, > 6; dynamic exclusion 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed and searched against Map3K14 reference sequence (provided by customer) using Maxquant (1.6.2.6). The parameters were set as follows: the protein modifications were carbamidomethylation (C) (fixed), oxidation (M) (variable), ubiquitination/neddylation: GlyGly (K) (variable); the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin; the maximum missed cleavages were set to 2; the precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was 0.6 Da.

### Publication Abstract
The conjugation of neural precursor cell expressed, developmentally downregulated 8 (NEDD8) to target proteins, termed neddylation, participates in many cellular processes and is aberrant in various pathological diseases. Its relevance to liver function and failure remains poorly understood. Herein, we show dysregulated expression of NAE1, a regulatory subunit of the only NEDD8 E1 enzyme, in human acute liver failure. Embryonic- and adult-onset deletion of NAE1 in hepatocytes causes hepatocyte death, inflammation, and fibrosis, culminating in fatal liver injury in mice. Hepatic neddylation deficiency triggers oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, and hepatocyte reprogramming, potentiating liver injury. Importantly, NF-&#x3ba;B-inducing kinase (NIK), a serine/Thr kinase, is a neddylation substrate. Neddylation of NIK promotes its ubiquitination and degradation. Inhibition of neddylation conversely causes aberrant NIK activation, accentuating hepatocyte damage and&#xa0;inflammation. Administration of N-acetylcysteine, a glutathione surrogate&#xa0;and antioxidant, mitigates liver failure caused by hepatic NAE1 deletion in adult male mice. Therefore, hepatic neddylation is important in maintaining postnatal and adult liver homeostasis, and the identified neddylation targets/pathways provide insights into therapeutically intervening acute liver failure.

### Keywords
Human, Nik

### Affiliations
Department of Physiology, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta University
Augusta University

### Submitter
Weiqin Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Weiqin Chen
Department of Physiology, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta University


