### Accession
PXD024221

### Title
Mia3 enables efficient secretion by constraining COPII vesicle budding - secreted proteome

### Description
Analysis of secreted proteome from cells engineered with knockout of Mia3 gene isoforms encoding TANGO1L and TANGO1S

### Sample Protocol
For the secretome analysis, each media sample was concentrated to approximately 100ul using a centrifugal filter unit with a 3kDa cut-off (Merck Millipore, Cork, Ireland), digested with trypsin (2.5µg trypsin; 37°C, overnight) and labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) ten plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Loughborough, UK), and the labelled samples pooled. TMT-labelled pooled samples were desalted using a SepPak cartridge according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA). Eluate from the SepPak cartridge was evaporated to dryness and resuspended in buffer A (20 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) prior to fractionation by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  In brief, the sample was loaded onto an XBridge BEH C18 Column (130Å, 3.5 µm, 2.1 mm X 150 mm, Waters, UK) in buffer A and peptides eluted with an increasing gradient of buffer B (20 mM Ammonium Hydroxide in acetonitrile, pH 10) from 0-95% over 60 minutes.  The resulting fractions were concatenated to generate a total of four fractions, which were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). High pH RP fractions were further fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7  gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1min., 6-15% B over 58min., 15-32%B over 58min., 32-40%B over 5min., 40-90%B over 1min., held at 90%B for 6min and then reduced to 1%B over 1min.) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 300°C.  All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 3.0 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow.  FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200 000 and a max injection time of 50ms. Precursors were filtered with an intensity threshold of 5000, according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic peak determination set to Peptide. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (60s +/-10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 10 000, max injection time of 70ms and CID collision energy of 35%. For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 50 000 resolution with an AGC target of 50 000 and a max injection time of 105ms.  Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 60% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield.  Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) was enabled to include up to 10 MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic Data Analysis The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Human database (downloaded August 2020: 167789 entries) using the SEQUEST algorithm.  Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6Da.  Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.995Da), acetylation of the protein N-terminus (+42.011Da) and Methionine loss plus acetylation of the protein N-terminus (-89.03Da) as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021Da) and the addition of the TMT mass tag (+229.163Da) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed.  The reverse database search option was enabled and all data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
Complex machinery is required to drive secretory cargo export from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), which is an essential process in eukaryotic cells. In vertebrates, the MIA3 gene encodes two major forms of transport and Golgi organization protein 1 (TANGO1S and TANGO1L), which have previously been implicated in selective trafficking of procollagen. Using genome engineering of human cells, light microscopy, secretion assays, genomics and proteomics, we show that disruption of the longer form, TANGO1L, results in relatively minor defects in secretory pathway organization and function, including having limited impacts on procollagen secretion. In contrast, loss of both long and short forms results in major defects in cell organization and secretion. These include a failure to maintain the localization of ERGIC53 (also known as LMAN1) and SURF4 to the ER-Golgi intermediate compartment and dramatic changes to the ultrastructure of the ER-Golgi interface. Disruption of TANGO1 causes significant changes in early secretory pathway gene and protein expression, and impairs secretion not only of large proteins, but of all types of secretory cargo, including small soluble proteins. Our data support a general role for MIA3/TANGO1 in maintaining secretory pathway structure and function in vertebrate cells.

### Keywords
Mia3 tango1 secretory pathway golgi endooplasmic reticulum

### Affiliations
University of Bristol

### Submitter
David Stephens

### Lab Head
Dr David Stephens
University of Bristol


