### Accession
PXD009066

### Title
Utilization of alpha- and beta-mannan by marine Flavobacteriia

### Description
About one half of the global, biogenic carbon dioxide fixation into organic matter is driven by microscopic algae in the surface oceans. These microalgal activities generate, among other molecules, polysaccharides that are food for and recycled by bacteria with polysaccharide utilization loci (PULs). These genetic clusters of co-evolved genes, which work together in recognition, depolymerizing and uptake of one type of polysaccharide. However, we rarely know the substrates of PULs present in marine bacteria. Here we investigated the proteomic and physiological response of mannan PULs from marine Flavobacteriia isolated in the North Sea. The genomic clusters of these marine Bacteroidetes are related to PULs of human gut Bacteroides strains, which are known to digest α- and β-mannans from yeasts and plants respectively. Proteomics and defined growth experiments with these types of mannans as sole carbon source confirmed the functional prediction. Our data suggest that biochemical principles established for gut or terrestrial microbes apply to marine bacteria even though the PULs are evolutionary distant. Moreover, our data support discoveries from the 60th reporting mannans in microalgae suggesting that these polysaccharides play an important role in the marine carbon cycle.

### Sample Protocol
15 µg proteins, extracted from Leeuwenhoekiella cultivated with different carbon sources, were loaded onto a 10% polyacrylamide sodium dodecyl sulfate mini gel and run at 150 V for 60 min, fixed with ethyl acetate and stained with Coomassie G 250. Afterwards the proteins were in-gel digested for 16h with trypsin as described by Heinz et al.. and eluted in an ultrasonic bath for 15 min. Peptides were subjected to a reversed-phase C18 column chromatography operated on a nanoAC-QUITY-UPLC (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) and separated as described by Otto et al.. Mass spectrometry (MS) and MS/MS data were determined using an online-coupled LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were searched against the target-decoy protein sequence database  Leeuwenhoekiella sp. MAR_2009_132, respectively, including common laboratory contaminants. Validation of MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications was performed with Scaffold (http://www.proteomesoftware.com) using an FDR (false discovery rate) of 0, 01 (1%) on peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
Marine microscopic algae carry out about half of the global carbon dioxide fixation into organic matter. They provide organic substrates for marine microbes such as members of the Bacteroidetes that degrade algal polysaccharides using carbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZymes). In Bacteroidetes genomes CAZyme encoding genes are mostly grouped in distinct regions termed polysaccharide utilization loci (PULs). While some studies have shown involvement of PULs in the degradation of algal polysaccharides, the specific substrates are for the most part still unknown. We investigated four marine Bacteroidetes isolated from the southern North Sea that harbour putative mannan-specific PULs. These PULs are similarly organized as PULs in human gut Bacteroides that digest &#x3b1;- and &#x3b2;-mannans from yeasts and plants respectively. Using proteomics and defined growth experiments with polysaccharides as sole carbon sources we could show that the investigated marine Bacteroidetes express the predicted functional proteins required for &#x3b1;- and &#x3b2;-mannan degradation. Our data suggest that algal mannans play an as yet unknown important role in the marine carbon cycle, and that biochemical principles established for gut or terrestrial microbes also apply to marine bacteria, even though their PULs are evolutionarily distant.

### Keywords
Leeuwenhoekiella, Marine, Polysaccharide, Mannan

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Institute of Pharmacy, University of Greifswald, Germany
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Frank Unfried

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Schweder
Department of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Institute of Pharmacy, University of Greifswald, Germany


