### Accession
PXD014519

### Title
Metaproteomic data of maize rhizosphere

### Description
We present metaproteome data from maize rhizosphere from sodic soil. Isolation of proteome from maize rhizosphere collected from Experimental Farm,  ICAR-IISS, Mau, India was done with the standardized protocol at our laboratory and metaproteome analysis was done with the standardized pipepline. In total 696 proteins with different functions representing 245 genus and 395 species were identified. The proteome data provides direct evidence on the biological processes in soil ecosystem and is the first reported reference data from maize rhizosphere.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of metaproteome from pooled maize rhizospheric soil samples from  ICAR-IISS, Mau experimental Farm , India with the standardized protocol at our laboratory. The protein after 1D-SDS-PAGE evaluation was quantified, trypsinized and analyzed with LC/MS MS. The mass spectra were searched against the NCBInr and analysis was done with the standardized pipepline.

### Data Protocol
Chromatograms of the MS/MS spectra were analyzed. The raw data was processed by MassLynx 4.1 WATER software. Mascot Generic File (MGF) was generated against individual spectra.  MGF file was used to search in database for protein identification on MASCOT server. Search parameters were as follows: taxonomy, all entries; fixed modification, cysteine carbamidomethylation; variable modifications, methionine oxidation; enzyme, trypsin; maximum number of missed cleavages, 1; peptide tolerance, 50 ppm; and MS/MS tolerance, 100 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Metaproteomics is a powerful tool for obtaining data on all proteins recovered directly from environmental samples at a given time. It provides a direct evidence of functional diversity and structure among microbiota present in niches and significant insights into microbial activity together with metabolomics, which is the study of the intermediate and end-products of cellular processes. Metaproteomics is a comparatively new approach which is facing a number of empirical, technical, computational and experimental design challenges that needs to be addressed. Presently only little efforts have been made to have information on microbial proteins in rhizospheric soil of maize through metagemonics approach but there is no direct evidence on functions of microbial community in this very important niche. Since rhizosphere microbiome plays important role in plant growth and development the present study is conducted to optimize the metaproteomic extraction protocol from maize rhizosphere and analyse functionality of microbial communities. We present metaproteome data from maize rhizospheric soil. Isolation of metaproteome from maize rhizosphere collected from ICAR-IISS, Mau experimental Farm was done with the standardized protocol at our laboratory and metaproteome analysis was done with the standardized pipeline. In total 696 proteins with different functions representing 244 genus and 393 species were identified. The proteome data provides direct evidence on the biological processes in soil ecosystem and is the first reported reference data from maize rhizosphere. The LC MS/MS proteomic data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD014519.

### Keywords
Microbiota, Soil microbial proteins, Lc msms, Metaproteome, Maize rhizosphere

### Affiliations
ICAR-NBAIM
ICAR- National Bureau of Agriculturally Important Microorganisms, Kushmaur, Maunath Bhanjan, Mau, Uttar Pradesh, INDIA

### Submitter
Renu S

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Renu
ICAR- National Bureau of Agriculturally Important Microorganisms, Kushmaur, Maunath Bhanjan, Mau, Uttar Pradesh, INDIA


