### Accession
PXD028539

### Title
Proteomic Insight into the Role of Exosomes in Proliferative Vitreoretinopathy Development

### Description
To characterize vitreous humor (VH) exosomes and to explore their role in the development of proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR) using mass-spectrometry based proteome profiling.

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes were isolated from undiluted vitreous humor from patients with retinal detachment with various stages of PVR, macular hole, or epiretinal membrane using differential ultracentrifugation. Total exosome protein concentration was determined using bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) reagent (Abcam; Cambridge, United Kingdom) as per the manufacturer’s instructions as previously described.22 Fifty μg of exosome protein from each sample were digested with 10 µg Promega Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega V5111, using the manufacturer’s protocols) for overnight incubation at 37°C in 40 mM NH4HCO3. The tryptic peptides were then desalted and concentrated using Pierce™ C18 spin columns (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, WA) to remove large undigested fragments and clean salt contaminants from the tryptic fragments. A total of 1 μg of tryptic peptides was then loaded onto a C18 sequencing column (AcclaimTM PepMapTM 100C18, ThermoFisher) and eluted using a 90-minute acetonitrile gradient.  Eluted fragments were analyzed by LC-MS/MS analysis using a Thermo Lumos Fusion Tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification utilized the SEQUEST search engine and the human Uniprot reference proteome database version 20201123 (42,412 reviewed and 54,052 unreviewed). Protein identification required detection of at least two peptides per protein. Database search parameters were restricted to three missed tryptic cleavage sites, a precursor ion mass tolerance of 10ppm, a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.03 Da, and a false discovery rate of ≤1%. Fixed protein modification was Cys carboxymethylation (+58Da). Variable protein modifications include Met oxidation (+16Da) and N-terminal acetylation (+42). Reporting of gene products/proteins followed the general guidelines recommended by the human eye proteome project.26 In brief, three biological replicates were used, and the search parameters in Proteomic Discoverer 2.4 9Thermo) were set to: ≥ 7 amino acids minimum peptide length; ≥2 peptide matches; and protein FDR cutoff ≥1%.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Purpose</b>: To characterize vitreous humor (VH) exosomes and to explore their role in the development of proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR) using mass spectrometry-based proteome profiling. <b>Methods</b>: Exosomes were isolated from undiluted VH from patients with retinal detachment (RD) with various stages of PVR (<i>n</i> = 9), macular hole (MH; <i>n</i> = 5), or epiretinal membrane (ERM; <i>n</i> = 5) using differential ultracentrifugation. The exosomal size, morphology, and exosome markers were analyzed using a nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and an exosome detection antibody array. The tryptic fragment sequencing of exosome-contained proteins was performed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and a Thermo Lumos Fusion Tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer. The pathway analysis of the MS data was performed. <b>Results</b>: The number of exosome particles were significantly increased only in the RD with severe PVR group compared with the control groups and the RD without PVR or with mild PVR groups. Of 724 exosome proteins identified, 382 were differentially expressed (DE) and 176 were uniquely present in PVR. Both DE proteins and exosome proteins that were only present in PVR were enriched in proteins associated with previously known key pathways related to PVR development, including reactive retinal gliosis, pathologic cellular proliferation, inflammation, growth of connective tissues, and epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT). The SPP1, CLU, VCAN, COL2A1, and SEMA7A that are significantly upregulated in PVR were related to the tissue remodeling. <b>Conclusions</b>: Exosomes may play a key role in mediating tissue remodeling along with a complex set of pathways involved in PVR development.

### Keywords
Vitreous humor, Exosome, Lc-ms/ms, Proliferative vitreoretinopathy

### Affiliations
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Department of Ophthalmology
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center

### Submitter
Virginie Sjoelund

### Lab Head
Dr Lee Sun Young
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Department of Ophthalmology


