### Accession
PXD037510

### Title
Loss of N-terminal acetyltransferase A activity induces thermally unstable ribosomal proteins and increases their turnover

### Description
Protein N-terminal (Nt) acetylation is one of the most abundant modifications in eukaryotes, covering ~50-80 % of the proteome, depending on species. Cells with defective Nt-acetylation display a wide array of phenotypes such as impaired growth, mating defects and increased stress sensitivity. However, the pleiotropic nature of these effects has hampered our understanding of the functional impact of protein Nt-acetylation. The main enzyme responsible for Nt-acetylation throughout the eukaryotic kingdom is the N-terminal acetyltransferase NatA. Here we employed a multi-dimensional proteomics approach to analyze Saccharomyces cerevisiae lacking NatA activity, which caused global proteome remodeling. Pulsed-SILAC experiments revealed that NatA-deficient strains consistently increased degradation of ribosomal proteins compared to wild type. Explaining this phenomenon, thermal proteome profiling uncovered decreased thermostability of ribosomes in NatA-knockouts. Our data are in agreement with a role for Nt-acetylation in promoting stability for parts of the proteome by enhancing the avidity of protein-protein interactions and folding.

### Sample Protocol
For global proteome profiling and pSILAC, yeast cells were resuspended 1:2 in lysis buffer composed of 100mM Tris, pH 8.5, 5mM, TCEP, 10mM chloroacetamide (CAA) and 2% Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate (SDS). Cells were lysed by eight rounds of bead beating  in a Precellys 24 homogenizer with 400 µm silica beads. The extracted protein lysates were heated to 95 C during 10 min, briefly sonicated and centrifuged at 16,000 xg, 4 C. Afterwards, the protein concentration was approximated using the BCA assay.The resulting samples were digested overnight using the protein aggregation capture (PAC) protocol. The proteolytic digestion for pSILAC was performed by addition of lysyl endopeptidase, 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio, and incubated at room temperature overnight. For all other sample preparations, lysyl endopeptidase and trypsin were added 1:300 and 1:100 enzyme to protein ratio respectively and incubated at 37 C overnight. The digestion was quenched by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid to final concentration of 1%. The resulting peptide mixtures were desalted and stored on Sep-Pak columns at 4 C until further use. Offline High pH Reversed-Phase HPLC Fractionation.100 µg of peptides were separated by HpH reversed-phase chromatography using a Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 3.5 μm 4.6 × 250 mm column on an Ultimate 3000 high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC). TPP-DIA and ITSA. Yeast pellets were resuspended in 1 ml lysis buffer1 composed of 0.1 % (NP-40) and Phosphate-Buffered Saline supplemented with protease inhibitor  at room temperature (RT). Samples were treated as before. Next, the samples were transferred to specific wells according to the desired temperature. The cell lysates were heated at their respective temperatures in a thermocycler for 4 min and immediately incubate at RT for additional 4 min. The resulting cell lysates were centrifuged at 20,000g, 4C for 1 h. The supernatant were transferred to a deep well plate. The resulting protein lysates were heated at 95 C during 10 min. The samples were digested overnight by a 96 well format automatized PAC workflow optimized for the KingFisherTM Flex robot. Nterminal-enrichment. The enrichment were performed as outlined previously with some modifications. Briefly, the yeast cells were lysed, and the protein concentration quantified as in yeast proteome profiling experiment. Afterwards, magnetic SiMAG-Sulfon beads were added to protein lysate to beat ratio of 1:10 ratio (w/w). Beads were resuspended in 100 μl 100 mM HEPES, pH 8. 2 M folmadehyde and 1 M sodium cyanoborohydride were added to a final concentration of 30 mM and 15 mM respectively. The lysate was incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. Following this, fresh labeling reagents were added, and the lysate incubated for an additional hour. The reaction was quenched by the addition of 4 M Tris, pH 6.8 to a final concentration of 500 mM and incubated for 3 h. The beads were resuspended in 300 μl of 200 mM HEPES buffer, pH 8.0. The digestion was performed with trypsin 1:100 enzyme to protein ratio and incubated 37 C overnight. After the digestion, 100% ethanol was added to the proteome digest to a final concentration of 40% v/v before addition of undecanal at an undecanal to peptide ratio of 20:1 w/w and addition of 1 M sodium cyanoborohydride to a final concentration of 30 mM. The mixture was incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. Afterwards, the mixture was bounded to a magnetic rack and the supernatant transferred to a low-binding tube. The supernatant was acidified to pH=2 with 0.1% TFA in 40% ethanol to a loading volume of 500 μl and loaded on a Sep-Pak column. The Sep-Pak columns were conditioned with 1 ml methanol followed by 3 ml 0.1% TFA in 40% ethanol. The flow-through was collected in 1.5 ml protein Low-bind tubes and concentrated by vacuum centrifugation. DiGly peptide enrichment. Yeast cells were resuspended 1:2 in lysis buffer Cells were lysed by bead beating and the resulting lysate was supplemented with CAA to a final concentration of 5.5 mM. DiGly peptide enrichment was performed using the PTMScan Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-ɛ-GG) Kit Briefly, 1 mg peptides per sample were reconstituted in 1.5 ml PTMScan HS IAP Bind Buffer and 20 µl of cross-linked antibody magnetic beads were added to each sample tube. The tubes were incubated on an end-over-end rotator for 2 h at 4°C. Afterwards, the tubes were spun at 2,000 g for 5 s and placed in a magnetic rack for 10 s. The supernatant was discarded and 1 ml HS IAP Wash Buffer was mix with the beads. Subsequently, the tubes were washed with LC-MS water 2 times. Finally, the DiGLY peptides were eluted form the magnetic beads by adding 50 µl of IAP Elution Buffer (0.15% TFA) to the beads for 10 min at room temperature and 500 rpm. Tube was placed in a magnetic rack and the supernatant was transfer to a new microcentrifuge tube. This operation was repeated 2 times.

### Data Protocol
For publication, all the raw files corresponding to pSILAC, Nt-enrichment and pSILAC-6h were analyzed with MaxQuant (1.6.7.0) and searched against a UniProt’s yeast protein sequence database as follows. For pSILAC, a database composed of the canonical isoforms of S. cerevisiae proteins as downloaded from UniProt in 2019, which was customized by removing all signal peptides as annotated in UniProt. For Nt-enrichment and pSILAC-6 h, a data database composed of the canonical isoforms of S. cerevisiae proteins as downloaded from UniProt in 2019 was used. For pSILAC analysis, the multiplicity was set to two allowing the detection of light (K0) and heavy (K8)-labeled peptides. Cysteine carbamylation was set as a fixed modification, whereas methionine oxidation and protein N-termini acetylation were set as variable modifications. Match between runs (MBR) was enable. For Nt-enrichment and pSILAC-6h the default settings were kept and MBR was disable.   TPP-DIA, ITSA and Ubiquitinome raw files were analyzed using Spectronaut v15 (Biognosys) with a library-free approach (directDIA) using a database composed of the canonical isoforms of Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteins as downloaded from UniProt in 2019, which was customized by removing all signal peptides as annotated in UniProt. This customized data based was supplemented with a common contaminant database. For TPP-DIA and ITSA, cysteine carbamylation was set as a fixed modification, whereas methionine oxidation and protein N-termini acetylation were set as variable modifications. For Ubiquitinome experiment, DiGLY (K,T,S) was defined as an additional variable modification and PTM localization was enabled and set to 0.5. Precursor filtering was set as Q-value and cross-run normalization was turned off for TPP-DIA. ITSA analysis was performed with Spectronaut using default settings. For ubiquitination imputation setting was disable. Further processing analyses were performed either in R (v4.2.1), Prostar (v1.28.0) or Perseus (v1.6.7.0)

### Publication Abstract
Protein N-terminal (Nt) acetylation is one of the most abundant modifications in eukaryotes, covering ~50-80 % of the proteome, depending on species. Cells with defective Nt-acetylation display a wide array of phenotypes such as impaired growth, mating defects and increased stress sensitivity. However, the pleiotropic nature of these effects has hampered our understanding of the functional impact of protein Nt-acetylation. The main enzyme responsible for Nt-acetylation throughout the eukaryotic kingdom is the N-terminal acetyltransferase NatA. Here we employ a multi-dimensional proteomics approach to analyze Saccharomyces cerevisiae lacking NatA activity, which causes global proteome remodeling. Pulsed-SILAC experiments reveals that NatA-deficient strains consistently increase degradation of ribosomal proteins compared to wild type. Explaining this phenomenon, thermal proteome profiling uncovers decreased thermostability of ribosomes in NatA-knockouts. Our data are in agreement with a role for Nt-acetylation in promoting stability for parts of the proteome by enhancing the avidity of protein-protein interactions and folding.

### Keywords
Sacharomyces cerevisiae, Psilac, Tpp, Nt-acetylation

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Proteomics Program, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ulises H Guzman 

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper V. Olsen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Proteomics Program, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark


