### Accession
PXD007262

### Title
Suppressor of IKKepsilon forms direct interactions with cytoskeletal proteins, tubulin and alpha-actinin, linking innate immunity to the cytoskeleton

### Description
Suppressor of IKKepsilon (SIKE) is associated with the innate immune system’s type I interferon response through TANK binding kinase 1 (TBK1).  Characterized as an endogenous inhibitor of TBK1 when overexpressed in viral infection and pathological cardiac hypertrophic models, mechanistic study revealed SIKE acted as a high affinity substrate of TBK1, but SIKE’s function remains unknown.  This study aimed to investigate the SIKE interaction network to identify by association a potential function for SIKE.  Our affinity purification/mass spectrometry results showed that SIKE formed interactions with cytoskeletal proteins, nucleic acid-associated proteins, enzymes, and chaperones.  In immunofluorescence assays, endogenous SIKE localized to cytosolic puncta in epithelial and myeloid cells whilst in epithelial cells additional staining occurred in stress fiber-like structures and adjacent to the plasma membrane, whereas myeloid cells revealed SIKE associated with nuclear puncta.  Using cellular markers, significant co-occurrence of SIKE fluorescence with actin, a-actinin, tubulin, ezrin, FAK and b-catenin was detected.  Reciprocal immunoprecipitation and in vitro precipitation assays confirmed a direct SIKE interaction with tubulin and a-actinin.  These results indicate that SIKE directly associates with the cytoskeleton thus demonstrating its potential role in mediating cytoskeletal rearrangement necessary in innate immunity but also its ability to link a key catalytic hub, TBK1, to the cytoskeleton to direct TBK1 activity.

### Sample Protocol
The solutions were diluted to 150 µL with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reduce the concentration of salts prior to digestion. The samples were reduced with 5 µL of 10 mM dithiothreitol in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 0.5 h. Then they were alkylated with 5 µL 50 mM iodoacetamide in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 0.5 h. The samples were digested with 1 g trypsin overnight and then quenched with 5% (v:v) glacial acetic acid.The LC-MS system consisted of a Thermo Electron LTQ-Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer system with a nanospray ion source interfaced to a Waters SCX trap column and a Waters NanoAcquity C18 reversed-phase capillary column. 7 µL of the final solution was injected onto the trap column, and the peptides were eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.4 µL/min over 60 minutes. The nanospray ion source was operated at 3.5 kV. The digests were analyzed using the double play capability of the instrument acquiring full scan mass spectra to determine peptide molecular weights and product ion spectra to determine amino acid sequence in sequential scans. This mode of analysis produces approximately 10000 CAD spectra of ions ranging in abundance over several orders of magnitude. Not all CAD spectra are derived from peptides.

### Data Protocol
The data was analyzed by database searching using the Sequest search algorithm against the IPI Human database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alpha-actinin, Tubulin, Sike, Innate immunity, Cytoskeleton

### Affiliations
Chemical and Proteomic Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Virginia Commonwealth University
Virginia Commonwealth University

### Submitter
Kevin Knitter

### Lab Head
Dr Kristina T Nelson
Chemical and Proteomic Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Virginia Commonwealth University


