### Accession
PXD034134

### Title
Lysine acetylation contributes to artificial ageing in wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) seeds.

### Description
In this work, the role of protein acetylation modification in wheat aging was studied using TMT labelling, enrichment of acetylation peptides and quantitative proteomics strategy of high-resolution liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. A total of 1663 acetylation sites were identified on 892 proteins, of which 1526 sites on 830 proteins had quantitative information. Furthermore, 255 differentially acetylated sites were identified, of which 135 sites were up-regulated and 120 sites were down-regulated.

### Sample Protocol
The wheat seeds were grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). (For PTM experiments, inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer, 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM for acetylation.) The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 20% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 12,000 g 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system.The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were used as query in the Uniprot_Triticum_aestivum database (143,668 sequences). Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation (Kac) is a protein post-translational modification (PTM) widely found in plants that plays vital roles in metabolic pathways. Although seed germination and development are regulated by Kac, its potential function in seed ageing remains to be investigated. Our preliminary study demonstrated that Kac levels were altered during wheat seed artificial ageing. However, its specific role in this process still needs to be elucidated. Here, we performed quantitative acetylation proteomics analysis of soft wheat seeds with different germination rates during artificial ageing. A total of 175 acetylation proteins and 255 acetylation modification sites were remarkably changed. The differentially acetylated proteins were enriched in metabolism; response to harsh intracellular environment, such as ROS; protein storage and processing. Notably, expression, point mutation to mimic Kac by K to Q mutation at K80 and K138, protein purification and enzyme activity detection revealed that the Kac of ROS-scavenging glutathione transferase attenuated its activity, indicating that the defense ability of wheat seeds to stress gradually diminished, and the ageing process was inevitable. Collectively, our data provide a basis for further understanding the roles of Kac in seed ageing and might aid in the development of new techniques to prolong seed viability and food quality.

### Keywords
Lysine acetylation; artificial ageing; wheat

### Affiliations
Henan University of Technology
Micrometer Biotech

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Yangyong Lv
Henan University of Technology


