### Accession
PXD043818

### Title
Defining neutralization and allostery by antibodies against COVID-19 variants

### Description
This project is aimed at characterizing the interactions of SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein and its variants with multiple full-length antibodies and monitoring the accompanying conformational dynamics. Different categories of antibodies are tested that recognize different domains of the Spike protein. The project aims at identifying the effects of weak, moderate and strong neutralizing antibodies on Spike protein and decipher their mechanisms of action. In addition to the direct binding effects, distal allosteric effects are also determined. A range of biophysical experiments, biochemical assays, and molecular dynamics simulations are used as orthogonal approaches. The rationale is to identify regions on the SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein that acts as indicators for antibody binding and use these hotspots to develop better neutralizing antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 and any future viral pandemics.

### Sample Protocol
Full-length SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein and its Receptor-binding domain from native Wuhan-Hu-1 strain and from Delta and Omicron variants of concern are purified using mammalian and insect cell expression system. Antibodies from convalescent sera were retrieved and checked for neutralizing efficacies. Certain antibodies were then subjected to cloning and purified for further analysis. Antibodies published in literature were used for reference. The purified Spike and RBD proteins were subjected to binding assays, ELISA, neutralization assays and related biochemical experiments, and hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry. Molecular dynamics simulations were also carried out. For hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, individual proteins and their antibody-antigen complexes in saturating conditions were targeted. HDXMS experiments were carried out using Waters M-class UPLC system coupled to Waters Synapt-G2 Si high resolution mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Biophysical and biochemical experiments were analyzed using the vendor-specific softwares acccompanying the instruments. Their statistical analysis and data visualization was performed using GraphPad Prism. For mass spectrometry experiments - data acquisition was done using Waters MassLynx software, data processing using ProteinLynx Global Server, data analysis using Waters Dynamx and statistical analysis using Deuteros 2.0. Mass spectrometry data peak matching and annotation were done using the amino acid sequences databases corresponding to the respective protein constructs used in this study. Molecular dynmaics simulations were done for various simulation timescales using high-performance computer.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Spike protein, Antibody, Hdxms, Variants of concern, Epitope-paratope mapping, Neutralization, Md simulations

### Affiliations
Senior Scientist, MSD International GmBH (Singapore)
Department of Microbiology & Immunology, National University of Singapore, Singapore

### Submitter
Nikhil Kumar Tulsian

### Lab Head
Dr Paul MacAry
Department of Microbiology & Immunology, National University of Singapore, Singapore


