### Accession
PXD031282

### Title
Protein homeostasis is maintained by proteasomes containing PSMB9 induced by EEF1A2 upon mitochondrial stress

### Description
Perturbed proteostasis and mitochondrial dysfunction are often associated with age-related diseases such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases. However, the link between them remains incompletely understood. Mitochondrial dysfunction causes proteostasis imbalance, and cells respond to restore proteostasis by increasing proteasome activity and molecular chaperons in yeast and C. elegans. Here, we demonstrate the presence of similar responses in humans. Mitochondrial dysfunction upregulates a small heat shock protein HSPB1 and an immunoproteasome subunit PSMB9 leading to an increase in proteasome activity. HSPB1 and PSMB9 are required to prevent protein aggregation upon mitochondrial dysfunction. Moreover, PSMB9 expression is dependent on a translation elongation factor EEF1A2, and PSMB9-containing proteasomes are located near mitochondria, enabling fast local degradation of aberrant proteins. Our findings put a step forward in understanding the stress response triggered by mitochondrial dysfunction, and may be useful for therapeutic strategies to prevent or delay the onset of age-related diseases and attenuate their progression.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins of proteasome complexes affinity-purified via FLAG-tagged PSMA5 from NDUFA11 KO, NDUFA13 KO or WT (control) cells were acetone-precipitated and resuspended in 6 M urea/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, followed by reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues and tryptic in solution digestion as described before (Peikert et al. 2017, Nature Communications). Peptides were differentially labeled by stable isotope dimethyl labeling as described previously (Dannenmaier et al. 2018, Analytical Chemistry) using 'light' formaldehyde and sodium cyanoborohydride (CH2O/NaBH3CN) for peptides originating from WT cells and the corresponding deuterated 'heavy' versions (CD2O/NaBD3CN) for peptides from NDUFA11 KO and NDUFA13 KO cells. Labeling efficiencies were assessed by LC-MS. Equal amounts of light and heavy labeled peptides were mixed, desalted on StageTips, and analyzed by LC-MS (n = 3 per experiment, i.e. NDUFA11 KO versus WT and NDUFA13 KO versus WT) using either an Orbitrap Elite or a Q Exective Plus mass spectrometer, each connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data were searched against the Uniprot human proteome set including isoforms, to which the sequence for PSMA5-FLAG was added, and a list of common contaminants using MaxQuant/Andromeda (version 1.6.0.1). MaxQuant was operated with default settings, except that protein identification and quantification were based on ≥ 1 unique peptide and ≥ 1 ratio count, respectively. DimethylLys0/dimethylNter0 and dimethylLys6/dimethylNter6 were selected as light and heavy labels, carbamidomethlyation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine were considered variable modifications, and 'match between runs' and 'requantify' were enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein aggregation, Mitochondrial dysfunction, Quantitative proteomics, Protein homeostasis, Stress response, Human cells

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

University of Freiburg, Institute of Biology II, Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
University of Freiburg, Institute of Biology II, Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics


