### Accession
PXD004998

### Title
Detection of Five Solid Carcinomas Using Blood Circulating Proteins

### Description
When diagnosed in a metastatic stage cancer is mostly incurable making its early detection via biomarkers of immense clinical interest. Proteins circulating in blood are a preferred source of biomarkers for a wide range of cancers due to the ease and non-invasiveness of collection. Our approach to cancer biomarker discovery is based on the observation that proteomic changes in tumor tissue are remotely detectable as changes in the protein composition of blood plasma. To determine whether these changes in the plasma of patients are specific for their specific cancer or represent a response to cancer in general we performed a cross-tumor plasma proteomic study. Using a proteomic serum/plasma workflow consisting of the combined use of N-glycosite enrichment and SWATH mass spectrometry (SWATH-MS), we investigated 155 blood samples derived from cohorts of patients with carcinomas at a localized or locally advanced clinical stage, or from a matched control group. A quantitative comparison of the resulting N-glycosite profiles indicated that some biomarkers are common to several cancers, while others are highly specific for one cancer type.

### Sample Protocol
N-glycoprotein isolation from 162 blood samples were prepared as previously described (Zhang et al., 2003) then applied in a high-throughput manner (Surinova et al., 2015b). 2 µl of blood was used to extracted N-glycopeptides for each MS run.

### Data Protocol
Purified N-glycosite peptides (de-glycosylated forms of peptides that are glycosylated in the native protein) were analyzed on a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometery. SWATH-MS Measurement and Data Processing All blood samples were measured on a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer which was operated in SWATH mode as described earlier (Gillet et al., 2012). The data were then imported into MSstats (version MSstats.daily 2.3.5), by which the data were converted to relative protein abundances to obtain both fold changes and corresponding p-values for comparisons of all proteins across the five cohorts using the statistical analysis supported by MSstats (Choi et al., 2014). The raw p-value < 0.05 and fold change (FC) between Carcinoma and Controls > 1.2 were used as criteria to recognize significant changes of blood glycoproteins (Table 1). These proteins were used as the input for further analyses including machine learning, logistic regression analysis and data stratifications.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer is mostly incurable when diagnosed at a metastatic stage, making its early detection via blood proteins of immense clinical interest. Proteomic changes in tumor tissue may lead to changes detectable in the protein composition of circulating blood plasma. Using a proteomic workflow combining N-glycosite enrichment and SWATH mass spectrometry, we generate a data resource of 284 blood samples derived from patients with different types of localized-stage carcinomas and from matched controls. We observe whether the changes in the patient's plasma are specific to a particular carcinoma or represent a generic signature of proteins modified uniformly in a common, systemic response to many cancers. A quantitative comparison of the resulting N-glycosite profiles discovers that proteins related to blood platelets are common to several cancers (e.g., THBS1), whereas others are highly cancer-type specific. Available proteomics data, including a SWATH library to study N-glycoproteins, will facilitate&#xa0;follow-up biomarker research into early cancer detection.

### Keywords
Plasma, Biomarker, N-glycoprotein, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
IMSB, ETH Zurich 
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, CH-8093, Switzerland ( lab head )

### Submitter
Tatjana Sajic

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, CH-8093, Switzerland ( lab head )


