### Accession
PXD035701

### Title
A mitochondrion-free eukaryote contains proteins preadapted for import into an exogenous mitochondrion-related organelle

### Description
The endobiotic flagellate Monocercomonoides exilis is the only eukaryote known to lose any form of mitochondria and all its associated proteins in its evolutionary past. This final stage of the mitochondrial evolutionary pathway may serve as a model to explain events at their very beginning such as the initiation of protein import. We have assessed the preadaptation of proteins in this mitochondrion-free cell to enter emerging mitochondria using a specifically designed in vitro assay. In this experiment, hydrogenosomes (reduced mitochondria) of Trichomonas vaginalis were incubated with a soluble protein pool derived from a cytosolic fraction of M. exilis, and proteins entering hydrogenosomes were subsequently detected by mass spectrometry. The assay detected 19 specifically and reproducibly imported proteins, and in 14 cases, import was confirmed by the overexpression of their tagged version in the T. vaginalis heterologous system and visualization by immunofluorescence and western blot. In most cases, only a small portion of the signal reached the hydrogenosomes, suggesting specific but inefficient transport. Most of these proteins represent enzymes of carbon metabolism, and none exhibited conspicuous signatures of proteins targeted to hydrogenosomes or mitochondria, which is consistent with their inefficient import. The observed phenomenon may resemble a primaeval type of protein import which might play a role in the establishing of the organelle and shaping of its proteome in the initial stages of endosymbiosis.

### Sample Protocol
urification of Trichomonas vaginalis hydrogenosomes and cytosol  The hydrogenosomes of T. vaginalis were isolated as previously described (35). Briefly, cells in mid-logarithmic phase were collected and sonicated to disrupt the cells. The large-granule fraction (LGF) was separated from the crude cytosolic fraction by centrifugation and suspended in 45% Percoll solution for ultracentrifugation. The extracted hydrogenosomes were washed twice and resuspended in import buffer. The supernatant above the LGF fraction was used to prepare the cytosolic fraction by ultracentrifugation (120,000 x g for 20 minutes at 4 ºC). The concentration of collected proteins was determined by a BCA assay.  In vitro protein import assay  To test the assay, 5 µg of denatured cytosol from TvFDP1 or TvFTX transformed T. vaginalis cells were incubated with 20 µl of purified wild type hydrogenosomes (200 µg) and 10 µl of 0.2 M ATP at room temperature for 1, 10, or 20 minutes. For the negative control, apyrase (20 U/mL) was used to eliminate ATP as previously described (32), and incubation with hydrogenosomes was carried out on ice without supplemented ATP. After incubations, non-imported proteins were digested by 10 µg of proteinase K on ice for 15 minutes, and digestion was then stopped by use of 1 mM final concentration phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) for 15 minutes on ice. Hydrogenosomes were repurified by centrifugation (20,000 x g for 10 minutes at 4 ºC) and washed twice before suspended in import buffer. Three replicates of the main import assay with M. exilis cytosol were performed under the same conditions as above, except that only the purified hydrogenosomes were incubated with 5 µg of denatured M. exilis cytosol supplemented with 5 µg of purified native T. vaginalis (wild type) cytosol. The hydrogenosomes were repurified and used for mass spectrometry (MS) identification. In the case of the Triton X-100 treatment, 0.5% final concentration of Triton X-100 was added into the reaction during the proteinase K treatment; the proteins were then precipitated by methanol and chloroform and resolved by SDS-PAGE sample buffer for electrophoresis.  Mass spectrometry sample preparation and data acquisition  Protein samples for MS were prepared as previously described (36). Briefly, samples were precipitated and dissolved in triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) with 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC). Proteins were then digested by trypsin, acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and desalted using in-house made stage tips packed with C18 disks (37). Nano reversed phase columns were used for LC/MS analysis. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.5 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 104 and the maximum injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge states 2–6 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes.

### Data Protocol
All data were analyzed and quantified with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.10.43) as previously described (36). The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectrum search against the M. exilis database (acquired from GiardiaDB) and T. vaginalis database (from TrichDB). Quantifications were performed with the label-free algorithm in MaxQuant (38). Data analysis was performed using Perseus 1.6.13.0 software (39).

### Publication Abstract
The endobiotic flagellate <i>Monocercomonoides exilis</i> is the only known eukaryote to have lost mitochondria and all its associated proteins in its evolutionary past. This final stage of the mitochondrial evolutionary pathway may serve as a model to explain events at their very beginning such as the initiation of protein import. We have assessed the capability of proteins from this eukaryote to enter emerging mitochondria using a specifically designed <i>in vitro</i> assay. Hydrogenosomes (reduced mitochondria) of <i>Trichomonas vaginalis</i> were incubated with a soluble protein pool derived from a cytosolic fraction of <i>M. exilis</i>, and proteins entering hydrogenosomes were subsequently detected by mass spectrometry. The assay detected 19 specifically and reproducibly imported proteins, and in 14 cases the import was confirmed by the overexpression of their tagged version in <i>T. vaginalis</i>. In most cases, only a small portion of the signal reached the hydrogenosomes, suggesting specific but inefficient transport. Most of these proteins represent enzymes of carbon metabolism, and none exhibited clear signatures of proteins targeted to hydrogenosomes or mitochondria, which is consistent with their inefficient import. The observed phenomenon may resemble a primaeval type of protein import which might play a role in the establishment of the organelle and shaping of its proteome in the initial stages of endosymbiosis.

### Keywords
Protein import, Evolution of protein targeting, : mitochondrion-free eukaryote, Hydrogenosome

### Affiliations
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, BIOCEV, Charles University, 149 00 Czech Republic
Charles University

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Vladimir Hampl
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, BIOCEV, Charles University, 149 00 Czech Republic


