### Accession
PXD024383

### Title
Proteome-wide effects of single gene perturbations

### Description
Protein expression levels are controlled at the transcriptional, translational and post-translational level and their regulatory principles are starting to emerge. While transcriptional outcomes, which are commonly also used as a proxy for protein abundance, have been investigated on a larger scale, the study of translational output requires large-scale proteomics data. However, data for proteome alterations by systematic assessment of knockouts genome-wide is not available yet. We here determined the individual proteome changes for 3,308 non-essential genes in the yeast S. pombe. We observed that genes with high proteome remodeling are predominantly involved in gene expression regulation, in particular acting as translational regulators. Focusing on those knockout strains with a large number of altered proteins, we performed paired transcriptome/proteome measurements to uncover translational regulators and features of translational regulation. Furthermore, by similarity clustering of these proteome changes, we infer gene functionality that can be extended to other species such as human or baker’s yeast.

### Sample Protocol
20 µl of the cell lysate was reduced for 30 min with dithiothreitol (f.c. 1 mM) and subsequently alkylated for 20 min with iodoacetamide (f.c. 5 mM) shaking at 300 rpm at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were diluted in seven volumes of 50 mM (NH4)HCO3 pH 8.0 and digested overnight with 50 ng endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako) shaking at 300 rpm at 25 ºC. Peptides were desalted using StageTips made from two layers of C18 material (Empore). Shortly, StageTips were activated using 100% methanol and washed with 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Equilibration and wash steps after peptide loading were done with 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8.0. Peptides were eluted from StageTips with 80% acetonitrile in 100 mM TEAB and the organic solvent subsequently evaporated. The labeling reaction was performed with 8 µg Tandem Mass Tag (TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent, Thermo Scientific) for 2 hours at room temperature, following 15 min quenching with hydroxylamine (f.c. 0.4%)  and acidifying with five volumes 0.1% formic acid. One batch of wt S. pombe grown in 2 ml deep 96-well plate filled with 1 ml YES media was labeled with Tandem Mass Tag 127C beforehand and frozen in aliquots at -80 ºC. An aliquot was combined with every 10plex pool to account for run-to-run and plate-to-plate variability. Each pool of 10 Tandem Mass Tag samples was cleaned by StageTip purification as described above. Peptide elution was done with 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid/50 mM (NH4)HCO3 pH 8.0. After the organic solvent was evaporated, the complete sample was injected for mass spectrometry measurement. Measurements were done on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC1000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on a self-packed C18 columns (Dr Maisch GmbH) using the following gradient: 0-157 min, 2-22% solvent B; 157-208 min, 22-40% solvent B; 208-212 min, 40-95% solvent B at a flow rate of 225 nl min-1. Solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid and solvent B of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were ionized with spray voltages of 2.0 - 2.4 kV.  Data acquisition for TMT samples was performed in positive ion mode with a Top15 data-dependent acquisition method. The full scan was set at a resolution of 70,000 with a scan range of 300 − 1650 m/z, AGC target of 3*106. The MS/MS were triggered with a 1.8 m/z isolation window at a minimum intensity threshold of 8.3*103 with following settings: ion charge 2-7; peptide match preferred; isotope exclusion on and a dynamic exclusion set for 35 s. Fragmentation energy was set to 33, resolution at 35,000 with an AGC target of 1*105 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms .

### Data Protocol
All MS raw files were run in a single MaxQuant version v. 1.6.1.0  using the integrated Andromeda search engine and the Schizosaccharomyces_pombe.ASM294v2.29.pep.all.fa database downloaded from ENSEMBL. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine was set as a fixed modification. FDR was adjusted to 0.01 on peptide and protein level. Second peptide search was disabled and only unique peptides were considered for quantitation. The mqpar  file with all settings is available at ProteomeXchange.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms; knockout strain

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)


