### Accession
PXD031462

### Title
Different roles of gamma- and beta-actin in neuronal functions

### Description
Lack of cytoplasmic beta-actin gene (Actb) leads to early embryonic lethality in mice, however targeted editing of Actb coding sequence by introducing five point mutations to encode cytoplasmic gamma-actin protein does not affect mouse viability. These mice with beta to gamma actin replacement (Actbc-g mice) develop normally and show no detectable phenotypes at young age, despite complete lack of beta-actin protein. Here we investigated the effect of the replacement of beta-actin with gamma-actin in the brain and the retina --- the tissue where these two cytoplasmic actin isoforms predominate.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly excised mouse brains and retinas, with the cornea and the lens removed, were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and ground up in liquid nitrogen to obtain brain and retinal lysates.  The proteins were pulled down with Phaloidin or DNasel agarose. The resulting protein samples were reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin.  Tryptic digests were analyzed using a 1.5 h LC gradient on the Thermo Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed using MaxQuant software (Version 1.6.17.0) from Max-Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany.

### Publication Abstract
Cytoplasmic beta- and gamma-actin are ubiquitously expressed in every eukaryotic cell. They are encoded by different genes, but their amino acid sequences differ only by four conservative substitutions at the N-termini, making it difficult to dissect their individual regulation. Here, we analyzed actin from cultured cells and tissues by mass spectrometry and found that beta, unlike gamma actin, undergoes sequential removal of N-terminal Asp residues, leading to truncated actin species found in both F- and G-actin preparations. This processing affects up to &#x223c;3% of beta actin in different cell types. We used CRISPR/Cas-9 in cultured cells to delete two candidate enzymes capable of mediating this type of processing. This deletion abolishes most of the beta actin N-terminal processing and results in changes in F-actin levels, cell spreading, filopodia formation, and cell migration. Our results demonstrate previously unknown isoform-specific actin regulation that can potentially affect actin functions in cells.

### Keywords
Brain, Mouse, Actin, Retina

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania

### Submitter
Dawei Dong

### Lab Head
Dr Dawei W Dong
University of Pennsylvania


