### Accession
PXD023726

### Title
SWATH-MS data showing differential protein expression due to the ModS methyltransferase of Streptococcus suis

### Description
Streptococcus suis is a significant cause of bacterial meningitis in humans, particularly in S.E. Asia, and is a leading cause of respiratory and invasive disease in pigs. Phase-variable DNA methyltransferases, associated with Restriction-Modification (R-M) systems, are a source of epigenetic gene regulation, controlling the expression of multiple genes throughout the genome. These systems are known as phasevarions (phase-variable regulons), and have been characterised in many host-adapted bacterial pathogens. We recently established the presence of a Type III DNA methyltransferase in S. suis (ModS), of which two alleles were described, ModS1 and ModS2. Strains which expressed either ModS1 or ModS2 exhibited differential methylation throughout the genome when compared with strains which did not. This altered methylation resulted in changes to gene expression and this SWATH-MS dataset demonstrates the resulting changes to protein expression as a result of the of ModS1 and ModS2. This dataset represents triplicate repeats from strains which express ModS (ON) and strains which do not (OFF).

### Sample Protocol
Overnight cultures of each S. suis strain (107 CFU/ml) were harvested, lysed in guanidium buffer (6 M guanidium chloride, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH8, 10 mM dithiothreitol) and incubated at 30°C for 30 minutes with shaking (500 rpm). Cysteines of the total protein were alkylated by addition of acrylamide to a final concentration of 25 mM and incubated at 30°C for 60 minutes with shaking (500 rpm). Concentration of samples was assessed using a Nanodrop 2000 (Thermo Fisher). A 100 µg aliquot of the protein was then precipitated by addition of 1:1 methanol: acetone at -20°C overnight. The protein was pelleted at 18,000xg for 10 minutes and supernatant was removed before the pellet was resuspended in 50 µL trypsin reaction buffer and 1 µg trypsin (New England Biolabs) added and the suspension incubated overnight at 37°C.  Tryptic digested peptides were then desalted and purified using a Ziptip (Millipore) as per manufacturer instructions. Briefly, tryptic peptides were analyzed by LC-ESI-MS/MS using a Prominence nanoLC system (Shimadzu) and Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer with a Nanospray III interface (SCIEX). Peptides were separated on a Vydac EVEREST reversed-phase C18 HPLC column at a flow rate of 1 μL/min. A gradient of 10−60% buffer B over 45 min, with buffer A (1% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) was used. An MS-TOF scan was performed from an m/z range of 350− 1800 for 0.5 s followed by information dependent acquisition of MS/MS of the top 20 peptides from m/z 40−1800 for 0.05 s per spectrum, with automated CE selection. Identical LC conditions were used for SWATH-MS. SWATH-MS of triplicate biological replicates was performed with the same MS-TOF scan, followed by high sensitivity information-independent acquisition with m/z isolation windows with 1 m/z window overlap each for 0.1 s across an m/z range of 400−1250. Collision energy was automatically assigned by Analyst software (AB SCIEX) based on m/z window ranges.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching against S. suis Lss89 and SS1056 genomes (NCBI Accession GCA_900059105.1 and GCA_900051945.1 respectively) and common contaminants with standard settings using ProteinPilot 5.0.1 (AB SCIEX). False discovery rate analysis was performed on all searches. ProteinPilot search results were used as ion libraries for SWATH analyses. The abundance of proteins was measured automatically using PeakView (AB SCIEX) with standard settings. Comparison of protein relative abundance was performed based on protein intensities or ion intensities using a linear mixed-effects model with the MSstats package in R. Proteins with greater than X changes in abundance and with adjusted P-values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microbiology, Streptococcus suis, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Institute for Glycomics, Griffith University

### Submitter
Greg Tram

### Lab Head
Dr John Atack
Institute for Glycomics, Griffith University


