### Accession
PXD001172

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of a Soybean Suspension Culture

### Description
A developmental analysis of intercellular and extracellular proteins from soybean suspension cells through a culture cycle

### Sample Protocol
Every day up to 14 days after transfer, the fresh weights of the cells were determined by filtering cells with Whatmen #1 paper in a Buchner funnel.  Cellular and extracellular proteins of day 5 and day 8 were selected for analysis.  Cells and media were collected and frozen at -20°C and lyophilized.    To extract the cellular proteins, 200 mg  5.0 ml of Tris pH 8.8 buffered phenol was added to 5.0 ml of extraction media (0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 10 mM EDTA, 0.4% 2-metacaptoethanol, 0.9 M sucrose), and 0.1% C7BZO. This was transferred to a 50 ml Falcon tube and homogenized 3 times using a Polytron with a small probe at setting 4.  Each homogenizing session was for 1 minute, with 5 minutes of rest on ice between each minute of homogenizing. This was transferred to a 15 ml corex tube and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 5000 g and 4°C. After centrifugation, the phenol phase was removed and placed into a 30 ml corex tube. The phenol extracted proteins were precipitated by adding 5 volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol (pre-chilled to -20°C). Next, it was vortexed and placed at -20°C for 2 hrs. The precipitate was collected by centrifugation 20 minutes at 10,000 rpm at 4°C.  The pellet was washed twice with ice cold 0.1M ammonium acetate/methanol containing 10mM DTT, then thrice with ice cold 80% acetone containing 10mM DDT, the last wash had no DTT.  The pellet was re-suspended each time by pipetting and was placed at -20°C for 20 minutes between each wash. The final pellet was allowed to air dry on the bench top for 10 minutes.  Day 5 and day 8 extracellular protein samples were re-suspended in 4 mL MS quality water.  Proteins were precipitated by adding 5 volumes of cold 100% acetone and 10 mM DTT and placed at -20°C for 1 hr.  The precipitate was collected by centrifugation 20 minutes at 10,000 rpm at 4°C.  Samples were washed twice in 80% acetone plus 10 mM DTT, pellets were broken up by pipetting. Second acetone wash, DTT was not added.  Final pellet was allowed to air dry on the bench top for 10 minutes.  The pellets from all samples were solubilized in 0.5 ml of IEF sample buffer (8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 0.2% CHAPS, , and 0.2% C7BZO) by pipetting and vortexing at 25°C. The cellular and extracellular samples, day 5 and day 8 were taken to MU proteomics core for DIGE analysis.  Identified spots were excise from gel using 1.5 mm spot picker (Gel company, San Francisco CA) stained spots were transfered into a clean 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube.  Plugs were wash gel with 500 µL of wash solution (50 % acetonitrile, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and incubate at room temperature for 20 min with gentle agitation (vortex mixer on lowest setting).  This was repeated until stain was removed. The gel plugs were dehydrated by washing twice with 500 µL of 100% acetonitrile 15 min each.  The second acetonitrile wash was discarded and gel plugs were air-dried.  Trypsin (Princeton Separation cat# EN-151) was made 20 ng/µL in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 30 µL was added to each gel plug and incubated on ice for 1 hr to rehydrate the gel plug.  The remaining trypsin solution was removed and replace with 30 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 16 hrs at 37°C.  Samples were briefly spun and transferred the 30 µL digestion solution into a clean 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube.  The gel plugs were washed with 30 µL of 60% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid for 10 min with gentle agitation, the wash was combined with the digestion solution and stored in the -20°C.

### Data Protocol
The Qualitative Analysis software was used to extract MS+MSMS using the “find compounds by auto MS/MS” feature.  These data were then exported as MGF files (MASCOT generic format).  These MGF files were loaded to Sorcerer-Sequest and searched against Glyma1.pep.nostar.DecoyRandom.cRAP.fasta database using these parameters: 25ppm mass accuracy on precursor, 0.1Da mass accuracy on fragments.  The resulting matches were analyzed using Scaffold 4; primary picks were made by the number of unique peptides per protein ID.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteins, Dige, Secretion, Intercellular, Lc-ms/ms, Extracellular

### Affiliations
USDA Agriculture Research Service
USDA, ARS

### Submitter
Jan Miernyk

### Lab Head
Dr Jan A. Miernyk
USDA, ARS


