### Accession
PXD019098

### Title
A systems approach delivers a functional 1 microRNA catalog and expanded targets for seizure suppression in temporal lobe epilepsy

### Description
Proteomic analysis Epilepsy was induced using perforant pathway stimulation (PPS) in rats as described (Norwood BA, et al. (2010) Classic hippocampal sclerosis and hippocampal-onset epilepsy produced by a single "cryptic" episode of focal hippocampal excitation in awake rats. J Comp 803 Neurol 518(16):3381-3407). Rats were killed under deep anesthesia (xylazine+ketamine) by transcardial perfusion with ice-cold 0.9 % NaCl solution at the following time points: 1 h, 24 h, 72 h, 10 d and 16 d after PPS (epileptogenesis); within 1 d of first spontaneous seizure (early epilepsy); 1 month after first spontaneous seizure (chronic epilepsy). Control rats were killed on day 17 after surgery (corresponding to day 10 after PPS). Hippocampi were removed and snap frozen at -80°C.  Frozen rat hippocampi were resuspended in 200 ul lysis buffer (6M GdmCl, 10mM TCEP, Complete protease inhibitor cocktail, PhosSTOP inhibitor, 100 mM TEAB, benzonase) and dounced 30 times on ice. Samples were boiled for 5 min, sonicated on ice for 2min and centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 3 min. The supernatant was added chloroacetamide to a final concentration of 20 mM followed by incubation in the dark for 30 min at room temperature (RT). Proteins were digested with LysC for 30 min at RT and then diluting 10x— using 100 mM TEAB followed by adding trypsin and incubating overnight at 37°C with shaking. LysC and trypsin were added in a LysC/trypsin:protein ratio of 1:100.   Samples were centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 5 min and from the supernatant a volume corresponding to 50 ug peptide was transferred to a new eppendorff tube. Sets of 6 samples were labelled using the TMTsixplex isobaric label reagent. (ThermoFisher Scientific). The labeling reagent was prepared using the manufactures instructions to first equilibrate to RT, then dissolving the labeling reagent in 41 ul anhydrous acetonitrile. The labeling reagent was added to each sample and incubated for 1 hour at RT. The reaction was quenched by incubating with 0.76 M lysine for 15 min. A small amount was taken from each sample, mixed and tested by mass spectrometry for labeling efficiency and mixing ratio. Remaining samples were mixed in a 1:1 ratio.   The Stage-tips for the high-pH reverse phase fractionation were prepared by placing first two C18 disks in a p200 pipette tip, then adding a slurry of C18 beads (ReproSil-Pur, 3 um) in methanol and adding one additional C18 disk in the top. The column was activated and equilibrated by washing one time in 150 ul buffer B (50% buffer A, 50% ACN) and then two times in 150 ul buffer A (20mM Ammonium hydroxide, pH 10). The labeled peptide sample was adjusted to pH 10 using buffer A and then loaded onto the activated and equilibrated stage-tip by spinning the sample through the column and collecting 26 the flow-through. The column was washed 2 times with 150 ul buffer 585 A and the washes were collected and combined with the flow-through. Next, peptides were eluted stepwise in 17 fractions by spinning 150 ul of buffer A containing increasing amounts of ACN for each step (3.5%, 4.5%, 6%, 8%, 10%, 10.5%, 11.5%, 13.5%, 15%, 16%, 17.5%, 18.5%, 19.5%, 21%, 27%, 50%, 80%) through the column. After collection, the liquid was evaporated completely in a Concentrator Plus (Eppendorf) and prepared for MS by resuspending in buffer A* (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA).   Samples were analyzed using an Easy-nLC system coupled online to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon/Thermo Scientific). The peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer during a chromatographic separation from a fused silica column packed in-house with 3 um C18 beads (Reprosil, Dr. Maisch) using a 120 min gradient of buffer B (80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) with a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The Q Exactive HF was operated in positive ion mode with a top 12 data-dependent acquisition method where ions were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using a normalized collisional energy (NCE)/ stepped NCE of 28 and 32. The resolution was set to 60,000 (at 400m/z), with a scan range of 300-1700 m/z and an AGC target of 3e6 for the MS survey. MS/MS was performed at a scan range of 100 - 2000 m/z using a resolution of 30,000 (at 400 m/z), an AGC target of 1e5, an intensity threshold of 1e5 and an isolation window of 1.2 m/z. Further parameters included an exclusion time of 45 sec and a maximum injection time for survey and MS/MS of 15 ms and 45 ms respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis Epilepsy was induced using perforant pathway stimulation (PPS) in rats as described (Norwood BA, et al. (2010) Classic hippocampal sclerosis and hippocampal-onset epilepsy produced by a single "cryptic" episode of focal hippocampal excitation in awake rats. J Comp 803 Neurol 518(16):3381-3407). Rats were killed under deep anesthesia (xylazine+ketamine) by transcardial perfusion with ice-cold 0.9 % NaCl solution at the following time points: 1 h, 24 h, 72 h, 10 d and 16 d after PPS (epileptogenesis); within 1 d of first spontaneous seizure (early epilepsy); 1 month after first spontaneous seizure (chronic epilepsy). Control rats were killed on day 17 after surgery (corresponding to day 10 after PPS). Hippocampi were removed and snap frozen at -80°C.  Frozen rat hippocampi were resuspended in 200 ul lysis buffer (6M GdmCl, 10mM TCEP, Complete protease inhibitor cocktail, PhosSTOP inhibitor, 100 mM TEAB, benzonase) and dounced 30 times on ice. Samples were boiled for 5 min, sonicated on ice for 2min and centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 3 min. The supernatant was added chloroacetamide to a final concentration of 20 mM followed by incubation in the dark for 30 min at room temperature (RT). Proteins were digested with LysC for 30 min at RT and then diluting 10x— using 100 mM TEAB followed by adding trypsin and incubating overnight at 37°C with shaking. LysC and trypsin were added in a LysC/trypsin:protein ratio of 1:100.   Samples were centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 5 min and from the supernatant a volume corresponding to 50 ug peptide was transferred to a new eppendorff tube. Sets of 6 samples were labelled using the TMTsixplex isobaric label reagent. (ThermoFisher Scientific). The labeling reagent was prepared using the manufactures instructions to first equilibrate to RT, then dissolving the labeling reagent in 41 ul anhydrous acetonitrile. The labeling reagent was added to each sample and incubated for 1 hour at RT. The reaction was quenched by incubating with 0.76 M lysine for 15 min. A small amount was taken from each sample, mixed and tested by mass spectrometry for labeling efficiency and mixing ratio. Remaining samples were mixed in a 1:1 ratio.   The Stage-tips for the high-pH reverse phase fractionation were prepared by placing first two C18 disks in a p200 pipette tip, then adding a slurry of C18 beads (ReproSil-Pur, 3 um) in methanol and adding one additional C18 disk in the top. The column was activated and equilibrated by washing one time in 150 ul buffer B (50% buffer A, 50% ACN) and then two times in 150 ul buffer A (20mM Ammonium hydroxide, pH 10). The labeled peptide sample was adjusted to pH 10 using buffer A and then loaded onto the activated and equilibrated stage-tip by spinning the sample through the column and collecting 26 the flow-through. The column was washed 2 times with 150 ul buffer 585 A and the washes were collected and combined with the flow-through. Next, peptides were eluted stepwise in 17 fractions by spinning 150 ul of buffer A containing increasing amounts of ACN for each step (3.5%, 4.5%, 6%, 8%, 10%, 10.5%, 11.5%, 13.5%, 15%, 16%, 17.5%, 18.5%, 19.5%, 21%, 27%, 50%, 80%) through the column. After collection, the liquid was evaporated completely in a Concentrator Plus (Eppendorf) and prepared for MS by resuspending in buffer A* (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA).   Samples were analyzed using an Easy-nLC system coupled online to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon/Thermo Scientific). The peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer during a chromatographic separation from a fused silica column packed in-house with 3 um C18 beads (Reprosil, Dr. Maisch) using a 120 min gradient of buffer B (80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) with a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The Q Exactive HF was operated in positive ion mode with a top 12 data-dependent acquisition method where ions were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using a normalized collisional energy (NCE)/ stepped NCE of 28 and 32. The resolution was set to 60,000 (at 400m/z), with a scan range of 300-1700 m/z and an AGC target of 3e6 for the MS survey. MS/MS was performed at a scan range of 100 - 2000 m/z using a resolution of 30,000 (at 400 m/z), an AGC target of 1e5, an intensity threshold of 1e5 and an isolation window of 1.2 m/z. Further parameters included an exclusion time of 45 sec and a maximum injection time for survey and MS/MS of 15 ms and 45 ms respectively.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from the LC-MS/MS analysis was processed using the MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.30 with default settings except from the following: In group specific parameters type was set to Reporter ion MS2 with 6plex TMT as isobaric labels. As variable modifications Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), and Deamidation (NQ) was added and in global parameters match between runs was selected. In MaxQuant, peak lists were searched against the rat UniProt 27 database (including both swiss-prot and TrEMBL) released 610 August 2016 using the build in search engine Andromeda.   Time profiles for each replicate were created by first normalizing to a common time point (day 16) present in each TMT experiment and then re-normalizing to the control. In this way each replicate time profile included protein ratios at each time point relative to the control. Differential expression was evaluated using a combined limma and rank product test to obtain q-values for each protein. Volcano plots were created by plotting log2 average ratios against log10 q-values obtained in the above mentioned limma and rank product test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Antisense oligonucleotide; biomarker; noncoding rna; epigenetic; epileptogenesis; hippocampal sclerosis; epilepsy, Microrna

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark, Department og Biochemistry and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Jens Andersen

### Lab Head
Dr Jens Andersen
University of Southern Denmark, Department og Biochemistry and Molecular Biology


