### Accession
PXD029565

### Title
Structural Basis for Defective Membrane Targeting of Mutant Enzyme in Human VLCAD Deficiency

### Description
Very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD) is an inner mitochondrial membrane enzyme that catalyzes the first and rate-limiting step of long-chain fatty acid oxidation. Point mutations in human VLCAD can produce an inborn error of metabolism called VLCAD deficiency that can lead to severe pathophysiologic consequences, including cardiomyopathy, hypoglycemia, and rhabdomyolysis. Discrete mutations in a structurally uncharacterized C-terminal domain region of VLCAD cause enzymatic deficiency by an incompletely defined mechanism. Here, we conducted a structure-function analysis, incorporating X-ray crystallography, hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, and computational modeling, to identify a specific membrane interaction defect of full-length, human VLCAD bearing the clinically-observed mutations, A450P or L462P. By disrupting a predicted a-helical hairpin, these mutations either partially or completely impair direct interaction with the membrane itself. Thus, we find that enzyme mislocalization underlies the metabolic deficiency syndrome of patients bearing specific mutations that disrupt the structure of an a-helical membrane binding region of VLCAD.

### Sample Protocol
Liposome binding equilibration: Prior to deuterium labeling, aliquots of VLCAD (wild-type, A450P, and L462P) with and without liposomes (designed to mimic the inner mitochondrial membrane: IMM) were prepared fresh in two independent replicates.  VLCAD proteins (1 µL at 40 µM in 10 mM HEPES, 200 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, pH 7.0 H2O) in the presence or absence of liposomes (1 µL 10 mM HEPES, 200 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, pH 7.0 or 10 mM liposomes prepared in 10 mM HEPES, 200 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, pH 7.0,  for 250-fold excess) were equilibrated at room temperature (21 °C) for 1 hour.  High osmolyte binding equilibration: Prior to deuterium labeling, aliquots of VLCAD wild-type with and without 500 mM KCl or 500mM KCl with liposomes (IMM) were prepared by equilibration of  wild-type VLCAD (1 µL at 20 µM in 10 mM HEPES, 500 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, pH 7.0 H2O) in the presence or absence of liposomes (1 µL 10 mM HEPES, 500 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, pH 7.0 or 5 mM liposomes prepared in 10 mM HEPES, 500 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, pH 7.0,  for 250-fold excess) at room temperature (21 °C) for 1 hour.  Deuterium labeling: Deuterium labeling was initiated with an 18-fold dilution (1 µL of the VLCAD) into 36 µL of D2O buffer (10 mM HEPES, 200 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, pD 7.0, 99.9% D2O). After each labeling time (10 seconds, 1 minute, 10 minutes, 1 hour) at 21 °C, the labeling reaction was quenched with the addition of 38 µL of ice-cold quenching buffer [(0.8 M guanidinium chloride, 0.8% (v/v) formic acid, pH 2.4, H2O] and analyzed immediately.   LC/MS:  Deuterated and control samples were digested online at 15 °C using a Waters Enzymate pepsin column (Waters, 186007233). The cooling chamber of the UPLC system, which housed all the chromatographic elements, was held at 0.0 ± 0.1 °C for the entire time of the measurements. Peptides were trapped and desalted on a VanGuard Pre-Column trap [2.1 mm × 5 mm, ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 1.7 µm (Waters, 186002346)] for 3 minutes at 100 µL/min.  Peptides were then eluted from the trap using a 5%–35% gradient of acetonitrile over 12 minutes at a flow rate of 100 µL/min, and separated using an ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3, 1.8 µm, 1.0 mm × 50 mm column (Waters, 186003535).  The back pressure averaged ~12,950 psi at 0 °C and 5% acetonitrile 95% water, 0.1% formic acid.  The error of determining the deuterium levels was less than ± 0.25 Da in this experimental setup.  To eliminate peptide carryover, a wash solution [1.5 M guanidinium chloride, 0.8% formic acid and 4% acetonitrile] was injected over the pepsin column during each analytical run.  Mass spectra were acquired using a Waters Synapt G2-Si HDMSE mass spectrometer in ion mobility mode.  The mass spectrometer was calibrated with direct infusion of a solution of glu-fibrinopeptide (Sigma, F3261) at 200 femtomole/µL at a flow rate of 5 µL/min prior to data collection.  A conventional electrospray source was used, and the instrument was scanned over the range 50 to 2000 m/z.  The instrument configuration was the following: capillary was 3.2 kV, trap collision energy at 4 V, sampling cone at 40 V, source temperature of 80 °C and desolvation temperature of 175 °C.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from replicate HDMSE analyses (as detailed in the Supplemental Data file 1) of undeuterated control samples using PLGS 3.0.1 (Waters Corporation). Peptide masses were identified from searches using non-specific cleavage of a custom database containing the sequence of human VLCAD (UniProt: P49748) lacking its cleavable leader sequence, no missed cleavages, no PTMs, a low energy threshold of 135, an elevated energy threshold of 35, and an intensity threshold of 500. No false discovery rate (FDR) control was performed.  The peptides identified in PLGS (excluding all neutral loss and in-source fragmentation identifications) were then filtered in DynamX 3.0 (Waters Corporation) implementing a minimum products per amino acid cut-off of 0.25, at least 2 consecutive product ions and a maximum MH+ Error of 10 ppm.  Those peptides meeting the filtering criteria to this point were further processed by DynamX 3.0 (Waters Corporation). The relative amount of deuterium in each peptide was determined by the software by subtracting the centroid mass of the undeuterated form of each peptide from the deuterated form, at each time point, for each condition.  These deuterium uptake values were used to generate all uptake graphs and difference maps.  The error of determining the average deuterium incorporation for each peptide was less than ± 0.25 Da. Deuterium levels were not corrected for back exchange and thus reported as relative [Wales & Engen (2006). Mass Spectrom Rev. 25(1), 158-170].

### Publication Abstract
Very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD) is an inner mitochondrial membrane enzyme that catalyzes the first and rate-limiting step of long-chain fatty acid oxidation. Point mutations in human VLCAD can produce an inborn error of metabolism called VLCAD deficiency that can lead to severe pathophysiologic consequences, including cardiomyopathy, hypoglycemia, and rhabdomyolysis. Discrete mutations in a structurally-uncharacterized C-terminal domain region of VLCAD cause enzymatic deficiency by an incompletely defined mechanism. Here, we conducted a structure-function study, incorporating X-ray crystallography, hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, computational modeling, and biochemical analyses, to characterize a specific membrane interaction defect of full-length, human VLCAD bearing the clinically-observed mutations, A450P or L462P. By disrupting a predicted &#x3b1;-helical hairpin, these mutations either partially or completely impair direct interaction with the membrane itself. Thus, our data support a structural basis for VLCAD deficiency in patients with discrete mutations in an &#x3b1;-helical membrane-binding motif, resulting in pathologic enzyme mislocalization.

### Keywords
Vlcad; fatty acid oxidation; membrane protein structure; hdx-ms; hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry; x-ray crystallography; molecular dynamics

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University
Northeastern University

### Submitter
John R. Engen

### Lab Head
Dr John R Engen
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University


