### Accession
PXD018051

### Title
Comparing Biological and Pathological Factors Affecting Osteocalcin Concentrations in Archaeological Skeletal Remains

### Description
Paleoproteomics and the study of ancient proteins has become an important consideration in bioarchaeological research as we seek to understand the relationship between the physical skeleton and its underlying biochemistry. Osteocalcin (OC) is an abundant, non-collagenous protein that is accessible archaeologically due to its affinity for hydroxyapatite in bone. Manufactured by the osteoblast cells during normal bone metabolism, osteocalcin is inherently linked to the process of bone remodelling. Clinical studies have consistently shown the impact of biological (i.e., sex and age) and pathological (i.e., disease) factors on osteocalcin concentrations within the body; however, this connection has yet to be fully explored bioarchaeologically. For this study, 46 individuals from the Danish Sct. Albert’s cemetery (AD 1250-1536) were analyzed with cortical bone samples harvested from the femur. Each sample was demineralized and quantified using established paleoproteomic methods (ELISA) and tested for diagenesis using FTIR-ATR. 4 samples were validated by LC-MS. No significant differences were found in the osteocalcin concentrations between adult males and females. However, males had a wider range of osteocalcin variability perhaps explained in part by their increased prevalence of pathological conditions characterized by bone remodelling. Similarly, non-adults had a wide range of osteocalcin variability but there were no significant differences when compared to the adult mean. No correlations were found between osteocalcin concentrations and diagenesis suggesting that the protein can survive across a range of temporal periods and variable burial environments. While no clear pattern emerged between osteocalcin concentrations and biological and/or pathological factors, this study is significant in that it further explores the use of paleoproteomics in bioarchaeological contexts and how we may unite our macroscopic and biochemical assessments of human skeletal remains.

### Sample Protocol
Cortical bone samples were collected from the proximal posterior shaft of the femur adjacent to linea aspera. Sample preparation followed the demineralization and filtering method outlined in Scott et al. (2016) with slight alterations to minimize the total sample need to complete the analysis and to reduce the demineralization timeline. The outer cortical bone on each sampling site was first removed using a Dremel® (300). Approximately 20 mg of bone powder from the cleaned sampling site was harvested from each individual. The Dremel® tip was sterilized using 70% ethanol and an ethanol flame between the cleaning and harvesting stages to reduce contamination. All 46 bone samples were demineralized with 10% wt/vol ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) and continuously oscillated in a fridge at 4°C for a 24-hour period. The supernatant was collected from each sample and filtered three times using 3kDa MWCO filters (Vivaspin® 500 Centrifugal Concentrators), EDTA was reduced 1000-fold with buffer exchange to phosphate buffered saline (PBS). Samples were eluted in 50 μl and diluted to the original input volume. Samples were subsequently stored at -20 °C prior to analysis. Protein quantification was determined using BCA assay (Thermo Scientific 23235) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Absorbance was measured at 560 nm on a MultiscanTM FC Microplate reader. A volume of sample filtrate equivalent to 20ug of protein (measured using BCA assay) for the two lowest concentrations (ay and oo/ø) and the two highest concentrations of OC (ar and n) was transferred into a protein LoBind microcentrifuge tube, a blank sample was also prepared. Trypsin was added at an enzyme : protein ratio of 1:50. Digestion was performed overnight at 37C with shaking (750rpm). The digestion was quenched by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to reduce the pH to <2. Peptides were desalted using C18 StageTips (prepared in house). Peptides were eluted with 50ul of 50% acetonitrile 0.1% TFA solution. The sample eluates were transferred to the Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, for LC-MS/MS analysis on a EASY-nLC 1200 (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). All samples were measured using Nanodrop (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) at A205 and the volume required for approximately 2 µg of protein per sample was placed in separate wells in a 96-well plate and topped up to 30 µL using 40% ACN and 0.1% formic acid (FA). The samples were evaporated to less than 3 µl using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). They were then resuspended with 15 μL of 0.1% TFA, 5% ACN, and 5 µL of sample analysed by LC-MS/MS. Samples were separated on a 15 cm column (75 μm inner diameter) in-house laser pulled and packed with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Germany) on a 77 min gradient. Flow rate was 250 nL/min. The column temperature was maintained at 40°C using an integrated column oven. A wash-blank method using 0.1% TFA, 5% ACN was run in between each sample to hinder cross-contamination.The LC-MS/MS parameters were adapted from those previously used for palaeoproteomic samples (Mackie et al., 2018; Jensen et al., 2020) to have a lower resolution and injection time in order to maximise capture of osteocalcin in a more complex proteome. In short the HF-X was operated as follows: MS1: 120k resolution, maximum injection time (IT) 25 ms, scan target 3E6. MS2: 30k resolution, top 12 mode, maximum IT 54 ms, minimum scan target 2E5, normalised collision energy of 28, dynamic exclusion 20 s, and isolation window of 1.2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry output files were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) against  the human proteome, including only proteins that have been manually reviewed (downloaded from UniProt on 18.2.2020). Common laboratory contaminants were also included in the search. All samples were analysed in a single search with label-free quantification (LFQ) module activated. The digestion parameter was set to trypsin semi-specific and variable post- translational modifications were oxidation (M), deamidation (N and Q), Gln ->pyro-Glu, Glu ->pyro-Glu,  carbamidomethylation (C) and gamma carboxylation (E). Proteins were considered confidently detected if 2 unique+razor peptides were detected. Minimum score was set at 40 and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Contaminants and proteins detected in the digestion blank were excluded and spectra were assessed manually. Peptides were validated for protein specificity by searching against the NCBI protein database using BLASTp (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human, Archaeology, Osteocalcin, Palaeoproteomics, Bone

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
Section for Evolutionary Genomics, GLOBE Institute,  University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

### Submitter
Meaghan Mackie

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Collins
Section for Evolutionary Genomics, GLOBE Institute,  University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.


