### Accession
PXD037452

### Title
Phosphosite mapping on Vimentin under hypotonic stress

### Description
Giant Axonal Neuropathy (GAN) is a pediatric neurodegenerative disease caused by loss-of-function mutations in the E3 ubiquitin ligase adaptor gigaxonin, which is encoded by the GAN (KLHL16) gene. Gigaxonin regulates the degradation of multiple intermediate filament (IF) proteins, including neurofilaments, peripherin, GFAP, and vimentin, which aggregate in GAN patient cells. Understanding how IFs and their aggregates are processed under stress can reveal new GAN disease mechanisms and potential targets for therapy. Here we tested the hypothesis that hypotonic stress-induced vimentin proteolysis is impaired in GAN. In this mass spectrometry-based proteomics analysis, phosphorylation at Ser-412, located at the junction between the central “rod” domain and C-terminal “tail” domain on vimentin, was identified to be involved in this stress response. Over-expression studies using either phospho-deficient (S412A) or phospho-mimic (S412D) mutants revealed that Ser-412 is important for filament organization, solubility dynamics, and cleavage of vimentin upon hypotonic stress exposure. Collectively, our work reveals that osmotic stress induces calpain- and proteasome-mediated vimentin degradation and IF network breakdown.

### Sample Protocol
Sample prep: GAN patient fibroblasts were plated on 10cm plates, then treated with 10mL/plate sterile molecular grade water in a 37C incubator at designated timepoints (0 min, 2 min, and 8 min). After treatment, the water was aspirated and Triton X-100 buffer (see above for details) was added directly to each plate. Insoluble fractions were isolated and subjected to SDS-PAGE, stained with GelCode Blue Stain. Bands corresponding to Vimentin were excised, and digested with trypsin overnight at 37ºC. Peptides were extract and desalted using C18 ZipTips. Samples were dried via vacuum centrifugation and stored at -80˚C until further analysis. LC/MS/MS Analysis: Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1200 coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size; Thermo Scientific) and separated over a 60 min method. The gradient for separation consisted of 5 - 40% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. The QExactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode, where the 15 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was analyzed in Proteome Discoverer v2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The data were searched against the Uniprot human database appended with a database of common contaminants, and tryptic peptides were identified using the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm, and up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. and tThe variable modifications were set to phosphorylation of Ser, Thr, and Tyr, and oxidation of methionine.. The ptmRS node was used to localize phosphorylation sites. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% and used to filter all data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Filaments, Giant axonal neuropathy, Hypotonic stress

### Affiliations
Cell Biology and Physiology, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
UNC-Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Laura Herring

### Lab Head
Dr Natasha Snider
Cell Biology and Physiology, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill


