### Accession
PXD012145

### Title
GSK3 alpha/beta knockout Mouse Podocytes proteomics

### Description
This is a set of proteomics performed on murine podocytes derived from a GSK3alpha/beta floxed mouse. GSK3 has been knocked down in the podocytes using lentiviral cre. This was performed 3 days prior to the analysis. For more details  see paper entitled "Podocyte GSK3 is an evolutionarily conserved critical regulator of kidney function" published in Nature Communications.

### Sample Protocol
Tandom Mass Tagging quantitative proteomic analysis of 10 samples. Samples fractionated and then analysed by acidic RP-nano-LC MSMS using Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass Spectometer.

### Data Protocol
Analysed initially using the proteome discoverer software as previously described in Wilson et al Molecular and Cellular Proteomics 15 (6) 1938-1946 (2016)

### Publication Abstract
Albuminuria affects millions of people, and is an independent risk factor for kidney failure, cardiovascular morbidity and death. The key cell that prevents albuminuria is the terminally differentiated glomerular podocyte. Here we report the evolutionary importance of the enzyme Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3 (GSK3) for maintaining podocyte function in mice and the equivalent nephrocyte cell in Drosophila. Developmental deletion of both GSK3 isoforms (&#x3b1; and &#x3b2;) in murine podocytes causes late neonatal death associated with massive albuminuria and renal failure. Similarly, silencing GSK3 in nephrocytes is developmentally lethal for this cell. Mature genetic or pharmacological podocyte/nephrocyte GSK3 inhibition is also detrimental; producing albuminuric kidney disease in mice and nephrocyte depletion in Drosophila. Mechanistically, GSK3 loss causes differentiated podocytes to re-enter the cell cycle and undergo mitotic catastrophe, modulated via the Hippo pathway but independent of Wnt-&#x3b2;-catenin. This work clearly identifies GSK3 as a critical regulator of podocyte and hence kidney function.

### Keywords
Mouse tmt proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Bristol
Bristol Renal University of Bristol UK

### Submitter
Richard Coward

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Richard Coward
Bristol Renal University of Bristol UK


