### Accession
PXD012467

### Title
Proteomic profiling of a large cohort of HCM patients: genotype-specific protein changes

### Description
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is characterized by asymmetric left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy and diastolic dysfunction, which leads to LV outflow tract obstruction (LVOTO) in the majority of cases. Mutations in genes encoding sarcomeric proteins cause HCM and are identified in more than half of the patients (sarcomere-mutation positive, SMP). Currently, more than 1500 HCM-causing mutations are known. Approximately 80% of mutations are located in the MYH7 and MYBPC3 genes, encoding for the thick filament proteins β-myosin heavy chain (β-MHC) and cardiac myosin-binding protein C (cMyBP-C), respectively. Less frequent are mutations in the TNNT2 and TNNI3 genes, encoding for the thin filament proteins cardiac troponin T (cTnT) and I (cTnI). Here, we applied an unbiased proteomics approach in a large number of myectomy samples from a clinically well-characterized HCM patient group to define HCM-specific derailments as well as genotype-specific changes at protein level. Our study shows that the downregulation of metabolic pathways and the upregulation of extracellular matrix proteins are the most prominent HCM-specific disease characteristics that are present in all samples independent of their genotype.

### Sample Protocol
Patient samples Tissue of the interventricular septum (IVS) of HCM patients was obtained during myectomy surgery to relieve LVOTO or after heart transplantation (1 sample). Cardiac tissue of the LV free wall and the IVS of 8 non-failing donors (NF), which had no history of cardiac abnormalities, was obtained from the Sydney Heart Bank and served as controls. The study protocol was approved by the local medical ethics review committees and written informed consent was obtained from each patient prior to surgery. HCM patients were assigned into 5 sub-groups based on genotype: patients with a Dutch MYBPC3 founder mutation (2373insG), which is a truncating mutation known to result in cMyBP-C haploinsufficiency; patients with MYBPC3 mutations other than the 2373insG mutation; patients with MYH7 mutations; patients with mutations in less frequently affected sarcomere genes (TNNT2, TNNI3 and MYL2), and SMN patients. Tissue homogenization Pulverized frozen tissue was homogenized in 40 μl/mg tissue 1x reducing sample buffer (106 mM Tris-HCl, 141 mM Tris-base, 2% LDS, 10% Glycerol, 0.51 mM EDTA, 0.22 mM SERVA Blue G250, 0.18 mM Phenol Red, 100 mM DTT) using a glass tissue grinder. Proteins were denatured by heating at 99°C for 5 min, after which samples were sonicated and heated again. Debris was removed by centrifugation at maximum speed for 10 min in a microcentrifuge.   SDS-PAGE/ In-gel-digestion Proteins were separated using 1D SDS-PAGE. For each sample, 30 μl of sample (containing approximately 20-30 μg of protein) were loaded on a precast 4-12% NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris 1.5 mm mini gel (Invitrogen) and run at 200V. Gels were fixed in a solution of 50% ethanol and 3% phosphoric acid and stained with a 0.1% Coomassie brilliant blue G-250 solution (containing 34% methanol, 3% phosphoric acid and 15% ammonium sulfate). Proteins were in-gel reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 54 mM iodoacetamide. Each gel lane was cut into 5 pieces, which were subsequently sliced into 1 mm³ cubes. Proteins were digested in-gel with 6.3 ng/ml trypsin. Peptides were extracted from the gel with 1% formic acid and 5% formic acid/50% acetonitrile and concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge prior to injection. LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 Nano LC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 40-cm x 75-μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 1.9-μm, 120-Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10-mm × 100-μm ID trap column packed with 5-μm, 120-Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 60 minutes (90 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of + 2 kV into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell using 1.6 amu isolation width and 25% normalized collision energy. MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a maxIT of 60 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.Data processing protocol

### Data Protocol
Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against a Uniprot human reference proteome FASTA file (swissprot_2017_03_human_canonical_and_isoform.fasta, 42161 entries) using MaxQuant version 1.5.4.1. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. Label free quantitation Proteins were quantified by spectral counting. Spectral counts were normalized on the sum of the counts per sample and differential protein analysis between groups was performed using the beta-binominal test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hcm, Spectral counting, Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, Label-free, Myectomy

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


