### Accession
PXD000177

### Title
Quantitative Phosphoproteomics after auxin-stimulated lateral root induction

### Description
Protein phosphorylation is instrumental to early signaling events. Studying system-wide phosphorylation in relation to processes under investigation requires a quantitative proteomics approach. In Arabidopsis, auxin application can induce pericycle cell divisions and lateral root formation. Initiation of lateral root formation requires transcriptional reprogramming following auxin-mediated degradation of transcriptional repressors. The immediate early signaling events prior this derepression are virtually uncharacterized. To identify the signal molecules responding to auxin application we used the Lateral Root Inducible System which was previously developed to trigger synchronous division of pericycle cells. To identify and quantify the early signaling events following this induction we combined 15N based metabolic labeling and phospho-enrichment and applied a mass spectrometry based approach. In total, 3068 phosphopeptides were identified from auxin treated root tissue. This experiment represents one of the largest quantitative phosphoprotein dataset on Arabidopsis to date. Key proteins responding to auxin treatment included the MDR and PIN2 auxin carriers, auxin response factor2, suppressor of auxin resistance3 and sorting nexin1 (SNX1). Mutational analysis of Serine16 of SNX1 showed that overexpression of the mutated forms of SNX1led to retarded growth and reduction of lateral root formation due to the reduced outgrowth of the primodium, showing proof of principle for our approach. Data Processing: All MS/MS spectra were centroided and merged to a single  peak list file using MaxQuant (version 1.0.13.13), which was searched using the Mascot search engine (version 2.2.0,  Matrix Science) containing a  total 67344 entries (which includes contaminants and  an equivalent number of decoy sequences) generated from the publicly available Arabidopsis database (The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR9); June 2009; file name, TAIR9_pep_20090619) with carbamidomethylcysteine as a fixed modification. Oxidized methionine and phosphorylation (serine, threonine, and tyrosine) were searched as variable modifications. Searches were done with tryptic specificity allowing two miscleavages and an initial tolerance on mass measurement of 50 ppm in MS mode and 0.6 Da for MS/MS ions and score cutoff of 20. The resulting .dat files were exported and filtered for a <1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide level using in-house developed software Rockerbox (Version1.1.0) (35). Relative quantification ratios of the identified phosphopeptides and protein were derived by MSQuant (MSQ2.0b4, 2010-02-25) (36). Proteins were quantified with at least two unique non phosphopeptides or single peptide with a score no less than 60. The phospho peptide ratio was normalized by dividing the ratio of its protein of origin. To determine whether phosphorylation ratios for normalized peptides were significantly different a p-value was generated using significance B which is part of the MaxQuant package. The changes were considered significant at a p-value of 0.05 or less. For comparison at the phosphopeptide level the most recent the full dataset with experimental sites was downloaded from PhosPhAt 4.0. Phosphopeptides with ambiguous residues denoted as (s), (t), etc., were converted to S and T, respectively. In addition we used Supplementary Table S1 from Lan et al., (2012) for phosphopeptide comparison. Modifications other than nonambiguous phosphorylation were ignored resulting in a reduction from the original 879 phosphopeptides to 556 peptides. We used pep2pro 'TAIR10 wos' dataset for comparison at the protein level.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation is instrumental to early signaling events. Studying system-wide phosphorylation in relation to processes under investigation requires a quantitative proteomics approach. In Arabidopsis, auxin application can induce pericycle cell divisions and lateral root formation. Initiation of lateral root formation requires transcriptional reprogramming following auxin-mediated degradation of transcriptional repressors. The immediate early signaling events prior to this derepression are virtually uncharacterized. To identify the signal molecules responding to auxin application, we used a lateral root-inducible system that was previously developed to trigger synchronous division of pericycle cells. To identify and quantify the early signaling events following this induction, we combined (15)N-based metabolic labeling and phosphopeptide enrichment and applied a mass spectrometry-based approach. In total, 3068 phosphopeptides were identified from auxin-treated root tissue. This root proteome dataset contains largely phosphopeptides not previously reported and represents one of the largest quantitative phosphoprotein datasets from Arabidopsis to date. Key proteins responding to auxin treatment included the multidrug resistance-like and PIN2 auxin carriers, auxin response factor2 (ARF2), suppressor of auxin resistance 3 (SAR3), and sorting nexin1 (SNX1). Mutational analysis of serine 16 of SNX1 showed that overexpression of the mutated forms of SNX1 led to retarded growth and reduction of lateral root formation due to the reduced outgrowth of the primordium, showing proof of principle for our approach.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Auxin, Arabidopsis root

### Affiliations
Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences

### Submitter
Hongtao Zhang

### Lab Head


