### Accession
PXD032397

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of human Arl4A upon fibronectin stimulation

### Description
The extracellular matrix (ECM) fibronectin (FN) not only provides the framework for cell invasion and deposition of collagens and other ECMs from wound studies, but also guide collective tumor migration during cancer progression. p21-activated kinase 1 (Pak1) and Arf-like (Arl) GTPase Arl4A have previously been found to recruit each other on the plasm membrane to promote cell migration, and their plasma membrane translocation are robustly potentiated by FN. Under FN stimulation, we found that Pak1 kinase activity is required for Arl4A protein stabilization. How FN-induced Pak1 activity enhances Arl4A protein stability is unknown. Given that the Pak1-Arl4A interaction is direct, we hypothesized that alternation of Pak1-dependent phosphorylation on Arl4A leads to its protein stabilization upon FN stimulation. We herein applied the SILAC method to identify the phosphorylation sites on Arl4A upon FN treatment through MS analysis and found that S141/143 site(s) increased phosphorylation under FN stimulation. We further validated that phosphorylation on S143 of Arl4A and corresponding site on S144 of Arl4D (closest Arl member of Arl4A) are indeed dependent on Pak1 kinase and contribute to their protein stability. By dissecting the phosphorylation property on S143/S144 of Arl4A/D, we revealed an Arl4A/D specific chaperon protein HYPK as the underlying mechanism to mask and protect the phospho-form of Arl4A/D from fast proteasome degradation. This study provides how FN signaling cascade promotes cell migration on a molecular basis by regulating Arl4A/D phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
For stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) experiments, HeLa cells were maintained in arginine- and lysine-depleted DMEM (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS (Gibco, USA, One Shot format) and 0.1 mg/mL light L-lysine and L-arginine or 0.1 mg/mL heavy [U-13C6]L-lysine and [U-13C6]L-arginine (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), respectively. Cells were passaged every 2-3 days and replaced with the corresponding light or heavy labeling medium for 2 weeks. Cells were then transfected with the Arl4A plasmid and with or without the subsequent fibronectin (FN) treatments. To identify the FN-induced differentially expressed phosphopeptides on Arl4A, one-dimensional SDS-PAGE combined with TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was applied. Briefly, cell lysates obtained from Arl4A-transfected HeLa cells with or without FN treatments in SILAC culture were separated via 12.5% SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250. The Arl4A-containing gel bands were excised from the SDS-PAGE gel and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion. The peptide mixtures were extracted for whole proteome and phosphoproteome analysis, respectively. For phosphopeptide enrichment, the peptide mixtures were loaded onto an in-house packed TiO2 trap column (GL Sciences, 10 μm, 0.3 × 5 mm), washed with 10 μL of wash buffer containing 2% formic acid/40% acetonitrile, and followed by 10 μL of wash buffer containing 2% formic acid/80% acetonitrile. The online TiO2 LC-MS/MS experiments were performed on a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite Hybrid MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated using Xcalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350–2,000 Da. Neutral loss scanning (98 for +1, 49 for +2, and 32.7 for +3 charged ions) was used to detect phosphopeptide, and a third stage MS was used to improve backbone fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
For the database search, the resulting mass spectra were searched using the Swiss-Prot human sequence database with the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK, version 2.2.04). To quantify the identified proteins and phosphopeptides, the raw spectrometry data, including the precursor ion quantifier node for SILAC, were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). A phosphosite localization algorithm, phosphoRS Site Probabilities, in Proteome Discoverer software was used to assign the phosphorylation sites on the identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The Arl4 small GTPases participate in a variety of cellular events, including cytoskeleton remodeling, vesicle trafficking, cell migration, and neuronal development. Whereas small GTPases are typically regulated by their GTPase cycle, Arl4 proteins have been found to act independent of this canonical regulatory mechanism. Here, we show that Arl4A and Arl4D (Arl4A/D) are unstable due to proteasomal degradation, but stimulation of cells by fibronectin (FN) inhibits this degradation to promote Arl4A/D stability. Proteomic analysis reveals that FN stimulation induces phosphorylation at S143 of Arl4A and at S144 of Arl4D. We identify Pak1 as the responsible kinase for these phosphorylations. Moreover, these phosphorylations promote the chaperone protein HYPK to bind Arl4A/D, which stabilizes their recruitment to the plasma membrane to promote cell migration. These findings not only advance a major mechanistic understanding of how Arl4 proteins act in cell migration but also achieve a fundamental understanding of how these small GTPases are modulated by revealing that protein stability, rather than the GTPase cycle, acts as a key regulatory mechanism.

### Keywords
Arl4a, Pak1, Arf-like gtpase, Hypk, Fibronectin

### Affiliations
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan

### Submitter
Chia-Jung Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Chia-Jung Yu
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan


