### Accession
PXD031508

### Title
Dynamics of integrin α5β1, fibronectin, and their complex

### Description
Integrin α5β1 mediates cell adhesion to the extracellular matrix (ECM) by binding fibronectin (Fn). Selectivity for Fn by α5β1 is achieved through recognition of an RGD motif in the 10th type-III Fn domain (Fn10) and the synergy site in the 9th type-III Fn domain (Fn9). However, details of the interaction dynamics are unknown. Here, we compared synergy-site and Fn-truncation mutations for their α5β1-binding affinities and stabilities. We also interrogated binding of the α5β1 ectodomain headpiece fragment to Fn using hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX MS) to probe binding sites and sites of integrin conformational change. Our results suggest the synergistic effect of Fn9 requires both specific residues and a folded domain. We found some residues considered important for synergy are required for stability. Additionally, we show decreases in fibronectin HDX are localized to a synergy peptide containing contacting residues in two β-strands, an intervening loop in Fn9, and the RGD-containing loop in Fn10, indicative of binding sites. We also identified binding sites in the α5-subunit β-propeller domain for the Fn9 synergy site and in the β1-subunit βI domain for Fn10 based on decreases in α5β1 HDX. Interestingly, the dominant effect of Fn binding was an increase in α5β1 deuterium exchange distributed over multiple sites that undergo changes in conformation or solvent accessibility and appear to be sites where energy is stored in the higher-energy, open-integrin conformation. Together, our results highlight regions important for α5β1 binding to Fn and dynamics associated with this interaction.

### Sample Protocol
Deuterium labeling: Two microliters of α5β1 headpiece (74.5 µM), Fn9–10 (68.6 µM), Fn7–10 (65.2 µM), α5β1 (59.6 µM) + cRGD (119.2 µM) mixture, α5β1·Fn9–10 complex (47.3 µM), or α5β1·Fn7–10 complex (54.4 µM) were diluted 15-fold with labeling buffer (20 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM MnCl2 and 0.2 mM CaCl2, 99.9% D2O (pD 7.4) at 21 °C to initiate deuterium exchange. At time points from 10s to 4h, an aliquot was removed and an equal volume of quench buffer [4 M GnHCl, 200mM sodium phosphate, 0.5M tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP-HCl), H2O, pH 2.5] was added to adjust the pH to 2.5. Each sample was immediately subjected to LC/MS analysis.   LC/MS: Deuterated and control samples were digested in solution with pepsin (10 mg/mL in H2O, Sigma P6887; Lot#SLBL1721V) for 5 minutes on ice, then injected into an M-class Acquity UPLC with HDX technology (Waters). The cooling chamber of the UPLC system, which housed all the chromatographic elements was held at 0.0 ± 0.1 °C for the entire time of the measurements. The injected peptides were trapped and desalted for 3 min at 100 µL/min using a BEH C18 2.1 x 5mm column (Waters, 186003975) and then separated in 14 min by an 5% – 40% acetonitrile:water gradient at 40 µL/min. The separation column was a 1.0×100.0 mm Acquity UPLC C18 BEH (Waters, 186002346) containing 1.7 µm particles. The back pressure averaged 8,800 psi at 0.1 °C. To eliminate peptide carryover, a wash solution of [1.5 M GnHCl, 0.8% formic acid and 4% acetonitrile] was injected after each run. Mass spectra were acquired using a Waters Synapt G2-Si HDMSE mass spectrometer with ion mobility mode enabled. A conventional electrospray source was used and the instrument was scanned over the range 100 to 1900 m/z. The instrument configuration was the following: capillary was 3.2 kV, trap collision energy at 6 V, sampling cone at 35 V, source temperature of 80 °C and desolvation temperature of 175 °C. The error of measuring the mass of each deuterated peptide averaged ± 0.15 Da across two technical replicates as given by the DynamX software, which in some cases is an average of more than one charge state.  All comparison experiments were performed under identical experimental conditions; deuterium levels were not corrected for back-exchange and are therefore reported as relative [Wales & Engen (2015). Mass Spectrom Rev. 25(1), 158-170].  The average amount of back-exchange was 30–35%, based on analysis of highly deuterated peptide standards.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using PLGS 3.0.1 (Waters, 720001408EN) using 3 replicates of undeuterated α5β1, 3 replicates of undeuterated Fn7–10 and 3 of undeuterated Fn9–10. Peptide masses were identified from searches using non-specific cleavage of a custom database containing the sequences of α5β1 and Fn7–10 (UniProt: P08648, P05556, P02751), no missed cleavages, N-linked glycosylation but no other PTMs, a low energy threshold of 135, an elevated energy threshold of 35, and an intensity threshold of 500. No false discovery rate (FDR) control was performed.  Raw data were imported into DynamX 3.0 (Waters, 720005145EN) and filtered as follows: minimum number of products of 3; minimum consecutive products of 2; minimum number of products per amino acid of 0.2; maximum mass error of 10 ppm. Those peptides meeting the filtering criteria were further processed automatically by DynamX followed by manual inspection of all processing. Peptides with low signal to noise ratios in either bound or free states were removed. The relative amount of deuterium in each peptide was determined by subtracting the centroid mass of the undeuterated form of each peptide from the deuteratered form, at each time point, for each condition. These deuterium uptake values were converted to percent relative deuteration for each peptide assuming total loss of label from the N-terminal backbone amide hydrogen of each peptide.  The results were plotted on respective crystal structures and sequence alignments, displayed as % deuteration at each time point of D2O labeling. No subtractive methods were used for overlapping peptides; all peptides including those that are overlapping are shown in the Supplemental Figures, and when mapped to a crystal/cryoEM structure only representative peptides were used without subtractive manipulation.

### Publication Abstract
Integrin &#x3b1;5&#x3b2;1 mediates cell adhesion to the extracellular matrix by binding fibronectin (Fn). Selectivity for Fn by &#x3b1;5&#x3b2;1 is achieved through recognition of an RGD motif in the 10th type III Fn domain (Fn10) and the synergy site in the ninth type III Fn domain (Fn9). However, details of the interaction dynamics are unknown. Here, we compared synergy-site and Fn-truncation mutations for their &#x3b1;5&#x3b2;1-binding affinities and stabilities. We also interrogated binding of the &#x3b1;5&#x3b2;1 ectodomain headpiece fragment to Fn using hydrogen-deuterium exchange (HDX) mass spectrometry to probe binding sites and sites of integrin conformational change. Our results suggest the synergistic effect of Fn9 requires both specific residues and a folded domain. We found some residues considered important for synergy are required for stability. Additionally, we show decreases in fibronectin HDX are localized to a synergy peptide containing contacting residues in two &#x3b2;-strands, an intervening loop in Fn9, and the RGD-containing loop in Fn10, indicative of binding sites. We also identified binding sites in the &#x3b1;5-subunit &#x3b2;-propeller domain for the Fn9 synergy site and in the &#x3b2;1-subunit &#x3b2;I domain for Fn10 based on decreases in &#x3b1;5&#x3b2;1 HDX. Interestingly, the dominant effect of Fn binding was an increase in &#x3b1;5&#x3b2;1 deuterium exchange distributed over multiple sites that undergo changes in conformation or solvent accessibility and appear to be sites where energy is stored in the higher-energy, open-integrin conformation. Together, our results highlight regions important for &#x3b1;5&#x3b2;1 binding to Fn and dynamics associated with this interaction.

### Keywords
Integrin, Affinity, Hydrogen deuterium exchange, Conformational change, Thermal stability, Fibronectin

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University
Northeastern University

### Submitter
John R. Engen

### Lab Head
Dr John R. Engen
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University


