### Accession
PXD026990

### Title
Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) of components of photosystem I monomers and dimers.

### Description
Photosystem I (PSI) enables photo-electron transfer and regulates photosynthesis in the bioenergetic membranes of cyanobacteria and chloroplasts. Being a multi-subunit complex, its macromolecular organization affects the dynamics of photosynthetic membranes. Here we reveal a chloroplast PSI from the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii that is organized as a homodimer.

### Sample Protocol
Starting material were detergent-solubilized (n-Dodecyl α-D-maltoside) photosystem I complexes from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (wiltype and lhca9 insertional mutant), purified by affinity chromatography (His-tagged PSAB) and sucrose density gradient (SDG) centrifugation. Removal of sucrose and protein digestion was carried out following the FASP protocol (Wiśniewski et al, 2009). Two µg of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) per SDG fraction were used for digestion. Iodoacetamide and dithiothreitol used in the original FASP protocol were replaced by chloroacetamide and tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, respectively. After over-night digestion at 37°C, samples were acidified by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final volume of 0.1%.  Five percent of the peptide solution were desalted using self-made Stage tips according to established protocols (Rappsilber et al, 2007). Desalted peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20°C. The LC-MS/MS system consisted of an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoLC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled via a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectromter (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were reconstituted in 5 µl of 2% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.05% (v/v) TFA in ultrapure water (eluent A1), loaded on a trap column (C18 PepMap 100, 300 µM x 5 mm, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and desalted for 3 min at a flow rate of 15 µl/min using eluent A1. Subsequently, the trap column was switched in-line with an Acclaim PepMap100 reversed phase column (75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm particle sizes, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific) for peptide separation. The mobile phases were composed of 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in ultrapure water (eluent A2) and 80 % (v/v) acetonitrile/0.08 % (v/v) formic acid in ultrapure water (B). Flow rate was 250 nl/min. The following gradient was applied: 5-35% B over 105 min, 35-99% B over 5 min, 99% B for 20 min (lhca9 mutant: 5-40% B over 40 min, 40-99% B over 5 min, 99% B for 15 min). MS full scans (scan range m/z: 350–1400, resolution 70,000 at m/z 200, AGC target value 3e6, maximum injection time 50 ms) were acquired in data-dependent mode, dynamically selecting the 12 most abundant precursor ions for fragmentation by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD, 27 % normalized collision energy, resolution 17,500 at m/z 200, precursor isolation window 1.5 m/z). Dynamic exclusion was set to ‘auto’ (chromatographic peak width: 15 s). AGC target value and intensity threshold for MS/MS were 5e4 and 1e4, respectively, at 80 ms maximum ion fill time. Singly charged ions, ions with charge state 5 or above and ions with unassigned charge states were rejected. Internal lock mass calibration was enabled on m/z 445.12003.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data was processed in MaxQuant 1.6.14 for protein identification and label-free quantification (Cox & Mann, 2008). Default settings were used, except for “second peptide search” which was disabled. Spectra were searched against a concatenated database containing protein sequences based on the Chlamydomonas v5.6 gene models (Joint Genome Institute, www.phytozome.org), as well as sequences of chloroplast- and mitochondrial-encoded proteins (GenBank BK000554.2 and NC_001638.1). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini were considered as variable modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied to peptide and protein identifications.  LFQ (iBAQ) data  was imported into Perseus (version 1.6.15.0) (Tyanova et al, 2016), log2-transformed, and contaminants, proteins only identified by site and reverse hits were removed.

### Publication Abstract
Photosystem I (PSI) enables photo-electron transfer and regulates photosynthesis in the bioenergetic membranes of cyanobacteria and chloroplasts. Being a multi-subunit complex, its macromolecular organization affects the dynamics of photosynthetic membranes. Here we reveal a chloroplast PSI from the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii that is organized as a homodimer, comprising 40 protein subunits with 118 transmembrane helices that provide scaffold for 568 pigments. Cryogenic electron microscopy identified that the absence of PsaH and Lhca2 gives rise to a head-to-head relative orientation of the PSI-light-harvesting complex I monomers in a way that is essentially different from the oligomer formation in cyanobacteria. The light-harvesting protein Lhca9 is the key element for mediating this dimerization. The interface between the monomers is lacking PsaH and thus partially overlaps with the surface area that would bind one of the light-harvesting complex II complexes in state transitions. We also define the most accurate available PSI-light-harvesting complex I model at 2.3&#x2009;&#xc5; resolution, including a flexibly bound electron donor plastocyanin, and assign correct identities and orientations to all the pigments, as well as 621 water molecules that affect energy transfer pathways.

### Keywords
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Psi, Photosystem i, Ibaq

### Affiliations
IBBP Muenster
WWU Muenster Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology (IBBP)

### Submitter
Martin Scholz

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hippler
WWU Muenster Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology (IBBP)


