### Accession
PXD007630

### Title
Lysine acetylation of chloroplast proteins 2

### Description
In photosynthesis, light is absorbed by the thylakoid embedded light harvesting pigment protein complexes (LHCs) that surround the photosynthetic reaction centers, photosystem II (PSII) and photosystem I (PSI). The distribution of light energy between the photosystems is balanced through state transitions1,2, which refer to the phosphorylation-dependent association of the loosely bound (L) LHCII antenna trimer either to PSII or PSI 3,4. Apart from phosphorylation, other mechanisms regulating state transitions have not been reported this far. In this study we demonstrate that lysine (Lys) acetylation of chloroplast proteins is a prerequisite for state transitions in Arabidopsis thaliana. Knock-out mutants lacking a chloroplast acetyltransferase NSI (At1g32070; AtNSI, SNAT) show selective decreases in the Lys acetylation status of several photosynthetic proteins including PSI, PSII and LHCII subunits. Fluorescence measurements revealed that changes in the wavelength of illumination do not cause state transitions in the nsi mutants even though their LHCII phosphorylation status is not defected. Furthermore, biochemical analyses of thylakoid proteins and protein complexes showed that nsi plants are not able to accumulate the phosphorylation dependent PSI-LHCII megacomplex. Our results manifest that Lys acetylation by NSI has an integral role in the regulation of state transitions in Arabidopsis.

### Sample Protocol
Fresh Arabidopsis leaves were ground 3 × 2 s in cold buffer (300 mM sucrose, 50 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.6, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM Na-EDTA, 1.25% BSA, 22 mM ascorbate, 10 mM NaF). Homogenate was filtered through Miracloth (Millipore) and the filtrate was centrifuged for 4 min, 4000 g, +4°C to pellet chloroplasts and thylakoids. Chloroplasts were broken by resuspending the pellet to hypotonic lysis buffer (5 mM sucrose, 10 mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.6, 5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM NaF, Pierce™ protease inhibitor (Thermo Scientific)). The lysate was centrifuged at 18 000 g for 5 min, +4°C, and the pellet (thylakoids) was resuspended in storage buffer (100 mM sucrose, 10 mM Hepes-KoH pH 7.6, 10 mM MgCl2, 10 mM NaF). Different biological replicates were prepared from plants grown at different times on separate trays. The chlorophyll concentration of thylakoids was determined as described (Porra et al., 1989). Large-pore blue native gels and samples were prepared as previously described (Järvi et al., 2011). Protein spots were excised from gels and trypsin digested as described before (Morgan et al., 2008). Dried peptides were dissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA for analysis. Samples were analyzed using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on 17 cm frit-less silica emitters (New Objective, 0.75 µm inner diameter), packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). The column was kept at 50°C in a column oven throughout the run. Following parameters were used for whole proteome analysis, and parameters for acetylome analysis are stated in brackets; if not stated separately parameters are identical. Peptides were eluted for 115 (68) min using a segmented linear gradient of 0% to 98% solvent B (solvent A 0% ACN, 0.5% FA; solvent B 80% ACN, 0.5% FA) at a flow-rate of 300 (250) nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with a Top15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300–1759 m/z at a resolution of 60 000 (120 000) FWHM, maximum IT of 55 ms and a target value of 3 × 106 ions. Precursors were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 (1.2) m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 25. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 105 (5 × 104) ions at a resolution of 15 000 FWHM, maximum IT of 55 (150) ms and a fixed first mass of m/z 100. Peptides with a charge of +1, greater than 6, or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2, and dynamic exclusion for 30 s prevented repeated selection of precursors.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 (http://www.maxquant.org/) (Cox and Mann, 2008; Tyanova et al., 2016a). MS/MS spectra were searched with the Andromeda search engine against the Araport 11 database. Sequences of 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences were automatically added during the search. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Acetylation of lysines and phosphorylation (STY) were set as variable modification. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%, a score ≥ 35 and a delta score of ≥ 6 for modified peptides were required. Match between runs and iBAQ were enabled. Downstream data analysis was performed using Perseus version 1.6.1.3 (Tyanova et al., 2016b). Reverse hits and contaminants were removed, and peptide and iBAQ intensities were log2 transformed. Technical replicates were averaged and sites as well as protein groups identified in only one replicate of each genotype were removed.

### Publication Abstract
The amount of light energy received by the photosynthetic reaction centers photosystem II (PSII) and photosystem I (PSI) is balanced through state transitions. Reversible phosphorylation of a light-harvesting antenna trimer (L-LHCII) orchestrates the association between L-LHCII and the photosystems, thus adjusting the amount of excitation energy received by the reaction centers. In this study, we identified the enzyme NUCLEAR SHUTTLE INTERACTING (NSI; AT1G32070) as an active lysine acetyltransferase in the chloroplasts of <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> Intriguingly, <i>nsi</i> knockout mutant plants were defective in state transitions, even though they had a similar LHCII phosphorylation pattern as the wild type. Accordingly, <i>nsi</i> plants were not able to accumulate the PSI-LHCII state transition complex, even though the LHCII docking site of PSI and the overall amounts of photosynthetic protein complexes remained unchanged. Instead, the <i>nsi</i> mutants showed a decreased Lys acetylation status of specific photosynthetic proteins including PSI, PSII, and LHCII subunits. Our work demonstrates that the chloroplast acetyltransferase NSI is needed for the dynamic reorganization of thylakoid protein complexes during photosynthetic state transitions.

### Keywords
Plant, Lc-msms, Arabidopsis

### Affiliations
WWU Münster
Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster  Institut für Biologie und Biotechnologie der Pflanzen  Pflanzenphysiologie - AG Finkemeier  Schlossplatz 7  48149 Münster

### Submitter
Ines Lassowskat

### Lab Head
Dr Iris Finkemeier
Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster  Institut für Biologie und Biotechnologie der Pflanzen  Pflanzenphysiologie - AG Finkemeier  Schlossplatz 7  48149 Münster


