### Accession
PXD021683

### Title
Sex Determination of Infant Remains

### Description
This study tests the application of an innovative new method of sex determination utilizing enamel peptides on a sample of incompletely developed deciduous teeth, including those of perinates.

### Sample Protocol
The tooth surface was abraded to remove any obvious surface contaminants using a dental burr. The enamel was then washed with 3% H2O2 for 30 seconds before being rinsed with ultrapure water (Elga Purelab Ultra, 18.2 MΩ-cm). Approximately 60 microliters (μL) of 5% (vol/vol) HCl was placed in the cap of a 0.2- milliliters (mL) Eppendorf tube, whereby an initial etch was performed by lowering the tooth onto the HCl and maintaining contact for 2 minutes; this first etch was discarded. The process was repeated for a second time and retained as the etch solution.  A C18 resin loaded ZipTip (ZTC18S096; EMD Millipore) was conditioned three times with 100% acetonitrile using a 10 μL pipette, followed by three times with 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid, before being discarded. The proteins were bound to the ZipTip by drawing the etch solution through the ZipTip 10 times discarding the last draw. The ZipTip was then washed six times with 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid; each wash was discarded. The resin-bound peptides were eluted by drawing a 4-μL 60% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid elution buffer through the ZipTip 10 times and the eluted peptides subsequently lyophilized. Samples were then dissolved in 12 μL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water, centrifuged for 5 minutes on a desktop centrifuge, and 10 μL transferred to glass autosampler vials. A sample of 5 μL was injected for analysis by reversed-phase nanoLC-MS (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano; Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a hybrid quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Orbitrap; Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanospray ion source (Nanospray Flex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were first loaded onto a C18 trapping cartridge (Pepmap100 C18; Thermo Fisher Scientific; 0.3 × 5 millimeter [mm] i.d.; 5 micrometer [μm] particle size) for 4 min at a flow rate of 20 μL/min using mobile phase A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in hypergrade water, Merck KGaA). Separation was achieved at a flow rate of 200 nL/min on an analytical column (PepMap100 C18; 15 cm × 75 μm; 2 μm particle size) using a gradient of mobile phase B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile, LiChrosolv, Merck KGaA) from 1% to 28% B (curve 4) over 42 min, 28% to 99% B (curve 6) over 8 min, 99% B for 5 min and back to 1% B over 1 min to equilibrate for 9 min, with a total chromatographic run time of 65 min. A stainless-steel emitter (40 mm, 1/32” OD) was used post column. Blank injections were used between runs to eliminate carryover. MS data was performed in the positive mode with a spray voltage 1.6 kV and a capillary temperature of 250°C. MS data was acquired in a data dependent manner; with full scan MS spectra (300-1,650 m/z, (R = 140,000 at m/z 200) followed by the fragmentation of the top 10 most abundant precursor ions. A lock mass of 445.1200 m/z, corresponding to polysiloxane ([M+H]+, (C2H6SiO)6), was used.  Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s, with charge exclusion set for unassigned and singly charged species. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 1 x 106 with a maximum injection time of 20 ms for full scan. Fragmentation of precursor ions was performed by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized stepped collision energy of 20, 25 and 30, with a default charge state of 2. MS/MS scans (R = 17,500 at m/z 200) were performed with an AGC target value of 1 x 105 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms using an isolation window of 2.2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The data was also searched against the Human FASTA file (Swiss-Prot (10/09/2020), canonical and isoforms, 214,628 valid protein count) using PEAKS Studio 10.5 build 20200219. Digest mode was set to unspecific, parent mass error tolerance was 10.0 ppm, fragment mass error tolerance was 0.05 Da with the variable modifications; deamidation of N and Q and oxidation of M, fragmentation mode was high energy CID (y and b ions), MS and MS/MS scan modes were FT-ICR/Orbitrap. Default settings were used for all other parameters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tooth enamel, Archaeology, Sex determination, Perinate, Amelogenin

### Affiliations
University of Brighton School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences
University of Brighton

### Submitter
Nicolas Stewart

### Lab Head
Dr Nicolas A. Stewart
University of Brighton School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences


