### Accession
PXD018967

### Title
CreA phosphorylation sites are important for the regulation of carbon catabolite repression in filamentous fungi

### Description
Saprobic microorganisms, such as filamentous fungi of the genus Aspergillus, are of particular interest for biotechnological applications due to their natural capacity to secrete plant cell wall-degrading enzymes that are known as carbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZy). The presence of easily metabolizable sugars such as glucose, whose concentrations increase during plant biomass hydrolysis, results in the repression of CAZy-encoding genes, in a process known as carbon catabolite repression (CCR), which is undesired for the purpose of large-scale enzyme production. To date, the C2H2 transcription factor CreA has been described as the major CC-repressor in Aspergillus spp. Although CreA-mediated CCR has been extensively studied, less is known about the regulation of CreA itself and the role of post-translational modifications in this process. In this work, phosphorylation sites were identified by mass spectrometry on A. nidulans CreA and subsequently four sites, S262, S268, T308 and S319, were chosen to be mutated to non-phosphorylatable residues before their effects on CCR in both CC-repressing and de-repressing conditions were studied. Sites S262, S268 and T308 are important for CreA protein accumulation and cellular localization and repression of enzyme activities. In contrast, site S319 is key for CreA degradation and induction of enzyme activities. All sites were shown to be important for glycogen and trehalose metabolism. This study highlights the importance of CreA phosphorylation sites for the regulation of CCR. Furthermore, these sites are interesting targets for biotechnological strain engineering without the need to delete essential genes which can result in undesired side effects.

### Sample Protocol
GFP-tagged CreA strains were constructed in the AGB551 wildtype background. Protein extracts were obtained by extraction from ground mycelia with B250 buffer (250 mM NaCl, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 10% glycerol, 1 mM EDTA and 0.1 % NP‑40) supplemented with 1.5 ml/L 1 M DTT, 1 pill/10mL Complete-mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail EDTA-free (Roche), 3 ml/L 0.5 M Benzamidine, 1 pill/10mL phosphoSTOP phosphatase inhibitors and 10 ml/L 100 mM PMSF. Total protein lysates were centrifuged at 13.000 rpm at 4˚C for 10 min, before the supernatant was collected. GFP-trap beads (Chromotek) were equilibrated with B250 lysis buffer (20 uL of beads into 500 uL lysis buffer B250) for 10 min before they were collected by centrifugation according to the manufacturer’s instructions and incubated with 6 mg of total protein lysate at 4˚C for 3 h. After incubation with protein lysates, GFP-trap beads were collected and the supernatant was removed. The GFP-trap beads were washed twice with 1 mL B250 lysis buffer without DTT and further washed with the addition of DTT. GFP-trap beads were collected and the supernatant was removed. Dried GFP-trap eluates were solubilized in 50 μl of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) in 50:50 (v/v) trifluoroethanol/water. Reduction and alkylation was performed in one step (thermomixer at 70°C, 500 rpm, 30 min) by addition of 500 nmol tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphin and 625 nmol 2-chloroacetamide. The protein solution was evaporated by a vacuum concentrator and resolubilized with 100 mM TEAB to gain a final volume of 50 µl. Tryptic cleavages were performed using 1 µg rLys C (Promega) incubated for 2 h at 37°C and subsequent addition of 2 µg Trypsin Gold (Promega) incubated for further 16 h at 37°C. Tryptic digested samples (WT0/5/10/30, CreA0/5/10/30, each 3 biological replicates) were wildtype and CreA-GFP strains were grown in minimal medium (MM) supplemented with 1% w/v xylose for 24 h before 2% w/v glucose was added for 5, 10 and 30 min. GluC cleavages were performed using 2 µg GluC (Promega) incubated for 18°C at 37°C. Samples digested with GluC were each 6 biological replicates of Fruct (growth in MM + fructose for 36 h), EtOH (growth in MM + fructose for 36 h and then transferred to MM + ethanol for 4 h), Et5/30 (growth in MM + fructose for 36 h and then transferred to MM + ethanol for 4 h and added 2% glucose for 5 min or 30 min), X (growth in MM + fructose for 36 h and then transferred to MM + xylan for 4 h), XG5/30 (growth in MM + fructose for 36 h and then transferred to MM + xylan for 4 h and added 2% glucose for 5 or 30 min). Peptides were dried and resolubilized in 25 µl 0.05% TFA and 2% ACN using a water bath sonicator (15 min). Finally, the samples were filtrates through a 0.2 µm  spin filters (Merck Millipore Ultrafree-MC) at 18,000g for 15 min and the filtrate was transferred into HPLC vials. Proteome analysis including phosphosite identification has been performed by nanoflow liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry as recently published (Misslinger et al. 2019 PLoS Genetics 15(9):e1008379). Briefly, peptide analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 nano LC using Acclaim Pep Map columns (Trapping: 2 cm x 75 μm, 3 μm; Separation: 50 cm x 75 μm, 2μm) coupled to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (all Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Eluent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water) was mixed with eluent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 90/10 acetonitrile/water): 0 min at 4% B, 6 min at 6% B, 14 min at 10% B, 20 min at 14% B, 35 min at 20% B, 42 min at 26% B, 46 min at 32% B, 52 min at 42% B, 55 min at 50% B, 58min at 65% B, 60–64.9 min at 96% B, 65–90 min at 4% B. Precursor ions were monitored at m/z 300–1500 (z=2-5) at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM using a maximum injection time (ITmax) of 120 ms and an AGC target of 1e6. MS2 ions generated by HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy were scanned at R=17,500 FWHM (ITmax = 120 ms, AGC = 2e5).

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the FungiDB protein database of Aspergillus nidulans FGSC A4 (https://fungidb.org/common/downloads/release-44/AnidulansFGSCA4/fasta/data/FungiDB-44_AnidulansFGSCA4_AnnotatedProteins.fasta) and the protein sequence of CreA-GFP using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.2 (Thermo) and the algorithms of Mascot 2.4.1, Sequest HT (version of PD2.2), and MS Amanda 2.0. Two missed cleavages were allowed for both tryptic and GluC digestion. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Modifications were defined as dynamic oxidation of Met, acetylation of the protein N-terminus, phosphorylation of Ser, Thr, and Tyr, and either ubiquitination (GG, tryptic cleavage) or SUMOylation of Lys (QIGG/QIGGG, GluC cleavage) as well as static Cys carbamidomethylation. A strict false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% were required for positive protein hits. The Percolator node of PD2.2 and a reverse decoy database was used for q-value validation of spectral matches. Only rank 1 proteins and peptides of the top scored proteins were counted. The Minora algorithm of PD2.2 was applied for relative label-free quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Dermonecrotic toxin (DNT) is one of the representative toxins produced by <i>Bordetella pertussis</i>, but its role in pertussis, <i>B. pertussis</i> infection, remains unknown. In this study, we identified the T-type voltage-gated Ca<sup>2+</sup> channel Ca<sub>V</sub>3.1 as the DNT receptor by CRISPR-Cas9-based genome-wide screening. As Ca<sub>V</sub>3.1 is highly expressed in the nervous system, the neurotoxicity of DNT was examined. DNT affected cultured neural cells and caused flaccid paralysis in mice after intracerebral injection. No neurological symptoms were observed by intracerebral injection with the other major virulence factors of the organisms, pertussis toxin and adenylate cyclase toxin. These results indicate that DNT has aspects of the neurotropic virulence factor of <i>B. pertussis</i> The possibility of the involvement of DNT in encephalopathy, which is a complication of pertussis, is also discussed.<b>IMPORTANCE</b><i>Bordetella pertussis</i>, which causes pertussis, a contagious respiratory disease, produces three major protein toxins, pertussis toxin, adenylate cyclase toxin, and dermonecrotic toxin (DNT), for which molecular actions have been elucidated. The former two toxins are known to be involved in the emergence of some clinical symptoms and/or contribute to the establishment of bacterial infection. In contrast, the role of DNT in pertussis remains unclear. Our study shows that DNT affects neural cells through specific binding to the T-type voltage-gated Ca<sup>2+</sup> channel that is highly expressed in the central nervous system and leads to neurological disorders in mice after intracerebral injection. These data raise the possibility of DNT as an etiological agent for pertussis encephalopathy, a severe complication of <i>B. pertussis</i> infection.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Phosphoproteomics, Aspergillus nidulans, Carbon catabolite repression, Crea

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Departement of Molecular and Applied Microbiology Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Olaf Kniemeyer
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Departement of Molecular and Applied Microbiology Germany


