### Accession
PXD008892

### Title
Biochemical Pathways Triggered by Antipsychotics in Human Oligodendrocytes: Potential of Discovering New Treatment Targets

### Description
Schizophrenia is a psychiatric disorder that affects more than 21 million people worldwide. It is an incurable disorder and the primary means of managing symptoms is through administration of pharmacological treatments, which consist heavily of antipsychotics. First-generation antipsychotics have the properties of D2 receptor antagonists. Second-generation antipsychotic are antagonists of both D2 and 5HT2 receptors. Recently, there has been increasing interest in the effects of antipsychotics beyond their neuronal targets and oligodendrocytes are one of the main candidates. Thus, our aim was to evaluate the molecular effects of typical and atypical drugs across the proteome of the human oligodendrocyte cell line, MO3.13. For this, we performed a mass spectrometry-based, bottom-up shotgun proteomic analysis to identify differences triggered by typical (chlorpromazine and haloperidol) and atypical (quetiapine and risperidone) antipsychotics. Proteins which showed changes in their expression levels were analyzed in silico using Ingenuity® Pathway Analysis, which implicated dysregulation of canonical pathways for each treatment. Our results shed light on the biochemical pathways involved in the mechanisms of action of these drugs, which may guide the identification of novel biomarkers and the development of new and improved treatments.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture, treatments and proteome extraction   Human hybrid MO3.13 cells are classified as an immature oligodendrocyte cell line (Buntinx et al., 2003; Cassoli et al., 2017a). Our group using a 2D liquid chromatographic strategy combined with UDMSE acquisitions have established a complete dataset of proteins expressed by the MO3.13 cells. More than 10,000 proteins expressed in this cell line have been identified, and it is possible to find the receptors mentioned in this study, such as the dopamine D2 receptor, target of antipsychotics  (Cassoli et al., 2017a).   MO3.13 cells were grown in DMEM medium supplemented with 0.5% penicillin/streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (Life Technologies, Darmstadt, Germany) at 37◦C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 as described previously (Brandão-Teles et al., 2017). The cells were treated with each antipsychotic once and collected after 8h as follows with respect to dosage and drug: Group 1 – 10 µM chlorpromazine; Group 2 – 50 µM haloperidol; Group 3 – 50 µM quetiapine; Group 4 – 50 µM risperidone; Group 5 – chlorpromazine and haloperidol vehicle solution (0.01 M HCl); Group 6 - quetiapine and risperidone vehicle solution (DMSO). Each treatment was done in biological triplicate. The antipsychotic doses were chosen as described previously (Martins-de-Souza et al., 2011). MO3.13 cells were centrifuged at 1,200g for 5 min and the pellets homogenized in a lysis buffer consisting of 6M urea, 2M thiourea, 10mM DTT, with protease and phosphatase inhibitors, 0.1 mM sodium pervanadate (lysis buffer). Protein lysates were centrifuged at 14,000g for 45 min at 4ºC in order to remove pelleted lipids and other vestiges. The supernatants were collected, desalted and concentrated as described in Brandão-Teles et al, 2017. Protein concentrations were determined by Qubit® Protein Assay Kit.  NanoLC-ESI MS/MSc Proteomic analyses were performed in a bidimensional microUPLC tandem nanoESI-UDMSE platform by multiplexed data-independent acquisitions experiments, using a 2D-RP/RP Acquity UPLC M-Class System (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) coupled to a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). The samples were fractionated using a one-dimension reversed-phase approach. Peptide samples (0.5µg) were loaded into a M-Class HSS T3 column (100 Å, 1.8 μm, 75 μm × 150 mm, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). The fractionation was achieved using an acetonitrile gradient from 7% to 40% (v/v) over 95 min at a flow rate of 0.4 µL/min directly into Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer. For every measurement, MS and MS/MS data were acquired in positive resolution mode with a resolving power around 25,000 FWHM. Ion mobility separation of precursor ions method (Geromanos et al., 2012) was used over a range of 50-2000 m/z and a cross-section resolving power of at least 40 Ω /ΔΩ. Precursor ion information was collected in low-energy MS mode by applying a constant collision energy of 4 eV in the range of 50-2000 m/z. Fragment ion information was obtained in the elevated energy scan using drift-time specific collision energies as detailed previously (Cassoli et al., 2017b). The spectral acquisition time in each mode was 0.6 s with a 0.05 s-interscan delay, resulting in an overall cycle time of 1.3s for the acquisition of one cycle of low and high energy data. The lock mass channel was sampled every 30s. The mass spectrometer was calibrated using a human [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B (785.8426 m/z) solution delivered through the reference sprayer of the NanoLock Spray source. All proteomics analysis were run in technical duplicate.

### Data Protocol
Data processing and database searches  Proteins were identified and quantified using dedicated algorithms and searching against the Uniprot Human Proteomic Database of Homo sapiens, version 2018/02 ( Li et al., 2009; Cassoli and Martins-de-Souza, 2017). The databases used were reversed “on the fly” during the database queries by the software to assess the false-positive identification rate.  For correct spectral processing and database searching conditions, we used the Progenesis QI for Proteomics software package with Apex3D, Peptide 3D, and Ion Accounting informatics (Waters Corporation). This software starts with loading of the LC-MS data, followed by alignment and peak detection, which creates a list of interesting peptide ions that are explored within Peptide Ion Stats by multivariate statistical methods. The processing parameters used were 150 counts for the low-energy threshold, 50.0 counts for the elevated energy threshold, and 750 counts for the intensity threshold. Automatic alignment of the runs (all runs in the experiment was assessed for suitability) was used for the processing. In peak picking, it was used 5 as maximum ion charge and the sensitivity value was selected as 4. Moreover, the following parameters were considered in identification of peptides/proteins: 1) digestion by trypsin with at most one missed cleavage; 2) variable modification by oxidation (M) and fixed modification by carbamidomethyl (C); and 3) a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%. Two or more ion fragments per peptide, five or more fragments per protein and one or more peptides per protein were required for ion matching. Data were analyzed by on-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with treatment factor p-value <0.05 compared to vehicle group. Identifications that did not satisfy these criteria were rejected. The experiment design was defined (Group 1 to 6) and label free protein quantitation was done using Hi-N (N=3) method.   Analysis in silico  For interpreting the functional significance of differentially expressed proteins, their UniProt accession IDs were uploaded into the Ingenuity Pathways Knowledgebase (IPKB) through the algorithm Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, Ingenuity Systems, Qiagen, Redwood, CA, USA; www.ingenuity.com) to determine potential interactions between these proteins, between these proteins and other proteins, to canonical pathways and to disease lists contained in the IPKB. The parameters used were the software default and p-value less than 0.05. Additional information can be found on Ingenuity Systems’ website (http://www.ingenuity.com)

### Publication Abstract
Schizophrenia is a psychiatric disorder that affects more than 21 million people worldwide. It is an incurable disorder and the primary means of managing symptoms is through administration of pharmacological treatments, which consist heavily of antipsychotics. First-generation antipsychotics have the properties of D<sub>2</sub> receptor antagonists. Second-generation antipsychotics are antagonists of both D<sub>2</sub> and 5HT<sub>2</sub> receptors. Recently, there has been increasing interest in the effects of antipsychotics beyond their neuronal targets and oligodendrocytes are one of the main candidates. Thus, our aim was to evaluate the molecular effects of typical and atypical drugs across the proteome of the human oligodendrocyte cell line, MO3.13. For this, we performed a mass spectrometry-based, bottom-up shotgun proteomic analysis to identify differences triggered by typical (chlorpromazine and haloperidol) and atypical (quetiapine and risperidone) antipsychotics. Proteins which showed changes in their expression levels were analyzed <i>in silico</i> using Ingenuity<sup>&#xae;</sup> Pathway Analysis, which implicated dysregulation of canonical pathways for each treatment. Our results shed light on the biochemical pathways involved in the mechanisms of action of these drugs, which may guide the identification of novel biomarkers and the development of new and improved treatments.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Schizophrenia, Biomarkers, Haloperidol, Mechanism of action, Risperidone, Chlorpromazine, Quetiapine

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Neuroproteomics, Institute of Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Tissue Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, SP, Brazil. UNICAMP’s Neurobiology Center, Campinas, SP, Brazil Instituto Nacional de Biomarcadores em Neuropsiquiatria (INBION) Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico, São Paulo, Brazil
University of Campinas

### Submitter
Caroline Teles

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Martins-de-Souza
Laboratory of Neuroproteomics, Institute of Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Tissue Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, SP, Brazil. UNICAMP’s Neurobiology Center, Campinas, SP, Brazil Instituto Nacional de Biomarcadores em Neuropsiquiatria (INBION) Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico, São Paulo, Brazil


