### Accession
PXD034840

### Title
Proteomics analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from multiple sclerosis patients

### Description
Innovative pro-regenerative treatment strategies for progressive multiple sclerosis (PMS), combining neuroprotection and immunomodulation, represents an unmet need. Neural precursor cells (NPCs) transplanted in animal models of multiple sclerosis promote neuroprotection and remyelination by releasing molecules sustaining trophic support and neural plasticity. We present the results of STEMS, a single dose escalation phase I clinical trial, evaluating the feasibility, safety, and tolerability of intrathecally transplanted human fetal NPCs (hfNPCs) in 12 PMS patients.

### Sample Protocol
250 µl of CSF were depleted using a Seppro IgY 14 spin column (SIGMA), thus allowing the removal of the 14 highly abundant proteins (Albumin, α1-Antitrypsin, IgG, IgA, IgM, Transferrin, Haptoglobin, β2-Macroglobulin, Fibrinogen, Complement C3, α 1-Acid Glycoprotein (Orosomucoid), HDL (Apolipoproteins A-I and A-II), LDL (mainly Apolipoprotein B), according to manufacturer’s instructions. The recovered supernatant was analyzed to determine total protein concentration using BCA protein assay kit from Pierce and BSA as standard. Twenty µg of total proteins from each sample were in-solution digested. Aliquots of the samples containing tryptic peptides were desalted using StageTip C18 (Thermo Scientific) and analysed by nano-scale liquid chromatographic tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems) and a nUPLC Easy nLC 1000 (Proxeon Biosystems). Peptide separations occurred on a home-made (75 µm i.d., 15 cm long) reverse phase silica capillary column, packed with 1.9-µm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). A gradient of eluents A (distilled water with 0.1% v/v formic acid) and B (acetonitrile with 0.1% v/v formic acid) was used to achieve separation (300 nL/min flow rate), from 2% B to 40% B in 88 minutes. Full scan spectra were acquired with the lock-mass option, resolution set to 70,000 and mass range from m/z 300 to 2000.. The ten most intense doubly and triply charged ions were selected and fragmented.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analysed using Mascot (version 2.6, Matrix Science) search engine to search the human_proteome 20180912 (95,106 sequences; 37,690,780 residues). Searches were performed with the following parameters: trypsin as proteolytic enzyme; 2 missed cleavages allowed; carbamidomethylation on cysteine as fixed modification; protein N-terminus-acetylation, methionine oxidation as variable modifications; mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and to 0.02 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. To quantify proteins, the raw data were loaded into the MaxQuant software version 1.6.1.0. Label-free protein quantification was based on the intensities of precursors. The experiments were performed in technical triplicates.

### Publication Abstract
Innovative pro-regenerative treatment strategies for progressive multiple sclerosis (PMS), combining neuroprotection and immunomodulation, represent an unmet need. Neural precursor cells (NPCs) transplanted in animal models of multiple sclerosis have shown preclinical efficacy by promoting neuroprotection and remyelination by releasing molecules sustaining trophic support and neural plasticity. Here we present the results of STEMS, a prospective, therapeutic exploratory, non-randomized, open-label, single-dose-finding phase 1 clinical trial ( NCT03269071 , EudraCT 2016-002020-86), performed at San Raffaele Hospital in Milan, Italy, evaluating the feasibility, safety and tolerability of intrathecally transplanted human fetal NPCs (hfNPCs) in 12 patients with PMS (with evidence of disease progression, Expanded Disability Status Scale &#x2265;6.5, age 18-55&#x2009;years, disease duration 2-20&#x2009;years, without any alternative approved therapy). The safety primary outcome was reached, with no severe adverse reactions related to hfNPCs at 2-year follow-up, clearly demonstrating that hfNPC therapy in PMS is feasible, safe and tolerable. Exploratory secondary analyses showed a lower rate of brain atrophy in patients receiving the highest dosage of hfNPCs and increased cerebrospinal fluid levels of anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective molecules. Although preliminary, these results support the rationale and value of future clinical studies with the highest dose of hfNPCs in a larger cohort of patients.

### Keywords
Progressive multiple sclerosis, Quantitative proteomics, Neural stem cells, Transplantation, Cerebrospinal fluid

### Affiliations
Neuroimmunology Unit Institute of Experimental Neurology San Raffaele Scientific Institute Via Olgettina 60 Milan 20132, Italy
Ospedale San Raffaele

### Submitter
Annapaola Andolfo

### Lab Head
Dr Gianvito Martino
Neuroimmunology Unit Institute of Experimental Neurology San Raffaele Scientific Institute Via Olgettina 60 Milan 20132, Italy


