### Accession
PXD015325

### Title
Thiol-Based Direct Threat Sensing by the Stress-Activated Protein Kinase Hog1

### Description
The stress-activated protein kinase Hog1 is best known for its role in osmotic stress but is also activated by a variety of mechanistically distinct environmental stressors including heat shock, ER stress, and arsenic. In the osmotic stress response, the signal is sensed upstream and relayed to Hog1 via a kinase cascade. Here we identify a novel mode of Hog1 function whereby Hog1 senses arsenic though direct physical interaction requiring three conserved cysteine residues located adjacent to the catalytic loop. These residues are essential for Hog1's role in protecting against arsenic, but completely dispensable for osmotic stress, and mediate Hog1's cellular localization upon arsenic exposure. Hog1 in turn regulates arsenic detoxification by phosphorylating the transcription factor Yap8, promoting its nuclear localization, and stimulating transcription of its only known targets, Arr2 and Arr3, which promote arsenic efflux. Arsenic binding was also observed with the related human kinases Erk1 and Erk2, suggesting that this may be a conserved aspect of this kinase family. These data provide a mechanistic basis for understanding how stress-activated kinases can sense individual threats and carry out highly specific adaptive responses.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Processing Exponential phase yeast cultures were harvested, resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mMHEPES, pH 8.2, 8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, and protease inhibitors (Roche Applied Science)), and lysed by bead beating. Lysates were normalized by protein concentration, reduced with DTT (5 mM), and alkylated with iodoacetamide (10 mM). Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 15 mM DTT followed by methanol-chloroform precipitation. Samples were resuspended in 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, subsequently diluted to a final concentration of 4 M urea using 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, and digested at room temperature for 2 h with Lys-C protease (5 ng/μl). Samples were next diluted to 1 M urea with 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, and trypsin was added at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio. Digestion proceeded overnight at 37 °C and was stopped by acidification with 0.4% TFA. Peptides were desalted using tC18 SepPak solid-phase extraction cartridges (Waters). Tandem Mass Tag Labeling Desalted peptides were resuspended in 100 μl of 200 mM HEPES, pH 8.5. One hundred μg of peptides from each sample were labeled with TMT reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific). TMT reagents were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile and added to the peptides to achieve a final acetonitrile concentration of ∼30% (v/v). After incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v). The TMT-labeled samples were pooled at a 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio. The sample was vacuum centrifuged to near dryness and again subjected to tC18 solid-phase extraction. Off-line Basic pH Reversed-phase Fractionation We fractionated the pooled TMT-labeled peptide sample using basic pH reversed-phase HPLC. We used an Agilent 1100 pump equipped with a degasser and a photodiode array detector (set at 220- and 280-nm wavelengths; ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were subjected to a 50-min linear gradient from 5–35% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8, at a flow rate of 0.8 ml/min over an Agilent 300Extend-C18 column. The peptide mixture was fractionated into a total of 96 fractions, which were consolidated into 24, of which only 12 nonadjacent samples were analyzed. Samples were vacuum-centrifuged to near dryness. Each eluted fraction was acidified with 1% formic acid and desalted via StageTips, dried via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid for liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS processing. Liquid Chromatography and Tandem Mass Spectrometry Mass spectrometry data were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC II LC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides (∼1 μg/analysis) were fractionated on a 75-μm-inner diameter microcapillary column packed with ∼0.5 cm of Magic C4 resin (5 μm, 100 Å; Michrom Bioresources) followed by ∼35 cm of GP-18 resin (1.8 μm, 200 Å; Sepax). Peptides were separated using a 2-h gradient of 6–26% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid at a flow rate of ∼350 nl/min. Each analysis used the multi-notch MS3-based TMT method. The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis; resolution 120,000; mass range 350–1400 m/z; automatic gain control target 4 × 105; maximum injection time 50 ms). Precursors for MS2/MS3 analysis were selected using a top speed of 2 s. MS2 analysis consisted of collision-induced dissociation (quadrupole ion trap analysis; automatic gain control 1 × 104; normalized collision energy 35; maximum injection time 120 ms). After acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, we collected an MS3 spectrum using a recently described method in which multiple MS2 fragment ions were captured in the MS3 precursor population using isolation waveforms with multiple frequency notches. MS3 precursors were fragmented by high energy collision-induced dissociation and analyzed using the Orbitrap (normalized collision energy 65; automatic gain control 15 × 104; maximum injection time 150 ms, resolution was 50,000 at 400 Thomson units).  

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a SEQUEST-based in-house software pipeline. Spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all entries from the yeast SGD (Saccharomyces Genome Database). This database was concatenated with a database composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 20-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, whereas oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the signal-to-noise ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion. Peptide-spectrum matches were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching peptide-spectrum matches using in-house software. Peptide-spectrum matches with poor quality, MS3 spectra with TMT reporter-summed signal to noise ratio that is <100, MS2 isolation specificity <0.7, or no MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
The yeast stress-activated protein kinase Hog1 is best known for its role in mediating the response to osmotic stress, but it is also activated by various mechanistically distinct environmental stressors, including heat shock, endoplasmic reticulum stress, and arsenic. In the osmotic stress response, the signal is sensed upstream and relayed to Hog1 through a kinase cascade. Here, we identified a mode of Hog1 function whereby Hog1 senses arsenic through a direct physical interaction that requires three conserved cysteine residues located adjacent to the catalytic loop. These residues were essential for Hog1-mediated protection against arsenic, were dispensable for the response to osmotic stress, and promoted the nuclear localization of Hog1 upon exposure of cells to arsenic. Hog1 promoted arsenic detoxification by stimulating phosphorylation of the transcription factor Yap8, promoting Yap8 nuclear localization, and stimulating the transcription of the only known Yap8 targets, <i>ARR2</i> and <i>ARR3</i>, both of which encode proteins that promote arsenic efflux. The related human kinases ERK1 and ERK2 also bound to arsenic in vitro, suggesting that this may be a conserved feature of some members of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) family. These data provide a mechanistic basis for understanding how stress-activated kinases can sense distinct threats and perform highly specific adaptive responses.

### Keywords
Yeast, Tmt, Arsenic stress

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Finley and Gygi lab Cell Biology Department Harvard Medical School US

### Submitter
Miguel Prado

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Finley
Finley and Gygi lab Cell Biology Department Harvard Medical School US


