### Accession
PXD001781

### Title
Charting the interactome of PDE3A in human cells using an IBMX based chemical proteomics approach

### Description
We attempt to study the interactome of PDEs by synthesizing a broad spectrum PDE-capturing resin based on the non-selective PDE inhibitor 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX). Chemical proteomics characterization of this resin in HeLa cell lysates led to the capture of several different PDEs. Combining the IBMX-resin with in-solution competition with other available, more selective PDE inhibitors, namely cilostamide and papaverine, allowed us to selectively probe the interactome of PDE3A in HeLa cells.

### Sample Protocol
Pulldowns were perfomed in HeLa cells subjected to dounce homogenization on ice in 5 ml of PBS, 0.2% Tween-20 containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors. 12 mg of proteins were incubated for 2.5 h at 4°C either with 240 µL of dry IBMX-resin or empty beads as a control. Samples were eluted with Laemmli sample buffer and proteins were separated on a 4-12% Bis-Tris gradient gel. Gel lanes were digested according to standard procedure by cutting 13 bands from each entire gel lane. For the experiments including in-solution competition, 12 mg of HeLa protein lysate, was either incubated with 350 nM cilostamide, 250 nM papaverine or DMSO (Control) at 4°C for 30 minutes on an end-over-end shaker. The samples were subsequently incubated with 240 µL of dried IBMX-resin for 2.5 hours. Samples were then subjected to washes with 3x 1 ml of PBS 0.1% Tween-20 for the control or with washing buffer supplemented with either cilostamide 350 nM or papaverine 250 nM. Bound proteins where then washed with 3x 1 ml of PBS before elution. Proteins were eluted at 95°C with 300 µL of a solution containing 2% SDS and 50 mM DTT. The volume was reduced to 30 µL using a 3 kDa cut off centrifugation filter. 7 µl of Laemmli sample buffer 4X was added to the eluted proteins and incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes. Samples were then run into a 4–12% Bis-Tris gradient gel (Bio-Rad) for about 1 cm. In-gel trypsin digestion was performed After digestion the peptides were concentrated and desalted, using an OASIS solid phase extraction plate (Waters). Subsequently in solution dimethyl labeling was performed. Peptides originating from the control sample were labeled as light (L), while the pull downs competed with cilostamide and papaverine were labeled as intermediate (M) and heavy (H) respectively. Samples were mixed in a 1:1:1 ratio prior LC-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap QExactive. Cultured HeLa cells were lysed with a dounce homogenizer in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8), 150 mM NaCl and 0.5% Triton) in presence of phosphatase inhibitors and protease inhibitors. 400 µg of proteins were diluted in 500 µl of lysis buffer and subsequently incubated for 3 h with 4 µg of PDE3A antibody at 4°C, in presence or absence of 350 nM cilostamide. 20 µl of proteinA magnetic beads slurry were added to the samples and incubated overnight at 4°C. Samples were then washed with 3x 400 µl washing buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8), 150 mM NaCl and 0.05% Triton). Samples were eluted with Laemmli sample buffer and proteins were separated on a 4-12% Bis-Tris gradient gel. The gel lanes were divided in 5 parts and subjected to trypsin digestion as described above. Extracted peptides were analyzed on a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer. Pull downs performed with IBMX-resin and empty beads were analyzed on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer, IBMX pull downs performed in presence of cilostamide and papaverine were analyzed on a Q-Exactive both coupled to a Proxeon Easy-nLC 1000, while the PDE3A IP were analyzed on a TripleTOF 5600 coupled to an Agilent 1290 Infinity System.  After reconstitution in 10% FA, 5% dimethyl sulfoxide, the peptides were separated on an in-house made 50 cm column with a 50 µm inner diameter packed with 2.7 µm C18 resin operated at a constant temperature of 40°C. The column was connected to the mass spectrometer through a nanoelectrospray ion source. The injected peptides were first trapped with a double fritted trapping column (C18, 3 μm, 2 cm x 100 μm) at a pressure of 600 bar with 100% solvent A (0.1 % formic acid in water) before being chromatographically separated by a linear gradient of buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) from 7% up to 30% in 35 or 150 min (for the in-gel digested bands or for the whole pull downs respectively) at a flow rate of 100 nl/min. Nanospray was achieved with an in-house pulled and gold-coated fused silica capillary (360 µm outer diameter, 20 µm inner diameter, 10 µm tip inner diameter) and an applied voltage of 1.7 kV. Full-scan MS spectra (from m/z 350 to 1500) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 35,000 for the Q-Exactive and 30,000 for the Orbitrap Elite. Up to ten most intense ions above the threshold of 500 counts were selected for fragmentation. HCD fragmentation was performed when using the Q-Exactive. For the TripleTOF 5600 a voltage of 2.7 kV was applied to the needle. The survey scan was from 350 to 1250 m/z and the high resolution mode was utilized, reaching a resolution of up to 40,000. Tandem mass spectra were acquired in high sensitivity mode with a resolution of 20,000. The 10 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent fragmentation using an information dependent acquisition, with a minimum acquisition time of 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
The raw files collected from the TripleTOF were first recalibrated based on two background ions with m/z values of 371.1012 and 445.1200. The calibrated raw files were converted to mgf by the AB Sciex MS Data Converter (version 1.1 beta) program.  Peak lists were generated using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) for the raw files obtained from the Orbitrap instruments and for the mgf files generated from the AB Sciex program using a standardized workflow. Peak lists, were searched against a Swiss-Prot database (taxonomy Human, 20,407 protein entries) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants, using Mascot (version 2.4 Matrix Science, London, UK). The database search was performed using the following parameters: a mass tolerance of 50 ppm for the precursor masses and ±0.6 Da for CID fragment ions and ±0.05 or ±0.15 Da for HCD fragments for the files acquired on the Orbitrap or on the TripleTOF, respectively. Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin with 2 missed cleavages allowed.  Carbarmidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, dimethyl labeling (L, I, H) of lysine residues and N termini (when dimethyl labeling was performed) were used as variable modifications. Percolator was used to ﬁlter the PSMs for <1% false discovery-rate. When applicable, triplex dimethyl labeling was used as quantification method, with a mass precision of 2 ppm for consecutive precursor mass scans. A retention time tolerance of 0.5 min was used to account for the potential retention time shifts due to deuterium. To further filter for high quality data we used the following parameters: high confidence peptide spectrum matches, minimal Mascot score of 20, minimal peptide length of 6 and only unique rank 1 peptides. For the identification and quantitation of the proteins, only unique peptides were considered. Protein ratios were normalized based on the protein median. Proteins showing an on/off situation were manually quantified by giving them an arbitrary value of 100 or 0.01 for extreme up- or down-regulation, which corresponds to the maximum allowed fold change in the used Proteome Discoverer settings.

### Publication Abstract
In the cell the second messenger cyclic nucleotides cAMP and cGMP mediate a wide variety of external signals. Both signaling molecules are degraded by the superfamily of phosphodiesterases (PDEs) consisting of more than 50 different isoforms. Several of these PDEs are implicated in disease processes inspiring the quest for and synthesis of selective PDE inhibitors, that unfortunately have led to very mixed successes in clinical trials. This may be partially caused by their pharmacological action. Accumulating data suggests that small differences between different PDE isoforms may already result in specific tissue distributions, cellular localization and different involvement in higher order signal protein complexes. The role of PDEs in these higher order signal protein complexes has only been marginally addressed, as no screening methodology is available to address this in a more comprehensive way. Affinity based chemical proteomics is a relatively new tool to identify specific protein-protein interactions. Here, to study the interactome of PDEs, we synthesized a broad spectrum PDE-capturing resin based on the non-selective PDE inhibitor 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX). Chemical proteomics characterization of this resin in HeLa cell lysates led to the capture of several different PDEs. Combining the IBMX-resin with in-solution competition with the available more selective PDE inhibitors, cilostamide and papaverine, allowed us to selectively probe the interactome of PDE3A in HeLa cells. Besides known interactors such as the family of 14-3-3 proteins, PDE3A was found to associate with a PP2A complex composed of a regulatory, scaffold and catalytic subunit.

### Keywords
Cilostamide, Ibmx, Mass spectrometry, Papaverine, Chemical proteomics, Phosphodiesterase

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Group, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands
Biomolecular and mass spectrometry group

### Submitter
Eleonora Corradini

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Group, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands


