### Accession
PXD033966

### Title
Transportin 1 is a major nuclear import receptor of the nitric oxide synthase interacting protein

### Description
The nitric oxide synthase interacting protein (NOSIP), an E3-ubiquitin ligase, is involved in various processes like neuronal development, craniofacial development, granulopoiesis, mitogenic signaling, apoptosis and cell proliferation. The best characterized function of NOSIP is the regulation of eNOS (endothelial nitric oxide synthase) activity by translocating the membrane bound enzyme to the actin-skeleton, specifically in the G2 phase of the cell cycle. For this, NOSIP itself has to be translocated from its prominent localization, the nucleus, to the cytoplasm. Nuclear import of NOSIP was suggested to be mediated by the canonical transport receptors importin /. Recently, we found NOSIP in a proteomic screen as a potential importin 13 cargo. Here, we describe the nuclear shuttling characteristics of NOSIP in vivo and in vitro and show that it does not interact directly with importin . Instead, it formed stable complexes with several importins (-, -7, -/7, -5, -13 and transportin 1) and was imported into the nucleus in digitonin-permeabilized cells. In vivo, transportin 1 seems to be the major nuclear transport receptor. A detailed analysis of the NOSIP-transportin 1 interaction revealed an unusual binding mode, involving the N-terminal half of transportin 1. In contrast to nuclear import, nuclear export of NOSIP seems to occur mostly by passive diffusion.

### Sample Protocol
20 µM His-NOSIP and 20 µM His-TNPO1 were incubated for 2 h on ice in a total volume of 300 µl and complexes were purified using a Superdex S200 analytical 10/300 GL column (Cytiva) equilibrated in cross-linking buffer (20 mM Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4 pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA and 5% glycerol). Complex containing fractions were pooled and cross-linked using bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate (BS3, Thermo Fisher, A39266, dissolved in DMSO) in 300-fold molar excess for 30 min at RT. Reactions were stopped by adding TRIS pH 8.0 to a final concentration of 50 mM. Cross-linked complex was subjected to SDS-PAGE (NuPAGE gradient 4-12%) and shifted bands in the gel corresponding to TNPO1 cross-linked to NOSIP were cut out and analyzed as described before (59). Briefly, proteins were digested with trypsin at a 1:20 (w/w) enzyme to substrate ratio at RT overnight. Samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and subsequently, dried peptides were reconstituted in 30% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and fractionated by peptide size-exclusion chromatography as described elsewhere (60). Fractions containing cross-linked peptides were dried again in a vacuum centrifuge.  LC-MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive HF or an Orbitrap ExplorisTM 480 mass Spectrometer coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Dried peptides were resuspended in 5% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (v/v) and separated on a C18 PepMap100 µ-Precolumn (0.3 x 5 mm, 5 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) followed by an in-house packed main column (75 µm x 30 cm, Reprosil-Pur 120C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) at 300 nl/min flow rate. The gradient for in-gel digested samples was set to 37 min from 10% to 36% buffer B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.08% (v/v) formic acid) followed by an increase to 45% buffer B for 6 min with an overall method duration of 58 min. MS1 scans were acquired with 120,000 resolution (full width at half maximum, FWHM), 1 x 106 automatic gain control (AGC) target, and 25 ms maximum injection time from 350 to 1,600 m/z scan range. The 25 most abundant precursor ions were selected individually with a 1.4 m/z isolation window and were fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 30. MS2 scans were acquired with 30,000 resolution FWHM, 1 x 105 target AGC, 120 ms maximum injection time and a fixed first mass of 110 m/z. Precursors with a charge smaller than 3 and larger than 8 were excluded from isolation and fragmentation and a dynamic exclusion was set to 10 s.

### Data Protocol
Acquisition files were subjected to database searching with pLink version 2.3.9 (61) against the protein sequences of TNPO1 and His-NOSIP and common contaminants. BS3 was set as a cross-linker, Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as fixed and oxidation on methionine was set as variable modification. Tryptic cleavage specificity with up to 3 missed cleavages or chymotryptic cleavage specificity with up to 5 missed cleavages was considered for peptides between 6 and 60 amino acids length and 600 to 6,000 Da size. The peptide-, fragment-and filter-tolerance were set to 20, 20, and 10 ppm, respectively. A 5% FDR cut-off on spectral level was applied separately for inter-and intra-protein cross-links. Identifications were further filtered for at least four fragment ions for each of the peptides in a cross-link pair, a minimum score of 5 and more than 2 spectrum identifications

### Publication Abstract
The nitric oxide synthase interacting protein (NOSIP), an E3-ubiquitin ligase, is involved in various processes like neuronal development, craniofacial development, granulopoiesis, mitogenic signaling, apoptosis, and cell proliferation. The best-characterized function of NOSIP is the regulation of endothelial nitric oxide synthase activity by translocating the membrane-bound enzyme to the cytoskeleton, specifically in the G2 phase of the cell cycle. For this, NOSIP itself has to be translocated from its prominent localization, the nucleus, to the cytoplasm. Nuclear import of NOSIP was suggested to be mediated by the canonical transport receptors importin &#x3b1;/&#x3b2;. Recently, we found NOSIP in a proteomic screen as a potential importin 13 cargo. Here, we describe the nuclear shuttling characteristics of NOSIP in living cells and in&#xa0;vitro and show that it does not interact directly with importin &#x3b1;. Instead, it formed stable complexes with several importins (-&#x3b2;,&#xa0;-7,&#xa0;-&#x3b2;/7,&#xa0;-13, and transportin 1) and was also imported into the nucleus in digitonin-permeabilized cells by these factors. In living HeLa cells, transportin 1 seems to be the major nuclear import receptor for NOSIP. A detailed analysis of the NOSIP-transportin 1 interaction revealed a high affinity and an unusual binding mode, involving the N-terminal half of transportin 1. In contrast to nuclear import, nuclear export of NOSIP seems to occur mostly by passive diffusion. Thus, our results uncover additional layers in the larger process of endothelial nitric oxide synthase regulation.

### Keywords
Transportin, Nuclear import

### Affiliations
Max-Plank Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany   Bioanalytics Group, Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, Robert-Koch-Straße 40, 37075 Göttingen, Germany

### Submitter
Henning Urlaub

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Henning Urlaub
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany   Bioanalytics Group, Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, Robert-Koch-Straße 40, 37075 Göttingen, Germany


