### Accession
PXD000318

### Title
Spider genomes provide insight into composition, function and evolution of venom and silk

### Description
Spiders are a highly diverse group of arthropods that occur in most habitats on land. Notably, spiders have significant ecological impact as predators because of their extraordinary prey capture adaptations, venom and silk. Spider venom is among the most heterogeneous animal venoms and has pharmacological applications, while spider silk is characterized by great toughness with potential for biomaterial application. We describe the genome sequences of two spiders representing two major taxonomic groups, the social velvet spider Stegodyphus mimosarum (Araneomorphae), and the Brazilian white-knee tarantula Acanthoscurria geniculata (Mygalomorphae). We annotate genes using a combination of transcriptomic and in-depth proteomic analyses. The genomes are large (2.6 Gb and 6 Gb, respectively) with short exons and long introns and approximately 50% repeats, reminiscent of typical mammalian genomes. Phylogenetic analyses show that spiders and ticks are sister groups outgrouped by mites, and phylogenetic dating using a molecular clock dates separation of velvet spider and tarantula at 270 my. Based on the genomes and proteomes, we characterize the genetic basis of venom and silk production of both species in detail. Venom protein composition differs markedly between the two spiders, with lipases as the most abundant protein in the velvet spider and present only at low concentration in tarantula. Venom in both spiders contains proteolytic enzymes, and our analyses suggest that these enzymes target and process precursor peptides that subsequently mediate the toxic effects of venom. Complete analysis of silk genes reveal a diverse suite of silk proteins in the velvet spider including novel types of spidroins, and dynamic evolution of major ampullate spidroin genes, whereas silk protein diversity in tarantula is far less complex. The difference in silk proteins between species is consistent with a more complex silk gland morpholgy and use of three-dimentional capture webs consisting of multiple silk types in aranomorph spiders.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Spiders are ecologically important predators with complex venom and extraordinarily tough silk that enables capture of large prey. Here we present the assembled genome of the social velvet spider and a draft assembly of the tarantula genome that represent two major taxonomic groups of spiders. The spider genomes are large with short exons and long introns, reminiscent of mammalian genomes. Phylogenetic analyses place spiders and ticks as sister groups supporting polyphyly of the Acari. Complex sets of venom and silk genes/proteins are identified. We find that venom genes evolved by sequential duplication, and that the toxic effect of venom is most likely activated by proteases present in the venom. The set of silk genes reveals a highly dynamic gene evolution, new types of silk genes and proteins, and a novel use of aciniform silk. These insights create new opportunities for pharmacological applications of venom and biomaterial applications of silk.

### Keywords
Venomics, Transcriptomics, Genomics, Zoology, Proteomics, System biology

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics

### Submitter
Kristian Wejse Sanggaard

### Lab Head


