### Accession
PXD005370

### Title
Targeting the Scaffold Protein Plectin by an Organometallic as a Strategy to Inhibit Tumour Invasiveness- nuclear proteins of untreated HCT 116 epithelial cells, 3h

### Description
The inability of determining direct molecular targets of metal-based therapeutic agents beyond the platinum class is one of the major bottlenecks in their development. Here, we employ an integrated chemical proteomics and response profiling approach to identify and validate plestatins, based on an organometallic ruthenium(II) scaffold, as selective plectin-targeting agents. Plectin is a giant scaffold protein involved in controlling cytoarchitecture. Subcytotoxic concentrations of plestatins induce drastic morphological phenotypes on the microtubule (MT) network accompanied by a global down-regulation of translational activity. Plestatins possess anti-invasive properties in tumour spheroids and also display tumour-inhibiting effects in vivo after oral administration. The ability of plestatins to alter the MT network via plectin represents a unique mechanism to target MTs and shows promise as an anticancer strategy.

### Sample Protocol
HCT 116, kindly provided by Brigitte Marian (Institute of Cancer Research, Medical University of Vienna, Austria), were cultured in McCoy’s (Life Technologies, UK) containing 10% FCS (ATCC, USA) and 100U/ml penicillin/streptomycin (ATCC, USA) at 37°C and 5% CO2. Medium was changed in control cells. Experiments were conducted for 3 hours in T25 flasks in triplicates with on average 107 cells per flasks.  With the combination of an isotonic lysis buffer containing protease inhibitors and shear stress cytoplasmic proteins were released and after centrifugation (2300xg, 5min, 4°C), the pellet containing the nuclear fractions were redissolved in hypertonic lysis buffer containing protease inhibitors and nuclear proteins were released by shear stress. After centrifugation (2300xg, 5min, 4¬C) the proteins precipitated with ice-cold ethanol at -20°C over night. Precipitated proteins were dissolved in sample buffer (7.5M urea, 1.5M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 0.05% SDS, 100mM dithiothreitol (DTT)) and a Bradford assay (Bio-Rad-Laboratories, Germany) was employed to determine protein concentrations. In solution digestions were performed with 25µg of protein. The samples were pre-concentrated on 10kDa filters (Pall Austria Filter GmbH), reduced with DTT (56°C, 30 min) and carbamidomethylated with iodacetamide (45 min in the dark). To receive peptides, samples were digested with a trypsin/lys-c mixture (Promega, Germany) for 18h at 37°C. Eluates were dried and stored at -20°C until analysis. For analysis a nanoLC-system (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific, Austria) was coupled to a high resolution QExactive orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Austria). Dried samples were resolved in 5µL 30% formic acid (FA) containing four synthetic peptides (10fmol each) and diluted with 40µL mobile phase A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA). Each sample was recorded twice, 5µL were injected per analysis. The LC-method lasted 135 minutes with a 90min long gradient from 8-40% solvent B (80%ACN, 20%H¬2O, 0.1% FA) running over a 75µm x 50cm C-18 separation column (Dionex, Acclaim PepMap RSCL). The MS-method lasted 115min with the resolution set to 70000 and 17500, maximum injection time to 50ms and 75ms for MS1 and MS2, respectively. M/z was scanned from 400-1400 and a top 8 method was chosen for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification. Protein identification was achieved searching against the SwissProt Database (version August 2014 with 20 194 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 10ppm for MS spectra and 50mmu for MS/MS spectra as well as a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Organometallic metal(arene) anticancer agents require ligand exchange for their anticancer activity and this is generally believed to confer low selectivity for potential cellular targets. However, using an integrated proteomics-based target-response profiling approach as a potent hypothesis-generating procedure, we found an unexpected target selectivity of a ruthenium(arene) pyridinecarbothioamide (plecstatin) for plectin, a scaffold protein and cytolinker, which was validated in a plectin knock-out model in&#x2005;vitro. Plectin targeting shows potential as a strategy to inhibit tumor invasiveness as shown in cultured tumor spheroids while oral administration of plecstatin-1 to mice reduces tumor growth more efficiently in the invasive B16&#x2005;melanoma than in the CT26&#x2005;colon tumor model.

### Keywords
Ruthenium, Response profiling, Organometallics, Plectin, Target identification, Metallodrugs, Mechanism of action, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


