### Accession
PXD006511

### Title
Ancylostoma caninum secretome - We have characterised the excretory secretory products from Ancylostoma caninum using a proteomics approach.

### Description
We have characterised the excretory secretory products from Ancylostoma caninum using a proteomics approach.

### Sample Protocol
Parasites were obtained form the intestine of dogs and cultured in Glutamax for 4h. Media was discarded after that time and worms were cultured for another 24h. The excretory/secretory products were collected, buffer exchanged in PBS and concentrated using a 10 kDa filter. One sample was run on a SDS-gel, follwoing in-solution digestion with trypsin and a second biological replicate was run in an Offgel fractionator.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometer used was a 5600+, and search engines used were Mascot (using Mascot Daemon) and X!tandem and Comet (using PeptideShaker)

### Publication Abstract
Hookworm infection is a major tropical parasitic disease affecting almost 500 million people worldwide. These soil-transmitted helminths can survive for many years in the intestine of the host, where they feed on blood, causing iron deficiency anemia and other complications. These parasites release a variety of molecules known as excretory/secretory products (ESPs) that are involved in many different biological processes that govern parasite survival. Using a combination of separation techniques such as SDS-PAGE and OFFGEL electrophoresis, in combination with state-of-the-art mass spectrometry we have reanalyzed the dog hookworm, Ancylostoma caninum, ESPs (AcESP). We identified 315 proteins present in the AcESP, compared with just 105 identified in previous studies. The most highly represented family of proteins is the SCP/TAPs (110 of the 315 proteins), and the most abundant constituents of AcESP are homologues of the tissue inhibitors of metalloproteases (TIMP) family. Interestingly, we identified new homologs of well-known vaccine candidates and immunomodulatory proteins. This study provides novel information about the proteins secreted by A. caninum, and constitutes a comprehensive dataset to study the proteins involved in host-hookworm interactions.

### Keywords
Secretome, Hookworm, Excretory/secretory products, A. caninum

### Affiliations
Australian Institute of Tropcial Health and Medicine
James Cook University

### Submitter
Javier Sotillo

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Loukas
Australian Institute of Tropcial Health and Medicine


