### Accession
PXD042605

### Title
The fungal pathogen Ustilago maydis targets the maize corepressor TPL2 to modulate host transcription for tumorigenisis

### Description
Ustilago maydis is a biotrophic fungus that causes tumor formation on all aerial parts of maize. U. maydis secretes effector proteins during penetration and colonization to successfully overcome the plant immune response and reprogram host physiology to promote infection.  In this study, we functionally characterized the U. maydis effector protein Topless (TPL) interacting protein 6 (Tip6). We found that Tip6 interacts with the N-terminus of ZmTPL2 through its two EAR (Ethylene-responsive element binding factor-associated amphiphilic repression) motifs. We show that the EAR motifs are essential for the virulence function of Tip6 and critical for altering the nuclear distribution pattern of ZmTPL2.  We propose that Tip6 mimics the recruitment of ZmTPL2 by plant repressor proteins, thus disrupting host transcriptional regulation. We show that a large group of AP2/ERF B1 subfamily transcription factors are misregulated in the presence of Tip6. Our study suggests a regulatory mechanism where the U. maydis effector Tip6 utilizes repressive domains to recruit the corepressor ZmTPL2 to disrupt the transcriptional networks of the host plant.

### Sample Protocol
Seven-day-old maize seedling leaves were infected with U. maydis carrying either SG200ΔTip6-Ppit2::Tip6-3xHA or SG200-Ppit2::SP-mCherry-3xHA. The infection assays were performed as previously described (Redkar & Dohlemann, 2016). At 3 dpi, the infected leaves (four biological replicates per sample) were collected and ground into powder using liquid nitrogen. For protein extraction, 500 uL of the ground powder was mixed with 1.5 mL of lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 1 % [v/v] Triton X-100, 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and protease inhibitor cocktail (Rothe. Cat. No. 04693159001)). After incubating on ice for 30 min with inversions every 10 min, the protein supernatant was obtained by centrifugation twice at 13,000 rpm 4 °C for 30 min.  Similarly, six-week-old Nicotiana benthamiana plant leaves were infiltrated with Agrobacterium carrying either p2x35S::GFP or p2x35S::Tip22-226-GFP. At 3 dpi, the infiltrated leaves (three biological replicates per sample) were harvested and ground into powder using liquid nitrogen. The ground powder was mixed with the same protein extraction buffer used in the maize samples and incubated on ice for 30 min with inversion every 10 min. The samples were centrifuged twice at 4°C for 30 min at 13,000 rpm, and the resulting supernatant was transferred to a new tube.  For both samples, 1 mL of the protein supernatant was mixed with 10 μL of respective antibody-coated beads (anti-HA magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher, Cat. No. 88836) for maize samples, and anti-GFP beads (ChromoTek GFP-Trap Agarose Cat. No. gta) for N. benthamiana samples). After incubating at 4°C for 1 h with constant rotation, the protein-bound beads were washed three times with extraction buffer and three times with extraction buffer without Triton X-100 before being subjected to mass spectrometry analysis.  Next, for the maize samples, the beads were re-dissolved in 25 µL digestion buffer 1 (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 2 M urea, 1 mM DTT, 5 ng/µL trypsin) and incubated at 30 °C in a thermomixer at 400 rpm for 30 min. The beads were then pelleted, and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube. To the beads, 50 µL of digestion buffer 2 (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 2 M urea, 5 mM CAA) was added. After mixing the beads, they were pelleted again, and the supernatant was collected and combined with the previously obtained supernatant. The combined supernatants were incubated overnight at 32 °C in a thermomixer at 400 rpm, while being protected from light. The digestion was stopped by adding 1 µL of TFA, and desalting was performed using C18 Empore disk membranes following the StageTip protocol (Rappsilber et al., 2003).   For the N. benthamiana samples, the beads were eluted with SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT). The SDS-eluted proteins were then subjected to a filter-aided sample preparation protocol (FASP) (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). Initially, the samples were reduced by adding 1/10 volume of 1 M DTT (100 mM final) and incubated at 95 °C for 5 min. Next, the samples were diluted with 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5 (UA) to achieve a compatible detergent concentration (maximum 0.5% SDS). The diluted samples were loaded onto filters (Sartorius, Vivacon 500, VN01H22, 30 kDa cutoff) by centrifuging at 14,000 g for 10 min. Following that, the samples were washed with UA by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 10 min and alkylated using 100 µL of 55 mM chloroacetamide in UA. The mixture was then incubated in the dark for 20 min, followed by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 10 min. After three washes with UA, the filter was transferred to a new Eppendorf tube. Next, 50 µL of LysC solution (stock: 0.5 µg/µL Lys-C (WAKO) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 (ABC), working solution: dilute with UA to an enzyme: protein ratio of 1:100) was added, and the sample was mixed and incubated for 3 h at room temperature (RT). Subsequently, 300 µL of trypsin solution (stock: 1 µg/µL in 1 mM HCl, working solution: dilute with UA to an enzyme: protein ratio of 1:100) was added, and the samples were mixed and incubated overnight at RT. After centrifugation, 50 µL of ABC were added, and the samples were centrifuged at 14,000 g for 10 min. The resulting flow-through containing the peptides was acidified with TFA to a final concentration of 0.5%. Desalting of the flow-through was performed using stage tips with C18 Empore disk membranes (3 M) following the protocol described previously (Rappsilber et al., 2003).

### Data Protocol
For LC-MS/MS data acquisition, dried peptides were re-dissolved in a solution containing 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA for analysis and adjusted to a final concentration of 0.1 µg/µl. Samples were analyzed using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on 16 cm frit-less silica emitters (New Objective, 75 µm inner diameter), packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch).  A total of 0.5 µg of peptides were loaded on the column and eluted for 115 min using a segmented linear gradient of 5% to 95% solvent B. (0 min: 5% B; 0-5 min -> 5% B; 5-65 min -> 20% B; 65-90 min ->35% B; 90-100 min -> 55% B; 100-105 min ->95% B, 105-115 min ->95% B) (solvent A 0% ACN, 0.1% FA; solvent B 80% ACN, 0.1%FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode using the TOP15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300–1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM and a target value of 3×106 ions. Precursors were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed with a normalized collision energy of 25. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 105 ions at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM, a maximum injection time of 55 ms and a fixed first mass of m/z 100. Peptides with a charge of +1, greater than 6, or with an unassigned charge state, were excluded from fragmentation for MS2. Dynamic exclusion for 30s prevented repeated selection of precursors. MS data analysis  For MS data analysis, the raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.7.4, http://www.maxquant.org/) (Cox & Mann, 2008) with label-free quantification (LFQ) and iBAQ enabled (Tyanova et al., 2016). MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against a combined database containing the sequences of N. benthamiana or Z. mays, along with sequences of 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences. The search parameters included trypsin specificity with a maximum of two missed cleavages, a minimal peptide length of seven amino acids, and fixed modifications of carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues. Variable modifications included the oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%.  Statistical analysis of the MaxLFQ values was carried out using Perseus (version 1.5.8.5, http://www.maxquant.org/). Quantified proteins were filtered for reverse hits and hits ‘identified by site’ and MaxLFQ values were log2 transformed. Samples were grouped by condition, and only proteins with two valid values in one of the conditions (for N. benthamiana) or three valid values in one of the conditions (for Z. mays) were retained for subsequent analysis. Two-sample t-tests were performed using a permutation-based FDR of 5%. Alternatively, quantified proteins were grouped by condition, and only hits with three valid values in one of the conditions (for N. benthamiana) or four valid values in one of the conditions (for Z. mays) were retained. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution, with a 1.8 downshift applied separately for each column. Volcano plots were generated in Perseus using an FDR of 5% and an S0 value of 1. The Perseus output was exported and further processed using Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ustilago maydis, Ap2/erf transcription factors, Ear motifs, Effector protein, Topless

### Affiliations
Plant Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Group
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research
Carl-von-Linné Weg 10
50829 Cologne
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Sara Christina Stolze

### Lab Head
Dr Hirofumi Nakagami
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany


