### Accession
PXD002680

### Title
Comprehensive Proteomic Profiling of Nuclear Fractions from Native Renal Inner Medullary Collecting Duct Cells

### Description
Regulation of renal water excretion is dependent on control of the molecular water channel aquaporin‐2 by the peptide hormone vasopressin in renal collecting duct cells. The control is in part due to the regulation of transcription of the Aqp2 gene and other genes by vasopressin. A systems biology‐based approach to understanding transcriptional control in renal collecting duct cells depends on knowledge of what transcription factors and other regulatory proteins are present in the cells' nucleus. The goal of this paper is to report comprehensive proteomic profiling of nuclear proteins in native inner medullary collecting duct (IMCD) cells of the rat. Multi‐dimensional separation procedures and state‐of‐the art protein mass spectrometry allowed the high stringency identification of a total of 5105 proteins in nuclear pellet (NP) and nuclear extract (NE) fractions of biochemically isolated rat IMCD cells (URL: https://helixweb.nih.gov/ESBL/Database/IMCD_Nucleus/)*. The analysis identified 369 transcription factor proteins out of the 1371 transcription factors coded by the rat genome. The analysis added 1898 proteins to the recognized proteome of rat IMCD cells, now amounting to 7003 unique proteins. Analysis of samples treated with the vasopressin analog dDAVP (1 nM for 30min) or its vehicle revealed 99 proteins in the NP fraction and 88 proteins in the NE fraction with significant changes in spectral counts (Fisher Exact Test, P<0.005). Among those altered by vasopressin were 7 distinct histone proteins all of which showed decreased abundance in the NP fraction, consistent with a possible effect of vasopressin to induce chromatin remodeling.

### Sample Protocol
IMCD Isolation and Protein Extraction. Thirty male Sprague‐Dawley rats were euthanized according to an approved National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Animal Care and Use Committee protocol (H‐0110R3). IMCD suspensions were prepared as previously described with slight modification. The kidney inner medullas were dissected, minced, and digested into suspensions by incubation at 37°C for 70–90 min in digestion solution (250 mM sucrose, 10 mM triethanolamine, pH 7.6) containing collagenase B (3 mg/ml; Roche, Indianapolis, IN) and hyaluronidase (3 mg/mL; Worthington, Lakewood, NJ). The resulting inner medullary suspension (whole IM) was subjected to three low‐speed centrifugations (at 70 g, 20 s) to separate the IMCD‐enriched fraction in the pellet from the non‐IMCD fraction in the supernatant. The supernatants containing non‐IMCD elements were discarded. The final pellet was resuspended in tubule suspension solution containing (in mM) 118 NaCl, 5 KCl, 4 Na2HPO4, 25 NaHC03, 2 CaCl2, 1.2 MgS04, 5.5 glucose, and 5 sodium acetate (300 mOsm). This method has been previously shown to successfully isolate IMCD cells that are viable, vasopressinresponsive and largely free of non‐IMCD cells. The suspended IMCD cells were divided into two volumes and were equilibrated under 95%air/5% carbon dioxide at 37 degrees C for 10 min. To the first aliquot, we added dDAVP (1 nM final concentration for 30 min) and to the second aliquot, we added the same volume of pure suspension fluid, the vehicle (also incubated 30 min). From this point, we followed the fractionation procedures described by Tchapyjnikov et al.. Briefly, the cells were homogenized (Potter‐Elvehjem homogenizer on ice for a total of 2 min in 15 s intervals), 7 centrifuged (1,000 Xg in 250 mM sucrose buffer containing 10 mM Tris [pH 7.4] with 20 μL Halt protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail [Life Technologies, #78440]) to obtain a pellet enriched in nuclei, and subjected to further fractionation using the NE‐PER Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Extraction Reagents kit (Life Technologies, #78835) to obtain fractions labeled NE (nuclear extract), NP (nuclear pellet) and NN (non‐nuclear fraction). Total protein was measured (BCA assay, Life Technologies, # #23227). SDS‐PAGE and In‐Gel Digestion. The protein samples (NE and NP with dDAVP and control for each) were concentrated using Amicon Centrifugal Filters, Ultracel 3K (Millipore) to about 400 μg in 110 μL of solution. A 5X concentrate of the Laemmli solution (7.5% SDS, 30% glycerol, 50 mM Tris, pH 6.8) with bromophenol blue was added to the samples (1 part 5X concentrate: 4 parts protein sample). One‐dimensional SDS‐PAGE was performed using a 12% polyacrylamide SDS‐Tris‐Glycine gels (Bio‐Rad). Separate gels were run for the NE and NP fractions, with the control and dDAVP samples being run on different lanes in the same gel. Molecular weight markers (Precision Plus, Bio‐Rad) were run in separate lanes. The gels were run for 45 minutes at 3.00A and 200V and were then stained with ImperialTM protein stain (Thermo Scientific). The gels were destained for 30 minutes in MS‐grade water (JT Baker #JTB‐ 9831‐02) and then sliced into 39 equal‐sized fractions using a paper pattern and a razor blade. Each slice was diced into 1.5 mm3 blocks using a razor blade. This gave 156 separate samples for LC‐MS/MS analysis (39 gel slices X 2 nuclear fraction X 2 treatments). These samples underwent reduction with DTT, alkylation, and in gel trypsinization as described Pisitkun except for the use of 12.5 ng/μL Trypsin Gold (Promega). 8 After digestion, the peptides were extracted from the gel pieces using four successive washes in 50% ACN/0.5% formic acid. Samples were dried and peptides were then suspended in 0.1% formic acid in MS‐grade water. Samples were desalted using C‐18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific, # 89870) according to the protocol provided with the kit. The resulting samples were dried (Speed‐Vac) for storage. Immediately prior to mass spectrometry analysis, the samples were re‐dissolved in 0.1% formic acid in MS‐grade water. LC‐MS/MS. All samples were analyzed on a nanoflow LC system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) coupled to a tandem mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Velos ProTM Hybrid, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). The sample loading onto a peptide trap cartridge (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA) occurred at a flow rate of 6 μl/min. The trapped peptides were then fractionated with a reversed‐phase PicoFrit column (New Objective, Woburn, MA) using a linear gradient of 5%– 35% ACN in 0.1% FA. The gradient time was 45 min at a flow rate of 0.25 μl/min.

### Data Protocol
In order to maximize the number of peptide identifications, three algorithms were used to match spectra to peptides viz. those coded by Mascot, SEQUEST and InsPecT. The post‐translational modifications allowed were a fixed carbamidomethyl modification on cysteine, variable deamination modifications on asparagine and glutamine, and a variable oxidation modification on methionine. False discovery rate at a peptide level was set to 0.01 based on target‐decoy analysis. To identify ambiguous identifications, we used in‐house program (coded in Java) called ProMatch (http://esbl.nhlbi.nih.gov/Bioinformatic%20Tools.htm). Peptides that only matched to one gene 9 symbol were extracted as “unique” identification. The peptides that matched to more than one gene symbol were separated as “multiple” identifications. To reconcile the multiple identifications, transcriptomic data from Affymetrix array profiling of rat renal IMCD transcripts was used. (Database available at: http://dir.nhlbi.nih.gov/papers/lkem/imcdtr/). If a given gene is not expressed, based on the transcriptomic data (median normalized value<0.4), its protein product was dropped from consideration. The search results from SEQUEST and Mascot searches were merged in Proteome Discoverer, and peptides with FDR < 0.01 and peptide rank =1 were retained for further analyses. Raw files, search results, and all spectra have been uploaded to PRIDE (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/; login username for reviewers: xxxxxxx; reviewer password: xxxxx; accession number xxxxxx). Spectral Counting. The number of peptide matches for a given gene symbol were counted and designated as the “spectral count” for that gene symbol. This was the sum of all spectra matching to the gene symbol in all gel slices. The spectral counts in the control samples and the dDAVP samples were compared using the Fisher Exact Test with the contingency table consisting of the control count, dDAVP count, total count of all peptides in control, and total count of all peptides in dDAVP. Peptides assigned to more than one gene symbol were assigned to the gene symbol with the most abundant transcript in the IMCD based on prior data. Bioinformatic Analysis. To assess the apparent molecular weights of each protein identified, we mapped the mass spectrometry output back to the gel slices and then used an in house Java‐based software tool, virtualBlot to generate gray‐scale images resembling a western blot for each protein (https://helixweb.nih.gov/ESBL/virtualBlot/; temporary login clp; password 10 Esbl!@#$). A general classification of protein groups present in the NP and NE fractions was done using the DAVID (Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery Version 6.7, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda) tool. The software tool ABE (Automated Bioinformatics Extractor, Systems Biology Center, NHLBI, Bethesda, MD) was used to extract Gene Ontology terms without statistical analysis (http://helixweb.nih.gov/ESBL/ABE/). The relationships among proteins that underwent changes in spectral counts in response to dDAVP were identified using STRING Version 10 (http://string‐db.org/). This program generates undirected graphs showing functional groups of proteins as clusters or subnetworks. A list of expressed transcription factors in the NE and NP fractions was generated through comparison with a list of all 1371 transcription factors in the rat genome (URL: http://bioguo.org/AnimalTFDB/).

### Publication Abstract
The control of renal water excretion occurs in part by regulation of transcription in response to vasopressin in cells of the collecting duct. A systems biology-based approach to understanding transcriptional control in renal collecting duct cells depends on knowledge of what transcription factors and other regulatory proteins are present in the cells' nuclei. The goal of this article is to report comprehensive proteomic profiling of cellular fractions enriched in nuclear proteins from native inner medullary collecting duct (IMCD) cells of the rat. Multidimensional separation procedures and state-of-the art protein mass spectrometry produced 18 GB of spectral data that allowed the high-stringency identification of 5,048 proteins in nuclear pellet (NP) and nuclear extract (NE) fractions of biochemically isolated rat IMCD cells (URL: https://helixweb.nih.gov/ESBL/Database/IMCD_Nucleus/). The analysis identified 369 transcription factor proteins out of the 1,371 transcription factors coded by the rat genome. The analysis added 1,511 proteins to the recognized proteome of rat IMCD cells, now amounting to 8,290 unique proteins. Analysis of samples treated with the vasopressin analog dDAVP (1 nM for 30 min) or its vehicle revealed 99 proteins in the NP fraction and 88 proteins in the NE fraction with significant changes in spectral counts (Fisher exact test, P &lt; 0.005). Among those altered by vasopressin were seven distinct histone proteins, all of which showed decreased abundance in the NP fraction, consistent with a possible effect of vasopressin to induce chromatin remodeling. The results provide a data resource for future studies of vasopressin-mediated transcriptional regulation in the renal collecting duct.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Transcription, Transcription factor, Mrna splicing, Kidney, Lc‐ms/ms

### Affiliations
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory National Heart Lung and Blood Institute National Institutes of Health
National Institutes of Health

### Submitter
Chung-Lin  Chou

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Knepper
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory National Heart Lung and Blood Institute National Institutes of Health


