### Accession
PXD003621

### Title
Prolyl hydroxylation regulates protein degradation, synthesis and splicing in human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes

### Description
Protein hydroxylases are oxygen and alpha-ketoglutarate-dependent enzymes that catalyze hydroxylation of amino acids such as proline, thus linking oxygen and metabolism to enzymatic activity. Prolyl hydroxylation is a dynamic post-translational modification that regulates protein stability and protein-protein interactions; however, the extent of this modification is largely uncharacterized. The goals of this study are to investigate the biological consequences of prolyl hydroxylation and to identify new targets which undergo prolyl hydroxylation in human cardiomyocytes.

### Sample Protocol
We used human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes in combination with pulse-chase amino acid labeling and proteomics to analyze the effects of prolyl hydroxylation on protein degradation and synthesis. iPSC-CM were equilibrated in light medium containing 10% dialyzed FBS for 3 days and underwent the Pierce SILAC Protein Quantification Kit as described by the manufacturer. The samples underwent an in-solution protocol with trypsin as previously described.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification by LC-MS/MS analysis of peptides was performed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) interfaced with an Ultimate 3000 Nano-HPLC apparatus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). iPSC-CM samples were searched against the modification proline oxidation. In detail, The LC-MS data were searched against the Swiss-Prot-database (taxonomy Homo sapiens [human]) using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom; version 2.5.1). Parameters for the search engine were: precursor mass tolerance at 20 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance at 0.8 Da, trypsin enzyme with 2 miscleavages with methyl methanethiosulfonate of cysteine as fixed modification and deamidation of glutamine and asparagine, oxidation of methionine and oxidation of proline as variable modifications. Proteome Discoverer Software (PD, version 1.4) was used and the data were filtered for high peptide confidence (FDR of <1%). From the peptide sequence annotation the proteins undergoing prolyl hydroxylation were identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ipsc-derived cardiomyocytes, Prolyl hydroxylation, Lc-ms/ms, Amino acid labeling

### Affiliations
NIH/NHLBI
NIH/NHLBI Cardiac Physiology Systems Biology Center Bethesda, MD, USA

### Submitter
Andrea Stoehr

### Lab Head
Dr Elizabeth (Tish) Murphy
NIH/NHLBI Cardiac Physiology Systems Biology Center Bethesda, MD, USA


