### Accession
PXD035892

### Title
The TRIPLE PHD FINGERS proteins are required for SWI/SNF complex-mediated +1 nucleosome positioning and transcription start site usage in Arabidopsis

### Description
Eukaryotes have evolved multiple ATP-dependent chromatin remodelers to shape the nucleosome landscape. We recently uncovered an evolutionarily conserved SWItch/Sucrose Non-Fermentable (SWI/SNF) chromatin remodeler complex in plants reminiscent of the mammalian BAF subclass, which specifically incorporates the MINUSCULE (MINU) catalytic subunits and the TRIPLE PHD FINGERS (TPF) signature subunits. Here we report experimental evidence that establishes the functional relevance of TPF proteins for the complex activity. Our results show that depletion of TPF triggers similar pleiotropic phenotypes and molecular defects to those found in minu mutants. Moreover, we report the genomic location of MINU2 and TPF proteins as representative members of the plant BAF-like complex and their impact on nucleosome positioning and transcription. These analyses unravel the binding of the complex to thousands of expressed genes where it modulates the position of the +1 nucleosome. These targets tend to produce 5´-shifted transcripts in the tpf and minu mutants pointing to the participation of the complex in alternative transcriptional start site (TSS) usage. Interestingly, there is a remarkable correlation between +1 nucleosome shift and upstream TSS usage suggesting their functional connection. In summary, this study unravels the function of a plant SWI/SNF complex involved in +1 nucleosome positioning and alternative TSS usage.

### Sample Protocol
Dried protein samples were resuspended in 50 μl digestion buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris- HCl pH 8. Protein disulfide bonds were subjected to reduction using 5 mM Tris (2- carboxyethyl) phosphine for 30 min, free cysteine residues were alkylated by 10 mM iodoacetamide for another 30 min. Samples were diluted with 100 mM Tris-HCl at pH 8 to reach a urea concentration of less than 2 M then digested sequentially with Lys-C and trypsin at a 1:100 protease-to-peptide ratio for 4 and 12 hours, respectively. The digestion reaction was terminated by the addition of formic acid to 5% (vol/vol) with centrifugation. Finally, samples were desalted using C18 tips (Thermo Scientific, 87784) and dried in a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator, and reconstituted in 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS processing.

### Data Protocol
All label-free mass spectrometry data were collected using data dependent acquisition on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an MS1 resolution of 120,000 followed by sequential MS2 scans at a resolution of 15,000.Database searching was performed with the Andromeda search against Arabidopsis proteome database to generate peptide and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Swi/snf complex, Arabidopsis, Proteomics

### Affiliations
UCLA
Ramón y Cajal Fellow IBMCP (UPV/CSIC) Valencia, Spain

### Submitter
Yasaman Jami-Alahmadi

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Gallego Bartolom
Ramón y Cajal Fellow IBMCP (UPV/CSIC) Valencia, Spain


